A review on strategies addressing interface incompatibilities in inorganic all-solid-state lithium batteries  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE00549H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE00549H
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3279-3309A review on strategies addressing interface incompatibilities in inorganic all-solid-state lithium batteries

        
          
            Ashim 
            Gurung†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jyotshna 
            Pokharel†
a, 
      
        
          
            Abiral 
            Baniya†
a, 
      
        
          
            Rajesh 
            Pathak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ke 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Buddhi Sagar 
            Lamsal
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nabin 
            Ghimire
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wen-Hua 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yue 
            Zhou
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Center for Advanced Photovoltaics and Sustainable Energy, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA. E-mail: yue.zhou@sdstate.edu; qiquan.qiao@sdstate.edu
bSichuan Research Center of New Materials, Institute of Chemical Materials, China Academy of Engineering Physics, Chengdu, P. R. China. E-mail: whzhang@caep.cn
Received 
      22nd July 2019
    , Accepted 30th August 2019First published on 2nd September 2019AbstractHigh flammability, susceptibility to unstable interfacial reactions and lithium dendrite growth make currently employed liquid electrolyte systems in lithium batteries prone to severe safety concerns. Replacing the liquid electrolytes by solid-state versions is believed to be the ultimate solution to address the safety issues. Many research efforts have been dedicated to find solid-state electrolytes with excellent ionic conductivity comparable to that of the liquid counterparts and tremendous success has been achieved, especially with ceramic sulfide-based and oxide-based solid-state electrolytes. However, another major constraint inhibiting the practical development of such solid-state batteries is the solid–solid interfaces. This review summarizes the notable approaches that have been implemented to address the interface incompatibilities of ceramic solid-state electrolytes with battery electrodes. The focus will be on interfaces of sulfide and oxide solid electrolytes with both cathodes and metallic lithium anodes.
1. Introduction
Batteries have been a reliable conventional means of energy for portable devices. The advancement in smart electronics demands higher energy density of batteries. On the other hand, progress in the acquirement of renewable resources for sustainable energy has also increased the demand for use of batteries to a great extent. Renewable resources such as sunlight and wind are intermittent in nature and require some sort of energy storage to address the issue. Batteries are considered to be the solutions for majority of the associated issues with high penetration of renewables into the electrical grid.1 Meanwhile, research in solar charging batteries has attracted much attention.2 Furthermore, batteries have enabled electric vehicles as car manufacturers such as Tesla further advance their deployment. Each of these energy storage demanding applications has their own priorities for the properties of batteries required and other figures of merit such as cost and safety. In particular, lithium-ion (Li-ion) battery chemistry has been a revolution since its commercialization by Sony Corporation in 1991, and still dominates today's consumer electronics.3–5 Extensive research has been conducted on the further development of Li-ion batteries.6–17 Commercial Li-ion battery chemistry composed of a graphite anode/LiNixCoyMnzO2(NMC) cathode can produce an energy density of 200–250 W h kg−1. However, it is imperative to investigate battery chemistries that can provide a much higher energy density to meet the ever-growing energy demand.18
One of the factors contributing to the lower energy density of the current Li-ion chemistry is the lower specific capacity of the graphite anode. Graphite has a theoretical specific capacity of 372 mA h g−1. This has motivated studies investigating higher capacity anode materials. Graphite facilitates lithiation based on an intercalation mechanism, which accommodates one lithium ion per six carbon atoms. Materials that exhibit alloy-based lithiation have been heavily pursued.19–21 Silicon is one such material and has a theoretical specific capacity of 4200 mA h g−1 which is more than 10 times that of graphite.22 However, silicon undergoes huge volume change of ∼400% during lithiation and mechanical breakage during delithiation. Several breakthrough strategies have been introduced such as the use of silicon nanostructures, carbon coating, hollow protective cells and porous silicon.19,23–27 However, scaling up these nanostructures to a cost-effective production volume is a limitation.
Lithium metal is the ideal anode for the Li-ion technology as it possesses the lowest negative electrochemical potential of −3.040 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode and a theoretical specific capacity of 3860 mA h g−1.4,28,29 Lithium metal was introduced as a potential anode before the lithium-ion technology. However, the violent reactive and unstable nature of lithium metal towards organic electrolytes led to safety issues and eventually Li-ion batteries with a graphite anode were introduced as a much safer alternative. Considering advances in nanotechnology, research on safe implementation of lithium metal has been revived.17 Research is focused on the use of innovative approaches to restrain lithium dendrite growth and the unstable solid electrolyte interphase layer associated with lithium metal as the anode. Several attempts have been made, such as the use of electrolyte additives, a protective layer on top of lithium metal, a porous current collector and the use of lithium hosts.17,30–34 These research efforts are promising and should be encouraged at a much greater extent.
The other problem with the existing Li-ion technology is the low capacity of the cathodes. Conventional lithium metal oxides offer specific capacities of ∼160–200 mA h g−1. Therefore, when coupled with advanced anodes (Li), discrepancy exists in the potential capacities that can be delivered. This has led to research on potential high capacity cathodes such as sulfur and oxygen, namely Li–S and Li–O2 batteries respectively.35 These potential cathodes when paired against Li metal have high theoretical energy densities of 2500 W h kg−1 and 3500 W h kg−1 respectively.36,37 These advanced chemistries are also considered promising to achieve a low-cost storage system. However, several challenges exist in the Li–S chemistry such as the shuttle effect with dissolution of polysulfides, low electronic and ionic conductivity, volume change etc., while several promising efforts have been demonstrated to address them.36,38 On the other hand, Li–O2 is a much more complicated chemistry and is still at an early stage.37,39,40
All these chemistries pursued for a higher energy density have a common obstacle for their safe commercial deployment, which is associated with the use of liquid electrolytes. Solvents incorporated into these electrolytes are flammable and raise safety concerns for their use. In addition, the use of lithium metal in such a liquid electrolyte environment poses significant risks of thermal runaway and thus safety.41,42 Besides, the liquid electrolytes tend to undergo uncontrollable side reactions with electrodes forming an unstable interface that leads to severe capacity fading and low battery cycle life. All the aforementioned issues can be significantly suppressed with use of electrolytes in the solid-state form which are non-flammable.43,44 Furthermore, the use of solid-state electrolytes can provide stackable and high volumetric energy density. Some solid-state electrolytes also have a very wide electrochemical stability window and can enable the use of high voltage cathode materials to achieve higher energy density batteries.45 In addition, solid-state electrolytes have also been proposed to suppress the growth of unwanted lithium dendrites when a lithium metal anode is employed. The employment of solid-state electrolytes in a lithium metal battery is the ultimate goal to achieve a safe and high energy density storage system.
2. Inorganic electrolytes – sulfides vs. oxides
The electrolyte in a Li-ion battery should have characteristics such as (1) being electronically insulating but ionically conducting, (2) ability to undergo repeated cycling without chemical transformation i.e. exhibit good chemical/electrochemical stability, (3) good thermal stability over a wide range of operating temperature, (4) a wide electrochemical operating window to enable a high energy density, (5) good compatibility with electrodes and separators to accomplish efficient ion transport, and (6) good mechanical stability to prevent or suppress lithium dendrite growth.46 It is rather challenging to find an electrolyte system that satisfies all these requirements; however numerous efforts have been made in pursuit of such an electrolyte. Solid-state electrolytes can be categorized into two major groups, namely (i) polymers and (ii) inorganics (sulfides and oxides).
Polymers, with better flexibility can facilitate better interface formation with electrodes, but have low ionic conductivity at room temperature, limited thermal stability and a narrow electrochemical window.46,47 In addition, solid polymer electrolytes can be more cost-effective compared to the inorganics. From an ionic conductivity perspective, inorganics especially sulfides and oxides are promising candidates (as shown in Fig. 1(ref. 43)) for further advancement of all-solid-state batteries and hence have attracted much attention.
 Fig. 1  Comparison of ionic conductivity of various solid-state lithium-ion conducting electrolyte families. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
Radar plots shown in Fig. 2a and b compare sulfides and oxides with respect to various performance parameters for a solid-state electrolyte respectively. Solid sulfide electrolytes are capable of faster ionic conduction compared to oxide counterparts, owing to the presence of wider channels for ionic conduction in their structure. In addition, lithium ions are more mobile in sulfides, attributed to the weaker affinity of lithium ions to sulfides.48 As a result, sulfide electrolytes have demonstrated the highest ionic conductivity among solid electrolytes. Sulfides such as Li10GeP2S12 (Fig. 2c) have already attained an ionic conductivity of 12 mS cm−1 which is comparable to that of organic liquid electrolytes of ∼10−2 S cm−1.49 Furthermore, efforts have been made to substitute expensive Ge and as a result, another lithium superionic conductor Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3 has been reported with a high ionic conductivity of 25 mS cm−1.50 Furthermore, sulfides have better processibility as they are comparatively easily deformable and have a lower melting point. This enables densification of cold pressed sulfide pellets to form the required intimate particle–particle contact, while a very high temperature is required for their oxide counterparts. This also makes sulfides attractive from a processing cost perspective.
 Fig. 2  Sulfide and oxide solid-state lithium ion conductors. Radar plots showing the performance properties of (a) sulfides and (b) oxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. Crystal structures of (c) Li10GeP2S12 (reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2011) Springer Nature) and (d) Li7La3Zr2O12 (reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2011) Chemical Society of Japan). 
However, sulfides also have their own challenges. Most sulfide electrolytes are chemically prone to instability with water molecules generating toxic H2S gas and therefore require an inert processing environment.52 Furthermore, sulfides are comparatively unstable towards lithium metal than oxides.
In comparison to the sulfide counterparts, solid oxide electrolytes demonstrate excellent chemical and thermal stability. Garnet type oxides such as Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZO) show good stability against Li. Garnet type solid ionic conductors were first introduced by Thangadurai et al.53 and later, the garnet LLZO (Fig. 2d) was introduced with fast lithium ion conduction with an ionic conductivity of 0.1–1 mS cm−1.54,55 Furthermore, these garnet oxides are found to be stable against lithium metal and have excellent thermal stability up to 900 °C.43 However, these oxides have poor mechanical flexibility and high grain-boundary resistance. In addition, the processing of these electrolytes is expensive for large-scale production.
3. Solid/solid interfaces
Liquid electrolytes can provide proper wettability to both anode and cathode in Li-ion batteries. This facilitates efficient Li+ transfer reactions into the bulk of the anode and cathode. Despite the high ionic conductivity of solid electrolytes such as the aforementioned sulfides, realization of an all-solid-state battery using such electrolytes is challenging as these solid electrolytes cannot effectively wet the battery electrode surface. This results in a high electrochemical impedance at the electrode/electrolyte interface in the case of the solid-state electrolytes. The chemical stability of the electrolyte plays a crucial role in determining the interfacial stability with the electrodes especially the interface with the lithium metal electrode. The chemical stability of an electrolyte depends on the energy alignment of the electrolyte's lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) or conduction band (CB) and the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) or valence band (VB) with the chemical potential of the anode and cathode.3 The interphase products due to the interfacial reaction play an important part in Li+ diffusion from the bulk electrolyte.56 Several characterization techniques have been employed to characterize these interphase products. In situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization has revealed the presence of Li3P, Li2S and Li–Ge alloys at a Li/LGPS interface57 and the presence of Ti3+, Ti2+ and Ti metal at a Li/lithium lanthanum titanate (LLTO) interface.58 These insights will play a key role in further engineering of the interfacial properties of solid-state electrolytes with the anode and cathode in order to improve the interface.
Herein, interfaces with a cathode and lithium metal electrodes focused on the oxide and sulfide solid electrolytes have been classified as follows: (i) cathode/sulfide electrolyte interface, (ii) cathode/oxide electrolyte interface, (iii) lithium/sulfide electrolyte interface and (iv) lithium/oxide electrolyte interface.
3.1. Cathode/sulfide electrolyte interface
The interface of the battery cathode and solid-state sulfide electrolyte is susceptible to elemental cross-diffusion and undesirable side reactions.59 This makes the interface unstable leading to a large interfacial resistance. Especially, a space charge layer can be formed at the interface between an oxide cathode and the sulfide electrolyte, which originates due to the large difference in the Li chemical potential in oxides and sulfides. This can be attributed to the much stronger bonding of lithium ions with oxides than with sulfides. Haruyama et al. studied the energy of exchanging ions between a typical cathode, lithium cobalt oxide, LiCoO2 (LCO), and β-Li3PS4 (LPS) solid electrolyte and suggested that the mixing of elements Co and P is energetically favorable to the unmixed states at the interface.60 Several efforts have been made to address the interface issue of sulfide solid electrolytes with battery cathodes.

3.1.1. Surface coating. 
Modification of the interface by applying a surface coating either on the sulfide electrolyte or the cathode particles has been extensively researched. These surface coatings can act as an effective buffer layer at the interface. Sasaki et al. developed a strategy to suppress the development of the space charge layer in the sulfide electrolyte by introducing an ionically conductive and electronically insulative thin film between the sulfide electrolyte and the oxide electrode.61 The thin film was formed by spray coating of lithium titanate (Li4Ti5O12 or LTO) on the surface of the LCO cathode particles. High rate performance of In–Li/LCO cells with a LGPS sulfide electrolyte was observed for the coated samples, demonstrating 64% capacity retention at 5 mA cm−2versus the uncoated sample with only 4%. A graphite/LCO all solid-state cell with a 70Li2S–30P2S5 sulfide electrolyte for the coated LCO cathode demonstrated comparable power densities with commercialized Li-ion batteries. Similar spray coated LTO on the other oxide cathode LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) was investigated with the 70Li2S–30P2S5 sulfide solid electrolyte.62 However, the impact of the LTO coating on NCA was not as significant as that on LCO. This was attributed to the much easier diffusion of Ni into LTO than Co. However, LTO has a low ionic conductivity, and thus its resistance significantly contributed to the electrode resistance, limiting the rate capability. Taking this into consideration, the same group also investigated other buffer layers such as LiNbO3 and LiTaO3 which have higher ionic conductivity in their amorphous state than LTO.63 In addition, these coatings could be processed at preferred low temperature as high temperature treatment induces thermal diffusion of the elements. These coatings were also formed on LCO cathode particles by spray coating. The In–Li/LCO cell with LiNbO3 coated LCO showed 74% capacity retention at 5 mA cm−2versus the uncoated sample with only 7%. A similar performance was observed in the case of the LiTaO3 buffer layer. Similarly, the effect of the LiNbO3 coating on the high voltage cathode LiMn2O4 was investigated.64 It was concluded that a similar space charge layer exists between LiMn2O4 and the sulfide electrolyte Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4 which limits the rate performance of all solid-state lithium batteries, and this can be suppressed by using coatings such as LiNbO3.
Furthermore, the use of 2D nanosheets in the form of tantalum oxide (TaO3) coated on the surface of a thin film LCO cathode formed by PLD was introduced.65 TaO3 nanosheets can function as an effective buffer layer as they can be very thin (∼1 nm) and electronically insulative with a bandgap of 5.3 V. TaO3 nanosheets were deposited on the LCO surface by spin coating an acetonitrile suspension consisting of nanosheets in tetrabutylammonium hydroxide (TBAOH), followed by UV-light exposure for 12 h in a N2/O2 environment to decompose the TBA ions. TaO3 as a buffer layer decreased the resistance by two orders of magnitude in an In–Li/LGPS/LCO system. The nanomesh structure of TaO3 nanosheets can provide openings of 0.11 nm × 0.11 nm which enables lithium ion conduction through these channels. Sakuda et al. reported coatings of SiO2 and Li2SiO3 on LiCoO2 particles to improve the rate performance of all solid-state lithium batteries (Fig. 3a).66 The sol–gel method was employed to obtain the coatings and consisted of mixing of the respective Li2SiO3 sol and SiO2 sol with LCO particles, followed by annealing at 350 °C for 30 min. An In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LCO cell was employed to evaluate the effectiveness of the coatings. The resistance contributed by the positive electrode side decreased from 270 Ω for the uncoated particles to 220 Ω for SiO2 coating and 160 Ω for Li2SiO3 coating (Fig. 3b). The cell demonstrated a higher rate cycling performance for the coated LCO compared to the uncoated LCO (Fig. 3c). The lower interfacial impedance and higher rate performance of Li2SiO3 coated LCO versus SiO2 coated LCO suggested that the ionic conductivity of the coating layer also contributes to achieving the high-rate performance of all solid-state batteries. The effect of these coatings was further evaluated with a cutoff voltage of 4.6 V, where the coated LCO demonstrated higher discharge voltages along with better cycling with higher charge/discharge capacities (Fig. 3d and e).67
 Fig. 3  LiCoO2 coating with the sol–gel prepared SiO2 and Li2SiO3 layers. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface of LiCoO2 particles with and without the coatings. Performance of In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 solid-state cells with and without the coatings: (b) Nyquist plots and (c) discharge voltage profiles at different current densities; reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2008) the Electrochemical Society. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles and (e) cycling capacities of In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 solid-state cells with and without the coatings at a higher cut-off voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2009) Elsevier. 
Furthermore, sulfide coatings in the form of CoS and NiS on the LCO cathode particles were explored.68 These sulfide coatings were formed by thermally decomposing their respective dithiocarbamato complexes on LCO particles at 400 °C for 2 h in a N2 atmosphere. All solid-state batteries utilized the Li2S–P2S5 sulfide electrolyte. These sulfide coatings mainly contributed to the suppression of decomposition of the LCO electrode and Li2S–P2S5 sulfide electrolyte and the formation of an interface with high electronic and lithium-ion conductivity. This resulted in a significant decrease in the interfacial resistance between LCO and the electrolyte. Furthermore, the group prepared a LiFePO4 glass ceramic electrode with an amorphous surface layer consisting of Li, Fe, Nb, P, O, and C elements and an 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide-based electrolyte for an all solid-state battery.69 The solid-state cell based on this modified LiFePO4 delivered higher capacities compared to commercial LiFePO4. It was observed that the amorphous surface layer improved the interfacial properties between the LiFePO4 electrode and Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte. Machida et al. employed a Li2O–ZrO2 coated LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) cathode to suppress mutual diffusion at the cathode/electrolyte interface and reduce the interfacial resistance.70 Full cells with graphite/Li2S–P2S5 (80:20 mol%)/NCA were tested. The NCA cathode composite consisted of Li2O–ZrO2 coated NCA (59 wt%), Li2S–P2S5 (80:20 mol%), conductive carbon based on carbon nanotubes (5 wt%) and a hydrocarbon polymer binder (2 wt%). The coated NCA cells showed a decrease in the interfacial resistance which contributed to the improvement in the discharge rate performance compared to the uncoated NCA. Similarly, coating of a higher capacity cathode oxide Li(Ni1/3Mn1/3Co1/3)O2 (NMC) has also been investigated. Inert metal oxides such as Al2O3 and ZrO2 have been employed as the coating on the NMC cathode to improve the interfacial stability of the NMC cathode and sulfide solid electrolytes.71
However, the poor ionic conductivity of these inert metal oxides restrains the achievement of an optimum rate capability performance of all-solid-state batteries. As a solution, the use of a LiAlO2 coating on NMC has been suggested as LiAlO2 with higher ionic conductivity can provide an effective Li+ conduction pathway from NMC to the solid electrolyte.72 A sol–gel method was employed to coat the LiAlO2 layer on the NMC cathode particles and the sol–gel mixture was heated at various temperatures of 250–750 °C for 1 h in an O2 environment to decompose the organic components. The performance of the coating on NMC was evaluated by using solid-state cells comprising the coated NMC cathodes, amorphous Li3PS4 as the solid electrolyte and Li4.4Si as the anode. The 1 mol% LiAlO2 coating heat treated at 350 °C showed minimum interfacial impedance. The cell with 1 mol% LiAlO2 coated NMC exhibited superior cycling stability with 134 mA h g−1 (1st discharge) and 124 mA h g−1 (400th discharge) compared to uncoated NMC with 102 mA h g−1 (1st discharge) and 74 mA h g−1 (250th discharge), suggesting the suppression of unwanted reactions between Li3PS4 and NMC by the LiAlO2 coating.
Furthermore, Kim et al. presented an interesting observation with the use of lithium carbonate (Li2CO3) as the coating on LCO cathode powders.73 Li2CO3, which is a spontaneous coating formed during the synthesis of LCO is unfavorable in conventional liquid Li-ion batteries as it is electrochemically inactive. Therefore, post treatment of LCO is done to remove Li2CO3 from the surface of LCO powders. However, Li2CO3 is also a component of the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer that prevents further electrolyte decomposition in the cell. Considering this, Li2CO3 coated LCO cathodes were investigated for all solid-state batteries employing the Li2S–P2S5 sulfide electrolyte. The Li2CO3 coating on LCO cathodes was prepared using mixtures of lithium hydroxide and LCO powder heated at a low temperature of 400 °C under CO2 for 3 h. The cell with 4 wt% Li2CO3 coated LCO exhibited a discharge capacity of 137 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 86.4 mA h g−1 at 0.5C compared to uncoated LCO with 62.1 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 13.9 mA h g−1 at 0.5C. These results suggest that an appropriate amount of the Li2CO3 coating as a physical barrier can contribute to enhancement in cell reversibility and interfacial stability by decreasing the interfacial impedance during charge/discharge.


3.1.2. Interface softening. 
One of the major obstacles for the implementation of solid-state electrolytes is their wettability towards the battery electrodes resulting in a small contact area between the active material and electrolyte. Kitaura et al. employed the softening of the 80Li2S·20P2S5 glassy electrolyte to increase the active contact area between the active material and solid electrolyte.74 The 80Li2S·20P2S5 glassy electrolyte was converted to a supercooled liquid state by hot pressing and this viscous liquid was used to form contact with the active materials LTO and LCO. It was observed that a reaction occurred between the viscous electrolyte and LCO, which was then overcome by coating LiNbO3 on LCO. A higher reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 was observed for an all-solid-state battery (LTO/80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte/LiNbO3 coated LCO) that employed hot pressing in comparison to one employing cold pressing with only 50 mA h g−1.


3.1.3. Electrolyte infiltration. 
Sulfide electrolytes are reactive towards the common polar solvents used for the wet slurry process to fabricate electrodes for lithium batteries. Therefore, to obtain a composite electrode for all solid-state batteries, Kim et al. demonstrated infiltration of a solution processable sulfide electrolyte into conventional electrodes of Li-ion batteries.75 For this, conventional LCO and graphite electrodes prepared by slurry casting were dipped into a Li6PS5Cl (LPSCl) sulfide electrolyte solution in ethanol, followed by drying in an argon environment, vacuum annealing at 180 °C and cold pressing under 770 MPa (Fig. 4a). The LPSCl infiltrated LCO (Fig. 4b) and graphite electrodes demonstrated a high reversible capacity of 141 mA h g−1 and 364 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 30 °C (Fig. 4c and d). The electrochemical performance of the LPSCl electrodes was found to be superior to conventionally prepared (dry-mixed and slurry-mixed) electrodes for solid state batteries and comparable to that of liquid electrolyte cells. The superior performance was attributed to the formation of intimate ionic contact formed by ionic percolation pathways.
 Fig. 4  Solution processable Li6PS5Cl sulfide electrolyte infiltrated into battery electrodes. (a) Schematic depicting the approach; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the infiltrated LCO battery electrode and elemental mapping of Co and S; charge/discharge voltage curves of (c) LCO/Li–In and (d) Gr/Li–In half cells at 0.1C with liquid (LE) and infiltrated solid-state (SE) electrolytes (inset shows voltage profiles for LCO without solid-state electrolyte infiltration). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society. 


3.1.4. Electrolyte coating on cathodes. 
The cathodes in all-solid-state batteries require a conductive pathway to the solid electrolyte. The conventional approach for cathodes in all solid-state batteries is to use a composite of a solid electrolyte powder mixed with the cathode. Another promising and effective approach is the coating of the cathode powder with a solid-state electrolyte. Sakuda et al. demonstrated 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte (1 wt%) coating on LiNbO3 coated LCO powder by PLD (Fig. 5a and b).76 The electrolyte coated LCO cells were able to reversibly charge and discharge with a reversible capacity of 30 mA h g−1 for 100 cycles while the non-coated LCO cells were not. This performance was further improved by controlling the amount of coating and heat treatment of the 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte coated LCO.77 The amount of coating when increased from 40 min to 120 min improved the reversible capacity from 35 to 65 mA h g−1 and further heat treatment at 200 °C improved it to 69 mA h g−1. The heat treatment led to an increase in ionic conductivity of the coating. Meanwhile, all-solid-state cells using a mixture of the sulfide electrolyte (20 min) coated LCO with sulfide electrolyte particles (90/10 wt%) delivered a much lower interfacial resistance and a reversible capacity of 95 mA h g−1 which was also superior to that of cells with uncoated (20 mA h g−1) and LiNbO3-coated LCO (60 mA h g−1) mixed with sulfide electrolyte particles (Fig. 5c). This approach demonstrated the effective formation of lithium-ion conducting pathways in the cathode composite for all solid-state batteries. In addition, this approach of sulfide coating on cathodes facilitates the use of a significantly less amount of the sulfide electrolyte to form the cathode composite in comparison to the traditional approach of mixing the sulfide electrolyte powder with the cathode powder to form the composite. This decrease in the amount of the sulfide electrolyte can contribute to the increase in the energy density of all-solid-state batteries.
 Fig. 5  LiCoO2 particles coated with the pulsed layer deposited Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the approach; (b) elemental mapping of the solid electrolyte coated LiCoO2 after 450 cycles; (c) charge–discharge voltage profiles of all-solid-state cells In/solid-state electrolyte/LiCoO2 consisting of 90 wt% LiCoO2 and 10 wt% solid electrolyte particles using uncoated LiCoO2, LiNbO3-coated LiCoO2 and solid-electrolyte (20 min) coated LiCoO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2011) Elsevier. 
To further enhance the performance of the all-solid-state batteries, thin film coatings of sulfide electrolytes such as Li4GeS4–Li3PS4 that possess even higher ionic conductivity than 10−3 S cm−1 at 25 °C were considered.78 A similar PLD method was employed to deposit the sulfide electrolyte on LiNbO3 coated LCO cathodes. Heat treatment of the sulfide coated LCO led to enhancement in ionic conductivity and decrease in the number of voids in the composite cathode electrode. This observation was complemented by (i) decrease in the interfacial resistance between the sulfide electrolyte coating layer and positive electrode, (ii) increase in the reversible capacity of In/80Li2S–20P2S5/LCO from 67 to 82 mA h g−1 and (iii) enhancement in the rate capability of the cells.
Furthermore, Aso et al. explored the deposition of the Li2S5–P2S5 sulfide electrolyte coating on NiS grown on vapor grown carbon nanofibers (VGCFs) by PLD as a composite electrode for all-solid-state batteries.79 The VGCFs facilitate continuous electronic conduction pathways in the composite electrode. The PLD deposited coating of 80Li2S–20P2S5 on the NiS-VGCF composite provides lithium ion conduction pathways for the NiS active material. The solid-state cell based on solid electrolyte coated NiS-VGCF composite/80Li2S–20P2S5/Li–In delivered a high 2nd cycle discharge capacity of 240 mA h g−1 at 1C rate versus the cell with the uncoated NiS-VGCF with only 100 mA h g−1. This suggested the favorable electron and lithium ion conduction pathways achieved by the sulfide electrolyte coated NiS-VGCF. Similarly, Xu et al. prepared a MoS2/Li7P3S11 composite cathode by coating a Li7P3S11 solid electrolyte layer on MoS2 particles using a solution processing method.80 The MoS2/Li7P3S11 electrode exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 868.4 mA h g−1 and a reversible charge capacity of 669.2 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of 77.1% versus the untreated MoS2 electrode with an initial discharge capacity of 740 mA h g−1 followed by rapid capacity fade during cycling.


3.1.5. Sulfur-based nanocomposite positive electrode. 
A rather compatible cathode for a sulfide solid electrolyte would be the sulfur-based cathode as the active material compared to the oxide cathodes. Hayashi et al. reported an approach to form nanocomposites of the NiS active material with the solid sulfide electrolyte 80Li2S–20P2S5 that accomplishes an intimate contact area between the solid electrolyte and positive electrode for all-solid-state batteries.81 Nanosized NiS embedded into the 80Li2S–20P2S5 sulfide electrolyte was obtained by a mechanochemical method. This approach of preparing the composite electrode delivered a higher charge/discharge capacity compared to the cell with the electrode formed by conventional mixing of electrode and electrolyte powders. Similarly, Li7P3S11 electrolyte particles anchored on cobalt sulfide nanosheets via an in situ liquid-phase approach were reported by Yao et al. (Fig. 6a).82 The anchored nanosized Li7P3S11 electrolyte particles (with a reduced particle size of ∼ 10 nm) onto the surface of cobalt sulfide nanosheets increased the contact area between the electrolyte and active materials, enabling the reduction of interfacial resistance (Fig. 6c). The enhancement in the interface led to an all-solid-state cell (Fig. 6b) exhibiting a high rate capability (Fig. 6d and e) of 421 mA h g−1 at 1.27 mA cm−2 after 1000 cycles (Fig. 6f) and high energy and power densities of 360 W h kg−1 and 3823 W kg−1 at current densities of 0.13 and 12.73 mA cm−2, respectively versus a pristine cobalt sulfide cathode.
 Fig. 6  Cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites as the positive electrode. (a) Schematic showing the synthesis process; (b) schematic showing the all-solid-state Li-ion battery under study; (c) Nyquist plots showing the comparison of cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites with cobalt sulfide at the 1st and 1000th cycles at a current density of 1.27 mA cm−2; charge/discharge voltage profiles of the solid-state cells at various rates in the voltage range of 0.5–3.0 V at 25 °C with (d) cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites and (e) cobalt sulfide nanosheets; (f) cycling performance of the cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
The fact that the Li–S battery technology employs sulfur which is also a constituent in sulfide electrolytes makes it appealing to explore sulfur positive electrodes. Nagao et al. investigated the use of a sulfur–carbon composite with the Li2S–P2S5 sulfide electrolyte for all-solid-state Li–S batteries.83 The composite of sulfur–carbon with Li2S–P2S5 was obtained by mechanical milling of sulfur (S), acetylene black (AB) and the Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte (SE), which facilitated amorphization of sulfur and reduction of the electrode particle size. The all-solid-state Li–S cells of Li–In/80Li2S–20P2S5 glass-ceramic/S with three different composite S electrodes were studied and compared, namely (i) S + AB + SE (obtained by grinding all three in a mortar), (ii) S–AB + SE (obtained by milling S and AB, followed by grinding the S–AB composite and SE in a mortar) and iii) S–AB–SE (obtained by milling the mixture of the S–AB composite and SE). The cell with the S–AB–SE electrode showed significant improvement in the reversible capacity with a charge/discharge capacity of 1550/1220 mA h g−1 (1st cycle) compared to S + AB + SE (<100 mA h g−1) and S–AB + SE (<300 mA h g−1). In addition, the cycling capacity of the cell with the S–AB–SE electrode was excellent exhibiting a reversible capacity of 853 mA h g−1 at 1.3 mA cm−2 and 996 mA h g−1 at 0.64 mA cm−2 for the 200th cycle. The superior performance was attributed to the intimate electronic contact and ionic contact formed among the three components, S, AB and SE, achieved by the mechanical milling approach. The same group investigated the Li2S active material for all-solid-state Li–S batteries using a similar approach of mechanical milling to obtain the Li2S composite electrode.84 All-solid-state In/80Li2S–20P2S5 glass-ceramic/Li2S with three different composite Li2S electrodes was studied and compared, namely (i) Li2S + AB + SE (obtained by grinding all three in a mortar, (ii) Li2S–AB + SE (obtained by milling S and AB, followed by grinding the S–AB composite and SE in a mortar) and (iii) Li2S–AB–SE (obtained by milling the mixture of the S–AB composite and SE). The cell with the Li2S–AB–SE electrode exhibited a reversible capacity of 700 mA h g−1 for 10 cycles compared to Li2S + AB + SE (<10 mA h g−1) and Li2S–AB + SE (only 170 mA h g−1). Furthermore, the effect of the particle size of the Li2S active material was studied using non-milled (particle size > 100 μm) and milled (particle size < 1 μm) Li2S particles. The Li2S–AB–SE electrode with milled Li2S delivered a higher reversible capacity of 795 mA h g−1 and a superior rate performance compared to the non-milled Li2S. The reduction of the particle size of Li2S and intimate contact between the three components Li2S, AB and SE contributed to the excellent performance of the all solid-state Li–S battery. Furthermore, the microstructural changes of the Li2S–AB–SE composite electrode upon cycling were studied.85 It was concluded that the Li2S active particles of less than 10 nm were able to reversibly change from crystalline to amorphous upon lithiation and amorphous to crystalline upon delithiation, suggesting that the reversible reaction Li2S ↔ S + 2Li+ + 2e− takes place. It is significantly important that the Li2S active particles of less than 10 nm be well-dispersed in the composite electrode consisting of AB and SE particles.
Han et al. introduced the concept of using a single material for all-solid-state batteries where they demonstrated the use of LGPS as both anode and cathode after mixing with carbon additives (Fig. 7a and b).86 The Li–S and Ge–S components in LGPS can act as the cathode and anode of the battery respectively. The area-specific interfacial resistance for the single-LGPS battery was comparable to that of the liquid electrolyte battery, despite the higher loading and larger thickness of the active material. High reversible capacities of 275 mA h g−1 and 253 mA h g−1 were observed for LGPS as the cathode and anode respectively with an excellent rate capability performance (Fig. 7c–f). The single LGPS battery was able to exhibit a reversible capacity of 104 mA h g−1 (Fig. 7g). A similar concept can be explored for other solid electrolyte systems as well.
 Fig. 7  Single material for all solid-state batteries. Schematic showing the comparison between (a) typical and (b) single-material (Li10GeP2S12) all-solid-state batteries; charge/discharge voltage profiles of Li/LGPS/LGPS-C solid-state cells in the voltage range of (c) 1.5–3.5 V for the cathode and (d) 0.0–2.0 V for the anode at a current density of 10 mA g−1; (e and f) charge/discharge voltage profiles of Li/LGPS/LGPS-C solid-state cells at different current densities; (g) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the single-LGPS battery at a current density of 10 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.0–2.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons. 

3.2. Cathode/oxide electrolyte interface
The high interfacial resistance at the cathode/electrolyte interface can be due to (1) poor contact between (a) the active cathode material and solid electrolyte in the bulk of the cathode composite and (b) the cathode layer and electrolyte layer, (2) electrochemical cycling instability between the cathode active material and solid electrolyte, and (3) volume change of the electrode materials causing interfacial stress/strain. This cathode/electrolyte interfacial problem is even more severe in the case of ceramic oxides compared to their sulfide counterparts. The objective would be to obtain an excellent fine physical contact between the cathode and electrolyte. Numerous efforts have been reported on the modification of this interface.

3.2.1. Vacuum deposition of a thin film cathode on oxides. 
One of the attempts to realize good interfacial contact between solid oxide electrolytes with the cathode has been the use of vacuum deposition of a thin-film cathode on solid oxide electrolytes. Toyota R&D Labs Inc demonstrated use of pulsed laser deposited LCO cathode thin films (∼500 nm) on top of Li6.75La3Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLZONb).87 The cathode thin film deposition approach demonstrated a low interfacial resistance of 170 Ω cm−2 for a LCO/LLZONb/Li cell which is comparable to that of Li-ion batteries with a liquid electrolyte. The cell exhibited a charge/discharge capacity of 130/129 mA h g−1, accounting to 90% of the theoretical capacity of LCO. Likewise, Matsuyama et al. reported a thin film electrode of amorphous TiS4 (α. TiS4) (∼400 nm) by pulse laser deposition on a garnet type solid electrolyte.88 The dense α. TiS4 electrode showed good contact between the electrode and the electrolyte with a conductivity of 1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 25 °C. An all solid-state cell of Li/LLZ/α. TiS4 at 25 °C showed a reversible capacity of about 500 mA h g−1 of α. TiS4 at 0.010 mA cm−2 and good cycling performance for 15 cycles. A thin film of LCO was sputtered onto a Li2O–Al2O3–SiO2–P2O5–TiO2–GeO2 (LICGC) NASICON-type glass ceramic solid electrolyte substrate and was annealed to observe the microstructural change in the LCO cathode and LCO/electrolyte interface.89 A solid-state cell with a LCO/NASICON electrolyte interface showed stable performance during cycling. However, capacity fading was observed due to the degradation of the NASICON-type electrolyte in contact with the lithium metal anode.


3.2.2. High temperature co-sintering of the cathode with oxides. 
The limitation of vacuum deposition of cathodes on oxides is the lower thickness of the cathodes. To realize a higher bulk energy density, a much thicker cathode (∼100 microns) would be required. A thicker cathode can be easily accomplished using the traditional slurry-based coating method. However, this conventional approach does not facilitate sufficient interfacial contact of the coated cathode and the solid oxide.
To address this, Goodenough et al. studied the sintering of LCO on a LLZO pellet at 700 °C and obtained a low capacity of only 35 mA h g−1,90 while the theoretical capacity of LCO is ∼140 mA h g−1. However, chemical instability between the cathode and LLZO is most likely to occur which again leads to a highly resistive interphase. This chemical instability was attributed to the elemental cross-diffusion and formation of a tetragonal LLZO phase at the interface. It is important to identify the reactions that take place between the oxide cathode and oxide electrolytes and their decomposition products in this high temperature cosintering approach to form dense cathodes. This can help achieve better interfacial design of a solid-state battery. Taking this into consideration, Miara et al. studied decomposition reactions that take place when cosintering high voltage spinel cathode materials Li2NiMn3O4, Li2FeMn3O8 and LiCoMnO4 with Li6.6La3Zr1.6Ta0.4O12 (LLZTO).91 Thermal analysis techniques and X-ray diffraction along with ab initio calculations were employed for the study. It was found that LLZTO was not compatible with spinel cathodes even at 600 °C. Lithium and oxygen of LLZTO were responsible for reacting with the cathodes to form insulation phases in the form of La2Zr2O7, La2O3, La3TaO7, TiO2 and LaMnO3 which contribute to increase the interfacial impedance. Liu et al. employed a rapid thermal annealing technique of the cathode on the garnet by supplying voltage to a suspended rectangular piece of carbon paper (1 cm length, 0.8 cm width and 250 μm thickness) on a glass substrate between two copper electrodes with conductive silver paste.92 The garnet solid electrolyte was put on the glass substrate beneath the carbon paper during rapid thermal annealing, which decreased the interfacial charge transfer resistance from 2.5 × 104 Ω cm2 to 71 Ω cm2 at room temperature. Furthermore, the interfacial resistance decreased by 5.5 times from 170 to 31 Ω cm2 at 100 °C.


3.2.3. Use of solid electrolytes in the cathode layer. 
The high chemical instability of the LCO/LLZO interface at high temperature has been addressed by the use of an ionic conductor in the cathode. Ohta et al. in 2013 introduced the sintering additive Li3BO3 (LBO) that is chemically stable with LCO and LLZONb.93 LBO is an ionic conductor with a low melting point (ca. 700 °C). LBO when melted enhances the physical contact of LCO with LLZONb and further facilitates conduction of Li+ ions between LCO and LLZO. The key is to use an interphase that is ionically conducting, electrochemically stable and wets both LLZO and LCO. This is not possible by using a sintering additive like LBO. Recently, an extremely low interfacial resistance was achieved by thermally soldering LCO and LLZO together. This was done by using Li2.3−xC0.7+xB0.3−xO3 (LCBO) that is formed by the reaction between the Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 solder and Li2CO3 coating (Fig. 8a).94 Li2CO3 is a spontaneously formed coating on the surface of LLZO and LCO. Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 powder was obtained by annealing Li2CO3 and LBO in air at 650 °C for 10 h. Li2.3C0.7B0.3O3 was added to the cathode composite and reacts with Li2CO3, forming a conformal coating on both LCO and LLZO (Fig. 8b–d). The LCBO interphase has a much higher ionic conductivity compared to LBO and has excellent wetting properties. The slurry of the cathode composite was coated on top of LLZO and annealed at 700 °C for 1 h in air. LCBO enabled complete separation between LCO and LLZO which suppressed elemental diffusion and chemical reactions leading to its superior chemical stability. An all-solid-state Li/LLZO/LCO battery fabricated by implementing this approach demonstrated excellent cycling performance and stability with a room temperature capacity of 94 mA h g−1 at 0.05C for 100 cycles (Fig. 8e) and an initial reversible capacity of 106 mA h g−1 at 1C at 100 °C.
 Fig. 8  LCBO interphase-modified all-ceramic lithium battery. (a) Schematic showing the engineered all-ceramic cathode/electrolyte interface; cross-sectional SEM images of the cathode composite (Li2.3Co0.7B0.3O3 + LLZO@Li2CO3 + LCO@Li2CO3) coated on LLZO (b) before sintering and (c) after sintering at 700 °C; (d) cross-sectional SEM image at high magnification of the cathode composite after sintering at 700 °C; (e) cycling capacity of the all solid-state interface-engineered Li/LLZO/LCO cell at 0.05C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2018) Cell Press. 
Liu and coworkers found that doping Ta ions in LLZO could effectively enhance the ionic conductivity of the LLZO electrolyte.95 2.5 at% Ta5+ ions were doped into LLZO, which provided an ionic conductivity of ∼10−3 S cm−1. LBO was employed in the cathode layer to provide good interfacial contact to assemble an all-solid-state battery. A maximum specific discharge capacity of 101.3 mA h g−1 at room temperature was obtained. A cohesive and highly conductive polymer electrolyte employed in the cathode layer or inserted in the interface of electrolyte/anode achieved a three-dimensional ionic conductive network in the cathode layer and superior interfacial contact of the electrolyte/electrodes (Fig. 9a).96 As shown in Fig. 9b–d, the SEM image of the screen-printed cathode shows a fluffy structure with uneven thickness, while the doctor bladed layers using PEO or PVdF as the binder show a more dense structure with uniform thickness. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements of cathode/LAGP/cathode symmetrical cells as shown in Fig. 9e–g show that the impedance values for the screen-printed LiFePO4 (LFP) cathode are almost 200 times that with PEO at 60 °C (15380 Ω cm2 v/s 77 Ω cm2) and 5 times when compared to the cathode with PVdF in it at 60 °C (∼15380 Ω cm2 v/s 2690 Ω cm2). Consequently, an all-solid-state battery LiFePO4/Li employing a NASICON-type ionic conductor covered with a PEO-based polymer exhibits excellent interfacial compatibility, ultra-long cycle life with a high reversible discharge capacity maintained at 127.8 mA h g−1 for the 1000th cycle at 1C (Fig. 9h), along with a retention of 96.6% and an initial discharge capacity of 153.4 mA h g−1 with a high retention of 99.9% after 200 cycles at 0.1C. Similarly, Zha et al. proposed a LLZO-based membrane electrolyte where a small amount of the polymer binder was used to bind the LLZO particles.97 The LLZO-based electrolyte layer was coated on top of the cathode and was hot pressed to compact the structure of the electrolyte/cathode. The ionic conductivity of LLZO–PEO (9:1) before hot pressing was 6.39 × 10−4 mS cm−1 at 30 °C while hot pressing improved the conductivity to 4.26 × 10−3 mS cm−1 at 30 °C and 2.17 × 10−2 mS cm−1 at 60 °C. An all-solid-state Li/90LLZO–10PEO/LiFePO4 battery exhibited good cycling performance with a discharge capacity of 148.3 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 50 cycles at 60 °C and 96 mA h g−1 at 25 °C.
 Fig. 9  Composite electrolyte based on coating of the PEO-based solid polymer electrolyte on LAGP pellets. (a) Schematic showing an all-solid-state Li/composite electrolyte/LiFePO4 cell; cross-sectional SEM images of the LAGP/LFP interface prepared by (b) screen printing, (c) doctor-blade with PEO, and (d) doctor-blade with PVDF; Nyquist plots of the cathode/LAGP/cathode symmetrical cells for which the cathode was prepared by (e) screen printing, (f) doctor-blade with PEO and (g) doctor-blade with PVDF; (h) long term cycling performance of an all-solid-state Li/composite electrolyte/LiFePO4 cell at 1C, 60 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The solid-state electrolyte requirements of a high modulus to block Li-dendrite formation at the Li-metal anode side and flexibility for good interfacial contact at the cathode side are the main bottlenecks for its application. Thus, solid-state electrolytes that can incorporate features of both solid polymer electrolytes and inorganic ceramic electrolytes which can mitigate or minimize the interfacial resistance and dendrite growth respectively are the current requirement to realize an efficient all-solid-state battery. Duan et al. employed an in situ polymerization technique to assemble a lithium metal battery based on an asymmetric solid electrolyte (ASE).98 A stack of the cathode LiFePO4, polymerization precursor solution, LLZO-coated separator and Li metal anode was prepared and heated at 80 °C for 48 h to accomplish the polymerization process. The precursor solution consisted of polymer monomer poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether acrylate/LiTFSI/heat initiator BPO. Thus, the prepared ASE had a Li-ion conductivity of 1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 55 °C and a wide electrochemical window of up to 4.8 V. SEM and EPMA-EDS analysis showed good adhesion of electrodes with the electrolyte. The bulk resistance and charge transfer resistance of a battery assembled with the ASE at 55 °C were 49.68 and 609.8 Ω cm2, respectively, which were lower than those of LFP/LLZTO/Li batteries. The LFP/ASE/Li battery showed a high initial discharge capacity of 160.6 mA h g−1 and an initial coulombic efficiency of 99.17% at 0.2C and 55 °C.


3.2.4. Surface coating. 
Modifying the interface with a suitable coating layer is another successfully demonstrated technique. Kato et al. introduced a thin Nb layer (∼10 nm) on both sides of the LLZO pellet by RF sputtering and subsequently deposited LCO on the Nb-modified surface by PLD (Fig. 10a).99 The Nb-deposited LLZO pellet was heated at 873 K for 2 h in an O2 environment. The introduction of the Nb layer leads to the formation of a Li+ conductive amorphous phase at the LLZO/LCO interface. This Li–Nb–O amorphous layer fulfills two purposes: (i) it prevents cross diffusion of La and Co and the formation of a non-Li+ conductive phase such as La2CoO4 and (ii) fills the voids between LLZO and LCO. This led to a decrease in interfacial resistance from 2600 Ω cm−2 to 150 Ω cm−2 (Fig. 10b) and high rate capability of Li/LLZO/LCO all-solid-state batteries (Fig. 10c). Wang et al. reported a unique and effective mixed ionic-electronic (MIE) conducting cathode-garnet interface which showed enhanced Li transport after slow pre-lithiation.100 TiS2 and P3-CNTs were sonicated and dispersed in an N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP) solvent and coated on a garnet solid state electrolyte (SSE). The carbon nanotubes provide channels for global electron transport whereas TiS2 assists in local electron transport in the design. After the pre-lithiation process, the layered TiS2 structure enhances Li ion transport. Variation in EIS spectra according to temperature was observed for solid-state batteries. As the temperature was varied from 60 °C to 150 °C, the electrolyte/electrode interfacial resistance decreased from more than 6000 Ω cm2 to less than 100 Ω cm2.
 Fig. 10  Surface modification using Nb. (a) Schematic of the approach; (b) interfacial resistance as a function of Nb layer thickness; (c) rate capability curves comparing the Nb-modified Li/LLZO/LCO cells vs. non-modified ones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2014) Elsevier. 


3.2.5. Porous garnet interface structure. 
An interesting technique was reported which utilizes the porous interface of the garnet electrolyte which can facilitate intimate accommodation of the electrode material into the garnet electrolyte (Fig. 11a).101 A sacrificial organic template was employed on dense c-Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 pellets which on sintering at a high temperature of 1075 °C in an O2 rich environment resulted in a porous interface. The LTO electrode slurry consisting of LTO, c-Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 powder, conductive carbon and PVDF binder was then cast onto the as-formed porous pellet surface. The cast electrode is intimately embedded into the pores of the pellet, in contrast to the flat pellet and electrode interface for the non-modified cell (Fig. 11b). The interface engineered all solid-state battery showed significant decrease in resistance (Fig. 11c) and thus exhibited a higher discharge capacity compared to the non-modified battery (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  Porous interface of the c-Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 garnet structure. (a) Schematic showing non-modified and modified interfaces; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the interface of the pellet with LTO; (c) Nyquist plots of all-solid-state cells with LTO and Li metal electrodes with non-modified and modified interfaces; (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the non-modified and interface engineered all-solid-state cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons. 


3.2.6. Plastic crystal interlayer. 
Lu et al. employed a plastic crystal interlayer which is based on succinonitrile with a fluoroethylene carbonate additive to modify the electrode|Ta-doped-LLZO (LLZTO) interface and enhance Li+ ion transport in it (Fig. 12a–e).102 The area-specific resistance (ASR) at the interface for the Li|LLZTO|LiFePO4 battery dropped from ∼13000 Ω cm2 to ∼560 Ω cm2 after coating the interlayer. This interlayer incorporated battery can cycle over 50 cycles maintaining a capacity of 140 mA h g−1 at room temperature (Fig. 12f). Furthermore, the total drop in resistance for Li symmetrical cells was by a factor of 16 between the coated (∼100 Ω cm2) and uncoated cell (∼1600 Ω cm2).
 Fig. 12  Plastic crystal interlayer based on succinonitrile (SN) with a fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) additive. (a) Schematic of interlayer preparation; cross-sectional SEM images of the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface (b) without and (d) with the interlayer; schematic showing Li+ transport at the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface (c) without and (e) with the interlayer; (f) rate capability of the all-solid-state Li./LLZTO/LiFePO4 cell with SN + FEC as the interlayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 

3.3. Lithium/sulfide electrolyte interface
Most sulfide electrolytes with high ionic conductivity are chemically unstable with lithium metal. This interfacial instability leads to the formation of lithium dendrites along the voids and grain boundaries in these sulfide electrolytes. The decomposition products at the interface have much lower ionic conductivity and higher electronic conductivity, thus making the interphase vulnerable to lithium dendrite growth as well. One of the strategies to reduce the electrochemical reduction of sulfide electrolytes has been the use of lithium alloys with a higher lithiation/delithiation potential.103 However, this lithium alloy significantly compromises the maximum cell energy density that the lithium metal anode can deliver. Therefore, it is critical to find alternative approaches to address this interfacial instability in order to realize the use of sulfide electrolytes with lithium metal. Several promising approaches have been applied which are further discussed.

3.3.1. Surface coating. 
Tatsumisago et al. modified the interface of the Li2S–P2S5 sulfide solid electrolyte by inserting a Au thin film between the electrolyte and Li metal via thermal evaporation.104 The use of this Au film helped achieve a higher utilization of Li metal with galvanostatic cycling of the symmetrical cells compared to that without the Au film. Similarly, the group studied the insertion of an indium thin layer in between Li and the Li2S–P2S5 sulfide solid electrolyte.105 The lithium–indium alloy possesses a high lithium ion diffusion coefficient. The deposition of the indium layer demonstrated good cyclability and rate capability for Li/LTO solid state cells. Similarly, Xu et al. introduced an in situ formed LiH2PO4 protective layer on the Li metal surface by spin casting different concentrations of phosphoric acid solution in THF.106 This protective layer improves the chemical stability of LGPS to Li metal by preventing the migration of mixed ionic-electronic reactants into LGPS, thus limiting the interphases. A symmetrical cell showed a low overpotential with cycling over 950 h at 0.1 mA cm−2. Furthermore, a solid-state cell based on LCO/LGPS/Li with the engineered interface demonstrated excellent cycling performance with 131.1 and 113.7 mA h g−1 for the 1st and 500th cycle respectively.
Aliovalent substitution of Li4SnS4 to form a Li3.833Sn0.833As0.166S4 solid electrolyte that has a higher ionic conductivity of 1.39 mS cm−1 at room temperature as well as excellent air stability was reported.107 However, this modified sulfide electrolyte was also unstable or incompatible with the metallic Li electrode. To address this, the surface of the solid electrolyte was chemically passivated with a Li-compatible composite 3LiBH4·LiI in a THF solvent. This surface modification led to stable cycling of the symmetrical cells, demonstrating the compatibility of the passivated electrolyte with metallic lithium. Xu et al. introduced a combination of two approaches to prevent the growth of Li dendrites, namely, (i) a LiF or LiI interface layer between Li and the sulfide electrolyte and (ii) methoxyperfluorobutane (HFE) (or I solution) to penetrate into the solid sulfide electrolyte (Fig. 13a).103 In addition to dendrite suppression facilitated by the LiF or LiI interface layer, the infiltrated HFE (or I) in the sulfide electrolyte can consume the lithium dendrites forming LiF (or LiI), thus forming a stable and compatible interface of the sulfide electrolyte with lithium (Fig. 13b). The interface modified Li symmetrical cells exhibited a much lower interfacial impedance compared to the non-modified cells (Fig. 13c). An all-solid-state lithium battery of LiNbO3 coated LiCoO2/Li7P3S11/Li was assembled with the HFE infiltrated sulfide electrolyte and LiF coated Li metal which demonstrated a reversible capacity of 118.9 mA h g−1 and a retention of 96.8 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles (Fig. 13d).
 Fig. 13  Interface engineering using the LiF (or LiI) interphase layer and HFE (or I solution) infiltrated sulfide electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the interface modification; (b) schematic showing the lithium stripping/plating process of bare and interface modified Li metal; (c) Nyquist plots of Li symmetrical cells based on the pristine and interface modified Li7P3S11 sulfide electrolyte; (d) cycling performance of a LCO-based all-solid-state battery without and with interface modification at 0.1 mA cm−2 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 
Wang et al. introduced the use of molecular layer deposition (MLD) to deposit an inorganic–organic hybrid interlayer (alucone) on the lithium metal surface as an artificial SEI layer.108 30 MLD cycles of alucone coating on Li metal displayed almost stable interfacial resistance with a total minimum resistance compared to bare Li metal, suggesting the suppression of interfacial reactions at the interface between the Li10SnP2S12 sulfide electrolyte and Li metal. Longer cycling was exhibited for the plating/stripping process of Li symmetrical cells by 30 MLD cycle alucone coated Li metal in comparison to bare Li. Furthermore, an all-solid-state cell using this modified Li metal delivered a high initial capacity of 120 mA h g−1, retaining 60 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles. Similarly, an efficient technique to stabilize the Li/LGPS interface by modifying the surface of the lithium electrode with a nanocomposite interphase consisting of organic (LiO-(CH2O)n-Li) and inorganic (LiF, –NSO2-Li, Li2O) salts was demonstrated by Guo et al. (Fig. 14a and b).109 This interphase was developed by in situ electrochemical reduction of a liquid electrolyte on Li metal. This interphase can serve as an interfacial protective layer facilitating the prevention of LGPS reduction by Li during cycling and thus stabilizing the Li/LGPS interface. Furthermore, this interphase also enables fast ion conduction at the interface. Using this interphase, the Li/LGPS/Li symmetrical cell demonstrated cycling for over 3000 h (Fig. 14c) and the Li/LGPS/TiS2 full cell achieved improved cycling stability over 200 cycles compared to bare Li (Fig. 14d).
 Fig. 14  Modification of the lithium metal surface using the Li salt-based organic–inorganic nanocomposite interphase. Schematics showing (a) poor interface and (b) stable interface between Li and LGPS; (c) plating/stripping voltage profiles of Li/Li symmetrical cells with different electrolyte compositions; (d) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li/LGPS/TiS2 full cells comparing bare Li and nanocomposite-stabilized Li. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons. 
Philip et al. introduced the use of solvate coated sulfide electrolytes using lithium bis(trifluoromethane sulfonyl)imide and a highly fluorinated ether solvate electrolyte.110 Two thiophosphates, namely Li7P3S11 (LPS) and LGPS, were examined for this purpose. Different observations were made for these two types of electrolytes. Cell resistance with time was found to decrease for solvate-LGPS (compared to LGPS) but increase for solvate-LPS (compared to LPS). This was attributed to solvate permeation into the bulk of LGPS. A LPS-1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl 2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (TTE) layer was formed on the surface of the LPS pellet, attributed to its higher solubility in TTE. Cyclic voltammetry tests showed a much enhanced current density for solvate-LGPS compared to LGPS, while solvate-LPS showed much better cycling stability (100 cycles) versus LPS (2 cycles).


3.3.2. Elemental substitution/doping. 
Despite the highest ionic conductivity displayed by sulfide solid electrolytes such as LGPS, their structural stability needs to be improved, which will further improve the electrochemical stability against Li metal. Yang et al. reported partially substituting Li sites by divalent Ba metal ions to realize high structural stability of LGPS.111 It was observed that although Li0.9Ba0.3GeP2S12 demonstrates a lower ionic conductivity of 7.04 × 10−4 S cm−1vs. LGPS with 1.43 × 10−3 S cm−1, the symmetrical cells with the modified LGPS demonstrated much reduced polarization. This further implied the enhancement in structural stability of LGPS owing to the strong coulombic interaction between Ba2+ and S2− sites as indicated by the blue shift observed in the Raman spectra. Better thermodynamic stability is expected, with chemical bonds between Ge/P–O being stronger than those in Ge/P–S. With this in view, Sun et al. partially substituted sulfur by oxygen to form an oxysulfide Li10GeP2S12−xOx solid electrolyte.112 It was confirmed that the oxygen substitution takes place at S(1) positions leading to local structural changes in the PS4 tetrahedra. High ionic conductivities of 1.03 × 10−2 to 8.43 × 10−2 S cm−1 were observed for Li10GeP2S11.7O0.3 and Li10GeP2S11.4O0.6 systems vs. LGPS with 1.02 × 10−2 S cm−1 along with excellent electrochemical stability in the voltage range of 0–10 V vs. Li/Li+. All solid-state cells based on LiNbO3 coated LCO/Li with the modified LGPS solid electrolyte showed better cycling performance compared to LGPS.
Xu et al. introduced a MoS2 doped Li2S–P2S5 glass ceramic sulfide solid electrolyte produced by high energy ball milling and annealing.113 The doped sulfide electrolyte Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01 maintained the structure of the Li7P3S11 sulfide family and delivered a higher ionic conductivity of 4.8 mS cm−1 at room temperature vs. Li7P3S11 (Fig. 15a and b). Furthermore, Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01 exhibited better compatibility with lithium metal with lower interfacial impedance and significantly suppressed side reactions in the voltage range of 4–5 V (vs. Li/Li+) compared to Li7P3S11 (Fig. 15c–e). This led to better cycling performance of all-solid-state Li–S batteries based on the doped sulfide electrolyte with a discharge capacity of 1020 mA h g−1 compared to Li7P3S11 with 775 mA h g−1 (Fig. 15f). Liu et al. introduced aliovalent substitution of the Li3PS4 sulfide electrolyte by Zn, O co-doping using 2 mol% ZnO, where Zn2+ partially substitutes P5+ and O2− partially substitutes S2−.114 In addition to the structural stability (Fig. 16a) and high ionic conductivity of 1.12 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature, the as-developed Li3.06P0.98Zn0.02S3.98O0.02 sulfide electrolyte also demonstrated excellent stability against lithium metal and in air (Fig. 16b). An all-solid-state cell using bilayer electrolytes with LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12/Li3.06P0.98Zn0.02S3.98O0.02/Li showed an initial capacity of 139 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with a retention of 81.0% after 100 cycles at room temperature compared to the LiCoO2/Li10GeP2S12/Li3PS4/Li cell with 127.7 mA h g−1 with 37.7% retention after 60 cycles (Fig. 16c). Similarly, sulfur substitution by oxygen in the argyrodite sulfide solid electrolyte Li6PS5Br where, O atoms substituted S atoms at the free S2− sites rather than at PS4 tetrahedra, was reported by Zhang et al.115 The O-doped Li6PS4.7O0.3Br solid sulfide electrolyte showed better electrochemical and chemical stability against metallic lithium than Li6PS5Br. Furthermore, all-solid-state cells comprising NCM-811/Li6PS4.7O0.3Br/Li–In exhibited enhanced capacities and rate capability compared to NCM-811/Li6PS5Br/Li–In.
 Fig. 15  MoS2 doping of the Li2S–P2S5 glass-ceramic electrolyte. (a) XRD patterns, (b) Arrhenius conductivity plots and (c) Nyquist plots of Li7P3S11 and Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01; cyclic voltammetry curves of Li symmetrical cells employing (d) Li7P3S11 and (e) Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01, (inset shows the modified view between 4 and 5 V); (f) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li–S batteries using Li7P3S11 and Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01 at C/20 at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 16  ZnO-doped Li3PS4 sulfide electrolyte. (a) XRD patterns of Li3+3xP1−xZnxS4−xOx and 0.98Li3PS4-0.02ZnO; (b) cyclic voltammetry curve of Li3.06P0.98Zn0.02S3.98O0.02 in the potential range of −0.5 V to 6 V (vs. Li/Li+); (c) cycling performance of the all-solid-state cell based on the doped and undoped Li3PS4 at 0.1C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2019) Elsevier. 
Lu et al. added Li2ZrO3 as a dopant to the 70Li2S–30P2S5 glass ceramic sulfide electrolyte to obtain a series of (100 − x)(70Li2S–30P2S5) − xLi2ZrO3 (x = 0, 1, 2, and 5), where 1 mol% Li2ZrO3 was found to be the optimum amount.116 99(70Li2S–30P2S5)–1Li2ZrO3 demonstrated a higher ionic conductivity of 2.85 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature compared to pristine Li2S–P2S5 with 1.65 × 10−3 S cm−1. An all-solid-state battery employing the modified electrolyte demonstrated higher discharge capacities by 21.9% for the 50th cycle and a lower interfacial resistance between the electrodes and the solid electrolyte, which were attributed to the high lithium ion diffusion coefficient and stable crystal structure of Li2ZrO3. Tatsumisago's group reported the use of P2O5 to prepare 70Li2S·(30 − x)P2S5·xP2O5 (mol%) oxysulfide glass ceramics, prepared by the melt quenching method where the glass ceramics were heated at a temperature above the crystallization temperature.117–119 The oxysulfide glass ceramic exhibited higher ionic conductivity and improved electrochemical stability. Tao et al. reported similar P2O5 doping of the 75Li2S·25P2S5 sulfide solid electrolyte, prepared by mechanical milling and heating.120 An enhanced ionic conductivity of 8 × 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature was observed for the 75Li2S·24P2S5·1P2O5 electrolyte. Cyclic voltammetry tests showed that the lithium deposition/dissolution reactions take place in the 0–0.5 V range, while no peaks were observed in the 0.5–10 V range, indicating the compatibility of the electrolyte with metallic lithium. Furthermore, lithium symmetrical cell tests indicated lower polarization for the 75Li2S·24P2S5·1P2O5 electrolyte compared to pristine 75Li2S·25P2S5, further demonstrating its compatibility with metallic lithium. An all-solid-state Li battery with LiCoO2/75Li2S·24P2S5·1P2O5 delivered a higher discharge capacity of 109 mA h g−1 at 0.1C with a retention of 85.2% after 30 cycles compared to the pristine 75Li2S·25P2S5 electrolyte with 84.6 mA h g−1 at 76.2% retention.
Similarly, Sb2O5 doping of the Li3PS4 sulfide electrolyte was studied with a series of Li3P1−xSbxS4−2.5xO2.5x electrolytes prepared by high energy ball milling followed by heat treatment.121 Among the several electrolytes studied, Li3P0.98Sb0.02S3.95O0.05 (x = 0.02) showed the highest ionic conductivity of 1.08 mS cm−1 compared to Li3PS4 with 0.5 mS cm−1. In addition, the doped electrolyte also exhibited no reactions up to 5 V, except the lithium deposition and dissolution reactions under 0.5 V. For lithium symmetrical cell tests, the doped electrolyte showed superior stability with steady voltage profiles compared to the pristine electrolyte. All-solid-state batteries with LiCoO2/bilayer electrolyte Li10GeP2S12/doped or pristine Li3PS4/Li showed a much higher discharge capacity of 133.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1C for the doped electrolyte compared to the pristine one with 127.7 mA h g−1. In addition, much faster capacity fading was observed with the pristine electrolyte which demonstrated a retention of 36.1% after 50 cycles, while the doped electrolyte retained 78.6%. This can be ascribed to the side reactions at the Li3PS4/Li interface which results in the formation of the Li2S layer.
Transition metal phosphides have been explored as anode materials for battery applications owing to their high conductivity, low polarization and low volume change during cycling. Li3P formed after Li intercalation into the metal phosphide has high Li+ conductivity and lithium metal stability. Taking this into consideration, Ge et al. investigated the doping of Li7P3S11 using Ni2P.122 Among the series of electrolytse (100 − x) (70Li2S–30P2S5)-xNi2P (x = 0, 1, 2, 3, and 4) tested, Li7Ni0.2P3.1S11 exhibited the highest ionic conductivity of 2.22 mS cm−1 at room temperature, 1.6 times higher than that of pristine Li7P3S11. A smoother CV curve for Li7Ni0.2P3.1S11 depicted that the presence of Ni2P endows better compatibility with the lithium electrode. An all-solid-state Li–S battery was fabricated with Li2S as the anode which demonstrated an initial discharge capacity of 429 mA h g−1 at 0.064 mA cm−2 and 454 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles.


3.3.3. Solution processed sulfide electrolytes. 
Finding a facile, efficient and cost-effective method to synthesize solid electrolytes is crucial. A liquid based synthesis and processing route can be one of the methods. It is important that the solvent used during the processing is not reactive towards Li metal. Taking this into consideration, Liu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of a thin film Li3PS4 sulfide electrolyte by solution processing.123 This involved casting a β-Li3PS4 solution onto Li metal that was formed by the reaction between soluble polysulfides and P2S5 in a diethylene glycol dimethyl ether solvent. A thin and dense solid electrolyte with a high-quality interface with Li metal was formed. Excellent electrochemical stability against Li metal and stable cycling of symmetrical cells were observed.


3.3.4. Hybrid of sulfides with polymers. 
A hybrid of the solid sulfide electrolyte Li7P3S11 (LPS) with a polymer composite of polyethylene oxide-LiClO4 was demonstrated by Xu et al. (Fig. 17a).124 The polymer not only was able to facilitate Li+ transport between the sulfide electrolyte particles and increase the ionic conductivity, but also suppress the reaction between metallic lithium and the sulfide electrolyte by isolating the two (Fig. 17c and d). This enabled a Li–S battery using the hybrid electrolyte (Fig. 17b) to achieve a much better cycling stability with a discharge capacity of 394 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles and a retention of 47.7% in comparison to the LPS electrolyte with only 6.1 mA h g−1 and 0.8% retention (Fig. 17e). Likewise, Zhang et al. introduced a hybrid of the argyrodite sulfide electrolyte Li6PS5Cl with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) to address the poor mechanical strength of the electrolyte and its unstable interface with lithium.125 Although pristine Li6PS5Cl has the highest ionic conductivity, the addition of the polymer resulted in the formation of a stable interface with lithium, attributed to the enhanced mechanical properties of the sulfide electrolyte. No changes were observed in the bulk of the electrolyte after cycling, and the Li/sulfide electrolyte interface with 5 wt% PEO showed no new solid electrolyte layer formation, thus achieving lower variation of the interfacial resistance after cycling. An all-solid-state Li–S battery fabricated with LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (NCM) as the cathode and a hybrid electrolyte with 5 wt% PEO exhibited a superior capacity retention of 44% after 500 cycles compared to pristine Li6PS5Cl with 27%.
 Fig. 17  Hybrid Li7P3S11/PEO–LiClO4 electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the composite preparation process; (b) schematic of an all-solid-state Li–S cell based on the composite electrolyte; (c) cyclic voltammetry curves of Li/electrolyte/stainless steel cells; (d) voltage profiles of Li–Li symmetrical cells based on LPS and the composite electrolyte; (e) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li–S cells based on LPS and the composite electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2018) Elsevier. 

3.4. Lithium/oxide electrolyte interface
Among the solid-state electrolytes, garnet-type oxide electrolytes demonstrate the lowest reduction potential against metallic lithium and the most thermodynamically stable interface with lithium.126 However, the rigid ceramic nature of the garnet-based solid-state electrolytes leads to a large interfacial impedance. A rather simple method to reduce the large interfacial resistance is the addition of a liquid electrolyte at the interface which is known as a solid–liquid hybrid electrolyte interface. Wang et al. presented a quantitative analysis of the required volume of the liquid electrolyte (1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate (EC)/dimethyl carbonate (DMC)/diethyl carbonate (DEC) with a volume ratio of 1:1:1) at the interface between the electrode and the Li1.4Al0.4Ti1.6(PO4)3 (LATP) solid electrolyte pellet by measuring the interfacial properties of the as-prepared cells.127 The analysis showed that the interfacial resistance of the cell while using 1 μL of the liquid electrolyte is about 1000 Ω, whereas increasing the liquid electrolyte volume to 2 μL leads to the decrease of the interfacial resistance to 275 Ω. However, the addition of any amount of liquid electrolyte would compromise the merits of an all-solid-state battery.
The general practice of pressing Li foil into LLZO garnet pellets can be used for analyzing interfacial resistance, while adding heat during the pressing can further enhance the effectiveness of the process. Wang and Sakamoto tested Li|LLZO|Li symmetric cells and showed a strong relationship between the interfacial resistance and adhesive strength of the Li–LLZO interface, σadh.128 For the highest interfacial resistance of 330 kΩ cm2 in the study, a σadh of 1.1 kPa was observed, while the lowest interfacial resistance of 7 Ω cm2 showed a σadh of 8 MPa. The other approach is heating or melting of lithium metal on top of the garnet electrolytes. However, this process leads to small microscopic gaps at the interface, which is due to the poor wetting between the garnet solid-state electrolyte and molten lithium metal. Therefore, the reduction in the interfacial impedance is not optimum. Several methods have been studied to address the chemical stability and high interfacial impedance of the garnet oxides with lithium metal, which are discussed further.

3.4.1. Surface polishing of the air-exposed oxides. 
It has been reported that oxide type garnets such as Ta-doped LLZO reacts with humid air forming an insulating Li2CO3 layer on their surface which decreases the ionic conductivity.129 Cheng et al. claimed that the high interfacial impedance is due to the natural formation of Li2CO3 on the garnet solid-state electrolytes such as LLZO when exposed to air.130 Surface polishing of the air exposed LLZO pellets was performed by using polishing papers with grit numbers ranging from 300 to 600, removing a 50 μm thick layer from the surface. This approach led to the achievement of a very low interfacial area specific resistance of 109 Ω cm2. Furthermore, Li et al. attributed the large interfacial resistance at the garnet/Li interface to (1) the blocking of Li+ transfer at the interface due to Li+/H+ exchange at the garnet surface; (2) the formation of an insulating Li2CO3 layer on the garnet surface; and (3) the Li–Al–O glassy phase on the garnet surface.131 The group introduced carbon which reacts with Li2CO3 on the garnet surface when sintered at 700 °C for 10 h, converting the garnet pellets from yellow into pure white. Interfacial resistances of 28 and 9 Ω cm2 at 25 °C and 65 °C respectively were obtained for Li/LLZT-C/Li symmetric cells in comparison to Li/LLZT/Li cells with 1210 and 725 Ω cm2 at 25 and 65 °C, respectively.


3.4.2. Control over the microstructure and grain boundary. 
Another method is to control the garnet's microstructure and grain boundary sizes. LLZO heterostructures with controlled compositions and microstructures were used to correlate the microstructures of solid ceramic LLZO electrolytes with interfacial resistances.132 An interesting observation was that a very low interfacial resistance of 37 Ω cm2 and improved cycling performance were observed for samples with small grains compared to large grain sizes.


3.4.3. Surface coatings. 
The surface of LLZO is lithiophobic, therefore conversion to a lithiophilic surface is essential to establish proper surface contact between LLZO and lithium metal. Lu et al. employed a simple approach of forming a stable SEI by immersing the LLZTO–LZO surface in a molten Li–Al alloy.133 An Al rich interface is spontaneously formed which helped achieve a low interfacial resistance of less than 1 Ω cm2. Symmetrical cell tests revealed stable cycling for up to 3000 h with a high critical current density of 2.3 mA cm−2 at 60 °C. Lu and coworkers employed an ultrathin amorphous Si coating on the LLZO (Li6.85La2.9Ca0.1Zr1.75Nb0.25O12) garnet solid electrolyte using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition.134 The Si coating converted the superlithiophobic LLZO surface into superlithiophilic, attributed to the formation of lithiated Si formed by the reaction between Li and Si. This was reflected in the interfacial resistance between Li and LLZO, which reduced from 925 to 127 Ω cm2 when compared to the uncoated LLZO. Similarly, the group deposited a thin germanium (Ge) layer on the LLZO garnet by electron beam evaporation which resulted in the formation of a Li–Ge alloy upon contact with lithium metal.135 A similar reduction in interfacial resistance was observed with a Ge-modified garnet showing 115 Ω cm2vs. 900 Ω cm2 for the uncoated LLZO. A full cell employing the Ge-modified garnet coupled with a LiFePO4 cathode and Li metal demonstrated comparable cycling performance at room temperature to liquid electrolytes.
An ultrathin coating of aluminium oxide (Al2O3) was deposited on the garnet Li7La2.75Ca025Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 (LLCZN) by atomic layer deposition (ALD) (Fig. 18a).136 The Al2O3 coating led to (1) improved wetting of metallic lithium and LLCZN (Fig. 18b), and (2) the lithiated-Al2O3 interface provided effective lithium ion transport between the lithium metal anode and LLCZN. This approach led to a significant reduction in the interfacial impedance from 1710 Ω cm2 to 1 Ω cm2 at room temperature (Fig. 18c). The Li/LLCZN/Li symmetrical cell with the ALD coating displayed stable lithium plating and stripping with a stabilized voltage at ∼13 mV, while the cell without the ALD coating exhibited a noisy voltage profile with large polarization. The Li/ALD-treated garnet/Li2FeMn3O8 full cell showed a charge capacity of 110 mA h g−1 over 50 cycles (Fig. 18d). Another similar approach was introduced by forming an ultrathin, artificial intermediary Li-metal alloy. This was done by using a thin layer of Al to form an ionically conducting Li–Al alloy as the interfacial layer between the garnet solid-state electrolyte and lithium metal.126 This alloy improved the wettability of the garnet surface making it more lithiophilic and was able to decrease the interfacial resistance from 950 Ω cm2 to 75 Ω cm2. However, a hybrid solid–liquid Li-ion cell was demonstrated using the LiFePO4 cathode and the coated garnet which delivered initial charge/discharge capacities of 152 and 132 mA h g−1 and a good rate capability. Li–S and Li–O2 cells with the hybrid solid–liquid electrolyte were also studied with the coated garnet.
 Fig. 18  Ultrathin coating of Al2O3 on the Li7La2.75Ca025Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 garnet solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the wettability of the garnet with molten Li; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the interface of the garnet with Li metal, without and with ALD deposited Al2O3; (c) Nyquist plots of Li/LLCZN/Li cells with and without ALD-Al2O3 coating on the garnet, (inset shows the magnified view of the impedance curve of the cell with the ALD coating); (d) cycling performance of the LFMO/ALD-garnet solid state electrolyte/Li full cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. 
Furthermore, Fu et al. deposited a metal magnesium (Mg) film on the LLCZN garnet by sputtering.137 Mg was found to diffuse into the bulk Li metal and form a Li–Mg alloy dominant interface between the garnet and Li metal. The transient dissolution behavior of this metal layer helped realize intimate contact of the garnet with Li metal. The interfacial resistance for the Li symmetric cell with the Mg coating was 70 Ω cm−2, which was minimal compared to the cell without the coating with 1000 Ω cm−2. The symmetric cell showed stable cycling at a current of 0.1 mA cm−2 during the Li stripping/plating test. An interesting observation was made that the interfacial resistance did not increase with increase in the metal layer thickness and this was attributed to the transient behavior of the metal layer. Wang and coworkers deposited an ultrathin and conformal coating of ZnO on LLCZN (Li6.75La2.75Ca0.25Zr1.75Nb0.25O12) by atomic layer deposition. ZnO facilitates the reaction with Li metal and improves the wetting of the garnet with lithium metal.138 This helped achieve a low interfacial resistance of 20 Ω cm2 at 300 °C. Additionally, Shao et al. employed graphite as the interface modifier on top of the tungsten (W)-doped garnet Li5.9Al0.2La3Zr1.75W0.25O12 (LALZWO).139 A very simple approach of drawing the graphite layer with a pencil on the garnet was adopted (Fig. 19a). This graphite-based soft interface forms lithiated graphite LiC6, provides both ionic and electronic conductivity and improves the wettability of molten lithium onto the garnet surface (Fig. 19b). This phenomenon led to the achievement of decrease in the interfacial impedance from 1350 to 105 Ω cm2 which indicated enhancement of interfacial contact between the garnet and Li metal (Fig. 19c). Symmetrical cells based on the graphite modified garnet showed better cycling performance compared to the bare garnet (Fig. 19d). Furthermore, a full cell consisting of the Li metal anode, ternary NCM523 cathode and graphite modified garnet achieved excellent cell performance (Fig. 19e and f).
 Fig. 19  Graphite-based soft interface modifier for the LALZWO ceramic. (a) Schematic showing the preparation of the graphite-based interface on the ceramic; (b) wettability of molten lithium on the ceramic without and with the graphite interface; (c) Nyquist plots and (d) voltage profiles at a current density of 50 μA cm−2 of the Li/LALZWO/Li symmetrical cells without and with the graphite modified interface; (e) rate capability and (f) cycling performance of the all-solid-state full cell based on NCM523 cathode/graphite modified LALZWO/Li at 0.5C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
Xu et al. coated Li3N on the surface of garnet using plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD).140 Li3N was used because it has high Li+ ion conductivity (10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature), improves wettability and interfacial contact between garnet electrolyte and Li metal, and suppresses Li dendrite growth as it prevents reduction of the garnet electrolyte by Li metal. In this process, Li2CO3 originally formed on the garnet surface was first removed by annealing with carbon, followed by the deposition of a thin Li3N layer. Li symmetrical cells exhibited decrease of the total interfacial impedance from 2512 Ω cm2 for LC-LLZT to 180 Ω cm2 for LN-LLZT at 60 °C and similarly 4785 Ω cm2 to 350 Ω cm2 at room temperature.
Although known solid polymer electrolytes show low Li+ ion conductivity at room temperature, their mechanical properties can be utilized to form a thin, flexible and interface compatible SEI membrane that is easily wetted by the lithium metal anode. Zhou et al. developed a polymer-ceramic single-ion-conducting solid electrolyte (PCSSE) by coating LLZTO pellets with a gel-solution of PEO–PAS using the drop casting technique.141 The decrease of the interfacial impedance from 5000 Ω for the Li/LLZTO/Li cell to 400 Ω for the Li/PEO–PAS/LLZTO/PEO–PAS/Li cell was observed. An all-solid-state Li/PEO–PAS/LLZTO/PEO–PAS/LiFePO4 cell exhibited a capacity of around 145 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 140 mA h g−1 at 0.2C.
Although most interfacial engineering approaches focus on introducing some ion conductive interfacial layers such as metal/metal oxide (Au, Si, Al, or Al2O3) or dry polymers, they need high temperature processing for manufacturing which is costly. Interlayers composed of a gel electrolyte can be a cheaper alternative for scalable manufacturing. Liu et al. used a gel polymer electrolyte (liquid electrolyte stored in a PVDF-HFP polymer matrix).142 For this hybrid electrolyte design, the interfacial resistance of the garnet/Li interface decreased from 1.4 × 103 to 214 Ω cm2. A full cell using LiFePO4 as the cathode demonstrated a high capacity of 140 mA h g−1 and was stable over 70 cycles at room temperature.


3.4.4. Introduction of additives. 
Garnet type materials have better compatibility with Li metal and have high Li-ion conductivity. However, the garnet type electrolytes cannot suppress dendrite formation, and thus short circuit can occur even at a low current density. This has been attributed to dendrite growth through the grain boundaries and voids in the electrolyte. To eliminate this phenomenon, Xu et al. used Li3PO4 as an additive to LLZTO (Fig. 20a).143 This addition of Li3PO4 improved Li-ion conductivity of the garnet to 1.4 × 10−4 S cm−1 (Fig. 20b), improved the interfacial resistance with a lower resistance (Fig. 20c) and suppressed Li-dendrite formation during the plating and stripping of lithium with stable cycling (Fig. 20d).
 Fig. 20  Li3PO4-modified LLZTO garnet. (a) Schematic showing the suppression of lithium dendrites by the addition of Li3PO4 to the garnet; (b) Arrhenius plots of the garnet without and with Li3PO4; (c) Nyquist plots and (d) voltage profiles of symmetrical Li/Garnet/Li cells without and with Li3PO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143.Copyright (2017) Elsevier. 
Wang et al. prepared an assistant ionic conductor by infusing an ionic liquid (Li-IL) into a porous metal–organic framework (MOF) host.144 Pristine LLZO showed an ionic conductivity of 1.5 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 30 °C, which increased to 4.1 × 10−5, 7.1 × 10−5, 1.0 × 10−4, and 1.3 × 10−4 S cm−1 as 5 wt%, 10 wt%, 20 wt%, and 30 wt% LIM (LiTFSI dissolved in [EMIM][TFSI]) was added, respectively. The introduction of an ionic liquid impregnated MOF into the LLZO SSE can improve the conductivity and effectively decrease the interfacial resistance due to the formation of a nanowetted interface between the electrolyte and Li metal. Composites of glassy amorphous Li-ion conductors and ceramic based garnets can enhance its wettability and have good chemical stability with Li metal at the electrolyte/Li interface. Tian et al. prepared a composite of the LLZTO garnet and amorphous Li3OCl antiperovskite Li-ion conducting materials.145 Only 2 wt% Li3OCl was added as a binder, filler and bridge in the LLZTO network to promote the ionic conductivity (2.27 × 10−4 S cm−1) and enhance the interfacial contact at room temperature. The formation of a dense and stable interfacial layer as a result of the reaction between Li metal and Li3OCl increases the wettability of the lithium anode to the solid electrolyte and hence, the interfacial resistance decreased from 1850 to 90 Ω cm2. Also, an all-solid-state LiFePO4/LLZTO-2 wt% Li3OCL/Li battery exhibited a specific capacity of 157.5 mA h g−1 and 85.7 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 0.5C, respectively.


3.4.5. 3D conductive framework. 
Most of the solid polymer electrolytes are flexible in nature, and consequently this property can help fill up the voids that exist between the Li metal and garnet interface. Chi et al. employed a solid polymer electrolyte based on PEO–LiTFSI in acetonitrile to modify the surface of the LLZTO garnet.146 In addition to this, 3D lithium metal prepared by molten lithium infusion in Ni foam was used. This combination of interface modification by solid polymer electrolyte and the use of 3D lithium led to superior symmetrical cell performance compared to the non-modified interface and bare Li electrode. Furthermore, a full cell consisting of LFP/SPE-LLZTO-SPE/3D Li exhibited excellent cyclability at 0.2C and 90 °C.
Yang et al. demonstrated hosting Li metal in a 3D garnet-type ion conductive framework with a planar current collector at the bottom.147 This structure enables Li plating from the bottom Cu current collector and rising during deposition. This approach facilitates lithium rise/fall away from the separator which would prevent internal short circuits due to lithium penetration. Meanwhile, the porous structure mitigates the volume change of the Li anode. Stable cycling for up to 300 h at 0.5 mA cm−2 and 1 mA h cm−2 was demonstrated with lithium metal in the garnet host. Liu et al. adopted 3D Li and a flowable interfacial layer to address the interfacial fluctuation that exists for the Li anode (Fig. 21a and b).148 A 3D rGO electrode filled with molten lithium was used as the 3D Li anode with a high electroactive surface area, while PEG plasticized with LiTFSI was impregnated into 3D Li by thermal infiltration at 150 °C to form the flowable interfacial layer. 3D Li along with the flowable interfacial layer helps accommodate interfacial fluctuation, thus maintaining intimate contact. The modified Li when used in a full cell with a LLZTO garnet along with LFP exhibited a much lower charge/discharge overpotential and superior rate capability compared to conventional Li foil (Fig. 21c and d). Fu et al. prepared a 3D bilayer garnet solid-state electrolyte framework that consists of a thick porous layer and thin dense layer using a tape casting process (Fig. 22a and b).149 The thick porous layer provides mechanical support and further serves as the host, enabling high loading of cathode materials, while the dense layer acts as the blocking element of physical and chemical short circuits that can occur due to volume changes and dendrite formation during charge/discharge cycles between the active electrodes. For electrochemical characterization of the garnet/Li metal interface, a polymeric gel layer was coated on the garnet surface (Fig. 22c). Sulfur was directly coated onto a porous garnet layer by melting sulfur powder into the porous matrix, enabling a higher sulfur mass loading of around 7.5 mg cm−2. A hybrid Li–S cell exhibited a discharge capacity of around 645 mA h g−1 for the 1st cycle and a coulombic efficiency of 99.8% with good cycling performance (Fig. 22d and e).
 Fig. 21  3D Li anode with a flowable interphase. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of the 3D Li–rGO composite via thermal infiltration of PEG–LiTFSI at 150 °C and construction of an all-solid-state Li–LFP full cell; (b) schematics showing the comparison of Li stripping/plating between conventional Li foil anode and the 3D-rGO anode as the lithium host; solid-state Li-LFP full cell with LLZTO as the middle layer and either 3D Li–rGO or Li foil as the anode; (c) charge/discharge voltage curves and (d) cycling performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2017) American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
 Fig. 22  3D bilayer garnet solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic of the garnet bilayer framework; (b) schematic of the CNT coated and S-encapsulated garnet based all solid-state Li–S battery; (c) schematic of bare and polymer coated garnet; (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles and (e) cycling performance of the solid-state Li–S battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Among different types of solid electrolytes, composite polymer electrolytes show acceptable Li-ion conductivity. However, in these types of composites, a high concentration of nanofillers degrades the performance of the battery due to agglomeration of these nanofillers in the polymeric chain which destroys the percolated network of the interphase. This inhibits the improvement in Li-ion conductivity for these composite polymer electrolytes. To overcome this, Bae et al. designed a 3D nanofiller, a nanostructured hydrogel-derived Li0.35La0.55TiO3 (LLTO) framework, for the fabrication of a composite polymer Li-ion electrolyte.150 The approach herein to fabricate 3D nanostructured hydrogel derived pre-percolated LLTO was for avoiding particle agglomeration while mixing with the polymer electrolyte. Avoiding particle agglomeration using interconnected 3D percolating nanostructures yields numerous continuous Li-ion conduction pathways. A Li-ion conductivity of about 10−4 S cm−1 was observed at room temperature for these composite solid electrolytes. Li and coworkers demonstrated a 3D fiber-network reinforced bicontinuous solid composite electrolyte prepared by electrospinning the precursor of lithium aluminum phosphate (LATP)/polyacrylonitrile (PAN) mixed in DMF and casting a PEO and LiTFSI mixture onto it.151 Thus, the obtained composite electrolyte had high stability against Li metal and good interfacial contact with the Li anode. The ionic conductivity of xLATP/PAN–[PEO8–LiTFSI], where x = 2 (x: mass ratios of LATP to PAN) was about 6.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 which is four times higher than that of the PEO8–LiTFSI control electrolyte. The interfacial resistance for a symmetric Li|2LATP/PAN–[PEO8–LiTFSI]|Li cell was 158 Ω at 60 °C which is much lower in comparison to that of the Li|LATP|Li cell (>3500 Ω at 600 °C). This decrease in resistance and increase in interface wettability with Li metal can be attributed to the increased interface contact area between the composite electrolyte nanofibers and Li electrode.

4. Conclusion, opportunities and outlook
Solid-state lithium batteries are believed to be the future and the energy storage industry is optimistic about it. Significant research and efforts are underway to bring this technology to the mass market. This has led to the development of solid-state electrolytes with comparable ionic conductivity to conventional liquid electrolytes. While major focus has been on the improvement of ionic conductivity of these solid electrolytes, it is equally important to consider their compatibility with electrodes in order to realize a working all-solid-state battery. This review summarized the notable efficient approaches that have addressed the interfacial issues of solid-state electrolyte systems (sulfides and oxides) with both battery cathode and lithium anode. Both sulfides and oxides (garnets and NASICON) have their own unique electrochemical, thermal and mechanical features; therefore, the approaches that have been applied to address their interfacial incompatibility with battery electrodes are different from one another. With several significant advances already achieved, the likelihood of adoption of the solid-state technology even for large scale energy applications such as electric vehicles and grids is high, considering the cost.
Majority of the research reports are dedicated to address either the lithium/SSE or cathode/SSE interface. However, a practical solid-state LMB should have both these interfaces equally efficient and stable. Therefore, it is imperative to modify both the interfaces to construct a working solid-state full cell. However, each electrolyte system has its own interfacial imperfections; therefore, there is no solution in the form of a single strategy that will be constructive to every electrolyte system. Consequently, it is key to treat each electrolyte system and its interfaces independently. It should be noted that interfacial processes in solid-state LMBs are complicated in nature and therefore, thorough dedicated research is imperative. Multiple interfacial issues need to be addressed when considering the fabrication of a solid-state LMB which can be summarized into two primary factors: (i) chemical and electrochemical compatibility and (ii) intimate mechanical contact. Interfacial surface chemistry is a complicated phenomenon that determines the formation of interphase layers and their electronic and ionic conductivity properties. It is very challenging to find an electrolyte that exhibits excellent chemical/electrochemical compatibility and mechanical stability with both lithium anode and cathode. Therefore, research in finding such an electrolyte should be focused as both the interfaces (with lithium and the cathode) play equally crucial roles. For this, computational studies on novel materials should be prioritized.
Based on the above review of individual interfaces, we believe that these three directions should be adopted to build an interface compatible solid-state LMB namely (i) hybrid ceramic/polymer composite electrolytes, (ii) surface coating and (iii) 3D scaffolds infusing Li. The use of hybrid electrolytes can be advantageous for both cathode/SSE and Li/SSE interfaces and should be adopted. Each electrolyte system (either oxides or sulfides) has its own advantages but some shortcomings. A synergistic combination of the properties of ceramics to that of polymer electrolyte systems can help overcome each other's intrinsic limitations. Solid polymer electrolytes have much better flexibility and adhesion properties with electrodes. This suggests that the addition of polymers can assist the processibility of ceramics and help achieve intimate mechanical contact especially with the cathodes. In addition, polymers can facilitate the necessary buffering function to relieve stress/strain caused upon volume change of the electrodes. Furthermore, Li-ion conducting polymers can exhibit good electrochemical stability with Li at the interface, thus contributing to low voltage polarization. These composite electrolytes basically combine the constructive properties of the two electrolyte systems, and some studies have shown positive outcomes.152–154 Furthermore, inorganic solid-state electrolytes have also been employed as additives or fillers into the polymer matrix and demonstrated to have a positive effect on the ionic conductivity and electrochemical performance of the polymer solid electrolytes.155,156 On the other hand, a conformal surface coating of a suitable in situ or ex situ interphase layer on Li metal and cathode coating to form a cathode/electrolyte composite have been the most effective approaches to address the interface incompatibility, for which we believe that battery research should further advance to a much greater extent. Furthermore, the 3D scaffolds (e.g. rGO, metal foams) synthesized with the Li infusion technique which have the capability of accommodating interfacial fluctuation during cycling should be adopted and have been rigorously studied for lithium dendrite suppression for liquid electrolyte-based lithium metal battery systems.157–160 In addition, numerous efforts have been made on interface modifications with lithium metal for a liquid electrolyte system.17 Findings and understanding obtained from these investigations can be directly experimented in solid-state electrolyte systems. However, it is most likely that a single technique alone will not be able to solve the impedance problem entirely. Therefore, implementing a combination of these approaches should be considered to realize a practical bulk solid-state LMB.
Detailed information on the interface products formed at the interfaces is still unknown, which will be unique for each electrolyte and interface system. In situ or operando and other advanced characterization techniques are being currently pursued to gather real time information and analysis during lithiation and delithiation processes such as in situ XPS, in situ TEM, in situ NMR, in situ XRD, and cryo-TEM. The use of these advanced techniques should be heavily encouraged to obtain insights into these complex interface issues existing in solid-state lithium batteries. Furthermore, fundamental understanding of the factors and mechanisms contributing to these interface issues should be prioritized. A recent study investigated the process of lithium dendrite growth and infiltration in inorganic solid electrolytes. The study showed that lithium penetration is dependent on the defect size and density rather than the impact of electrolyte shear modulus and surface roughness, and that faster Li dendrite growth is dominated by cracks, grain boundaries and/or micro/nanoscale pores.161 Furthermore, a study on the origin of dendrite formation in LLZO and Li3PS4 representative solid electrolytes during lithium plating was carried out using time-resolved operando neutron depth profiling, which suggested that the high electronic conductivity of these solid electrolytes is responsible for dendrite formation.162 Such fundamental findings will be key to better understand the solid–solid interfaces and contribute to building efficient and safe all-solid-state batteries. In addition, theoretical modeling based on machine learning should be employed for high-throughput materials screening to develop efficient and stable interfaces.
Scalability of the technology should also be taken into consideration with low-cost manufacturability. The methodology and fabrication involved should line up with current lithium-ion production infrastructure to enable a transferable technology into industry. This can facilitate mass production without imposing substantial financial burden.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from NASA EPSCoR (NNX14AN22A), NSF-MRI (1428992), the SD BoR competitive Research Grant Program (CRGP), the SD BoR Research & Development Grant, the NSF IUCRC Planning Program (1841502), and the EDA University Center Program (ED18DEN3030025).
References
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gurung and Q. Qiao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1217–1230 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K.-S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, W. Lei, Y. Liu, Q. Qiao and W.-H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37445–37452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Naderi, A. Gurung, Z. Zhou, G. Varnekar, K. Chen, J. Zai, X. Qian and Q. Qiao, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700043 CrossRef .
S. J. Varapragasam, C. Balasanthiran, A. Gurung, Q. Qiao, R. M. Rioux and J. D. Hoefelmeyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 11089–11099 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Qiao, A. Gurung, R. Naderi, H. Elbohy, A. L. Smirnova, H. Lu and S. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1440 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qiao, Z. Xia, Y. Liu, R. Cui, Y. Fei, Y. Cai, Q. Wei, Q. Yao and Q. Qiao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 400, 492–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurung, R. Naderi, B. Vaagensmith, G. Varnekar, Z. Zhou, H. Elbohy and Q. Qiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 720–725 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dondelinger, J. Swanson, G. Nasymov, C. Jahnke, Q. Qiao, J. Wu, C. Widener, A. M. Numan-Al-Mobin and A. Smirnova, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 498–505 CrossRef CAS .
M. McGraw, P. Kolla, B. Yao, R. Cook, Q. Quiao, J. Wu and A. Smirnova, Polymer, 2016, 99, 488–495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 540–550 CrossRef .
R. Pathak, A. Gurung, H. Elbohy, K. Chen, K. M. Reza, B. Bahrami, S. Mabrouk, R. Ghimire, M. Hummel, Z. Gu, X. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Zhou and Q. Qiao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 15956–15966 RSC .
Y. Sun, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Li, H. R. Lee, A. Pei, X. He and Y. Cui, Joule, 2019, 3, 1080–1093 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gurung, R. Naderi, B. Vaagensmith, G. Varnekar, Z. Zhou, H. Elbohy and Q. Qiao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 720–725 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13–24 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 31–35 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 CrossRef .
P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, C. Yao, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 422–446 CrossRef .
X. Shen, Z. Tian, R. Fan, L. Shao, D. Zhang, G. Cao, L. Kou and Y. Bai, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1067–1090 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, T. Zhang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 4, 1–14 CrossRef .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu, P. Müller-Buschbaum and Y.-J. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113–143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 RSC .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, J.-H. Kim, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
X.-B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C.-Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, M. Jiang, Y. Xie, H. Xu, J. Jia and J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706375 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, C. Guo, A. Naveed, J. Lei, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 199–221 CrossRef .
J. Lang, L. Qi, Y. Luo and H. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 7, 115–129 CrossRef .
K. Chen, R. Pathak, A. Gurung, E. A. Adhamash, B. Bahrami, Q. He, H. Qiao, A. L. Smirnova, J. J. Wu, Q. Qiao and Y. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 389–396 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .
D. Aurbach, B. D. McCloskey, L. F. Nazar and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16128 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, L. Li, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, F. Wu and K. Amine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5611–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Grande, E. Paillard, J. Hassoun, J.-B. Park, Y.-J. Lee, Y.-K. Sun, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 784–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 2525–2540 RSC .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Bachman, S. Muy, A. Grimaud, H.-H. Chang, N. Pour, S. F. Lux, O. Paschos, F. Maglia, S. Lupart, P. Lamp, L. Giordano and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 140–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, X. Yu and S. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16103 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, C. Ma, M. Chi, C. Liang and N. J. Dudney, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401408 CrossRef .
L. Fan, S. Wei, S. Li, Q. Li and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702657 CrossRef .
Z. Xue, D. He and X. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19218–19253 RSC .
S. Chen, D. Xie, G. Liu, J. P. Mwizerwa, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Xu and X. Yao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 58–74 CrossRef .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16030 CrossRef CAS .
A. Junji, T. Akira, K. Kunimitsu, K. Norihito, I. Yasushi and A. Junji, Chem. Lett., 2011, 40, 60–62 CrossRef .
K. Kerman, A. Luntz, V. Viswanathan, Y.-M. Chiang and Z. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1731–A1744 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangadurai, H. Kaack and W. J. F. Weppner, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2003, 86, 437–440 CrossRef CAS .
H. Buschmann, J. Dölle, S. Berendts, A. Kuhn, P. Bottke, M. Wilkening, P. Heitjans, A. Senyshyn, H. Ehrenberg, A. Lotnyk, V. Duppel, L. Kienle and J. Janek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 19378–19392 RSC .
R. Murugan, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7778–7781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao, F. Wei, J. G. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500213 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wenzel, S. Randau, T. Leichtweiß, D. A. Weber, J. Sann, W. G. Zeier and J. r. Janek, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2400–2407 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wenzel, T. Leichtweiss, D. Krüger, J. Sann and J. Janek, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 949–956 CrossRef .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama and Y. Tateyama, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 286–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, L. Zhang, R. Ma, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2226–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Seino, T. Ota and K. Takada, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6488–6492 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ohta, K. Takada, I. Sakaguchi, L. Zhang, R. Ma, K. Fukuda, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1486–1490 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takada, N. Ohta, L. Zhang, X. Xu, B. T. Hang, T. Ohnishi, M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 594–597 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, K. Takada, K. Fukuda, T. Ohnishi, K. Akatsuka, M. Osada, B. T. Hang, K. Kumagai, T. Sekiguchi and T. Sasaki, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3509–3512 RSC .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A1–A3 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 527–530 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, N. Nakamoto, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15247–15254 RSC .
A. Sakuda, H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, M. Tatsumisago, Y. Hosoda, T. Nagakane and A. Sakamoto, Chem. Lett., 2012, 41, 260–261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, S. Fujiki, T. Yamada, Y. Aihara, Y. Park, T. Y. Kim, S.-W. Baek, J.-M. Lee, S. Doo and N. Machida, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 943–950 CrossRef CAS .
N. Machida, J. Kashiwagi, M. Naito and T. Shigematsu, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 354–358 CrossRef CAS .
K. Okada, N. Machida, M. Naito, T. Shigematsu, S. Ito, S. Fujiki, M. Nakano and Y. Aihara, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 255, 120–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, M. Kim, S. Noh, G. Lee and D. Shin, Ceram. Int., 2015, 42, 2140–2146 CrossRef .
H. Kitaura, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 118–124 RSC .
D. H. Kim, D. Y. Oh, K. H. Park, Y. E. Choi, Y. J. Nam, H. A. Lee, S.-M. Lee and Y. S. Jung, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3013–3020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A73–A75 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo, S. Hama and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6735–6741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, M. Otoyama, A. Hayashi, T. Ohtomo and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aso, A. Sakuda, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 686–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Xu, X. L. Wang, S. Z. Zhang, Y. Xia, X. H. Xia, J. B. Wu and J. P. Tu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 374, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hayashi, Y. Nishio, H. Kitaura and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1860–1863 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yao, D. Liu, C. Wang, P. Long, G. Peng, Y.-S. Hu, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Xu, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7148–7154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6055–6059 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10015–10020 RSC .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi, M. Tatsumisago, T. Ichinose, T. Ozaki, Y. Togawa and S. Mori, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 471–476 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, T. Gao, Y. Zhu, K. J. Gaskell and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3473–3483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ohta, T. Kobayashi, J. Seki and T. Asaoka, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 332–335 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuyama, R. Takano, K. Tadanaga, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 285, 122–125 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim, Y. Oh, K. H. Kang, J. H. Kim, J. Kim and C. S. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16063–16070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Park, B.-C. Yu, J.-W. Jung, Y. Li, W. Zhou, H. Gao, S. Son and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8051–8059 CrossRef CAS .
L. Miara, A. Windmüller, C.-L. Tsai, W. D. Richards, Q. Ma, S. Uhlenbruck, O. Guillon and G. Ceder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26842–26850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, K. Fu, Y. Gong, C. Yang, Y. Yao, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel and H. Xie, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4917–4923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ohta, S. Komagata, J. Seki, T. Saeki, S. Morishita and T. Asaoka, J. Power Sources, 2013, 238, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, J. Yue, C. Chen, N. Zhao, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Wang, X. Guo and C. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 497–508 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Y. Ren, Y. Shen, S.-X. Zhao, Y. Lin and C.-W. Nan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Chen, D. Xie, X. Yao, P. Cui and X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16984–16993 RSC .
W. Zha, Y. Xu, F. Chen, Q. Shen and L. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 330, 54–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Duan, Y.-X. Yin, Y. Shi, P.-F. Wang, X.-D. Zhang, C.-P. Yang, J.-L. Shi, R. Wen, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 140, 82–85 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kato, T. Hamanaka, K. Yamamoto, T. Hirayama, F. Sagane, M. Motoyama and Y. Iriyama, J. Power Sources, 2014, 260, 292–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. Zhang, H. Xie, G. Pastel, J. Dai, Y. Gong, B. Liu, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van Den Broek, S. Afyon and J. L. Rupp, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600736 CrossRef .
Z. Lu, J. Yu, J. Wu, M. B. Effat, S. C. Kwok, Y. Lyu, M. M. Yuen and F. Ciucci, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 311–319 CrossRef .
R. Xu, F. Han, X. Ji, X. Fan, J. Tu and C. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 958–966 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kato, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2016, 309, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 734–736 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Chen, J. Yang, J. Wang, L. Yao, X. Yao, P. Cui and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2556–2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sahu, Z. Lin, J. Li, Z. Liu, N. Dudney and C. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1053–1058 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Zhao, Q. Sun, X. Li, Y. Liu, J. Liang, X. Li, X. Lin, R. Li, K. R. Adair, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 168–174 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, D. Wang, Y. C. Li, Z. Yu, T. E. Mallouk and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13608–13612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Philip, P. T. Sullivan, R. Zhang, G. A. Wooley, S. A. Kohn and A. A. Gewirth, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2014–2021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. Yan, L. An, B. Wu, K. Zhong and R. Yang, Solid State Ionics, 2017, 301, 59–63 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Suzuki, K. Hara, S. Hori, T.-a. Yano, M. Hara, M. Hirayama and R. Kanno, J. Power Sources, 2016, 324, 798–803 CrossRef CAS .
R.-c. Xu, X.-h. Xia, X.-l. Wang, Y. Xia and J.-p. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2829–2834 RSC .
G. Liu, D. Xie, X. Wang, X. Yao, S. Chen, R. Xiao, H. Li and X. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 266–274 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Yan, H. Wang, Y. Liu, C. Yu, X. Cao, L. van Eijck and B. Wen, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410–411, 162–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lu, F. Ding, Z. Xu, J. Liu, X. Liu and Q. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .
K. Minami, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1282–1285 CrossRef CAS .
K. Minami, F. Mizuno, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2008, 354, 370–373 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohtomo, F. Mizuno, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 715–718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tao, S. Chen, D. Liu, G. Peng, X. Yao and X. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A96–A101 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xie, S. Chen, Z. Zhang, J. Ren, L. Yao, L. Wu, X. Yao and X. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, L. Zhou, Y.-m. Lian, X. Zhang, R. Chen and W. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 97, 100–104 CrossRef CAS .
H.-D. Lim, H.-K. Lim, X. Xing, B.-S. Lee, H. Liu, C. Coaty, H. Kim and P. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701328 CrossRef .
X. Xu, G. Hou, X. Nie, Q. Ai, Y. Liu, J. Feng, L. Zhang, P. Si, S. Guo and L. Ci, J. Power Sources, 2018, 400, 212–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zheng, J. Lou, Y. Xia, C. Liang, H. Huang, Y. Gan, X. Tao and W. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fu, Y. Gong, B. Liu, Y. Zhu, S. Xu, Y. Yao, W. Luo, C. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, Y. Chen, Y. Mo, E. Wachsman and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601659 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao, X. Li, X. Lin, M. N. Banis, M. Li, W. Li, K. R. Adair, D. Wang, J. Liang, R. Li, L. Zhang, R. Yang, S. Lu and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 35–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang and J. Sakamoto, J. Power Sources, 2018, 377, 7–11 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xia, B. Xu, H. Duan, X. Tang, Y. Guo, H. Kang, H. Li and H. Liu, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2017, 100, 2832–2839 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cheng, E. J. Crumlin, W. Chen, R. Qiao, H. Hou, S. Franz Lux, V. Zorba, R. Russo, R. Kostecki, Z. Liu, K. Persson, W. Yang, J. Cabana, T. Richardson, G. Chen and M. Doeff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18294–18300 RSC .
Y. Li, X. Chen, A. Dolocan, Z. Cui, S. Xin, L. Xue, H. Xu, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6448–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, W. Chen, M. Kunz, K. Persson, N. Tamura, G. Chen and M. Doeff, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 2073–2081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, X. Huang, Y. Ruan, Q. Wang, R. Kun, J. Yang and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18853–18858 RSC .
W. Luo, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, K. K. Fu, J. Dai, S. D. Lacey, C. Wang, B. Liu, X. Han, Y. Mo, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12258–12262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. Gong, Y. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Yao, Y. Zhang, K. Fu, G. Pastel, C.-F. Lin, Y. Mo, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606042 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, Y. Gong, K. Fu, X. He, G. T. Hitz, J. Dai, A. Pearse, B. Liu, H. Wang, G. Rubloff, Y. Mo, V. Thangadurai, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 572–579 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Gong, Z. Fu, H. Xie, Y. Yao, B. Liu, M. Carter, E. Wachsman and L. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14942–14947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Y. Gong, B. Liu, K. Fu, Y. Yao, E. Hitz, Y. Li, J. Dai, S. Xu, W. Luo, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Z. Gong, D. Wang, B. Zheng, J. Zhu, Y. Lu, Y.-S. Hu, X. Guo, H. Li, X. Huang, Y. Yang, C.-W. Nan and L. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1212–1218 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, Y. Li, A. Zhou, N. Wu, S. Xin, Z. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7414–7418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhou, Y. Zhu, N. Grundish, X. Sen, S. Wang, Y. You, N. Wu, J. Gao, Z. Cui, Y. Li and J. B. Goodenough, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 926–931 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Gong, K. Fu, X. Han, Y. Yao, G. Pastel, C. Yang, H. Xie, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18809–18815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xu, W. Li, H. Duan, H. Wang, Y. Guo, H. Li and H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 354, 68–73 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Yang, H. Wang, Y. Song, L. Han, K. Yang, J. Hu, H. Chen and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 580–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, F. Ding, H. Zhong, C. Liu, Y.-B. He, J. Liu, X. Liu and Q. Xu, Energy Storage Materials, 2018, 14, 49–57 CrossRef .
S.-S. Chi, Y. Liu, N. Zhao, X. Guo, C.-W. Nan and L.-Z. Fan, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 17, 309–316 CrossRef .
C. Yang, L. Zhang, B. Liu, S. Xu, T. Hamann, D. McOwen, J. Dai, W. Luo, Y. Gong, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2018, 115, 3770–3775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Lin, Y. Jin, K. Liu, X. Tao, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao0713 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fu, Y. Gong, G. T. Hitz, D. W. McOwen, Y. Li, S. Xu, Y. Wen, L. Zhang, C. Wang, G. Pastel, J. Dai, B. Liu, H. Xie, Y. Yao, E. D. Wachsman and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1568–1575 RSC .
J. Bae, Y. Li, J. Zhang, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Shi, J. B. Goodenough and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2096–2100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, L. Chen, T. Wang and L.-Z. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7069–7078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, M. Tang and Y. Y. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12538–12542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Huang, B. Xu, Y. Lin, B. Xu, L. Li, C.-W. Nan and Y. Shen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13779–13785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Fu, Y. Gong, J. Dai, A. Gong, X. Han, Y. Yao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen and C. Yan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 2016, 113, 7094–7099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Wu, G. Peng, X. Chen, X. Yao, Y. Bai, F. Wu, S. Chen and X. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 47–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ju, Y. Wang, B. Chen, J. Ma, S. Dong, J. Chai, H. Qu, L. Cui, X. Wu and G. Cui, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13588–13597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-P. Yang, Y.-X. Yin, S.-F. Zhang, N.-W. Li and Y.-G. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, A. Wang, Q. Li, J. Wu, K. Chiou, J. Huang and J. Luo, Joule, 2018, 2, 184–193 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Liang, H.-W. Lee, J. Sun, H. Wang, K. Yan, J. Xie and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-S. Chi, Y. Liu, W.-L. Song, L.-Z. Fan and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700348 CrossRef .
L. Porz, T. Swamy, B. W. Sheldon, D. Rettenwander, T. Frömling, H. L. Thaman, S. Berendts, R. Uecker, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1701003 CrossRef .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Comparison of ionic conductivity of various solid-state lithium-ion conducting electrolyte families. Reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Sulfide and oxide solid-state lithium ion conductors. Radar plots showing the performance properties of (a) sulfides and (b) oxides. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature. Crystal structures of (c) Li10GeP2S12 (reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright (2011) Springer Nature) and (d) Li7La3Zr2O12 (reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2011) Chemical Society of Japan).	 

 	Fig. 3  LiCoO2 coating with the sol–gel prepared SiO2 and Li2SiO3 layers. (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface of LiCoO2 particles with and without the coatings. Performance of In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 solid-state cells with and without the coatings: (b) Nyquist plots and (c) discharge voltage profiles at different current densities; reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright (2008) the Electrochemical Society. (d) Charge–discharge voltage profiles and (e) cycling capacities of In/80Li2S·20P2S5/LiCoO2 solid-state cells with and without the coatings at a higher cut-off voltage. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright (2009) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  Solution processable Li6PS5Cl sulfide electrolyte infiltrated into battery electrodes. (a) Schematic depicting the approach; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the infiltrated LCO battery electrode and elemental mapping of Co and S; charge/discharge voltage curves of (c) LCO/Li–In and (d) Gr/Li–In half cells at 0.1C with liquid (LE) and infiltrated solid-state (SE) electrolytes (inset shows voltage profiles for LCO without solid-state electrolyte infiltration). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright (2017) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  LiCoO2 particles coated with the pulsed layer deposited Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the approach; (b) elemental mapping of the solid electrolyte coated LiCoO2 after 450 cycles; (c) charge–discharge voltage profiles of all-solid-state cells In/solid-state electrolyte/LiCoO2 consisting of 90 wt% LiCoO2 and 10 wt% solid electrolyte particles using uncoated LiCoO2, LiNbO3-coated LiCoO2 and solid-electrolyte (20 min) coated LiCoO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright (2011) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites as the positive electrode. (a) Schematic showing the synthesis process; (b) schematic showing the all-solid-state Li-ion battery under study; (c) Nyquist plots showing the comparison of cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites with cobalt sulfide at the 1st and 1000th cycles at a current density of 1.27 mA cm−2; charge/discharge voltage profiles of the solid-state cells at various rates in the voltage range of 0.5–3.0 V at 25 °C with (d) cobalt sulfide-Li7P3S11 nanocomposites and (e) cobalt sulfide nanosheets; (f) cycling performance of the cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Single material for all solid-state batteries. Schematic showing the comparison between (a) typical and (b) single-material (Li10GeP2S12) all-solid-state batteries; charge/discharge voltage profiles of Li/LGPS/LGPS-C solid-state cells in the voltage range of (c) 1.5–3.5 V for the cathode and (d) 0.0–2.0 V for the anode at a current density of 10 mA g−1; (e and f) charge/discharge voltage profiles of Li/LGPS/LGPS-C solid-state cells at different current densities; (g) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the single-LGPS battery at a current density of 10 mA g−1 in the voltage range of 0.0–2.5 V. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright (2015) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  LCBO interphase-modified all-ceramic lithium battery. (a) Schematic showing the engineered all-ceramic cathode/electrolyte interface; cross-sectional SEM images of the cathode composite (Li2.3Co0.7B0.3O3 + LLZO@Li2CO3 + LCO@Li2CO3) coated on LLZO (b) before sintering and (c) after sintering at 700 °C; (d) cross-sectional SEM image at high magnification of the cathode composite after sintering at 700 °C; (e) cycling capacity of the all solid-state interface-engineered Li/LLZO/LCO cell at 0.05C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. Copyright (2018) Cell Press.	 

 	Fig. 9  Composite electrolyte based on coating of the PEO-based solid polymer electrolyte on LAGP pellets. (a) Schematic showing an all-solid-state Li/composite electrolyte/LiFePO4 cell; cross-sectional SEM images of the LAGP/LFP interface prepared by (b) screen printing, (c) doctor-blade with PEO, and (d) doctor-blade with PVDF; Nyquist plots of the cathode/LAGP/cathode symmetrical cells for which the cathode was prepared by (e) screen printing, (f) doctor-blade with PEO and (g) doctor-blade with PVDF; (h) long term cycling performance of an all-solid-state Li/composite electrolyte/LiFePO4 cell at 1C, 60 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Surface modification using Nb. (a) Schematic of the approach; (b) interfacial resistance as a function of Nb layer thickness; (c) rate capability curves comparing the Nb-modified Li/LLZO/LCO cells vs. non-modified ones. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright (2014) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Porous interface of the c-Li6.25Al0.25La3Zr2O12 garnet structure. (a) Schematic showing non-modified and modified interfaces; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the interface of the pellet with LTO; (c) Nyquist plots of all-solid-state cells with LTO and Li metal electrodes with non-modified and modified interfaces; (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the non-modified and interface engineered all-solid-state cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright (2016) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 12  Plastic crystal interlayer based on succinonitrile (SN) with a fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) additive. (a) Schematic of interlayer preparation; cross-sectional SEM images of the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface (b) without and (d) with the interlayer; schematic showing Li+ transport at the LiFePO4/LLZTO interface (c) without and (e) with the interlayer; (f) rate capability of the all-solid-state Li./LLZTO/LiFePO4 cell with SN + FEC as the interlayer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Interface engineering using the LiF (or LiI) interphase layer and HFE (or I solution) infiltrated sulfide electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the interface modification; (b) schematic showing the lithium stripping/plating process of bare and interface modified Li metal; (c) Nyquist plots of Li symmetrical cells based on the pristine and interface modified Li7P3S11 sulfide electrolyte; (d) cycling performance of a LCO-based all-solid-state battery without and with interface modification at 0.1 mA cm−2 at 25 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Modification of the lithium metal surface using the Li salt-based organic–inorganic nanocomposite interphase. Schematics showing (a) poor interface and (b) stable interface between Li and LGPS; (c) plating/stripping voltage profiles of Li/Li symmetrical cells with different electrolyte compositions; (d) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li/LGPS/TiS2 full cells comparing bare Li and nanocomposite-stabilized Li. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright (2018) John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  MoS2 doping of the Li2S–P2S5 glass-ceramic electrolyte. (a) XRD patterns, (b) Arrhenius conductivity plots and (c) Nyquist plots of Li7P3S11 and Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01; cyclic voltammetry curves of Li symmetrical cells employing (d) Li7P3S11 and (e) Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01, (inset shows the modified view between 4 and 5 V); (f) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li–S batteries using Li7P3S11 and Li7P2.9S10.85Mo0.01 at C/20 at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  ZnO-doped Li3PS4 sulfide electrolyte. (a) XRD patterns of Li3+3xP1−xZnxS4−xOx and 0.98Li3PS4-0.02ZnO; (b) cyclic voltammetry curve of Li3.06P0.98Zn0.02S3.98O0.02 in the potential range of −0.5 V to 6 V (vs. Li/Li+); (c) cycling performance of the all-solid-state cell based on the doped and undoped Li3PS4 at 0.1C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 114. Copyright (2019) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  Hybrid Li7P3S11/PEO–LiClO4 electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the composite preparation process; (b) schematic of an all-solid-state Li–S cell based on the composite electrolyte; (c) cyclic voltammetry curves of Li/electrolyte/stainless steel cells; (d) voltage profiles of Li–Li symmetrical cells based on LPS and the composite electrolyte; (e) cycling performance of all-solid-state Li–S cells based on LPS and the composite electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright (2018) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  Ultrathin coating of Al2O3 on the Li7La2.75Ca025Zr1.75Nb0.25O12 garnet solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic showing the wettability of the garnet with molten Li; (b) cross-sectional SEM images of the interface of the garnet with Li metal, without and with ALD deposited Al2O3; (c) Nyquist plots of Li/LLCZN/Li cells with and without ALD-Al2O3 coating on the garnet, (inset shows the magnified view of the impedance curve of the cell with the ALD coating); (d) cycling performance of the LFMO/ALD-garnet solid state electrolyte/Li full cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2016) Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 19  Graphite-based soft interface modifier for the LALZWO ceramic. (a) Schematic showing the preparation of the graphite-based interface on the ceramic; (b) wettability of molten lithium on the ceramic without and with the graphite interface; (c) Nyquist plots and (d) voltage profiles at a current density of 50 μA cm−2 of the Li/LALZWO/Li symmetrical cells without and with the graphite modified interface; (e) rate capability and (f) cycling performance of the all-solid-state full cell based on NCM523 cathode/graphite modified LALZWO/Li at 0.5C at room temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Li3PO4-modified LLZTO garnet. (a) Schematic showing the suppression of lithium dendrites by the addition of Li3PO4 to the garnet; (b) Arrhenius plots of the garnet without and with Li3PO4; (c) Nyquist plots and (d) voltage profiles of symmetrical Li/Garnet/Li cells without and with Li3PO4. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143.Copyright (2017) Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  3D Li anode with a flowable interphase. (a) Schematic showing the fabrication of the 3D Li–rGO composite via thermal infiltration of PEG–LiTFSI at 150 °C and construction of an all-solid-state Li–LFP full cell; (b) schematics showing the comparison of Li stripping/plating between conventional Li foil anode and the 3D-rGO anode as the lithium host; solid-state Li-LFP full cell with LLZTO as the middle layer and either 3D Li–rGO or Li foil as the anode; (c) charge/discharge voltage curves and (d) cycling performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright (2017) American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 22  3D bilayer garnet solid electrolyte. (a) Schematic of the garnet bilayer framework; (b) schematic of the CNT coated and S-encapsulated garnet based all solid-state Li–S battery; (c) schematic of bare and polymer coated garnet; (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles and (e) cycling performance of the solid-state Li–S battery. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright (2017) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† These authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
