A safe, high-rate and high-energy polymer lithium-ion battery based on gelled membranes prepared by electrospinning   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00348D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00348D
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 921-927Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsA safe, high-rate and high-energy polymer lithium-ion battery based on gelled membranes prepared by electrospinning†

        
          
            Fausto 
            Croce‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Maria Letizia 
            Focarete
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jusef 
            Hassoun
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ida 
            Meschini
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Bruno 
            Scrosati
          
        
      c
aDip. di Scienze del Farmaco, Università “G. d'Annunzio”, Via dei Vestini, 31, 66100, Chieti, Italy. E-mail: fausto.croce@unich.it
bDipartimento di Chimica “G. Ciamician” e Consorzio Interuniversitario Nazionale per la Scienza e Tecnologia dei Materiali (INSTM, UdR Bologna), Università di Bologna, Via Selmi, 2, 40126, Bologna, Italy
cDipartimento di Chimica, Università “La Sapienza”, P.le A. Moro, 5, 00185, Roma, Italy
Received 
      9th August 2010
    , Accepted 11th November 2010First published on 7th January 2011AbstractIn this paper we report on the characteristics of a polymer Li-ion battery based on a unique combination of innovative electrode and electrolyte materials. In particular, the electrolytic separator of this system is based on gelled membranes prepared by the electrospinning technique. Electrospinning of polymer fibers is usually realized by applying a strong electric field to a polymer solution in an appropriate solvent. Typical membranes (mats) consist of nanometre size fibers and have porosities of 56–85%. Here we describe the fabrication, physical chemistry and electrochemical properties of PVdF (poly(vinylidene difluoride))-based electrospun membranes and their use as gelled electrolyte in Li-ion battery. Moreover, we describe the performances of a battery formed by sandwiching a gelled membrane with a nanoscale engineered Sn–C based anode and a lithium nickel manganese oxide spinel cathode. The battery so obtained has an appealing performance in terms of energy density, power capability, cycle life and safety.

Broader context
Since no more than two decades, efficient, light and environmentally friendly electric energy storage batteries have become, all over the world, one of the hot topics of both research development and building industry. Among the plethora of battery chemistries, lithium ion battery stands as the most promising technology monopolizing the consumer electronic market and attracting the attention of EV (electric vehicle) and HEV (hybrid electric vehicle) developers. However, the full exploitation of the current commercial lithium ion battery on the EV and HEV market is still unsatisfactory and there is potentially much room for improvement. Research efforts have been focused on developing systems with high discharge capacity, high charge/discharge rate and long life cycles. To achieve these goals, emphasis has been placed to developing functional materials (electrodes and electrolytes) that optimally facilitate the transport and the electrodic intercalation/de-intercalation of lithium ions. The work presented here is collocated in this frame.

1. Introduction
Modern society thrives on energy and the cost of reducing energy consumption would have profound consequences on life quality for the developed countries and the impossibility of life quality improvement for the underdeveloped ones. On the other end, the burning of fossil fuels and biomass inevitably poses a global gloomy threat on either the human and planet life due to the pollution of large modern cities and to the CO2-related global warming. This quandary is the driving force for worldwide initiatives aimed at the utilization of alternative energy sources and replacement of internal combustion engines with wireless electric motors. All alternative, CO2-free, energy sources, such as solar, wind, geothermal and even nuclear, would benefit from energy storage devices that could compensate time and space limitations of energy production. In this regard, many energy storage systems, able to balance production with demand, are being presently investigated and it is largely accepted that between them the most attractive are portable chemical storage devices. Batteries are electrochemical energy storage devices with the unique ability to deliver the stored chemical energy as electric energy with a high conversion efficiency and without any kind of gaseous exhaust. Moreover, batteries, in spite of the competition of other energy storage systems to buffer alternative energy sources, are, at the moment, the sole player to power efficiently the hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) or electric vehicles (EVs). Accordingly, particularly appealing are rechargeable, low cost and safe batteries having high specific energy (high voltage joined with high specific capacity) and high rate capability. Nowadays, the Li-ion battery exceeds at least by a factor of 2.5 any rivaling technology thanks to its energy density (210 Wh kg−1; 650 Wh l−1).1Lithium-ion battery technology has completely monopolized the portable electronic market (cellular phones and laptop computers), it has entered the power tool equipment market and it is expected, in the near future, that it plays a key role in the emerging EV market, provided that its cost and safety can be substantially improved. The state-of-the-art Li-ion battery utilizes thin (≈25 μm) microporous polyolefin separators the cost of which constitutes a significant fraction of the overall cost of the manufacture of Li-ion batteries for HEV and EV. In addition, polyolefin separators show poor wetting capability due to their small pore size and porosity, which hinders the absorption of electrolyte solutions into the microporous membrane. As a consequence, these separators suffer from lower conductivity as compared to pure electrolyte solutions, and fade in both capacity and power capability upon cycling, particularly at high temperatures.2 Battery separators can be realized much more economically by an innovative technology called electrospinning.3–7 In this technique, a fibrous membrane composed of ultrafine fibers with a diameter ranging from micrometres to tens of nanometres can be easily prepared8–10 by applying a strong electric field (1–25 kV cm−1) to the tip of a metallic capillary connected to a syringe which contains a polymer solution. Upon applying small pressure to the polymer solution a droplet starts to form at the tip of the capillary and it is stretched and deformed by the strong electric field into a conical shape known as Taylor cone.11 As soon as the applied voltage overcomes the surface tension of the polymer solution, one or more jets are ejected from the tip and fly toward the grounded collector where they are collected as ultrafine porous membranes (mats). By controlling the process parameters (polymer properties, polymer solution parameters, process variables and environmental parameters) mats of fully interconnected open-pore structure, 10–50 μm thick, with porosities from 30 to 90% and pore sizes ranging from submicrometers to a few micrometres can be obtained.12
Electrospun nanofibrous membranes based on homopolymer PVdF (poly(vinylidenefluoride)) and co-polymer PVdF-HFP (poly(vinilidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene)) have already been reported in the literature.13,14 These membranes have been utilized to trap typical lithium-ion electrolyte solutions (e.g.LiPF6 in a carbonate solvent mixture) and used as separators in lithium-ion batteries. Moreover, some of us have already reported15 on the use of PVdF-based hybrid membranes to prepare gel-type electrolytes with high ionic conductivity (i.e. approaching the one typical of liquid solutions) combined with good mechanical properties (i.e. those characteristic of a polymer) and on their use in developing a polymer lithium-ion battery based on an innovative combination of new electrode and electrolyte materials.16 This original new battery utilized an advanced, nanostructured, anode material based on a Sn–C (1:1) composite which is characterized by the following electrochemical reaction: Sn–C + 4.4 Li = Li4.4Sn + C(1)with an associated specific capacity of 400–500 mAh g−1 and a cathode material based on a lithium nickel manganese oxide spinel, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4, characterized by a two-phase electrochemical process: LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 = Li1−xNi0.5Mn1.5O4 + xLi(2)which exhibits a flat voltage profile around 4.5 V and a theoretical specific capacity of 146 mAh g−1.17
In this paper we report on the characteristics of a microporous fibrous membrane based on a new PVdF copolymer, i.e. poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-chlorotrifluoroethylene), PVdF-CTFE, gelled with a typical lithium-ion solution (i.e.LiPF6 in a carbonate solvent mixture). The gelled membrane is used as an electrolytic separator, for the first time in the literature as self-standing,22 in a Li-ion battery, which utilizes a nanoscale engineered Sn–C based anode and a lithium-nickel-manganese spinel cathode developed previously.16
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
Poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-chlorotrifluoroethylene) copolymer (PVdF:CTFE 90:10 molar ratio, 8 cl g−1 intrinsic viscosity) (PVdF-10CTFE) was provided by Solvay Fluoropolymers. Acetone and N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMAc) were purchased form Sigma-Aldrich Co. and were used without further purification. Battery grade electrolyte LP 30, 1M LiPF6 – EC:DMC (1:1 w/w), was purchased from Merck KGaA, Germany.
The nickel-manganese LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 cathode material was obtained by following a wet chemistry route described in detail in a previous work.17 Basically, the LiNO3, Ni(NO3)2·H2O, and M(NO3)2·H2O reagents were dissolved in water and mixed in a stoichiometric ratio; the mixture was then dried and finally thermally treated in air at 800 °C for 24 h followed by slow cooling at a 0.5 °C min−1 rate. The synthesis of the Sn–C nanostructured composite material was based on the infiltration of an organometallic tin precursor in an organic resorcinol (benzene-1,3-diol)-formaldehyde (methanal) gel, followed by calcination under argon, according to a procedure already described in previous work.18,19
2.2 
          Membrane fabrication through electrospinning
For membrane fabrication a PVdF-10CTFE solution was prepared at room temperature (RT) by dissolving the polymer in acetone:DMAc 70:30 v/v at a concentration of 13% w/v. The electrospinning apparatus made in-house was composed of a high voltage power supply (Spellman, SL 50 P 10/CE/230), a syringe pump (KDScientific), a glass syringe, a stainless-steel blunt-ended needle (id 0.84 mm) connected with the power supply electrode and a metallic cylindrical rotating collector (radius = 25 mm) positioned 15 cm from the tip of the needle. The polymer solution was dispensed through a Teflon tube to the needle which was vertically placed on the collecting mandrel. The process was conducted by using the following experimental conditions: applied voltage 12 kV, solution flow-rate 0.01 ml min−1, rotation angular speed of the cylindrical collector 400 rpm, at RT and relative humidity RH = 40–45%. The obtained membranes consisted of non-woven mats containing randomly oriented fibers indicated as PVdF-10CTFE. The obtained electrospun scaffolds were kept under vacuum at room temperature, in a desiccator over P2O5 overnight, in order to remove residual solvents.
2.3 Electrolyte and electrodes preparation, cell assembly and testing methods
The gelled electrolyte membranes were prepared by in situ, room-temperature addition of LP30 electrolyte solution to electrospun mat disks of 1 cm diameter and 20–50 μm thickness. After the electrolyte solution addition the gelled membranes were left resting for 45 min before testing. With this procedure homogeneous, mechanically stable and transparent membranes of about 100 μm thickness were obtained (Fig. 1a). These electrolyte membranes are hereafter simply indicated by the notation EGPE-PVdF-CTFE (electrospun gel polymer electrolyte PVdF-CTFE-based).
 Fig. 1  (a) View of the electrospun PVdF-10CTFE-based mat before and after the gelation. (b) Weight increase of the PVdF-10CTFE-based mat upon liquid electrolyte uptake. 
The conductivity of EGPE-PVdF-CTFE samples was measured by running impedance spectroscopy of cells formed by sandwiching the samples between two stainless-steel (AISI 316 SS) blocking electrodes. A Bio-Logic SAS, VMP2Z multi-channel potentiostat was used for impedance measurements.
The positive and negative electrodes were prepared as thin films by doctor-blade deposition on an aluminium or copper substrate, respectively, of a slurry composed of 80% active material, 10% PVdF 6020, Solef Solvay (binder) and 10% SP carbon, MMM Belgium (electron conductor additive). Prior to cell testing, the Sn–C anode was activated using a procedure originally established in our laboratory, which involves a direct contact with electrolyte-wetted metallic lithium.18 More details are reported in the supplementary section of ref. 16.
Complete lithium-ion cells were assembled using the nanostructured Sn–C composite as the anode, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 as the cathode and a EGPE-PVdF-CTFE as the electrolyte. The lithium ion cells were cycled at various C-rates (1C corresponding to about 0.2 A cm−2 g−1 with respect to the cathode mass) and within a 3.0–4.9 V voltage range, using a Maccor Series 4000 Battery Test System as the driving and controlling instrument.
Fiber morphology was observed with a Philips 515 Scanning Electron Microscope (SEM) at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV. Prior to SEM analysis the samples were sputter-coated with gold. The fiber diameter distribution was evaluated by measuring 200 fiber diameters by means of an image acquisition software (EDAX Genesis) and the results were given as the average diameter ± standard deviation. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) measurements were performed with a TA Instruments TGA2950 Thermogravimetric Analyzer (temperature range: RT to 800 °C, heating rate: 10 °C min−1, air atmosphere). Differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements were carried out using a TA-Instruments Q100 DSC equipped with a liquid nitrogen cooling system (LNCS) accessory. DSC scans were performed in the temperature range of 100 to 220 °C in helium atmosphere. The glass transition temperature (Tg) was taken at half-height of the glass transition heat capacity step and the melting temperature (Tm) was taken at the peak maximum of the melting endotherm. Wide-angle X-ray diffraction measurements (WAXS) were carried out at room temperature with a PANalytical X'Pert PRO diffractometer equipped with an XCelerator detector. CuK radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm) was used as an X-ray source. The degree of crystallinity (χc) was evaluated as the ratio of the crystalline peak areas to the total area under the scattering curve.20 The amorphous and crystalline contributions were calculated by the fitting method using the WinFit program.21
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Morphological analysis

Fig. 1a shows pictures of PVdF-CTFE electrospun mats before and after gelatinization, at RT, by means of LP30 (1M LiPF6 – EC:DMC (1:1)) electrolyte solution. The pictures are taken a few seconds apart. The gelatinization is realized by just immersing the electrospun PVdF-CTFE based mats in an excess of liquid electrolyte solution, waiting for 45 min and then gently removing any excess liquid using a paper tissue. As can be clearly seen, the mats swell immediately and become transparent, testifying a very fast kinetics of the gelling process.
In order to quantify this latter kinetics we have measured the weight increase of the mats as a result of the liquid electrolyte uptake during the gelatinization process. Fig. 1b clearly shows a very rapid uptake which reaches an equilibrium value in less than 1 h. The overall weight increase is higher than 800% of the pristine weight of the mats. After swelling, the weight of the gels remained constant and no syneresis effect was observed.
The capillarity of the mats, caused by their very high surface area and porosity, combined with the good wetting and swelling properties of PVdF-10CTFE polymer, is the driving force of the quick liquid electrolyte absorption. To investigate the morphological characteristics of the dry and wet mats, SEM images have been taken before and after the electrolyte uptake and are reported in Fig. 2a and 2b, respectively.
 Fig. 2  
            SEM micrographs of the electrospun random mat (PVdF-10CTFE) before (a) and after (b) electrolyte (1M LiPF6 in EC/DMC 1:1) uptake. 

Polymer fibers without bead-like defects and with a constant diameter along the fiber length (diameter distribution = 230 ± 38 nm) were obtained after careful optimization of the spinning process conditions (Fig. 2a). It is worth noting that no papers are available in the literature on the electrospinning of PVdF–CTFE copolymers, except for the very recent one by Lee et al.22 As can be clearly seen in Fig. 2b, after electrolyte absorption, the fibers become largely swollen, more entangled and in closer contact to each other, with the fibrous structure still retained. The microscopic porosity has almost disappeared while diffuse nanopores are still present. The overall picture clearly shows an extensive interaction between the fibers and the electrolyte solution, which accounts for the large amount of retained liquid. Moreover, SEM images show that the mat fibrous network is still substantially intact, which accounts for the excellent mechanical properties of gelled samples.
3.2 Thermal analysis
The as-electrospun PVdF-10CTFE mats were preliminarily characterized by means of TGA measurements in order to exclude the presence of residual solvent and evaluate their thermal stability in air. The mats showed almost identical TGA curves (not reported here) to those of the powder pristine material and no appreciable weight loss was observed up to about 250 °C, indicating the absence of solvents, of low molecular weight compounds and/or humidity. Both electrospun mats showed a very high thermal stability and degraded with two main degradation steps centered at a temperature of the maximum degradation rate (Tmax) reported in Table 1 together with the Tmax value for the PVdF-10CTFE powder material, for comparison reasons. Interestingly, the electrospun mats showed a slight increase of thermal stability with respect to the powder material.
Table 1 Thermal properties and crystallinity of PVdF-10CTFE and its electrospun mats




Sample

T
max (TGA)a (°C)

T
g
b (°C)

                    ΔCpb (J g−1°C)

T
m
b
,
c(°C)

                    ΔHmb (J g−1)

                    Xcd (%)





a From TGA measurements.
b From first DSC scan (heating rate 20 °C min−1).
c Upper temperature melting peak.
d Crystallinity degree from WAXS (±5%).






                    PVdF-10CTFE powder
433; 505
−32
0.08
164
54,2
45


PVdF-10CTFE-mats
455; 496
−31
0.12
164
46,3
39




In order to examine if the electrospinning process has altered the thermal properties of PVdF-10CTFE material, DSC measurements were carried out either on the pristine powder samples and on the electrospun membranes. Fig. 3 shows the DSC curve of PVdF-10CTFE mats, while, for the sake of comparison, the main calorimetric data are summarized in Table 1 together with those of the powder material.
 Fig. 3  
DSC curve (first scan, heating rate 20 °C min−1) of electrospun membranes PVdF-10CTFE. Inset: enlargement of the glass transition region. 
All samples showed a well-defined glass transition at a temperature (Tg) of around −30 °C (see inset of Fig. 3 and Table 1), intermediate between those reported for poly(vinilydene fluoride) (PVdF) (Tg = −40 °C) and for poly(chlorotrifluoroethylene) (PCTFE) (Tg = 52 °C) homopolymers.23 This result seems to indicate that a miscible amorphous phase is present in the PVdF-10CTFE copolymer. In addition to the glass transition two melting regions were observed in the DSC curve (Fig. 3): a low temperature one located around 50 °C and a broad region between 120 and 180 °C, the latter being characterized by multiple-peak endotherms. DSC curves very similar to those shown in Fig. 3 were previously reported by other authors for PVdF-CTFE copolymers containing 9 and 12 mol% of CTFE.26 The overall melting enthalpy value calculated from the DSC curve shown in Fig. 3 is reported in Table 1 and indicates that all samples were highly crystalline.
Furthermore, the degree of crystallinity, calculated from WAXS diffractrograms and reported in Table 1, confirms that the electrospun membranes have lower crystallinity with respect to the powder material, in agreement with calorimetric data. Although the crystalline structure of PVdF, both in powder form and as electrospun membranes, has been widely investigated by many authors24,27 a limited number of papers are reported in the literature regarding PVdF-CTFE copolymers from a structural point of view.28,29 The lower value of crystallinity of the electrospun membranes can be explained considering that during the electrospinning process, the rapid solidification of macromolecular chains under high elongation stretching may prevent the development of crystallinity, since polymer chains have little time to organize in a crystal structure before occurring of fiber solidification and deposition on the collector. The decrease in material crystallinity after electrospinning was previously observed by other authors for plain PVdF.24
The DSC trace of the gelled membrane is reported in Fig. 2S of the ESI.† As expected, the calorimetric behavior of gelled mats resembles that of pure liquid rather than that of the dry electrospun PVdF-CTFE mats. A more detailed discussion on this topic is reported in the ESI.†
3.3 Electrochemical characterization
The ionic conductivity of EGPE-PVdF-CTFE membrane was calculated from the bulk resistance determined by AC impedance spectroscopy. In the entire temperature and time ranges investigated, the Nyquist plots of the gelled membranes (Fig. 4) consisted in an inclined straight vertical line whose high frequency intercept on the real axis, determined by a fitting procedure, gave a resistance value, R, with an error lower than 5%, from which the ionic conductivity was calculated.
 Fig. 4  Nyqist plot of the EGPE-PVdF-CTFE membrane. 
Worth noticing here is the absence, in the impedance spectrum, of a semi circle in the high frequency region which testifies to the homogeneity of the samples and the completeness of the gelling process of the electrospun fibers upon liquid electrolyte addition. In fact, had any phase separation (e.g. due to the coexistence of amorphous/crystalline phases) been present this would have reflected, at least in the limits of measurements sensitivity, in different Nyquist plots, consisting of a high frequency semi circle and a low frequency inclined straight line.25

Fig. 5a shows the conductivity versus temperature plot of the EGPE-PVdF-CTFE sample. The plot exhibits a remarkable curvature which is more evident in the low temperature region. Generally, two types of behavior of temperature dependence for polymer or gel electrolyte are reported in the literature. The first behavior is described by the Arrhenius equation: σ(T) = A·exp(−Ea/RT)(3)
 Fig. 5  (a) Conductivity versus temperature plot of EGPE-PVdF-CTFE. Data obtained using impedance spectroscopy. (b) VTF plot of conductivity data. (c) Conductivity time evolution at room temperature of the EGPE-PVdF-CTFE. 
This behavior is indicative of a decoupling between the ionic conductivity and the polymer chains dynamics.
The second behavior is better described by the Vogel–Tamman–Fulcher (VRF) empirical equation:25 σ(T) = A·T−1/2exp(Ea/R(T − T0))(4)

A is a parameter indicative of the number of charge carriers, while Ea is the activation energy of the activated ion-hopping conduction process. T0 is a parameter correlated to the glass transition temperature, Tg, of the material (often referred to as the ‘zero configurational entropy’ of the system) and is usually about 30 K lower than Tg. VTF behavior, with its typical curvature of the σ(T)versus 1000/T plot, is the fingerprint of the coupling between ions and polymer chains dynamics. Fig. 5a shows the conductivity data plotted according to the Arrhenius equation where the curvature is quite evident.

Fig. 5b shows the conductivity data plotted according to the VTF equation and Table 2 reports the related parameters A, Ea and T0 calculated by a non-linear-least-square fitting regression on the experimental data. Worth noticing is the low value of Ea which is close to those of liquid electrolyte solutions. In addition, to be noticed is the high value of the ionic conductivity that decreases slightly, i.e. from 2.57 × 10−3 to 1.17 × 10−3, passing from 50 to 0 °C. The conductivity at room temperature is greater than 2 × 10−3 S cm−1, a value similar to that of common lithium-ion electrolytes. Moreover, the fact that the Arrhenius plot shows a curvature, while the VTF one shows a linear behavior, is a direct indication of strong coupling between the ionic conductivity and the polymer chain dynamics.30Fig. 5a also shows the overlapping of the heating and cooling scans, which indicates good stability of the electrolyte in the entire temperature range examined. This stability is confirmed by Fig. 5c, which reports the time evolution of the room temperature conductivity.
Table 2 
            VTF fit parameters of EGPE-PVdF-CTFE




 

A/S−1 cm−1 K−1/2

E
a/eV

T
0/K




Sample
1.075 ± 0.005
2.75 × 10−3 ± 5 × 10−5
248 ± 3




These results clearly show that the membranes have retained their high conductivity and thus their integrity over the entire storage time. In fact, had the membranes lost the liquid phase then separation and/or crystallization would have occurred, which would have been evidenced by an appearance in the impedance spectrum of a high frequency semi-circle and by a decrease of the conductivity with time.
3.4 Battery performances

Fig. 6 shows typical voltage profiles of the charge–discharge process of the Sn–C/EGPE-PVdF-CTFE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 battery at room temperature and various rates. Rate capability is an important parameter as it is strictly correlated to the power the battery can release and to recharging speed. A more precise definition of this physical quantity can be found in the ESI.†
 Fig. 6  Galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles of Sn–C/EGPE-PVdF-CTFE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4lithium-ion cell at RT and C/3 rate. 
The process basically involves the exchange of lithium ions between the two electrodes. We can see that the battery, which is cathode-limited, operates at around 4.0 V and delivers at a C/3 rate a capacity of 120 mA h g−1, i.e. 82% of the theoretical value. These high capacity and voltage values reflect in an energy density as high as 480 W h kg−1. Obviously, this value is only indicative since it does not take into account the weight of the battery ancillary components, such as electrolyte, current collectors and case. Thus, the practical value is certainly lower; we are, however, confident that by optimizing the cell design and structure, an achievement of an effective energy density approaching 180 W h kg−1 is a reasonable precision. The results of the figure also demonstrate that the battery combines high energy with high rate capability. Indeed, we can see that even at a rate as high as 2C (Fig. 7), which means releasing all the stored charge or being completely recharged in half an hour, the battery is capable of delivering 80 mA h g−1, which is still 55% of the theoretical value.
 Fig. 7  Capacity upon the cycle number for the Sn–C/EGPE-PVdF-CTFE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4lithium-ion cell at RT and different rates. 
Cycle life is also an important evaluation parameter for rating lithium-ion batteries. Accordingly, we monitored the battery response for over 70 charge–discharge cycles at room temperature and at different C rates. Fig. 7, which shows the capacity evolution during the cycling test, demonstrates very stable behavior with a capacity decay, for the cycles run at rates lower than 1 C, limited to only 0.06 mA h g−1 per cycle. The decreases which is observed at the intermediate rates is a phenomenon that can be partially associated to the unpredictable relaxation processes following the instrumental transient stimulus of the cell experiments at the change of the discharge rate. This behavior has been reported in the literature16 and is confirmed by the fact that the decreasing is not pronounced at lower rates and tends to level as the cyclation number increases. The trends clearly reveal that the battery can cycle at high rates with a very contained capacity decay that is mainly due to ohmic polarization (see ESI).† This suggests that by optimizing the cell geometry,31 such as by reducing its overall resistance, one could achieve performances even better that those reported here.
4. Conclusions
The results reported in this paper demonstrate the relevance of nanofiber-based, gelled polymer electrolyte for the development of high power and safe lithium-ion batteries, which can be utilized to power hybrid and electric vehicles and to store the energy produced by renewable energy sources. These gelled nanofibrous electrolytes showed high conductivity of liquid-type over a wide temperature range, and good mechanical stability. The battery here presented, prepared by assembling a novel combination of electrode materials separated by a gel-type nano-engineered polymer electrolyte, can potentially guarantee environmental sustainability, high energy content and low safety hazard.
Acknowledgements
This work has been carried out with the support of the Italian Ministry of Research and University, under a PRIN 2007 project.
References
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bansal, B. Meyer and M. Salomon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 848–851 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Cheruvally, J.-K. Kim, J.-W. Choi, J.-H. Ahn, K.-W. Kim and H.-J. Ahn, J. Power Sources, 2007, 167, 491 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Cho, T. Sakai, S. Tanase, K. Kimura, Y. Kondo, T. Tarao and M. Tanaki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A159 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gao, X. Hu, C. Dai and T. Yi, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 131, 100 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, S. W. Choi, S. M. Jo, B. D. Chin, D. Y. Kim and K. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2006, 163, 41 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kim, S. W. Choi, S. M. Jo, W. S. Lee and B. C. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A295 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Tsai and H. S. Gibson, J. Electrost., 2002, 54, 333 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshimoto, Y. M.- Shin, H. Terai and J. P. Vacani, Biomaterials, 2003, 24, 2077 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, C. Drew, S.-H. Lee, K. J. Senecal, J. Kumar and L. A. Samuelson, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1273 CrossRef CAS .
G. Taylor, Proc. R. Soc. London, Ser. A, 1969, 313, 453 .
S. W. Choi, S. M. Jo, W. S. Lee and Y. R. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15(23), 2027 CrossRef CAS .
S.-S. Choi, Y. S. Lee, C. W. Joo, S. G. Lee, J. K. Park and K.-S. Han, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 339–343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Kim, S. W. Choi, S. M. Jo, W. S. Lee and B. C. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152(2), A295–A300 CrossRef CAS .
F. Croce, A. D'Epifanio, J. Hassoun, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119–121, 399 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, S. Panero, P. Reale and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4807–4810 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reale, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1949 CrossRef CAS .
G. Derrien, J. Hassoun, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2336 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hassoun, G. Derrien, S. Panero and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3169 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Kakudo, N. Kasai, X-Ray Diffraction by Polymers, American Elsevier Publishing- New York 1972, Chapters 12 and 13 Search PubMed .
S. Krumm, Acta Univ. Carol. Geol., 1994, 38, 253 Search PubMed .
S. Y-Lee, Y. B. Jeong and D.-W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6197 CrossRef .

          M. Pyda, B. Wunderlich, “Heat Capacities of High Polymers” in Polymer Handbook, Editors: J. Brandrupet al. 1999, 4, Ed., New York, John Wiley Search PubMed .
K. Gao, X. Hu, C. Dai and T. Yi, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2006, 131, 100 CrossRef CAS .

          F. M. Gray, Polymer Electrolytes, Royal Society of Chemistry Monographs, Cambridge 1997 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Wang and Z.-Y. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 062904 CrossRef .
S. W. Choi, J. R. Kim, Y. R. Ahn, S. M. Jo and E. J. Cairns, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19104 .
B. Chu, X. Zhou, K. Ren, B. Neese, M. Lin, Q. Wang, F. Bauer and Q. M. Zhang, Science, 2006, 313, 334 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Wang and Z.-Y. Cheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 062904 CrossRef .
N. Binesh and S. V. Bath, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1998, 36, 1201–1209 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Srinivasan, Battery for Vehicular Applications, http://berc.lbl.gov/venkat/files/status_of_batteries_for_vehicles.pdf Search PubMed.

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c0ee00348d‡ The authors are listed in alphabetical order.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
Since no more than two decades, efficient, light and environmentally friendly electric energy storage batteries have become, all over the world, one of the hot topics of both research development and building industry. Among the plethora of battery chemistries, lithium ion battery stands as the most promising technology monopolizing the consumer electronic market and attracting the attention of EV (electric vehicle) and HEV (hybrid electric vehicle) developers. However, the full exploitation of the current commercial lithium ion battery on the EV and HEV market is still unsatisfactory and there is potentially much room for improvement. Research efforts have been focused on developing systems with high discharge capacity, high charge/discharge rate and long life cycles. To achieve these goals, emphasis has been placed to developing functional materials (electrodes and electrolytes) that optimally facilitate the transport and the electrodic intercalation/de-intercalation of lithium ions. The work presented here is collocated in this frame.

Sn–C + 4.4 Li = Li4.4Sn + C	(1)
LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 = Li1−xNi0.5Mn1.5O4 + xLi	(2)

 	Fig. 1  (a) View of the electrospun PVdF-10CTFE-based mat before and after the gelation. (b) Weight increase of the PVdF-10CTFE-based mat upon liquid electrolyte uptake.	 

 	Fig. 2  
            SEM micrographs of the electrospun random mat (PVdF-10CTFE) before (a) and after (b) electrolyte (1M LiPF6 in EC/DMC 1:1) uptake.	 



                    PVdF-10CTFE powder	433; 505	−32	0.08	164	54,2	45
PVdF-10CTFE-mats	455; 496	−31	0.12	164	46,3	39

 	Fig. 3  
DSC curve (first scan, heating rate 20 °C min−1) of electrospun membranes PVdF-10CTFE. Inset: enlargement of the glass transition region.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nyqist plot of the EGPE-PVdF-CTFE membrane.	 
σ(T) = A·exp(−Ea/RT)	(3)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Conductivity versus temperature plot of EGPE-PVdF-CTFE. Data obtained using impedance spectroscopy. (b) VTF plot of conductivity data. (c) Conductivity time evolution at room temperature of the EGPE-PVdF-CTFE.	 
σ(T) = A·T−1/2exp(Ea/R(T − T0))	(4)

Sample	1.075 ± 0.005	2.75 × 10−3 ± 5 × 10−5	248 ± 3

 	Fig. 6  Galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles of Sn–C/EGPE-PVdF-CTFE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4lithium-ion cell at RT and C/3 rate.	 

 	Fig. 7  Capacity upon the cycle number for the Sn–C/EGPE-PVdF-CTFE/LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4lithium-ion cell at RT and different rates.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c0ee00348d
‡ The authors are listed in alphabetical order.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
