Controlling strategies to maximize reliability of integrated photo-electrochemical devices exposed to realistic disturbances   - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8SE00441B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8SE00441B
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1297-1306Controlling strategies to maximize reliability of integrated photo-electrochemical devices exposed to realistic disturbances†

        
          
            Saurabh 
            Tembhurne
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Sophia 
            Haussener
          
        
      *
      Laboratory of Renewable Energy Science and Engineering, EPFL, Station 9, 1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: sophia.haussener@epfl.ch;   Tel: +41 21 69 33878
Received 
      1st September 2018
    , Accepted 18th March 2019First published on 19th March 2019AbstractWe numerically investigate the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy by integrated photo-electrochemical (IPEC) devices and assess their response to time-dependent changes in the boundary conditions and the material properties. We focus on a device architecture which uses concentrated solar irradiation to reduce the use of rare and expensive components such as light absorbers and catalysts. For practical usability of IPEC devices, it is of particular importance that the device operates with stable efficiency and production rates. Variations in the operating conditions, resulting, for example, from degradation of the materials over the lifetime and from the daily and seasonal changes in incoming irradiation, pose a challenge for the stable and secure production of fuel from such devices. To tackle these issues, we develop performance optimization strategies utilizing device design, component and material choice, and adaptation of operational conditions. Degradation effects can be alleviated (3–21% improvement in production) by dynamically adapting the input water flow rates. The water mass flow controller acts as an optimum operating point tracker for the IPEC device eliminating any need for additional, external power electronics (such as a dc–dc based maximum power point tracker). Mass flow rate adaptation can further be used to alleviate higher frequency variations given by the per-minute and daily variation in the irradiation. A stabilized efficiency and hydrogen production for the day can be achieved with mass flow controlling, with a production increase in the range of 1–6%. The developed strategies highlight that the design of an IPEC device needs to consider the realistic operation of the IPEC during the complete life. The developed strategies show that mass flow control allows for a more dynamic PEC operation and is a powerful tool to ensure robust and efficient device operation and to allow for alleviation of degradation effected performance reduction while excluding any external power electronics.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is the largest renewable energy resource. Its conversion and utilization for the production of heat, electricity, fuels and other chemical commodities is essential for a renewable energy future.1 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) processing of fuels and chemical commodities is of particular importance for the direct processing and storage of solar energy in chemical bonds. For its practical relevance, a PEC device has to be efficient, robust, sustainable and cost-effective.2 We loosely define PEC devices as devices that closely integrate a photoabsorber and an electrocatalyst. This definition can include traditional PEC devices using a semiconductor–liquid junction for the charge separation or integrated PEC devices with a buried photovoltaic (PV) in close electrical contact with the electrocatalyst (EC).3–6
Simulations7–12 and experimentation5,12 have shown that the proper design of a complete PEC device requires careful consideration of the device materials and components and the device architecture in order to ensure best performance. For example, the current and potential of the photoanode and -cathode have to be carefully matched in order to ensure the highest possible performance. This matching is usually done based on an assumed ideal operating condition (non-degraded components, standard AM1.5G irradiation conditions) and decides the design point of the device as well as the best material choices.4
In order to obtain a perfect matching, a macroscopic separation of the photoabsorber and electrocatalysis components and their coupling via the incorporation of power electronics (such as a dc–dc based maximum power point (MPP) tracker) can be considered. This approach is not applicable to traditional PEC devices relying on the direct semiconductor–electrolyte interface for charge separation, and to integrated PEC devices, which are based on a buried PV component microscopically connected with solid conductors to electrocatalytically actives sites.3,4,6 In fact, a majority of PEC demonstrations are based on such buried junctions.13–19 The benefits or drawbacks of an (integrated) PEC device compared to a separated PEC device with power electronics (a dc–dc based MPP for an externally wired PV plus EC device) can be assessed using 0-dimensional models.2,4 The relative change in efficiency between a separated design with power electronics and an integrated design without power electronics, both for a range of photoabsorbers with varying fill factors (FF) – obtained by varying the series resistances – and a range of electrocatalysts with varying current dilution factors (F = Acat/Aphoto), is shown in Fig. 1b. The corresponding J–V characteristics are shown in Fig. 1a. The photoabsorbers are triple junction III–V material based cells and the electrocatalysts are Ni/Co3O4 in alkali environments. The power curves with FFs between 0.60 and 0.91 are shown with different colors, the load curves for different F are indicated by numbers.
 Fig. 1  (a) Characteristic current density versus voltage curves of III–V based triple junction PV (power curves) and Ni/Co3O4 based EC (load curves) for varying FF (0.60, 0.70, 0.80, 0.91) and varying F = Acat/Aphoto (0.013, 0.019, 0.027, 0.038, 0.15, 10). The black dots represent the intersections between the power and load curves (i.e. integrated operation), the colored dots (on each load curve) represent the operating point if a 93% efficient dc–dc based MPP tracker is employed (for the respective colored power curve), and the orange diamonds represent the MPP of the different power curves. (b) Relative change in the efficiency between a device utilizing an external dc–dc based MPP tracker and an integrated (no-converter) device for each power case (0.6 ≤ FF ≤ 0.91) and its corresponding load curves (curves 1 to 6 correspond to F = 0.013 to 10). Positive bars imply the integrated case has a lower efficiency and vice versa. 
If the operating current of the separated PV-driven electrolyzer is lower than the operating current of the integrated device, then the power electronics were not enhancing the efficiency, even though the integrated device was not operating exactly at (but close to) the MPP. The opposite (dc–dc converter enhances efficiency) was true when the operating current of the separated design was higher than the respective integrated design operating current (which correspondingly lied far away from MPP). The motivation behind analyzing such a wide spread of power and load curves was to simulate cases where the integrated operating point lies at varying distances from the MPP of the power curve. We observed that there were some cases (positive bars in Fig. 1b) where power electronics enhanced the devices' efficiency while for others (negative bars in Fig. 1b) the use of power electronics caused the device's efficiency to decrease. Depending on the distance of the operating point form the corresponding MPP of the power curve, the enhancement was as high as +46% (i.e. for the load curve with F = 10 and the power curve with FF = 0.91) and as low as −7% (i.e. for the load with F = 0.15 and the power curve with FF = 0.60). In many cases (though badly designed) the separated design with external dc–dc converter seemed to benefit the overall device performance.
This said, the use of power electronics generally requires a non-integrated (PV plus EC) PEC device, for which close thermal and electronic integration is not possible. We have predicted that thermal and fluidic integration together with close electronic integration can benefit the device performance.14,20,21 In order to take benefit of this advantage, ways of adapting and tracking the optimal operating point without the use of external power electronics need to be developed. This is what we propose and numerically assess here.
The relevance of this approach relies also on the observation that practical PEC devices will never operate at their design point. This is given by – for example – unavoidable degradation of the materials and components22 and the location-dependent, intermittent nature of the solar irradiation, both effects occurring at different rates and frequencies during the lifetime of the device. The intermittency and degradation not only affect the production at a particular time of the day, but they also change the operating point of the device effecting a sudden and/or slow drift of the current–voltage curves of the components, potentially leading to a complete shutdown of the device. Consequently, reliable and stable operation of PEC devices over their lifetimes become an ultimate challenge.
We have identified two routes to tackle this challenge and to ensure continuous and stable fuel production from PEC devices exposed to sustained and fluctuating disturbances (Fig. 2). The first route is an idea based on a PEC design which allows for dynamic adaptation of its operating conditions (specifically by the adaptation of the reactant mass flow rate) to effectively deal with disturbances of different types, magnitude, and frequency. The second route relies on a macroscopic separation of the photoabsorber and electrocatalysis components and their coupling via the incorporation of power electronics (as analyzed above, see Fig. 1). This approach is not applicable to traditional PEC devices relying on the direct semiconductor–electrolyte interface for charge separation. The first approach would however also be applicable to the traditional PEC device.
 Fig. 2  Schematics showing the different types of PEC device configurations: traditional or integrated PEC, photovoltaics and electrolyzer with power electronics (dc–dc MPP tracker), and traditional or integrated PEC with reactant flow control. 
The first route requires designing an integrated device which can dynamically respond to changes in the operating conditions without external power electronics. This approach requires a design providing controllable and adjustable operation. A detailed multi-physics model is required to properly scout for operational parameters which can be controlled and/or varied, ultimately allowing to change the device's operating point. For this purpose, we used our previously developed coupled 2D multi-physics non-isothermal model23 which uses finite element and finite volume methods to predict the performance of IPEC devices, potentially operating with concentrated irradiation. The parametric analysis presented in Tembhurne et al.20 studied the effect of operational parameters such as the flow rate of the reactant and the input irradiation concentration (C = AConc./Aphoto) along with variations in materials and dimensional parameters. We have observed in this analysis that with varying mass flow rates the characteristic J–V curves of the EC component intersected in a small potential region giving rise to two characteristic operating zones. Zone I, occurring at low to intermediate electrochemical current densities (e.g. 1–14000 A m−2 for C = 450 for Si based devices, see Fig. S.3†), is characterized by temperature effects where increase in EC temperatures lead to decrease in overpotentials and hence better performance. Zone II, occurring at intermediate to high electrochemical current densities (e.g. >14000 A m−2), is dominated by mass transport limitations which cause decrease in overpotentials with increase in flow rates. This competing behavior in zones I and II is interesting, especially as the device's input irradiation concentration changes the operating point of the integrated system from one zone to another. This behavior makes the reactant mass flow rate the perfect parameter to be controlled to track the optimum operating point of the device. This was further supported by observing that a Pareto front was formed for the objective functions of solar-to-hydrogen efficiency and hydrogen production rate.20 This implies that both these objective functions cannot be maximized at a single reactant flow rate, hence, motivating smart flow rate control. In this paper, we prove and exploit this observation and quantify the benefit.
To summarize, three types (see Fig. 2) of photo-electrochemical systems (i) traditional and integrated, (ii) non-integrated (PV plus EC) with external power electronics control, and (iii) traditional and integrated with reactant flow control, are analyzed and compared. We particularly focus on an IPEC device design for solar fuel generation working under concentrated irradiation and present the development of controlling strategies which allow for stable and controllable operation of the device exposed to a variety of disturbances.
One possible concentrated integrated photoelectrochemical (CIPEC) device consists of a membrane electrode assembly (MEA) sandwiched between gas diffusion layers and bipolar flow plates.21 The anodic flow plate incorporates a stage of the dimensions of the PV component, which allows for its direct integration on the plate. The positive contact of the PV is in direct contact with the anode plate and the top-negative contact is connected to the cathode plate via a path made by metal conductors and electrically masked but conducting screws. This device configuration of n–p–anodic–cathodic can alternatively be p–n–cathodic–anodic depending on the designed polarity of the PV component. The design further incorporates a top reactant delivery plate which serves as the inlet for the reactant and which allows the excess heat from the PV component to be removed while preheating the reactant. The reactant is then transferred to the EC component by a direct fluidic connection. The integrated device operates under concentrated irradiation which not only allows to reduce the usage of expensive PV and catalytic materials but also to enhance the device performance by utilizing the normally unused thermal energy. This particular design uses close thermal and electronic integration and therefore allows for the application of our active controlling strategies to internally track the optimum operating point ensuring optimal output power. The device design is discussed in more detail in Tembhurne et al.20,21,23
We first present the incorporation of degradation models in our 2D multi-physics model.20 This allows us to simulate realistic degradation behavior of the photovoltaic and electrolyzer components. Then the exploitation of the model is presented, for the yearly (long-term disturbance) degradation analysis and daily irradiation variation (short term disturbance) analysis. And finally, the role of the reactant mass flow as an internal optimum power point tracker is discussed.
2. Methodology
Our 2-dimensional, non-isothermal multi-physics model, presented in Tembhurne et al.,20,23 served as the basis for the device model. The non-isothermal treatment of the device requires temperature-dependent material parameters. For the electromagnetic wave (EMW) propagation for any complex 2-dimensional geometry, the simulation of the electromagnetic field was done using the combined form of the Maxwell curl equations.24 The finite element method was used for this simulation. The net heat source term (QEM) arising from EMW propagation comprised of the thermalization losses and losses due to absorption of wavelengths above the bandgap wavelength. The sum of the net heat source terms for individual wavelengths gives the overall EM heat source (QEM). For the charge transport in the electrolyte, the current conservation and Nernst–Planck equations obeying electro-neutrality were used, whereas Ohm's law was used for the current conservation in the electrode. The concentration-dependent Butler–Volmer expression23,25 was used to account for the electrochemical reaction at the electrode–electrolyte interface for the anodic oxygen evolution reaction (OER), and cathodic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Finite element methods were used for solving the charge conservation equations in the electrode and electrolyte. The fluid flow and mass transport in the channels and the porous gas diffusion layers (GDLs) were modeled by the Navier–Stokes equation with the Darcy extension,26,27 and species transport by the Maxwell–Stefan diffusion model.28 The heat source in the electrochemical system (QEC)25 comprised of electrode ohmic losses, electrolyte ohmic losses, and kinetic losses, and are detailed in Tembhurne et al.20 The Poisson equation and the current conservation equations were solved simultaneously for the charge transport in the semiconductor (SC). Fermi–Dirac statistics and a finite volume solver were utilized where the internal heat source term (QPV) comprised of ohmic and recombination losses in the semiconductor. The steady-state energy conservation equation29 was solved for heat transfer using finite element methods in order to calculate the temperature field in the IPEC device. QH = QEM + QPV + QEC is the total heat source for the integrated PEC which includes the heat from electromagnetic heating, semiconductor transport, and electrochemical reactions. The coupling between different physical nodes and detailed simulation flow are discussed in Tembhurne et al.23
We used two reference case device designs differentiated by the photoabsorber component: reference case I used an aSi–ucSi–ucSi thin film triple junction PV (Voc ∼2.1 V, Jsc ∼47 A m−2, FF ∼64%) and reference case II used a Ga0.51In0.49P–GaAs dual junction (Voc ∼2.35 V, Jsc ∼100 A m−2, FF ∼93%). Details of the characteristics are given in Table S.1.†
In order to incorporate the degradation phenomena during the lifetime of the device, a reference degradation profile for various components (concentrator, PV, and EC) was generated based on the earlier work by Dumortier et al.30 and Fouda-Onana et al.31,32 The concentrator degradation was modeled using Cnew = C(1 − 0.0065 years), indicating a 0.65% loss in optical performance per year. PV degradation was modeled via an effective concentration received by the PV to be degrading with lifetime as CPV_new = Cnew(1 − 0.01 years) which incorporates both open circuit voltage (Voc) and short circuit current (Jsc) degradation. The degradation profiles for the concentrator and PV are presented in the ESI in Section S.0 and Fig. S.2.† For the EC component, the report by Fouda-Onana31 was used to identify the main degradation phenomena and then three parameters from our model were chosen to mimic this degradation behavior. The H+ diffusion coefficient in the electrolyte membrane was used to model the decrease in the EC's saturation current with time and was given as Dnew = D(1 − α0.1 years/3) (where D is the initial H+ diffusion coefficient in the Nafion membrane). The GDL's conductivity was used to model the increase in ohmic losses and, specifically, to capture the EC's efficiency losses at high current31 and was given as σnew = σ(1 − α(−0.002years2 + 0.0734years)) (where σ is the initial GDL conductivity). The exchange current densities of the anode and cathode (i.e. IrRuO2/Pt) were used to model the increase in the activation overpotential with time and were given as Jnew = J(1 − α 0.1years/3) (where J is the initial exchange current density of the anode and cathode). The variation of the EC J–V curves with these parameters is shown in Fig. S.1.† Combining these three parameters, a reference degradation profile, mimicking the realistic degradation behavior occurring in the EC component, was generated and was used for the degradation analysis in this study. α is an arbitrary parameter based on fitted degradation J–V behavior reported in literature (see ESI in Section S.0†) and was chosen 1 for reference degradation case, and 1.5 and 2 for medium and higher degradation cases, respectively.
3. Results and discussion
We define solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH) as , where faradaic efficiencies of 1 and a negligible product crossover are assumed. E0eq is the equilibrium potential of 1.23 V for neutral pH, T = 25 °C, and p = 1 atm. Jop (A m−2) is the operating current density, C is the operating irradiation concentration, and Iin (W m−2) is the incident irradiation.
The results and discussions for sustained disturbance (lifetime degradation) analysis, frequent disturbance (daily and seasonal irradiation variation) analysis and the mass flow rate based control of the optimum operating point of the IPEC are presented. The analysis presented here is for aSi–ucSi–ucSi triple junction Si PV based (reference case I) integrated photo-electrochemical device with F (Acat/Aphoto) = 1, unless stated otherwise. The inlet velocity range investigated is between 0 and 0.2 m s−1, based on the observed saturation behaviour of the performance when further increasing the velocity.20,23
3.1. Sustained disturbances: degradation as an example
For an IPEC device, a conservative design approach could consist of designing the device in a way that it initially operates far away from its Voc (clearly in the plateau region of the PV's J–V). This implies that a PV is chosen with a sufficiently high Voc. This provides sufficient extra potential, which can be accessed when the operating potential is increasing because of the degradation. In this case, the performance will not significantly drop even when the overpotentials increase (for a PV with high FF and constant shunt resistance), unless and until the operational voltage pushes above the voltage of the MPP. However, such a device is highly over dimensioned (usually taking a hit on the Jsc) and in order to fully utilize the power achievable from the PV component in the EC component, one should design the device to operate close to or at the MPP. For these devices, it becomes extremely important that their performance be maintained, independent of the degree of degradation, as their operating point lies just at the falling edge of the PV's J–V curve. When applying our controlling approach which is based only on the reactant flow rate, one can maximize, maintain, stabilize, and optimise the performance of such devices. Two strategies are presented, each serving different roles, i.e. strategy I for production maximisation and strategy II for production stabilisation.
The reference degradation profiles, discussed in Section 2 and ESI,† were used for this analysis. The characteristics of the PV and EC components were simulated for operational years between 0 and 18. Fig. 3a shows the J–V curves for the PV and EC components for increasing operational time and for a constant water inlet mass flow velocity of 0.2 m s−1. The irradiation concentration was chosen C = 450 so as to ensure the operating current density was close to the MPP. The Jsc and Voc of the PV component decreased with degradation and operational years. The EC's saturation current decreased while the activation overpotentials and the ohmic losses increased. Fig. 3b and c show that when the water flow velocity is changed, the performance of the device can be altered. We observed that a smart control of the flow velocity allows for a significant performance enhancement (for example a seven-fold increase in the water flow increases the STH efficiency by 3–21%). To understand the effects of the water flow rate control on the degradation alleviation, the characteristic curves for 0.03 m s−1 and 0.2 m s−1 are shown on top of each other (Fig. 3b). At the start of the operation of the device, the operating points for both 0.03 m s−1 and 0.2 m s−1 lie in the operational zone II (see Section S.1†).
 Fig. 3  (a) The characteristic J–V curves of the triple junction thin film Si based CIPEC device (reference case I) at C = 450 for 0.2 m s−1 water flow inlet velocity and for different operational times. (b) Zoom into figure (a) and with the EC component at 0.03 m s−1 inlet velocity (dotted line) and 0.2 m s−1 inlet velocity (dotted-cross line), visualizing the overlap between the two velocity cases. (c) Variation of current density (left y-axis) and STH efficiency (right y-axis) with operational time for two different water flow inlet velocities. (d) ηSTH with increasing operational years of the triple junction thin film Si based IPEC device (reference case I) at C = 450 for the cases where we consider only PV degradation (with α = 1), only EC degradation (α = 2), and medium (α = 1.5) and high (α = 2) degradation rates of PV and EC together. The cross-over points (shown by the vertical arrows) for the two flow rates are different for all cases. 
Two important observations were made as we went to later operational years: (i) the benefit of switching from one water flow rate to another (in this case going to a higher flow velocity) kept on decreasing with increasing operational years and increasing degradation (shown by the decreasing size of the blue ellipse), and (ii) the operational zone (shown by the blue ellipse) got closer to the cross-over point of the EC. After around 11 years (in this particular case) the operating points shifted and lied in zone I. Both, (i) and (ii), lead to this interesting device performance behavior.
The variation of ηSTH with time for the two water flow velocities is shown in Fig. 3c. The initial advantage of choosing a higher flow velocity started diminishing and after 11.5 years it was no longer beneficial to operate at a flow velocity of 0.2 m s−1, instead, the device should be operated at 0.03 m s−1. A similar trend was observed for the H2 production, depicted by the operating current density plotted in Fig. 3c.
The cross-over point between the different flow rate curves depends on the degradation mechanism and rates. In Fig. 3d we compare the analysis' results for the case where we consider only the PV degradation (keeping all other components' degradation to zero, with α = 1). The cross-over point lied at 11.4 years. This resulted from the PV's J–V curves that moved over a single (nearly overlapping cluster of) EC's J–V curves and the cross-over point was decided by the time when the operating points shifted from region II to I (Fig. S.6a†). A similar comparison was performed for the case where we only consider EC components' degradation (with α = 2). The shift of the operating points from zone II to I occurred just after 6 years (Fig. S.6b†) and, hence, for this case the cross-over point lied at 6.15 years only. Changing the degradation rates also affects the cross-over point. For example, the cross-over point was at 4.84 years for our high degradation rates case, compared to 6.5 years for the medium degradation rates (and 11.5 years for the reference). The cross-over point is highly dependent on the degradation behavior and it is of utmost importance to know the degradation rates a priori. The detailed knowledge of the degradation helps in better designing and operating the system.
The cross-over point also depends on the device's material and operational choices. For example, the plots shown in Fig. 4a and S.4† for the variation of ηSTH with operational time for the GaInP–GaAs dual junction III–V PV based IPEC (reference case II) at C = 180 uncover that there is no crossover for the STH curves for the two water flow rates. This is because the operating points for this III–V based PV case always lie in operational zone II.20 Again, C = 180 was chosen to ensure that the operating current density was close to the MPP.
 Fig. 4  (a) Operating current density (left y-axis) with increasing operational years and ηSTH (right y-axis) of the III–V PV based IPEC device (reference case II) at C = 180. The inset shows that the two mass flow rate curves never intersect. (b) Current density as a function of operational time of the III–V PV based IPEC device (reference case II) at C = 180 for constant 0.3 m s−1 water flow inlet velocity (pink line) and with varying water flow inlet velocity (orange line) and the corresponding flow velocity profile (red, right y-axis). 

Production output stabilization with water flow control. 
A water flow rate-based control can be deployed to stabilize the hydrogen production output of the IPEC device. Generally, an engineer chooses to design the device to operate at or close to the MPP (using the yearly-averaged irradiation) of the PV component and at the lowest possible water flow rate. For example for the III–V PV based device (reference case II), an operation at 0.03 m s−1 water velocity for C = 180 and for an average day-light hours irradiation of 800 W m−2 would result in operation at the MPP of the PV. However, as discussed previously, once the degradation starts, the operating current density of the device decreases. With our flow rate based control, we can keep the output production constant for the 6 following operational years. The controlling profile of the water velocity (red curve) for the decreasing output (pink) curve of the device to achieve a stabilized (orange) output is presented in Fig. 4b. The cumulated hydrogen production for 6 years (apart from being very stable) is increased by 5% with this flow controlling profile compared to the case with constant 0.03 m s−1 flow rates. Similar stabilisation can be achieved for Si-PV based device but only up to 1.3 years (Fig. 3c) that is to say the degree of output stabilization with water flow control depends on the exact material and device configurations.
The above discussed behavior has been experimentally verified with our implemented CIPEC device.21 We have performed a thermal analysis by measuring the device's operating point (potential and output H2 production flow) for varying input reactant velocities and at different irradiation concentrations. The flow rate has been decreased within a reasonable limit so as to still maintain the operating temperatures below 80 °C. We have performed the water mass flow rate variability analysis for C = 150. The total overpotential dropped by 0.25 V when the flow rates were decreased from 3.8 l min−1 to 0.34 l min−1 while the EC temperature (measured at the cathode plate) increased from ∼25 °C to 60 °C. Similar significant overpotential drops were recorded for C = 250 (∼0.3 V drop) and C = 411 (∼0.4 V drop) when the water flow rates were reduced from 4 l min−1 to ∼0.3 l min−1. For these tests, the output hydrogen flow rate has been found to be constant, independent of the water flow rate, given by the high FF of the III–V PV based triple junction PV and the sustained location of the operating point in the plateau region of this PV's J–V (Voc = 2.6–3 V for C = 100–400). Thus, we have shown that for a particular concentration and decreasing reactant (DI water) flow rate, the electrochemical component's temperature increased, causing a reduction in the EC components overpotentials' and generally in the device's operating voltage. This demonstration confirms the numerical predictions in terms of J–V trends (shown in Fig. S.3†) and the temperature effect domination in zone I. It also confirms the importance of the reactant flow rate as an integral way for thermal management and, in turn, performance optimization.
The degradation analysis highlights that the operational parameter such as input water flow rate plays a significant role in the device's operation. Operational parameters should not be kept constant during the lifetime of the device. In fact, a smart control of the water flow rate allows for (i) efficiency as well H2 production enhancement during the lifetime of the device (strategy I), and (ii) a stabilization of the H2 production rate (strategy II). For example for strategy I, a relative increase in efficiency between 3 and 21% is achieved (Fig. 3c and S.4†, for reference case I and II, respectively) at the beginning of the operational life of the device when operating at an optimum flow rate of 0.2 m s−1.20 After 6 years of operation, this enhancement decreases to 0.5–9.5% signifying it may no longer be beneficial to deploy extra energy in operating at high flow rates. After 11 years and for the aSi–ucSi–ucSi case (reference case I), it is beneficial to switch to lower flow rates. Overall, we increased the H2 production by 1.5% compared to the case of constant flow rate operation at 0.03 m s−1 for reference case I. For strategy II, the water flow based control of the operating point allowed achieving a stable output production of the device at the penalty of 10.5% of hydrogen production compared to operating at constant flow rate of 0.2 m s−1. In summary, if the maximum hydrogen production is desired then strategy I (adaptation of the mass flow rate from large to small values depending on the cross-over point) is to be followed, and if a constant and stable hydrogen production is sought after then strategy II (adaptation of the flow rate from low to higher values) is to be followed.

3.2. High frequency disturbances: example daily irradiation variation
Tracking of the optimum power point during the day can be done with an external dc–dc conversion based MPP tracker (as discussed in the introductory section). However, deploying extra money and energy for external power electronics may not be a good option compared to our water mass flow rate based tracking of the optimum operational point. To show the significance of the water flow rate controlling for maximizing and stabilizing (i.e. reducing the variations) the daily production output and efficiency from the system, we simulated the characteristic performance curves of the CIPEC device (Fig. S.7†) with varying daily irradiation levels (ranging from 20–140%, where levels from 20–130% are realistic and 140% is included to account for minor concentrating effects). Here we take an example of the CIPEC device designed to be working with 0.03 m s−1 at the start of the life and for which the operating point lies at the MPP of the PV component at an average irradiation of 800 W m−2 (=100%).
The J–V curves (Fig. S.7a†) of the EC for the 0.03 m s−1 flow rate showed clear separation (40 mV difference between 20% and 100% irradiation level curves at ∼10000 A m−2) from each other, given by the different operating temperatures for all irradiation levels for this low flow velocity. However, the higher flow velocity of 0.2 m s−1 ensured proper heat removal making the device temperature independent of the irradiation levels and, hence, no separation (5 mV difference between 20% and 100% irradiation level curves at ∼10000 A m−2) of the EC curves was observed. The comparison of the operating currents and ηSTH for the two flow rates depicted that the cross-over between the low and high flow velocity curves happened after around 80% of the reference irradiation level. The operating current increased with increasing irradiation levels, however, ηSTH decreased (due to the slope in the plateau region of the PV, i.e. the existence of the shunt resistance). The crossover implies that it is beneficial to operate at a lower flow velocity of 0.03 m s−1 for 0–80% irradiation levels and at 0.2 m s−1 for the rest of the day (Fig. 5a). It should be noted that for these daily irradiation variations, a single strategy (that is strategy II: adapting the flow rate from lower to higher based on the cross-over point) leads to both production maximisation and production stabilisation. This is as opposed to the degradation case where two different strategies are needed.
 Fig. 5  The variation of (a) operating current density and STH efficiency with different irradiations for the thin film Si based IPEC device (reference case I) for two (0.03 m s−1 and 0.2 m s−1) water flow inlet velocities, with C = 450 and F = 1. (b) The operating current density comparisons for non dc–dc (solid lines) and dc–dc based MPP tracker (dotted lines) for reference case I with C = 450 and F = 1. 

Flow rate based optimum operating point tracking versus traditional power electronics. 
We compared the performance of our water flow rate-based optimum operating point tracking to a traditional dc–dc based MPP tracking (with overall dc–dc and MPP tracker efficiency of 93%). We observed that our water flow rate-based optimum power point tracking outperforms the dc–dc based approach in most of the cases. Fig. 5b highlights that the operating current density obtained with an external MPPT is always lower (except for >110% irradiation levels for 0.03 m s−1 flow rate case) than the output achieved without it. This effect is more pronounced for the cases with low FF PVs (as is for aSi–ucSi–ucSi shown in Fig. 5b). The use of an external MPPT is not justified if the operating power is greater than 93% of the maximum power achievable. Only for cases where the integrated operating point lies far away from the MPP (difference >7% of the MPP, for 93% efficient dc–dc case), an external MPPT should be used. However, we expect this case to rarely happen in realistically and well-designed devices. In fact, the benefits expected for the dc–dc based MPPT (in Fig. 5b for the 0.03 m s−1 flow rate case, the dc–dc case (dotted purple) curve is above the integrated case's (solid purple) curve only for >110% irradiation level) can be obtained with the flow rate control based tracking, namely the mass flow can be increased (the solid orange curve for the 0.2 m s−1 flow rate case is higher than the dotted purple curve of the MPP tracker for 0.03 m s−1). The maximization of the hydrogen production rate can be achieved more efficiently with internal mass flow controller rather than an external power-electronics (MPPT) component. This shows that the water flow rate control can act as an efficient internal optimum power point tracker. Though it should be noted that the increase of operating current with the flow velocity has a saturating trend20 and normally the benefits of mass control are limited to the flow rates per length of about 40 g s−1 m−1 (corresponding to a flow velocity of ∼2 m s−1).
To understand the benefits of the water flow rate based controlling approach for a realistic daily irradiation variation, we show below the flow controlling profile to be adopted for different irradiation profiles and the percentage increase as well as stabilizing effect on the device's output.
For the example irradiation profile shown in Fig. S.8,†Jop and ηSTH for 0.2 m s−1 (green bars) and 0.03 m s−1 (blue bars) flow rates are plotted in Fig. 6a and b. It can be seen that for the irradiation levels <80% low flow rate operation shows higher efficiencies than high flow rate operation. Hence by varying the water flow velocity during the day (as per the profile shown in Fig. 6b, red curve on right y-axis), the daily efficiency is increased and a daily increase of 4% in the H2 production or the average operating current density (increases from 10734 to 11167 A m−2) is achieved, relative to 0.03 m s−1-only case. The increment obtained with the flow rate controlling profile depends on the irradiation profile itself. Two additional examples of daily irradiation profiles are presented in Fig. 6c and d along with the respective best flow velocity operation profile. The output production increment was as high as 6.2% (Fig. 6c) and as low as 1.3% (Fig. 6d). In fact, the benefit is directly proportional to the number of times the irradiation switches from below 80% to above and for how long it stays at these intensities. A fully flat irradiation profile (with no variation from under 80% to above) would indicate that flow rate based controlling is of no use, though such irradiation cases are unrealistic. The benefits (STH efficiency and hydrogen production output increase) are smaller (though still noticeable), if a device with variable flow rate operation is compared to a device operating at 0.2 m s−1 only. In this case, a clear benefit in terms of hydrogen production rate stabilization is observed.
 Fig. 6  Three different daily irradiation profiles are shown in Fig. S.8c and d.† Variations of (a) operating current density and (b) ηSTH for the irradiation profile shown in Fig. S.8† for flow velocities of 0.2 m s−1 (green bars) and 0.03 m s−1 (blue bars). The respective optimized flow velocity controlling profiles are shown in red for (b), and in blue for (c and d) on the right y-axis. The increase in the daily hydrogen production is also indicated. 
However, in order to reduce the pumping work, smaller flow rates should be targeted whenever possible. The estimated power for providing the water to our device is W = ρgΔh/η, where  is the volumetric flow rate of water, Δh is the differential head of the whole system (assumed ∼2 m) and η is the efficiency of the pump (∼0.75). For the cooling water flow velocities of 0.03 m s−1 and 0.2 m s−1, the volumetric flow rates (for a device with a photoactive area of 1 cm2 and a water channel thickness of 0.2 mm) are 2.16 × 10−4 m3 h−1 and 14.4 × 10−4 m3 h−1, respectively, and the required pumping powers are 0.0016 W and 0.011 W, respectively. This is very small compared to the output power of the PV of ∼5 W for C = 500. The pumping power is only about 0.032–0.22% of the output power, and hence has not been incorporated in the STH efficiency calculations. It should also be noted that the controlling approach depends on the exact nature of the characteristic curves of the PV and EC components of the device, implying the deciding level of 80% of the nominal irradiation intensity would be different for different material based devices. Hence, such an analysis has to be performed before the physical installation of the device and once the material choices are fixed.

4. Conclusions
The practical operation of (I)PEC devices will results in unstable and non-robust operation of the device. These variations are given by degradation of components or changes in the operating conditions (for example irradiation intensity). Traditional power electronics (MPPT and dc–dc converters) can be used to counteract some of these variations in PV plus electrolyzer systems, however at the expense of losses in overall efficiency. Here, we show that a tailored dynamic operation of the device (in this specific case through the reactant flow rate management) can replace an external power electronics component. We present the dynamic controlling of the input parameters (particularly reactant flow rate) in response to the sustained (degradation) and fluctuating (irradiation changes) disturbances for maximizing and producing a stable, reliable, durable and robust supply of solar fuels. An advanced 2-dimensional multi-physics model for photo-electrochemical solar fuel production20,23 was extended by incorporating the realistic degradation behavior of its various components and then used to quantify the effect of dynamic operation. The study focusses on device designs that use concentrated irradiation for achieving cost-effective hydrogen production.2 The photoactive and the concentrator components' degradation was modeled using an effective concentrator factor, whereas the electrochemical component's degradation was realized using transport parameters, namely the diffusion coefficient in the electrolyte, the ohmic conductivity of gas diffusion layers and the exchange current densities of the catalysts.
We showed that the effect of reactant (water) flow rate in a thermally and electronically integrated PEC device was an important parameter in developing device operating or controlling strategies, which help in stable or efficient operation and in degradation effect alleviation. Degradation analysis was conducted showing the need for controlling of operational parameters, particularly the reactant flow rate, rather than keeping them at the same values as designed at the start of the operational life of the device. Two strategies were identified for achieving the goals of production maximization (strategy I: flow rate adaption from high to low) and of product stabilization (strategy II: flow adaption from low to high rates), both in the case of sustained disturbances like material degradation. It is shown that the smart controlling of the flow rate can allow to achieve a stable output from the device for an elongated period of years despite of device degradation. For dual junction III–V based (or 3-junction Si based) PEC devices, the degradation in performance of 5% (1.3%) in 6 (1.3) years was compensated by deploying a water flow rate controlling profile allowing constant output for the first 6 (1.3) years. The benefits of one (higher) flow rate over the other (lower) flow rate started decreasing with operational years and after some time there was a reversal, suggesting a switchover of the flow rate benefits. The cross-over point (time at which reversal happens) was dependent on each of the component's degradation rates with high rates causing the fastest reversal.
The controlling approach showed to reduce the destabilizing hydrogen output effects of daily and seasonal irradiation variations. We predicted flow rate profiles, which were adapted to the particular daily irradiation profiles, and predicted that a daily output production increase in the range of 1–6% was possible. The reactant flow rate was shown to act as an internal operating point tracker eliminating the need for external and additional cost inducing dc–dc based power electronic components. In fact, the flow based control allowed better performance than external dc–dc based trackers, and only when the integrated operating power point lied far away (difference greater than 100 minus efficiency of external tracker) from the MPP, the use of external trackers was justified.
The periodic operational control of the PEC devices proves to be strongly aiding the efforts of making such devices more efficient and cost-effective as well as being able to produce solar fuels in a stable, reliable, durable and robust way, in spite of sustained and fluctuating disturbances. Reactant mass flow based controller opens new pathways for achieving efficient device operation and degradation effect alleviation in a more simplistic way.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This material is based upon work performed with the financial support of the Nano-Tera.ch initiative, as part of the SHINE project (Grant #145936). We thank Fredy Nandjou from LRESE, EPFL, for useful discussions on degradation modeling.
References
J. H. Williams, A. DeBenedictis, R. Ghanadan, A. Mahone, J. Moore and W. R. Morrow, 
            et al., The technology path to deep greenhouse gas emissions cuts by 2050: the pivotal role of electricity, Science, 2012, 335(6064), 53–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dumortier, S. Tembhurne and S. Haussener, Holistic design guidelines for solar hydrogen production by photo-electrochemical routes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(12), 3614–3628 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi and E. A. Santori, 
            et al., Solar water splitting cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Haussener, Y. Gaudy and S. Tembhurne, Chapter 9: Modelling-derived Design Guidelines for Photo-electrochemical Devices, in RSC Energy and Environment Series, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2018, pp. 239–265 Search PubMed .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Experimental demonstrations of spontaneous, solar-driven photoelectrochemical water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(8), 2811–2824 RSC .
M. A. Modestino and S. Haussener, An Integrated Device View on Photo-Electrochemical Solar-Hydrogen Generation, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2015, 6(1), 13–34 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haussener, C. Xiang, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Ardo, N. S. Lewis and A. Z. Weber, Modeling, simulation, and design criteria for photoelectrochemical water-splitting systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(12), 9922 RSC .
S. Haussener, S. Hu, C. Xiang, A. Z. Weber and N. S. Lewis, Simulations of the irradiation and temperature dependence of the efficiency of tandem photoelectrochemical water-splitting systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(12), 3605 RSC .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, An analysis of the optimal band gaps of light absorbers in integrated tandem photoelectrochemical water-splitting systems, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6(10), 2984 RSC .
G. M. Sriramagiri, W. Luc, F. Jiao, K. Ayers, K. D. Dobson and S. S. Hegedus, Computation and assessment of solar electrolyzer field performance: comparing coupling strategies, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3(2), 422–430 RSC .
C. Carver, Z. Ulissi, C. K. Ong, S. Dennison, G. H. Kelsall and K. Hellgardt, Modelling and development of photoelectrochemical reactor for H2 production, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37(3), 2911–2923 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Davis and D. V. Esposito, Limiting photocurrent analysis of a wide channel photoelectrochemical flow reactor, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50(8), 84002 CrossRef .
A. Fallisch, L. Schellhase, J. Fresko, M. Zedda, J. Ohlmann and M. Steiner, 
            et al., Hydrogen concentrator demonstrator module with 19.8% solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency according to the higher heating value, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(43), 26804–26815 CrossRef CAS .
G. Peharz, F. Dimroth and U. Wittstadt, Solar hydrogen production by water splitting with a conversion efficiency of 18%, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32(15), 3248–3252 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nakamura, Y. Ota, K. Koike, Y. Hidaka, K. Nishioka and M. Sugiyama, 
            et al., A 24.4% solar to hydrogen energy conversion efficiency by combining concentrator photovoltaic modules and electrochemical cells, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8(10), 107101 CrossRef .
J. Jia, L. C. Seitz, J. D. Benck, Y. Huo, Y. Chen and J. W. D. Ng, 
            et al., Solar water splitting by photovoltaic-electrolysis with a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency over 30%, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 13237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Chang, K.-H. Lee, H. Ha, K. Jin, G. Kim and S.-T. Hwang, 
            et al., Design Principle and Loss Engineering for Photovoltaic–Electrolysis Cell System, ACS Omega, 2017, 2(3), 1009–1018 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Bonke, M. Wiechen, D. R. MacFarlane and L. Spiccia, Renewable fuels from concentrated solar power: towards practical artificial photosynthesis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(9), 2791–2796 RSC .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino and D. Dominé, 
            et al., Solar-to-Hydrogen Production at 14.2% Efficiency with Silicon Photovoltaics and Earth-Abundant Electrocatalysts, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(10), F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
S. Tembhurne and S. Haussener, Integrated Photo-Electrochemical Solar Fuel Generators under Concentrated Irradiation II. Thermal Management a Crucial Design Consideration, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(10), 999–1007 CrossRef .
S. Tembhurne, F. Nandjou and S. Haussener, A thermally synergistic photo-electrochemical hydrogen generator operating under concentrated solar irradiation, Nat. Energy, 2019 DOI:10.1038/s41560-019-0373-7 .
F. Nandjou and S. Haussener, Degradation in photoelectrochemical devices: Review with an illustrative case study, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50(12), 124002 CrossRef .
S. Tembhurne and S. Haussener, Integrated Photo-Electrochemical Solar Fuel Generators under Concentrated Irradiation I. 2-D Non-Isothermal Multi-Physics Modeling, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163(10), 988–998 CrossRef .

          R. K. Shevgaonkar, Electromagnetic waves, Tata McGraw-Hill,  2006, p. 580 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods: fundamentals and applications, Wiley, New York,  2001, p. 833 Search PubMed .
M. Le Bars and M. G. Worster, Interfacial conditions between a pure fluid and a porous medium: implications for binary alloy solidification, J. Fluid Mech., 2006, 550(1), 149 CrossRef .

          D. A. Nield and A. Bejan, Convection in porous media, Springer,  2013 Search PubMed .

          R. B. Bird, E. N. Lightfoot and W. Stewart, Transport phenomena, John Wiley & Sons,  2007 Search PubMed .

          F. P. Incropera, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, 7th edn, John Wiley and Sons,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. Dumortier and S. Haussener, Design guidelines for concentrated photo-electrochemical water splitting devices based on energy and greenhouse gas yield ratios, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(11), 3069–3082 RSC .

          F. Fouda-Onana, AST Protocols for PEM Water Electrolysis: Insights on performances and components degradation, in 2nd international workshop on durability and degradation issues in PEM electrolysis cells and its components,  2016, https://www.sintef.no/globalassets/project/novel/pdf/oral-presentations/ast-protocols-for-pem-water-electrolyis-insight-on-performances-and-components-degradation.pdf Search PubMed.
M. Chandesris, V. M. Edeau, N. Guillet, S. Chelghoum, D. Thoby and F. Fouda-Onana, Membrane degradation in PEM water electrolyzer: Numerical modeling and experimental evidence of the influence of temperature and current density, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 1353–1366 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00441bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Characteristic current density versus voltage curves of III–V based triple junction PV (power curves) and Ni/Co3O4 based EC (load curves) for varying FF (0.60, 0.70, 0.80, 0.91) and varying F = Acat/Aphoto (0.013, 0.019, 0.027, 0.038, 0.15, 10). The black dots represent the intersections between the power and load curves (i.e. integrated operation), the colored dots (on each load curve) represent the operating point if a 93% efficient dc–dc based MPP tracker is employed (for the respective colored power curve), and the orange diamonds represent the MPP of the different power curves. (b) Relative change in the efficiency between a device utilizing an external dc–dc based MPP tracker and an integrated (no-converter) device for each power case (0.6 ≤ FF ≤ 0.91) and its corresponding load curves (curves 1 to 6 correspond to F = 0.013 to 10). Positive bars imply the integrated case has a lower efficiency and vice versa.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematics showing the different types of PEC device configurations: traditional or integrated PEC, photovoltaics and electrolyzer with power electronics (dc–dc MPP tracker), and traditional or integrated PEC with reactant flow control.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The characteristic J–V curves of the triple junction thin film Si based CIPEC device (reference case I) at C = 450 for 0.2 m s−1 water flow inlet velocity and for different operational times. (b) Zoom into figure (a) and with the EC component at 0.03 m s−1 inlet velocity (dotted line) and 0.2 m s−1 inlet velocity (dotted-cross line), visualizing the overlap between the two velocity cases. (c) Variation of current density (left y-axis) and STH efficiency (right y-axis) with operational time for two different water flow inlet velocities. (d) ηSTH with increasing operational years of the triple junction thin film Si based IPEC device (reference case I) at C = 450 for the cases where we consider only PV degradation (with α = 1), only EC degradation (α = 2), and medium (α = 1.5) and high (α = 2) degradation rates of PV and EC together. The cross-over points (shown by the vertical arrows) for the two flow rates are different for all cases.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Operating current density (left y-axis) with increasing operational years and ηSTH (right y-axis) of the III–V PV based IPEC device (reference case II) at C = 180. The inset shows that the two mass flow rate curves never intersect. (b) Current density as a function of operational time of the III–V PV based IPEC device (reference case II) at C = 180 for constant 0.3 m s−1 water flow inlet velocity (pink line) and with varying water flow inlet velocity (orange line) and the corresponding flow velocity profile (red, right y-axis).	 

 	Fig. 5  The variation of (a) operating current density and STH efficiency with different irradiations for the thin film Si based IPEC device (reference case I) for two (0.03 m s−1 and 0.2 m s−1) water flow inlet velocities, with C = 450 and F = 1. (b) The operating current density comparisons for non dc–dc (solid lines) and dc–dc based MPP tracker (dotted lines) for reference case I with C = 450 and F = 1.	 

 	Fig. 6  Three different daily irradiation profiles are shown in Fig. S.8c and d.† Variations of (a) operating current density and (b) ηSTH for the irradiation profile shown in Fig. S.8† for flow velocities of 0.2 m s−1 (green bars) and 0.03 m s−1 (blue bars). The respective optimized flow velocity controlling profiles are shown in red for (b), and in blue for (c and d) on the right y-axis. The increase in the daily hydrogen production is also indicated.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8se00441b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
