Fluoride ion batteries – past, present, and future  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11656D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11656D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5980-6012Fluoride ion batteries – past, present, and future

        
          
            Mohammad Ali 
            Nowroozi†
a, 
      
        
          
            Irshad 
            Mohammad†
b, 
      
        
          
            Palanivel 
            Molaiyan†
c, 
      
        
          
            Kerstin 
            Wissel†
a, 
      
        
          
            Anji Reddy 
            Munnangi
          
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Oliver 
            Clemens
          
          
        
      *a
aUniversität Stuttgart, Institut für Materialwissenschaft, Chemische Materialsynthese, Heisenbergstraße 3, 70569, Stuttgart, Germany. E-mail: oliver.clemens@imw.uni-stuttgart.de
bUniversité Paris-Saclay, CEA, CNRS, NIMBE, LEEL, 91191, Gif-sur-Yvette, France
cInstitute of Particle Technology, Technical University of Braunschweig, Volkmaroder Str. 5, 38104, Braunschweig, Germany
dCollege of Engineering, Swansea University, Fabian Way, Swansea, SA1 8EN, UK. E-mail: a.r.munnangi@swansea.ac.uk
Received 
      30th November 2020
    , Accepted 2nd February 2021First published on 17th February 2021AbstractFluoride-Ion Batteries (FIBs) have been recently proposed as a post-lithium-ion battery system. This review article presents recent progress of the synthesis and application aspects of the cathode, electrolyte, and anode materials for fluoride-ion batteries. In this respect, improvements in solid-state electrolytes for FIBs as well as liquid electrolytes will be discussed. Furthermore, the achievements regarding the development of cathode and anode materials will be considered. With the improvements made, the field is currently attracting a steady increase of interest, and we will discuss the potentials of this technology together with necessary future milestones to be achieved in order to develop FIBs for future energy storage.Mohammad Ali NowrooziDr Ali Nowroozi received his master degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shiraz University in 2012. He did his PhD on the development of intercalation-based cathodes for all-solid-state fluoride ion batteries in the department Materials and Earth Sciences at Technical University of Darmstadt (TUD). After the completion of his PhD in 2020, he started his postdoctoral studies at TU Darmstadt/University of Stuttgart with a focus on the battery materials and development of recycling strategies for all solid-state Lithium-ion batteries.Irshad MohammadDr Irshad Mohammad is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Laboratoire d'Etude des Eléments Légers (LEEL) in CEA Saclay, Gif-Sur-Yvette, France, advised by Dr Magali GAUTHIER. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from the department of Chemistry and Gene technology in Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia in 2019. Prior to this he received his MSc degree in chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology Madras in 2013. His research interests focus on design, synthesis, and characterization of novel materials for energy storage devices such as solid-state batteries, fluoride ion batteries, sodium ion batteries, and magnesium ion batteries as well as development of NMR methodology to investigate batteries.Palanivel MolaiyanDr Palanivel Molaiyan obtained his Master's in Materials Science at PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, India. He completed his doctoral studies in Applied Physics (2020) from Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia. His thesis topic is entitled solid-state electrolytes for fluoride ion batteries. Presently, he is working as a Research Associate at the Institute of Particle Technology (iPAT), Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany. His research expertise is in materials science, advanced battery materials, electrochemistry. His primary research work involves sulfide, halide, and fluoride materials based solid-state electrolytes to develop all-solid-state batteries.Kerstin WisselDr Kerstin Wissel studied Materials Science at the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, where she received her PhD in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Clemens. Her dissertation focuses on the development of electrode materials for fluoride-ion batteries using different topochemical synthesis approaches and on the reversible tunability of functional properties within these batteries. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Technical University of Darmstadt/University of Stuttgart, Germany. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of novel battery materials and recycling of all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries.Anji Reddy MunnangiDr Anji Reddy Munnangi is a Senior Lecturer at the College of Engineering, Swansea University. Earlier, he worked as a research scientist at Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He received his doctoral degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM), India. Dr Munnangi is a solid-state electrochemist, with over 15 years of experience in the design, synthesis, and testing of new materials, their structure–property correlation as electrode and electrolyte materials for different battery technologies. He introduced (together with Prof. Fichtner) and made significant contributions to rechargeable fluoride-ion batteries (FIBs). In addition to FIBs, he made sizeable contributions to lithium-ion, sodium-ion, lithium-sulfur, and solid-state lithium batteries.Oliver ClemensDr Oliver Clemens studied chemistry at Saarland University, Germany, where he also obtained his PhD in solid state chemistry in the group of Prof. Beck in 2012. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of Birmingham, UK, in the groups of Prof. Slater, Prof. Berry and Dr Wright, he became group leader of the Joint Research Laboratory Nanomaterials, TU Darmstadt and KIT, Germany, at TU Darmstadt. There he got promoted to the level of Assistant Professor in 2017. In 2020, he accepted an offer for Full Professor at University of Stuttgart, Germany, and is leading the group of Material Synthesis since. His work is focusing on materials for fluoride ion batteries and perovskite compounds for electrocatalytic applications, recycling of battery materials, as well as magnetic or superconducting properties and their tunability via chemical and electrochemical reactions.
1 Introduction
Modern life is highly dependent on energy storage devices. From portable electronics to electric vehicles (EVs), electric trains and airplanes, which may become the future of mobility, all benefit from modern rechargeable energy storage technologies. Moreover, energy storage devices are required to store the energy generated from solar, wind, and tidal sources. Therefore, the demand for efficient and sustainable systems is increasing drastically.
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) turned out to be the best and foremost choice for portable electronics and are the main contenders for emerging EVs due to their high energy density, specific power, and cycling stability.1 However, the large adoption of LIBs for these applications led to the depletion of lithium resources, which are low in abundance and geometrically constrained. Not only the abundance of lithium, but also the abundance of other key elements (e.g., Co) used in LIBs is critical. Even if cobalt-free and high energy nickel-rich materials have been developed recently, the safety and thermal stability of such Ni-rich materials is a concern. Though this might not necessarily impact small scale technologies, these aspects will become of tremendous importance for large scale storage. In this context, it is important to consider alternative energy storage systems, which work based on shuttling ions other than Li+ and might also lead to the use of other elements within the electrode materials.
In response, several alternative battery technologies were proposed and investigated. Alternative rechargeable battery systems, which perform based on shuttling of ions other than Li+, have been investigated so far, including sodium-ion batteries (NIBs),2,3 magnesium-ion batteries,3,4 calcium-ion batteries5 and aluminum-ion batteries.6 For these systems, the shuttling ions possess low standard reduction potentials (i.e., the ionic species can be reduced, but not oxidized), which are similar to lithium. In contrast, chloride-ion batteries7 and fluoride-ion batteries (FIBs)8 rely on shuttling ions with potentials at the other side of electromotive force (EMF) series (i.e., those species can be oxidized, but not be reduced). Fluorine has a lower atomic mass (18.9984 u9) as compared to Na+ (22.9897 u9) and K+ (39.0983 u9). Therefore, FIBs potentially may reach higher gravimetric energy densities as compared to recently emerged rechargeable battery systems of sodium ion batteries and potassium ion batteries. Fig. 1 compares the gravimetric and volumetric energy densities (these energy densities are theoretical and on the material basis), from which it can be seen that FIBs would be in principle favourable to LIBs in this respect. The volumetric energy density of FIBs is particularly high which is of interest for EV and large scale storage applications. Besides the high energy density, batteries based on a fluoride shuttle offer some further unique features. Fluorine is the strongest oxidizing agent and most electronegative element in the periodic table and consequently, the fluoride ion is a very redox-stable anion, which enables a wide electrochemical potential window. In this respect, FIBs can potentially provide a higher open circuit voltage as compared to sodium ion batteries and most of other multivalent batteries such as magnesium and aluminum ion batteries. Moreover, recent development in liquid electrolytes for FIBs proves that aqueous and non-aqueous liquid electrolytes can be used to build up FIBs. However, FIBs can also be made in all-solid-state modification. Therefore, safety issues as found in the Li-ion battery technology due to metal dendrite growth become irrelevant for FIBs. Additionally, fluoride containing materials are globally more abundant as compared to lithium reserves.10
 Fig. 1  Overview of secondary ion batteries for future battery technologies.11 The charge transfer ions can be distinguished into cationic shuttles (such as Li+, Na+, and Mg2+), and anionic shuttles (such as Cl− and F−), providing a wide variety of different battery types. From bottom left to upper right: commercial Li-ion batteries (LIBs), sodium-ion batteries (NIBs), chloride-ion batteries (CIBs), Zn–air batteries, Na–air batteries, fluoride-ion batteries (FIBs), metal–sulphur batteries (with Mg and Li as the anode), magnesium-ion batteries, and top right for lithium–air and magnesium–air batteries. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In this review, the advancement of FIBs and their components, including solid and liquid electrolytes and electrode materials from the early stages to the most recent studies are presented. Further, recent advances in FIB chemistry and systems, fluoride-ion-transport mechanisms, and fundamental properties of solid-state/liquid fluoride electrolytes for FIBs will be discussed. Given the importance of next-generation energy storage applications and perspectives, challenges, opportunities, and potentials for future research directions will be highlighted.
2 Early work on fluoride-ion batteries
FIBs have been first proposed in the 1970s, and at the time they were mostly referred to as fluoride galvanic cells. Baukal12 claimed that CaF2 could serve as a solid electrolyte in an all-solid-state FIB in a high temperature range of 400–500 °C. However, no experimental results on the operation of a full cell were reported. Kennedy and Miles13 showed the first experimental observation of an electrochemical cell based on shuttling of fluoride ions, using KF-doped β-PbF2 as a solid electrolyte in CuF2|β-PbF2|Pb and AgF|β-PbF2|Pb electrochemical cells. Although the observed starting potentials (0.70 V and 1.3 V for CuF2|Pb and AgF|Pb cells, respectively) were close to the open cell voltage (OCV) (Pb + CuF2 → PbF2 + Cu; ΔE° = 0.72 V; Pb + 2AgF → PbF2 + 2Ag; ΔE° = 1.32 V), poor capacities were observed. This has been related to strong polarizations which have been suggested to be a result of the formation of the α-PbO2 phase in the anode material leading to a poor ionic conductivity of the cell. They also reported on discharging of a thin-film cell made up of CuF2, Pb, and PbF2 cathode, anode, and electrolyte materials, respectively.14 Results revealed that discharge capacities as large as ∼40% of the theoretical capacity of CuF2 (528 mA h g−1) could be obtained, though further charging of the cell could not be achieved.
In 1976 Schoonman15 reported on building a Pb|β-PbF2:AgF|BiO0.09F2.82|Bi cell, which was fabricated by spring-loading the disks of Pb and Bi, which were painted with powders of β-PbF2, AgF or BiO0.09F2.82, respectively, from dispersions in ethyl acetate. The observed discharge potential (0.330–0.335 V) was close to the OCV (0.37 V), showing that oxyfluorides can principally be candidates for the electrolyte materials in FIBs. However, no further information about the reversibility of the cell was reported. Following Schoonman's work, in 1978 Danto et al. reported on the reversible cycling of thin-film solid-state galvanic cells with a mean thickness of 0.55 μm made up of Pb as the anode, Bi/BiF3 as the cathode, and PbF2 (cubic β-PbF2) as the electrolyte.16 The measurements were performed at room temperature. They reported on a starting discharge potential as high as 353 mV, followed by a flat discharge plateau at around 280 mV for a current density of 40 μA cm−2.
Investigations on the electrolytes for fluoride-ion galvanic cells were followed up by Schoonman. In 1979 he reported17 on the solid solution based electrolyte M1−x−yUxCeyF2+2x+y (M = Ca, Sr, Ba) for thin-film galvanic cells with BiF3 and Ca as cathode and anode materials, respectively.
In 1981, the term solid-state fluoride-ion battery had been used for the first time by Schoonman and Wolfert.18,19 In these publications, they reported on improvements in ionic conductivity of CaF2 anodes by doping with La or Yb (for instance forming the corresponding fluoride Ca1−xLaxF2+x).
3 Re-introduction of rechargeable fluoride-ion batteries: a proof of principle
Between 1981 and 2011, not much has been done in the field of FIBs. However, in 2011 FIBs attracted some attention again, when Reddy and Fichtner reported8 on reversible all-solid-state conversion-based FIBs using metal/metal fluoride electrode materials along with Ba doped LaF3 (La1−xBaxF3−x) as a solid-state electrolyte. They were able to operate FIBs at elevated temperatures (∼150–200 °C) with comparatively short life cycling performances. This study opened new horizons for battery technologies by introducing new battery chemistry. The cathodic and anodic reactions during discharging of a cell can be written as follows (also see Fig. 2):At cathode side: xe− + MFx → M + xF−;At anode side: xF− + M′ → M′Fx + xe−.
 Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the metal/metal fluoride conversion based FIB proposed by Reddy and Fichtner.8 
In that study, it was shown that doping of Ba into tysonite-type LaF3 results in a significant increase (roughly two orders of magnitude) of the ionic conductivity compared to the undoped state, and that this increase is necessary to obtain current densities reasonable high to achieve C-rates of ∼C/25 to C/50 to make testing at lab scale feasible. Results suggest that La0.9Ba0.1F2.9, which was produced by mechanochemical milling of BaF2 and LaF3, has the highest ionic conductivity among all other La1−xBaxF3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) compounds (about 2.8 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 160 °C)8 with a good electrochemical stability due to the low electrochemical potentials of Ba2+ and La3+. Various metal fluorides including CuF2, BiF3, SnF2, and KBiF4 were tested as cathode materials against Ce metal to make all-solid-state FIBs in their charged states. Since most of the electrode materials (e.g., BiF3 and CuF2) suffered from low ionic and electronic conductivity, they were mixed with the solid electrolyte and carbon for better electrochemical performance, and their conversion between the metal and metal fluoride state could be well confirmed with diffraction studies.
After this proof-of-concept paper, research on FIBs has gained increased attention over the last years, with studies appearing in the field of electrolyte (solid and liquid), electrode (conversion and intercalation), and cell design development. In the following, we will summarize the attempts that have been made together with the key findings.
4 Solid electrolytes for FIBs
Solid-state batteries have certain advantages compared to liquid electrolyte batteries, particularly concerning safety. To operate solid-state batteries, solid electrolytes (SEs) are required. Interestingly, fluoride ions show a high mobility in the solid-state. Though the ionic size of F− is large (∼1.33 Å)20 it shows significant high mobility in solids, due to its monovalency and low charge density. Indeed, there are several solid fluoride conducting electrolytes that show significantly high conductivities at RT. For example, PbSnF4 has an ionic conductivity of 1 × 10−3 S cm−1 at RT, which is well beyond the garnet based solid electrolytes for LIBs.21 Apart from a high ionic conductivity, the electrolyte in a battery should fulfill certain criteria: Suitable electrolyte candidates must exhibit high ionic conductivity with a negligible electronic conductivity to avoid self-discharging of the cell.22 They should possess a high electrochemical stability window, i.e., they must be electrochemically stable within the operating voltage of the cell. The electrolyte must be chemically compatible with the electrode materials (cathode and anode) to ensure fast ion transport of the charged species across the interfaces, which does not only require stability towards redox reactions, but also an ion exchange within acid-base type of reactions. Further, SEs should possess certain mechanical properties, e.g., sufficient flexibility and softness, required for the fabrication of a solid state battery.
Most of the studies on fluoride-conducting electrolytes were carried out on single crystals. Some of the fluoride conducting single crystals show a high ionic conductivity. For example, barium doped lanthanum fluoride shows a fluoride ion conductivity in the order of 10−4 S cm−1, which is suitable to operate solid-state batteries with respect to the commonly encountered aspect ratios and charging/discharging rates. However, single crystals are expensive, difficult to grow and they are difficult to be integrated into an all-solid-state battery configuration. Thus, polycrystalline solid electrolytes are a more appropriate and realistic option. Ionic transport in polycrystalline materials is significantly different due to the presence of grain boundaries (GB) and an increase in surface to volume ratio. Thus, ionic transport mechanisms are more complex in nanocrystalline samples due to the surface charge regions.
In solid electrolytes, ionic transport generally depends on the structural framework, the intrinsic mobility of conducting ions and their thermal activation, the concentration of intrinsic and/or extrinsic defects, and further on the crystal field impact of the mobile ions. Ion diffusion mechanisms are mostly based on Schottky and anti-Frenkel point defects, comprising the vacancy mechanism, interstitial mechanism, and interstitial–substitutional exchange mechanism.23 However, some materials with fluorite or tysonite type structure can achieve high ionic conductivities without a high defect concentration.24,25 Geometric frustration from size mismatch of the cation lattice was recently also discussed to play an important role for the conductivity of multinary fluorides with fluorite type structure.26 In general, only a few stable fluorides exhibit significant ionic conductivity, while being insulators for the transport of electrons due to a wide bandgap.
Different fluoride conducting solid-electrolytes were reported in the literature. These solid electrolytes can be broadly categorized into two classes of compounds: tysonite-type (LaF3 prototype) and fluorite-type (CaF2 prototype). A considerable number of possibilities to achieve improved solid-state electrolyte/separator approaches for FIBs have been developed and will be addressed in this chapter. Different materials are discussed and grouped according to their structure type (e.g., rare-earth fluorides (tysonite-type structure) doped with alkaline-earth or alkaline-earth fluorides (fluorite-type structure) doped with rare-earth fluorides). This discussion also comprises further design aspects, such as the creation of surface defects by vapor pressure treatment (CaF2-Hum), grain boundary activation using Lewis acids (BF3), or critical geometry frustrations due to crystal deformations by multiple-phase systems.
4.1 Design of all-solid-state cells used for FIBs
FIBs have often been made in an all-solid-state modification. For all-solid-state FIBs, the most popular strategy is to make bulk pellets by cold (uniaxial) pressing of the powder precursors (cathode/electrolyte/anode). For this approach, it is important to note that most of the used active electrode materials for FIBs suffer from low electronic and ionic conductivity. For the powder-based electrodes, a suitable electron conduction pathway needs to be provided, which is commonly achieved by additives such as carbon black, graphite, nanotubes, metal surplus, etc.24,27 The ionic conductivity is increased by the introduction of electrolyte materials. In most studies, the FIB active electrode materials are mixed with the electrolyte material and carbon black or nanotubes to form composite electrode materials.8,24,27–29 Ball milling is by far the most used technique to prepare the composite electrodes and solid-state electrolytes. For the assembly of all-solid-state battery cells, Swagelok-type electrochemical cells are very common.8,24,30Fig. 3 represents a typical Swagelok-type cell. Due to the low ionic conductivity of the most solid-state electrolytes for FIBs, the electrochemical cell setup should be heated most frequently up to 150–200 °C, and the cell-design helps to protect the Teflon-based sealings from plastic deformation or heat-induced degradation. Recently thin-film strategies have also been introduced to make FIB cells. For instance, Zhang et al. reported31 on implementing a thin-film of Ba doped LaF3 electrolyte by spin coating technique on a CaF2 or MgF2 anode composite as a substrate. Further, coin cell based systems were proposed by Grenier et al., where a high temperature stable epoxy resin can be used for sealing, facilitating improved longer-term operability.32
 Fig. 3  A schematic of a high-temperature cell used for the electrochemical measurements conducted on all-solid-state FIBs. The figure has been reproduced from ref. 35. 
There also exist some reports33,34 on FIBs, which are based on liquid electrolytes and can then be investigated in the most common Swagelok-type setup. For instance, Davis et al. reported34 on standard three electrode systems for FIBs based on a liquid electrolyte. In this study, copper nanoparticles or Cu@LaF3 core–shell nanoparticles were made into a paste with polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) to prepare the working electrode platinum, and silver wires were used as the counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively. Moreover, bismuth, lead, cerium and calcium thin strip foils were used as the working electrode.
4.2 Ionic conductivity of rare-earth fluorides with tysonite-type structure
Tysonite-type RE1−xMxF3−x (RE = La, Ce, Sm, and M = Ba, Ca, Sr) fluorides are promising as SEs for FIBs as they show high ionic conductivities and large electrochemical stability window.8,36 In an undoped state, rare-earth fluorides show insufficient conductivities even for lab-scale operation. To improve the ionic conductivity in solid-state electrolytes defects are introduced into the crystal structure by increasing the concentration of mobile ionic species via aliovalent doping. It was shown that the doping of LaF3 by BaF2 enables the creation of fluoride vacancies.37 These F− vacancies promote a higher ionic mobility within the fluoride sublattice, leading to an increase of the fluoride conductivity by two orders of magnitude as compared to the stoichiometric compound.38 Thus, the conduction mechanism in tysonite-type structures relies on a purely vacancy-type mechanism due to Schottky defects.23,39,40 Reddy and Fichtner used Ba-doped La1−xBaxF3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) (LBF) as the SEs in FIBs in their initial studies (Fig. 4a). They found a maximum conductivity for La0.9Ba0.1F2.9. Further, LBF prepared by high energy ball milling method can be improved via sintering at high temperature.8,40,41 The ionic conductivities of compacted, unsintered La0.90Ba0.10F2.90 (1.6 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 160 °C) can be significantly improved by a further sintering step at 800 °C for 2 h to 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature (Fig. 4b). This observation within tysonite-type LBF fluoride ion conductors is explained by the differences in the grain boundary structure, which can result in a partial blocking of the migration pathways, and has been observed for various anion conducting compounds.42 Thus, sintering treatments are viable methods to increase the ionic conductivity at the cost of the ease of cell fabrication. It is also worth acknowledging that the grain boundary influence can be compensated without increasing the grain size: In the case of a co-precipitated electrolyte, a slight increase of conductivity was attributed to reduced amounts of impurities during the synthesis process as compared to mechanical milling.43
 Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivities of La1−xBaxF3−x. Parts (a) and (b) are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 37 with permission copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) La1−xBaxF3−x (x = 0.03,0.05, 0.07, 0.1) samples after cold-uniaxial pressing, cold isostatic pressing, and sintering of the pellets. Parts (c) and (d) are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 46 (an original RSC publication). In part (d) the blue and green lines from the single crystal of La1−xBaxF3−x (x = 0.07, 0.1). Different pressing method applied for the La0.95Ba0.05F2.95 sample for the ionic conductivity for cold-uniaxial pressed pellet, a cold-uniaxial, cold-isostatic pressed pellet and a sintered pellet are reported. 
In 2017, Chable et al. investigated the ionic conductivity of La1−xBaxF3−x (LBF) synthesized by various methods, among them high-temperature solid-state reactions under inert atmosphere.44 It was found (see Fig. 4c) that the ionic conductivity at room temperature for the Ba-doped samples (≈6 × 10−5vs. 10−4 S cm−1 at RT for La0.93Ba0.07F2.93) approaches the limit of the single crystalline state of pure LaF3.45 The observed conductivity was two orders of magnitude higher than observed earlier on cold-pressed pellets, with activation energies between 0.2 and 0.4 eV.44 Still, compositional dependence is maintained, with the maximum conductivity at room temperature for a composition close to x = 0.05–0.07 (see Fig. 4d).44 In addition, the compacted La0.95Ba0.05F2.95 samples were tested and compared to powders that underwent the process at 900 °C with different combinations of cold uniaxial pressing and cold uniaxial plus isostatic pressing. From these experiments, the authors conclude that rare earth fluorides should be treated by a sintering process before or after the ball-milling to improve the ionic conductivity.
Zhang et al.47 investigated the ionic conductivity of La1−xBaxF3−x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.15) thin-films synthesized by a sol–gel assisted spin coating method based on mixtures of metal trifluoroacetate salts. They observed that the conductivity of the thin films could be significantly improved by increasing the sintering temperature and time. The conductivity value of the film was 1.6 × 10−4 S cm−1, a significant improvement in comparison to porous films,36,47 and an optimized thermal treatment condition was determined to be at 450 °C for 4 h. When compared to the bulk-type electrolyte, the overall conductance of the film was improved by a factor of ∼65. The thin film morphology is of special importance, since the overall resistance was significantly reduced due to the low thickness of the thin films. A comparison shows that the conductance of a bulk type electrolyte at 170 °C is similar to that of a thin-film electrolyte at 80 °C, which could help to build all-solid-state fluoride ion batteries working at more viable conditions.36
Not only lanthanum-based fluorides can be used as a solid electrolyte.104 Dieudonné et al. investigated the ionic conductivity of SrF2 doped CeF3 (Ce1−xSrxF3−x), synthesized by solid-state reaction at 900 °C for 24 h.48 A high ionic conductivity of 3 × 10−4 S cm−1 was obtained for Ce0.975Sr0.025F2.975 at RT, which is close to the conductivity of a corresponding single crystal and better than previously reported fluoride compounds.48 At room temperature, the ionic conductivity observed in various fluorides adopting the fluorite-type structure reached a maximum value at x = 0.025 with one of the lowest activation energies of 0.31 eV. The Sr2+ substitution for Ce3+ ions in this network associated with the creation of anionic vacancies modifies the fluoride ion mobility drastically. A maximum F− conductivity for x = 0.025 corresponds to the largest difference in bond distances between the F2 (4d site) and F3 (2a site) ion to the surrounding Sr/Ce ion and the highest buckling of the RE1−xAExF3−x layers, which appears to result in low activation energy in addition (Fig. 5a). They further concluded that in tysonite-type RE1−xAExF3−x (RE = rare-earth and AE = alkaline-earth) the difference in the ionic sizes of the host element (RE) and the dopant (AE) plays a vital role for achieving high ionic conductivity: when the ionic sizes are comparable, the conductivity reaches to the maximum at a low substitution rate due to network relaxation of the RE1−xAExF3−x slabs in competition with the chemical pressure, which leads to a strong variation of sheet thickness.
 Fig. 5  (a) The crystal structure representation of the tysonite-type structure. (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission copyright©2015, American Chemical Society). (b) Evolution with x of the room temperature ionic conductivity of RE1−xAExF3−x (RE = La, Ce, Sm; AE = Ba, Sr, Ca). (reproduced from ref. 48 (an original RSC publication)). 
Further detailed investigations have been carried out on tysonite-type Ca-doped SmF3, Sm1−xCaxF3−x (0.05 ≤ x ≤ 0.17), again by Dieudonné et al.49 The SEs were prepared using solid-state synthesis followed by sintering at 1000 °C. Analysis of the XRD data showed a reduction in the unit cell volume with an increasing amount of Ca dopant. This volume reduction of the cell has been attributed to the creation of anionic vacancies that decrease cationic coordination, and could further be explained by increased cation repulsion due to the loss of shielding. The best ionic conductivity as high as 1.0 × 10−4 S cm−1 was obtained for Sm0.95Ca0.05F2.95 at RT. In Sm1−xCaxF3−x, the difference (+0.05 Å) of ionic radii for nine-fold coordination between Ca2+ (1.18 Å) and Sm3+ (1.13 Å) leads to a predominant influence of the network relaxation with a decrease of cell volume related to segregation of anionic vacancies. Both the thickness of [Sm1−xCaxF3−x] layers (≈1.20 Å) and the ionic conductivity are maximal for a composition of x = 0.05. This observation was explained by a modification of the fluorine environments and segregation of the vacancies around the calcium by increasing the x values. In contrast, for La1−xBaxF3−x, the large difference of cationic radii (+0.25 Å) introduces a significant chemical pressure and microstrain together with a significant increase in the cell volume. Comparison with La1−xBaxF3−x, Ce1−xSrxF3−x, and La1−xSrxF3−x, shows that the higher the buckling effect of RE1−xAExF2−x, which affects the distortion of the F1 site, the higher the ionic conductivity. This explains the evolution with x of the RT ionic conductivity of different solid electrolytes (Fig. 5b), which hardly correlates with simple volume changes only. They suggested that a moderate ionic radii difference serves to optimize the ionic conductivity: Y-Ca, Eu–Ca and Gd–Ca could fulfill this requirement. However, there are no experimental results on the suggested systems so far. Most recently, Sm1−xCaxF3−x solid electrolytes were prepared by high-energy planetary ball-milling as an alternative method and studied with NMR by Molaiyan et al.,50 which helped to correlate the ionic conductivity to the detailed structural arrangements and relaxations taking place within this compound.
4.3 Alkaline-earth fluorides with fluorite-type structure

4.3.1 AE1−xRExF2+x compounds. 
Solid-state fluorite-type electrolyte systems are found at the alkaline earth richer end of the series with a general chemical formula of AE1−xMxF2+x (AE = Ca, Sr, Ba; M = RE), and also for a binary mixture between two alkaline earth fluorides. Most of these fluoride-conducting electrolytes have been synthesized by a high energy ball-milling method, e.g., for the formation of the series BaxCa1−xF2.39,51,52 An ionic conductivity of 1.16 × 10−5 S cm−1 for BaxCa1−xF2 at 413 K was reported,52 which is lower than for the tysonite type systems. Apart from isovalent doping, also aliovalent series of BaF2 doped with LaF3 were taken into consideration.42,53,105 Ba0.6La0.4F2.4 shows the highest conductivity among the Ba1−xLaxF2+x solid solutions (Fig. 6a). Ball-milling of coarse-grained BaF2 yields a nano-crystalline sample, which shows a conductivity of almost two orders of magnitudes higher as compared to non-milled material. The ionic conductivity can be further improved by further addition of calcium,54 by which a non-equilibrium phase is obtained. In contrast, the increase of conductivity was explained here from the increase of disorder and strain introduced when the cations are of different sizes.55,56
 Fig. 6  (a) Ionic conductivity for Ba1−xLaxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.55) solid solutions in comparison with ball-milled and single crystals of Ba1−xLaxF2+x. The best performance of ionic conductivity was reported for the sample x = 0.40. (Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 58 with permission copyright©2013 American Chemical Society). (b) 19F Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) studies reported for the chemical shift changes of Ba1−xLaxF2+x with x. The red points indicate that the fluoride ions on the anion site in the fluorite-type structure and F1 sites in the tysonite structure appear to show a transition between each other. The NMR lines of Ba1−xLaxF2+x (x ≥ 0.80) corresponding to F1 on F2 and F3 sites with the tysonite-type structure as blue rhombs. (Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission copyright©2014 American Chemical Society). 
Düvel et al.57 reported a detailed NMR study of Ba1−xLaxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) compositions synthesized by a ball milling method at ambient temperature. The Ba1−xLaxF2+x compounds crystallized in the fluorite-type structure from 0 ≤ x ≲ 0.775, with phase mixtures beyond this range and tysonite-type structures for x >0.85. From x ≈ 0.70 to x ≈ 0.85, the NMR spectra indicate structural aspects of both crystal structures, though there is still a decrease of the chemical shift of the fluoride ions on the F2/3 sites with increasing BaF2 content (Fig. 6b). The authors showed that changes of chemical shifts associated with the structural transition can be correlated with the transitions in the bond distances d(M–F). Further, there seems to be an intrinsic change of bonding to the F1 ion in the range from x = 0.55 to x = 1 making the fluoride site in the fluorite-type structure more similar to the F1 ion in the tysonite-type structure (Fig. 6b).


4.3.2 Tetragonal BaSnF4 and interlayer electrolytes (La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/BaSnF4). 
SnF2 containing compounds like MSnF4 (M = Pb, Ba, Ca, Sr) can show ordering between the M and the Sn site cations in an otherwise fluorite-type structural setting. Such ordering can lead to a high conductivity even at room temperature.59–61 The high ionic conductivity in SnF2 containing compounds results from the presence of the 5s2 lone pair on the Sn2+ atom, which requires space (the lone pair is known to require as much space as a fluoride ion itself62,63). This strongly distorts the fluoride sublattice in combination with the ordering of cations. The crystal structure of tetragonal BaSnF4 (Fig. 7a) can be derived from the cubic fluorite-type structure by ordering of the Sn and Ba cations in Sn–Sn, Ba–Sn, and Ba–Ba layers, along the c-direction of the tetragonal cell. This ordering results in three different fluoride sites, termed as F1 (¾, ¼, 0.19), F2 (¾, ¼, ½), and F3 (¼, ¼, 0.68), and they reside in Sn–Sn, Ba–Sn, and Ba–Ba layers, respectively. The stereoactive lone pair induces a repulsive interaction between the lone pair electron and negatively charged fluoride ion, which leads to a depletion of the fluoride ions in the Sn–Sn and Sn–Ba layers of the BaSnF4 crystal structure. Hence, the fluoride ions between Sn–Sn and Sn–Ba layers become mobile since the lone pair is polarizable and can reorient on movement, thus becoming involved in the conduction process. The ionic conductivity of BaSnF4 is in the order of 1 × 10−4 S cm−1 at RT.64 Interestingly, its cold-pressed powders also exhibit high conductivity at RT, which makes it suitable candidates as solid electrolytes for fluoride ion batteries. Recently, Mohammad et al. have demonstrated rechargeable RT-FIBs utilizing BaSnF4 as a solid electrolyte,65 where the electrode materials were chosen to take into account the limited electrochemical stability of the electrolyte. The ionic conductivity of 3.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at RT for the electrolyte (see Fig. 7b) can be sufficient for RT fluoride-ion battery applications. The cells were based on BaSnF4 as the electrolyte, BiF3 as the cathode, and Zn or Sn as the anode. The electrochemical results on Zn/BaSnF4/BiF3 cell are displayed in Fig. 7c, d. The cyclic voltammetry profile of the cell features a cathodic and anodic peak confirming the reduction of BiF3 and oxidation of Bi, respectively (Fig. 7c). The cell exhibits a first discharge and charge capacity of 56 and 43 mA h g−1, respectively (Fig. 7d). At subsequent discharging and charging, the capacity is found to increase slightly, which can be explained by increased electrochemical accessibility of the Zn anode.
 Fig. 7  (a) Layered structure of tetragonal BaSnF4 displaying different cation layers and fluoride ions with Sn coordination environment of BaSnF4 showing lone pairs on Sn2+ pointing in the c-direction (figure (a) is reproduced from ref. 59 with permission copyright©2002 American Chemical Society); (b) Nyquist plot of tetragonal BaSnF4 obtained at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 66), (c) cyclic voltammogram profiles of Zn/BaSnF4/BiF3 cells obtained at 25 °C; (d) voltage-composition profiles of Zn/BaSnF4/BiF3 cells obtained at 25 °C (c and d are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 65 with permission copyright©2018, American Chemical Society). 
Currently, the low electrochemical stability of BaSnF4 limits the use of highly reductive anode materials or highly oxidizing cathode materials, because Sn2+ can both be oxidized or reduced at intermediate potentials already. To build high potential FIBs, high electropositive metals (Ce, Mg, La) should be used as anodes, which are compatible with electrolytes like tysonite-type La0.9Ba0.1F2.9. La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 electrolytes with low RT conductivity (4 × 10−7 S cm−1). To overcome these limitations of the low electrolyte stability and low ionic conductivity, Mohammad et al. developed an interlayer electrolyte concept to build high-potential RT-FIBs.67 This approach is developed by combining synergies of BaSnF4 and La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 electrolytes. A thin layer of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 was pressed together with a thick layer of BaSnF4. The use of low conductive La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 succeeded in maintaining the high total conductivity of the electrolyte (compared to pure La0.9Ba0.1F2.9), and in physically isolating the less stable and highly conductive electrolyte (BaSnF4) from the electropositive anode. In fact, such a modification is due to the fact that BaSnF4 offers a narrow potential stability. Therefore, to increase the potential window two thin layers of conductive La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 could be attached to the BaSnF4 layer. However, La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 has a much lower conductivity at room temperature than BaSnF4. Fig. 8a shows the cross-sectional SEM image obtained for an inter-layer electrolyte pellet (La0.9B0.1F2.9 (90 μm)/BaSnF4 (650 μm)), which highlights that both layers stick uniformly to each other without intermixing. Impedance analyses are used to investigate the conductivity and interface stability of the interlayer electrolyte as shown in Fig. 8b and c. The figure compares the Nyquist plots of interlayer electrolyte with different relative thicknesses of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 obtained at 25 °C, and show a strong difference on to which extent grain, grain boundary and electrode responses are expressed, though the resistance appears to scale linearly with the thicknesses of the different layers. In the mentioned report, only the La0.9B0.1F2.9 (90 μm)/BaSnF4 (650 μm) electrolyte was utilized for electrochemical tests. The other electrolyte with thinner La0.9B0.1F2.9 (<45 μm) layer has provided higher conductivity, however it was not employed for the electrochemical tests due to the possibility of physical contact between the anode (Ce composite) and BaSnF4 electrolyte (through the penetration of the thin LBF layer). The thickness of interlayer electrolytes was optimized to La0.9B0.1F2.9 (<45 μm)/BaSnF4 (<650 μm), further optimization was not possible due to mechanical stability and sample preparation technique reason (manual powder spreading and pressing). The authors conclude that with improved coating methods, it might be possible to achieve high ionic conductivities similar to that of BaSnF4 while extending its electrochemical stability window. Electrochemical performance testing of the interlayer electrolyte was conducted using BiF3 as a cathode and Ce as an anode. The charge–discharge profiles of the interlayer electrolyte-based cell is displayed in Fig. 8d. The cell shows an open circuit voltage of 2.6 V at room temperature. It delivered a first discharge capacity of 27 mA h g−1 at an average voltage of 1.4 V. During the second and subsequent cycles, the discharge and charge profiles show high average voltage plateau. In the following cycling, quick capacity fading was observed, resulting in 3 mA h g−1 after five cycles (Fig. 8d).
 Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (20 mg)/BaSnF4 (120 mg) pellet, (b) Nyquist plots (symbols) and the corresponding fit (lines) of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (20 mg)/BaSnF4 (120 mg) and La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 obtained at 25 °C, (c) Nyquist plots (symbols) and corresponding fit (line) for La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (10 mg)/BaSnF4 (130 mg) electrolyte obtained at 25 °C, (d). Voltage-composition profiles of Ce/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/BaSnF4/BiF3 cell obtained at 25 °C with a current density of ±10 μA cm−2 (figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 67 with permission copyright©2019, American Chemical Society). 

4.4 Nano-crystalline fluorite-type Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4)
Besides Sn2+, there are other cations containing lone pairs of electrons such as Sb3+, Bi3+, and Tl+, which might have a similar effect on the ionic conductivity. In an attempt to mimic the idea of the lone pair effect for the ionic conductivity enhancement, Mohammad et al. have recently synthesized SbF3-doped BaF2via ball-milling, assuming that ns2 configured Sb3+ might strongly participate to an increase of the ionic conductivity of BaF2.68 The doping of SbF3 in the BaF2 crystal was limited to x < 0.5, confirmed by an XRD analysis (displayed in Fig. 9a). This means a comparably lower amount of SbF3 is sufficient in order to obtain a higher occupancy of the interstitial site. In the crystal structure of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4), Ba and Sb (represented in grey) form an fcc array in which fluoride ions (represented in blue) occupy all tetrahedral sites (Fig. 9b). During doping, extra fluoride ions due to the higher valancy of the dopant Sb3+ occupy the interstitial positions such as F2 and F3. The interstitial site F1 (½, ½, ½) is being occupied at a lower concentration of the dopant, whereas the related sites with off-centre shifts, F2 (½, 0.37, 0.37) and F3 (½, 0.41, 0.41), are occupied at higher concentrations of the dopant. The ion conductivity of the solid solution was increased with increasing dopant concentration, indicating that these off-centre shifts can be considered crucial for obtaining functional ceramics. Further, the temperature dependent evolution of the ionic conductivity of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4) was investigated (Fig. 9c). By this, it was found that it can reach twice the conductivity of the isostructural Ba0.7La0.3F2.3 (1.55 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 160 °C), meaning that the additional increment of conductivity might result most plausibly from the stereochemical impact of the ns2 cation. The material can also be used within a full battery against Ce anodes. Fig. 9d shows the electrochemical profiles of the cell for the first five cycles, showing high electrochemical accessibility of the active electrode material of ∼66% of the theoretical specific capacity of SbF3 (450 mA h g−1). However, rapid capacity fading was observed for prolonged cycling. This considerable capacity fading is probably due to large volume and structural changes in the electrode materials and not necessarily linked to the electrolyte itself.
 Fig. 9  (a) XRD patterns of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) compounds, (b) representative structural view of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (doped fluorite), (c) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4) compounds (symbols) and their fits (dotted lines). (d) Voltage-capacity profiles of Ba0.7Sb0.3F2.3/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Ce cell obtained at 150 °C with a current density of 10 μA cm−2 (figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 68 with permission copyright©2018, American Chemical Society). 
4.5 PbSnF4 based solid fluoride electrolytes
In-depth investigations and improvements of the ionic conductivities of solid-state electrolytes are emerging areas of FIBs. So far, PbxSn2−xF4 (Fig. 10a) is one the best superionic fluoride conductors.6919F MAS NMR results show the that mechanochemical synthesis drives the system mainly into the cubic β-phase, with the introduction of surface defects, which exchange with the nanoparticle core.69,70 This interaction also promotes conductivities within the crystallite and at the particle boundaries, with ion mobility at the macroscopic material level, which is in slight contrast to what is reported in previous studies.71–73 Low activation energies result in high ionic conductivities at room temperature (Fig. 10b), with values close to single crystals and better than what was found previously for fluorite type materials.74,75 The solid electrolytes of PbxSn2−xF4 were also prepared by high-energy planetary ball-milling.76 Such electrolytes showed a fluoride ion conductivity equal to that of the electrolytes synthesized using a melting method with an activation energy of 0.30 eV for x = 1.1.
 Fig. 10  (a) Packing of β+-PbSnF4 in the unit cell. Blue and red balls are Sn and Pb, respectively. (b) Dependence of the conductivity at room temperature on the Pb/Sn molar ratio in the PbxSn2−xF4 pressed-powder samples (x = 0.96–1.56) annealed at 400 °C (open circle) and 200 °C (filled circle) (figures are reproduced from ref. 77 with permission copyright©2019 American Chemical Society). 
4.6 CaF2 based solid electrolytes for FIBs
CaF2 would be a cheap electrolyte material with a high electrochemical stability; however, pure CaF2 is a bad ionic conductor, due to the hard nature of the Ca2+ ion.78 Yuria Saito et al. reported that an ionic conductivity enhancement of CaF2 could be achieved using Lewis acids,79 but not via the creation of grain conductivity on doping. The effect of the addition of a Lewis acid, e.g., SbF5 or BF3, on the fluoride ion conductivity in CaF2 indicated a surface activation of the particles. The conductivity enhancement mechanism is based on the adsorption of Lewis acids, which attract fluoride ions out of the CaF2 boundary regions to create vacancies at the CaF2/SbF5 or CaF2/BF3 interfaces, giving rise to a strong increase of the ionic conductivity. The conductivity results based on CaF2 thin films also confirmed the presence of space-charge regions as a consequence of the attractive forces of the adsorbed Lewis acid.79
Molaiyan et al. have recently reported that the surface activation and conductivity enhancement of calcium fluoride synthesized via ball milling is possible.80 The pure CaF2 powder was exposed to salt water with a relative humidity (RH) of 88%, and ball-milled subsequently. The reported ionic conductivity of synthesized humidified CaF2 electrolyte was around 1.9 × 10−5 S cm−1 at room temperature. The reported values are several orders of magnitude higher than pure and ball-milled CaF2 (2 × 10−7 to 1.6 × 10−11 S cm−1).81 The reported activation energy of the humidified CaF2 was around 0.35 eV, which was related to the surface formation of interstitial fluoride sites with suggested formation energies of around 0.25 eV,82,83 making the material applicable in fluoride ion batteries.84 The ionic conductivity increases with higher temperature up to a certain critical temperature, after which the decomposition of the defect structure is promoted and the conductivity decreases. From this study, it can be concluded that crystal surface defects strongly influence overall bulk conductivities85,86 and can provide an alternative route as compared to bulk modifications.87,88
4.7 Synthesis of solid electrolytes: ball-milling method and other methods
Solid-state reactions generally occur at higher temperatures and often lead to powder morphologies that are unfavorable for battery cell fabrication. In favorable cases, reactions can be carried out merely by grinding the reagents via mechanochemical synthesis,89 and this method has been widely studied for the preparation of multinary fluorides.42,52,57,73,90–93 On the lab-scale level, such synthesis will be done with a high-energy milling method. The crystalline reagents are being impacted with the milling balls at high kinetic energies, which causes high impact energies and can reduce the crystalline regions down to nanometer size with the introduction of crystal defects also.42 Higher rotational speeds introduce a higher energy to the system leading to reduction in the crystallite size or even a destruction of the crystal structure and a creation of more defects including point defects and grain boundaries. Therefore, ball milling can be a method of choice when nanostructure/amorphous phases are desired. Furthermore, especially in the case of doping purposes, a higher energy results in a more homogenous distribution of the dopant. The optimal milling rotational speed highly depends on the type and the mechanism of ion transport within the solid electrolyte. For instance, nanocrystallization of CaF2 and Ba1−xLaxF2+x serves to make more defects and is in favor of obtaining higher conductivities due to migration of vacancies along the grain boundaries. The mechanism of conductivity in tysonite-type structures of La1−xBaxF3−x, however, is different from fluorite-type samples and the presence of grain boundaries may block the migration of vacancies through the sample.37 In this case, increasing milling rotational speed is not in favor of increasing the conductivity, although, it results in a more homogenous distribution of the dopant which eventually significantly increases the ionic conductivity. In this respect, it is reported that sintering of nanoparticles of La1−xBaxF3−x (as a sort of post-ball-milling treatment) can remarkably improve the ionic conductivity of the compound.43 Thus, mechanochemical synthesis may become an essential method for the synthesis of new nanomaterials and nanocomposite materials, as it is relatively cheap and energy-efficient. In addition, further advantages of mechanochemical synthesis comprise a more reliable, easy operation to ensure reproducibility and large scale synthesis. As a disadvantage, one must acknowledge that due to high-speed rotation of the vial usually for few hours, contaminations might be introduced into the system. This can be even more severe for fluoride-based materials, which can be reactive towards many milling vials (e.g., silica or alumina based materials). Further, the magnitude of the contamination in a ball milling process depends on time of milling, intensity of milling, atmosphere in which the powder is milled, nature and size of the milling medium and differences in the hardness of the powder and the milling container.94 Milling parameters such as time directly influence the energy provided with the milling process and it is not always possible to reduce the milling time or rotational speed. Therefore, to provide the required energy for the milling and simultaneously keep the contamination as low as possible, several strategies have been suggested such as minimizing the impurity within the starting materials, coat the inner walls of the milling container by alike powders, use grinding medium and container that is harder than the powder being milled, pursue the milling process under an inert gas such as Ar (for instance, fill the milling container inside a high Ar purity glove box)94 and finally introduce sufficient breaks in order to avoid local increase in temperature resulting in crystallite growth or occurrence of undesired reactions.95
As discussed in the previous section, post-ball-milling treatments such as high-temperature sintering can often be required to reach the highest ionic conductivities, where the increase of conductivity must be balanced against particle growth, which can be unfavorable for cell fabrication. The ionic conductivity is highly dependent on the microstructure of the polycrystalline material, as conduction properties are different within the grain boundaries and in bulk.96 In polycrystalline solid electrolytes, especially when milled to the nanoscale, the conduction properties can be radically different from their single-crystalline counterparts. This is due to the fact that high amounts of grain boundaries must be surpassed and since such powders are often richer in defects.97 From a microscopic viewpoint, properties are different for the bulk, which generally presents the same conduction properties as a single crystal, and for the surface, where many defects are present at the grain boundaries.48 While the conduction is limited by the migration of the ionic species in the grain boundaries, if the powder processed by cold uniaxial pressing, the sintered samples are normally dominated by bulk conduction.98
Apart from ball-milling, only a few reports exist which emphasize on the preparation of nano-crystalline materials via other approaches. Since most electrolytes are based on alkaline earth or lanthanide metals, precipitation routes are feasible for the fabrication of nano-crystalline defect rich powders. This is based on the low solubility of these fluorides, even in an aqueous solution. Bhatia et al.43 found that this fabrication method can give similar properties as the ball-milling procedure. Due to the similar low solubility of LaF3 and BaF2, this method can even be used for the preparation of mixed crystals of higher complexity, such as La1−xBaxF3−x. Further, up-scaling of powder production could also be considered easier for wet-chemical approaches in contrast to milling based reaction routes.
4.8 Temperature-dependence of fluoride conducting materials – a comparison
From the early days until now, the detailed understanding of structural and conductivity features of inorganic fluorides has opened the path for the development of many solid fluoride electrolytes with improved ionic conductivity and their use in lab-scale batteries in various electrochemical studies. In a nutshell, the doping of pure fluoride electrolytes with aliovalent fluorides (e.g., BaF2-doped LaF3, KF-doped β-PbF2 or BiF3-doped β-PbF2) leads to an increase in the ionic conductivity of the doped material due to the creation of fluoride point defects most often. Defects present in the crystal structure provide fast diffusion pathways for fluoride ions and result in the conductivity enhancement required to obtain reasonable charging times. An overview of ionic conductivities reported previously for a variety of materials is given in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of synthesis methods for different solid-state fluoride electrolytes with their electrochemical properties. RT refers to room temperature




Solid-state fluoride electrolyte
Ionic conductivity: σ (S cm−1)
Synthesis method
Anode/Cathode
Capacity (mA h g−1) at 1st discharge
Discharging stability (mA h g−1)
Coulombic efficiency (at 1st cycle)
Current density
References




La0.95Ba0.05F2.95
1.26 × 10−4 (60 °C)
Co-precipitation method
Ce/BiF3 (150 °C)
245
90 (8th cycle)
83%
4 mA g−1

43



La0.90Ba0.10F2.90 (90 μm)/BaSnF4 (650 μm)
3.5 × 10−6 (RT)
High energy ball milling + annealing
Ce/BiF3 (25 °C)
27
3 (5th cycle)
85%
10 μA cm−2

67



Ce/BiF3 (150 °C)
251
119 (5th cycle)
93%
10 μA cm−2


La0.95Ba0.05F2.95@PEO
5.75 × 10−6 (90 °C)
Co-precipitation method
Li/FeF3 (70°C)
113.5
18 (5th)
92%
71 mA g−1

99



La0.90Ba0.10F2.90
1.20 × 10−6 (RT)
High energy ball-milling + sintering
Not reported

100



La0.90Ba0.10F2.90
4 × 10−7 (RT)
High energy ball milling
See Table 3

67



La0.90Ba0.10F2.90
2.36 × 10−4 (200 °C)
High energy ball milling

101



La0.95Sr0.05F2.95
2.0 × 10−6 (RT)
Single crystal
Not reported

102



La0.8Ca0.2F2.8
1.0 × 10−6 (RT)
Ball-milling + annealing
Not reported

55



La0.95Sr0.05F2.95
3.0 × 10−5 (RT)
Single crystal + high energy ball-milling + sintering
Not reported

103



Sm0.95Ca0.05F2.95
1.0 × 10−4 (RT)
Sintering + solid state synthesis + mixing
Not reported

49



Sm0.95Ca0.05F2.95
2.8 × 10−5 (RT)
High energy ball-milling
Not reported

80 and 106


β-PbSnF4
1.20 × 10−3 (RT)
Sintering + mixing
Not reported

87



Pb0.55Sn0.45F2
2.53 × 10−3 (RT)
High energy ball-milling
Not reported

76



PbxSn2−xF4 (x = 1.21)
3.53 × 10−3 (RT)
High energy ball-milling + annealing
Not reported

77





5 Liquid and polymer-based electrolytes for fluoride-ion batteries
Fluoride ion batteries have mostly been studied using solid electrolytes, mainly leading to operating temperatures of 150 °C or even above. However, more and more reports have been demonstrating the fluoride ion battery concept using a liquid electrolyte in very recent years.
The preparation of liquid electrolytes for FIBs is significantly different as compared to LIBs. For Li-ion batteries, liquid electrolytes typically consist of simple lithium salts such as LiPF6 or LiClO4 in organic solvents. However, this cannot be mimicked for fluoride ion batteries because simple fluoride salts such as KF and CsF are almost insoluble in organic aprotic solvents. So far, two strategies were adopted to prepare fluoride ion conducting liquid electrolytes: the first one is by dissolving fluoride salts in organic solvents, and the second one is by mixing organic fluorides into ionic liquids (ILs). For the latter, only one patent has claimed the fabrication of a FIB cell using an IL based electrolyte, which was composed of tetramethylammonium fluoride (TMAF) and 1-methyl-1-propylpiperidinium bis(tri-fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (MPPTFSI).107 The assembled cell showed an electrochemical performance for two cycles with an initial capacity of 103 mA h g−1, but the structural data of electrodes before and after discharge was not reported. To date, several patents have been reported, claiming the feasibility of FIBs containing a liquid electrolyte.108–111 Thus, several attempts have been made in order to develop liquid fluoride conducting electrolytes and test them in battery setups. In an initial report, Gschwind et al. prepared a polymer-based electrolyte based on ammonium bifluoride-doped polyethylene glycol (PEG) matrix.33,112 Their objective was to form a hydrogen-bonded PEG matrix to trap difluorides for fluoride conduction. Fig. 11a shows a schematic drawing of the possible hydrogen bonding, which could be expected in a polymer electrolyte containing bifluoride ions (FHF−). The electrolyte showed an ionic conductivity of 2.1 mS cm−1 at room temperature for an optimized concentration of 0.02 M. The assembled cell with BiF3 as the cathode, Mg as the anode and this polymer electrolyte showed a good first discharge capacity. However, it fails to deliver any reversible capacity (Fig. 11b). To find the exact reason of the non-reversibility of the cell, SEM analysis was performed on the Mg electrode before and after discharging, which reveals a snowflake-like formation of MgF2 layers on the Mg surface.112 This is a very poor ionic conductor, acts as a passivation layer for F− diffusion, and can be considered as the main reason for irreversibility. Recently, a new fluoride ion-conducting polymer system consisting of poly(ethylene)oxide (PEO), metal fluoride salts, and anion acceptors has been reported.113 The polymer electrolyte exhibited the ionic conductivity of 1 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 303 K, with fluoride transference numbers as large as 0.8. A FIB utilizing a liquid electrolyte for fluoride transport was reported recently by Ogumi et al., where the electrolyte was made from mixing an organic fluoride (1-methyl-1-propylpiperidinium fluoride: MPPF) in an ionic liquid (N,N,N-trimethyl-N-propylammonium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide: TMPA/TFSA).114 The electrolyte shows a conductivity of 2.5 mS cm−1 at room temperature for a concentration of 0.35 M. The electrochemical stability of the electrolyte was investigated by cyclic voltammetry using Pt or Bi as working electrode, and a fluorinated Pb plate as counter and reference electrode (Fig. 11c), indicating a small electrochemical stability window of 0.7 V vs. Pb/Pb2+. The full cell assembly utilizing the electrolyte showed significant charge and discharge capacities for few cycles at low operating voltage (∼0.2 V) (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) A schematic drawing of possible hydrogen bonds, which could occur in a hydrogen bifluoride-doped PEG matrix (reproduced from ref. 33 (an original RSC publication)), (b) discharge curves of BiF3 against Mg using PEG matrix based electrolyte with three different separators (reproduced with some modifications from ref. 112 (an original RSC publication)), (c) CVs of the Bi and Pt electrodes in ∼0.07 mol dm−3 MPPF/TMPA-TFSA at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1 (blue lines: Bi. Gray lines with circles: Pt), (d) cycling test of the bismuth electrode in ∼0.35 mol dm−3 MPPF/TMPA-TFSA at current densities of 20 μA cm−2 (parts c and d are reproduced from ref. 114 with permission copyright©2017 American Chemical Society). 
Later, the same group has further developed FIBs by introducing a new type of electrolyte synthesized by dissolving a fluoride salt in an organic solvent with the help of an anion acceptor.115 The idea was to develop an electrolyte that can dissolve and deposit the active material to facilitate the electrochemical reaction of FIBs. The electrolyte solution was prepared by using bis [2-(2-methoxyethoxy) ethyl] ether (tetraglyme:G4) as the solvent containing 0.45 M cesium fluoride (CsF) with addition of 0.5 mol L−1 of a boron-based anion acceptor (fluorobis (2,4,6-trimethylphenyl) borane: FBTMPhB). The anion acceptor was added mainly to enhance the solubility of CsF in the tetraglyme solvent by reducing the cation–anion interaction between Cs+ and F−. DFT calculations confirm the capability of FBTMPhB as anion acceptor to bind fluoride ions. Fig. 12a shows the most stable binding site for the fluoride ion at the boron atom. The electrochemical stability of this liquid electrolyte was investigated by cyclic voltammetry (displayed in Fig. 12b), where the CsF(0.45)-FBTMPhB(0.5)-G4 composition shows a stability window between −2.2 to −0.3 V vs. Ag/Ag+. Furthermore, the performance of this electrolyte was demonstrated in a FIB half cell constituting of BiF3 as a working cathode and a Pt mesh as a counter electrode. The cell delivered a first discharge capacity of 316 mA h g−1 (slightly higher than the theoretical capacity, indicating some side reactions), but in the subsequent cycles the capacity faded rapidly and decreased close to zero after 10 cycles. The electrochemical performance of PbF2 as an active material has also been investigated within a FIB system with the same liquid electrolyte.116 In this work, the discharge capacity reduced to almost half after only three cycles, though, the XRD measurements confirm occurrence of the charge/discharge reactions within the second and third cycles.
 Fig. 12  (a) Optimized molecular structure of FBTMPhB-F−, (b) cyclic voltammograms of the CsF(0.45)-FBTMPhB(0.5)-G4 (parts a and b are reproduced from ref. 115 with permission copyright©2017 The Electrochemical Society); (c) simulated solvation shell of BTFE molecules surrounding F− (pink sphere) (d) linear sweep voltammograms for 0.75 M Np1F in BTFE, collected using a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (Parts c and d are reproduced from ref. 34 with permission copyright©2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science). 
Later, the effect of two other boron-containing compounds, triphenylboroxine (TPhBX) and triphenylborane (TPhB), as anion acceptors was investigated.117 The authors concluded that the addition of TPhBX and TPhB can significantly increase the solubility of CsF in G4. Still, a significant capacity fading (from ∼350 mA h g−1 in the first cycle to ∼75 mA h g−1 in the third cycle for CsF-TPhB-G4) can be observed during the cell operation. A similar argument holds true when PbF2 is used as the electrode material instead of BiF3.118 This poor behavior of TPhBX has been related to the dissolution of Bi119 and Pb118 ions. It is also shown that the amount of CsF in the solution can influence the cycling stability: The discharge capacity of the system based on the electrolyte with G4 containing saturated CsF and 0.50 M TPhBX can increase the discharge capacity of BiF3 in the second and third cycles to almost 100% as compared to that within the system based on the electrolyte with G4 containing 0.45 M CsF and 0.50 M TPhBX.119 In the same system, other factors such as microparticulation of the BiF3 and adhesion of the conductive material to BiF3 by ball milling were investigated later, showing that while reducing the particle size only slightly affects the practical capacity, adhesion of the BiF3 to carbon particles can significantly increase the charge/discharge capacities.120 To further improve the cycling performance, a PbF2 electrode was later used by the same research group to build up a FIB cell based on bis[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethyl] ether containing cesium fluoride and TPhB as the electrolyte.121 This resulted in a better capacity retention during the first three cycles (∼210 mA h g−1 and ∼100 mA h g−1 at the first and third cycles, respectively) as compared to that with BiF3 as the electrode material.122,123 In another study,124 PbF2 has been investigated using a similar liquid-based electrolyte but with the addition of TPhBX as the anion acceptor. There, the effects of pulverization of PbF2 and carbon additive were elaborated and the authors conclude that a mixture of PbF2 and carbon, which is pulverized by ball milling, can increase the capacity of the cell.
A liquid fluoride conducting electrolyte with high ionic conductivity and wide electrochemical stability was designed and developed by Davis et al.34 A highly concentrated (>2.2 M) electrolyte was synthesized by dissolving dry N,N,N,trimethyl-N-neopentylammonium fluoride (Np1F) in the organic solvent Bis(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl) ether (BTFE) (Fig. 12c). They also investigated the solubility of Np1F in several non-aqueous solvents in order to find the most suitable electrolyte for FIBs.125 The 0.75 M Np1F/BTFE electrolyte, in particular, displays ionic conductivity of 7.95 mS cm−1 at room temperature. The electrochemical stability window of 0.75 M Np1F/BTFE was determined by linear sweep voltammetry, showing a potential window between 0.7 V (cathodic voltage limit) and 4.8 V (anodic voltage limit) versus Li+/Li (Fig. 12d). However, the electrochemical cycling of various metallic electrodes (such as: Cu, Pb, Bi, Ce and Ca) revealed that there is a considerable amount of metal dissolution into the electrolyte, which leads to poor performances. To avoid the electrolyte breakdown due to direct contact with the metal, a fluoride conductive layer protecting the electrode materials was introduced. The Ce electrode was engineered with a fluorinated solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer, whereas Cu particles were encapsulated in a thin layer of LaF3 in a core–shell setup, referred to as Cu@LaF3. The fabricated cell comprised of the modified electrodes and the liquid electrolyte was cycled reversibly at room temperature with a reversible capacity of around 60 mA h g−1, which is 8 times less than the theoretical capacity of CuF2 (528 mA h g−1), meaning an incomplete reaction occurred at the electrodes. Another report describes a new electrolyte based on fluorohydrogenate ionic liquid [C2C1im][(FH)2.3F] (C2C1im = 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium), with an ionic conductivity as high as 100 mS cm−1 at 25 °C.126 Here, the FIB cell with CuF2 cathode delivered an excellent first discharge capacity of 500 mA h g−1, which is close to the theoretical capacity of CuF2. The reversible capacity reaches to 475 mA h g−1 during the first cycle, resulting in a Coulombic efficiency of 92%, which is already higher than the value observed in previous reports. In the following cycles, the performance of the cell degraded gradually; as a result, the 10th reversal capacity reaches to 264 mA h g−1. Thus, one can conclude that realizing full utilization of active material at room temperature is a very challenging task, whose implementation requires the development of other electrolytes.
Apart from using organic solvents to develop liquid electrolytes for FIBs, aqueous solutions have also been considered for the same purpose. For instance, cells based on fluoride and sodium ion (dual) transfer were proposed by Zhang et al.127 In their study, aqueous sodium fluoride was used as a liquid electrolyte while BiF3 and sodium manganese oxides (NMO) were used as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The cell delivered a reversible and stable discharge capacity of 47.3 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles. A NaF salt solution has also been used as a liquid electrolyte to build up a FIB cell by Hou et al.128 In this study, BiF3 has been used as an anode and cycled against a 4-hydroxy-TEMPO cathode, i.e., a persistent radical that is sterically protected by four α-methyl groups and undergoes one electron oxidation.128 The electrodes were implemented as a paste (slurry method) on graphite paper and a high-quality anion exchange membrane was used to prevent side effects of insoluble compounds ensuring only fluoride ions are transported during the operation of the cell. Here the results show stable cycling performance at least for 85 cycles with a reversible capacity of around 90 mA h g−1. However, a relatively large voltage hysteresis (∼1.0 V on average) can be observed.
A summary of the reported liquid electrolytes and their electrochemical properties can be found in Table 2.
Table 2 Liquid electrolytes for FIBs and their electrochemical property




Electrolyte

σ (S cm−1) at 25 °C
Stability-window (V)
Anode/Cathode
Capacity (mA h g−1) 1st discharge
Cycle life (mA h g−1) discharge
Coulombic efficiency (at 1st cycle)
Current density
References




0.1 M TMAF/MPPTFSI
1 × 10−3
−3.5 to 4.0 (vs. Ag/Ag+)
PbF2/PANI
103
96 (2nd)
49% (ca.)
—

107



0.02 M FHF doped PEG
2.1 × 10−3
—
Mg/BiF3
250
—
—
10 μA

33



0.35 M MPPF/TMPA-TFSA
2.5 × 10−3
0 to 0.7 (vs. Pb/PbF2)
PbF2/Bi
0.16 mA h
0.01 mA h (5th)
56%
20 μA cm−2

114



CsF(0.45 M)-FBTMPhB(0.5 M)-G4
—
−2.2 to −0.3 (vs. BiF3/Bi)
Pt/BiF3
316
Close to 0 (10th)
70%
7.5 mA g−1

115



0.75 M Np1F/BTFE
7.9 × 10−3
0.7 to 4.8 (vs. Li/Li+)
Pt/Cu@LaF3
50
63 (7th)
78%
10 μA

34



[C2C1im][(FH)2.3F]
1 × 10−1
−0.3 to 0.7 (vs. CuF2/Cu)
CuF2/Cu + CuF2
517
270 (10th)
92%
26 mA g−1

126



1 M LiPF6 in EC/DME
—
0 to 3.0 (vs. Mg/MgF2)
Mg + MgF2/BiF3
160
27 (10th)
53%
38 μA cm−2

129



Mg + MgF2/SnF2
142
24 (10th)
56%
38 μA cm−2


P(EO/PO)/MF/AA
1 × 10−6
—
—
—
—
—
—

113



Aqueous 0.8 M NaF
—
0 to 1.5 (Ag/AgCl)
NMO/BiF3
137
47 (40th)
52%
100 mA g−1

127





6 Electrode materials
6.1 Conversion vs. intercalation mechanism
In fluoride ion battery systems, storage of the ions in electrodes can take place through two main types of reaction mechanisms. As it was highlighted in Section 3, the suitability of FIBs for reversible energy storage systems has been first demonstrated for cells containing conversion-based electrode materials. Such conversion-based electrodes generally offer the highest specific capacities due to their ability to accommodate more electrons per redox-active metal species and often lower molar mass of the active electrode material. However, in a conversion-reaction, the electrode material undergoes a redox reaction during fluorination/de-fluorination, which is accompanied by a change in the crystal structure leading to breaking and recombining of the chemical bonds and often a large volume change in the active electrode material.1 This large volume change results in a loss of physical contact between the active electrode material, the conductive particle and the ion conductor (see the scheme in Fig. 13), which can lead to a significant deterioration in the electrochemical performance of the electrode material.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the volume changes in the contact surface area of the active electrode material/electrolyte/carbon grains taking place during electrochemical charge/discharge. Reproduced from ref. 28. 
The second reaction for storage of the fluoride ions is based on the intercalation mechanism (sometimes also called insertion or solid solution reactions,130 depending on the detailed structural arrangement of the host and the substructure of the incorporated species and nature of bonding therein). In the following, we refer to an intercalation-based electrode material for FIBs as a solid host network, which can store guest ions within the vacant positions in the host lattice, without referring to the dimensionality of this host sublattice explicitely. In other words, the guest species are inserted into normally unoccupied interstitial sites or anion vacancies in the crystal structure of a stable host material. The great advantage of the intercalation-based electrode materials relates to the fact that the ions can be inserted or removed into/from the host network reversibly with much lower volume changes during the redox reaction (e.g., in the order of 2% for LiCoO2 (ref. 131) as an intercalation-based cathode for lithium-ion batteries) while the basic crystal structure or amounts of the phase in the microstructure do not change significantly.130 Therefore, intercalation-based electrode materials can often provide a better cycling performance as compared to conversion-based electrode materials, with improved charging and discharging rates. However, this normally comes at the cost of lower specific capacities,1 as intercalation-based materials are usually heavier in weight than the conversion-based electrode materials due to the existence of redox-inactive lattice atoms within the materials and the capability of accommodating fewer ions per redox-active species (for instance, theoretical capacity for intercalation-based LiCoO2 is calculated to be 140 mA h g−1, for lithiation/de-lithiation of 0.5 Li-ions132 in comparison to conversion-based Li/Li2S1 with a theoretical capacity of 1675 mA h g−1).
The following sections aim to provide an overview of the different electrode materials investigated previously. Table 3 provides an outline about the cathode and anode materials that have been developed so far for the FIB systems and briefly summarize their electrochemical performances. It is also worth mentioning that as yet no evidence suggests the migration of other ions such as La, Sn or Sr ions during the redox reactions within the reviewed FIB systems. These ions have low mobility at the temperatures used for the battery experiment as compared to F−, and they cannot take the same diffusion paths as F− within the ionic lattice.
Table 3 A summary of the electrochemical performances of different cathode/anode materials that will be discussed in this section. *La0.9Ba0.1F2.9; §Ce0.95Ba0.05F2.95; ¥BaSnF4




Cathode/electrolyte/anode
Average discharge potential range (V)
1st discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycling performance

T (°C)
Current density
References




BiF3 (composite)/LBF*/Ce
∼2.5
∼125
Not reported
150
10 μA cm−2

8



BiF3 (solid-solution)/LBF*/Ce
∼2.15
∼190
26% capacity retention after 40 cycles
150
10 μA cm−2

8



BiF3/(co-precipitated LBF* electrolyte)/Ce
∼2.4
∼250
Discharge capacity: 90 mA h g−1 at cycle 8
150
±4 mA g−1

43



BiF3/LBF*/Ce
Dropped rapidly
<5 (ref. 1)
No cycle life
150
±4 mA g−1

24



BiF3/LBF*/Mg
Dropped rapidly
<5
No cycle life
150
±4 mA g−1

24



BiF3/LBF*/Mg + MgF2
2.1–2.7
∼80
<25 mA h g−1 at cycle 10
150
±4 mA g−1

24



Bi0.7Fe1.3O1.5F1.7/CBF§/Pb
∼0.3
360
Not reported
140



134



CuF2/LBF*/Ce
∼2.5
∼322
Not reported
150
10 μA cm−2

8



CuF2/LBF*/Mg + MgF2
∼2.8–1.5
33
<20 mA h g−1 after cycle 10
150
±4 mA g−1

24



Cu@LaF3 in standard three-electrode cell/1 M Np1F|BTFE/Pt wires
∼2.3–2.0
∼52
Low capacity fading over first 7 cycles
RT
10 μA

34



SnF2/LBF*/Ce
∼2.1
∼180
Not reported
150
10 μA cm−2

8



KBiF4/LBF*/Ce
∼2.2
∼170
Not reported
150
10 μA cm−2

8



Sn/BSF¥/BiF3
∼0.3–0
∼120
Large capacity fading from ∼120 mA h g−1 at the 1st cycle to <10 mA h g−1 at cycle 10
25
±10 μA cm−2

65



Zn/BSF¥/BiF3
∼0.5–0
∼60
Cycle stable up to cycle 20
25
±10 μA cm−2

65



La2NiO4+d/LBF*/Zn + ZnF2
∼1.3–0.5
72
Cyclic stability over 220 cycles only at cutoff voltage of 30 mA h g−1
170
+24 μA cm−2

133



−12 μA cm−2


La2NiO4+d/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.9–0.3
55
Discharge capacity increases to 55 mA h g−1 up to cycle 10 then reduces to 24 mA h g−1 up to cycle 20
170
+24 μA cm−2

28



−12 μA cm−2


La2NiO3F2/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼1.0–0.4
22.5
Discharge capacity increases from ∼12 mA h g−1 up to ∼23 mA h g−1 at cycle 50
170
2.5 mA g−1

135



La2CoO4+d/LBF*/Zn + ZnF2
∼1.0–0.3
40
Discharge capacity drops to 32 mA h g−1 in the 2nd cycle then gradually reaches to 8 mA h g−1 at cycle 50
170
+24 μA cm−2

136



−2.4 μA cm−2


La2CoO4+d/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.6–0.2
32
Discharge capacity: ∼8 mA h g−1 at cycle 50
170
+24 μA cm−2

30



−2.4 μA cm−2


LaSrMnO4/LBF*/PbF2
∼1.0–0.2
35
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

95



−2.4 μA cm−2


LaSrMnO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼1.0–0.2
36
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

95



−2.4 μA cm−2


La1.3Sr1.7Mn2O7/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.5–0
25
No significant capacity fading over 40 cycles
170
5.1 μA

137



LaSrFeO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.8–0
6
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

28



−2.4 μA cm−2


LaSrCoO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.8–0
16
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

28



−2.4 μA cm−2


Co0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.5–0
6
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

138



−2.4 μA cm−2


Mg0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2
∼0.5–0
3
Not reported
170
+24 μA cm−2

138



−2.4 μA cm−2


BaFeO2.5/LBF*/MgF2
∼2.5–1.0
6
Only three cycles were reported which shows a slight capacity fading
150
10 μA cm−2

139





6.2 Conversion-based cathode materials
BiF3 and CuF2 are by far the most used cathode materials in conversion-based FIBs.8,24,33,34,65,140 Reddy and Fichtner reported on the cycling behaviour of BiF3 as cathode material against a Ce anode material in an all-solid-state cell modification using La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 as the electrolyte.8 In addition, they reported the first discharge behaviour of several metal fluorides. Fig. 14 summarizes the first discharge profile of various metal fluorides as cathode materials (against Ce anode material) compared to BiF3 and CuF2. It is worth mentioning that in this study the cathode materials were made in a charged state (i.e., MFx). The results revealed that for the CuF2 composite material the highest discharge capacity of 322 mA h g−1 (in the first cycle) with a flat discharge potential of around 2.7 V could be obtained when the cell was discharged at 150 °C using a current density of 10 μA cm−2. The high discharge capacity of CuF2 is due to the high theoretical capacity of CuF2, which arises from the low molar mass of Cu (e.g. theoretical capacities of Cu/CuF2 and Bi/BiF3 are calculated to be ∼843 and 384 mA h g−1, respectively). The Cu/CuF2 redox couple has also been used as a conversion-based cathode in a nanostructure core–shell modification,34 as discussed in Section 5. For the BiF3 cathode composite, a flat plateau around 2.5 V with a discharge capacity of 126 mA h g−1 was observed. The discharge capacity could be further increased up to 190 mA h g−1 by synthesizing a BiF3 (tysonite-type) solid solution (via mechanical milling of the BiF3 active cathode material together with the electrolyte material with increased rotational speed up to 600 rpm). However, the average discharge potential slightly reduced to ∼2.15 V for the BiF3 solid solution. The improvement of the discharge capacity has been attributed to a higher fluoride ion mobility within the BiF3 solid solution as compared to a BiF3 composite.
 Fig. 14  (a) Voltage-capacity profiles of various metal fluorides vs. Ce metal. The discharge curves were obtained at 150 °C with a current density of 10 mA cm−2; (b) cycling performance of the BiF3 (solid solution)/Ce cell for the first 10 cycles; (c) changes of discharge capacity with cycle numbers for the same electrochemical cell. The figures have been reproduced with some modifications from ref. 8 (an original RSC publication). 
The cycling performance of BiF3 against Ce reveals a large capacity loss (∼35%) already after the first cycle, followed by rapid capacity fading over the next cycles, leading to only ∼26% capacity retention after 40 cycles (see Fig. 14b, c). Interestingly, it was found that synthesizing the La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 solid electrolyte by co-precipitation could lead to a significant increase in the discharge capacity of a BiF3|Ce electrochemical cell of up to 250 mA h g−1. Though the cell still suffered from a strong capacity fading upon cycling (the discharge capacity reached to 90 mA h g−1 after only 8 cycles, when the cells were cycled at 150 °C), these findings indicate that the performance of certain electrode materials can highly depend on the detailed morphological and compositional aspects of the solid electrolyte used in the electrode composite mixture.43
Cathode composites of Bi + BiF3 were also studied in detail by Grenier et al.141 by means of pair distribution function analysis of synchrotron data, revealing a complex transformation reaction comprising also the formation of oxyfluoride compounds at intermediate cycling states. Further, they could show that such oxide impurities cannot migrate through the fluoride conducting electrolyte, and thus remain at the respective electrode side.
In another report,24 electrochemical activities of Bi and Cu (active cathode materials in discharged states) against CeF3, CaF2, MgF2 and Mg + MgF2 anode composites have been studied. The results suggested that the electrochemical fluorination of Bi against CeF3 (during charging) takes place in several steps as was found by Grenier et al.141 and that the transformation process can be very complex: first, traces (remaining from the starting powder) of Bi2O3 were fluorinated, and β-BiF3−2xOx is formed, which was accompanied by a charge plateau below 2.4 V. In the second step, BiF3 forms from Bi (desired reaction) and a plateau between 2.5 and 2.7 V could be observed. The last step was referred to as the formation of BiF5 from previously formed BiF3. Considering the theoretical capacity related to the reaction of three fluoride ions with Bi (385 mA h g−1), the first charge capacity was ∼404 mA h g−1, indicating that a reaction of BiF3 to BiF5 might be partly involved in the redox process. Other possibilities such as carbon or electrolyte decomposition were not evaluated as the source of the side reaction related to the observed excessive charge capacity. When using the other mentioned anode materials, similar charging behaviors were found. However, a considerable reversibility upon discharging could only be obtained when using CeF3 and MgF2 based anode composites. A significant improvement of the cyclability was further observed when a Mg + MgF2 anode composite, containing a mixture of Mg and MgF2, was used (see also Section 6.3).
A slightly improved cycling stability has been reported31 for Bi|CaF2 cells using a thin film La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 electrolyte (see also Section 4.2). In this study, SnO2 and indium tin oxide (ITO) instead of carbon nanotubes as the electronic conductor have been investigated to study the role of the electron-conducting additive for the electron transfer to the active electrode material. It was observed that the best cycling behavior could be observed using carbon nanotubes as the electronic conductor. Despite of a low Coulombic efficiency in the first cycle (the cell has been initially charged up to ca. 320 mA h g−1 but only 120 mA h g−1 could be reversed), in the next cycles, the capacity fading was less severe compared to the first cycle. Nevertheless, the discharge capacity reached to ca. 66% of its initial value (∼120 mA h g−1) within only 10 cycles. Recently, Konishi et al. showed120 that pulverization of BiF3 with the conductive material by ball milling can improve the practical capacity of the FIB system. This has been explained by the reduction of the particle size and a stronger adhesion of the conductive particle to the BiF3 electrode material. Another approach to improve the capacity retention of BiF3 was proposed very recently by Konishi et al.142 In this publication, it was shown that a solid solution of BiF3 and BaF2 (Bi1−xBaxF3−x, 0 < x< 0.4) as the cathode material made by mechanical alloying, offers a higher capacity retention during cycling for x = 0.4. However, the overall capacity was reduced to almost 50% of the one for pure BiF3. This has been claimed to be due to an excess amount of barium fluoride that did not contribute to the redox reaction.
Apart from using Bi/BiF3 as a cathode in an all-solid-state modification, it has also been used as the cathode in a liquid electrolyte system. In 2019 Yamanaka et al. reported143 on using orthorhombic-BiF3 microparticles in a gold plating film as a cathode material against Pb wire as the counter electrode. Then the structural transformation and reaction mechanisms within BiF3 as the active electrode material were studied by means of in situ Raman microscopy. The authors showed that by discharging the cell within a potential range of 0.45–0.2 V (against. Pb), a part of the orthorhombic-BiF3 is deposited as Bi on the gold plate, which is indicative for a direct de-fluorination process while the rest of the orthorhombic-BiF3 was transformed to cubic-BiF3. The de-fluorination of the cubic-BiF3 was observed only below 0.2 V (vs. Pb) and with a slower rate as compared to orthorhombic-BiF3. Moreover, it is suggested144 that electronic diffusion is the rate-limiting process during the de-fluorination: The de-fluorination of orthorhombic-BiF3 starts from the cluster that is in contact with conductive gold plate and not from the cluster that is in contact with the liquid electrolyte. This non-uniformity in the de-fluorination would not have been observed if the electronic diffusion at the surface of the BiF3 cluster in contact with the liquid electrolyte was as fast as the ionic diffusion at the surface of BiF3. In a recent attempt34 to build up a room-temperature FIB, Cu/CuF2 redox couple has been used as a conversion-based cathode in a nanostructured core–shell modification with a redox-inert thin shell of LaF3 (Cu@LaF3) around the active material. The cell was prepared as a standard three-electrode with a liquid electrolyte (also see Section 5 for the view-point of the liquid electrolyte design). The results reveal that the Cu has been charged up to at least 80 mA h g−1, of which 50 mA h g−1 could be reversed during the first cycle. With respect to the theoretical capacity of Cu/CuF2 (843 mA h g−1) the obtained discharge capacity is much lower than the theoretical capacity. The capacity within the first 7 cycles seems to be stable, though, the Coulombic efficiency appeared to be low (<50%).
Very recently, Takami et al. have introduced the use of multinary oxyfluorides as active electrode materials.134 In this report, by chemical fluorination with PVDF, quaternary Bi0.7Fe1.3O1.5F1.7 was synthesized, and then the phase was used as a charged cathode material. The Bi0.7Fe1.3O1.5F1.7 cathode material has been discharged against Pb + PbF2 composites, and a discharge capacity of 500 mA h g−1 has been obtained. However, this capacity is much larger than the theoretical capacity corresponding to a de-fluorination of 1.7 F− ions. Nevertheless, during the charge step, an effective charge plateau of about 190 mA h g−1 can be observed, which is in the order of the theoretical capacity. No subsequent cycling experiments were possible for the cell, which the authors assigned to a poor reaction activity and low electronic conductivity of the active cathode material itself.134
6.3 Conversion-based anode materials
Due to the strong interplay between the cathode and anode, a strict separation of the influences of individual electrode materials on the cycling performance and the overall improvement of FIBs is challenging. As already introduced in the previous section, significant contributions to the development of conversion-based electrodes have been made by the research groups of Reddy and Fichtner. On the anode side, composites based on the Ce/CeF3 (ref. 8 and 24) Ca/CaF2 (ref. 24 and 31) and Mg/MgF2 (ref. 24) redox couples have been intensively studied. For Ce/CeF3, experiments were conducted starting from the charged state of Ce8 as well as the discharged state of CeF3.24 As reported by Rongeat et al.,24 the use of an anode composite in a “half-discharged” state, containing a mixture of the discharge and charge products leads to the presence of more reactive interfaces within the composite and, therefore, to a better reactivity during charging (MFx → M) and discharging (M → MFx). This is shown for the cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Mg + MgF2 in comparison to the cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/MgF2 in Fig. 15. While for the cell containing the Mg + MgF2 anode, reversibility upon discharging could be observed and cycling was possible, the cell with the pure MgF2 anode showed a very low discharge capacity, and cycling could not be achieved. A strong capacity fading was also observed for the Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Mg + MgF2 cell with increasing cycling number. Further, the use of composite mixtures as the starting point already indicates that the fully charged or fully discharged state might be unfavourable for maintaining the overall integrity of the electrode.
 Fig. 15  Voltage profiles of (a) the first three cycles of a cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Mg + MgF2 and (b) the first charging and discharging of a cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/MgF2. The cells were heated to 150 °C, a current density of 4 mA g−1 (10 mA cm−2) was applied. The figures have been reproduced from ref. 24 (an original RSC publication). 
The successful application of a Pb + PbF2 anode composite in combination with an intercalation-based LaSrMnO4 cathode in a FIB was firstly demonstrated by Nowroozi et al.95 DFT based calculation predicted a redox potential of 2.26 V vs. Li/LiF for the Pb/PbF2 redox couple, making it a suitable material for being used as an anode material. Upon charging of the cell, a transformation of PbF2, contained in the anode composite, into Pb takes place. As it was observed for Mg + MgF2 anodes, when using this Pb + PbF2 anode composite instead of a composite, containing only PbF2, lower overpotentials and better cycling performances with much more pronounced charging plateaus and higher phase fractions of the fluorinated LaSrMnO4F2−δ could be identified, even though the involved redox couple remained the same. This shows that the complex conversion process taking place within the anode has a significant influence on the charging (and discharging) behavior of the cells. To gain a deeper understanding of the influence of such conversion-based anode materials on the cycling stabilities, the authors conducted an additional study, addressing the conversion reactions and determined limiting factors, including volume changes upon the occurring phase transformations.136 Different conversion-based anodes, containing Pb and PbF2, Zn and ZnF2, and Mn and MnF2 were investigated against an intercalation-based cathode composite containing La2CoO4 as an active material. In particular, for cells with a Mn + MnF2 anode, a strong change in the impedance response due to increasing capacitive behavior was found upon charging above a certain capacity. This change was related to the strong volume decrease of MnF2 when transformed to Mn (ΔV > 300%), which leads to a loss of contact between the active material and the electrolyte and carbon additive. This general dependency of cycling stabilities on the volume changes could also be confirmed based on the investigation of symmetrical cells. It was found that overpotentials increase much stronger for symmetrical cells with Zn + ZnF2 electrodes over prolonged cycling in comparison to the observed stable overpotentials for respective Pb + PbF2 cells, as the Zn and ZnF2 undergo stronger volume changes. Overall, it appears that large and soft cations, with corresponding low melting points of the metal and high ionic conductivity within the metal fluoride state, seem to be preferable for maintaining structural integrity, which can be key for reversibility.
6.4 Intercalation-based cathode materials
Investigations on fluorine insertion in oxides via electrochemical fluorination have been performed even before the recent development of FIBs. For instance, Y1Ba2Cu3O7−x has been electrochemically fluorinated in an all-solid-state configuration in 1991 by MacManus et al.145 using a single crystal of Eu-doped in LaF3 as the ion conductor and Cu/CuF2 as the counter electrode at very high temperatures of ∼300 °C. After careful evaluation of the structural changes upon fluorine insertion, they reached the conclusion that the electrochemical process resulted in a shrinkage of the c parameter of the unit cell, which has been explained by the occupation of oxygen sites by fluoride in the basal plane of the lattice. The other example is the electrochemical fluorination of La2CuO4 in a classic three-electrode configuration using organic fluorinated electrolytes (in liquid state) and gold foil and Pt wire as counter and reference electrodes, respectively.146 In this work, it was reported that 0.18 fluoride ions had been electrochemically inserted in the vacant interlayers of La2CuO4, resulting in an increase in the parameter c of the cell from 13.141 Å to 13.205 Å. The results were in good agreement with what was found using chemical fluorination methods using F2 gas. It should be taken into consideration that in both mentioned cases, no electrochemical reversibility has been reported since the investigations were solely devoted to the fluorine insertion (intercalation).
Attempts to develop all-solid-state FIBs based on the intercalation mechanism was first reported by Clemens et al. in 2014 on anion deficient perovskite-related BaFeO2.5, which showed low uptake of fluoride and poor performance as a cathode material.139 As today, the three structure types of Ruddlesden–Popper (K2NiF4-type structure), Schafarzikite (MSb2O4) and (anion deficient) perovskite (AMO3−y) have been investigated as potential intercalation-based cathode materials for FIBs. Among these, Ruddlesden–Popper-type compounds (e.g., La2MO4 and LaSrMO4) appeared to be the most promising candidates.
The Ruddlesden–Popper structure type can be regarded as a perovskite-related structure with a general formula of An+1MnO3n+1 (or (AMO3)nAO),147 where n shows the number of connected layers of vertex sharing MO6 (n perovskite layers are stacked between rock-salt AO layers along the c-axis). Fig. 16 schematically illustrates the Ruddlesden–Popper-type structure with n = 1 and formula of (AMO3)nAO (also known as K2NiF4-type structure). In a K2NiF4 (A2MO4) structure MO6 octahedra share corners with each other to form AMO3 (two-dimensional) perovskite layers and the AO rock salt units exist between multiple layers of the perovskite along the c-axis, resulting in a tetragonal unit cell with an aristotype symmetry of I4/mmm;147 for compositions close to A2BO4 the lattice parameter c normally ranges between ∼12.6–13.2 Å.148–152 The vacant anion positions within the rock salt-type interlayers are suitable for the accommodation of fluoride ions (Fig. 16): K2NiF4-type compounds are capable of accepting up to 2 fluoride ions per formula unit, resulting in theoretical capacities (normally between 130–160 mA h g−1) comparable to various state of the art materials for LIBs (intercalation cathodes such as LiMn2O4: 120 mA h g−1 and LiFePO4: 165 mA h g−1 (ref. 153–155)). This fluorine insertion most often, but not always, results in an expansion of the lattice along the c-axis. For instance, fluorination of LaSrMnO4 leads to an increase in lattice parameter c to around ∼14.2 Å for the occupation of only one interlayer (A2MO4F) and 15.5 Å for an ideal full occupation of both anion sites (A2MO4F2).156
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the n = 1 Ruddlesden–Popper (A2MO4) structure (left) and fully fluorinated A2MO4F2 structure (right). 
The reversible electrochemical intercalation and deintercalation of fluoride ions into the Ruddlesden–Popper type compound LaSrMnO4 using a Pb/PbF2 counter electrode (anode) was reported by Nowroozi et al.95 in 2017. In this work, it has been shown that the structural changes upon electrochemical fluorination are in principle agreement with the results of chemical fluorination experiments of LaSrMnO4:156,157 the fluorination process occurs in two steps, in the first step partially fluorinated LaSrMnO4F with a c-parameter of ∼14.2 Å forms and in the second step a new phase with an extended c-parameter up to ∼15.6 Å is obtained which is an indication for formation of the rich-fluoride content phase of LaSrMnO4F2−δ. The initial structure could be recovered by discharging the cell (electrochemical de-intercalation) to negative potentials (down to −3.5 V against PbF2). This indicates that for the recovery of initial LaSrMnO4, the overpotentials which were created during the charging step could only be overcome at negative potentials. Such large overpotentials were attributed to the decomposition of the carbon conductive matrix during the charging step.95 Successful insertion/removal of the fluoride ions into/from the anion interlayers of Ruddlesden–Popper type LaSrMnO4 serves as proof of principle for developing intercalation-based cathodes for FIBs, and meanwhile, reversed cycling at low capacities could be found for higher-order manganates.137 The need to optimize cycling conditions has been related to the deterioration of the conductivity of the cell as a result of decomposition of the conductive carbon.95
Unlike the fluorination of LaSrMnO4, which takes place in a layer-wise manner, the transformation of the Ruddlesden–Popper-type compounds La2NiO4+d and La2CoO4+d to La2MO4+dFy (1 ≤ y ≤ 2) occurs in only one step, and no stage-ordered fluorinated La2MO4+dF1 phase could be observed during the charging (electrochemical fluorination) step.30,133 For the charged La2NiO4+d particles, the data obtained from electron diffraction tomography (ADT) suggests that 1.59 to 1.72 fluoride ions can be inserted within the interlayers of a La2NiO4+d unit cell, which corresponds to a change in the oxidation state of Ni from close to +2 for un-fluorinated particles to almost +4 for the fluorinated particles. This change in the oxidation state of Ni is also confirmed by XANES analysis.133 In the case of La2CoO4.16, the number of inserted fluoride ions calculated (based on the effective charge capacity) is around 1.2 F− per formula unit. Furthermore, a separation between the side reaction of the carbon additive and the desired electrochemical redox reaction can be observed in the charge curves of La2CoO4+d which has been reported to be in favor of controlling the degree of the side reactions taking place.30
Based on the extended cycling experiments on La2NiO4+d and La2CoO4+d, it is reported30,133 that the choice of the cutoff criteria (capacity and potential) can significantly influence the cycling stability of cathodes with Ruddlesden–Popper-type structures. For instance, higher charging cutoff capacities such as 120 or 80 mA h g−1 would significantly deteriorate the cyclic stability of La2NiO4+d (as can be seen in Fig. 17a), while at a lower cutoff capacity of 50 mA h g−1 the cyclic stability becomes much better (∼60 cycles) and a cycle life of more than 220 cycles with a Coulombic efficiency close to 100% is reported for the cutoff capacity of 30 mA h g−1 (see Fig. 17a). A similar dependency on the cutoff criterion of the cycling behavior has also been observed for La2CoO4.16:30,136 the Coulombic efficiency at the first cycle of the La2CoO4.16|Pb + PbF2 cell that was charged up to 65 mA h g−1 is calculated to be almost 50% while it is only ∼18% for the cell charged up to 130 mA h g−1. The discharge capacity decreases to less than 10 mA h g−1 starting from the second cycle for the charge cutoff capacity of 130 mA h g−1, showing the severity of the capacity fading for this cell. On the other hand, the discharge capacity for the cell that was initially charged up to 65 mA h g−1 was still above 15 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles, which is roughly half of the discharge capacity at the first cycle (Fig. 17b). The reason for the stability upon limiting the cutoff criteria can be understood as a result of limited oxidation of carbon facilitating the maintenance of electrically conducting interfaces.133
 Fig. 17  (a) Cycling stability of the La2NiO4.13|Zn + ZnF2 cell at different cutoff capacities;133 (b) the effect of overcharging on cycling stability of a La2CoO4.16|Pb + PbF2 cell. All cells were heated at 170 °C and charged/discharged at a current of 24/−12 μA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 30. 
The effect of the counter electrode (anode material) on the hysteresis potentials have also been found for the La2NiO4+d intercalation-based system.133 In fact, by using anode materials with a lower intrinsic volume change during the redox reactions, less overpotentials would be introduced to the La2NiO4+d system, and therefore the cycling stability of the cell may be improved especially at higher cutoff capacities (Fig. 18a). However, such a strategy does not improve the cycling stability of the La2CoO4.16 cathode material. This inconsistency between the effect of the anode material on La2NiO4+d and La2CoO4+d may arise from a higher internal resistivity of the La2CoO4+d composite material, which might originate from some unknown low-potential side reactions.136
 Fig. 18  The effect of anode material on the overpotential and cycling behavior of La2NiO4.13 by showing (a) the first few cycles of La2NiO4+d against Zn + ZnF2 and Pb + PbF2 anode materials (b) discharge capacities of La2NiO4+d against Zn + ZnF2 and Pb + PbF2 anode materials. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 133. 
Electrochemical cycling of the n = 2 Ruddlesden–Popper-type La1.3Sr1.7Mn2O7 has been performed by Vasala et al.137 in order to reversibly tune the ferromagnetic properties of the compound. For this, La1.3Sr1.7Mn2O7 has been charged up to 0.45 or 0.6 V against Pb + PbF2 corresponding to specific capacities of ∼15 and ∼25 mA g−1 during the charging step and down to −0.3 V during the discharging. Over a span of 10–45 cycles, the electrochemical behavior of the cells is very stable without any significant capacity fading during the cycling. Upon cycling, the compound shows a change of the ferromagnetic behavior from strong (defluorinated state) to weak (fluorinated state) ferromagnetism.
Besides Ruddlesden–Popper type oxides, Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxyfluorides An+1BnO3n+1−xF2x□2−x with x < 2 were also found to be suitable as intercalation-based cathode materials. Such oxyfluorides can be prepared via low-temperature topochemical fluorination reactions of the respective Ruddlesden–Popper type oxide using fluorine-containing polymers such as polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF) as fluorination reagent.35,158–161 The fluorination takes place via a coupled substitution and intercalation process, in which for each substituted oxide ion, two fluoride ions are intercalated under the maintenance of the oxidation state. When used as active cathode materials for FIBs (the oxyfluoride represents the discharged state), additional fluoride ions are intercalated into these oxyfluorides upon charging. Therefore, anion vacancies have to be present after the topochemical fluorination in order to enable oxidative fluorination of these compounds during the electrochemical fluorination. This is, for example, given for non-oxidatively fluorinated A2BO3F2□, derived from an n = 1 Ruddlesden–Popper type oxide A2BO4.
The topochemical fluorination of La2NiO4+d using PVDF leads to the formation of La2NiO3F2□.162 In this compound, only half of the interstitial anion sites are occupied. Thus, additional fluoride intercalation of up to one ion per formula unit is possible, leading to the formation of La2NiO3F3 within the charged cathode composite.35 As for the cycling of cells La2NiO4+d|Zn + ZnF2, the choice of the cutoff capacity has a significant influence on the cycling stabilities. For cells La2NiO3F2|Pb + PbF2, best performances are found when using a cutoff capacity of 30 mA h g−1 (Fig. 19). For these cells, comparatively stable cycling can be observed over at least 50 cycles. However, the Coulombic efficiency is considerably reduced compared to the cells La2NiO4+d|Zn + ZnF2 of the pure oxide compound, even though a steady increase of the efficiency occurs with increasing cycling numbers. In contrast to the high cycling stabilities of the cells La2NiO4+d|Zn + ZnF2, cycling of La2NiO3F2 against Zn + ZnF2 leads to an early onset of capacity fading. Further, it was found that apart from the importance of this synthesis route for new battery technologies, such routes can play a vital role for the synthesis of metastable oxyfluoride: a chemical preparation of La2NiO3F3via common topochemical reaction approaches using F2 gas has not been successful.35,135 For the electrochemical route, the controllability is obtained by adjusting the potential, whereas the chemical potential of chemical reactants cannot be altered.
 Fig. 19  (a) Cycling curves of a cell La2NiO3F2 against Pb + PbF2. The cell was cycled between a charging cutoff capacity of 30 mA h g−1 and a discharging cutoff potential of 0 V, (b) Coulombic efficiencies of cells La2NiO3F2 against Pb + PbF2 and La2NiO3F2 against Zn + ZnF2 charged to different cutoff capacities. The cells were heated to 170 °C, a current of ∼2.5 mA g−1 (∼C/25 rate) was applied. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society. 
The one-dimensional tunnel structure of Schafarzikite-type compounds with a general composition of MSb2O4 (ref. 163) has recently attracted some attentions for the application of intercalation-based electrodes for FIBs.138,164 Schafarzikite type compounds possess a tetragonal symmetry (space group P42/mbc), and the structure can be understood as being built up of chains of edge-linked MO6 octahedra running along the [0 0 1] direction; the chains are connected via trigonal pyramidal SbO3 units (Fig. 20). Recent studies have shown that it is possible to fluorinate variants of this material, which contain Fe2+ on the M site, via topochemical reactions.165 This material can thus be of interest for making electrode materials for FIBs because of the mechanism for the inclusion of excess fluoride ions within the channel of the structure (Fig. 20). Therefore, it can be considered to be a 1D intercalation material, like olivine type materials for lithium-ion batteries.166 This is in contrast to the layered ordering of intercalated fluoride ions within Ruddlesden–Popper-type compounds that has been discussed in the previous sections, which are 2D intercalation materials.
 Fig. 20  Schematic presentation of the non-fluorinated MSb2O4 (left) and fluorinated MSb2O4Fy (right) Schafarzikite-type structure. Sb orange, M (Fe, Co) blue, O red, F (partially occupied to ∼15%) green. Reproduced from ref. 138 (open source publication). 
Nowroozi et al. reported138 on the successful electrochemical fluorination/de-fluorination of Schafarzikite-type compounds (Co/Mn)0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4 at 170 °C. Recently, Zaheer et al. reported164 on room temperature topochemical fluorination and defluorination of FeSb2O4 by stirring the Schafarzikite-type and XeF2 within an acetonitrile solution showing the principle of fluoride ion insertion/removal in Schafarzikite-type structures at room temperature. Though the Schafarzikite compounds138 showed poor cycling performance in FIBs using solid electrolytes, this might highlight the potential of these materials to be used in a liquid electrolyte based battery systems at ambient conditions.
Anion-deficient perovskite-type compounds such as BaFeO2.5 (ref. 139) and SrFeO2 (ref. 28) have also been investigated as potential intercalation-based cathode materials for FIBs. It is reported that SrFeO2 has insufficient chemical stability towards the other components used in the electrode composite at the applied experimental conditions (T = 170 °C) and the active cathode material undergoes an oxidation reaction resulting in the formation of a compound with high similarity to SrFeO2F. It is not clear how this oxidation takes place and it seems that SrFeO2 can only be stabilized under highly reductive conditions (such as in the presence of excess of CaH2 used during its synthesis).167
In another effort by Clemens et al.,139 BaFeO2.5 has been investigated against Ce/CeF3 or Mg/MgF2 (conversion-based anode) materials using La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 electrolyte (at 150 °C). The cell has been charged up to 4.0 V (vs. CeF3), corresponding to ∼80 mA h g−1, which is slightly larger than the theoretical capacity of BaFeO2.5/BaFeO2.5F0.5 (57.5 mA h g−1). This was claimed to be arising from side reactions. Diffraction experiments revealed that upon the electrochemical fluorination (charging), a decrease in the cell volume per BaFeX3−y unit, down to the range where oxidatively fluorinated compounds are expected, could be observed together with a symmetry change from a vacancy ordered modification to a cubic perovskite. These structural changes upon electrochemical fluorination are in agreement with what was found on fluorinating BaFeO2.5via chemical fluorination using F2 gas. Although the chemical fluorination was successful, only negligible discharge capacities of around 6 mA h g−1 could be obtained upon discharging the cell against CeF3.28

Fig. 21 sums up the discharge profiles (after the first charging cycle) of some intercalation-based cathodes that have been discussed in this chapter. The discharge capacity for Ruddlesden–Popper-type La2NiO4+d appeared to be the highest among all other cathodes: The highest stable discharge capacity that has been so far obtained for an intercalation-based cathode material for FIB was measured to be about 70 mA h g−1 (accompanied by a high average discharge potential of ∼1.2 V) for La2NiO4+d against a Zn + ZnF2 anode composite material. The discharge capacity for La2CoO4+d and LaSrMnO4 cathode materials was found to be in a similar range, around 30 mA h g−1 (however, LaSrMnO4 provides a higher potential as compared to La2CoO4+d), while LaSr(Co/Fe)O4 cathode materials showed only a poor performance with respect to their discharge capacity (Fig. 21). Such a poor performance of the LaSr(Co/Fe)O4 cathodes was indicated28 to result from a structural instability of the active cathode material upon electrochemical fluorination, though these materials might require further elaboration. The lowest discharge capacity is observed for the Schafarzikite-type structure (Co0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4) around 5 mA h g−1, which is in the same capacity range as that of the anion-deficient perovskite structure of BaFeO2.5. This comparison reveals the great potential of the Ruddlesden–Popper-type compounds (especially La2MO4+d) as promising intercalation-based cathode materials for FIBs. Furthermore, a high degree of structural reversibility has been observed over a routine discharging process for La2NiO4.13 and La2CoO4.16: after a discharge step, there is no sign of the high fluorine content phase with an extended c-parameter (up to ∼15.2 Å) and the initial La2MO4+d structure could be recovered.30,133
 Fig. 21  Discharge profiles of some of the so far proposed intercalation-based cathode materials for FIBs. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 28. 
6.5 Intercalation-based anode materials
So far, only a few reports about intercalation-based anode materials for FIBs exist. A suitable active anode material should be a strong reductant in its charged (defluorinated) state, i.e., the redox-active cation should have an unusually low oxidation state. Thus, the involved redox couple should have a low potential against Li|LiF. As has been described in the previous section, compounds with Ruddlesden–Popper-type structure offer great potential for their use as intercalation-based active cathode materials since the structure shows flexibility towards reversible oxidative intercalation of fluoride ions upon charging and discharging of FIBs. The topochemical modification of Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxides An+1BnO3n+1via non-oxidative fluorination reactions, leading to the formation of oxyfluorides An+1BnO3n+1−xF2x□2−x with x < 2 offers possibilities for the development of intercalation-based anode materials.35 Such oxyfluorides represent the discharged states of potential anode materials, while electrochemical charging leads to reductive defluorination reactions. Apart from Ruddlesen–Popper-type compounds, layered electride materials such as Ca2N or Y2C and their transformation to the fluorinated states Ca2NF or Y2CF were recently studied by Hartman et al.,168 indicating that these materials could work as high-energy anode materials, if stability towards other battery components can be achieved.
A synthesis process for the chemical low-temperature preparation of the charged states of Ruddlesden–Popper-type anode materials has been recently introduced by Wissel et al.169 This strongly reductive process allows for an in-depth structure and property analysis of the anode materials in their charged states. It is based on a reaction between the Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxyfluoride and sodium hydride, resulting in selective extraction of fluoride ions from the oxyfluoride. So far, the chemical defluorination behavior of n = 1 Sr2TiO3F2, n = 2 Sr3Ti2O5F4 and n = 1 La2NiO3F2 has been investigated.35,169–171 This defluorination reaction is favoured by the high lattice energy of NaF, which helps to prepare anode materials in the charged state down to a potential of < ∼1 V against Li/LiF.
The feasibility of topochemical modifications of these Ruddlesden–Popper-type oxyfluorides, when used as active anode materials, via electrochemical defluorination reactions in FIBs have also been investigated.35,135 A significant redox-activity of the active materials has been only found for the Ni-based compound. Electrochemical charging of cells with a La2NiO3F2-containing anode and a Pb + PbF2-based cathode resulted in the formation of a Ni+-containing phase with reduced monoclinic symmetry (space group C12/c1) and an approximate composition of La2NiO3F1.9 (i.e., containing 10% of monovalent Ni species). Changes in the crystal structures due to the successful deintercalation of fluoride ions can be related to the chemically formed reduced phases and are also found for electrochemical reactions (Fig. 22).
 Fig. 22  Comparison of selected angular ranges of XRD patterns of chemically (top) and electrochemically (middle) defluorinated La2NiO3F2−x. The chemical defluorination was obtained via a hydride-based reduction, the electrochemical defluorination within a FIBs, in which an anode material containing La2NiO3F2 was used. In addition, an XRD pattern of the anode composite before electrochemical treatment (bottom) is given, highlighting the change in the reflection patterns of the reduced La2NiO3F2−x and the precursor phase La2NiO3F2. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society. 
A typical charging curve of a cell of Pb + PbF2 against La2NiO3F2 is given in Fig. 23a. A comparison between the theoretical capacity related to the extraction of one fluoride ion from La2NiO3F2 to the actually observed capacities illustrates that substantial side reactions are taking place in parallel to the reduction of La2NiO3F2 (see also Section 6.6) and can be assigned to changes in the carbon matrix. Moreover, large overpotentials and low Coulombic efficiencies have been found (Fig. 23b), resulting in negligible reversible capacities on discharging to 0 V. Nevertheless, by discharging to negative potentials, full reversibility of the structural changes has been reported. This is similar to what is reported for LaSrMnO4 in Section 6.4.
 Fig. 23  (a) Charging curve of a cell Pb + PbF2 against La2NiO3F2, (b) charging and discharging curves of a cell Pb + PbF2 against La2NiO3F2. The cell was charged to 90 mA h g−1 prior to the discharging. The cells were heated to 170 °C, a current of ∼2.5 mAg−1 (∼C/25 rate) was applied. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society. 
Overall, a closer examination of the origin and influence of the side reactions, which seem to play a crucial role in the defluorination process, has been found to be very important. This has also become obvious with regards to the unsuccessful electrochemical reduction of the Ti-based compounds89 (see also Section 6.6).
6.6 The issue of carbon side reactions for the application of electrode materials
Due to the low electronic conductivity, usually the active electrode materials are mixed with carbon black/carbon nanotubes.8,30,95,133,136,138,139 The possibility of the occurrence of the carbon side reaction has been reported by different research groups in several studies.48,95,139 Dambournet et al.27 carried out investigations on possible interactions of carbonaceous additives (as electronic conductor) with the fluoride conducting electrolyte. After the ball milling of the LBF electrolyte and carbon, no indication of the formation of insulating graphite fluorite (CFx) could be determined by NMR. However, according to impedance measurements, the conductivity of the mixed LBF-C composite (produced by ball milling) is lower by one order of magnitude (5 × 10−8 S cm−1 at 30 °C) as compared to milled La0.95Ba0.1F2.95 (5.4 × 10−7 S cm−1 at 30 °C). The authors have further investigated the presence of a reaction of carbon with the LBF electrolyte to yield CFx by conducting cyclic voltammetry experiments on Li|LBF|LBF-C cells. They showed a rapid increase in the measured current at a potential range between 4.2–4.8 V. The standard potential of the electrochemical fluorination reaction of carbon (according to: 1/3 LaF3 + C → CF + 1/3 La) had been calculated to be 4.19 V which is very close to the contribution to the current behaviour observed in the CV measurements of the LBF-C cell, suggesting that carbon probably undergoes electrochemical fluorination to form CFx.
It was also shown28 that cyclic voltammograms of a carbon electrode (as the positive electrode) feature an irreversible anodic peak (as can be seen in Fig. 24a), which has been attributed to the irreversible oxidation (fluorination; e.g., formation of CFx) of the carbon.28 Such irreversible anodic peaks can also be observed in the cyclic voltammograms of the La2NiO4.13 cells. However, in the latter case the peak slightly shifted towards the lower potential range (Fig. 24a), which has been explained by a catalytic effect of the active cathode material towards the carbon side reaction.133 Interestingly, reversible cathodic peaks corresponding to the de-fluorination of La2NiO4.13Fx in the cathode composite material can only be observed upon limiting the cycling voltage range below the range for the occurrence of the irreversible anodic peaks (Fig. 24b), suggesting that oxidation reactions of C within the cathode composite result in electrochemical irreversibility of the cell.133 Other characterization methods also support the oxidation of carbon during the charging step within the La2MO4+d systems. For instance, XPS measurements confirm an increase in the oxidation state of carbon within the La2NiO4+d systems during the charge step. Further, electrochemical impedance measurements show a rapid change in the impedance behavior of the La2NiO4+d cells from a Warburg-type behavior (indicative for electrochemical reactions) to a capacitive behavior, which is indicative for a blocking effect. This rapid change occurs within the region in which the irreversible cathodic reactions are seen within the cyclic voltammograms of La2NiO4+d cathode material. Moreover, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements reveal a sharp increase in resistivity of the cells after ∼60 mA h g−1 in the La2CoO4+d systems, which is explained as a significant deterioration in the conductivity of the cell due to carbon oxidation.30,136
 Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammograms of (a) carbon electrode as compared to La2NiO4+d cathode material (Pb + PbF2 as counter electrode); (b) La2NiO4+d cathode material vs. Zn + ZnF2 in two different potential range of 0–2 V and 0–3.5 V. Figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 28. 
On the anode side, there has also been an indication for the occurrence of side reactions in the form of a carbon reduction. The detailed nature of this reaction is yet to be understood and could involve the release of surface-adsorbed oxygen or a reaction of carbon with La or Ba of the electrolyte LBF (according to C + x LaF3 → CLax + 3F−).35 Cyclic voltammetry measurements showed that these irreversible side reactions take place largely in parallel with the desired reactions during the charging of the La2NiO3F2-based anode composites. XPS measurement revealed, furthermore, that the carbon additive is reduced during this process. The carbon reduction and the associated destruction of the electronically conductive matrix within the electrode material also provides an explanation of why Sr2TiO3F2 and Sr3Ti2O5F4 could not be defluorinated electrochemically when used as anode material. Due to the low potential of Ti3+|Ti4+, the carbon reduction sets in at much higher potentials compared to the desired reduction of the Ti-based compound. This impairs a reduction of the Ti-based compounds.
While the reaction of carbon within the FIB cells is often considered to be a side reaction27,30,133 affecting the conductivity of the cell, fluorine-intercalated graphite has recently been proposed172 as a cathode material (positive electrode) for FIBs. In this study, the active cathode material of CxF has been made in a charged state by the reaction of graphite powder and fluorine gas in anhydrous HF at room temperature to form C2.8F. The full cell was built up using PbSnF4 as the electrolyte and a Pb plate as the anode material. To increase the discharge capacity, the active cathode material was mixed with CuF2. The highest discharge capacity of 230 mA h g−1 with a voltage plateau of 0.6–0.55 V is reported for the cathode composite with a CuF2 weight fraction of 80%. The obtained capacity lies around half of the theoretical capacity of C2.8F (521 mA h g−1). However, since the active carbon cathode is mixed with CuF2, it is not clear if all the obtained capacity is arising from the defluorination of carbon or a contribution of the CuF2 to the Cu conversion-type reaction exists, which could also be responsible for some fraction of the discharge capacity.
7 Conclusions and future challenges
In this review, the improvements of FIBs from the early 1970s until today have been discussed with respect to the development of the electrolytes as well as cathode and anode materials.
In contrast to LIBs, the first cells suggested for FIBs relied on the use of solid fluoride ion conductors due to the difficulty of transporting a “naked” fluoride ion in liquid conditions. The respective doped binary fluorides are easy to make and commercially available but have limited conductivities at room temperature and thus require heating to ∼150 °C or above in order to be charged/discharged with reasonable C-rates. Therefore, in the future, a critical focus must be based on the development of RT-FIB systems with either solid or liquid electrolytes, which could make the technology a real alternative to the current commercial batteries, especially for localized storage applications.
In particular, since less attention has been paid to develop FIBs based on liquid electrolytes, their further elaboration and determination of compatibility with various electrode materials can play an important future role in making efficient cells. In this subfield, it will be important to stabilize a weakly coordinated fluoride species, while maintaining high compatibility towards the electrode materials as well as additives in the cell. Especially for carbon-based additives, their interaction with liquids is known to be complex, and needs to be studied in detail for the different materials to be developed, conversion- and intercalation-based systems, thus providing a large exploitation space. Further, safety aspects have not been discussed for liquid electrolytes to any extent, and it is not clear if dendritic growth of the electrode materials (which could in principle account for both, cathode and anode, if conversion-based systems are being used) can occur for specific elements and/or at increased C-rates. In addition, we would like to acknowledge that the use of liquid electrolytes could result in the preparation of new oxyfluoride materials with exciting magnetic or electronic properties via topochemical methods; since such oxyfluorides are metastable most frequently, reduction of synthesis temperature might be achievable within such battery cells.
A big advantage of solid ion conductors lies in a maximal transport number for a certain ionic species approaching a value of t ∼1, which can facilitate high C-rates. For LIBs, it is considered that this can prevent certain polarization issues arising at high current densities,22 and it is valid to assume similar behavior for FIBs. However, due to the intrinsically lower ionic conductivity of FIBs, the breakthrough of solid ion conductors can be measured primarily by the challenges of operating temperature and cell preparation before the consideration of high-performance issues should take place. The operating temperature can, in principle, be matched by few materials containing ns2 cations (PbSnF4 has the highest conductivity of around 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature until present), which show a lower electrochemical stability window. Again, this gives some similarity to solid lithium-ion conductors, such as thiophosphate based compounds, which have high conductivities, but low electrochemical stability.173 Potentially, such instabilities could be circumvented in future by applying coating to electrode materials or using interlayer approaches. Clearly, the design strategies cannot be adopted one by one, but a certain similarity might also account here. Stabilization of the cathode side towards the solid electrolyte might be easier to be achieved, since known solid ion conductors such as La0.9Ba0.1F2.9, which would have sufficient conductivity to be applied as a coating, have high stability towards oxidizing reactions. In contrast, metals with low electronegativity such as Mg or Ce used on the anode side will be more difficult to be stabilized by coating since they perform conversion reactions with large volume changes and have similar redox potentials than La0.9Ba0.1F2.9, which might imply a certain cross-reactivity. Lower redox potentials and thus higher stability towards anode materials would be expected for alkaline fluorides AF (A = Li, Na, K) as a coating, but these materials are bad fluoride ion conductors and would rather be expected to be conductive for the A+ cations at least partially. Thus, explorative work is required in order to find strategies to stabilize such coatings against electropositive metals while avoiding blocking of transport pathways to the highest extent possible. Regardless of the work that has to be done in the future, the authors of this review assume that solid electrolytes will still be of importance for the development of other cell components such as electrode materials within the upcoming years in any case. Thus, it can be expected that many reports will be based on the development of solid-state FIB concepts. In this context, also novel solid conductors should be explored, e.g., by using weakly charged cage molecules, such as boranes, as cationic counterparts to fluoride ions, a concept which also proved successful for sodium ion conductors.174
Cell preparation is another important aspect of FIBs. Fluorides have in general lower melting temperatures than oxide materials and thus can show easier thermal handling in order to minimize grain boundary resistances. Other methods such as cold sintering or spark plasma sintering might bring into play new aspects for the preparation of ceramic conductors, which have been basically unexplored. Further, though some reports have considered the use of thin films, the exploration space provided in this field is large, with aspects such as the exploration of multilayers (where interlayers could act as protective coatings), interface studies, thin-film batteries, strain engineering, etc., deserving future focus. Especially for the use of 1D or 2D intercalation-based materials, the use of epitaxially grown materials or the introduction of strong texturing into polycrystalline films could facilitate the use of larger C-rates, required for bringing the method closer to application.
Another point to be considered for future applications lies in the fact that rare earth fluoride conductors present challenges in terms of weight and material costs (for example, La, Ce, Sr). These materials neither possess a large availability for large scale applications nor a strong interest for applications such as electromobility. Though alkaline earth or lanthanide fluorides possess good stability against humidity and do not release HF easily (e.g., LaF3 can be precipitated from aqueous solutions), certain alkali metal fluorides are more sensitive to humidity and acidic conditions especially, and can release corrosive HF gas; therefore, replacement with lower weight cations might come at the cost of safety and must be assessed critically. Further, elements such as Pb and Sb imply certain environmental concerns, and would be desirable to be replaced or limited in use for real applications.
The authors also would like to emphasize that solid-state batteries are in general less understood than the liquid electrolyte-based counterparts and that research performed in this context can lead to co-operative effects in creating a deeper understanding of the matter for LIBs.
Recent developments of the electrode materials (both cathodes and anodes) for FIBs were discussed in the context of intercalation and conversion mechanisms. It is shown that conversion-based systems mainly provide large capacities, though, they often suffer from poor cycling stability. Therefore, the highest cycle life has been so far observed for intercalation-based cathode materials with Ruddlesden–Popper-type structure. It is worth mentioning that to overcome intrinsic problems with conversion-based electrode materials, several strategies have been derived for lithium-ion batteries, which might be conceptually adaptable to improve conversion-based electrodes for FIBs within future research directions. These strategies comprise the preparation of cells in thin electrode configurations,1 encapsulation of the electrode material in a hollow structure,175,176 or the infiltration of materials into porous carbon hosts.177 Nevertheless, considering the limitations of the conversion-based electrode materials, even the state of the art of the LIBs still mainly relies on intercalation-based electrode materials. Thus, the solution to the problem of obtaining functional intercalation-based materials might not necessarily be fully chemistry-related, but also include materials science and engineering aspects, such as the application of pressure during cycling, or the exploration of suitable binders even for all solid state cells. In contrast, a chemical approach for improving conversion materials might be in finding suitable combination of various fluorides within multinary materials, e.g., within high-entropy fluorides (high-entropy oxides were recently found to show improved reversibility as conversion-based electrodes for LIBs178). Therefore, by such further improvement and exploration of the conversion-based electrode materials, they may enter into the market of reversible batteries, especially due to their high energy capacity required for large scale energy storage,40 in case the problem of long-term operation can be reasonably addressed.
With respect to intercalation-based systems, there is still a wide space for exploration, especially for anode materials, where the concept of oxide for fluoride substitution and subsequent reductive fluoride extraction could be adopted to metal cations such as Sn4+, In3+, Ru6+, etc. to stabilize them in more reductive, lower oxidation states, or by exploring electrides as suggested recently.168 However, also the field of layered oxides for lithium-ion batteries was not pushed forwards by using other materials, but by developing doped (e.g., redox-inert cations such as Al3+) or substituted/multinary (e.g., Co for Ni and Mn) isostructural compounds, which gave a boost of stability as well as intrinsic conductivity at the same time, and is yet to be explored for FIBs. For intercalation materials, another issue lies in the replacement of heavy alkaline earths or lanthanides, such as Sr, Ba, or La by lower weight and higher abundant cations such as Ca or Sc for Ruddlesden–Popper based systems, which would help to increase the specific capacity strongly, since the redox-inert cations contribute to the weight of the active material upto ∼75%. In addition, topochemical reactions based on anions are not limited to Ruddlesden–Popper type compounds, but can also occur for other perovskite related materials, which use would decrease the amount of redox-inert cations per redox-active cation.179 Alternatively, a lighter matrix could also be achieved by using fluoride in combination with polyanions such as phosphate or sulphate, by which the stabilization of the host matrix might occur via the polyanion instead of the alkaline/rare earth metals. In this respect, one must succeed in adopting topochemical fluorination routes away from perovskite-related systems159 to other structural settings. In the other hand, the issues related to the carbon side reaction need to be further investigated, and techniques to mitigate the negative effect of carbon degradation should be developed; this can imply the use of different kinds of carbon materials (e.g., multi-wall carbon nanotubes), or suitable nanostructures of conductive redox-stable oxides. In this context, materials engineering can be highly important, where contact points between the different cell components might be optimized by using nano-rod morphologies, particle coating strategies and core–shell structures, or by using thin films.
Although commercial application of FIBs lies in the far future, it is worth to think on how the materials discussed here could be exploited for large-scale fabrication processes. For oxide materials used as cathode materials for LIBs in combination with liquid electrolytes, various procedures exist for the preparation of electrode coatings, which require the formation of slurries as starting point. Such slurries are made from a dispersant, binder, conductive additive and the active material itself. For intercalation-based oxide materials for FIBs, such procedures might be easily transferable; in contrast, preparation strategies might have to change drastically when moving to conversion based-materials, e.g., metal fluorides, which can be expected to have different interactions with dispersants, and will thus require solution strategies of material engineers. On the other hand, for fully conversion-based batteries, fabrication processes can be expected to be similar, potentially simplifying the overall process.
Though many improvements were made over the last years, FIBs are still at an early stage of development; their performance is not yet close to the state-of-the-art LIBs, but they can approach other alternative battery technologies such as chloride, magnesium or aluminum ion batteries. For certain applications, the development of room temperature solid-state and liquid electrolytes is an obligation in order to attract more interest in FIBs. However, high-temperature batteries might still fill a niche for certain applications,180 might not be as critical considering electromobility (where the so-called ZEBRA battery has been used already181), and might be unproblematic for large scale energy storage, for which the energy losses can be minimized using well-engineered thermal insulation.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
O. Clemens, K. Wissel and A. Nowroozi acknowledge funding from the German Research Foundation within CL551/2-1.
References
N. Nitta, F. Wu, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 252–264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sawicki and L. L. Shaw, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 53129–53154 RSC .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. Gu, X. Li, Z. Nie, P. Zuo, G. Li, T. Liu, J. Xiao, Y. Cheng, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 255–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Melemed, A. Khurram and B. M. Gallant, Batteries Supercaps, 2020, 3, 570–580 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiao, C. Wang, J. Tu, D. Tian and S. Jiao, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 2331–2334 RSC .
X. Zhao, S. Ren, M. Bruns and M. Fichtner, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 706–711 CrossRef CAS .
M. Anji Reddy and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17059–17062 RSC .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2005, Internet Version 2005 edn Search PubMed .
List of Occurrences, http://www.mindat.org/min-1576.html, accessed 09.07.2019, 2019.
F. Gschwind, H. Euchner and G. Rodriguez-Garcia, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2017, 2017, 2784–2799 CrossRef CAS .
W. Baukal, Electrochim. Acta, 1974, 19, 687–694 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and R. C. Miles, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kennedy and J. C. Hunter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 10–14 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoonman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1772–1775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Danto, G. Poujade, J. D. Pistré, C. Lucat and J. Salardenne, Thin Solid Films, 1978, 55, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoonman, K. E. D. Wapenaar, G. Oversluizen and G. J. Dirksen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 709–713 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoonman and A. Wolfert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1522–1523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schoonman and A. Wolfert, Solid State Ionics, 1981, 3–4, 373–379 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
R. Murugan, V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7778–7781 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Lotsch and J. Maier, J. Electroceram., 2017, 38, 128–141 CrossRef .
A. Hayashi, K. Noi, A. Sakuda and M. Tatsumisago, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 856 CrossRef .
C. Rongeat, M. A. Reddy, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20861–20872 RSC .
H. Konishi, A. C. Kucuk, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 2019, 839, 173–176 CrossRef CAS .
A. Düvel, P. Heitjans, P. Fedorov, G. Scholz, G. Cibin, A. V. Chadwick, D. M. Pickup, S. Ramos, L. W. L. Sayle, E. K. L. Sayle, T. X. T. Sayle and D. C. Sayle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 5842–5848 CrossRef .
A. Grenier, A. G. Porras-Gutierrez, M. Body, C. Legein, F. Chrétien, E. Raymundo-Piñero, M. Dollé, H. Groult and D. Dambournet, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24962–24970 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Nowroozi, PhD, Technische Universität Darmstadt,  2020 DOI:10.25534/tuprints-00011523 .

          L. Zhang, PhD, Helmholtz Institute Ulm,  2016 DOI:10.18725/OPARU-4272 .
M. A. Nowroozi, S. Ivlev, J. Rohrer and O. Clemens, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4658–4669 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. A. Reddy and M. Fichtner, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2018, 22, 997–1006 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grenier, A. G. Porras Gutierrez, H. Groult and D. Dambournet, J. Fluorine Chem., 2016, 191, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gschwind, Z. Zao-Karger and M. Fichtner, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1214–1218 RSC .
V. K. Davis, C. M. Bates, K. Omichi, B. M. Savoie, N. Momcilovic, Q. Xu, W. J. Wolf, M. A. Webb, K. J. Billings, N. H. Chou, S. Alayoglu, R. K. McKenney, I. M. Darolles, N. G. Nair, A. Hightower, D. Rosenberg, M. Ahmed, C. J. Brooks, T. F. Miller 3rd, R. H. Grubbs and S. C. Jones, Science, 2018, 362, 1144–1148 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Wissel, PhD, Technische Universität Darmstadt,  2020 DOI:10.25534/tuprints-00013383 .
L. Zhang, M. Anji Reddy and M. Fichtner, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 272, 39–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Rongeat, M. A. Reddy, R. Witter and M. Fichtner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2103–2110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Breuer, M. Gombotz, V. Pregartner, I. Hanzu and M. Wilkening, Energy Storage Materials, 2019, 16, 481–490 CrossRef .
B. P. Sobolev, A. M. Golubev and P. Herrero, Crystallogr. Rep., 2003, 48, 141–161 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gschwind, G. Rodriguez-Garcia, D. J. S. Sandbeck, A. Gross, M. Weil, M. Fichtner and N. Hörmann, J. Fluorine Chem., 2016, 182, 76–90 CrossRef CAS .
K. Motohashi, T. Nakamura, Y. Kimura, Y. Uchimoto and K. Amezawa, Solid State Ionics, 2019, 338, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wilkening, A. Düvel, F. Preishuber-Pflügl, K. da Silva, S. Breuer, V. Šepelák and P. Heitjans, Z. Kristallogr. - Cryst. Mater., 2017, 232 Search PubMed .
H. Bhatia, D. T. Thieu, A. H. Pohl, V. S. K. Chakravadhanula, M. H. Fawey, C. Kubel and M. Fichtner, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23707–23715 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chable, A. G. Martin, A. Bourdin, M. Body, C. Legein, A. Jouanneaux, M. P. Crosnier-Lopez, C. Galven, B. Dieudonné, M. Leblanc, A. Demourgues and V. Maisonneuve, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 692, 980–988 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roos, F. C. M. v. d. Pol, R. Keim and J. Schoonman, Solid State Ionics, 1984, 13, 91–203 Search PubMed .
J. Chable, B. Dieudonne, M. Body, C. Legein, M. P. Crosnier-Lopez, C. Galven, F. Mauvy, E. Durand, S. Fourcade, D. Sheptyakov, M. Leblanc, V. Maisonneuve and A. Demourgues, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 19625–19635 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. Anji Reddy, P. Gao and M. Fichtner, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 684, 733–738 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dieudonné, J. Chable, M. Body, C. Legein, E. Durand, F. Mauvy, S. Fourcade, M. Leblanc, V. Maisonneuve and A. Demourgues, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 3761–3769 RSC .
B. Dieudonné, J. Chable, F. Mauvy, S. Fourcade, E. Durand, E. Lebraud, M. Leblanc, C. Legein, M. Body, V. Maisonneuve and A. Demourgues, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 25170–25179 CrossRef .
P. Molaiyan and R. Witter, Mater. Lett., 2019, 244, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ruprecht, M. Wilkening, S. Steuernagel and P. Heitjans, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 5412–5416 RSC .
M. Heise, G. Scholz, A. Düvel, P. Heitjans and E. Kemnitz, Solid State Sci., 2016, 60, 65–74 CrossRef CAS .
N. I. Sorokin, E. A. Krivandina, Z. I. Zhmurova, B. P. Sobolev, M. V. Fominykh and V. V. Fistul’, Phys. Solid State, 1999, 41, 573–575 CrossRef CAS .
R. Witter, M. Roming, C. Feldmann and A. S. Ulrich, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 390, 250–257 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Sobolev, I. A. Sviridov, V. I. Fadeeva, S. N. Sul’yanov, N. I. Sorokin, Z. I. Zhmurova, P. Herrero, A. Landa-Canovas and R. M. Rojas, Crystallogr. Rep., 2005, 50, 478–485 CrossRef CAS .
F. Preishuber-Pflugl, P. Bottke, V. Pregartner, B. Bitschnau and M. Wilkening, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 9580–9590 RSC .
A. Düvel, J. Bednarcik, V. Šepelák and P. Heitjans, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7117–7129 CrossRef .
C. Rongeat, M. A. Reddy, R. Witter and M. Fichtner, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4943–4950 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaudhuri, F. Wang and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11746–11757 CrossRef CAS .
F. Preishuber-Pflügl, V. Epp, S. Nakhal, M. Lerch and M. Wilkening, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2015, 12, 10–14 CrossRef .
N. I. Sorokin, Inorg. Mater., 2004, 40, 989–997 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravindran, R. Vidya, A. Kjekshus, H. Fjellvåg and O. Eriksson, Phys. Rev. B, 2006, 74, 224412 CrossRef .
O. Clemens, R. Kruk, E. A. Patterson, C. Loho, C. Reitz, A. J. Wright, K. S. Knight, H. Hahn and P. R. Slater, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 12572–12583 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ahmad, Y. Yamane and K. Yamada, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 074106 CrossRef .
I. Mohammad, R. Witter, M. Fichtner and M. A. Reddy, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4766–4775 CrossRef CAS .

          I. Mohammad, PhD, Tallinn University Of Technology,  2019 DOI:10.23658/TALTECH.27/2019 .
I. Mohammad, R. Witter, M. Fichtner and M. A. Reddy, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 1553–1562 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mohammad, J. Chable, R. Witter, M. Fichtner and M. A. Reddy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 17249–17256 CrossRef CAS .
E. Murray, D. F. Brougham, J. Stankovic and I. Abrahams, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5672–5678 CrossRef CAS .
V. Y. Kavun, A. I. Ryabov, I. A. Telin, A. B. Podgorbunskii, S. L. Sinebryukhov, S. V. Gnedenkov and V. K. Goncharuk, J. Struct. Chem., 2012, 53, 290–294 CrossRef CAS .
M. Murakami, Y. Morita and M. Mizuno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2627–2634 CrossRef CAS .
V. Trnovcová, P. P. Fedorov and I. Furár, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2009, 45, 630–639 CrossRef .
M. Heise, G. Scholz, A. Düvel, P. Heitjans and E. Kemnitz, Solid State Sci., 2018, 77, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Popov, A. A. Sidorov, E. A. Kul’chenkov, A. M. Anishchenko, I. C. Avetissov, N. I. Sorokin and P. P. Fedorov, Ionics, 2017, 23, 233–239 CrossRef CAS .
V. Trnovcova, P. P. Fedorov, Buchinskaya, II, V. Smatko and F. Hanic, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 119, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
P. Molaiyan and R. Witter, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 845, 154–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Murakami, Y. Morita, M. Yonemura, K. Shimoda, M. Mori, Y. Koyama, T. Kawaguchi, K. Fukuda, Y. Ishikawa, T. Kamiyama, Y. Uchimoto and Z. Ogumi, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 7704–7710 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Melemed and B. M. Gallant, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167 Search PubMed .
Y. Saito and J. Maier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 3078–3083 CrossRef CAS .
P. Molaiyan and R. Witter, Mater. Des. Process. Commun., 2019, 1, e44 CAS .
S. Breuer and M. Wilkening, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 4105–4117 RSC .
A. M. Ibraheem, M. A. H. Khalafalla and M. H. Eisa, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2017, 90, 42 CrossRef .
P. Jain, S. Kim, R. E. Youngman and S. Sen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1126–1129 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Molaiyan, PhD, Tallinn University Of Technology,  2020 DOI:10.23658/taltech.4/2020 .

          N. I. S. B. P. Sobolev and N. B. Bolotina, in Photonic and Electronic Properties of Fluoride Materials, ed. K. P. Alain Tressaud, Elsevier, 1st edn,  2016, pp. 465–491,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-801639-8.00021-0 .
G. Scholz, I. Dörfel, D. Heidemann, M. Feist and R. Stösser, J. Solid State Chem., 2006, 179, 1119–1128 CrossRef CAS .
V. Trnovcová, P. P. Fedorov and I. Furár, J. Rare Earths, 2008, 26, 225–232 CrossRef .
G. George, J. I. Hayes, C. N. Collins, J. E. Davis, L. Yu, Y. Lin, J. Wen, D. Ila and Z. Luo, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 857, 157591 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Patro, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 2219–2232 CrossRef CAS .
G. Scholz, K. Meyer, A. Duvel, P. Heitjans and E. Kemnitz, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2013, 639, 960–966 CrossRef CAS .
G. Scholz, S. Breitfeld, T. Krahl, A. Düvel, P. Heitjans and E. Kemnitz, Solid State Sci., 2015, 50, 32–41 CrossRef CAS .
A. Duvel, M. Wilkening, R. Uecker, S. Wegner, V. Sepelak and P. Heitjans, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11251–11262 RSC .
A. Duvel, L. M. Morgan, G. Cibin, D. Pickup, A. V. Chadwick, P. Heitjans and D. C. Sayle, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 5121–5124 CrossRef CAS .
C. Suryanarayana, Research, 2019, 2019, 4219812 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nowroozi, K. Wissel, J. Rohrer, A. R. Munnangi and O. Clemens, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3441–3453 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. S. Irvine, C. S. Derek and A. R. West, Adv. Mater., 1990, 2, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef .
L. N. Patro and K. Hariharan, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 239, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, L. Yang, M. Liu, X. Y. Wang, X. L. Li, D. S. Shao, K. L. Luo, Z. G. Luo and G. R. Chen, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 25, 100886 CrossRef .
A. Roos and J. Schoonman, Solid State Ionics, 1984, 13, 205–211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gombotz, V. Pregartner, I. Hanzu and H. M. R. Wilkening, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 1517 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fujara, D. Kruk, O. Lips, A. F. Privalov, V. Sinitsyn and H. Stork, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 2350–2357 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sorokin and B. Sobolev, Phys. Solid State, 2011, 50, 416–421 CrossRef .
K. Mori, Y. Morita, T. Saito, T. Kamiyama, T. Otomo, T. Abe and T. Fukunaga, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 18452–18461 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mori, A. Mineshige, T. Saito, M. Sugiura, Y. Ishikawa, F. Fujisaki, K. Namba, T. Kamiyama, T. Otomo, T. Abe and T. Fukunaga, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2873–2880 CrossRef CAS .
P. Molaiyan and R. Witter, Mater. Des. Process. Commun., 2019, 2, e76 Search PubMed .

          I. Darolles, C. M. Weiss, M. M. Alam, A. Tiruvannamalai and S. C. Jones, US Pat., US9166249B2,  2015 Search PubMed .

          K. Junichi, N. Hirofumi and T. Reiji, EP Pat., EP3719908A1,  2020 .

          K. Billings, C. J. Brooks, V. Davis, R. H. Grubbs, S. C. Jones, J. Kim, T. Miller, S. Munoz, K. Omichi, W. Wolf and Q. Xu, WO Pat., WO2020118108A1,  2020 .

          M. Yoshiyuki, N. Toshiyuki, Y. Takayuki, M. Kazuhiko and H. Rika, WO Pat., WO2019188358A1,  2019 .

          N. Hirofumi, O. Zempachi and A. Takeshi, DE Pat., DE102017108650A1,  2017 .
F. Gschwind and J. Bastien, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5628–5634 RSC .
K. Takahashi, A. Yokoo, Y. Kaneko, T. Abe and S. Seki, Electrochem, 2020, 88, 310–313 CrossRef CAS .
K.-i. Okazaki, Y. Uchimoto, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1460–1464 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A3702–A3708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2018, 826, 60–64 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, Chem. Lett., 2018, 47, 1346–1349 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 871, 114103 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 10246–10252 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 6237–6241 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 5984–5987 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haruyama, K. I. Okazaki, Y. Morita, H. Nakamoto, E. Matsubara, T. Ikeshoji and M. Otani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 428–435 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamanaka, A. C. Kucuk, Z. Ogumi and T. Abe, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 9390–9400 CrossRef CAS .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 226, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Davis, S. Munoz, J. Kim, C. M. Bates, N. Momčilović, K. J. Billings, T. F. Miller, R. H. Grubbs and S. C. Jones, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2721–2727 RSC .
T. Yamamoto, K. Matsumoto, R. Hagiwara and T. Nohira, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6153–6157 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Hu, Y. Zhou, S. Wang, L. Yao, H. Pan, C.-Y. Su, F. Chen and X. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8244–8250 RSC .
X. Hou, Z. Zhang, K. Shen, S. Cheng, Q. He, Y. Shi, D. Y. W. Yu, C.-y. Su, L.-J. Li and F. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A2419–A2424 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mohammad and R. Witter, Mater. Lett., 2019, 244, 159–162 CrossRef CAS .

          R. A. Huggins, Energy Storage, Springer, New York,  2010 Search PubMed .
R. Koerver, W. Zhang, L. de Biasi, S. Schweidler, A. O. Kondrakov, S. Kolling, T. Brezesinski, P. Hartmann, W. G. Zeier and J. Janek, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2142–2158 RSC .
S. Luo, K. Wang, J. Wang, K. Jiang, Q. Li and S. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nowroozi, K. Wissel, M. Donzelli, N. Hosseinpourkahvaz, S. Plana-Ruiz, U. Kolb, R. Schoch, M. Bauer, A. M. Malik, J. Rohrer, S. Ivlev, F. Kraus and O. Clemens, Comms. Mater., 2020, 1, 27 CrossRef .
T. Takami, T. Saito, T. Kamiyama, K. Kawahara, T. Fukunaga and T. Abe, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 051103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wissel, R. Schoch, T. Vogel, M. Donzelli, G. Matveeva, U. Kolb, M. Bauer, P. R. Slater and O. Clemens, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 499–512 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Nowroozi and O. Clemens, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6626–6637 CrossRef .
S. Vasala, A. Jakob, K. Wissel, A. I. Waidha, L. Alff and O. Clemens, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 6, 1900974 CrossRef .
M. A. Nowroozi, B. de Laune and O. Clemens, ChemistryOpen, 2018, 7, 617–623 CrossRef CAS .
O. Clemens, C. Rongeat, M. A. Reddy, A. Giehr, M. Fichtner and H. Hahn, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 15771–15778 RSC .
M. Hammad Fawey, V. S. Chakravadhanula, M. A. Reddy, C. Rongeat, T. Scherer, H. Hahn, M. Fichtner and C. Kubel, Microsc. Res. Tech., 2016, 79, 615–624 CrossRef CAS .
A. Grenier, A.-G. Porras-Gutierrez, H. Groult, K. A. Beyer, O. J. Borkiewicz, K. W. Chapman and D. Dambournet, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15700–15705 RSC .
H. Konishi, T. Minato, T. Abe and Z. Ogumi, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 4943–4946 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamanaka, K. Okazaki, Z. Ogumi and T. Abe, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 8801–8808 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamanaka, K. I. Okazaki, T. Abe, K. Nishio and Z. Ogumi, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. MacManus, D. J. Fray and J. E. Evetts, Phys. C, 1991, 184, 172–184 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Delville, D. Barbut, A. Wattiaux, J. M. Bassat, M. Menetrier, C. Labrugere, J. C. Grenier and J. Etourneau, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7962–7969 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Ishihara, Perovskite Oxide for Solid Oxide Fuel Cells, Springer,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. M. Longo and P. M. Raccah, J. Solid State Chem., 1973, 6, 526–531 CrossRef .
C. Bansal, H. Kawanaka, H. Bando, A. Sasahara, R. Miyamoto and Y. Nishihara, Solid State Commun., 2003, 128, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Thanh, H. T. Van, D. T. A. Thu, L. V. Bau, N. V. Dang, D. N. H. Nam, L. V. Hong and S. C. Yu, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2017, 53, 1–4 Search PubMed .
D. E. Bugaris and J. A. Ibers, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 5949–5964 RSC .
S. J. Skinner and G. Amow, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 1977–1983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Y. W. Kim, B. Kim, J. G. Lee and B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 1618–1621 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee, S. Lee, P. Oh, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 993–999 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. C. A. Yamada and K. Hinokuma, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A224–A229 CrossRef .
L. D. Aikens, R. K. Li and C. Greaves, Chem. Commun., 2000, 21, 2129–2130 RSC .
L. D. Aikens, L. J. Gillie, R. K. Li and C. Greaves, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 264–267 RSC .
C. Greaves and M. G. Francesconi, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 1998, 3, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
O. Clemens and P. R. Slater, Rev. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 33, 105–117 CAS .

          P. Slater and L. Driscoll, in Photonic and Electronic Properties of Fluoride Materials, ed. A. Tressaud and K. Poeppelmeier, Elsevier, Boston, 1st edn,  2016, pp. 401–421,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-801639-8.00018-0 .
E. E. McCabe and C. Greaves, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 448–458 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wissel, J. Heldt, P. B. Groszewicz, S. Dasgupta, H. Breitzke, M. Donzelli, A. I. Waidha, A. D. Fortes, J. Rohrer, P. R. Slater, G. Buntkowsky and O. Clemens, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 6549–6560 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. de Laune and C. Greaves, J. Solid State Chem., 2012, 187, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zaheer, J. L. Andrews, A. Parija, F. P. Hyler, C. Jaye, C. Weiland, Y.-S. Yu, D. A. Shapiro, D. A. Fischer, J. Guo, J. M. Velázquez and S. Banerjee, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 2520–2526,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c01328 .
B. P. de Laune, G. J. Rees, J. F. Marco, H. Y. Hah, C. E. Johnson, J. A. Johnson, F. J. Berry, J. V. Hanna and C. Greaves, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2017, 56, 10078–10089 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Padhi, K. S. Nanjundaswamy and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 1188–1197 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto and H. Kageyama, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 946–953 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Hartman and R. Mishra, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24469––24476 RSC .
K. Wissel, S. Dasgupta, A. Benes, R. Schoch, M. Bauer, R. Witte, A. D. Fortes, E. Erdem, J. Rohrer and O. Clemens, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22013–22026 RSC .
K. Wissel, A. M. Malik, S. Vasala, S. Plana-Ruiz, U. Kolb, P. R. Slater, I. da Silva, L. Alff, J. Rohrer and O. Clemens, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3160–3179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wissel, T. Vogel, S. Dasgupta, A. D. Fortes, P. R. Slater and O. Clemens, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 1153–1163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsuo, J. Inamoto, A. Mineshige, M. Murakami, K. Matsumoto and R. Hagiwara, Electrochem. Commun., 2020, 110, 106626 CrossRef CAS .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16141 CrossRef .
L. Duchêne, S. Lunghammer, T. Burankova, W.-C. Liao, J. P. Embs, C. Copéret, H. M. R. Wilkening, A. Remhof, H. Hagemann and C. Battaglia, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3449–3460 CrossRef .
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5904–5908 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, D. Bigio and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12201–12207 RSC .
A. Sarkar, L. Velasco, D. Wang, Q. Wang, G. Talasila, L. de Biasi, C. Kubel, T. Brezesinski, S. S. Bhattacharya, H. Hahn and B. Breitung, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3400 CrossRef .
K. G. Ranmohotti, E. Josepha, J. Choi, J. Zhang and J. B. Wiley, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 442–460 CrossRef .
R. A. Guidotti and P. Masset, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1443–1449 CrossRef CAS .

          J. W. B. a. W. L. Auxer, in Handbook of Batteries, ed. D. Linden and T. B. Reddy, McGraw-Hill, New York, 3rd edn,  2001, ch. 40, p. 1453 Search PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Mohammad Ali Nowroozi	Dr Ali Nowroozi received his master degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Shiraz University in 2012. He did his PhD on the development of intercalation-based cathodes for all-solid-state fluoride ion batteries in the department Materials and Earth Sciences at Technical University of Darmstadt (TUD). After the completion of his PhD in 2020, he started his postdoctoral studies at TU Darmstadt/University of Stuttgart with a focus on the battery materials and development of recycling strategies for all solid-state Lithium-ion batteries.
Irshad Mohammad	Dr Irshad Mohammad is currently a postdoctoral researcher at Laboratoire d'Etude des Eléments Légers (LEEL) in CEA Saclay, Gif-Sur-Yvette, France, advised by Dr Magali GAUTHIER. He received his PhD degree in chemistry from the department of Chemistry and Gene technology in Tallinn University of Technology, Estonia in 2019. Prior to this he received his MSc degree in chemistry from Indian Institute of Technology Madras in 2013. His research interests focus on design, synthesis, and characterization of novel materials for energy storage devices such as solid-state batteries, fluoride ion batteries, sodium ion batteries, and magnesium ion batteries as well as development of NMR methodology to investigate batteries.
Palanivel Molaiyan	Dr Palanivel Molaiyan obtained his Master's in Materials Science at PSG College of Technology, Coimbatore, Tamilnadu, India. He completed his doctoral studies in Applied Physics (2020) from Tallinn University of Technology, Tallinn, Estonia. His thesis topic is entitled solid-state electrolytes for fluoride ion batteries. Presently, he is working as a Research Associate at the Institute of Particle Technology (iPAT), Technical University of Braunschweig, Germany. His research expertise is in materials science, advanced battery materials, electrochemistry. His primary research work involves sulfide, halide, and fluoride materials based solid-state electrolytes to develop all-solid-state batteries.
Kerstin Wissel	Dr Kerstin Wissel studied Materials Science at the Technical University of Darmstadt, Germany, where she received her PhD in 2020 under the supervision of Prof. Clemens. Her dissertation focuses on the development of electrode materials for fluoride-ion batteries using different topochemical synthesis approaches and on the reversible tunability of functional properties within these batteries. She is currently a postdoctoral researcher at the Technical University of Darmstadt/University of Stuttgart, Germany. Her research interests include the design, synthesis and characterization of novel battery materials and recycling of all-solid-state lithium-ion batteries.
Anji Reddy Munnangi	Dr Anji Reddy Munnangi is a Senior Lecturer at the College of Engineering, Swansea University. Earlier, he worked as a research scientist at Helmholtz Institute Ulm (HIU), Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Germany. He received his doctoral degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM), India. Dr Munnangi is a solid-state electrochemist, with over 15 years of experience in the design, synthesis, and testing of new materials, their structure–property correlation as electrode and electrolyte materials for different battery technologies. He introduced (together with Prof. Fichtner) and made significant contributions to rechargeable fluoride-ion batteries (FIBs). In addition to FIBs, he made sizeable contributions to lithium-ion, sodium-ion, lithium-sulfur, and solid-state lithium batteries.
Oliver Clemens	Dr Oliver Clemens studied chemistry at Saarland University, Germany, where he also obtained his PhD in solid state chemistry in the group of Prof. Beck in 2012. After a postdoctoral stay at the University of Birmingham, UK, in the groups of Prof. Slater, Prof. Berry and Dr Wright, he became group leader of the Joint Research Laboratory Nanomaterials, TU Darmstadt and KIT, Germany, at TU Darmstadt. There he got promoted to the level of Assistant Professor in 2017. In 2020, he accepted an offer for Full Professor at University of Stuttgart, Germany, and is leading the group of Material Synthesis since. His work is focusing on materials for fluoride ion batteries and perovskite compounds for electrocatalytic applications, recycling of battery materials, as well as magnetic or superconducting properties and their tunability via chemical and electrochemical reactions.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of secondary ion batteries for future battery technologies.11 The charge transfer ions can be distinguished into cationic shuttles (such as Li+, Na+, and Mg2+), and anionic shuttles (such as Cl− and F−), providing a wide variety of different battery types. From bottom left to upper right: commercial Li-ion batteries (LIBs), sodium-ion batteries (NIBs), chloride-ion batteries (CIBs), Zn–air batteries, Na–air batteries, fluoride-ion batteries (FIBs), metal–sulphur batteries (with Mg and Li as the anode), magnesium-ion batteries, and top right for lithium–air and magnesium–air batteries. Reproduced from ref. 11 with permission 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
At cathode side: xe− + MFx → M + xF−;
At anode side: xF− + M′ → M′Fx + xe−.

 	Fig. 2  A schematic illustration of the metal/metal fluoride conversion based FIB proposed by Reddy and Fichtner.8	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic of a high-temperature cell used for the electrochemical measurements conducted on all-solid-state FIBs. The figure has been reproduced from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) and (b) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivities of La1−xBaxF3−x. Parts (a) and (b) are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 37 with permission copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (c) and (d) La1−xBaxF3−x (x = 0.03,0.05, 0.07, 0.1) samples after cold-uniaxial pressing, cold isostatic pressing, and sintering of the pellets. Parts (c) and (d) are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 46 (an original RSC publication). In part (d) the blue and green lines from the single crystal of La1−xBaxF3−x (x = 0.07, 0.1). Different pressing method applied for the La0.95Ba0.05F2.95 sample for the ionic conductivity for cold-uniaxial pressed pellet, a cold-uniaxial, cold-isostatic pressed pellet and a sintered pellet are reported.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The crystal structure representation of the tysonite-type structure. (reproduced from ref. 49 with permission copyright©2015, American Chemical Society). (b) Evolution with x of the room temperature ionic conductivity of RE1−xAExF3−x (RE = La, Ce, Sm; AE = Ba, Sr, Ca). (reproduced from ref. 48 (an original RSC publication)).	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Ionic conductivity for Ba1−xLaxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.55) solid solutions in comparison with ball-milled and single crystals of Ba1−xLaxF2+x. The best performance of ionic conductivity was reported for the sample x = 0.40. (Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 58 with permission copyright©2013 American Chemical Society). (b) 19F Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) studies reported for the chemical shift changes of Ba1−xLaxF2+x with x. The red points indicate that the fluoride ions on the anion site in the fluorite-type structure and F1 sites in the tysonite structure appear to show a transition between each other. The NMR lines of Ba1−xLaxF2+x (x ≥ 0.80) corresponding to F1 on F2 and F3 sites with the tysonite-type structure as blue rhombs. (Reproduced from ref. 57 with permission copyright©2014 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Layered structure of tetragonal BaSnF4 displaying different cation layers and fluoride ions with Sn coordination environment of BaSnF4 showing lone pairs on Sn2+ pointing in the c-direction (figure (a) is reproduced from ref. 59 with permission copyright©2002 American Chemical Society); (b) Nyquist plot of tetragonal BaSnF4 obtained at 25 °C (reproduced from ref. 66), (c) cyclic voltammogram profiles of Zn/BaSnF4/BiF3 cells obtained at 25 °C; (d) voltage-composition profiles of Zn/BaSnF4/BiF3 cells obtained at 25 °C (c and d are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 65 with permission copyright©2018, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Cross-sectional SEM image of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (20 mg)/BaSnF4 (120 mg) pellet, (b) Nyquist plots (symbols) and the corresponding fit (lines) of La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (20 mg)/BaSnF4 (120 mg) and La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 obtained at 25 °C, (c) Nyquist plots (symbols) and corresponding fit (line) for La0.9Ba0.1F2.9 (10 mg)/BaSnF4 (130 mg) electrolyte obtained at 25 °C, (d). Voltage-composition profiles of Ce/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/BaSnF4/BiF3 cell obtained at 25 °C with a current density of ±10 μA cm−2 (figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 67 with permission copyright©2019, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) XRD patterns of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.5) compounds, (b) representative structural view of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (doped fluorite), (c) Arrhenius plots of the ionic conductivity of Ba1−xSbxF2+x (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.4) compounds (symbols) and their fits (dotted lines). (d) Voltage-capacity profiles of Ba0.7Sb0.3F2.3/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Ce cell obtained at 150 °C with a current density of 10 μA cm−2 (figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 68 with permission copyright©2018, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Packing of β+-PbSnF4 in the unit cell. Blue and red balls are Sn and Pb, respectively. (b) Dependence of the conductivity at room temperature on the Pb/Sn molar ratio in the PbxSn2−xF4 pressed-powder samples (x = 0.96–1.56) annealed at 400 °C (open circle) and 200 °C (filled circle) (figures are reproduced from ref. 77 with permission copyright©2019 American Chemical Society).	 

La0.95Ba0.05F2.95	1.26 × 10−4 (60 °C)	Co-precipitation method	Ce/BiF3 (150 °C)	245	90 (8th cycle)	83%	4 mA g−1	
43

La0.90Ba0.10F2.90 (90 μm)/BaSnF4 (650 μm)	3.5 × 10−6 (RT)	High energy ball milling + annealing	Ce/BiF3 (25 °C)	27	3 (5th cycle)	85%	10 μA cm−2	
67

Ce/BiF3 (150 °C)	251	119 (5th cycle)	93%	10 μA cm−2
La0.95Ba0.05F2.95@PEO	5.75 × 10−6 (90 °C)	Co-precipitation method	Li/FeF3 (70°C)	113.5	18 (5th)	92%	71 mA g−1	
99

La0.90Ba0.10F2.90	1.20 × 10−6 (RT)	High energy ball-milling + sintering	Not reported	
100

La0.90Ba0.10F2.90	4 × 10−7 (RT)	High energy ball milling	See Table 3	
67

La0.90Ba0.10F2.90	2.36 × 10−4 (200 °C)	High energy ball milling	
101

La0.95Sr0.05F2.95	2.0 × 10−6 (RT)	Single crystal	Not reported	
102

La0.8Ca0.2F2.8	1.0 × 10−6 (RT)	Ball-milling + annealing	Not reported	
55

La0.95Sr0.05F2.95	3.0 × 10−5 (RT)	Single crystal + high energy ball-milling + sintering	Not reported	
103

Sm0.95Ca0.05F2.95	1.0 × 10−4 (RT)	Sintering + solid state synthesis + mixing	Not reported	
49

Sm0.95Ca0.05F2.95	2.8 × 10−5 (RT)	High energy ball-milling	Not reported	
80 and 106
β-PbSnF4	1.20 × 10−3 (RT)	Sintering + mixing	Not reported	
87

Pb0.55Sn0.45F2	2.53 × 10−3 (RT)	High energy ball-milling	Not reported	
76

PbxSn2−xF4 (x = 1.21)	3.53 × 10−3 (RT)	High energy ball-milling + annealing	Not reported	
77


 	Fig. 11  (a) A schematic drawing of possible hydrogen bonds, which could occur in a hydrogen bifluoride-doped PEG matrix (reproduced from ref. 33 (an original RSC publication)), (b) discharge curves of BiF3 against Mg using PEG matrix based electrolyte with three different separators (reproduced with some modifications from ref. 112 (an original RSC publication)), (c) CVs of the Bi and Pt electrodes in ∼0.07 mol dm−3 MPPF/TMPA-TFSA at a scan rate of 1.0 mV s−1 (blue lines: Bi. Gray lines with circles: Pt), (d) cycling test of the bismuth electrode in ∼0.35 mol dm−3 MPPF/TMPA-TFSA at current densities of 20 μA cm−2 (parts c and d are reproduced from ref. 114 with permission copyright©2017 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Optimized molecular structure of FBTMPhB-F−, (b) cyclic voltammograms of the CsF(0.45)-FBTMPhB(0.5)-G4 (parts a and b are reproduced from ref. 115 with permission copyright©2017 The Electrochemical Society); (c) simulated solvation shell of BTFE molecules surrounding F− (pink sphere) (d) linear sweep voltammograms for 0.75 M Np1F in BTFE, collected using a scan rate of 1 mV s−1. (Parts c and d are reproduced from ref. 34 with permission copyright©2018 American Association for the Advancement of Science).	 

0.1 M TMAF/MPPTFSI	1 × 10−3	−3.5 to 4.0 (vs. Ag/Ag+)	PbF2/PANI	103	96 (2nd)	49% (ca.)	—	
107

0.02 M FHF doped PEG	2.1 × 10−3	—	Mg/BiF3	250	—	—	10 μA	
33

0.35 M MPPF/TMPA-TFSA	2.5 × 10−3	0 to 0.7 (vs. Pb/PbF2)	PbF2/Bi	0.16 mA h	0.01 mA h (5th)	56%	20 μA cm−2	
114

CsF(0.45 M)-FBTMPhB(0.5 M)-G4	—	−2.2 to −0.3 (vs. BiF3/Bi)	Pt/BiF3	316	Close to 0 (10th)	70%	7.5 mA g−1	
115

0.75 M Np1F/BTFE	7.9 × 10−3	0.7 to 4.8 (vs. Li/Li+)	Pt/Cu@LaF3	50	63 (7th)	78%	10 μA	
34

[C2C1im][(FH)2.3F]	1 × 10−1	−0.3 to 0.7 (vs. CuF2/Cu)	CuF2/Cu + CuF2	517	270 (10th)	92%	26 mA g−1	
126

1 M LiPF6 in EC/DME	—	0 to 3.0 (vs. Mg/MgF2)	Mg + MgF2/BiF3	160	27 (10th)	53%	38 μA cm−2	
129

Mg + MgF2/SnF2	142	24 (10th)	56%	38 μA cm−2
P(EO/PO)/MF/AA	1 × 10−6	—	—	—	—	—	—	
113

Aqueous 0.8 M NaF	—	0 to 1.5 (Ag/AgCl)	NMO/BiF3	137	47 (40th)	52%	100 mA g−1	
127


 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the volume changes in the contact surface area of the active electrode material/electrolyte/carbon grains taking place during electrochemical charge/discharge. Reproduced from ref. 28.	 

BiF3 (composite)/LBF*/Ce	∼2.5	∼125	Not reported	150	10 μA cm−2	
8

BiF3 (solid-solution)/LBF*/Ce	∼2.15	∼190	26% capacity retention after 40 cycles	150	10 μA cm−2	
8

BiF3/(co-precipitated LBF* electrolyte)/Ce	∼2.4	∼250	Discharge capacity: 90 mA h g−1 at cycle 8	150	±4 mA g−1	
43

BiF3/LBF*/Ce	Dropped rapidly	<5 (ref. 1)	No cycle life	150	±4 mA g−1	
24

BiF3/LBF*/Mg	Dropped rapidly	<5	No cycle life	150	±4 mA g−1	
24

BiF3/LBF*/Mg + MgF2	2.1–2.7	∼80	<25 mA h g−1 at cycle 10	150	±4 mA g−1	
24

Bi0.7Fe1.3O1.5F1.7/CBF§/Pb	∼0.3	360	Not reported	140	
	
134

CuF2/LBF*/Ce	∼2.5	∼322	Not reported	150	10 μA cm−2	
8

CuF2/LBF*/Mg + MgF2	∼2.8–1.5	33	<20 mA h g−1 after cycle 10	150	±4 mA g−1	
24

Cu@LaF3 in standard three-electrode cell/1 M Np1F|BTFE/Pt wires	∼2.3–2.0	∼52	Low capacity fading over first 7 cycles	RT	10 μA	
34

SnF2/LBF*/Ce	∼2.1	∼180	Not reported	150	10 μA cm−2	
8

KBiF4/LBF*/Ce	∼2.2	∼170	Not reported	150	10 μA cm−2	
8

Sn/BSF¥/BiF3	∼0.3–0	∼120	Large capacity fading from ∼120 mA h g−1 at the 1st cycle to <10 mA h g−1 at cycle 10	25	±10 μA cm−2	
65

Zn/BSF¥/BiF3	∼0.5–0	∼60	Cycle stable up to cycle 20	25	±10 μA cm−2	
65

La2NiO4+d/LBF*/Zn + ZnF2	∼1.3–0.5	72	Cyclic stability over 220 cycles only at cutoff voltage of 30 mA h g−1	170	+24 μA cm−2	
133

−12 μA cm−2
La2NiO4+d/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.9–0.3	55	Discharge capacity increases to 55 mA h g−1 up to cycle 10 then reduces to 24 mA h g−1 up to cycle 20	170	+24 μA cm−2	
28

−12 μA cm−2
La2NiO3F2/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼1.0–0.4	22.5	Discharge capacity increases from ∼12 mA h g−1 up to ∼23 mA h g−1 at cycle 50	170	2.5 mA g−1	
135

La2CoO4+d/LBF*/Zn + ZnF2	∼1.0–0.3	40	Discharge capacity drops to 32 mA h g−1 in the 2nd cycle then gradually reaches to 8 mA h g−1 at cycle 50	170	+24 μA cm−2	
136

−2.4 μA cm−2
La2CoO4+d/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.6–0.2	32	Discharge capacity: ∼8 mA h g−1 at cycle 50	170	+24 μA cm−2	
30

−2.4 μA cm−2
LaSrMnO4/LBF*/PbF2	∼1.0–0.2	35	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
95

−2.4 μA cm−2
LaSrMnO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼1.0–0.2	36	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
95

−2.4 μA cm−2
La1.3Sr1.7Mn2O7/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.5–0	25	No significant capacity fading over 40 cycles	170	5.1 μA	
137

LaSrFeO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.8–0	6	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
28

−2.4 μA cm−2
LaSrCoO4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.8–0	16	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
28

−2.4 μA cm−2
Co0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.5–0	6	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
138

−2.4 μA cm−2
Mg0.5Fe0.5Sb2O4/LBF*/Pb + PbF2	∼0.5–0	3	Not reported	170	+24 μA cm−2	
138

−2.4 μA cm−2
BaFeO2.5/LBF*/MgF2	∼2.5–1.0	6	Only three cycles were reported which shows a slight capacity fading	150	10 μA cm−2	
139


 	Fig. 14  (a) Voltage-capacity profiles of various metal fluorides vs. Ce metal. The discharge curves were obtained at 150 °C with a current density of 10 mA cm−2; (b) cycling performance of the BiF3 (solid solution)/Ce cell for the first 10 cycles; (c) changes of discharge capacity with cycle numbers for the same electrochemical cell. The figures have been reproduced with some modifications from ref. 8 (an original RSC publication).	 

 	Fig. 15  Voltage profiles of (a) the first three cycles of a cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/Mg + MgF2 and (b) the first charging and discharging of a cell Bi/La0.9Ba0.1F2.9/MgF2. The cells were heated to 150 °C, a current density of 4 mA g−1 (10 mA cm−2) was applied. The figures have been reproduced from ref. 24 (an original RSC publication).	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the n = 1 Ruddlesden–Popper (A2MO4) structure (left) and fully fluorinated A2MO4F2 structure (right).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Cycling stability of the La2NiO4.13|Zn + ZnF2 cell at different cutoff capacities;133 (b) the effect of overcharging on cycling stability of a La2CoO4.16|Pb + PbF2 cell. All cells were heated at 170 °C and charged/discharged at a current of 24/−12 μA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 30.	 

 	Fig. 18  The effect of anode material on the overpotential and cycling behavior of La2NiO4.13 by showing (a) the first few cycles of La2NiO4+d against Zn + ZnF2 and Pb + PbF2 anode materials (b) discharge capacities of La2NiO4+d against Zn + ZnF2 and Pb + PbF2 anode materials. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 133.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Cycling curves of a cell La2NiO3F2 against Pb + PbF2. The cell was cycled between a charging cutoff capacity of 30 mA h g−1 and a discharging cutoff potential of 0 V, (b) Coulombic efficiencies of cells La2NiO3F2 against Pb + PbF2 and La2NiO3F2 against Zn + ZnF2 charged to different cutoff capacities. The cells were heated to 170 °C, a current of ∼2.5 mA g−1 (∼C/25 rate) was applied. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic presentation of the non-fluorinated MSb2O4 (left) and fluorinated MSb2O4Fy (right) Schafarzikite-type structure. Sb orange, M (Fe, Co) blue, O red, F (partially occupied to ∼15%) green. Reproduced from ref. 138 (open source publication).	 

 	Fig. 21  Discharge profiles of some of the so far proposed intercalation-based cathode materials for FIBs. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 28.	 

 	Fig. 22  Comparison of selected angular ranges of XRD patterns of chemically (top) and electrochemically (middle) defluorinated La2NiO3F2−x. The chemical defluorination was obtained via a hydride-based reduction, the electrochemical defluorination within a FIBs, in which an anode material containing La2NiO3F2 was used. In addition, an XRD pattern of the anode composite before electrochemical treatment (bottom) is given, highlighting the change in the reflection patterns of the reduced La2NiO3F2−x and the precursor phase La2NiO3F2. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Charging curve of a cell Pb + PbF2 against La2NiO3F2, (b) charging and discharging curves of a cell Pb + PbF2 against La2NiO3F2. The cell was charged to 90 mA h g−1 prior to the discharging. The cells were heated to 170 °C, a current of ∼2.5 mAg−1 (∼C/25 rate) was applied. Reproduced with some modifications from ref. 135 with permission copyright©2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Cyclic voltammograms of (a) carbon electrode as compared to La2NiO4+d cathode material (Pb + PbF2 as counter electrode); (b) La2NiO4+d cathode material vs. Zn + ZnF2 in two different potential range of 0–2 V and 0–3.5 V. Figures are reproduced with some modifications from ref. 28.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
