Defects in metal triiodide perovskite materials towards high-performance solar cells: origin, impact, characterization, and engineering  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00868F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00868F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4581-4610Defects in metal triiodide perovskite materials towards high-performance solar cells: origin, impact, characterization, and engineering

        
          
            Chenxin 
            Ran
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiantie 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *bc, 
      
        
          
            Weiyin 
            Gao
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunmao 
            Huang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Shixue 
            Dou
          
          
        
      c
aShaanxi Key Lab of Information Photonic Technique, School of Electronic and Information Engineering, Xi’ an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China
bSchool of Environment and Energy, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Atmospheric Environment and Pollution Control, National Engineering Laboratory for VOCs Pollution Control Technology and Equipment, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: jiantiexu@scut.edu.cn
cInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Wollongong 2500, Australia
Received 
      13th January 2018
    First published on 23rd April 2018AbstractThe rapid development of solar cells (SCs) based on organic–inorganic hybrid metal triiodide perovskite (MTP) materials holds great promise for next-generation photovoltaic devices. The demonstrated power conversion efficiency of the SCs based on MTP (PSCs for short) has reached over 20%. An MTP material is a kind of soft ionic solid semiconductor. The intrinsic optoelectronic properties of MTP are greatly determined by several factors, such as the crystalline phase, doping type, impurities, elemental composition, and defects in its crystal structure. In the development of PSCs, a good understanding and smart engineering of the defects in MTP have been demonstrated to be a key factor for the fabrication of high-efficiency PSCs. In this review, we start with a brief introduction to the types of defects and the mechanisms for their formation in MTP. Then, the positive and negative impacts of defects on the important optoelectronic features of MTP are presented. The optoelectronic properties mainly include charge recombination, charge transport, ion migration, and structural stability. Moreover, commonly used techniques for the characterization of the defects in MTP are systematically summarized. Recent progress on the state-of-the-art defect engineering approaches for the optimization of PSC devices is also summarized, and we also provide some perspectives on the development of high-efficiency PSCs with long-term stability through the optimization of the defects in MTP.
Chenxin Ran
Dr Chenxin Ran received a BS in Applied Chemistry from Xidian University, and a PhD in electronic science and technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2009 and 2016, respectively. In the period of 2014–2015, he worked as a visiting scholar in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is currently a lecturer in the School of Electronic and Information Engineering at Xi’an Jiaotong University. His current research interests are the controllable preparation of lead and lead-free perovskite films and their application in photoelectric devices.
Jiantie Xu
Prof. Jiantie Xu received his PhD degree in Engineering from the University of Wollongong, Australia. During his PhD study, he moved to Prof. Liming Dai's group at Case Western Reserve University for a half-year's visiting. He completed postdoctoral studies in Prof. Liming Dai's group for two years and his PhD supervisors Profs. Shixue Dou & Huakun Liu's group for one year. In 2017.9, he started as a group leader and professor at South China University of Technology. His research interests include various types of energy storage/conversion devices, such as metal-alkali ion batteries, lithium sulfur batteries, lithium air batteries, supercapacitors, perovskite solar cells, and integrated devices between perovskite solar cells and metal-alkali ion batteries.
Weiyin Gao
Dr Weiyin Gao received her BS in Applied Chemistry in 2009, MS in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics in 2012, and PhD degree in Electronic Science and Technology in 2017 from Xi’an Jiaotong University. Now she works as a postdoctoral fellow in Xi’an Jiaotong University. During 2014–2015, she studied as a visiting scholar in the Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University. Her research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of lead and lead-free perovskite materials, and the technology improvement of perovskite solar cell devices.
Chunmao Huang
Chunmao Huang received his BS in Physics from Lingnan Normal University in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate at South China University of Technology. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of carbon based materials and their applications in lithium air batteries.
Shixue Dou
ShiXue Dou is a Distinguished Professor and Director of the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM) at the Australian Institute of Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong. He was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He was awarded a DSc by the University of New South Wales in 1998 and three Australian Professorial Fellowships by the Australian Research Council in 1993, 2002 and 2007. He received the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and the Engineering Excellence Award highly commended in 2006, was a finalist of the Eurek Award for Science Leadership in 2010 and a finalist of the Eurek Award for mentoring in 2013, and received the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008 and the Vice-Chancellor Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012. He is a program leader for the ongoing ARENA Smart Sodium Storage System program. He has supervised more than 90 PhD students to completion and more than 60 postdoctoral and visiting fellows who have been widely spread within five continents.
1. Introduction
In the past few years, perovskite solar cells (PSCs) based on organic–inorganic hybrid metal triiodide perovskite (MTP) materials (e.g., methylammonia lead iodide (MAPbI3)) have been considered to be one of the most promising types of third-generation solar cells (SCs). This is mainly because their power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) have reached over 20%, starting from 3.8% in 2009.1–6 Compared to the traditional commercialized SCs, it is very impressive to obtain such a high PCE in such a short period. The superior optoelectronic performance of PSCs is mainly attributed to the high absorption coefficient, balanced ambipolar carrier transport, long charge diffusion length, high charge mobility, low exciton binding energy, and tunable direct band gap of MTP.7–9 Moreover, the simple and cost-effective film fabrication process and the flexibility of MTP films also make MTP very promising for the large-scale commercialization of PSCs and their application in integrated devices in the near future.10
Despite the overwhelming advantages in the fabrication of MTP film for PSCs (e.g., solution spin-coating and vacuum thermal evaporation technologies), the inherently “soft” structure of MTP, with a large and significant level of unintentional defects, still significantly affects the optoelectronic performance of PSCs in terms of the PCE and long-term stability.11 For example, a well-defined single crystal of MAPbI3 shows a much lower defect density (1010–1011 cm−3) than a solution deposited MAPbI3 film (1016–1017 cm−3).12 As expected, MTP single crystals with low defect density have displayed higher charge mobility, longer charge diffusion length, and higher structural stability. Moreover, efficient control and engineering of defects distributed in well-established inorganic light-absorbing semiconductor materials (i.e., crystalline silicon,13 GaAs,14 CdTe,15 chalcopyrite Cu(In,Ga)Se2,16 and kesterite Cu2ZnSnS417) have also been proven to be an effective way to accelerate the development and commercialization of high-performance SCs.18 Although the reported PCE of PSCs was over 20%, it is still far below the thermodynamic PCE limit of ∼31% for MAPbI3.19 This is most likely due to the unavoidable shallow- or deep-level defects formed in MTP film during crystal formation. Such defects are considered to be responsible for the hysteresis,20 non-radiative recombination,21 charge trapping,22 charge scattering,23 and ion-migration24 effects in MTP film. As a result, these factors inevitably lead to inferior performance and long-term instability issues in the resultant PSC devices. Therefore, it is highly desirable to develop high-performance PSCs with efficient control of the defects in MTP.
In this review, we pay close attention to recent progress on the topic of defect science and engineering in MTP for PSC applications. We begin with an overview of the established theoretical studies on the origins of the defects in MTP. Then, we move forward to a discussion on the negative and positive impacts of defects on the optoelectronic properties of MTP. Thereafter, the typical characterization methods for the defects in MTP are systematically summarized and critically discussed. To improve the performance of PSCs, the state-of-the-art experimental efforts on the control and engineering of defects are also presented in this review. Finally, we also provide some perspectives on the development of high efficiency PSCs with long-term stability through optimization of the defects in MTP.
2. Defects in MTP
2.1 Origin of the defects in semiconductors
In the ideal crystal structure of a semiconductor, every atom is located on its prescribed site without any defects or impurities (Fig. 1a). In a real semiconductor, however, there is often a large amount of unavoidable defects generated from the crystal growth or/and post-treatment process, and thus present in the crystal structure (Fig. 1b). This is due to imperfect lattice alignment over long distances or to trace foreign atoms. The presence of such defects in semiconductors (especially, traditional inorganic compounds) has commonly been recognized as fatal, such that the semiconductor properties (e.g., conductivity, free charge mobility, and charge lifetime) are significantly decreased.18 Nevertheless, these property variations might be beneficial in some cases, when they are used intentionally for their “unique” properties required in certain applications.25–27 Some examples include alkali-metal atom doping of C60 (i.e., Cs3C60) as a superconducting material,28 N doping of carbon to make efficient catalysts,29–31 metal doping of layered transition metal dichalcogenides for energy applications,32 and the use of alkali-metal atom doping for the fabrication of high performance PSCs.33 To expand the field of application of the semiconductor, a good understanding of the science of defects should take priority before their control and engineering.34 Considering single defects, as shown in Fig. 1c, there are three common kinds of intrinsic point defect that are formed in the crystalline structure of a semiconductor (i.e., vacancies, interstitials and antisites). These point defects can be formed intrinsically or by introducing foreign atoms (impurities or dopants) intentionally, and the possibility of the presence of a defect is determined by its formation energy. The presence of a point defect could create a charge recombination centre within the band gap of the semiconductor to attract and trap free charges. At the same time, these defects will form shallow or deep electron transition levels in the forbidden region, namely, defect trap states. These states are largely determined by the location of their energy levels relative to the conduction band minimum (CBM) or valence band maximum (VBM) edge.18
 Fig. 1  Ideal structure (a) without defects and (b) after introducing defects. Possible defects existing in the crystal structure of a semiconductor: (c) point defects, (d) defect pairs, and (e) higher dimensional defects. 
Single point defects are basic units in theoretical study, and they are closely related to the natural properties of the crystal structure of the semiconductor. Apart from point defects, the defects in most semiconductors often exist in array configurations. Fig. 1d shows two types of neutral defect pairs, commonly recognized as Frenkel defects and Schottky defects. The former is an ion vacancy that involves the same ion as an interstitial while the latter involves anion and cation vacancies occurring together.36 Moreover, a series of dimensional defects is formed by the combination of point defects and defect arrays. As shown in Fig. 1e, the 1-dimensional (1D) defects, namely, dislocations, takes the form of lines along edges in which the crystal pattern is broken. The 2-dimensional (2D) defects are found on the crystal surface (i.e., the external surface and the grain boundaries (GBs)), in which differently oriented crystallites are joined together. The 3-dimensional (3D) defects induce the volume changes in the crystal pattern. 3D defects include precipitates (small volumes with a different crystal structure), large voids, and second-phase domains. Whatever types of defect exist in a semiconductor (point, array, configuration, and combinations thereof), they lead to considerable localized structural variation and thus significantly affect the photovoltaic properties of the semiconductor, as well as the performance of SCs. Therefore, better understanding and identification of the defects existing in MTP is an important step towards the fabrication of high-performance PSCs. It should be noted that the formation of intrinsic defects in MTP follows the same patterns as in a traditional semiconductor, as is discussed above. In the following sections, we will use the classical and most-studied organic–inorganic hybrid lead-based MTP (i.e., MAPbI3), as an example to demonstrate research progress on defect science and engineering in MTPs.
2.2 Defects in MTP
It is well-known that the formation of a substance is thermodynamically governed by its formation energy, so that the substance with the lowest formation energy exists in its most stable state. Because crystal growth of MTP is always fast and requires high temperature, the wide existence of defects in MTP is inevitable. Theoretical calculations are a powerful tool to investigate the photovoltaic properties of MTP as influenced by defects, as well as providing valid guidance to defect engineering in material design and the corresponding PSC fabrication. With the help of theoretical calculations, the formation and function of simple point defects in MTP can be deeply investigated. A classical method to study the origin of a defect is to calculate its theoretical formation energy by first principle calculations. This method has been widely used to investigate the characteristics of point defects in semiconductors according to their inherent properties on the atomic scale.36–39 As an example, the ideal MAPbI3 crystal structure (Fig. 2a) has twelve possible intrinsic point defects: three vacancies (VMA, VPb, VI), three interstitials (MAi, Pbi, Ii), and six substitutions (MAPb, PbMA, MAI, PbI, IMA, IPb).35 All these point defects create a transition level, which is a Fermi level position located near the CBM (VBM) or within the forbidden band of MAPbI3. The transition level introduces charge recombination centres (traps) to trap free electrons or holes. A defect-induced transition level near the CBM (VBM) is called a shallow-level defect trap. In this defect trap, the trapped charges have a high probability of detrapping into the CBM or VBM, indicating that a shallow-level defect trap with a low charge recombination rate could influence the charge mobility to some extent.40 A transition level located within the middle third of the forbidden band is called a deep-level defect trap, where the trapped charges are doomed to be recombined via a non-radiative recombination process. A defect trap in the deep-level state is also known as a Shockley–Read–Hall (SRH) recombination centre, which is suggested to be detrimental for efficient charge extraction in PSCs.41 According to the energy level location of these point defects in the band gap of MAPbI3, all the point defects could be further divided into electron acceptors (Ii, MAPb, VMA, VPb, IMA, and IPb) and electron donors (MAi, PbMA, VI, Pbi, MAI, and PbI), as shown in Fig. 2b and c, respectively.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the MAPbI3 unit cell. The calculated transition energy levels of (b) intrinsic acceptors and (c) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. (d) The thermodynamic stability range for equilibrium growth of MAPbI3 is in the red region. (e–g) The formation energies of intrinsic point defects in MAPbI3 at chemical potentials A, B, and C as shown in (d). Dashed lines stand for the defects that have much higher formation energy so that they cannot exist. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2014. 
The formation of the point defects is largely determined by the environment. Under different film fabrication conditions (e.g., precursor concentrations, precursor ratio, solvents, temperature, and doping), all the point defects have different formation energies. Here, the chemical potential of each constituent in MAPbI3 under various conditions plays a decisive role in the formation of the MAPbI3 structure. Under thermodynamic equilibrium growth conditions, the chemical potential for the formation of a stoichiometric MAPbI3 phase should follow this equation:42 μMA + μPb + 3μI = ΔH(MAPbI3) = −5.26 eV(1)where μ stands for the chemical potential of each constituent in its most stable phase and ΔH(MAPbI3) is the formation enthalpy of MAPbI3. To obtain a pure MAPbI3 phase, the formation of secondary phases (MAI and PbI2) must be restrained, and the chemical potentials of MAI and PbI2 should be satisfied as follows:35 μMA + μI < ΔH(MAI) = −2.87 eV(2) μPb + 2μI < ΔH(PbI2) = −2.11 eV(3)
On satisfying eqn (1)–(3) simultaneously, the formation of MAPbI3 can be realized in the red region, as shown in the chemical potential chart of Pb vs. I (Fig. 2d). In other words, MAPbI3 will decompose into PbI2 and MAI when the formation energy is outside of this red region. This narrow formation window indicates relatively strict equilibrium conditions for the formation of MAPbI3. The formation energy difference between MAPbI3 and its precursors (i.e., PbI2 and MAI) is only ∼0.1 eV, further suggesting the possible presence of MAI and PbI2 in MAPbI3.43 On the other hand, the long shape of the red region indicates that it is possible to tune MAPbI3 from n-type to p-type. This can be realized by adjusting the localized chemical potential of I and Pb through changing the formation of the defects in MAPbI3.35 For example, when the chemical potential of Pb is higher than that of I (point A in the red region), the defects (e.g., Ii, MAPb, and VPb) with the lowest formation energies in the structure (Table 1) could increase the hole carrier density, thus leading to the formation of p-type MTP. When the chemical potential of Pb is lower than that of I (point C in the red region), the electron carrier density could be increased by the defects (e.g., MAi and VI) with the lowest formation energy (Table 1), which makes MTP n-type. These results indicate that even in the same MAPbI3 phase, the defects formed in the structure could be different when the chemical potentials of the constituents are located in different positions in the red region.
Table 1 The formation energies (unit: eV) of twelve point defects in MAPbI3 at chemical potential points A, B, and C (Fig. 2d). The boldface entries are the defects that only create shallow transition levels near the CBM or VBM, as shown in Fig. 2b and c35




Position
Ii
MAPb
VMA
VPb
IMA
IPb
MAi
PbMA
VI
Pbi
MAI
PbI






Unit: eV


A

0.23


0.28

0.81

0.29

1.96
1.53
1.39
2.93
1.87
4.24
3.31
5.54


B

0.83


1.15


1.28

1.62
3.01
3.45

0.93

2.51
1.27
2.91
2.25
3.62


C
1.42
1.47
2.01
2.68
4.34
5.10

0.20

1.74

0.67

1.85
0.93
1.97




By using density functional theory (DFT), the formation energies of all the defects at three different chemical potentials for the A (I-rich), B (moderate), or C (Pb-rich) positions in the red region (Fig. 2d) are estimated. As shown in Table 1, the formation energies are very different under different growth conditions. Table 1 collects the values of the formation energies obtained from Fig. 2e–g. As can be seen, the point defect that has the lowest formation energy only creates a shallow transition energy level (Fig. 2b and c), indicating that deep-level defects are unlikely to form in MAPbI3, which is in agreement with the fact that MAPbI3-based PSCs show high defect tolerance.44 The DFT results indicated that Schottky defects (e.g., PbI2 vacancy and MAI vacancy) did not create a trap state within the band gap, while Frenkel defects (e.g., Pb, I, and MA vacancies) as unintentional doping sources were found to form shallow-level states near band edges. This is in agreement with the reported result that neutral defects in MAPbI3 did not form a deep-level state, so that the charge diffusion length and lifetime of MAPbI3 are seldom affected by neutral defects.36
Despite the progress achieved, there are still some controversial results in which defects did introduce deep-level trap states in MAPbI3.12,36,45–47 It is commonly suggested that VI is a shallow donor point defect.35,36,45,47 Agiorgousis et al.46 reported, however, that VI is an amphoteric point defect with a deep transition energy level in the band gap. Moreover, Du et al.45 reported that Ii is a low energy deep-level trap and non-radiative recombination centre. This is in contrast to other results.35,46 The discrepancies in these studies resulted partly from the different phases of MAPbI3 used in their calculations (i.e., α-MAPbI3,35 β-MAPbI3,45–47 and γ-MAPbI336), as well as partly from the inconsistent calculation methods. Du et al.39 used a hybrid DFT method involving spin–orbit coupling (SOC) to calculate the point defects in a β-MAPbI3 phase (stable at room temperature). They found that only VI and its complexes create deep-level electron/hole trap states within the band gap of MAPbI3.39 Despite the discrepancy in the results of these theoretical studies, there is consensus that the deep-level defect traps present in MTP are undisputedly fatal to the photovoltaic performance of the material. Generally, for obtaining high-performance PSCs, the formation of deep-level defects should be effectively avoided. Therefore, the prediction and identification of the possible deep-level defects in MTP is fundamentally crucial.
In addition to MA-based MTP, a formamidinium (FA) based MTP material in PSCs has recently achieved a high PCE of 22.1%.48 So far, there have been a few theoretical studies on the properties of intrinsic defects in FAPbI3. Very recently, Liu et al.49 performed DFT calculations to study the intrinsic point defects in FAPbI3. The energy levels of the defects in FAPbI3 are similar to those in MAPbI3. FA-related defects (e.g., VFA, FAI, and IFA), have the lowest formation energies, however, and antisites (e.g., FAI and IFA) create deep levels in the band gap. This is different from the MA system and is most likely attributable to the weak van der Waals interactions between FA cations and PbI6 octahedra.49 To avoid the formation of deep-level FAI defects, it is suggested that the FAPbI3 material should be grown in an I-rich environment and that the electrochemical potential should be controlled in the n-doped region. This result is consistent with the experimental report using excess iodide ions (I3−) as an additive in an FA-based system.48
3. The impacts of defects on the properties of MTP
As discussed above, the presence of point defects in MTP can create higher dimensional defects (e.g., dislocations, GBs, and precipitates) in films (Fig. 1b).11 Although intentional introduction of defects could sometimes be advantageous for a semiconductor material, the higher dimensional defects are considered to lead to serious damage to the optoelectronic properties of MTP and subsequent performance failure in PSCs. In order to effectively fabricate high-performance MTP based PSCs, further understanding and identification of the negative and positive impacts of the defects in MTP are critically urgent. We now briefly overview current research progress on understanding the negative impacts of defects on the optoelectronic properties of MTP, such as ion migration and structural instability. On the other hand, we also summarize some recent emerging studies related to the positive impacts of defects in MTP for PSCs and other applications.
3.1 Role of defects in the optoelectronic properties of MTP

3.1.1 Charge recombination. 

Fig. 3 shows the recombination pathways of charges (electrons and holes) in a semiconductor. As can be seen, in an ideal structure after photo-excitation, the electrons from the ground state at the VBM will be activated into excited states at the CBM and simultaneously form free charges. The free charges are transported within the semiconductor, transfer out through the interface, or recombine via band-to-band recombination. The “band-to-band” radiative recombination process involves the transition of excited electrons at the CBM directly back to the ground state, where they are recombined with holes at the VBM through relaxation in the MTP (Fig. 3a). This process is intrinsic, often occurs at a location where no defects are present, and results in the photoluminescence (PL) phenomenon (Fig. 3d). Since it directly relates to the reverse process of light absorption, the “band-to-band” radiative recombination process doesn’t significantly depend on the defect levels of the MTP.50 Actually, the energy difference between the photo-excited free electrons and holes is the origin of the open-circuit voltage (VOC) of the PSCs. Therefore, the “band-to-band” radiatively recombined charges should be significantly preserved in MTP.
 Fig. 3  Charge recombination pathways in a semiconductor. (a) “Band-to-band” radiative recombination, (b) shallow-level defect assisted radiative recombination, and (c) deep-level defect assisted non-radiative recombination. (d) “Band-to-band” radiative recombination occurs at a location where no defects are present, (e) shallow-level defect assisted radiative recombination occurs at a location where shallow defects are present, and (f) deep-level defect assisted radiative recombination occurs at a location where deep defects are present. 
Because defects will insert an energy transition level within the band gap of the semiconductor, however, the presence of a defect could trap the free charges and greatly change the charge recombination pathways and influence the optoelectronic process. During the transportation of the free charges, a part of the free charges is likely to be captured or trapped by the defects. Such a process breaks the ideal photophysical properties of the MTP, thereby reducing the optoelectronic properties of the PSCs containing it. The charges trapped by the defects with different energy levels have different types of behaviour. It is well-known that the shallow-level defects can create transition energy levels in the band gap close to the CBM or VBM of an MTP. In this regard, the trapped charges could radiatively recombine or detrap back to the CBM (or VBM) band via phonon absorption.40 The former could lead to a substantial enhancement of the PL quantum yield but in the form of PL emission, while the latter could enhance the optoelectronic properties of the MTP.51 Moreover, the charges trapped by the shallow-level defects could result in a small energy loss, which leads to radiative recombination with red-shifted emission (Fig. 3b and e).52,53 In the case of the deep-level defects, the trapped charge would need to annihilate with an opposite charge before it could be emitted, as shown in Fig. 3c. This process is the so-called non-radiative recombination, which releases a part or all of its electronic energy as in the form of phonons to the adjacent lattice (Fig. 3f), and this process dramatically decreases the valuable optoelectronic properties of the MTP.54
Shallow-level defects are not a severe problem for MTPs. In the case of MAPbI3, despite the detrapping of charges captured by shallow-level defects, even if radiative recombination assisted by shallow-level defects is by far the most dominant process, the recombination rate can be very high without compromising the performance of PSCs.55 This is because the emitted photons would probably be reabsorbed by the MTP. As expected, the photons get “recycled” before charge extraction by the respective electrodes.56 Moreover, the charge diffusion length of MAPbI3 is reported to cover a large range from several hundreds of nanometers to micrometers.57–59 This demonstrates that, as long as the free charge is not trapped and non-radiatively recombined via deep-level defects, it can be fully extracted from the MTP and yield high PCE.
Since deep-level defects are the origin of the non-radiative recombination process, they are the biggest problem. For MTP, the dynamics of charge recombination is closely correlated with the depopulation rate of the charges on defects and with the defect density. The deep-level defects in MTP are considered to be the major non-radiative recombination centre that eliminate the charges and limit the performance of PSCs.60 The non-radiative recombination process in MTP could reduce the steady-state electron/hole density, charge lifetime, and charge diffusion length, thereby leading to a severe loss of PSC performance.55 Higher dimensional defects in MTP films, such as GBs and surface traps, are considered to be composed of deep-level defects and thus are significantly responsible for the non-radiative recombination process.61 As a result, an MTP with abundant GBs and grain surface area exhibits low PL intensity, further revealing the faster non-radiative recombination rate occurring at these places.62 Conductive atomic force microscopy (c-AFM) clearly detected intra-grain heterogeneity in the VOC and short circuit current density (JSC), together with low VOC and JSC at GBs in MTP film,63 which further suggests that the state densities of facet-dependent defects at GBs and surfaces are primarily responsible for the reduced photovoltaic performance of PSCs.


3.1.2 Charge trasportation. 
Free charges in a semiconductor are transported rapidly through the crystal lattice under an electric field until they interact with scatterers (e.g., phonons, impurities, and defects) or are trapped by vacancies. When the charges eventually reach their respective electrodes, photon-to-current conversion is performed. As expected, the efficient transportation of free charges (electrons/holes) largely determines the photovoltaic performance of SCs. To achieve high PCE values for the SCs, the free charges must be transported far enough to be collected by the electrodes before they are trapped or scattered at a defect. This requires charge transport in a semiconductor with high charge mobility and a long charge lifetime. The presence of defects in the semiconductor could increase the charge trapping rate and lead to charge scattering, as shown in Fig. 4.23
 Fig. 4  Charge trapping and charge scattering effects in a semiconductor. 
Because of their low charge effective mass (0.104 me, where me refers to the mass of an electron),64 high charge mobility,65 and long charge diffusion length,66 MTP based PSCs have displayed impressive optoelectronic performance. Nevertheless, dispersive transport of charges in MAPbI3 was identified in PSCs using mesoporous titanium oxide (TiO2) as the electron transporter.67 Whereas, no such behaviour was observed in planar PSCs containing a [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) passivation layer as an electron transporter.67 This was suggested to be due to the considerable presence of defects at the MAPbI3 interface due to the use of mesoporous TiO2. In addition, deep-level defects at GBs in MTP could also create potential barriers to reduce the conductivity and charge transport, and increase the charge scattering.68 This is evidenced by the much lower defect density (1010–1011cm−3) in single-crystal MAPbI3 than in polycrystalline MAPbI3 film (1016–1017cm−3).12 The former exhibits much higher charge mobility and longer charge diffusion lengths.12,69,70

3.2 The negative impacts of the defects in MTP
As discussed above, the presence of defects in MTP significantly influences the free charges drifting within the crystal structure. In addition to this, the presence of defects could also lead to some detrimental impacts on the characteristics of MTP. In this part, we will introduce the negative impacts of defects in MTP, involving ion migration and structural instability.

3.2.1 Ion migration. 
Ion migration in inorganic halide-based perovskite materials was observed 30 years ago. The migration of halide-ion vacancies with low activation energies (EA) was considered to be the intrinsic mechanism.73 The hysteresis74–76 and giant switchable photovoltaic effect20 of MTP based PSCs have made the ion migration within MTP the focus of recaptured attention. For example, based on the new finding of ferroelectricity and trapping effects in MTP film, it was proposed that ionic defect migration under an electric field might be the possible origin of these phenomena, effectively resulting in the photocurrent hysteresis effect.71,72 Moreover, it was suggested that the ion migration could induce polarization of the MTP, leading to hysteretic behaviour in PSCs.77 The ion migration process was also considered as a main factor in several physical phenomena, including the giant dielectric constant,78 diminished transistor behaviour at room temperature,79 photo-induced phase separation and the self-poling effect,80 and electrical-field driven reversible conversion between PbI2 and MAPbI3 phases.81 Thus, many efforts have been made to further investigate the inherent mechanism of ion migration in MTP. It is well known that the ion migration is hard to realize in an ideal MTP without any defects, so study of the ion migration by means of defect-mediated hopping is an important direction.82
To deeply understand defect-mediated ion migration, many theoretical studies have been carried out.71,72,83–86 As a representative MTP, in MAPbI3, all the ions (MA+, Pb2+, and I−) could migrate through point defects (i.e., vacancies and interstitials). As shown in Fig. 5a–c, vacancy-mediated ion migration involves an ion moving from one lattice site to its adjacent site. The interstitials use the ion on the regular lattice site as a bridge instead of diffusion by hopping along different interstitial sites (Fig. 5d). This is because the close-packed structure of the MAPbI3 crystal lacks sufficient space for ions to move between two interstitial sites.85 In order to initiate the defect-mediated ion migration, each defect in MTP needs to be activated in the first place. Defects with lower EA are easy to move. As shown in Fig. 5e and f, Eames et al.72 calculate three vacancy transport pathways related to conventional hopping between neighbouring positions: (i) I− migration along an octahedron edge, (ii) Pb2+ migration along the [110] diagonal of the cubic unit cell and (iii) MA+ migration into a neighbouring vacant A-site cage. They found that the EA of I− migrations through VI mediated diffusion (0.58–0.68 eV) is lower than that of MA+ migration through VMA (0.84 eV) and Pb2+ through VPb (2.31 eV).72 Haruyama et al.84 showed that VI and VMA have EA of 0.32–0.45 eV and 0.57–0.89 eV, respectively. Azpiroz et al.71 reported that the EA of VI, VMA and VPb is calculated to be 0.08, 0.46, and 0.80 eV, respectively. Among these studies, EA values at different defects are quite discrepant. This is due to the different MAPbI3 phase and calculation models used. Despite this, it reaches a consensus that VI and VMA have the highest possibility for mobility among all the ions under external electric poling.72,86 In addition, recent work found that H+ migration in MAPbI3 along a transient hydrogen bond connecting two equatorial iodides only requires an EA of 0.29 eV.83
 Fig. 5  Diffusion pathways of the different ions: (a) I− through VI, (b) MA+ through VMA, (c) Pb2+ through VPb and (d) I atoms through Ii. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. The three ionic transport mechanisms involve conventional vacancy hopping between neighbouring positions: (e) I− migration along an octahedron edge and Pb2+ migration along the [110] diagonal, and (f) MA+ migration into a neighbouring VMA cage. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
Despite the progress achieved on theoretical calculations, experimental observations of ion migration are still limited. In 2015, Xiao et al.20 observed a colour and morphology change close to the anode side of PSCs when the electrode was intentionally poled for 2 hours. They speculated that it originated from the drift of the charged Pb and MA vacancies. Later, Yuan et al.87 presented visual images of MA+ migration for the first time, using advanced photo-thermal induced resonance (PTIR) microscopy integrated with Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR) chemical signal acquisition and AFM imaging. After the poling of a lateral MAPbI3 based PSC in a small electric field (∼0.3 V μm−1), the uniform distribution of MA+ was destroyed. This clearly indicated that MA+ accumulated around the cathode region and left MA vacancies behind at the original sites. The accumulation of MA+ near the cathode induced n-type doping, and the MA vacancies near the anode induced p-type doping. The p-i-n configuration from this fabrication resulted in enhancement of the PCE of PSCs from 4.31% to 9.08%.80 In 2016, the migration of I− through vacancy-mediated diffusion was directly visualized by optical microscopy and elemental mapping. Under a strong electric field (∼3 V μm−1) at 330 K, a reversible conversion between MAPbI3 and PbI2 phases was observed.81 Under external bias, however, Pb2+ was found to not be mobile. This is in agreement with the theoretical prediction for Pb2+ with high EA.72 Delugas et al.88 employed first-principles calculations to investigate the molecular dynamics of all the atoms in MAPbI3. On the nanosecond scale and at room temperature, the iodine defects (both vacancies and interstitials) were found to be very mobile and detectable, while both Pb and MA defects were found to be difficult to move. This is because the time scale of MA+ and Pb2+ diffusion is several orders of magnitude larger than that of I−.88 Thus, it is proposed that the migration of Ii occurs when one of the two I–Pb bonds rotates around the Pb in the plane of the dumbbell. This process will kick off a neighbouring I− and generate a new dumbbell at a neighbouring crystal site.88
The presence of a high density of defects in MTP could result in unfavourable vacancy-mediated ion migration and structural transformation, leading to decreased performance of PSCs. Therefore, more experimental observations of ion migration with the help of theoretical calculations are needed.


3.2.2 Structural instability. 
To pave the way for the large-scale commercialization of PSCs, their long-term operational stability is a key to the success of PSC commercialization. This remains a big challenge, however, because of the instability of MTP. So far, many efforts have been made to understand the instability mechanism of MTP.89
First of all, the constituents of an MTP initially determine its phase stability. The phase stability of an MTP greatly depends on the symmetry of its crystal structure. The symmetry of the crystal structure of an MTP (considering the formula of ABX3) can be described by the tolerance factor t:9 (4)where RA, RB, and RX are the ionic radii of A, B, and X ions, respectively. The MTP can be formed in the t range of 0.813 < t < 1.107.90 When t = 1, the structure of MTP is highly symmetric and in its most stable phase. In order to increase the MTP stability with t closer to 1, replacing MA by FA (a larger ionic radius) and replacing I by Br (a smaller ionic radius) to form a more stable cubic crystal structure (MAyFA1−yPb(IxBr1−x)3) with high-symmetry is an efficient method.91–93
In addition, the replacement of MA by an organic cation with a long chain could cut MTP down from a 3D structure into a 2D structure in which the aligned PbI6 octahedral framework is covered by long chain cations. The resulted 2D structure shows high stability due to the protection of the long chain molecules and lower defect density at GBs. For example, Karunadasa et al.94 reported a highly stable 2D layered (PEA)2(MA)2[Pb3I10] (phenethylamine, PEA = C6H5(CH2)2NH+) that was exposed to moisture for 46 days with negligible degradation. Moreover, a mixture of halides (e.g., I and Br) in MTP was also found to increase the stability of the PSCs in the presence of humidity.95
Despite the progress achieved, several major drawbacks responsible for the degradation of MTP have reasons beyond its intrinsic structure, such as external environment (e.g., moisture, oxygen, temperature, and illumination) and internal intrinsic factors (e.g., ion migration, electron migration, and interfacial reactions).96 Essentially speaking, all these factors are associated with the defects present in MTP. In this section, the degradation mechanism of MTP originated from defects, in terms of moisture, oxygen, illumination, and thermal effects, are discussed.
3.2.2.1 Air instability. 
Moisture is one major reason for the degradation of MTP that diminishes the performance of unsealed PSCs. The reversible deprotonation as a result of hygroscopic MA exposure to moisture is mainly responsible for triggering the structural decomposition.97 Recently, Choi et al.98 reported that the charges preferentially trapped by the defects at GBs provide charge accumulation sites and infiltration pathways for water vapour. This is responsible for the irreversible moisture-induced degradation of MTP regardless of the polarity of charge.98 The degradation of MTP was found to be initiated from the GBs, which then gradually led to decomposition to irreversible products. The overlapping images of the topology and the potential distribution of the MTP clearly indicate the charges trapped along GBs.98 It was also proposed that the trapping of charges with any polarities at defects together with the induced local electric field could lead to deprotonation of organic cations.98 Such a deprotonation process could lead to the evaporation of volatile molecules (MA and FA) at room temperature. As a result, controlling the defect density in MTP, especially the surface defects, can increase its moisture stability to a great extent.
Similar to the case of moisture, the instability resulting from MTP exposure to oxygen is also a major obstacle. For example, exposure of MAPbI3 film to oxygen together with light leads to the formation of reactive superoxide (O2−) species. The O2− can deprotonate MA+ of photo-excited MAPbI3, leading to the formation of PbI2, H2O, MA, and I2 (Fig. 6a–d).99 DFT calculations revealed that VI defects in the crystal structure as reaction mediators play a key role in facilitating the superoxide formation.100 Moreover, it is found that negatively charged VI binding with O2 has the lowest formation energy to form superoxide. The thus-formed superoxide species could lead to oxygen-induced degradation from the surface into the interior of the MTP. In contrast, the grains with larger size, corresponding to low GB density and low defect density show lower yield of superoxide formation and thus display better stability compared to the grains with smaller size. This further suggests that higher defect density more easily promotes the decomposition rate of MTP through the penetration of O2 at GBs.100 Moreover, the formation of H2O when degraded by O2 could also promote the decomposition rate of MTP.
 Fig. 6  (a–d) Schematic representation of the reaction steps of oxygen-induced photodegradation of MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic representation of halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide MTP films. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Snapshots of the iodine interstitial Ii diffusion during annealing. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
3.2.2.2 Light irradiation instability. 
The optical instability of MTP under ultraviolet (UV) light irradiation was already observed in the early stages of PSC research. The photocatalytic effect of TiO2 was found to generate defects at the interface.101 This is considered as one of the main reasons for MTP degradation.102 Later, Leijtens et al.103 confirmed this proposed mechanism. They found that using a UV filter or replacing TiO2 with photo-stable Al2O3 could significantly enhance the UV stability of MTP. Inverted TiO2-free PSCs using UV filters, however, also displayed a decreased JSC and fill factor (FF), as well as the presence of light-activated metastable defects, leading to performance degradation of the PSCs.104 These results show the possibility of light-driven degradation within the MTP. Recently, Xing et al.105 observed that sunlight irradiation could greatly reduce the energy barrier for ion migration and promote ultrafast vacancy-mediated ion migration within polycrystalline MTP films. Instead, ion migration within a single crystal is difficult to detect, because an MTP single crystal with much lower defect density shows a much higher energy barrier for ion migration, therefore, the density of the intrinsic defects in MTP plays a crucial role in the light-driven structural degradation process.105
The degradation through vacancy-mediated ion migration was further observed in MTPs containing mixed halides. One superiority of MTP is that its bandgap (Eg) can be tuned by controlling the composition.106 For example, the Eg of (MAPbBrxI3−x (x = 0–3)) can be continuously tuned between 1.55 and 2.43 eV by adjusting the ratio of I to Br.107 The substitution of Br for I not only yields a higher VOC, but also considerably enhances the stability of the MTP by stabilizing its crystal lattice.95,109 It was found, however, that the light irradiation could lead to phase segregation and the growth of I-rich and Br-rich domains.110–112 Very recently, it was proposed that the segregation was attributable to the vacancy-influenced halide ion migration and the differing affinity of Pb2+ towards Br− and I−.108 As shown in Fig. 6e, vacancies play a major role in achieving stable I-rich and Br-rich phases after photoirradiation.108 A similar study also indicated that ion segregation takes place via halide defects, resulting in I-rich low-band-gap regions close to the illuminated surface.113 The localized strain induced by a single photo-excited charge interacting with the soft and ionic lattice of an MTP with mixed halides was sufficient to promote halide phase separation and nucleate a I-rich cluster.114 Although this segregation effect was reversible under short-term illumination, the defect-assisted light-driven ion migration from long-term irradiation could cause rapid degradation of MTPs with mixed halides, leading to poor performance of PSC devices.115
3.2.2.3 Thermal instability. 
The defects in MTP also influence the thermal stability of PSCs. The decomposition of MTP at GBs or surfaces can occur at much lower temperature and accelerate at elevated temperature. As expected, the decomposition of MTP begins from the GBs and interface.61 Theoretical work has shown that the iodine defects (both VI and Ii) are very mobile, especially at higher temperature. Fig. 6f shows snapshots of Ii diffusion during annealing.88 There is also indirect evidence for the thermal instability of MTP caused by defects. For example, single crystal MAPbI3 with a very low defect density (109–1011 cm−3) shows no signature of thermal decomposition, but with a small amount of HI and MA beginning to volatilize at 240 °C.116,117 Moreover, Stoumpos et al.57 reported that the decomposition of MAPbI3 single crystal started at >300 °C under N2 flow. Supasai et al.118 and Dualeh et al.119 demonstrated, however, that the well-studied MAPbI3 polycrystalline films with higher defect density by several orders of magnitude (1015–1017 cm−3) normally decompose at the low temperature of 150 °C. Although several lines of experimental evidence indicated that the thermal instability of an MTP was related to the defects in the MTP, further theoretical insights and deeper investigations into the defect-assisted thermal instability of MTP are still needed.

3.3 The positive impacts of the defects in MTP
It is well-known that the intentional introduction of defects through element doping into a semiconductor can endow the material with superior electrical properties. This strategy has been intensively applied in the smart and rational design of semiconductors to be used in energy conversion and storage systems, including rechargeable ion batteries,29,30,120,121 hydrogen evolution,122 fuel cells,31 and supercapacitors.123 As mentioned in the section above, however, the defects in MTP have been found to be greatly detrimental to the performance of PSCs. Nevertheless, the intentional introduction and manipulation of defects in MTP might bring some potential benefits and even enable the design of MTPs for a broader range of applications. In this section, some studies dealing with the potential advantages of utilizing defects in MTP are discussed.

3.3.1 Intentional manipulation of defects. 
Although there is a general consensus that defects in MTP film need to be reduced as much as possible to realize efficient PSCs, some emerging studies have proposed that defects could play very vital functions relating to the electrical properties of MTP and the performance of PSCs.36 As noted previously, the intentional introduction of interstitial defects into inorganic perovskite oxide semiconductors could modify their physical and electrical properties.124,125 Recently, it was reported that the intentional introduction of potassium cations (K+) into MAPbI3 is beneficial for improving the performance of PSCs (Fig. 7a).126 The doped K+ mainly occupied the interstitial sites in the MAPbI3 lattice and simultaneously created MA vacancies. The presence of K+ in an optimized amount (20 mol%) could lead to increased crystallinity, red-shifted PL emission, and decreased surface potential of the MAPbI3 film, thereby resulting in enhanced charge separation and reduced charge recombination in the MTP film. As shown in Fig. 7b and c, PSCs based on K0.2MA0.8PbI3 exhibited the highest PCE of 19.3% with stabilized power output. Very recently, Son et al.33 again confirmed that K+ is the valid dopant to occupy the interstitial sites in MTP by introducing a series of alkali metal iodides (LiI, NaI, KI, RbI, and CsI), which prevent the formation of iodide Frenkel defects. In this regard, the hysteresis effect can be greatly reduced by K+ doping. These studies should motivate more attention to the engineering of defects in MTP to lead to enhanced performance of PSCs and other applications.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the K0.2MA0.8PbI3 crystal structure and (b and c) performance comparison of K0.2MA0.8PbI3 and MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d and e) Schematic illustration of the structure of a designed resistive random access memory device based on MAPbI3. (f) Measured and fitted semi-logarithmic J–V curves. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (g) Mechanism for VI filling by CH3I molecules and (h) current measured in a N2 atmosphere and in air for MAPbI3 film before and after CH3I treatment. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 


3.3.2 Potential application utilizing the defects in MTP. 
The presence of defects in MTP often results in decreased performance of PSCs due to easy polarization, ion migration, charge trapping, and scattering. The disadvantages induced by the defects in MTP may be advantageous, however, in other applications. For example, the use of MTP has been extended to the field of resistive switching (RS).127 For MTP, VI with the lowest EA was considered to be the main cause of RS behavior.128 Lee et al.128 designed a non-volatile memory memristor taking advantage of the defect migration in MAPbI3−xClx film. The designed device shows a remarkable RS effect. As shown in Fig. 7d, under an applied forward bias voltage, the randomly distributed VI could be initialized to be positively charged and drift toward the negatively charged electrode (indium tin oxide, ITO). When the alignment of VI took place, the electron transport rate was enhanced by trap-to-trap hopping via charged VI sites (Fig. 7e). This is also called the “set” process (Fig. 7f), which originates from the well-known space-charge limited conduction (SCLC) of semiconductors. When electron detrapping occurs during the reset process, the conduction paths will be ruptured, and the material will be switched from the low-resistance state (ON) to the high-resistance state (OFF). During the “set-reset” process, MTP displays obvious bipolar RS characteristics.127
Very recently, an application of MAPbI3 as an O2 gas sensor has been developed.129 It was proposed that VI in an MAPbI3 crystal provided the active sensing sites for the O2 filling, because VI defects can act as charge traps. The decreased number of VI after O2 filling immediately translates into a higher number of charges, which are available for electrical transport with higher current. Moreover, to verify this “trap healing mechanism”, MAPbI3 film was treated with CH3I, in which an I atom is capable of filling a VI (Fig. 7g).130 After CH3I treatment, two effects can be observed in the current response measurement. As shown in Fig. 7h, the absolute current measured in pure N2 increased from 40 to 120 nA, which could be explained as a trap healing effect induced by the CH3I-mediated vacancy filling. What is more, the sensor response to O2 is lower after CH3I treatment. This is evidenced by the relative change in the current measured in N2 and air decreasing from 68 times without CH3I treatment to 45 times with CH3I treatment, which can be assigned to the lower number of VI active sites available for O2 sensing after CH3I treatment.
To date, applications utilizing the defects in MTP, such as memristors and O2 sensors, are still rare. It is highly desirable to explore more applications based on the defects in MTP.

4. Measurement methods for the defects in MTP
Although it is beyond the existing technology to visually see the defects in the crystal structure of MTP experimentally, it is still of great importance to understand the features of the defects (density and energy level) in MTP experimentally. Efficient techniques to study the defects in MTP are necessary and powerful in terms of providing useful information on the defects. In this part, we summarize the advantages and disadvantages of frequently-used technologies that characterize the defects in MTPs. These technologies include space charge limited current (SCLC), thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS), thermally stimulated current (TSC), steady-state PL emission, and deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS), which are explained as follows.
4.1 Space charge limited current (SCLC)
It is well known that the defects in semiconductors can capture and trap the free charges, and thus, the electrical properties of the material can be changed after all the defects are filled. In this regard, the SCLC method has been widely utilized to measure the relevant properties of defects (i.e., conductivity, carrier concentration, carrier mobility, and defect density).131
The inherent mechanism of the SCLC method is as follows: when a semiconductor is subjected to a sufficiently large electric field through Ohmic contacts, charges will be injected into the material and generate a current flow. When defect sites are present, they will capture a part of the injected charges and thus reduce the density of free charges. As expected, the current is limited by the space-charge effect. The defect density in the semiconductor can be obtained from the curve of the current vs. voltage (J–V) in the region of space-charge-injected current.135
The J–V curve is often plotted on a double logarithmic scale and analysed according to SCLC theory. Fig. 8a shows a typical J–V curve of PSCs based on an MAPbBr3 single crystal.132 As can be seen, the J–V curve is divided into three regions: the Ohmic region, the trap-filled limit (TFL) region, and the Child region. At low-voltage, the J–V curve (labelled in blue) is linearly fitted to I ∝ Vn=1 when defects are filled by a part of the injected charges. After all the defects are filled by charges at a particular onset voltage, the injected charges will freely move through the MAPbBr3 and the current will rapidly jump up to a low resistance state at the onset voltage of the trap-filled limit (VTFL). As a result, the defect (trap) density (ntraps) can be estimated as follows:132 (5)where L, ε, ε0, and q are the thickness of the MTP film, dielectric constant of the material, permittivity of vacuum, and electronic charge, respectively. For MTP, defects are either hole-traps or electron-traps. The SCLC method can selectively characterize the hole-trap density and electron-trap density of MTP by fabricating hole-only (electrode/hole transport material (HTM)/MTP/HTM/electrode) or electron-only (electrode/electron transport material (ETM)/MTP/ETM/electrode) devices, as shown in Fig. 8b and c.70,133,136,137Table 2 compares the defect density of MTP in the form of either single crystal or polycrystalline film, as measured by SCLC.
 Fig. 8  (a) Typical J–V curve of MAPbBr3. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. J–V curve for (b) hole-only and (c) electron-only MAPbI3 devices. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic band diagram of a p-type semiconductor junction. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (e) Typical trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by TAS measurements and (f) the corresponding performance of PSCs. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. 
Table 2 The state-of-the-art characterization techniques for defect trap densities in MTPs




Method
Material
Form
Defect density (cm−3)

E
A (eV)
Advantages
Limitations
Ref.




SCLC
MAPbBr3
Single crystal

n
electron = 1.1 × 1011
—
1. Gives two types of defect density, i.e., electron and hole density.
1. Only shows a single type of defect density at one time.

116




n
hole = 2.6 × 1010
2. EA of the defects can be obtained by temperature-dependent SCLC.
2. The kick point of VTFL may not only be caused by the defect trap filling, but also by some other effects, which produces a deviation in the estimated defect density.


SCLC
MAPbI3
Single crystal

n
electron = 4.8 × 1010
—
3. Need to fabricate electron-only or hole-only devices.

116




n
hole = 1.8 × 109


SCLC
MAPbI3
Single crystal
3.3 × 1010
—

132



SCLC
MAPbBr3
Single crystal
5.8 × 109
—

132



SCLC
MAPbI3
Single crystal
3.6 × 1010
—

133



SCLC
MAPbI3
Film
1.22 × 1016
—

137



SCLC
MAPbI3
Single crystal

n
hole = 3 × 1010

E
A(hole) = 0.1

139




n
electron = 3 × 1011

E
A(electron) = 0.2


SCLC
FAPbI3
Single crystal
1.34 × 1010
—

152



SCLC
FAPbI3
Single crystal
1.5 × 1011
—

153



SCLC
FAPbI3
Single crystal
1.1 × 1010
—

154



SCLC
FAPbBr3
Single crystal
9.6 × 109
—

154



SCLC
FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45
Film
3 × 1015
—

155







TAS
MAPbI3
Film
1 × 1015–1 × 1017
0.35–0.55
1. Detects both shallow and deep defects by tracing the junction capacitance.
1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.

61



TAS
MAPbI3
Single crystal
1 × 109–1 × 1010
0.35–0.50

2. Provides EA of defects.
3. Measured on regular working devices under illumination.

2. Only the defects below the energy demarcation can capture or emit charges and contribute to the capacitance signal.

133



TAS
(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3
Film
1 × 1016–1 × 1019
0.42–0.55
3. Trapped charges with long thermal emission time cannot contribute to the capacitance signal.

156



TAS
MAPbI3
Film
1 × 1018–1 × 1019
0.33–0.45

157







TSC
MAPbI3
Film
1 × 1015
0.5
1. Detects wide defect levels by tracing the thermally activated current.
1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.

146



TSC
FA0.83MA0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3
Film
7.3 × 1016
0.248

2. Provides EA of defects.
3. Measured on regular working devices under illumination.


2. Only estimates the lower limit of defect density in the material.
3. Trapped charges with long thermal emission time will not contribute to the thermally activated current signal.


158







ssPL
MAPbI3
Film
Bulk ∼5 × 1016
—
1. Directly measures on the film surface, with no need to deposit an electrode.
1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.

147



Surface ∼1.6 × 1017
2. Provides bulk defect density, surface defect density, and total defect density.
2. The EA of defects cannot be deduced.


ssPL
FAPbI3
Film
1 × 1017
—

148



ssPL
MAPbI3
Film
2.5 × 1017
—

148



ssPL
MAPbI3
Film
1 × 1017–1 × 1018
—

159



ssPL
MAPbI3
Film
3.6 × 1016
—

160



ssPL
MAPbI3−xClx
Film
5.1 × 1015
—

160







DLTS
FAPbI3
Film
5.28 × 1014
0.46–0.8
1. Great sensitivity, and wide range of observable defect depths.
1. Might miss minority carrier traps that cannot be saturated at practical levels of forward current.

48



2. Provides information about EA and electron- and hole-capture cross-sections.
2. Cannot observe shallow-level defect traps with high thermal emission rate.




Temperature-dependent SCLC measurements are introduced to deduce the energy depth of the defects in a semiconductor. It is able to probe the energy level of defects close to both the valence and the conduction band if both hole-only and electron-only devices are prepared.138 From the temperature-dependent SCLC curves at each voltage point, the EA of defects can be extracted using the following equation:139 (6)where J, kB, and T are the current density, Boltzmann's constant, and absolute temperature, respectively.
Although SCLC has been widely recognized for the evaluation of the defect density in MTPs, there are also several drawbacks. First, SCLC only shows the density of a single type of charge defect (electron traps or hole traps) at one time through a single charge type device. Moreover, the defect density estimated by VTFL is based on the assumption that the linear part of the J–V curve always occurs in the Ohmic region until the defects are completely filled. This onset point might also result from field ionization of defects, however, or the onset of a double injection effect.135 Thus, the estimated defect density could have a deviation.
4.2 Thermal admittance spectroscopy (TAS)
Charged defects are equivalent to a localized capacitor, so that the trapped charges not only influence the electrical properties of the semiconductor, but also the capacitance characteristics. By tracing the changes in capacitance during the alternating current (AC) voltage, the features of a defect can be deduced. As an established and effective technique, TAS has been broadly applied to measure the defect density in SCs, including both shallow- and deep-level defects, by tracing the junction capacitance,140,141 because the defect density and its effectiveness as a dopant are related to the junction capacitance. In order to reveal the defect density and energy distribution within the band gap in a semiconductor, TAS measurements at various temperatures are commonly used.134
In typical p–n junction SCs, the capacitance mainly originates from the charging–discharging of defects with changes in the frequency of the AC voltage. Defect occupancy of the semiconductor is determined by the position of the Fermi level. As shown in Fig. 8d, electron traps below the Fermi level are assumed to be filled by photo-generated electrons.133,134 When the frequency of the AC voltage changes, the corresponding traps can release their charge within the AC period and thus contribute to the admittance. The release of the charge depends on not only the energy depth of the defect, but also the temperature, because the charge could be thermally activated and released, and then contribute to the admittance signal. Therefore, the defect traps with different EA at different modulated AC frequencies and temperatures are related to the junction capacitance.134
The energy of the defect energy level Eω at frequency (ω) and the characteristic attempt-to-escape frequency (ω0) can be expressed as follows:61 Eω = Ed − Ev(7) (8)where EV, Ed, ω0, and β are the VBM energy level, the energy depth of the defect, the attempt-to-escape frequency, and a temperature-dependent parameter, respectively. Below Eω, defect traps can capture or emit charges and contribute to the capacitance. The defect density can be derived from the angular frequency dependent capacitance as follows:61 (9)where C and ω are the capacitance and angular frequency, respectively. Vbi and W, the built-in potential and depletion width of the target material, are extracted from capacitance–voltage measurements and Mott–Schottky analysis, respectively.61 The typical analysis of capacitance–voltage scans for Schottky junctions is based on the depletion approximation. It assumes that there are no free charges at the junction in the space charge region. In this view, the charge in this region entirely originates from the dopant atoms or molecules.141 The depletion width W can be expressed as:142 (10)where εr and A are the relative dielectric constant and the contact area, respectively.

Fig. 8e displays a typical curve for the trap density of states (tDOS) (i.e., defect density) as a function of the defect energy level Eω based on MAPbI3 PSCs, together with the passivation layer of PCBM as a comparison.61 As can be seen, the Eω below 0.4 eV (band 1, 0.35–0.40 eV) was assigned to the relatively shallow-level defect trap. The Eω above 0.4 eV (band 2 and band 3) was indexed to the deeper level ones. It was found that PSCs that had a PCBM layer but were not thermally annealed showed a significantly reduced tDOS at band 2 and band 3. PSCs with both a PCBM layer and the annealing process could efficiently reduce the shallow-level defect trap even more. These results indicate that the deep-level defect trap located at the surface of the MAPbI3 film can be passivated by PCBM without thermal annealing. The shallow-level defect traps stay deeper in MAPbI3 films that can only be passivated by the diffusion of PCBM into the MAPbI3 layer.61 After deposition and annealing of PCBM, PSC devices showed improved photovoltaic performance, as shown in Fig. 8f.
The TAS method is a valid technology to qualitatively compare the defect density in MTP deposited under different conditions. Nevertheless, TAS has its own limitations in principle, as follows. (i) Admittance spectroscopy cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states. If valence and conduction band states are similar in shape and density, the analysis of admittance data would lead to an overestimated defect density.140 (ii) Only the defect traps below the energy demarcation can capture or emit charges and contribute to the capacitance signal. In this case, the defects with deeper levels are easily omitted, leading to incomplete estimation of the defect density. (iii) TAS measurement is a temperature dependent technique. A trapped charge with a long thermal emission time cannot contribute to the capacitance signal, which also reduces the accuracy of the measured defect density.
4.3 Thermally stimulated current (TSC)
As well as the capacitance behaviour, the trapped charge could also be thermally released, because the charges captured by defect traps have certain thermal excitation energies, depending on not only their energy depth, but also the temperature. As expected, the variation in current is able to reflect the features of the defects in a semiconductor. The fundamental principle of TSC is based on the assumption that defect traps can be partly filled by optically excited electrons at very low temperature. During the subsequent heating process in the dark, these electrons may be thermally excited to the CBM yielding the current signal ITSC.143 The EA of the charge in the defect trap can be calculated as follows:144 (11)
The lower limit of the total defect (trap) density ntrap can be obtained by integrating the TSC spectrum over time based on the inequality:145 (12)where V is the volume of the sample.
To measure the TSC curve of a PSC, the device is first cooled to a very low temperature. Then, the charges are optically excited by illumination. After that, the PSC device is held at a constant low temperature to allow the charge to relax in the density of states and occupy possible trap states. This process is called the thermalization process. When the temperature is slowly increased at a constant rate, the charges are gradually released from defect traps. During this process, it is possible for current to flow in the device.
As shown in Fig. 9a, Baumann et al.146 used the TSC method to study the defect traps in MAPbI3 based PSCs with the device structure of ITO/poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate)/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Au) (red curve) and ITO/CuSCN/MAPbI3/PCBM/C60/BCP/Au (green curve), where CuSCN is copper(I) thiocyanate. As can be seen, two peaks at very low temperatures (T1, T2) were assigned to the shallow-level defect traps in the PCBM/C60 electron transport layers rather than the MAPbI3 layer. This is because the device without transport layers (purple curve) did not show T1 and T2. The peak at T3 was attributed to the phase transition of MAPbI3 from the orthorhombic to the tetragonal phase. It should be noted that the defect trap distribution overlaps the phase transition at ∼163 K. Since all the peaks occurring below the phase transition are not directly relevant to the device performance, the authors did not pay more attention to T3. This is mainly because only the trapping behaviour of the phases at higher temperature is important for PSCs operating under ambient terrestrial conditions.146 The peak at T4 at ∼194 K resulted from the charges released from defect traps. Thus, the features of the defect traps at T4 were deduced by TSC theory. Based on inequality (12), a lower limit for the defect density of 1 × 1021 cm−3 was calculated from the time integral of TSC. From the Arrhenius plots (Fig. 9b) and eqn (11), EA of ∼508 ± 20 meV was calculated for the defects at T4.146
 Fig. 9  (a) TSC measurement of devices with a CuSCN hole-transport layer (HTL) (green), PEDOT:PSS HTL (red), without a transport layer (purple), and in the dark with a CuSCN HTL (black). (b) Arrhenius plots of the initial rise of the TSC peak T4 for the devices with CuSCN HTL (green), PEDOT:PSS HTL (red), and without a transport layer (purple). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) PL intensity as a function of pump fluence, with the arrow indicating the defect trap saturation of the threshold fluence Ptrapth. (d) PL intensity as a function of the photon-generated exciton density within the low pump fluence range; the defect density of bulk nFTP and surface nSTP can be obtained by fitting the plots using eqn (16). Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014. 
TSC has obvious limitations. Inequality (12) only estimates the lower limit of the defect density in the MTP. During the TSC measurement process, the incomplete trap filling, partial detrapping of charges during thermalization, and recombination of the detrapped charges with opposite charges could lead to undetected defects. Moreover, similar to TAS, only those detrapped photo-generated charges could contribute to the TSC response. Under these conditions, the defect traps with long thermal emission times will not be counted in the TSC measurement, and this reduces the accuracy of the estimation.
4.4 Steady-state PL emission (ssPL)
In addition to electrical properties, the optical properties can also be influenced by the defects in semiconductors due to charge trapping. It is very much expected that the PL features of a semiconductor could provide useful information about its defects. Under ambient conditions, an MTP film was photo-excited with increasing pump fluence to demonstrate its coherent light emission properties (steady-state PL emission spectra).147 After photo-excitation, the excited charges in an MTP film either relax through band edge emission or are trapped by defect traps. The turning point at low pump fluence represents the photo-generated charges needed to fill all the defect traps (i.e., the threshold trap pump fluence, Ptrapth). Ptrapth is obtained by the intersection of the linearly extrapolated PL intensity and the pump fluence axis. The total defect (trap) density ntrap (both bulk and surface) can be estimated according to the following equation:148 (13)where α and E are the absorption coefficient and the energy of one photon at the wavelength of the laser pulse, respectively.
Under low fluence femtosecond laser pulse excitation in which Auger recombination is negligible, it is assumed that defect-mediated charge recombination is much slower than band edge radiative recombination. The dynamics of the photogenerated charge density (nC) can be described using the following equations:147 (14) (15)where niTP(t), ai, and τ0 are the defect (trap) density, the product of the trapping cross section and carrier velocity, and the initial lifetime of the photoluminescence of the film, respectively. Thus, the relationship between the integrated band-edge PL intensity (IPL) and the initial photogenerated charge density nc(0) can be obtained as:147 (16)where k is a constant. When the experimental results are fitted by eqn (16), it can yield two types of defect: a bulk defect with a fast trapping time and a surface/interfacial defect with a slow trapping time. Also, the corresponding defect densities can be calculated.
For example, Xing et al.147 measured the defect density in MAPbI3 film by steady-state PL emission spectroscopy. As shown in Fig. 9c, the experimental results led to the deduction that the bulk defect density nFTP was ∼5 × 1016 cm−3, whereas the surface defect density nSTP was ∼1.6 × 1017 cm−3. The sum of these two types of defect correlates well with the total defect density (both bulk and surface) of ∼2 × 1017 cm−3. The latter is simply estimated based on eqn (13) with the Ptrapth value of 1.4 ± 0.3 μJ cm−2 (Fig. 9d).
Generally, PL emission with increased pump fluence is an efficient method to estimate the total defect density with relatively high accuracy. In particular, it can also provide both bulk and surface defect densities. The main drawback of this method is that the energy level of defects cannot be deduced from the experimental data.
4.5 Deep-level transient spectroscopy (DLTS)
The release of the charges captured by shallow-level defects can influence the electrical properties of a semiconductor. The charge trapped by deep-level defects is difficult to detect, however, using the techniques mentioned above. DLTS analysis has improved features from the aspects of its sensitivity, range of observable defect depths, and facile operation.149 The essential feature of DLTS is the ability to set an emission rate window. The instrument only responds when it detects a transient with a rate within this window. Thus, if the emission rate of a defect varies in this window at different temperatures, the instrument will show a response peak at the specific temperature. The main idea behind DLTS is to use the variation in defect emission rates with temperature to determine the difference in energy between the defect states and one of the band edges as well as to determine the capture cross-section of the defects.150
In the typical DLTS measurement, the capacitance transients are investigated by measuring the capacitance variations with variations in temperature, usually in the range from liquid nitrogen temperature to room temperature (300 K) or above. During the initial bias pulse at low temperature, defects could be filled by the bias-generated charges. In this process, the capture rate of a defect trap is much larger than its emission rate, and thus, the latter can be neglected. When the temperature increases, DLTS peaks will appear if the emission rate of charge trapped by the defects is within the rate window. The defect density can be obtained directly from the capacitance change, corresponding to complete filling of the defect traps with a saturating injection pulse or the largest possible majority-carrier pulse. The defect density at a certain temperature can be simply described as:149 ntrap = 2(ΔC/C)(NA − ND)(17)where ΔC and C are the capacitance change from t = 0, and the capacitance of the diode under quiescent reverse-biased conditions, respectively. NA − ND is the net acceptor concentration on the p side of the junction. The EA of the defects below the conduction band can be given as:149 (18)where en, σn, νn, ND, and gn are the thermal emission rate of the trapped charges, charge capture cross-section, mean thermal velocity of the charges, effective density of states in the carrier band, and degeneracy of the defect, respectively.
For example, as shown in Fig. 10a, Yang et al.48 used DLTS to measure the density of deep-level defects in an FAPbI3 film with a temperature scan rate of 0.81547 s−1. As can be seen, the control layer displays three DLTS peaks, labelled as A1, A2, and A3. Based on the Arrhenius plot, as shown in Fig. 10b, the energy levels of the defects are calculated to be 0.78 eV (A1), 0.82 eV (A2), and 0.46 eV (A3). These are below the conduction band, indicating dominant deep-level defects (A1 and A2) and a semi-shallow defect (A3) for the FAPbI3 film. These defects are suggested to originate from interstitial Pb (Pbi) and antisite defects (i.e., MAI, PbI, IMA and IPb). Moreover, after the introduction of additional iodide ions (I3−) into the precursor solution, the deep-level defects (A1 and A2) were significantly reduced, including the quick disappearance of the A1 signal, while the defect density of A2 decreased from 5.28 × 1014 cm−3 to 8.81 × 1013 cm−3.48 As a result, the effective reduction of the deep-level defects enabled PSCs with a high certified PCE of 22.1% in small cells and 19.7% in 1-square-centimeter cells with negligible hysteresis (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) DLTS spectra of the FAPbI3 film and control measured in the temperature range from 150 to 330 K. (b) Arrhenius plots to determine the energy levels of defects. (c) J–V curves of the champion PSCs in forward- and reverse-scan modes and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. 
DLTS can provide information about the EA, concentration profile, and electron- and hole-capture cross-section of the different defects in MTP. Nevertheless, DLTS also has its limitations. For example, it might miss minority charge traps (defects) that cannot be filled at forward current. Even if such a defect level could be saturated during the injection pulse, it might also be able to empty during the fall time of the pulse.149 Moreover, if the thermal emission rate is much larger than the optical rate (shallow centres such as donors, acceptors, and bound excitons), the defect can no longer be filled between pulses, and the transient disappears. This indicates that DLTS cannot observe shallow-level defects with a high thermal emission rate.
As shown in Table 2, the advantages and disadvantages of the above-discussed techniques to characterize the defects in MTP are compared. These techniques give important information (e.g., density and energy levels) about the defects in MTP. So far, the defect trap density of MTP is highly related to the quality of the MTP materials. The defect trap density of an MAPbI3 single crystal is in the range of 109–1011 cm−3, which is much lower than for its film form with a defect density of 1015–1017 cm−3. Moreover, Adinolfi et al.139 found that the EA of the defects in an MAPbI3 single crystal was as low as 0.10–0.15 eV, which agrees well with the DFT prediction.151 For the MAPbI3 thin film, the shallow and deep-level defect traps with a wide EA distribution of 0.10–0.82 eV are generally measured by different techniques (Table 2). Among these techniques, SCLC is most frequently-used by many research groups working on MTP single crystals and MTP thin films. The obtained results are highly consistent.151 Despite this, using the SCLC technique, as well as the other four techniques, it is still difficult to identify the defect structure. Therefore, the development of more advanced techniques to identify defect structures, as well as the preparation of high quality MTP single crystals and MTP films, is highly important.
5. Defect engineering for highly efficient MTP based PSCs
As described above, the presence of defect trap states located in the forbidden gap of an MTP is one of the main limiting factors obstructing the fabrication of high-performance PSCs. Suppressing the formation of the defects in the MTP is an effective way to improve the PCE and operational stability of PSCs. To date, many research efforts have been made, and much progress has also been achieved. In this section, we will give a brief overview of the state-of-the-art effective defect engineering techniques for highly efficient PSCs, including defect passivation, GB density reduction, and structural dimensionality reduction.
5.1 Defect passivation
Although most vacancy defects create shallow transition state levels near the band edges, deep-level defects (e.g., interstitial and antisite defects) have been identified as non-radiative recombination centres that are fatal to the optoelectronic properties of MTP. The defects in MTP could possibly exist on the surface, at the GBs, and in the grain interior. Theoretical results suggest that the non-radiative recombination centres for charges in MTP are mainly related to the presence of I-rich chemical species (e.g., I interstitials or I antisites).43,134 In order to eliminate these species of deep-level defects, passivating them through chemical interactions is the most facile and effective strategy.

5.1.1 Additive passivation. 
To passivate the defects at the GBs and on the surface of MTP film, numerous small-sized molecules have been used as additives. This is because these molecules are able to bond with the point defect sites in MTP. As a classic electron transport layer in inverted PSC devices, PCBM coated on MAPbI3 film after thermal annealing can permeate into the MAPbI3 layer along the GBs, effectively passivating the defects and eliminating the notorious photocurrent hysteresis phenomenon in PSCs.161 The reduction of the defect density significantly reduces the recombination of interface charges and prolongs the lifetime and mobility of charges, leading to improved performance of PSCs. Based on DFT calculations, it was found that the introduction of PCBM can interact with the Pb–I antisite defect, in which I occupies the Pb site and forms a trimer with neighbouring I atoms, as shown in Fig. 11a. This interaction leads to a hybridized ground state wave function between the PCBM and the MAPbI3 surface (Fig. 11b). Because the bond between PCBM and I− is thermodynamically favourable, the formation of deep-level defects is significantly suppressed (Fig. 11c).161 The bond between PCBM and I− results from the charge transfer from PCBM to the buckyball and the van der Waals force between I− and the butyric acid methyl ester group, which is further evidenced by liquid-state 1H nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) measurements.162 Moreover, our work revealed that the introduction of ordered PCBM nanorods into MAPbI3 film was also found to be useful for defect passivation and simultaneous incorporation of “electron transport highways” within the MAPbI3 film.163 This is due to the formation of bulk heterojunction structures between the MAPbI3 and the PCBM nanorods.163 Apart from fullerene derivatives, CuI and Cu(thiourea)I [Cu(Tu)I] have been recently reported to effectively passivate the defects in MAPbI3 film.164 A defect can interact with the under-coordinated metal cation and the halide anion at the surface of MAPbI3. Such interaction not only provides I− to fill the halide vacancies and coordinate the under-coordinated metal cations (red arrows in Fig. 11d), but also chelates the under-coordinated halide anions with the electropositive Cu atoms (red dashed lines in Fig. 11d). The incorporated p-type defect passivators can form bulk heterojunctions with MAPbI3, which can further facilitate hole transport and decrease the recombination of charges. As a result, the passivated MAPbI3 film demonstrated a high PCE of 19.9% with no hysteresis in inverted PSCs (Fig. 11e).164 In addition, other small molecules, such as pyridine,62,165 triiodide,48 thiocyanide ion (SCN−),166,167 iodopentafluorobenzene (IPFB),168 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT),169 guanidinium (GA),170 N-doped graphene,171 and Lewis acid and Lewis base172 have also been used to passivate the defects in MTP, leading to improved performance of PSCs.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of PCBM adsorbed on Pb–I antisite defects, (b) the wavefunction overlap of the hybridization between PCBM and the surface defect, and (c) the density of states (DOS) with a deep-level trap state (black) induced by the reduced Pb–I antistite defect and a shallower-level trap state (red) after the passivation of PCBM. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic illustration of possible mechanisms for the trap state passivation of defects in MAPbI3 with the addition of CuI and Cu(Tu)I. (e) J–V curves of PSC with Cu(Tu)I additive in the MAPbI3 layer. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 


5.1.2 Surface passivation. 
Apart from the reduction of defects by the use of small molecules, the elimination of defects at the interface between the MTP active layer and the electron transport layer (ETL) in PSCs has recently also attracted great interest. In 2014, Noel et al.173 found that the treatment of the crystal surface of MAPbI3−xClx with the Lewis bases thiophene and pyridine could significantly reduce non-radiative electron–hole recombination and prolong the photoluminescence lifetimes up to 2 μs. This is attributed to the electronic passivation of under-coordinated Pb atoms in MAPbI3−xClx.173 Zhao et al.174 treated the surface of MTP film with long-chain C8 diammonium iodide. The passivation was confirmed by scanning Kelvin probe microscopy (SKPM) and time-resolved PL (TRPL) measurements. Recently, Lin et al.157 introduced an n-type π-conjugated Lewis base, indacenodithiophene end-capped with 1,1-dicyanomethylene-3-indanone (IDIC), as an interlayer in PSCs. As shown in Fig. 12a, IDIC with n-type semiconducting properties enabled the extraction of electrons from MTP, while the Lewis base end groups in IDIC simultaneously passivated the under-coordinated Pb ions and Pb clusters in MTP (namely, the Lewis acid traps).157 The energy diagram results (Fig. 12b) clearly indicated the reduction of the defect density after the surface passivation by IDIC. Compared to the control device without IDIC, the PSCs with IDIC yielded a 45% PCE enhancement (19.4% for the champion cell). Zheng et al.175 reported quaternary ammonium halides as an efficient interfacial passivation layer to reduce the defect density and prolong the recombination lifetime of charges in MAPbI3 film. As shown in Fig. 12c and d, quaternary ammonium ions were expected to only passivate MA+ vacancies at cuboctahedral sites to compensate the loss of MA+ on the film surface. The authors found that, compared with the PCBM passivation layer, choline chloride passivation can yield higher photovoltaic performance with a PCE of 21.0%, JSC of 23.7 mA cm−2, VOC of 1.14 V, and FF of 78.0% (Fig. 12e). Moreover, treating the TiO2 electron transport layer with ionic liquid137 or Cl155 is another efficient method to passivate the defects at the interface between the TiO2 and the MTP layer. Without Cl treatment, the Pb–I antisite defects will lead to localized states near the valence band edge, where these states can capture holes and become non-radiative recombination centres, leading to decreased performance of the PSCs.155 When the TiO2 is treated with Cl, the formation energy of the Pb–Cl antisite at the PbCl2-terminated interface is improved, indicating that the antisite defect is suppressed (Fig. 12f). Theoretical calculations also showed that the Pb–Cl antisite defect has little effect on interface recombination, and it becomes much shallower and more delocalized.155 The improved performance of PSCs containing a Cl-treated TiO2 layer was also evidenced by a high laboratory PCE of 21.4% (VOC = 1.189 V, JSC = 22.3 mA cm−2, FF = 0.806), without hysteresis in J–V sweeps (Fig. 12g) and having excellent reproducibility within the narrow distribution of PCE values (average PCE of 19.6%) in over 204 devices (Fig. 12h).
 Fig. 12  (a) The interface passivation of MAPbI3 film by a π-conjugated Lewis base and (b) DOS comparison of PSCs before and after surface passivation. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (c) The device structure of planar heterojunction PSCs and (d) schematic illustration of quaternary ammonium halides assembled on the defect sites. (e) J–V curves of FA0.83MA0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 PSCs with choline chloride and PCBM passivation layers. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017. (f) DFT calculation results for shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl antisite defects on the PbCl2-terminated TiO2/perovskite interface. (g) J–V curves of PSCs with TiO2 and TiO2–Cl as ETMs, measured in reverse and forward scans, and (h) histogram of PCE values among 204 devices with a TiO2–Cl HTL. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. 
In addition to the defect passivation of MTP film, other interface issues (e.g., energy level alignment, band bending, pinned Fermi level) could be affected by the density of surface defect states (DoSDS) of MTP film during the ETL deposition. It is generally suggested that the MAPbI3 films deposited under different preparation conditions could generate various DoSDS on the film surface, thus leading to different energy level alignments at the interface. For example, Wang et al.176 prepared an MAPbI3 film using a two-step solid reaction method and found upward band bending in the MAPbI3 layer when C60 with an upward shift of the energy levels was deposited on the MAPbI3 film. Schulz et al.,177 however, prepared an MAPbI3 film using a one-step spin-coating method, and reported that no band bending was observed at the MAPbI3/C60 interface after C60 deposition. This is because almost flat band conditions are created with the formation of the MAPbI3/C60 interface. Moreover, the DoSDS of the MTP film could lead to a pinned Fermi level. For example, the n-type MTP single crystal shows a pinned Fermi level that moves downward to the VBM, which is caused by donor-type surface states.178 Very recently, it was also proposed that the interface issues are highly correlated with the initial DoSDS of the MTP film.179 In particular, only small changes in the surface band bending are observed when the initial DoSDS of the MTP film is high. This is because the Fermi level is strongly pinned close to the CBM. When the DoSDS is low, the MTP film after ETL deposition displays strong band flattening at the MTP/ETL interface, which has resulted from an upward band bending of the MTP.


5.1.3 Self-passivation. 
In addition to the extraneous molecule-assisted defect passivation discussed above, MTP films can also be self-passivated by control of the component ratio of the MTP. The PbI2 residual left in the MAPbI3 film has been demonstrated to be an important factor that can influence the performance of PSCs. For example, excess PbI2 can induce the self-passivation of MTP, giving it a prolonged charge lifetime and reduced non-radiative recombination at both the GBs and the interface,180–187 although the film stability was found to be slightly decreased.188 Chen et al.181 proposed that prolonged annealing time for MTP film would force the MAI to escape from the GBs and generate a PbI2 rich region (Fig. 13a and b). As a result, the thus-formed p-i-n structures (TiO2–PbI2–MAPbI3 and MAPbI3–PbI2–2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl amine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (spiro-OMeTAD)) effectively reduced the probability of charge recombination at both interfaces. As shown in Fig. 13c, at the TiO2/perovskite interface, the presence of wide band-gap PbI2 species helps to reduce the probability of charge recombination. At the perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD interface, the presence of PbI2 changes the band alignment bending from downward to upward, which reduces the charge recombination between the electrons from perovskite and the holes from spiro-OMeTAD, as shown in Fig. 13d. At the optimized annealing time of 60 min, the PSCs achieved a PCE of 12.0%, with VOC, JSC, and FF of 0.959 V, 18.05 mA cm−2, and 69.32%, respectively (Fig. 13e). It was also found that the hysteresis effect could be significantly reduced by prolonging the film annealing time up to 100 min.189 It was due to the passivation of GBs by precipitated PbI2. In order to confirm the influence of the PbI2 dosage, Jacobsson et al.53 compared MTP films with different compositions, ranging from a large deficiency of PbI2 (i.e., MAI-rich) to a large surplus of PbI2 (i.e., PbI2-rich). It was interesting that the MAI-rich condition yielded a higher VOC value of 1.20 V, although the PbI2-rich condition gave a higher PCE in PSC devices. They suggested that a surplus of MA+ could lead to the complete conversion of PbI2 into MTP phase, enabling MTP with high crystal quality, longer charge lifetimes, and high PL and external electroluminescence quantum efficiency.53 Also, they pointed out that thick PbI2 layers with the wrong energy matching may insulate individual grains and block charge transfer instead. Moreover, they also found that the excess MAI present at GBs could obstruct the ion migration, leading to decreased J–V hysteresis and increased photostability.53
 Fig. 13  (a) Energy diagram and (b) schematic diagram of PbI2 self-passivation in MAPbI3 film. (c and d) Two types of a p-i-n structure are formed at both interfaces. (e) J–V curves of the PSCs device. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Schematic representation of MAPbI3 film with and without a GB healing layer containing Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates. (g) J–V curves of PSCs based on MA1+xPbI3 with x = 0.06. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
Furthermore, Son et al.190 claimed that excess MAI could also heal the GBs with a continuous and pronounced conducting pathway through the GBs. As shown in Fig. 13f, the pathways were produced by self-assembled MAI GBs. The healing process at GBs could greatly improve the charge lifetime, suppress non-radiative recombination, and extract the charges at the interface between the MTP and selective contacts.190 With these advantages, PSCs with excess MAI delivered a high average PCE of 20.4% (Fig. 13g). The reverse scan showed PCE = 20.6% with JSC = 23.72 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.117 V, FF = 0.779, and the forward scan showed PCE of 20.2% with JSC = 23.67 mA cm−2, VOC = 1.110 V, and FF = 0.768.190

5.2 GB density reduction
Considering the high crystallinity of MAPbI3, intrinsic defects might have a good chance to occupy sites at the surface and GBs. Many efforts have been devoted to increasing the size of the grains (i.e., reduction of GB density), as well as their crystal quality. In this part, we mainly focus on the film fabrication strategies that are able to enlarge the grain size of MTP film,52,191–196 though the grain size can be enlarged through the introduction of some small molecules as additives to MTP.161,171,197,198
As shown in Fig. 14a, Xiao et al.191 employed a solvent post-annealing method for the first time to efficiently increase the crystallinity and grain size of MAPbI3. TAS measurements showed that the total defect density of the solvent-annealed (SA) PSC device after solvent annealing was 1.8 × 1016 cm−3, which was nearly three times smaller than for the thermally-annealed (TA) PSC device (5.3 × 1016 cm−3). This is because the solvent vapour could condense on the surface and in the void areas of the MAPbI3 film, leading to the elimination of GBs and appropriate rearrangement of the MAPbI3 film. Fig. 14b and c displays cross-sectional SEM images of the SA MAPbI3 film with larger grain size than that for the TA film. As expected, the device using the SA method exhibited a higher PCE of 15.6% with no hysteresis (Fig. 14d) compared with the one using the TA method (9.9%), as well as a stable steady-state photocurrent output at the maximum power point (Fig. 14e).
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvent-annealing-induced method with increased grain size, and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of PSCs with (b) thermal annealing and (c) solvent annealing. (d) PSCs measured at different scanning rates from negative to positive bias and (e) steady-state photocurrent output at the maximum power point (0.82 V). Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (f) Schematic illustration of large-area growth of MAPbI3 based on the hot-casting method. (g) Planar device configuration of PSCs for photovoltaic performance characterization. (h) Optical micrograph of the MAPbI3 film with large grain size. (i) J–V curves at different voltage scan rates and voltage delay times (ms). (j) PCE values for 50 measured PSC devices. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. 
Nie et al.194 reported continuous and pinhole-free MAPbI3 films with millimeter-scale crystalline grains produced by using a solution-based hot-casting technique, as shown in Fig. 14f. Benefiting from the reduction in bulk defects and improved charge mobility in large GBs, PSC devices with an inverted structure (Fig. 14g) exhibited high PCE, approaching 18% with no hysteresis as well as high reproducibility (Fig. 14j).
In order to investigate the effect of the wettability of the hole transport layers (HTLs) on the growth of MAPbI3 grains, Bi et al.52 grew the grains on non-wetting HTLs (Fig. 15a). They found that the HTLs increased the nucleus spacing though the suppression of heterogeneous nucleation and reduction of the GB density. This was realized by imposing less drag force on the substrate. In a comparison of the morphologies of MAPbI3 films on different HTLs with various wettabilities (Fig. 15c), the authors concluded that poly[bis(4-phenyl)(2,5,6-trimethylphenyl)amine] (PTAA) as the HTL enabled MAPbI3 films with a grain size of 2–3 μm, possessing low defect density, fewer bulk and surface defects, and higher charge mobility. As a result, MAPbI3 film grown on PTAA yielded a high PCE of 18.1% with a high external quantum efficiency (EQE), and stable photocurrent response and output (Fig. 15d and e).52 Yang et al.195 developed a simple layer-by-layer fabrication method to grow MTP films with large, single-crystal grains and vertically oriented GBs. The fabrication of MTP films was conducted under the conditions of air exposure and thermal annealing. PSCs with high quality crystals delivered high internal quantum efficiencies (IQEs) approaching 100% with suppressed J–V hysteresis. This is mainly attributed to (1) the reduction of the defect density in MTP due to the growth of large, single crystal grains, and (2) the passivation of defects by infiltration of spiro-OMeTAD into the GBs. Liang et al.192 developed a facile spray deposition method without any post-annealing process, and it could be conducted under ambient conditions with a high humidity up to 50%. The MTP film exhibited full surface coverage and large grain sizes up to the micrometer scale, but the PCE of the device was only 7.89%.
 Fig. 15  Illustration of the nucleation and growth of the grains on (a) wetting and (b) non-wetting HTLs after thermal annealing. (c) Contact angles, and cross-sectional and surface SEM images of MAPbI3 films grown on different substrates. (d) J–V curve, (e) EQE, and (f) stabilized photocurrent of MAPbI3 based PSCs with a PTAA HTL. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. 
5.3 Structure dimensionality reduction
Recently, reduction of the dimensionality of MTP has been demonstrated to improve its stability.199 This is mainly due to defect passivation at the GBs of low-dimensional MTP. As a result of its lower defect density, as well as higher exciton binding energy, the low-dimensional MTP showed competitive PL and electroluminescence (EL) efficiency.200,201 From the 3D to the 2D MTP structure, the small MA+ is replaced by a much bulkier organic primary ammonium cation. This replacement makes the MTP 2D because of steric effects.
The family of 2D layered MTP has Ruddlesden–Popper phases with the formula A2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (A = phenylethylammonium (PEA), butylamine (BA), n = 1, 2, 3, 4…∞). As n increases, the band gap of the A2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 changes from 2.24 eV (BA2PbI4 (n = 1)) to 1.52 eV (MAPbI3 (n = ∞)).201 As shown in Fig. 16a, compared to 3D MTP, the low-dimensional MTP with a lower defect density exhibits enhanced ambient stability, high formation energy for defects, and high structural stability.202,203 In other words, the photocurrent hysteresis, photo-induced poling effect, film decomposition, and non-radiative recombination centres in 2D layered MTP with long-chain cations could be largely suppressed.204 In addition, the presence of long-chain cations in 2D MTP also prevents moisture and oxygen from entering into the MTP structure and thus enhances the PSC stability.204 Smith et al.,94 for the first time, fabricated a high-quality 2D MTP film with robust moisture resistance based on PEA+. DFT calculations suggested that MTP layers intercalated by PEA could introduce quantitatively appreciable van der Waals interactions. Such van der Waals interaction increases the formation energy and material stability.203 When the optimized PEA content (n = 60) was used, the hysteresis-free PSCs showed a certified PCE of 15.3% (Fig. 16b) and improved moisture and thermal stability. As shown in Fig. 16c, Tsai et al.205 employed the hot-casting technique to fabricate 2D layered (BA)2(MA3)Pb4I13 (n = 4) with strong preferential out-of-plane alignment with respect to the contacts. More importantly, the 2D layered (BA)2(MA3)Pb4I13 shows a lack of Urbach tails in the optical absorption, a very small Stokes shift, and strong absorption and photoluminescence, indicating that (BA)2(MA3)Pb4I13 has high crystallinity, few defects, and a disorder-induced density of states in the band gap. As a result, (BA)2(MA3)Pb4I13 based PSCs demonstrated a promising PCE of 12.51% (Fig. 16d), and un-encapsulated devices retained over 60% of their efficiency for over 2250 hours under operation conditions, with great tolerance to 65% relative humidity (Fig. 15e and f). It should be noted that the encapsulated devices did not show any degradation under the same operation conditions (Fig. 15g and h).205
 Fig. 16  (a) Unit cell structure of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 MTP with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞) and (b) the certified PCE of the best performing device with no hysteresis. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation of a hot-casted 2D MTP, and (d) J–V curves for the best performing device with no hysteresis. (e–h) Stability measurements of PSCs based on 2D MTP under operation conditions. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016. 
6. Summary and outlook
Despite the rapid development of highly efficient PSCs based on organic–inorganic hybrid MTP, the large-scale application of commercial PSCs with high PCE and long-term operation stability is still in the future. Here, we give an elaborate review to provide insight into and understanding of the state-of-the-art research progress on defect science and engineering in MTP, which is a fundamental issue for guiding the further development of MTP based PSCs, as well as other SCs. Beginning with the well-established understanding of the defects in traditional inorganic semiconductors, we have discussed the defects in MTP in detail as follows: our theoretical understanding of the origins of the intrinsic defects, the disadvantages and advantages of defects, frequently used techniques for the characterization of defects, and the latest research progress on defect engineering toward high-performance PSC devices.
Although the GBs in MTP film are broadly considered to be detrimental, a few recent reports have claimed that GBs may not be the dominant non-radiative centres and may be rather benign or even beneficial for collecting charges efficiently.206,207 Such conflicting conclusions are most likely caused by the different features of GBs (e.g., surface termination, electronic state and resulting charge carrier behaviour). The different features are highly correlated with several factors (e.g., the film fabrication strategy, material composition, and illumination conditions).208–212 Therefore, further theoretical and experimental studies on the photo-physical properties of GBs in different environments are necessary to fully unravel the key role of GBs in PSCs.
At present, there are several defect characterization techniques to estimate the density and energy level of the defects. The results from these measurement techniques have low consistency, however. When the defect characterization largely depends on the material preparation conditions and the characterization techniques used, detailed comparisons of the same MTP sample characterized by various techniques are welcome. Apart from the challenges arising from the measurement techniques, defect identification in the MTP structure also remains a challenge. Although many theoretical studies have predicted which type of defect has the highest possibility to exist in MTP crystals, visual observation of the defect structure (i.e., specific atom vacancies, atom interstitials, atom dislocations, etc.) has not been reported to date. Emerging studies have attempted to show mapping images of the electronic trap states using PL mapping in combination with scanning electron microscopy (SEM),62 atomic force microscopy (AFM),213 and femtosecond transient absorption microscopy (TAM).214 These are still only methods for the detection of defect positions, however, instead of their identification. Therefore, the next big step forward for defect identification may lie in the identification of defect types with the help of extremely high-magnification microscopy with resolution down to the atomic-scale as well as theoretical calculations. It should be noted that high-magnification microscopy requires a high energy electron beam, which could destroy the MTP material. Successful image acquisition from MTP crystals using atomic-resolution transmission electron microscopy (TEM) with extremely low beam doses could provide an important research direction.215
Inspired by the chemical self-healing effect of CuInSe2,216 the unravelling of the mechanism for self-healing of defects in MTP is exhilarating. This would be a facile, highly efficient, and low-energy-cost way to obtain ideal crystals of MTP. Pioneering theoretical work has demonstrated the light-induced annihilation of Frenkel defects in MTP.217 When the presence of large amounts of defects in lead-free MTP materials greatly limits their development in PSCs applications,218 effective strategies for defect engineering in lead-free MTP are also urgently required. Therefore, further investigations and deeper insight into the formation mechanism and methodology for manipulating defects in MTP could enable MTP based PSCs with enhanced performance.
In addition, there is a new concept that a promising MTP absorber should exhibit not only high dimensionality in its structure, but also high electronic dimensionality.219 An optoelectronic semiconductor may exhibit high structural dimensionality, but low electronic dimensionality. It may hold less promise as a light absorber, mainly due to the high barriers for the transport of isotropic current flow (electrons/holes), and the presence of deeper-level defects. Nevertheless, the defects in MTP play indelible roles, as mentioned above. Therefore, deeper insight into defect science and engineering could open up new chapters in our essential understanding and the practical engineering of MTP towards highly efficient optoelectronic devices in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation under Grant 2017M613137, the “Young Talent Fellowship” program from the South China University of Technology, and an Australian Renewable Energy Agency (ARENA) S4 project. The authors also want to thank Dr Tania Silver for her critical reading of the MS.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Z. Hong, S. Luo, H. Duan, H. Wang, Y. Liu, G. Li and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 622–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J. Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. S. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Park, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16149 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, A. Abdelhady, W. Peng, I. Dursun, M. Yuan, S. Hoogland, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, A. Wang and M. A. Green, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1991 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Ceisz, S. Kurtz, M. W. Wanlass, J. S. Ward, A. Duda, D. J. Friedman, J. M. Olson, W. E. McMahon, T. E. Moriarty and J. T. Kiehl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023502 CrossRef .
S. H. Wei and S. B. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 155211 CrossRef .
B. Huang, S. Chen, H. X. Deng, L. W. Wang, M. A. Contreras, R. Noufi and S. H. Wei, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2014, 4, 477–482 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka, M. Oonuki, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281, 945–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. I. Sha, X. Ren, L. Chen and W. C. H. Choy, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 221104 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Wetzelaer, M. Scheepers, A. M. Sempere, C. Momblona, J. Avila and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1837–1841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, A. J. Barker, G. Crancini, W. Zhang, J. M. Ball, A. R. S. Kandada, H. J. Snaith and A. Petrozza, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3472–3481 CAS .
E. Conwell and V. F. Weisskopf, Phys. Rev., 1950, 77, 388–390 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 286–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Lee and J. A. Gupta, Science, 2010, 330, 1807–1810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7938–7961 RSC .
J. Nowotny, M. A. Alim, T. Bak, M. A. Idris, M. Ionescu, K. Prince, M. Z. Sahdan, K. Sopian, M. A. Mat Teridi and W. Sigmund, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8424–8442 RSC .
A. Y. Ganin, Y. Takabayashi, Y. Z. Khimyak, S. Margadonna, A. Tamai, M. J. Rosseinsky and K. Prassides, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 367–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Xu, Y. Lin, J. W. Connell and L. M. Dai, Small, 2015, 11, 6179–6185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. X. Dou and L. M. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, Y. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. Dai and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Tedstone, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1965–1974 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Son, S. G. Kim, J. Y. Seo, S. H. Lee, H. Shin, D. Lee and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, G. R. Blake and T. T. Palstra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1693–1706 RSC .
W. J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, J. H. Lee and K. H. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1312–1317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Zhang, S. H. Wei, A. Zunger and H. Katayama-Yoshida, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 57, 9642–9656 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zakutayev, C. M. Caskey, A. N. Fioretti, D. S. Ginley, J. Vidal, V. Stevanovic, E. Tea and S. Lany, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1117–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Du, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1461–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, J. Liu, F. Q. Bai, H. X. Zhang and O. V. Prezhdo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1270–1278 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Xiao, Y. B. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. C. Shao, Y. Bai, Y. H. Deng, Q. F. Dong, M. Hu, C. Bi and J. S. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2016, 101, 1–38 CrossRef .
S. H. Wei, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2003, 30, 337–348 CrossRef .
A. Buin, P. Pietsch, J. Xu, O. Voznyy, A. H. Ip, R. Comin and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6281–6286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, L. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 CAS .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y. Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. B. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Shi and M. H. Du, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 174103 CrossRef .
W. S. Yang, B. W. Park, E. H. Jung, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, D. U. Lee, S. S. Shin, J. Seo, E. K. Kim, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 1376–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu and C. Yam, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 6800–6804 RSC .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 146–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. S. Kandada, S. Neutzner, V. D'Innocenzo, F. Tassone, M. Gandini, Q. A. Akkerman, M. Prato, L. Manna, A. Petrozza and G. Lanzani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13604–13611 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bi, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Jacobsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. H. Anaraki, B. P. Philippe, S. D. Stranks, M. E. F. Bouduban, W. Tress, K. Schenk, J. Teuscher, J. E. Moser, H. Rensmo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10331–10343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Collins, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2016, 5, R3170–R3184 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tress, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602358 CrossRef .
L. M. Pazos-Outon, M. Szumilo, R. Lamboll, J. M. Richter, M. Crespo-Quesada, M. Abdi-Jalebi, H. J. Beeson, M. Vrucinic, M. Alsari, H. J. Snaith, B. Ehrler, R. H. Friend and F. Deschler, Science, 2016, 351, 1430–1433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Xie, D. Zhang, H. Su, X. Ren, K. S. Wong, M. Gratzel and W. C. Choy, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 639–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, Y. Feng, S. Huang, F. Huang, Y. B. Cheng, M. Green and A. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 793–800 RSC .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. de Quilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Leblebici, L. Leppert, Y. Li, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, S. Wickenburg, E. Wong, J. Lee, M. Melli, D. Ziegler, D. K. Angell, D. F. Ogletree, P. D. Ashby, F. M. Toma, J. B. Neaton, I. D. Sharp and A. Weber-Bargioni, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16093 CrossRef CAS .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Protugall, J. T. W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. Nicholas, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, W. Shi, J. Xi, D. Wang and Z. Shuai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19968 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Yan, Y. Li, S. Wang, W. Wang, Z. Bian, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Petrović, T. Ye, C. Vijila and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602610 CrossRef .
J. Y. W. Seto, J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 46, 5247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Shao and Q. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3218–3227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mizusaki, K. Arai and K. Fueki, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 11, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Unger, E. Hoke, C. Bailie, W. Nguyen, A. Bowring, T. Heumüller, M. Christoforo and M. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 CAS .
S. Meloni, T. Moehl, W. Tress, M. Franckevicius, M. Saliba, Y. H. Lee, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Rothlisberger and M. Graetzel, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, R. S. Sanchez, L. Badia, G. Garcia-Belmonte, Y. S. Kang, I. Mora-Sero and J. Bisquert, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2390–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Deng, Z. Xiao and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500721 CrossRef .
Y. Yuan, Q. Wang, Y. Shao, H. Lu, T. Li, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501803 CrossRef .
A. B. Munoz-Garcia, A. M. Ritzmann, M. Pavone, J. A. Keith and E. A. Carter, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3340–3348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Egger, L. Kronik and A. M. Rappe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12437–12441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Haruyama, K. Sodeyama, L. Han and Y. Tateyama, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10048–10051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yang, W. Ming, H. Shi, L. Zhang and M. H. Du, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4349–4357 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yang, W. J. Yin, J. S. Park and S. H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13105–13112 CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
P. Delugas, C. Caddeo, A. Filippetti and A. Mattoni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2356–2361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, Y. Li, C. Zheng, D. Gao and W. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38079–38091 RSC .
H. S. Kim, S. H. Im and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CAS .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Xie, L. Chen, Z. A. Nan, H. X. Lin, T. Wang, D. P. Zhan, J. W. Yan, B. W. Mao and Z. Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3320–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 11414–11417 CrossRef .
J. H. Noh, S. H. Im, J. H. Heo, T. N. Manda and S. I. Seok, Nano Lett., 2014, 13, 1764–1769 CrossRef PubMed .
T. A. Berhe, W. N. Su, C. H. Chen, C. J. Pan, J. H. Cheng, H. M. Chen, M. C. Tsai, L. Y. Chen, A. A. Dubaleb and B. J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 CAS .
J. A. Christians, P. A. M. Herrera and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1530–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, K. Kwak, M. S. Jang, H. Yoon, B. Y. Lee, J. K. Lee, P. V. Pikhitsa, J. Byun and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Aristidou, C. Eames, I. Sanchez-Molina, X. Bu, J. Kosco, M. S. Islam and S. A. Haque, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15218 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Aristidou, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchuangchutchaval, M. Brown, L. Martinez, T. Rath and S. A. H. Haque, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8208–8212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Lee, S. Kim, S. Bae, K. Cho, T. Chung, L. E. Mundt, S. Lee, S. Park, H. Park, M. C. Schubert, S. W. Glunz, Y. Ko, Y. Jun, Y. Kang, H. S. Lee and D. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 38150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, W. Li, F. Meng, L. Wang, H. Dong and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 705–710 CAS .
T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. Pathak, A. Abate, M. M. Lee and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2885 Search PubMed .
W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xing, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, Y. Fang and J. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 30484–30490 RSC .
T. Jesper Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. S. Pazoki, M. Saliba, K. Schenk, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1706–1724 CAS .
C. M. Sutter-Fella, Y. Li, M. Amani, J. W. Ager, 3rd, F. M. Toma, E. Yablonovitch, I. D. Sharp and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 800–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Yoon, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1507–1514 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chiang, J. W. Lina and C. G. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13525–13533 CAS .
O. Hentz, Z. Zhao and S. Gradecak, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Slotcavage, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1199–1205 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, S. Draguta, J. S. Manser, O. Sharia, W. F. Schneider, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Barker, A. Sadhanala, F. Deschler, M. Gandini, S. P. Senanayak, P. M. Pearce, E. Mosconi, A. J. Pearson, Y. Wu, A. R. S. Kandada, T. Leijtens, F. D. Angelis, S. E. Dutton, A. Petrozza and R. H. Friend, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1416–1424 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. T. Hoke, D. J. Slotcavage, E. R. Dohner, A. R. Bowring, H. I. Karunadasa and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 613–617 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5176–5183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dang, Y. Zhou, X. Liu, D. Ju, S. Xia, H. Xia and X. Tao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3447–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Supasai, N. Rujisamphan, K. Ullrich, A. Chemseddine and T. Dittrich, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 183906 CrossRef .
A. Dualeh, N. Tetreault, T. Moehl, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Gratzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3250–3258 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Xu, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and L. M. Dai, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 439–442 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Xu, I. Y. Jeon, J. M. Seo, S. X. Dou, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7317–7323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Ye, Y. J. Gong, J. H. Lin, B. Li, Y. M. He, S. T. Pantelides, W. Zhou, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1097–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Zhu, A. S. Childress, M. Karakaya, S. Dandeliya, A. Srivastava, Y. Lin, A. M. Rao and R. Podila, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7185–7192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, Y. Sui, S. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Sheng, Z. Zhang, T. Lü and W. Liu, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 492, 40–43 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Han, D. Q. Liu, S. H. Song, Y. Kim and J. B. Goodenough, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3210–3216 CrossRef .
P. Zhao, W. Yin, M. Kim, M. Hna, Y. J. Song, T. K. Ahn and H. S. Jung, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7905–7911 CAS .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Stoeckel, M. Gobbi, S. Bonacchi, F. Liscio, L. Ferlauto, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702469 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Xu, J. A. McLeod, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Wu, S. Bai, Z. Yuan, T. Song, Y. Wang, J. Si, R. Wang, X. Gao, X. Zhang, L. Liu and B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23181–23189 CAS .
G. G. Malliaras, J. R. Salem, P. J. Brock and C. Scott, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 13411 CrossRef .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Duan, H. P. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Y. Sun, S. Luo, T. B. Song, B. Bob and Y. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 112–116 RSC .
R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 1733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, Y. H. Chung, L. Zheng, D. Zhang, X. Yu, L. Xiao, Z. Chen, S. Wang, B. Qu, Q. Gong and D. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 6406–6411 CAS .
D. Yang, X. Zhou, R. X. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Yu, X. L. Wang, C. Li, S. Z. Liu and R. P. H. Chang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3071–3078 CAS .
F. Schauer, R. Novotny and S. Nespurek, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 81, 1244–1249 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adinolfi, M. Yuan, R. Comin, E. S. Thibau, D. Shi, M. I. Saidaminov, P. Kanjanaboos, D. Kopilovic, S. Hoogland, Z. H. Lu, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3406–3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Walter, R. Herberholz, C. Muller and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 80, 4411–4420 CrossRef CAS .
R. Herberholz, M. Igalson and H. W. Schock, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 318–325 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kirchartz, W. Gong, S. A. Hawks, T. Agostinelli, R. C. I. MacKenzie, Y. Yang and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7672–7680 CAS .
R. R. Haering and E. N. Adams, Phys. Rev., 1960, 117, 451–454 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. J. Garlick and A. F. Gibson, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, 1948, 60, 574–590 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schafferhans, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 655–660 CrossRef CAS .
A. Baumann, S. Vath, P. Rieder, M. C. Heiber, K. Tvingstedt and V. Dyakonov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2350–2354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 5, 476–480 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yuan, Z. X. Wu, H. Dong, J. Xi, K. Xi, G. Divitin, B. Jiao, X. Hou, S. F. Wang and Q. H. Gong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 15318–15325 CAS .
D. V. Lang, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 3023–3032 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Rosenberg, M. J. Legodi, Y. Rakita, D. Cahen and M. Diale, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 122, 145701 CrossRef .
V. Adinolfi, W. Peng, G. Walters, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1700764 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. C. Liu, J. K. Sun, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. D. Ren, H. Xu, Z. P. Yang and S. Z. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1829–1837 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Han, S. H. Bae, P. Y. Sun, Y. T. Hsieh, Y. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. X. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Z. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2253–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Zhumekenov, M. I. Saidaminov, M. A. Haque, E. Alarousu, S. P. Sarmah, B. Murali, I. Dursun, X. H. Miao, A. L. Abdelhady, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 32–37 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Z. Lan, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. J. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. C. Zhao, F. J. Fan, P. C. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. B. Zhao, Z. H. Lu, Z. Y. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Lin, B. Chen, F. W. Zhao, X. P. Zheng, Y. H. Deng, Y. C. Shao, Y. J. Fang, Y. Bai, C. R. Wang and J. S. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700607 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, L. Shen, J. Dai, Y. Deng, Y. Wu, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, J. Wang, Y. Fang, H. Wei, W. Ma, X. Cheng, X. Zhan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604545 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, E. M. Hutter, P. Rieder, I. Grill, J. Hanisch, M. F. Aygüler, A. G. Hufnagel, M. Handloser, T. Bein, A. Hartschuh, K. Tvingstedt, V. Dyakonov, A. Baumann, T. J. Savenije, M. L. Petrus and P. Docampo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1703057 CrossRef .
W. N. Peng, B. Anand, L. H. Liu, S. Sampat, B. E. Bearden, A. V. Malko and Y. J. Chabal, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1627–1634 RSC .
R. J. Stewart, C. Grieco, A. V. Larsen, G. S. Doucette and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12392–12402 CAS .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J. P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, W. Zhou, W. Ma, S. Meng, H. Li, J. Wei, R. Fu, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Ran, Y. H. Chen, W. Y. Gao, M. Q. Wang and L. M. Dai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8566–8572 CAS .
S. Ye, H. Rao, Z. Zhao, L. Zhang, H. Bao, W. Sun, Y. Li, F. Gu, J. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Bian and C. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7504–7512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, K. Y. Wong, S. Yang and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 3806–3812 CAS .
Q. Tai, P. You, H. Sang, Z. Liu, C. Hu, H. L. Chan and F. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ye, H. Rao, W. Yan, Y. Li, W. Sun, H. Peng, Z. Liu, Z. Bian, Y. Li and C. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abate, M. Saliba, D. J. Hollman, S. D. Stranks, K. Wojciechowski, R. Avolio, G. Grancini, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3247–3254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Stewart, C. Grieco, A. V. Larsen, J. J. Maier and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1148–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. De Marco, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, P. Sun, Z. Liu, L. Meng, E. P. Yao, Y. Liu, A. Schiffer and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1009–1016 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hadadian, J. P. Correa-Baena, E. K. Goharshadi, A. Ummadisingu, J. Y. Seo, J. Luo, S. Gholipour, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Saliba, A. Abate, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8681–8686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niu, J. Lu, R. Munir, J. Li, D. Barrit, X. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Yang, A. Amassian, K. Zhao and S. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1706576 CrossRef PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. S. Parrott, V. M. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhao, C. C. Chueh, Q. Chen, A. Rajagopal and A. K. Y. Jen, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, B. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Fang, Y. Bai, Y. Lin, H. Wei, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17102 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Wang, X. Liu, J. Kauppi, Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, J. Huang and Y. Gao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 111603 CrossRef .
P. Schulz, L. L. Whittaker-Brooks, B. A. MacLeod, D. C. Olson, Y. L. Loo and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400532 CrossRef .
F. S. Zu, P. Amsalem, I. Salzmann, R. B. Wang, M. Ralaiarisoa, S. Kowarik, S. Duhm and N. Koch, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700139 CrossRef .
F. Zu, P. Amsalem, M. Ralaiarisoa, T. Schultz, R. Schlesinger and N. Koch, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41546–41552 CAS .
D. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, M. J. Katz, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 091101 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, T. B. Song, S. Luo, Z. Hong, H. S. Duan, L. Dou, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4158–4163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. McCleese, A. Kovalsky, Y. Zhao and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12205–12208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Par, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696–8699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, J. Luo, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3925–3933 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
S. Wang, W. Dong, X. Fang, Q. Zhang, S. Zhou, Z. Deng, R. Tao, J. Shao, R. Xia, C. Song, L. Hu and J. Zhu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6600–6608 RSC .
T. Zhang, N. Guo, G. Li, X. Qian and Y. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 50–56 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, Q. Dong, M. K. Wong, A. B. Djurišić, A. Ng, Z. Ren, Q. Shen, C. Surya, W. K. Chan, J. Wang, A. M. C. Ng, C. Liao, H. Li, K. Shih, C. Wei, H. Su and J. Dai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502206 CrossRef .
J. W. Lee, S. G. Kim, S. H. Bae, D. K. Lee, O. Lin, Y. Yang and N. G. Park, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4270–4276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Son, J. W. Lee, Y. J. Choi, I. H. Jang, S. Lee, P. J. Yoo, H. Shin, N. Ahn, M. Choi, D. Kim and N. Park, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16081 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Xu, N. Wang, J. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Bi, G. Xu, N. Yuan and J. Ding, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 60562–60569 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Gao, X. He, Q. Ye, L. Ouyang, D. Zhuang, C. Liao, J. Mei and W. Lau, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24008–24015 CAS .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H. L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, O. Dyck, J. Poplawsky, J. Keum, A. Puretzky, S. Das, I. Ivanov, C. Rouleau, G. Duscher, D. Geohegan and K. Xiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9210–9213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. Song, L. Zhang, F. Niu, Y. Hao, P. Zeng, H. Niu, J. Huang and J. Lian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8554–8561 CAS .
S. B. Bag and M. F. Durstock, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5053–5057 CAS .
M. Yang, T. Zhang, P. Schulz, Z. Li, G. Li, D. H. Kim, N. Guo, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and Y. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ran, J. Xi, W. Gao, F. Yuan, T. Lei, B. Jiao, X. Hou and Z. Wu, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 713–721 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yaffe, A. Chernikov, Z. M. Norman, Y. Zhong, A. Velauthapillai, A. van der Zande, J. S. Owen and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045414 CrossRef .
Y. P. Zhang, J. Y. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Z. Xue, Q. D. Ou, L. Polavarapu, J. L. Zheng, X. Qi and Q. L. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13637–13655 RSC .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. N. Quan, M. J. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Tsai, W. Y. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. S. Toumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, S. H. Woo, Y. Heo, J. Seidel, F. Huang, Y. B. Cheng and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Yang, Y. N. Zeng, Z. Li, D. H. Kim, C. S. Jiang, J. van de Lagemaat and K. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 5043–5050 RSC .
S. D. Stranks, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1515–1525 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Zuo, H. X. Guo, D. W. deQuilettes, S. Jariwala, N. De Marco, S. Q. Dong, R. DeBlock, D. S. Ginger, B. Dunn, M. K. Wang and Y. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700106 CrossRef PubMed .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Gratzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tress, M. Yavari, K. Domanski, P. Yadav, B. Niesen, J. P. C. Baena, A. Hagfeldt and M. Graetzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 151–165 CAS .
J. W. Lee, S. H. Bae, N. D. Marco, Y. T. Hsieh, Z. Dai and Y. Yang, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 7, 149–160 CrossRef .
M. Vrućinić, C. Matthiesen, A. Sadhanala, G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, S. E. Dutton, C. Ducati, M. Atatüre, H. J. Snaith, R. H. Friend, H. Sirringhaus and F. Deschler, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500136 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Simpson, B. Doughty, B. Yang, K. Xiao and Y. Z. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1725–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, X. Ying, C. E. Hsiung, R. Sougrat, K. Li and Y. Han, Science, 2018, 359, 675–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. F. Guillemoles, U. Rau, L. Kronik, H. W. Schock and D. Cahen, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 957–961 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, D. M. Meggiolaro, H. J. Snaith, S. D. Stranks and F. D. Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3180–3187 CAS .
C. Ran, Z. Wu, J. Xi, F. Yuan, H. Dong, T. Lei, X. He and X. Hou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 394–400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 206–216 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Chenxin Ran
	Dr Chenxin Ran received a BS in Applied Chemistry from Xidian University, and a PhD in electronic science and technology from Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2009 and 2016, respectively. In the period of 2014–2015, he worked as a visiting scholar in the Department of Macromolecular Science and Engineering at Case Western Reserve University. He is currently a lecturer in the School of Electronic and Information Engineering at Xi’an Jiaotong University. His current research interests are the controllable preparation of lead and lead-free perovskite films and their application in photoelectric devices.

Jiantie Xu
	Prof. Jiantie Xu received his PhD degree in Engineering from the University of Wollongong, Australia. During his PhD study, he moved to Prof. Liming Dai's group at Case Western Reserve University for a half-year's visiting. He completed postdoctoral studies in Prof. Liming Dai's group for two years and his PhD supervisors Profs. Shixue Dou & Huakun Liu's group for one year. In 2017.9, he started as a group leader and professor at South China University of Technology. His research interests include various types of energy storage/conversion devices, such as metal-alkali ion batteries, lithium sulfur batteries, lithium air batteries, supercapacitors, perovskite solar cells, and integrated devices between perovskite solar cells and metal-alkali ion batteries.

Weiyin Gao
	Dr Weiyin Gao received her BS in Applied Chemistry in 2009, MS in Macromolecular Chemistry and Physics in 2012, and PhD degree in Electronic Science and Technology in 2017 from Xi’an Jiaotong University. Now she works as a postdoctoral fellow in Xi’an Jiaotong University. During 2014–2015, she studied as a visiting scholar in the Department of Chemistry at Case Western Reserve University. Her research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of lead and lead-free perovskite materials, and the technology improvement of perovskite solar cell devices.

Chunmao Huang
	Chunmao Huang received his BS in Physics from Lingnan Normal University in 2016. He is currently a PhD candidate at South China University of Technology. His research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of carbon based materials and their applications in lithium air batteries.

Shixue Dou
	ShiXue Dou is a Distinguished Professor and Director of the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials (ISEM) at the Australian Institute of Innovative Materials, University of Wollongong. He was elected as a Fellow of the Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering in 1994. He was awarded a DSc by the University of New South Wales in 1998 and three Australian Professorial Fellowships by the Australian Research Council in 1993, 2002 and 2007. He received the Australian Government's Centenary Medal in 2003 and the Engineering Excellence Award highly commended in 2006, was a finalist of the Eurek Award for Science Leadership in 2010 and a finalist of the Eurek Award for mentoring in 2013, and received the Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award in 2008 and the Vice-Chancellor Outstanding Partnership Award in 2012. He is a program leader for the ongoing ARENA Smart Sodium Storage System program. He has supervised more than 90 PhD students to completion and more than 60 postdoctoral and visiting fellows who have been widely spread within five continents.

 	Fig. 1  Ideal structure (a) without defects and (b) after introducing defects. Possible defects existing in the crystal structure of a semiconductor: (c) point defects, (d) defect pairs, and (e) higher dimensional defects.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the MAPbI3 unit cell. The calculated transition energy levels of (b) intrinsic acceptors and (c) intrinsic donors in MAPbI3. (d) The thermodynamic stability range for equilibrium growth of MAPbI3 is in the red region. (e–g) The formation energies of intrinsic point defects in MAPbI3 at chemical potentials A, B, and C as shown in (d). Dashed lines stand for the defects that have much higher formation energy so that they cannot exist. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from American Physical Society, copyright 2014.	 
μMA + μPb + 3μI = ΔH(MAPbI3) = −5.26 eV	(1)
μMA + μI < ΔH(MAI) = −2.87 eV	(2)
μPb + 2μI < ΔH(PbI2) = −2.11 eV	(3)


	Unit: eV
A	
0.23
	
0.28
	0.81	
0.29
	1.96	1.53	1.39	2.93	1.87	4.24	3.31	5.54
B	
0.83
	
1.15
	
1.28
	1.62	3.01	3.45	
0.93
	2.51	1.27	2.91	2.25	3.62
C	1.42	1.47	2.01	2.68	4.34	5.10	
0.20
	1.74	
0.67
	1.85	0.93	1.97

 	Fig. 3  Charge recombination pathways in a semiconductor. (a) “Band-to-band” radiative recombination, (b) shallow-level defect assisted radiative recombination, and (c) deep-level defect assisted non-radiative recombination. (d) “Band-to-band” radiative recombination occurs at a location where no defects are present, (e) shallow-level defect assisted radiative recombination occurs at a location where shallow defects are present, and (f) deep-level defect assisted radiative recombination occurs at a location where deep defects are present.	 

 	Fig. 4  Charge trapping and charge scattering effects in a semiconductor.	 

 	Fig. 5  Diffusion pathways of the different ions: (a) I− through VI, (b) MA+ through VMA, (c) Pb2+ through VPb and (d) I atoms through Ii. Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. The three ionic transport mechanisms involve conventional vacancy hopping between neighbouring positions: (e) I− migration along an octahedron edge and Pb2+ migration along the [110] diagonal, and (f) MA+ migration into a neighbouring VMA cage. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a–d) Schematic representation of the reaction steps of oxygen-induced photodegradation of MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017. (e) Schematic representation of halide vacancies in the Pb–I plane of mixed halide MTP films. Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Snapshots of the iodine interstitial Ii diffusion during annealing. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the K0.2MA0.8PbI3 crystal structure and (b and c) performance comparison of K0.2MA0.8PbI3 and MAPbI3. Reproduced from ref. 126 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d and e) Schematic illustration of the structure of a designed resistive random access memory device based on MAPbI3. (f) Measured and fitted semi-logarithmic J–V curves. Reproduced from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (g) Mechanism for VI filling by CH3I molecules and (h) current measured in a N2 atmosphere and in air for MAPbI3 film before and after CH3I treatment. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Typical J–V curve of MAPbBr3. Reproduced from ref. 132 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. J–V curve for (b) hole-only and (c) electron-only MAPbI3 devices. Reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic band diagram of a p-type semiconductor junction. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015. (e) Typical trap density of states (tDOS) obtained by TAS measurements and (f) the corresponding performance of PSCs. Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014.	 

SCLC	MAPbBr3	Single crystal	
n
electron = 1.1 × 1011	—	1. Gives two types of defect density, i.e., electron and hole density.	1. Only shows a single type of defect density at one time.	
116


n
hole = 2.6 × 1010	2. EA of the defects can be obtained by temperature-dependent SCLC.	2. The kick point of VTFL may not only be caused by the defect trap filling, but also by some other effects, which produces a deviation in the estimated defect density.
SCLC	MAPbI3	Single crystal	
n
electron = 4.8 × 1010	—	3. Need to fabricate electron-only or hole-only devices.	
116


n
hole = 1.8 × 109
SCLC	MAPbI3	Single crystal	3.3 × 1010	—	
132

SCLC	MAPbBr3	Single crystal	5.8 × 109	—	
132

SCLC	MAPbI3	Single crystal	3.6 × 1010	—	
133

SCLC	MAPbI3	Film	1.22 × 1016	—	
137

SCLC	MAPbI3	Single crystal	
n
hole = 3 × 1010	
E
A(hole) = 0.1	
139


n
electron = 3 × 1011	
E
A(electron) = 0.2
SCLC	FAPbI3	Single crystal	1.34 × 1010	—	
152

SCLC	FAPbI3	Single crystal	1.5 × 1011	—	
153

SCLC	FAPbI3	Single crystal	1.1 × 1010	—	
154

SCLC	FAPbBr3	Single crystal	9.6 × 109	—	
154

SCLC	FA0.85MA0.15PbI2.55Br0.45	Film	3 × 1015	—	
155



TAS	MAPbI3	Film	1 × 1015–1 × 1017	0.35–0.55	1. Detects both shallow and deep defects by tracing the junction capacitance.	1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.	
61

TAS	MAPbI3	Single crystal	1 × 109–1 × 1010	0.35–0.50	
2. Provides EA of defects.
3. Measured on regular working devices under illumination.
	2. Only the defects below the energy demarcation can capture or emit charges and contribute to the capacitance signal.	
133

TAS	(FA0.83MA0.17)0.95Cs0.05Pb(I0.6Br0.4)3	Film	1 × 1016–1 × 1019	0.42–0.55	3. Trapped charges with long thermal emission time cannot contribute to the capacitance signal.	
156

TAS	MAPbI3	Film	1 × 1018–1 × 1019	0.33–0.45	
157



TSC	MAPbI3	Film	1 × 1015	0.5	1. Detects wide defect levels by tracing the thermally activated current.	1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.	
146

TSC	FA0.83MA0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3	Film	7.3 × 1016	0.248	
2. Provides EA of defects.
3. Measured on regular working devices under illumination.
	
2. Only estimates the lower limit of defect density in the material.
3. Trapped charges with long thermal emission time will not contribute to the thermally activated current signal.
	
158



ssPL	MAPbI3	Film	Bulk ∼5 × 1016	—	1. Directly measures on the film surface, with no need to deposit an electrode.	1. Cannot distinguish between valence band and conduction band states.	
147

Surface ∼1.6 × 1017	2. Provides bulk defect density, surface defect density, and total defect density.	2. The EA of defects cannot be deduced.
ssPL	FAPbI3	Film	1 × 1017	—	
148

ssPL	MAPbI3	Film	2.5 × 1017	—	
148

ssPL	MAPbI3	Film	1 × 1017–1 × 1018	—	
159

ssPL	MAPbI3	Film	3.6 × 1016	—	
160

ssPL	MAPbI3−xClx	Film	5.1 × 1015	—	
160



DLTS	FAPbI3	Film	5.28 × 1014	0.46–0.8	1. Great sensitivity, and wide range of observable defect depths.	1. Might miss minority carrier traps that cannot be saturated at practical levels of forward current.	
48

2. Provides information about EA and electron- and hole-capture cross-sections.	2. Cannot observe shallow-level defect traps with high thermal emission rate.
	(6)
Eω = Ed − Ev	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 9  (a) TSC measurement of devices with a CuSCN hole-transport layer (HTL) (green), PEDOT:PSS HTL (red), without a transport layer (purple), and in the dark with a CuSCN HTL (black). (b) Arrhenius plots of the initial rise of the TSC peak T4 for the devices with CuSCN HTL (green), PEDOT:PSS HTL (red), and without a transport layer (purple). Reproduced from ref. 146 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) PL intensity as a function of pump fluence, with the arrow indicating the defect trap saturation of the threshold fluence Ptrapth. (d) PL intensity as a function of the photon-generated exciton density within the low pump fluence range; the defect density of bulk nFTP and surface nSTP can be obtained by fitting the plots using eqn (16). Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2014.	 
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
ntrap = 2(ΔC/C)(NA − ND)	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 10  (a) DLTS spectra of the FAPbI3 film and control measured in the temperature range from 150 to 330 K. (b) Arrhenius plots to determine the energy levels of defects. (c) J–V curves of the champion PSCs in forward- and reverse-scan modes and the corresponding photovoltaic parameters. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of PCBM adsorbed on Pb–I antisite defects, (b) the wavefunction overlap of the hybridization between PCBM and the surface defect, and (c) the density of states (DOS) with a deep-level trap state (black) induced by the reduced Pb–I antistite defect and a shallower-level trap state (red) after the passivation of PCBM. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015. (d) Schematic illustration of possible mechanisms for the trap state passivation of defects in MAPbI3 with the addition of CuI and Cu(Tu)I. (e) J–V curves of PSC with Cu(Tu)I additive in the MAPbI3 layer. Reproduced from ref. 164 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The interface passivation of MAPbI3 film by a π-conjugated Lewis base and (b) DOS comparison of PSCs before and after surface passivation. Reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (c) The device structure of planar heterojunction PSCs and (d) schematic illustration of quaternary ammonium halides assembled on the defect sites. (e) J–V curves of FA0.83MA0.17Pb(I0.83Br0.17)3 PSCs with choline chloride and PCBM passivation layers. Reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2017. (f) DFT calculation results for shallow and delocalized Pb–Cl antisite defects on the PbCl2-terminated TiO2/perovskite interface. (g) J–V curves of PSCs with TiO2 and TiO2–Cl as ETMs, measured in reverse and forward scans, and (h) histogram of PCE values among 204 devices with a TiO2–Cl HTL. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Energy diagram and (b) schematic diagram of PbI2 self-passivation in MAPbI3 film. (c and d) Two types of a p-i-n structure are formed at both interfaces. (e) J–V curves of the PSCs device. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (f) Schematic representation of MAPbI3 film with and without a GB healing layer containing Lewis acid–base adduct intermediates. (g) J–V curves of PSCs based on MA1+xPbI3 with x = 0.06. Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the solvent-annealing-induced method with increased grain size, and cross-sectional scanning electron microscope (SEM) images of PSCs with (b) thermal annealing and (c) solvent annealing. (d) PSCs measured at different scanning rates from negative to positive bias and (e) steady-state photocurrent output at the maximum power point (0.82 V). Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2014. (f) Schematic illustration of large-area growth of MAPbI3 based on the hot-casting method. (g) Planar device configuration of PSCs for photovoltaic performance characterization. (h) Optical micrograph of the MAPbI3 film with large grain size. (i) J–V curves at different voltage scan rates and voltage delay times (ms). (j) PCE values for 50 measured PSC devices. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  Illustration of the nucleation and growth of the grains on (a) wetting and (b) non-wetting HTLs after thermal annealing. (c) Contact angles, and cross-sectional and surface SEM images of MAPbI3 films grown on different substrates. (d) J–V curve, (e) EQE, and (f) stabilized photocurrent of MAPbI3 based PSCs with a PTAA HTL. Reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Unit cell structure of (PEA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 MTP with different n values, showing the evolution of dimensionality from 2D (n = 1) to 3D (n = ∞) and (b) the certified PCE of the best performing device with no hysteresis. Reproduced from ref. 203 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (c) Schematic representation of the (101) orientation of a hot-casted 2D MTP, and (d) J–V curves for the best performing device with no hysteresis. (e–h) Stability measurements of PSCs based on 2D MTP under operation conditions. Reproduced from ref. 205 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group, copyright 2016.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
