A new view for nanoparticle assemblies: from crystalline to binary cooperative complementarity  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00696E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00696E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1483-1509A new view for nanoparticle assemblies: from crystalline to binary cooperative complementarity

        
          
            Cong 
            Yan
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Tie 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Analytical Chemistry for Living Biosystems, Institute of Chemistry, The Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: wangtie@iccas.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      25th September 2016
    First published on 6th January 2017AbstractStudies on nanoparticle assemblies and their applications have been research frontiers in nanoscience in the past few decades and remarkable progress has been made in the synthetic strategies and techniques. Recently, the design and fabrication of the nanoparticle-based nanomaterials or nanodevices with integrated and enhanced properties compared to those of the individual components have gradually become the mainstream. However, a systematic solution to provide a big picture for future development and guide the investigation of different aspects of the study of nanoparticle assemblies remains a challenge. The binary cooperative complementary principle could be an answer. The binary cooperative complementary principle is a universal discipline and can describe the fundamental properties of matter from the subatomic particles to the universe. According to its definition, a variety of nanoparticle assemblies, which represent the cutting-edge work in the nanoparticle studies, are naturally binary cooperative complementary materials. Therefore, the introduction of the binary cooperative complementary principle in the studies of nanoparticle assemblies could provide a unique perspective for reviewing this field and help in the design and fabrication of novel functional nanoparticle assemblies.
Cong Yan
Cong Yan is an assistant professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BSc (2004) from Peking University and his PhD (2008) from the University of Nottingham, UK. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Pierre and Marie Curie University, France. He joined the ICCAS in 2014. His research focuses on nanoparticle assemblies and the application of their mechanical properties.
Tie Wang
Tie Wang is a professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BSc (2002) from Xi’an Jiaotong University and his PhD (2007) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, China. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY and the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL. He joined the ICCAS with the award of the “Thousand Youth Talents Plan” in 2013. His research focuses on nanoparticle assemblies and their applications.
Introduction
The term binary cooperative complementary materials denotes the materials composed of two cooperative and complementary components, which can be identified in various forms in nature, from the subatomic to the universal scale.1 Atoms, which are among the fundamental constituents that make up our universe, are composed of nuclei and electrons, which have opposing and cooperative electrical properties. The universe itself, as far as we know at present, is supposed to comprise both matter and antimatter. Versatile binary cooperative complementary materials could be identified in almost every aspect. Physical, chemical, and biological representatives of these materials could make up a long list. For example, magnetic materials possess north and south poles; ionic materials, such as NaCl, contain positive and negative ions; biological organs, such as bones and teeth, consist of hard inorganic and soft organic materials; and cell membranes are known to have both hydrophilic heads and hydrophobic tails. Except for these examples, the binary cooperative complementary principle could be abstracted from and applied in much broader fields although we may rarely look at these fields from this point of view. It is believed that the observation of binary cooperative complementary materials is the realization of the philosophy of “Yin–Yang” and the “Dialectics of Nature” in the material sciences.1,2
The development of nanoscience and nanotechnology has provided researchers with more powerful instruments, methods and building blocks to create remarkable materials and devices. Both top-down and bottom-up pathways help in the control of nanoscale materials and equip scientists to copy and perform natural functions. Inspired by the beauty of binary cooperative complementary materials in nature, scientists have attempted to reproduce equivalent materials on the nanoscale, which are known as binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials (BCCNMs). The initial development of BCCNMs is roughly a history of mimicking nature on the nanoscale, whereas BCCNMs exhibit great potential and advantages, as nanomaterials benefit from a higher surface ratio and additional collective properties in comparison to the respective bulk materials. In fact, thanks to the development of nanoscience and nanotechnology, a wide range of BCCNMs have been designed and fabricated, although they are not officially categorized as binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials.
The discovery and development of nanoparticles (NPs)/nanocrystals (NCs) have provided scientists, maybe for the first time, with the possibility of exploring, modifying and constructing an artificial world as complex as nature from a fundamental level. To date, various types of materials such as metals,3–10 semiconductors,11,12 oxides,13,14 inorganic salts,15,16 and polymers17,18 have been synthesized in the form of nanoparticles with a range of structures: spheres,19 Platonic polyhedra,20,21 rods,22,23 ellipsoids,24 plates,25–30 tetrapods,31,32 core/shell forms,3,33–35 void core/shell forms,36,37 nanocages,38–40 and dumbbells,41–43etc. These nanoparticles have been further utilized to construct novel materials from the nanoscale to the macroscale,44–47 which are known as nanoparticle superlattices (also referred to as superstructures or supercrystals). A variety of physical and chemical, as well as biological, methods have been intensively investigated for the fabrication of nanoparticle superlattices, as they demonstrate fascinating potential applications in drug delivery,48 solar cells,49 sensors,50 and catalysis,51etc. In addition to these achievements, nanoparticle-based materials/devices, especially those with hybrid and designed properties/functions, are becoming increasingly attractive. These new features require new methods, techniques and strategies for the design and synthesis of novel nanoparticle systems. The binary cooperative complementary principle could be a feasible solution for the above requirements. In fact, various types of nanoparticle superlattice conform to the binary cooperative complementary principle. Binary nanoparticle superlattices (BNSLs), which comprise two types of nanoparticle that are co-assembled into ordered arrays, are naturally classified as BCCNMs, because the different nanoparticle components consist of cooperative complementary groups. In comparison to nanoparticle superlattices with only one type of nanocrystal, binary nanocrystal superlattices have the advantage of possessing not only the properties of the individual nanoparticle building blocks but also collective properties due to interactions between the nanoparticles. This feature is exactly what future studies require, and thus integrates several properties of the individual nanoparticle building blocks and enhances the overall features of the system. According to these descriptions, we believe that the binary cooperative complementary principle would represent a promising toolkit for providing a big picture of the development of nanoparticle assemblies, as well as promoting various aspects of nanoparticle studies for future applications and innovation.
In this review, nanoparticle assemblies will be presented and discussed from the perspective of the binary cooperative complementary principle. We will start by categorizing the main interactions in nanoparticle assemblies. Then a brief description of the configuration of nanoparticle assemblies will be provided, followed by the properties of nanoparticle assemblies. Throughout these sections, the assembly effects of nanoparticles will be fully displayed. Then the concept of the binary cooperative complementary principle, as well as general binary interactions, will be introduced. Next, the synthesis of binary nanoparticle superlattices will be discussed to show their versatile structural configurations in comparison to the limited configurations of nanoparticle superlattices with a single component. Afterwards, specific properties of binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies will be illustrated to inspire further studies and exploration in this field. Finally, we will summarize the philosophy and methodology behind the binary cooperative complementary principle and present an outlook for the future of this topic.
Interactions between nanoparticles
Nanoparticles are considered to be artificial atoms and their assemblies have been intensively studied for decades owing to their remarkable chemical, magnetic, optical, and electronic, etc., properties.52–56 Assemblies of nanoparticles are a major field of research, because they have additional collective properties as well as those of the individual nanoparticles. Interparticle interactions determine the architecture, as well as the functions, of nanoparticle assemblies, which makes them fundamental factors for the study of nanoparticle assemblies. As was mentioned, the binary cooperative complementary principle exists widely in nanoparticle assembly systems, although it is not specifically discussed. For binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials, the distance between, and the geometries of, the cooperative components are the most important parameters; hence, a comprehensive understanding of the interparticle forces in a nanoparticle assembly is the first step in correlating this system with the binary cooperative complementary principle. What the main interactions are, and how the attractive and repulsive forces balance one another, are the key questions in this field (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Interactions of an attractive and repulsive nature between nanoparticles. 
van der Waals interactions
In general, the self-assembly of nanoparticles or even superlattices occurs mainly via non-covalent interactions. van der Waals forces, which are prevalent in non-covalent interactions between molecules, are fundamental to the construction of nanoparticle assemblies. The magnitude of van der Waals forces varies from a few to hundreds of times the value of kT and they often cause the undesired aggregation of nanoparticles in solution. However, when choosing appropriate ligands and solvents, van der Waals forces could be utilized to guide their assembly via ligand–ligand and/or ligand–solvent interactions. Although various interactions exist between colloidal nanoparticles, van der Waals forces are a primary attractive component and commonly eliminate electrostatic and steric repulsion.
Among the many influences that regulate van der Waals interactions in a self-assembly process, the type of solvent is a non-negligible factor, because the ligand–ligand and ligand–solvent interactions can be altered in different chemical environments. Quan et al. reported a difference in assembly behaviour due to competition between ligand–ligand and ligand–solvent interactions.57 In their studies, Pt nanocubes self-assembled into simple cubic (sc) superstructures to achieve maximum ligand–ligand (oleic acid or oleylamine) interactions in a toluene solvent. The energetically unfavourable ligand–solvent interactions were omitted and the coating ligands on Pt nanocubes shrank in the toluene solvent and acted as part of the solid cubic structures during condensation. On the other hand, the oleic acid/oleylamine ligands were more soluble and therefore extended fully in hexane, which made the nanocubes behave in the same way as spherical nanoparticles. Under such conditions, the strong ligand–solvent interactions overwhelmed the ligand–ligand interactions, resulting in the formation of body-centered tetragonal (bct) lattices. In this structure, four adjacent nanocubes form an interstitial structure and the second layer is deposited in a staggered phase to fill the geometric gaps in the first layer.
Liquid/air interface assembly is another widely used method for producing nanoparticle superlattices, in which van der Waals forces can also play a key role in the formation of the assemblies. By the intelligent choice of the solvent, the self-assembly of a nanoparticle superlattice can be achieved at a liquid/air interface. In order to implement this strategy, a chemically inert solvent is ideal as the liquid surface, and its evaporation rate should be controlled during the assembly procedure. The nanoparticle superlattice would form as a floating film on the substrate solvent and could be transformed into different types of substrate. Based on this approach, binary, ternary, or even quasi-quaternary nanocrystal superlattice membranes could easily be obtained with spherical nanoparticles, nanorods, nanoplates, and tripodal, rhombohedral and hexagonal nanoparticles.58–62
Electrostatic interactions
In a similar way to van der Waals forces, electrostatic interactions play a key role in various aspects of nanoparticle assemblies such as ionic, colloidal and macroparticle systems. Unlike van der Waals forces, which are attractive, electrostatic interactions in nanoparticle assemblies can be attractive, repulsive, or even directional. In order to balance attractive forces, electrostatic repulsion can be achieved when nanoparticles with identical surface charges approach each other, resulting in an overlapping electrical double layer (EDL) surrounding the particles,63 whereas directional electrostatic interactions appear when nanoparticles are asymmetrically charged or permanently polarized. These different types of interactions enable electrostatic interactions to be utilized in various conditions. For example, repulsive forces commonly protect colloidal nanoparticles against aggregation or coagulation, which is the key factor for improving colloidal stability. On the other hand, in a system with oppositely charged nanoparticles, attractive forces could be tuned to facilitate the self-assembly of binary superstructures by precisely controlling the concentration of the nanoparticles and the size and valence of the surrounding counter-ions.
Effects of electrostatic interactions can be identified on different scales and from different aspects. On the atomic scale, electrostatic forces induce oppositely charged ions to form ionic crystals. Coulombic forces can drive biological macromolecules to form complex structures. For instance, a wide range of self-assembly processes can be achieved by controlling the intermolecular electrostatic interactions between peptides or proteins with pairs of charged amino acids.64–66 Such properties of electrostatic interactions will help to promote the study of organic molecule-mediated nanoparticles. Electrostatic interactions can not only reinforce close-packed nanoparticle superstructures, but also drive the formation of non-close-packed superlattices. In addition, in comparison to other long-range forces, electrostatic interactions can be more conveniently adjusted via factors such as the pH value or electrolyte concentration.
Pairs of positive and negative charges between nanoparticles can generate electric dipole–dipole interactions, which usually lead to the orientation of assemblies.67 In the case of some colloidal nanoparticles with dipole moments, attention should be paid to the surface electron density, because this could easily neutralize the dipole moment. When an external electric field is applied, dipolar interactions between nanoparticles will dominate their assembly. Nanoparticle assemblies of symmetric colloidal dimers, metal nanoparticles, or nanoparticles with different diameters can be obtained in this way.68–70
Magnetic interactions
Magnetic nanoparticles with certain dimensions have large magnetic moments. Magnetic interactions will drive self-assembly when these nanoparticles approach each other within a range of several nanometres, and they tend to align their magnetic moments in the direction of the local magnetic field caused by neighbouring particles or an applied field. One-dimensional line or ring structures are commonly preferred, because their dipole coupling is strong enough to make all the single domains of magnetic nanoparticles orientate along the magnetic field lines. A huge number of studies have been reported, such as those of Co nanoparticle wires of millimetre length,71 silica-coated iron oxide nanoparticle and Pt nanoparticle chains,72 necklace rings,73etc. The structure of the assembly is dependent on the interaction energy. When this energy is higher than 8kT a linear phase assembly will form, whereas with a further increase in energy a branched phase appears, which will finally result in a connected, gel-like network.74 In the case of extremely strong interactions induced by an external field, a nanoparticle assembly with a body-centered tetragonal structure has been observed.75
Two- or three-dimensional nanoparticle assemblies have also been obtained via magnetic interactions.76 Helically structured nanoparticle assemblies have also been reported by manipulating the axes of magnetization of nanoparticles and the external field.77 In the same work, it is also stated that the [111], [110], and [100] directions of magnetic nanocubes correspond to easy, intermediate, and difficult axes of magnetization, respectively, which reveals that the [111] axis is the easiest to magnetize. On the other hand, the orientation of the individual nanoparticles is determined by the competition between the interactions of two parallel dipoles and their coupling with the external magnetic field. Therefore, the nanoparticles are aligned along the direction of the external field when this is strong, and a “zigzag” construction will be favoured when the external field is weak.
Magnetic nanoparticles could further be decorated with electrically active components to form dually responsive nanoparticles, of which the assembly can be controlled by a combination of magnetic and electrical interactions.78 Iron oxide nanoparticles coated with azobenzene-terminated catechol ligands are good examples. They can self-assemble into one-dimensional structures (lines or rods) under the influence of orthogonal magnetic and light-induced electrical interactions, in which aggregation is initiated by UV-light-induced electrical interactions and the aspect ratio of the assemblies is controlled by the strength of the magnetic field.
Other interactions
Unlike van der Waals, electrostatic and magnetic forces, which originate from the electromagnetic force, entropic effects do not create attractive interparticle potentials, yet they are also among the important factors that drive the assembly of nanoparticles. Entropic effects can provide both attractive and repulsive interactions in nanoparticle systems. In a nanoparticle system that features strong attractive forces between components, long-chain molecules are commonly used as coating ligands to prevent the aggregation or precipitation of nanoparticles. In this configuration, entropic effects would drive the ligand molecules to form “brushes” and provide a weak repulsive force to stabilize the nanoparticle assembly. On the other hand, entropic effects can lead to attractive forces. For example, in a system in which hard spherical particles are dissolved in a dilute solution with smaller spheres as a diluent, attraction will occur between the hard spheres that prevents the solute from fitting into the interstices. It should be noted that entropic effects are also regarded as depletion forces in some cases, which is explained by the Asakura–Oosawa model.79 In general, depletion forces are a key issue for the stability of a colloidal system, which is defined as comprising large spheres suspended in a dilute solution of non-adsorbing polymers, micelles or smaller hard spheres. The basic effect of a depletion force is the exclusion of small particles from the gaps between larger particles. Studies of depletion forces in colloidal systems have been performed for decades and in certain situations these could be described quantitatively. If the radius of a large particle is R, the diameter of a small particle is σ, the separation is h and the volume fraction is φ, in the case that σ ≪ R and 0 < h < σ, the attractive force between the large spheres could be calculated to the third order with respect to φ and a repulsive barrier at greater separations is identified.80
Hydrogen bonds are common molecular interactions that are widespread in supramolecular systems and are also able to occur in studies of the self-assembly of nanoparticles. For example, barbituric acid residues can direct fullerene derivatives to self-assemble into highly directional materials along their crystal axes via hydrogen bonds.81 Hydrogen bonding can also be employed between ligands and assist the self-assembly of nanoparticles, of which the degrees of aggregation and ordering are dependent on the strength of the individual hydrogen bonds. It has been reported that multilayer ultrathin films could be formed by the interaction between two series of gold nanoparticles via hydrogen bonds.82 Owing to its interaction characteristics, hydrogen bonding has the advantages of enabling pH response83 or site-selective functionalization.84
The use of DNA pairs as ligands for coating nanoparticles is receiving an increasing amount of attention currently owing to their specific styles of interaction. DNA strands will only bind strongly to complementary strands, and this feature makes them highly controllable and programmable. For example, the technique of DNA origami provides a powerful tool for designing and fabricating DNA structures.85 By this technique, the length of ligands and the interactions between nanoparticles can be fully controlled, and one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) nanoparticle superlattices have accordingly been reported.86–89
In this section, several commonly observed interparticle interactions and some cutting-edge research have been introduced and discussed briefly. These interactions are fundamental for fabricating nanoparticle assemblies. Different states of balance will result in different types of assembly, as well as various structures and functions. In the next section, detailed examples will be given to illustrate how interparticle forces influence the formation and structures of nanoparticle assemblies.
Nanoparticle assemblies
Monodisperse nanoparticles can form highly ordered nanoparticle assemblies, which are called nanoparticle superlattices. Studies of nanoparticle assemblies have been a research focus for decades owing to their collective properties in contrast to those of the individual nanoparticles, such as unique and tunable vibrational, photoluminescence, electronic and magnetic properties.90–98 They have high potential as candidates for novel artificial solids.90–92,94,99–104 The possibility of assembling nanoparticles into superlattices makes them ideal building blocks for constructing the “nanoworld”. The interactions between the component nanoparticles determine the formation and configuration of nanoparticle superlattices, whereas the configuration affects the collective properties of nanoparticle superlattices.
Several parameters can affect the formation of the structure of superlattices. When nanoparticles freely assemble into superlattices, which means there are no external or additional influences, intrinsic properties such as the shape of the building blocks,105 the ratio between the ligand chain length and the core size of the nanoparticles,106 and the molecular interactions between the ligands and the surrounding solvent,107etc., determine the final states of the nanoparticle assemblies. Otherwise, when the assembly procedure is directed by external factors such as external electric/magnetic fields, hard/soft templates, and programmable coating ligands, etc., the nanoparticle superlattices will be configured accordingly. Therefore, both free assembly and template assembly could be utilized to modify the geometric properties of nanoparticle superlattices, where such modification is directed towards properties and applications.
Template-free nanoparticle assemblies
Nanoparticles with different structures or interactions can assemble into various superlattices.108 1D, 2D and 3D nanoparticle assemblies have been reported with a wide range of component nanoparticles.

One-dimensional nanoparticle assemblies. 
Although various nanoparticles can form 1D nanoparticle assemblies, those with specific geometries, such as nanorods, have advantages in forming 1D nanoparticle superlattices owing to their anisotropic structures. For example, metallic nanorods and nanowires have been of particular interest because they have two plasmon bands; one arises from the longitudinal direction and the other from the transverse direction. An enhancement in the electric field will occur at the tips of metallic nanorods and nanowires, which leads to an increase in the surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy effect.109 The formation of 1D nanorod assemblies in an end-to-end configuration is preferred among studies of nanoparticles and numerous methods have been investigated to achieve this construction such as biological linkers, stretched polymer films, the application of electric fields, lithographic formation of 1D patterns on substrates, etc.110–112
Specific coating ligands can also be utilized to construct 1D nanoparticle chains. Au nanorods decorated with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) on their long sides and polystyrene molecules at their ends can form either chain or bundle structures when different solutions are used.113 γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticles coated with both nonanoic acid and 4-phenylbutyric acid ligands can assemble into nanoparticle chains,114 which indicates a common route for fabricating nanoparticle chains by utilizing phase-separated coating ligands.
Recently, Zhang et al. reported a new, general method that utilized molecular clusters to fabricate a 1D nanoparticle superlattice.115 By this method, isotropic spherical nanoparticles can aggregate into wide linear polymer-like single-nanoparticle chains of up to 1000 close-packed nanoparticle components (Fig. 2a). Moreover, this strategy is applicable to various metallic, semiconducting, or magnetic nanoparticles with different sizes and shapes, and provides a general way to study unidirectional charge and energy transport.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic and TEM image of the 1D nanoparticle superlattice formed from molecular clusters and the corresponding intensity profile (inset) along the chain length (indicated by the arrow). Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) 2D close-packed Au nanoparticle superlattice with various structural building blocks. Insets are fast Fourier transforms and zoomed-in images correspondingly. The scale bars are 500 nm for the main image and 100 nm for the insets. Reproduced from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Formation and deconstruction of PbS nanoparticle superlattice at different reaction times. Reproduced from ref. 135. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 


Two-dimensional nanoparticle assemblies. 
To form 2D nanoparticle arrays, a balance between interparticle interactions should be achieved. For example, CdTe nanoparticles can assemble into closely packed nanoparticle sheets if there is a balance between hydrophobic attractions and electrostatic interactions.113 Anisotropic nanoparticles, such as nanorods, can form a 2D assembly in a side-by-side configuration, which has been found to be an excellent medium for propagating light.116,117 For example, highly ordered Au or Ag nanoparticle films have always been the focus of research for applications in plasmonic devices113 and solar energy conversion.118 A large number of techniques have been developed for the fabrication of 2D nanoparticle films for various applications, such as the Langmuir–Blodgett technique,119 the slow evaporation method,120 template assembly,121etc.
In order to assemble nanoparticles directly on functional substrates without mesoscale defects and to achieve better control of the interfacial structures, Lin et al. reported an epitaxial assembly approach.122 In this method, layered hybrid perovskite (LHP) materials are used as substrates and CTAB-coated Au nanoparticles are formed into 2D close-packed lattices on the surface of LHP. Various shapes of Au nanoparticle such as Au octahedra, truncated Au nanocubes, Au trisoctahedra, Au nanocubes, Au nanorods and Au@Pd nanocubes have confirmed the feasibility and universality of this method, which enables its potential application in light-emitting diodes and solar cells (Fig. 2b).
2D nanoparticle superlattices with tunable phases have been fabricated by the Langmuir–Blodgett technique.123 In practice, Au nanoparticles with alkanethiols of various lengths as coating ligands are successively compressed to obtain uniform 2D nanoparticle films. It is found that with an increase in the ligand length, the assembled films undergo a melting process from an ordered crystalline phase to a disordered liquid phase, which helps in the understanding of the melting process of 2D nanoparticle films.


Three-dimensional nanoparticle assemblies. 
The fabrication of 3D nanoparticle superlattices commonly occurs at air–liquid and liquid–liquid interfaces or directly on substrates.124–126 The assemblies are normally polyhedral blocks and are dominated by either a face-centered cubic (fcc)127–129 or a body-centered cubic (bcc)130–132 structure in most cases.
In general, nanoparticle building blocks are spherical to minimize their surface energy; hence, when they assemble into highly packed superlattices the crystal orientation of the component nanoparticles is random. Non-spherical nanoparticles do not experience such limitations and their assemblies possess unique properties owing to their anisotropic nature.133 On the other hand, unlike spherical nanoparticles, close-packed 3D assemblies of polyhedral nanoparticles are strongly influenced by the morphology of the nanoparticle building blocks. Torquato and Jiao simulated the packing densities of four polyhedral nanoparticle assemblies (tetrahedron, octahedron, dodecahedron and icosahedron) and found that the densities were 0.782, 0.947, 0.904 and 0.836, respectively.134
The formation mechanism of non-spherical nanoparticle assemblies has been further studied. Fernandez et al. carefully investigated the formation of star-like PbS superstructures and found that large seemingly monocrystalline PbS superstructures actually consisted of small octahedral nanoparticles on multiple scales.135 In practice, the authors divided the mechanism into five distinct periods (Fig. 2c), which included growth from 31 nm nanoparticles to 100–500 nm octahedral mesocrystals and then to 1000–2500 nm hyperbranched stars (10 to 30 minutes), recrystallization into six-armed rods (more than 5 hours), and deconstruction into rods and cuboctahedral nanoparticles (inset of image for 5 days). This study gives a profound insight into, and understanding of, the mechanisms behind the self-assembly of PbS nanoparticles, which may facilitate the controlled self-assembly of PbS for further applications.
As well as the polyhedral nanoparticle assemblies, Rana et al. have reported the formation of spherical nanoparticle superlattices with polymer templates.136 The spherical assemblies are of micrometre size with shells of sub-micrometre thickness, forming a microcapsule structure. The formation requires two simple tandem steps and could be extended to different types of nanoparticles. This system is advanced because of its easy encapsulation process, mild conditions of synthesis, and robust and semipermeable shell, which make it highly promising for applications in controlled-release devices and reaction vessels.

Template-assisted nanoparticle assemblies
When nanoparticles self-assemble into superlattices, the system follows a path that minimizes the overall energy until all interactions in the system remain in a stable state. During this procedure, the final structure and dimensions of the superlattices are not fully controlled. Although by modifying the geometry of the nanoparticles and/or the interparticle interactions the stoichiometry of the superlattices can be tuned, the fabrication of nanoparticle assemblies with the desired structures and properties remains a challenge. The use of templates with defined structures will help the construction of nanoparticle assemblies with specific dimensions, complexities, and predictable collective properties.137
A wide range of templates have been reported to direct the aggregation of nanoparticle assemblies. The self-assembly of colloidal nanoparticles on patterned surfaces has been studied intensively. van Blaaderen et al. have reported the template-directed assembly of silica nanoparticles.138 In their studies, poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) with a thickness similar to the diameter of the nanoparticles was used as a substrate and etched into periodic holes to direct the assembly of silica nanoparticles. The first layer of nanoparticles was formed from dilute suspensions of the nanoparticles. Then the second and third layers of nanoparticles accumulated on the pattern of previous layers. Truong et al. obtained 2D and 3D colloidal arrays using azopolymer gratings and analysed the transitions between different crystal planes by tuning the periods of the gratings.139 The templates mentioned above could be employed as hard templates, which offer a well-defined shape for nanoparticle assemblies but lack control of the interparticle spacing between the nanoparticles.113
External-field-induced assembly of nanoparticles is another commonly used strategy for obtaining nanoparticle superlattices with specific geometries. Bannwarth et al. reported the successful fabrication of polymer-like nanoparticle assemblies,140 which took place under an external magnetic field, and adjacent nanoparticles were strongly bonded by thermal sintering. One of the remarkable advantages of this approach is that the constituent nanoparticles can have a broad size distribution and the assembly structure can be designed in the form of chains, branches or networks. Electric-field-induced assembly has also been intensively studied.141–143 Normally, nanoparticles with both dielectric characteristics and mobile charges can be polarized in an electric field,144 for which purpose both alternating-current (AC) and direct-current (DC) fields have been investigated.145 Electric-field-assisted assembly can be achieved via electrophoretic deposition (EPD). For example, Herman et al. once used multi-step EPD to fabricate spherical 3D multi-level CdSe nanocrystals with conformal coverage and varying deposition rates.146 On the other hand, Ryan et al. simply combined a DC electric field with the slow evaporation of a nanoparticle solution and obtained assembled superlattices of anisotropic CdS nanorods perpendicular to a substrate. Such an assembly process is finely controlled and can provide efficiency in the formation of nanorod-polymer solar cells.147
Collective properties of nanoparticle assemblies
Nanoparticle assemblies have collective properties in comparison to those of discrete nanoparticles, which are due to interactions between the constituent nanoparticles. The coherent vibration of Ag nanoparticle superlattices gives an example of such an effect.148 Various types of nanoparticle (metal, metal oxide, semiconductor, etc.) and interparticle interactions endow their assemblies with better electronic, magnetic, and optical properties.
Electronic properties
Metal and semiconductor nanoparticles are of great research interest owing to their size-dependent electronic and chemical properties.149–151 Their large surface area and small size have a direct influence on the electronic band gap; hence, the electronic properties can be tuned simply by modifying the sizes of the nanoparticles. In the case of nanoparticle assemblies, the ability to tune the structure or configuration would lead to a dramatic change in the collective properties. The electron transport properties of Ag nanoparticles are one example.152 When a single Ag nanoparticle is deposited on a Au(111) surface and subjected to scanning tunnelling spectroscopy measurements, the I–V curve displays a nonlinear profile and a zero value of dI/dV at a bias voltage of zero, which is known as the Coulomb blockade effect (Fig. 3a). When the same measurements are performed on a 2D Ag nanoparticle film with identical Ag nanoparticles, the value of dI/dV is not zero at a bias voltage of zero, and both the I–V and the dI/dV−V curve indicate that the tunnelling current exhibits both metallic and Coulombic contributions (Fig. 3b). In addition, when Ag nanoparticles form 3D assemblies, the I–V curve exhibits clear ohmic characteristics and the dI/dV curve is almost flat, which implies a strong tunnelling effect in comparison to the resistance between adjacent Ag nanoparticles (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  Difference in electron transport properties between single, 2D and 3D Ag nanoparticles. I–V and dI/dV−V curves of (a) a single Ag nanoparticle, (b) a 2D Ag nanoparticle film, and (c) a 3D Ag nanoparticle superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society. 
The novel conductivity of metallic nanoparticle assemblies has been investigated for fabricating promising nanoelectronic devices. The single-electron transistor is one promising application, in which only one electron is involved in conduction when it is in operation.153,154 Assemblies of 5.4 nm Au nanoparticles on a Au electrode on GaAs have been studied and it appeared that such a system displayed a Coulomb blockade effect on the I–V curve at low temperatures (4.2 K) whereas it exhibited an ohmic response at room temperature.155 CdSe, PbSe and InAs nanoparticles have been intensively studied for applications in solar cells owing to their tunable band gaps, whereas they could also provide photogenerated electrons. Brown et al. reported a smart approach in which CdSe nanoparticles are coated with C60 as an electron acceptor. Experimental results revealed that films containing CdSe with C60 had a photocurrent generation efficiency that was two orders of magnitude greater than that of CdSe film alone.156
Magnetic properties
Metal and metal oxide nanoparticle assemblies exhibit collective magnetic properties due to interparticle interactions.91,157 Such effects function via dipolar interactions and lead to increases in barrier energy and blocking temperature and changes in the shape of hysteresis loops.91,114,158 For instance, in comparison to the discrete and aggregated states, γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticle assemblies exhibit an increase in blocking temperature of almost 40 K (Fig. 4).114 3D Co nanoparticle assemblies with fcc structures have a much narrower peak in zero-field-cooled susceptibility in comparison to disordered film assemblies, which is attributed to the narrow distribution of the interaction energy and therefore the barrier energy.158 Further studies revealed that these collective magnetic properties can be influenced by the ordering and packing density, as well as the shape of the nanoparticle assemblies.159
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticle and its 1D assembly chain. (b) Zero-field cooled (ZFC, opened square) and field cooled (FC, closed circle) magnetization of the chains, isolated nanoparticles and the aggregates normalized to 1 at 5 K in FC. Inset shows magnetization curve for the chains at 120 K corresponding to the blocking temperature. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim. 
Magnetic nanoparticle assemblies also have specific collective properties in comparison to those of the individual nanoparticles. Pileni et al. revealed that a Co nanoparticle chain exhibited an increase in coercivity, which was closely related to the direction of the magnetic moment of the nanoparticles in an external field.160 FePt and CoPt nanoparticle assemblies have been studied as potential materials for data storage, and a linear density of up to 5000 flux changes per millimetre has been observed.161,162
Optical properties
The optical properties of nanoparticle assemblies are normally due to the collective effects of metal, metal oxide, and semiconductor nanoparticles, which are mainly applied in the fields of imaging and optical sensing.
Semiconducting polymer nanoparticles (SPNs) have attracted increasing attention recently owing to their novel optical properties. SPNs have exhibited potential applications in electronic devices or sensors.163–166 Fluorescent SPNs have been reported for imaging tumors in living mice. A folate-modified P7-based SPN has displayed high targeting capability in the H22 mouse model of subcutaneous tumors.167 Amphiphilic P9-based SPNs are also efficient in aqueous solutions for the targeted imaging of KB tumours in living mice.168 The addition of optically active dyes to SPNs can lead to the formation of nanoprobes for imaging chemical mediators or biomarkers at disease sites. For instance, a P10-based SPN has been designed and synthesized for detecting reactive oxygen and nitrogen species.169 The feature of chemiluminescence could also be combined with SPNs for real-time imaging of drug-induced liver damage. For example, SPNs with the functions of chemiluminescence resonance energy transfer (CRET) and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) have been designed and used to detect H2O2 and peroxynitrite (ONOO–)/hypochlorite (–OCl), respectively.170 SPNs are also competitive candidates for applications in photoacoustic molecular imaging (Fig. 5a). Photoacoustic molecular imaging is a non-ionizing imaging technology that provides deeper tissue imaging penetration and higher spatial resolution. SPNs as contrast agents generate stronger and more photostable photoacoustic signals in the near infrared region in comparison to detectors using carbon nanotubes or Au nanorods, and they possess high structural flexibility for in vivo real-time imaging171 (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of SPN, as well as a TEM image and a picture of the solution. (b) Comparison of photoacoustic properties of SPNs with those of single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and Au nanorods (GNRs). Reproduced from ref. 171. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. 
Owing to their surface plasmon resonance (SPR) properties, DNA-coated nanoparticle assemblies have been used to detect the presence of oligonucleotides via the colour change that is induced by the hybridization of DNA strands and oligonucleotides.172 Such a detection strategy has been developed as colorimetric sensing and has been applied in the detection of enzymatic activity173 and DNA hybridization,174 as well as heavy metal ions.175 Assemblies of metal nanoparticles have unexpected advantages in molecular detection by surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS)176–178 in comparison to the individual nanoparticles. The enhancement can be up to a hundred times greater in magnitude than that of conventional measurements and the strength of the electromagnetic field can be adjusted via the spatial arrangements and shapes of the nanoparticles.179,180
Closely assembled nanoparticles may exhibit near-field coupling between surface plasmons. The geometry of the assemblies may have an impact on the absorption of light and the interparticle distance may affect the strength of the coupling. For example, in one-dimensional nanorod assemblies, especially in an end-to-end configuration, it has been revealed that the electric field at the ends is so strong that the assemblies display great advantages in SERS and fluorescence sensing applications.181,182 Interactions within spherical nanoparticle assemblies may result in a red shift in the longitudinal band and a blue shift in the transverse band, whereas nanorods assembled in side-by-side geometry give rise to the opposite coupling effects.110,183 When nanoparticles are small and the spacings between neighbouring nanoparticles are small, electronic coupling can also result in a red shift in the absorption band.184 However, such coupling decreases dramatically when the sizes of the nanoparticles increase.
Oriented assemblies of anisotropic nanocrystals also exhibit anisotropic optical properties. Weller et al. once reported a self-assembly method that was applicable to a range of nanorod materials, by which they could obtain 3D CdSe nanorod assemblies with glassy, nematic, smectic, or crystalline ordering. These assemblies exhibit characteristic birefringence. Such strong optical anisotropy is supposed to be due to the intrinsic anisotropy of CdSe nanorods and the collective physical properties of the superlattices.185 Gacoin et al. also reported the observation of remarkable birefringence (n = 0.13) with LaPO4 nanorod assemblies.186 These assemblies are well-aligned thin LaPO4 films prepared by utilizing the shear orientation effect from a thixotropic gel suspension, which is supposed to be an alternative method for the fabrication of thin-film wave plates.
Other properties
Nanoparticle assemblies can enhance the sensitivity of electrochemical biosensors by being deposited on the electrodes and increasing their surface area.187 In addition, nanoparticle assemblies can also improve redox processes as catalysts. It has been reported that Au nanoparticle assemblies coated with flavin adenine dinucleotide on electrodes yielded an electron transfer rate that was seven times higher than that in a system with oxygen as an electron acceptor.188
Polymer-mediated nanoparticle assemblies have remarkable potential for applications in chemical sensing, because their configuration leads to higher rates of analyte uptake and higher sensitivity. In comparison to simple nanoparticle assemblies, polymers in the spaces between the nanoparticles increase the interparticle distance and porosity, which facilitates the absorption of analytes. Furthermore, polymers can be decorated with various functional end groups, which widen the range of analytes that can be captured by the nanoparticle assemblies. Finally, the softness of polymers alleviates the hardness of the core materials, which leads to relatively tunable mechanical properties that can be applied in various situations.189
The production of H2 by the hydrogen evolution reaction is of great interest, for which semiconductor photocatalysis provides a promising method. However, the efficiency of the production of H2 has been limited by the rapid recombination rate of photogenerated carriers. Noble metal nanoparticles such as Cu nanoparticles have been utilized for the production of H2,190 because they can enhance the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs in semiconductors.191
In the previous two sections, the interactions in nanoparticle superlattices and their versatile properties have been introduced, from which the potential of nanoparticles to act as building blocks in the construction of a novel nanoworld could be expected. In the future, new functional materials will be hybridized to give designed materials with dramatic and tailorable functions. For example, the establishment of an operating system to meet the objectives of multiple missions is becoming increasingly attractive. The current challenge is how to integrate several distinct material phases or several dimensional scales with increased interconnectivity in a composite to improve the overall performance of the system, which is intrinsically different from that of the single component phases, in which each phase performs a different but necessary function such as structure, transport, electrical conductivity, or energy storage, etc.192,193 A binary assembled material would represent an answer to this challenge, whereas the integration of the individual functions of various component phases requires a new design methodology in which system-level performance is emphasized in preference to the optimization of individual functions. Therefore, in the following sections we will introduce the concept of the binary cooperative complementary principle and how it is related to nanoparticle assemblies. Such a linkage could provide a powerful and feasible strategy for designing and fabricating novel nanomaterials with enhanced properties.
Binary cooperative complementary principle
Concept of binary cooperative complementarity
The concept of binary cooperative complementarity is a universal principle. It not only provides a pathway to inspire scientists to mimic nature in nanomaterials, but also offers a special perspective to review nanomaterials and devices that have already been obtained. Binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials are fabricated and studied as an outcome of the binary cooperative complementary principle on the nanoscale. Various cutting-edge nanomaterials intrinsically have features in accordance with the binary cooperative complementary principle, but unfortunately they are not viewed from this standpoint. Therefore, we will elaborate the concepts of the binary cooperative complementary principle in this section for a clearer and better understanding.
In general, the term BCCNMs denotes nanomaterials composed of two cooperative and complementary components (Fig. 6). The cooperative and complementary constituents of a BCCNM need not necessarily be total opposites. Cooperativity and complementarity instead of oppositeness are the fundamental factors in a BCCNM. For example, doped nanomaterials are eligible to be BCCNMs although the doped materials may not have opposing properties.
 Fig. 6  Illustration of different types of binary cooperative complementary pairs. 
With an understanding of the main issues of cooperativity and complementarity, the key difficulties are how to choose the constituent materials and an appropriate synthesis method. The distance between the two components is a key factor in the formation of BCCNMs.1,2 When the constituent building blocks have opposing physical properties and their separation is comparable to the characteristic range of the relevant interaction, this will dominate the cooperation between the building blocks and endow the BCCNMs with macroscopic properties. Therefore, an understanding of the interactions between the components of the BCCNMs and the fabrication of appropriate structures to correspond to the effective range of the interactions are the two key factors in the construction of BCCNMs.
Typical interactions in BCCNMs and their effective range
Commonly observed opposing components in BCCNMs include hydrophilic and hydrophobic constituents,194,195 electron donors and acceptors,196,197 strongly and weakly thermoelectric nanomaterials,198,199 ionic and ion-vacancy multilayered films,200,201 magnetic and non-magnetic nanostructures202,203 and high and low dielectric waveguide nanoarchitectures,204,205etc. Some of the characteristic separations in these BCCNMs are listed below.

Magnetic coupling distance. 
Magnetic coupling occurs between magnetic and non-magnetic nanostructures. The effective range of such coupling is several nanometres. One example is that when two ferromagnetic layers are isolated by a thin insulating layer (a few nanometres thick), isolation and tunnelling of electrons can be achieved by tuning the orientation of the magnetization.206 In general, nanomaterials with enhanced magnetic performance usually exhibit exchange coupling between antiferromagnetic and ferro/ferromagnetic components. For instance, Cozzoli et al. reported a straightforward strategy for synthesizing exchange-coupled bimagnetic hybrid nanocrystals, which could be used to fabricate future generations of magnetic recording devices.207 These bimagnetic hybrid nanocrystals contain single-crystalline tetrapod-shaped ferromagnetic iron oxide functionalized with spherical ferromagnetic Co. Owing to exchange coupling at the interfaces between the two materials, these nanostructures exhibit higher values of saturation magnetization and coercivity, exchange bias, and enhanced thermal stability. In addition, according to the authors, these improvements in magnetic nanomaterials could not be achieved with single components or their physical mixtures. Other examples are Py/IrMn and CoFe/IrMn bilayer disks, in which circular exchange bias is observed to have a profound effect on the reversal behaviour of the ferromagnetic magnetization.208


Exciton diffusion length. 
In the context of BCCNMs, the term exciton diffusion length refers in particular to donor/acceptor BCCNMs systems, in which charge transfer occurs between donor and acceptor molecules without the formation of a chemical bond between them.209 The acceptor material needs a suitable energy offset to the binding energy of the exciton with the donor. Charge transfer occurs if the following condition is satisfied:210EAA – EDA > UDwhere the superscripts A and D refer to the acceptor and donor, respectively, EA refers to the electron affinity, while U is the Coulombic binding energy of the exciton on the donor. The characteristic distance was calculated to be about 10–20 nm, according to a previous study;211 hence, if the domain of the donor and acceptor is too large recombination will occur, which decreases the operating efficiency. One solution is the fabrication of binary nanomaterials within which the domains of donors and acceptors are small enough to maximize the efficiency of the system. With this idea in mind, Heeger et al. used cross-sectional TEM to study the morphology of a bulk heterojunction material containing rrP3HT:PCBM (1:0.7) and revealed that the high efficiency of this material in solar cells arose from its ideal domain size, which allowed almost all excitons to reach the donor–acceptor interface during their lifetime to yield mobile carriers.212


Ion diffusion length. 
Ion conduction occurs when ion-vacancy domains are introduced into ionic solids, which facilitates the movement of ions from one point to another. The diffusion process is governed by Fick's laws:ji = −Di∇ci  where ji, ci and Di are the ionic flux, concentration, and diffusivity of the solute i, respectively. Accordingly, the diffusion length in BCCNMs is about several tens of nanometers.213,214 In a similar way to that mentioned in the previous section, the morphology of the components is important in affecting the performance of the hybrid material system. For example, in a system of Ag2S/GeS2 composites, the electrochemical process involves both Ag+ ions and electrons; thus, the structure of the Ag2S nanocrystals can significantly influence the transport of ions and electrons in the system, resulting in a substantial, approximately tenfold increase in ionic conductivity when the diameter of the Ag2S nanocrystals changes from 4.3 to 9.3 nm.215


Phonon scattering length. 
Phonons function in typical phonon-glass/electron-crystal thermoelectric materials as heat carriers and play an important role in the thermoelectric efficiency in terms of the figure of merit ZT:  where S is the Seebeck coefficient, ρ is the electrical resistivity, T is the absolute temperature, and λ is the total thermal conductivity. From experiments, it appears that the phonon scattering length ranges from about 10 to several hundred nanometers.216–218 Moreover, it has been found that strong phonon scattering in weakly thermoelectric materials could improve the thermoelectric efficiency. In one study, it was revealed that by utilizing hierarchically structured nanomaterials, heat-carrying phonons with long mean free paths can be tuned more efficiently, which leads to a maximum reduction in the thermal conductivity of the lattice and a value of ZT of ∼2.2 at 915 K for PbTe and SrTe composites.219


Critical distance for hydrophobic interactions. 
The characteristic range of hydrophobic interactions is defined by the roughness of a surface that can maintain a contact angle of less than 65°. Therefore, by careful testing and fabrication, the critical distance was found to be about 100 nm for hydrophobic interactions.220 Therefore, a simple and applicable method of adjusting the amphiphilic properties of materials comprises modification of their surface roughness, which can also lead to superhydrophobic/superhydrophilic properties. For example, Wang et al. applied such a strategy in a real application, in which commonly used cotton textiles could become superhydrophobic when functionalized SiO2 nanoparticles were introduced to modify the surface of the textiles.221


Optical wavelength (λ/2) in UV-vis-IR region. 
Periodically arrayed high/low dielectric nanostructures can change the manner of propagation of light, owing to interactions between light and the dielectric materials. The electric susceptibility χe of a dielectric material is a measure of how easily it is polarized in response to an electric field, which, in turn, determines the electric permittivity of the material. This is defined as the constant of proportionality that relates the electric field E to the induced dielectric polarization density P:P = ε0χeEwhere ε0 is the electric permittivity of free space. The susceptibility is related to the relative permittivity εr by:χe = εr − 1hence, in a vacuum it is the case thatχe = 0Because the wavelength determines the transport behaviour, the characteristic distance in high/low dielectric BCCNMs can be defined by the wavelength, which is about 150–350 nm.1 One example is one-dimensional gold nanowires that are fabricated by hybrid direct laser writing using an electron beam lithography technique.222 In such a configuration, the gold nanowires and photoresist constitute binary high/low dielectric structures, and not only strong optical properties but also a magnetic response, which is normally obtained in 3D structures, are observed.

Fig. 7 shows the characteristic distances and representative applications of BCCNMs that are already known, which could provide a convenient reference for building BCCNMs with these configurations. Keeping the above issues in mind will help us to discover and understand a huge number of BCCNMs with novel properties.
 Fig. 7  Illustration of the suitable distance between two nanoscopic components that should be allowed to match the characteristic range of certain physical interactions. Reproduced from ref. 2. Copyright 2016, Springer. With the permission of Springer. 

Binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies
The requirement for cooperative complementary components and an effective interaction distance has led to a wide range of BCCNMs from one-dimensional nanopores223 and microfibers224 to two-dimensional smart surfaces225,226 and three-dimensional nanostructures.206,227,228 In the case of a nanoparticle superlattice, the precondition of a characteristic distance is naturally satisfied, because the general interparticle distance is commonly less than 10 nm, which implies that all the interactions mentioned above can occur in nanoparticle superlattices. The only criterion for forming binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies is that the nanoparticle assembly should contain cooperative and complementary components. In fact, multicomponent nanoparticle superlattices have already been reported, and the most popular are known as binary nanoparticle superlattices (BNSLs).
The concept of binary components can be traced back to 1978, when the gem opal was found to contain two different sizes of sphere mixed together.229 Then, in 1998, a study of nanoparticle superlattices composed of two different sizes of Au nanoparticles was published, which opened the doors of this realm.230 Although similar interparticle interactions, such as entropic driving forces, Coulombic interactions, and van der Waals, charge–dipole, dipole–dipole, and magnetic forces, etc., have been identified in the formation of BNSLs,104,231,232 BNSLs have distinct superlattice structures, in comparison to nanoparticle assemblies with a single component. This difference is supposed to be attributed to binary cooperative complementary effects.
In a BNSL system, an additional influencing factor is involved as well as common interparticle interactions, which is either a geometric difference between component nanoparticles that consist of identical materials or a new type of interactive effect between component nanoparticles made from different materials. In order to form a stable nanoparticle superlattice, the geometric difference should be complementary to allow space filling and the different interactive effects should be cooperative. It is this cooperation and complementarity in BNSLs that endow them with remarkable properties in comparison to single-component nanoparticle assemblies. As was stressed previously, the cooperative and complementary constituents of a BCCNM need not necessarily be total opposites, and BNSLs are ideal examples of this principle.
Nanoparticle interactions attribute to the crystalline nanoparticle assemblies, whereas the binary cooperative complementary principle provides an alternative and practical perspective for reviewing BNSLs. A large number of studies of BNSLs have been reported since 1998, and in the following subsection we will discuss the novel structures of these ideal nanoparticle assemblies.
Crystalline binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies
The structure of BNSLs is determined by the geometric complementarity and interactive cooperation between the constituent nanoparticles. Geometric complementarity depends on the overall entropy of the system. In the early stages of studies, entropic effects were a fundamental attribute for the formation of BNSLs, whereas the effects of other interparticle interactions were trivial. According to theoretical simulations, for hard binary spheres the packing fraction of the superlattice should either exceed or be very close to the density of a close-packed fcc lattice (∼0.7405), otherwise the superlattice would be unstable. In such a situation, space-filling rules determine the assembly of BNSLs and AB, AB2 or AB13 structures are normally obtained for BNSLs. However, later studies revealed that geometric complementarity seems a primary requirement for stable BNSLs, because AB, AB2 and AB13 structures are also observed to be the most stable state of BNSL systems with different interparticle interactions.233,234 Interactive cooperation arises from the various component nanoparticles in BNSLs. Thanks to the development of synthetic techniques, the range of constituent nanoparticles that form binary nanoparticle superlattices has expanded from identical metals to different types of metal, magnetic nanocrystals, semiconducting materials, etc.233–235 Later, several works focusing on controllable superlattice structures, interparticle forces, and theories of formation have been published,236–238 and afterwards various lattice structures with different types of nanoparticle could be fabricated under control.
By using combinations of semiconducting, metallic and magnetic nanoparticles, Shevchenko et al. first reported the formation of more than 15 different BNSL structures, which included AB, AB2, AB3, AB4, AB5, AB6, AB13, cub-AB13 and polymorphous forms104 (Fig. 8). Many of these structures have a density that is lower than 0.7405, which is explained by the fact that not only entropic driving forces but also van der Waals, electrostatic, and dipolar interactions would contribute to the formation of stable BNSLs. Talapin et al. studied binary superlattice systems of CdSe/PbS and PbSe/Pd, and also reported the versatile stoichiometries of these systems.239 For the CdSe/PbS system, structures with a high packing density such as AB, AB2 and AB13 are obtained whereas for the PbSe/Pd system AB, AB2, AB3, AB4, AB5 and AB13 structures can be obtained. Because AB3, AB4, and AB5 structures are all unstable phases according to models of hard spheres and strong interparticle interactions are identified in the PbSe/Pd system, it could be concluded that in a binary nanoparticle system with strong interparticle interactions it is the comparable contributions of both entropy and the interactions between the component nanoparticles that finally determine the geometrical properties of the superlattice.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of BNSLs with different nanoparticle components and stoichiometries. The insets are the modelled unit cells of the corresponding three-dimensional structures. Reproduced from ref. 104. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group. 
More BNSL structures have been reported when interactions were modified. Murray et al. reported the formation of a body-centered cubic (bcc) AB6 stoichiometry of a binary Fe3O4/Au nanoparticle superlattice, and attributed the main driving force to entropic effects240 (Fig. 9a). Such a bcc-AB6 stoichiometry is a new structural polymorph and has no atomic analogue in nature. In addition, by tuning the size ratio between the two component nanoparticles (Fe3O4 and Au), the polymorphism of Fe3O4/Au superlattices can be tailored, from the coexistence of AB6 with bcc-AB6 to pure bcc-AB6 (Fig. 9b). These results reveal the possibility that many polymorphous binary nanoparticle superlattices could be fabricated and tuned via entropic effects. Moreover, this finding is of great interest in materials science, because structures and properties are highly interdependent. One example is that face-centered cubic (fcc) K3C60 is superconducting, whereas no superconductivity is observed in bcc K3C60. The transformation from AB6 to bcc-AB6 may indicate a promising route for designing the morphology and properties of binary nanoparticle superlattices.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structural models and TEM images of AB6 and bcc-AB6 BNSLs self-assembled from 4.6 nm Au and 14.0 nm Fe3O4 NCs. (b) Space-filling curves of CaB6 and bcc-AB6 structures and TEM image showing the coexistence of CaB6 and bcc-AB6 structures of Au and Fe3O4 BNSLs. The scale bars represent 50 nm. Reproduced from ref. 240. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Unlike previous examples, in which nanoparticles are regarded as hard spheres, BNSLs assembled from anisotropic nanoparticles have also been reported. One typical example is the formation of binary c-In2O3/Pd superlattices, in which 16 nm nanooctahedral c-In2O3 and 6 nm spherical Pd nanoparticles with opposite electric charges were co-assembled into 2D binary superlattice films.241 Because one of the component nanoparticles had an anisotropic structure (octahedral) rather than isotropic spheres, this feature directly led to the formation of three different skeletal patterns of c-In2O3 in the assembled superlattice, which were named type I, type II and type III, respectively (Fig. 10). In addition, Coulombic interactions, as well as the structural differences between the c-In2O3 and Pd nanoparticles, resulted in an interesting superlattice geometry in which the Pd nanoparticles were resident on the central plane of c-In2O3 above the substrate surface, rather than sitting on it.
 Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM image and schematic of the Type I assembly. (c) and (d) TEM image and schematic illustrations of Type II assembly. (e) and (f) TEM image and schematic illustrations of Type III assembly. Reproduced from ref. 241. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to BNSLs, ternary nanoparticle superlattices have also been obtained by Vanmaekelbergh et al.,242 which could be regarded as an extension of the binary cooperative complementary principle. The authors report the formation of a ternary nanoparticle superlattice with an ABC4 structure composed of CdSe and PbSe nanoparticles with two different diameters, which is an analogue of the isostructural atomic lattice AlMgB4. Later, Dong et al. reported the formation of a ternary nanoparticle superlattice with an ABC2 structure by combining FePt nanoparticles and two sizes of Fe3O4 nanoparticle243 (Fig. 11a and b). Unlike binary nanoparticle superlattices, it is not easy to fabricate ternary nanoparticle superlattices owing to the difficulty of deliberately balancing the interparticle interactions to keep the system stable. These types of nanoparticle assemblies are also binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM images of ABC2-type ternary nanoparticle superlattice bilayers self-assembled from 16.5 nm Fe3O4, 7.0 nm Fe3O4, and 5.0 nm FePt NCs. (b) Low- and high-magnification HRSEM images, as well as structural models of ABC2-type Fe3O4 and FePt NCs. Reproduced from ref. 243. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Semicrystalline and other structured binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies
With the exception of ordered and disordered nanoparticle assemblies, in certain cases nanoparticle assemblies cannot be categorized into the above groups. Quasicrystalline superlattices may be one example. A quasicrystal contains a structure that is ordered but not periodic, which means that it does not have translational symmetry. On the other hand, it has rotational symmetries (five-, eight-, ten-, and twelve-fold), which classical crystallographic structures do not have. Quasicrystals were first discovered in 1984 and were later reported with intermetallic compounds, soft matter, etc.244–247 In 2009, quasicrystalline binary nanoparticle superlattices were observed.248 Three different sets of binary nanoparticles, namely, Fe2O3/Au, Fe3O4/Au and PbS/Pd, were successfully assembled into dodecagonal quasicrystalline orders (Fig. 12a). Because nanoparticle assemblies are counterparts of atomic systems, the formation of quasicrystalline nanoparticle superlattices could provide insights into understanding the mechanisms of quasicrystalline materials. According to the results, it appears that the formation of quasicrystalline superlattices does not rely on any specific combination of nanoparticles or on unique interparticle interactions. It should be simply driven by entropy and interparticle potentials. Moreover, quasicrystalline superlattices are also observed to coexist with normal binary superlattices with low-defect interfaces, which indicates the possibility of hybrid nanoparticle superlattices. Pileni et al. reported such a coexistence of normal and quasicrystalline binary nanoparticle superlattices with a Co/Ag system249 (Fig. 12b). In addition, it was also observed that when the Co nanoparticle was changed from the amorphous phase to the ferromagnetic single crystal (hcp) phase, the as-formed binary superlattice changed from an AB-type to a quasicrystalline form. Such a stoichiometric transition is supposed to be driven by magnetic forces, which supplement the entropic effects mentioned in previous studies.
 Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of dodecagonal quasicrystalline superlattices self-assembled from Fe2O3/Au and PbS/Pd NCs. Reproduced from ref. 248. Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM images of quasicrystalline superlattices and transitional domains of hcp phase Co and Ag NCs. The bottom-left ZFC/FC curves show the difference in behaviour between amorphous Co (red) and hcp Co (black) with Ag NCs. Reproduced from ref. 249. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Doping is among the common methods of producing binary cooperative complementary materials, as we stated in previous sections. It is also a feasible way to fabricate binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies. In this situation, randomly localized dopants and crystalline base materials form a complementary pair. Cargnello et al. investigated and demonstrated the possibility of utilizing nanoparticles as dopants to form nanoparticle superlattices.250 In practice, they used Au nanoparticles as substitutional dopants in CdSe or PbSe nanocrystalline assemblies. Although the doping position is random, the density is widely controllable, which is analogous to the case in atomic doping. Furthermore, the electronic properties are highly tunable via doping, which could result in a change of six orders of magnitude in the conductivity of PbSe.
Collective properties of binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies
The introduction of the binary cooperative complementary principle into studies of nanoparticle assemblies provides an alternative way to look at the big picture in this field. Owing to their remarkable properties, BNSLs are attracting an increasing amount of research interest, as they possess collective properties rather than those of the component nanoparticles. Such advantages of BNSLs have made them a research focus in both science and industry. During the past decades, a variety of versatile BNSLs with novel properties have been reported and researchers are still investigating new compositions of BNSLs with more interesting properties (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Enhanced properties of binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies. Reproduced from ref. 251, 253, 258, 270 and 276. Copyright 2008, 2009, 2010, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Structural properties
Nanoparticle superlattices composed of binary cooperative complementary components can have specific structures that are difficult to achieve for single-component nanoparticle superlattices. For example, obtaining a nanoparticle superlattice with the diamond structure is a challenge, since the diamond structure is an unstable state for single-component nanoparticle assemblies. This problem could be simply solved by adding another factor to balance and strengthen the interaction of the nanoparticles. Grzybowski et al. confirmed this assumption by producing oppositely charged metal NPs of nearly equal sizes.236 Ag NPs (8.60 nm and positively charged) and Au NPs (8.36 nm and negatively charged) were used in the experiments. To self-assemble the superlattice, two solutions with a molar ratio of unity were mixed and the superlattice was obtained as a precipitate. XRD patterns revealed that the precipitate was characteristic of the diamond structure with a lattice constant of 19.08 nm, which agreed with the value (18.5 nm) obtained from scanning electron microscopy (SEM). Also, the interparticle distance calculated from XRD data (8.27 nm) was very close to the values estimated from the hard-sphere radii of the individual NPs (8.48 nm) and the SEM images (8.5 nm). In the latter part of this work, the authors emphasized that it requires subtle calibration to balance the interparticle forces if the sizes or charges of the nanoparticles vary. This work gives a good example of the fact that the introduction of binary components and electrostatic forces into the self-assembly of nanoparticles may open new avenues to novel nanostructured materials.
Another way to introduce binary cooperative complementary pairs into nanoparticle superlattices is the formation of alloy nanoparticles. Mundoor et al. synthesized semiconducting nanorods of β-NaY0.5Gd0.3Yb0.18Er0.02F4 and successfully obtained a highly unusual superlattice that had both long-range orientational and triclinic positional ordering.251 In previous studies of nanoparticle assemblies, although various forms of superlattice structure have been formed, architectures with low symmetry, such as triclinic systems, have rarely been fabricated. In their study, the researchers obtained a nanorod assembly with a triclinic structure by combining anisotropic elastic and electrostatic interactions, which arose from the use of a nematic liquid crystal (NLC) host. The lattice periodicity of such a nanorod superlattice is an order of magnitude larger than the size of the component nanorod, which exhibits long-range orientation. The axes of the alloy nanorod and the triclinic superlattice tend to follow the orientation of the NLC host and could be coupled with it, which reveals the potential of tuning the superlattice on the macroscale. Furthermore, by varying the charge on the nanorods or doping/deionizing the NLCs, the periodicity of the triclinic superlattice can be tuned via a change in electrostatic interactions. Considering that numerous methods are available for modifying the mechanical properties of NLCs, this study provides a platform for investigating the mesoscopic colloidal positional and orientated ordering of nanoparticle superlattices.
Electronic and magnetic properties
Because nanoparticle assemblies possess mutually embedded structures in which the constituent nanoparticles closely interact with each other, they offer an ideal counterpart on the nanoscale to natural/artificial materials that require doping or hybridization. Therefore, the design and fabrication of semiconductors based on binary nanoparticle superlattices have been performed. In order to obtain high p-type electronic conductivity and low thermal conductivity, Urban et al. fabricated binary PbTe/Ag2Te nanoparticle thin films.252 By fabricating single-component (PbTe) and binary superlattices, among their electronic properties an almost 100-fold increase in gate current was identified (Fig. 14). In addition, by varying the PbTe/Ag2Te ratio, it was found that the maximum enhancement was achieved with a 1:1 mixture. Although different from conventional doping methods, the formation of a binary superlattice provides the ability to tune the ratio of the components (doping percentage) without losing their homogeneity, as well as the interparticle distance by changing the stoichiometry, which could not be easily modified by conventional methods.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM images of NaCl-type and CuAu-type BNSLs, as well as a CuAu-type BNSL annealed at 200 °C. The insets are the structural illustrations of the corresponding superlattices, as well as the zoomed-in TEM image. (b) Source-gate current versus source-gate voltage of single-component PbTe superlattice film, 1:1 PbTe/Ag2Te BNSL films and 5:1 PbTe/Ag2Te BNSL films. Reproduced from ref. 252. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. 
Dipole–dipole interactions are primary interparticle interactions in magnetic nanoparticle assemblies, which may contribute to the specific collective properties of BNSLs. It has been reported that a binary nanoparticle superlattice with two different sizes of Fe3O4 nanoparticles (14.3 nm and 7.2 nm in an AB13 structure) could exhibit a single-phase-like magnetization alignment process.253 On the other hand, a mixture of the nanoparticles with separate phases only displays a combination of the features of the individual nanoparticles, which confirms that dipolar interactions in a binary nanoparticle superlattice can modulate the collective properties of the system. This contrast between the nanoparticle mixture and the binary superlattice is also corroborated by Monte Carlo simulations. Furthermore, a dipolar interaction effect is also observed for a binary Fe3O4 superlattice with an AB2 structure as well as a binary Fe3O4/FePt superlattice, which indicates its universality in magnetic nanoparticle assembly systems and provides a promising route for designing and tuning their collective properties.
BNSL-based exchange-spring magnets have attracted an increasing amount of attention recently. These BNSLs comprise both hard and soft phases, which interact via magnetic exchange coupling. In order to fabricate high-quality exchange-spring magnets, it is necessary that the hard and soft phases should be controlled on the nanoscale. Therefore, the synthesis of nanoparticles that contain hard and soft phases and their assembly into a binary superlattice will be a convenient approach. Such a design was achieved by Sun et al., who combined FePt (magnetically hard phase) and Fe3O4 (magnetically soft phase) into binary superlattices.55 By varying the size ratio of FePt to Fe3O4, the exchange coupling and the energy produced could be increased by up to 50% in comparison to that for non-exchange-coupled FePt materials.
Optical properties
The binary cooperative complementary effect can be observed in hybrid assemblies of semiconductors and metal nanoparticles. Interactions between semiconductors and metals have always been the subject of research interest, especially coupling between excitons in a semiconductor and plasmon resonance in a metal. In such a system, exciton-plasmon coupling can be used to tune the strength and lifetime of photoluminescence.254–257 The amplification of an electromagnetic field induced by surface plasmon resonance will enhance photoluminescence, whereas the transfer of energy from a semiconductor nanoparticle to a metal nanoparticle will result in the reverse consequence. By fabricating a binary semiconductor/metal nanoparticle superlattice, the interaction between excitons and plasmons can be tuned by varying the size of the nanoparticles, the stoichiometry of the superlattice, and the spacings between the nanoparticles. Such a geometry-dependent interaction is highly consistent with the binary cooperative complementary interactions discussed before. Both theoretical and experimental studies have confirmed a blue shift in semiconductor/metal nanoparticle systems, whereas single-component assemblies of either component have never exhibited such properties.254,258
Semiconductor/metal hybrid assemblies can also lead to energy transfer, enhancements in emission and nonlinear Fano resonance,259 which can be tuned by modifying the mutual arrangement, size, shape, relative ratio, and semiconductor/metal materials.260–263 Alivisatos et al. reported the fabrication and characterization of binary CdSe and Au nanoparticle superlattices and revealed a dramatic decrease in the fluorescence intensity, as well as the fluorescence lifetime, of the binary system in comparison to pure CdSe nanoparticle assemblies.264 This change was explained by the transfer of energy from the CdSe nanoparticles to the Au nanoparticles and indicated the feasibility of tuning the radiation of the semiconductor.
Binary nanoparticle assemblies can also lead to remarkable optical properties. One example is the fabrication of core/shell semiconductor nanorods. Talapin et al. reported a feasible method for fabricating CdSe/CdS core–shell nanorods and nanotetrapods, which exhibited a highly polarized emission265 (Fig. 15a). This attractive property is attributed to highly efficient charge transfer from CdS to CdSe, and a later study showed that the polarization ratio could be about 0.75, which is equal to or up to 1.5 times higher than that of the equivalent sphere-in-rod systems.266 This observation is exactly due to the effect of cooperative shapes and complementary materials between the core and shell semiconductor constituents. In addition, this effect could be further enhanced by introducing additional cooperative interactions between the individual nanorods. Wang et al. intelligently balanced environmental and interparticle interactions and successfully fabricated single-domain needle-like self-assembled CdSe/CdS nanorod superstructures267 (Fig. 15b). The needle-like superlattices could be further arranged into parallel and unidirectional free-standing films, which exhibited even stronger photoluminescence polarization in comparison to that of single CdSe/CdS nanorods (the polarization ratio was about 0.88). Such an enhancement in luminescence properties is supposed to be due to second-order cooperative complementary interactions and can be used in energy down-conversion phosphors to construct polarized light-emitting diodes.268
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of CdSe/CdS core–shell nanorod exhibiting a highly polarized emission (the polarization ratio is about 0.75). (b) Schematic illustration of CdSe/CdS core–shell nanorods self-assembled into single-domain needle-like superlattices and the corresponding SEM images. These superlattices could be assembled into unidirectional alignments with a remarkable polarization ratio (about 0.88). Reproduced from ref. 267. Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Mechanical properties
Semiconductor-semiconductor BNSLs have been investigated owing to their specific interparticle interactions and properties. For instance, 8.1 nm CdTe and 4.4 nm CdSe nanoparticles were self-assembled into superlattices and it was observed that cuboctahedral AB13 and AB5 were the most preferred structures.269 By performing measurements of electrophoretic mobility, an ionic driving force was excluded for the formation of these superlattices and a pure entropic effect was indicated during the assembly process. However, because cub-AB13 and AB5 have much lower packing densities in comparison to other binary stoichiometries, the authors suppose that van der Waals interactions between the coating ligands should contribute equally with the entropic driving force. Hence, the stable structures represent a balance between the contribution of surfaces and hard-sphere effects.
Interparticle interactions have been carefully studied for the fabrication of the required nanoparticle assemblies. However, the mechanical properties of the environment have also been proved to influence the formation of BNSLs. Korgel et al. carefully studied a binary Fe2O3/Au superlattice with an AB2 structure by grazing-incidence small-angle X-ray scattering and revealed a uniaxial shrinkage of the superlattice perpendicular to the substrate.270 Such shrinkage could not be observed by SEM or TEM, because the route of the probing electrons is vertical. Specifically, when the superlattice is deposited on the (100) surface the shrinkage will occur in the [210] direction and result in a transformation in symmetry to centered orthorhombic. Moreover, by carefully checking TEM images, it seems that the binary nanoparticle superlattice can nucleate both on the substrate and in solution, and strain from the air-solution interface would lead to the formation of periodic dislocations in the superlattice.
The kinetics and microscopic pathways of the transformation of extended solids from one structure to another are a fundamental but not fully understood topic. Nanoparticles have provided a possible way of solving this problem. A previous study revealed that a single-domain nanocrystal (CdSe) would convert from the wurtzite structure to the rock salt structure under increasing pressure.271 This transition is explained by single nucleation events and the nanocrystal would reversibly reconvert to the wurtzite structure when the pressure was released (Fig. 16a). This observation opened the door to the transitions of solid phases; however, stable multi-phase solids were still a challenge. Recently, Wang et al. made significant progress when they studied superlattices of nanoparticles and successfully obtained a high-pressure nucleated metastable phase of PbS nanoparticles in ambient conditions.272 In practice, the hard PbS nanoparticle core was protected by soft oleic acid (OA) ligands, which could form a large “strained-but-interconnected” 3D porous architecture under increasing pressure. With such a configuration, the PbS nanoparticle superlattices transformed from the rock salt structure to the orthorhombic structure via the PbS RS(220) planes along the SL(220) direction and the latter structure was maintained when the pressure was released. Further analysis indicates that it was the greater compressibility of OA in comparison to that of PbS and the irreversible expansion of mesopores that caused the storage of stress in OA after the release of pressure, which enabled the structural stability of the high-pressure metastable phase under ambient conditions (Fig. 16b). This finding reveals an unexpected property upon combining soft and hard nanomaterials, which is also a vivid example of the binary cooperative complementary principle functioning in the field of nanomaterials. Indeed, natural materials, such as human bones, are an exquisite combination of hard and soft tissues,273 and it has recently been demonstrated that a hierarchical artificial grafted bone that mimics the soft/hard combination of natural bone could provide an optimized microenvironment to improve bone regeneration by recruiting host cells.274
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic demonstration of the phase transformation of a CdSe nanoparticle from wurtzite to rock salt and vice versa under the application and release of pressure. (b) Schematic illustration of the structural transition of a PbS nanoparticle superlattice from rock salt to orthorhombic under pressure and the maintenance of this metastable phase when pressure is released. Reproduced from ref. 272. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim. 
Sensing properties
Chemiresistors that respond to biochemical stimuli can also be produced on a nanoparticle array system.275 Tokonami et al. reported the use of nanoparticle arrays for DNA sensing.276 In their experiments, large Au nanoparticles (46 nm) were capped by small Au nanoparticles (12 nm), which were coated with probe DNA sequences. When this system is immersed in a solution of target DNA, hybridization of the target DNA with the probe DNA will crosslink the small Au nanoparticles, which leads to the connection of the large Au nanoparticles. Accordingly, the resistance of the device decreases with high sensitivity to a single base pair. An alternative application of nanoparticle arrays doped with single molecules is found in highly sensitive strain sensors. Transport between neighbouring nanoparticles occurs via tunnelling electrons; hence, a slight change in the interparticle distance will lead to an exponential change in resistance, which could provide an ideal gauge factor.277
Plasmonic coupling between noble metal nanoparticles is highly distance-dependent, which will result in a shift in the plasmonic peak or a change in the shape of the data curve.278 This feature has been utilized to fabricate sensors for the colorimetric detection of chemicals, biomolecules, enzymatic activities, and the hybridization, bending and cleavage of DNA with higher sensitivity than conventional methods.173,174,258,279 A plasmonic ruler has been reported based on the high sensitivity of the plasmon resonance of assembled noble metal nanoparticles. Sönnichsen et al. fabricated a dimer of Au and Ag nanoparticles via the mediation of DNA and monitored the DNA hybridization process.280 The change in distance between the Au/Ag nanoparticle pair resulted in a blue shift in the scattering measurements, which could last for over 3000 s and the maximum measurement distance was up to 70 nm.
In the above sections, various binary cooperative complementary nanomaterials have been presented, which display remarkable and versatile properties. These properties arise from the geometrical complementarity and interactive cooperation between the constituent nanoparticles, and could provide a clue to the design and construction of more functional nanoparticle-based materials. In addition, the binary cooperative complementary principle could be a fundamental guiding philosophy for the study of nanomaterials, whereas unfortunately they have never before been discussed from this point of view. Moreover, it should be stressed that these studies represent the major focus of nanoparticle assemblies, which indicate that the binary cooperative complementary principle is highly consistent with mainstream research in this field rather than an isolated interest. As stated at the beginning of this section, the binary cooperative complementary principle provides a special perspective for reviewing the development of nanoparticles and their assemblies.
Conclusions and perspectives
The binary cooperative complementary principle is one of the fundamental rules of the universe, which contributes tremendously not only to the beauty of nature but also to remarkable artificial materials and devices. Nanoparticle assemblies, as a promising form of nanotechnology for the future development of human beings, play increasingly important roles from the lab to everyday life. The introduction of the binary cooperative complementary theory into studies of nanoparticle assemblies will facilitate the investigation and fabrication of new nanomaterials with desirable properties and functions. As illustrated in previous sections, it is clear that the advantages of binary nanoparticle superlattices mostly derive from different aspects of their cooperative and complementary properties, including interparticle interactions, the sizes/structures of nanoparticles, and different types of nanoparticle. From this point of view, it could also be expected that more remarkable nanoparticle assemblies would be discovered via the intersection of these cooperative and complementary aspects.
In fact, for the identification of nanoparticle assemblies with cutting-edge properties, there are even more cooperative and complementary aspects that have not yet been fully discovered. These secrets are hidden in the coating ligands of nanoparticles. When keeping the core material of a nanoparticle constant, varying the coating ligands could immediately give rise to a change in at least one cooperative complementary property of the system. For example, during developments in the self-assembly of nanoparticles, the consequent collective properties are claimed to occur via coupling between adjacent nanoparticles or the delocalization of excitons, which achieves the band-like transport of electrons in nanoparticle assemblies. An appropriate distance between the two nanoscopic units is the key to generating the collective properties of nanoparticle supercrystals. However, like opposite sides of the same coin, ligand molecules on the nanoparticle surface not only control growth during synthesis to prevent aggregation, but also create barriers around each nanoparticle to hinder interparticle electronic coupling. Strong coupling can only take place in plasmonic metal nanostructures over a small interparticle distance when plasmonic hybridization occurs, which is different from the case of most atoms, which can covalently bond to adjacent atoms by the overlap of electron clouds in a σ-bond or π-bond. The insulating ligand shell increases the interparticle spacing and blocks electronic communication between neighbouring nanoparticles. Electronic coupling could not occur in the event of a large interparticle distance as a result of the thick insulating coating on individual nanoparticles. Ligand removal is a practical strategy for achieving electron transfer but entails the risk of destroying surface states, leading to uncontrollable aggregation or fusion of nanoparticles. More importantly, the electronic defects generated as a consequence will trap charge carriers and make the material more sensitive to the environment, especially to ambient oxygen and water. However, engineering nanoparticle surfaces with functional ligands including biological, optical, electrical, and magnetic elements can be developed as a solution in nanoparticle assembly systems to generate collective properties and create multiple functionalities in supercrystals (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  Illustration of potential application areas of cooperative and complementary ligand shells. Reproduced from ref. 282, 289, 290, 291, 297 and 299. Copyright 2008, 2010, 2013, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Programming nanoparticle assembly
As well as directing the formation of common nanoparticle assemblies, the binary cooperative complementary principle may play a much more important role in future studies of this topic. The programmable self-assembly of nanoparticles is a rapidly emerging and important field that relies heavily on BCCNM nanoparticle assemblies. It provides a much greater possibility of fabricating the desired nanomaterials, because most nanoparticle self-assemblies are highly symmetrical structures.281 With the help of programming, a selection of structures could be obtained from nanoparticle building blocks. The key difference between simple assembly and programmed assembly is that information is provided in programmed assembly that specifies the location, connectivity, or order of each individual building block. In general, two strategies are used to undertake the programming process: the puzzle approach and the folding approach.282 The puzzle approach defines the information required for assembly in terms of the specific interactions between each individual nanoparticle. By specifying the interactions, the location of each building block is fixed and hence the structure of the assembly is confirmed. In contrast, the folding approach first constrains the building blocks into a flexible sequence and then spontaneously folds the sequence into the desired structure. In the case of the puzzle approach, the use of DNA strands as interparticle linkers is the best choice, because the localization of each building block will need numerous pairs of distinct and highly selective interactions and, so far, only DNA pairs could provide this possibility.283 For the folding approach, the requirement is to form a flexible one-dimensional chain; thus, hydrophobic interactions,284 lock-and-key depletion forces,285 DNA hybridization286 and chemical crosslinking287 are all qualified candidates for the assembly process.
Geometrical complementarity adjustment
In general, when molecules are confined within a space that is comparable to their dimensions, their chemical properties vary dramatically. Scientists have utilized this behaviour of molecules by confining them within nanostructured spaces to study their properties.288 However, the diffusion of molecules into and out of nanostructures makes it difficult to obtain reasonable results. Recently, functional coating ligands helped in the construction of a “nanoflask”, which could be used to study the physicochemical properties of confined molecules.289 In this work, photoresponsive ligands (azobenzene) were decorated on nanoparticles (Au, Fe3O4, and SiO2), which led to the controllable assembly and disassembly of nanoparticles via ultraviolet and visible-light irradiation. Such dynamic assembly behaviour is utilized to trap several types of molecules in solution, which further undergo fast chemical reactions with stereoselectivities different from those in the bulk solution. The dimensions of the nanoflasks are tuned via the lengths of the ligands and the diameters of the nanoparticles. The large surface areas of nanoparticle assemblies make these nanoreactors better than traditional planar surfaces, and they are suitable for application in the polymerization of trapped monomers, enantioselective reactions, or the preparation of various classes of inorganic nanostructures.
Chemical/photonic sensors
Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) is a well-known redox unit that can be incorporated with nanoparticle arrays to form a redox switching system. In practice, dithiolated TTFs (TTFDT) are used to bind to Au nanoparticle arrays, where they can be reversibly oxidized and reduced in solutions of iron chloride and ferrocene, respectively.290 The sheet conductance changes according to the oxidized and reduced state of the TTFDT molecules, and an increase of one order of magnitude is observed after oxidation by iron chloride. This switching property provides a new opportunity of fabricating chemical sensors with these binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle arrays.
Nanoparticle arrays with an organic matrix have various potential applications. They can be used as a platform to characterize molecular compounds and to demonstrate their functionality. One example is molecular switch devices. Photochromic diarylethene molecules are typical representatives, which are studied intensively owing to their fatigue resistance and negligible change in length upon isomerization. When irradiated with visible light or ultraviolet light, photochromic diarylethene molecules exhibit two different states, namely, the off and on state, respectively. Both states will remain unchanged if the molecule is kept away from light or in darkness. The conjugation state of diarylethenes will change from high to low upon visible-light irradiation. This variation will lead to a decrease in conductance and a blue shift in the surface plasmon resonance peak, which could be reversed upon irradiation with UV light. Therefore, a reversible conductance switching function could be achieved by the alternate application of visible light, UV light and darkness.291
Electronic devices
Spintronics have attracted huge research interest for decades and have already been applied in the information technology industry. Metal oxides are commonly used for spintronics studies, among which Fe3O4 is the most promising practical material owing to its strong ferrimagnetism, good room-temperature conductivity and high Curie temperature.292 In order to match nanoscale electronic devices, Fe3O4 nanoparticles have been synthesized, which have a particularly high magnetoresistance (MR). However, Fe3O4 nanoparticles with a size of less than 20 nm need additional oxygen (O) atoms on their surface to compensate for O defects. Lv et al. intelligently solved this problem by introducing tetrathiafulvalene (TTF)-fused carboxylate ligands (TTF-COOH).293 TTF units have rigid planar structures and are excellent electron donors, which leads to a tunable interparticle distance and an increase in electronic conductivity. Moreover, binding to COO groups compensates for the O deficiency and increases the spin polarization of the Fe3O4 nanoparticles. A typical cooperative and complementary pair is formed by the Fe3O4 core and the TTF-COOH ligands. Moreover, when the TTF-COO–Fe3O4 nanoparticles self-assembled into superlattices, it was observed that electron transport and MR were dependent on the ligand structure and interparticle spacing. A shorter distance and better conjugation between the HOMO and LUMO of TTF will result in an increase in electronic conductivity and MR, which confirms the previous statement that the distance of cooperation determines the function of a binary cooperative complementary system.
Nanoparticles have been investigated as a replacement for conventional materials for fabricating electronic devices with novel functions and applications. A number of examples, such as solar cells, transistors, photodetectors, etc., have been reported with improved efficiency, processability or sensitivity.294–296 On the other hand, electronic circuits that purely comprise metal nanoparticles have posed a challenge, because metals screen electric fields. However, this problem could be solved by introducing metal nanoparticles functionalized with charged organic ligands. Yan et al. recently reported a simple electronic circuit made exclusively from metal nanoparticles with different types of organic ligands.297 The current in these circuits is controlled by the ionic gradient of mobile counter-ions surrounding the nanoparticle assemblies. In practice, four types of 5.5 nm Au nanoparticle are used with coating ligands of: (1) HS-(CH2)11-N(CH3)3+ ligands surrounded by mobile Cl− anions; (2) HS-(CH2)10-COO− ligands surrounded by mobile N(CH3)4+ or NH4+ cations; (3) HS-(CH2)10-COOH ligands; and (4) 11-mercaptoundecanoic acid (MUA) and HS-CH2CH(NHCOCH3)COOH with no mobile ions. These Au nanoparticles then assemble into films that are hundreds of nanometres thick and act as resistors, diodes, acid/base gas sensors, cation sensors and humidity sensors. Environmental changes will trigger these nanoparticle circuitries, and their switching times are comparable to those of polymer electronic components. In addition, they can perform logic operations with low power consumption and are mechanically flexible. The use of metal nanoparticles will also allow other integrations of entirely different functions into the active layer of electronic circuitry, which may be inkjet-printed using aqueous nanoparticle inks in future.
Biosensors
Nanoparticle biosensors have received intense interest and exhibited promising applications in both research and medicine. Coating ligands are one of the most important factors that affect the adaptability of nanoparticles in biosystems; hence, the selection of appropriate functionalized coating ligands is crucial for the design and fabrication of nanoparticle biosensors. The primary factor for a suitable coating ligand is its thickness, because in biosystems many biomolecules (enzymes, lipids, etc.) and ions in blood, urine, and saliva are harmful to nanoparticles, which require a thick layer of coating ligands. On the other hand, a thinner layer of ligands will boost the nanoparticle-analyte signal. Therefore, a delicate balance between a decrease in thickness and an improvement in protection is the key point.298 One solution is that the coating ligands could be further combined with various low-molecular-weight functional groups, of which zwitterions are a good example. Zhan et al. reported that CdSe/ZnS nanoparticles with zwitterionic coating ligands could maintain their optical and spectroscopic properties under a variety of distinct conditions such as a wide range of pH values, excess amounts of electrolytes, and the presence of growth media and reducing agents.299 Polymeric coating ligands are also topical candidates because they have advantages in the controllability of the number and position of surface-binding groups and functional groups. A number of studies have shown progress in polymer ligands and their promising applications.300–303 Treue et al. revealed that the cellular uptake of nanoparticles was strongly affected by the presence and physicochemical properties of protein ligand layers.304 By modifying human serum albumin protein with ethylenediamine, a 1000-fold increase in binding affinity was observed, which indicates that even small physicochemical changes in the protein coating could affect the biological responses of nanoparticles.
The current challenge in nanoparticle assembly is to facilitate the generation of a coupling effect that induces superior properties in comparison to those of the individual nanoparticles. The abovementioned engineering elements can work alone or together to modify the structures of nanoparticle assemblies to enhance their coupling effect. Engineered supercrystals may behave like the Avengers, who combined superheroes such as Spiderman, the Flash, and Magneto, to provide strong guarantees against weak collective properties in further applications. The accumulation of knowledge regarding surface engineering will lead to new insights into the design of multiple collective properties that are applicable in various uses.
At the end of this review, we would like to recommend a typical routine for fabricating BCCNMs via: (i) selecting a pair of complementary properties; (ii) designing or grafting nanomaterials with particular functional ligands; (iii) adjusting the distance between the nanocomponents so as to make it comparable to their characteristic length until the expected BCCNM is obtained; and (iv) repeating steps (ii) and (iii) and finally verifying the routine. These design and synthesis steps provide a feasible strategy for fabricating BCCNMs and they may inspire more types of BCCNMs to be considered and discovered.
In the case of nanoparticle assemblies, we would like to note that the complementary principle is not limited to geometries or interactions, while all nanoparticles with complementary structures/properties/functions could be considered. Furthermore, beyond the limitation to nanoparticles, the application of the binary cooperative complementary principle could be much more impressive. For example, polymer-coated nanoparticles contain a cooperative and complementary pair of hard and soft materials. However, the strong interaction between the core and the polymer could be utilized and vice versa. In general studies of polymers, one difficulty is how to bind one polymer to a gel of another polymer. Common solutions include chemical reactions, heating, changing the pH, ultraviolet irradiation or applying an additional electric field, which are either time- or energy-consuming.305–307 Faced with this problem, Rose et al. provided a creative method to solve it.308 This method relies on strong interactions between the polymer gel and the nanoparticles. In practice, Rose et al. spread a layer of a silica nanoparticle solution onto one hydrogel surface and then made it contact another hydrogel (with either the same or different chemical properties or rigidities). After a short period of time (a few seconds) the two hydrogels formed a strong bond as they were completely glued together. In addition, this method was also tested with modified nanotubes and cellulose nanoparticle solutions, and the authors successfully used a silica nanoparticle solution to glue together two cut pieces of calf's liver.
In fact, the binary cooperative complementary principle is also deeply rooted in natural materials, which display hierarchical cooperation and complementarity that even surpass artificial BCCNMs in both structure and functionality: materials as simple as human bones have at least five levels of cooperative and complementary pairs.273 However, human beings may still learn from nature. Very recently, inspired by the structure and functions of human fingers, Ko et al. fabricated integrated e-skins, which could closely mimic the functions of the fingers.309 Such e-skins are composed of fingerprint-like patterns and interlocked microstructures in ferroelectric films, which can enhance the piezoelectric, pyroelectric, and piezoresistive sensing of static and dynamic mechanothermal signals. In comparison with previous sensors, which could only detect static and low-frequency stimuli,310,311 these microstructured ferroelectric skins are advanced in their flexible texture and capability to detect and discriminate between multiple spatiotemporal tactile stimuli, including static and dynamic pressure, vibration, and temperature, with high sensitivity and is thus considerably attractive for applications in robotic skins, wearable sensors, and medical diagnostic devices. The key reason why the e-skin functions much better than previous planar ferroelectric film sensors is due to the interlocked microstructure design that it contains, which undergoes a larger change in contact area between neighbouring microdome arrays under external stress and hence has significantly enhanced tactile sensitivity, which enables the detection of minute variations in temperature, pressure, and acoustic vibration. The fabrication of this e-skin has integrated almost every single cooperative complementary pair mentioned previously: cooperative components, complementary structures, and multiple functions. Now, the concept of “cooperativity and complementarity” in BCCNMs could be extended to everyday life. In short, the deeper is the understanding of cooperation and complementarity in nanoparticle assembly systems, the broader is the picture it will display, which will certainly lead to the better design, manipulation and fabrication of nanoparticle assemblies.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the 1000 Young Talents Program and the National Science Foundation of China Grant No. 21422507 (T. W.), 21321003 (T. W.), and 215032337 (C. Y.). The design of this manuscript was attributed to Prof. Lei Jiang's suggestions.
References
B. Su, W. Guo and L. Jiang, Small, 2015, 11, 1072–1096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu and L. Jiang, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 239–246 CrossRef .
M.-C. Daniel and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 293–346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Brust, M. Walker, D. Bethell, D. J. Schiffrin and R. Whyman, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1994, 801–802 RSC .
Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Science, 2002, 298, 2176–2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Ahmadi, Z. L. Wang, T. C. Green, A. Henglein and M. A. El-Sayed, Science, 1996, 272, 1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Fan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 63–82 RSC .
Z. Fan, Y. Chen, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, B. Li, Y. Zong, Y. Han and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 795–799 RSC .
Z. X. Fan, Z. M. Luo, X. Huang, B. Li, Y. Chen, J. Wang, Y. L. Hu and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1414–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Fan, M. Bosman, X. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Yu, K. P. Ong, Y. A. Akimov, L. Wu, B. Li, J. Wu, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, C. E. Png, C. L. Gan, P. D. Yang and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Trindade, P. O'Brien and N. L. Pickett, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3843–3858 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Meulenkamp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 5566–5572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun and H. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 8204–8205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vaucher, M. Li and S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1793–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. Kagan and M. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gref, Y. Minamitake, M. T. Peracchia, V. Trubetskoy, V. Torchilin and R. Langer, Science, 1994, 263, 1600–1603 CAS .

          C. R. Martin, Nanomaterials–a membrane-based synthetic approach, DTIC Document,  1994 Search PubMed .

          K. Graf, M. Kappl and H. Butt, Physics and Chemistry of Interfaces, Weinheim,  2006 Search PubMed .
W. Han, S. Fan, Q. Li and Y. Hu, Science, 1997, 277, 1287–1289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dai, E. W. Wong, Y. Z. Lu, S. Fan and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 1995, 375, 769–772 CrossRef CAS .
L. Vayssieres, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 464–466 CrossRef CAS .
B. Nikoobakht and M. A. El-Sayed, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1957–1962 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Wiley, Y. Chen, J. M. McLellan, Y. Xiong, Z.-Y. Li, D. Ginger and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1032–1036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Klajn, A. O. Pinchuk, G. C. Schatz and B. A. Grzybowski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8363–8367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kan, X. Zhu and G. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Millstone, G. S. Métraux and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1209–1214 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Fan and D. L. Carroll, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10777–10781 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Z. Li, Y. Z. Huang, S. X. Wu, X. Z. Zhou, S. Z. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. X. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Han, M. Bosman, Q. X. Wang, Y. H. Zhu, Q. Liu, B. Li, Z. Y. Zeng, J. M. T. Wu, W. X. Shi, S. Z. Li, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700–12706 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fang, J. Y. Park, Y. Cui, P. Alivisatos, J. Shcrier, B. Lee, L.-W. Wang and M. Salmeron, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 184704 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Oldenburg, R. Averitt, S. Westcott and N. Halas, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 288, 243–247 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Fan, Y. H. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Han, Q. X. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5672–5676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Fan, X. Zhang, J. Yang, X. J. Wu, Z. D. Liu, W. Huang and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10910–10913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111–1114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, B. Wiley, Z. Y. Li, D. Campbell, F. Saeki, H. Cang, L. Au, J. Lee, X. Li and Y. Xia, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2255–2261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, L. Au, J. McLellan, Z.-Y. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1764–1769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Skrabalak, J. Chen, Y. Sun, X. Lu, L. Au, C. M. Cobley and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1587–1595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, R. Klajn, A. O. Pinchuk and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2008, 4, 1635–1639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Teranishi, Y. Inoue, M. Nakaya, Y. Oumi and T. Sano, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9914–9915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, H. Zeng, Y. Sahoo, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, Y. Ding, Z. L. Wang, M. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 875–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. F. Puntes, K. M. Krishnan and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 291, 2115–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Fan, U. Gösele and M. Zacharias, Small, 2007, 3, 1660–1671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pelton, J. Aizpurua and G. Bryant, Laser Photonics Rev., 2008, 2, 136–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ferrari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 131–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2957–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8340–8347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Jun, J. S. Choi and J. Cheon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3414–3439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Michalet, F. Pinaud, L. Bentolila, J. Tsay, S. Doose, J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. Wu, S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Lee, Y.-M. Huh, Y.-W. Jun, J.-W. Seo, J.-T. Jang, H.-T. Song, S. Kim, E.-J. Cho, H.-G. Yoon and J.-S. Suh, Nat. Med., 2007, 13, 95–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zeng, J. Li, J. P. Liu, Z. L. Wang and S. Sun, Nature, 2002, 420, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310, 462–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Quan, H. Xu, C. Wang, X. Wen, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, R. Li, C. J. Sheehan, Z. Wang and D.-M. Smilgies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1352–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. A. Millan, M. Engel, J. Chen, B. T. Diroll, S. C. Glotzer and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4980–4988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, B. T. Diroll, E. A. Gaulding and C. B. Murray, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2419–2423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Paik and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2952–2956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. Chen, M. Engel, J. A. Millan, W. Li, L. Qi, G. Xing, J. E. Collins, C. R. Kagan and J. Li, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 466–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. E. Collins, Y. Kang, J. Chen, D. T. Chen, A. G. Yodh and C. B. Murray, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 22430–22435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Walker, B. Kowalczyk, M. O. de La Cruz and B. A. Grzybowski, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1316–1344 RSC .
I. Willerich and F. Gröhn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20341–20356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. O'Leary, J. A. Fallas, E. L. Bakota, M. K. Kang and J. D. Hartgerink, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 821–828 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Qiao, Z. Niu and Q. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 6178–6194 RSC .
M. Yang, K. Sun and N. A. Kotov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1860–1872 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Shah, M. Ganesan, J. Jocz and M. J. Solomon, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8095–8103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ma, S. Wang, L. Smith and N. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4334–4343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X.-M. Lin, Y. Sun and T. Rajh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3764–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niu, Q. Chen, H. Zhu, Y. Lin and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 1803–1805 RSC .
M. R. Gao, S. R. Zhang, Y. F. Xu, Y. R. Zheng, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 916–924 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Q.-W. Chen, Y.-B. Sun, M.-S. Wang, L.-X. Sun and W.-S. Yan, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5957–5962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tlusty and S. Safran, Science, 2000, 290, 1328–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Goyal, C. K. Hall and O. D. Velev, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2008, 77, 031401 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ku, D. M. Aruguete, A. P. Alivisatos and P. L. Geissler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 133, 838–848 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Singh, H. Chan, A. Baskin, E. Gelman, N. Repnin, P. Král and R. Klajn, Science, 2014, 345, 1149–1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, P. Ranjan, P. S. Maiti, G. Singh, G. Leitus and R. Klajn, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 422–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Asakura and F. Oosawa, J. Polym. Sci., 1958, 33, 183–192 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asakura and F. Oosawa, J. Chem. Phys., 1954, 22, 1255–1256 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Chu, G. Raffy, D. Ray, A. D. Guerzo, B. Kauffmann, G. Wantz, L. Hirsch and D. M. Bassani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12717–12723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Shen and P. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2008, 319, 398–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, W. Ni, Z. Yang, X. Kou, L. Li and J. Wang, Small, 2008, 4, 1287–1292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Thomas, S. Barazzouk, B. I. Ipe, S. S. Joseph and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13066–13068 CrossRef CAS .
P. W. Rothemund, Nature, 2006, 440, 297–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cheng, M. J. Campolongo, J. J. Cha, S. J. Tan, C. C. Umbach, D. A. Muller and D. Luo, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 519–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sharma, R. Chhabra, A. Cheng, J. Brownell, Y. Liu and H. Yan, Science, 2009, 323, 112–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuzyk, R. Schreiber, Z. Fan, G. Pardatscher, E.-M. Roller, A. Högele, F. C. Simmel, A. O. Govorov and T. Liedl, Nature, 2012, 483, 311–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Auyeung, J. I. Cutler, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Jones, J. Wu, G. Liu, K. Zhang, K. D. Osberg and C. A. Mirkin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 24–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Courty, A. Mermet, P. A. Albouy, E. Duval and M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pileni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 685–693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pileni, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1799–1809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Podsiadlo, G. Krylova, B. Lee, K. Critchley, D. J. Gosztola, D. V. Talapin, P. D. Ashby and E. V. Shevchenko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8953–8960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. V. Titov and P. Kral, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1213–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lisiecki, V. Halte, C. Petit, M. P. Pileni and J. Y. Bigot, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4176–4179 CAS .
N. Zaitseva, Z. R. Dai, F. R. Leon and D. Krol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10221–10226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8741–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin and C. B. Murray, Science, 2005, 310, 86–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fudouzi and Y. N. Xia, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 9653–9660 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Kagan, C. B. Murray and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 8633–8643 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Nie, A. Petukhova and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 15–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3358–3371 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Tao, D. P. Ceperley, P. Sinsermsuksakul, A. R. Neureuther and P. D. Yang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4033–4038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Damasceno, M. Engel and S. C. Glotzer, Science, 2012, 337, 453–457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Korgel and D. Fitzmaurice, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 14191–14201 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Bian, J. J. Choi, A. Kaushik, P. Clancy, D. M. Smilgies and T. Hanrath, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2815–2823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 13–30 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Caswell, J. N. Wilson, U. H. F. Bunz and C. J. Murphy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13914–13915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. I. van der Zande, L. Pagès, R. A. M. Hikmet and A. van Blaaderen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 5761–5767 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. I. van der Zande, G. J. M. Koper and H. N. W. Lekkerkerker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 5754–5760 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Nie, A. Petukhova and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 15–25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakata, Y. Hu, O. Uzun, O. Bakr and F. Stellacci, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4294–4299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Lv, L. Ji, G. Guo, L. Liu, D. Han, B. Wang, Y. Tu, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3290–3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Maier, M. L. Brongersma, P. G. Kik, S. Meltzer, A. A. G. Requicha and H. A. Atwater, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Maier, P. G. Kik, H. A. Atwater, S. Meltzer, E. Harel, B. E. Koel and A. A. G. Requicha, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 229–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, W.-R. Lee, N. Singh, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6066–6073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Tao, J. Huang and P. Yang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1662–1673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wen and S. A. Majetich, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8868–8876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Zhou, D. J. Park, K. Torabi, K. A. Brown, M. R. Jones, C. Zhang, G. C. Schatz and C. A. Mirkin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2157–2161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-X. Lin, L. Chen, D.-Y. Liu, Z.-C. Lei, Y. Wang, X.-S. Zheng, B. Ren, Z.-X. Xie, G. D. Stucky and Z.-Q. Tian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2828–2831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, S. J. Kwon, J.-B. Chang, C. A. Ross, T. A. Hatton and F. Stellacci, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao and K. P. Kalyanikutty, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 489–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, H. Kojima, S. Sato and K. Kimura, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10317–10323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Mendes, S. Jacke, K. Critchley, J. Plaza, Y. Chen, K. Nikitin, R. E. Palmer, J. A. Preece, S. D. Evans and D. Fitzmaurice, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3766–3768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Goubet, H. Portales, C. Yan, I. Arfaoui, P. A. Albouy, A. Mermet and M. P. Pileni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3714–3719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. Zhuang, H. M. Wu, Y. A. Yang and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14166–14167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gutierrez-Wing, P. Santiago, J. A. Ascencio, A. Camacho and M. Jose-Yacaman, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2000, 71, 237–243 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Goodfellow, R. N. Patel, M. G. Panthani, D. M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6397–6404 CAS .
D. Nykypanchuk, M. M. Maye, D. van der Lelie and O. Gang, Nature, 2008, 451, 549–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Jana, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 1536–1540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Torquato and Y. Jiao, Nature, 2009, 460, 876–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, J. C. Hernández-Garrido, H. Yang, Y. Zhou, A. Varela, M. Parras, J. J. Calvino-Gámez, J. M. González-Calbet, P. F. Green and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3800–3812 CrossRef PubMed .
R. K. Rana, V. S. Murthy, J. Yu and M. S. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1145–1150 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang and H. Möhwald, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 459–468 RSC .
A. van Blaaderen and P. Wiltzius, Adv. Mater., 1997, 9, 833–835 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Ye, S. Badilescu, V.-V. Truong, P. Rochon and A. Natansohn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 872–874 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Bannwarth, S. Utech, S. Ebert, D. A. Weitz, D. Crespy and K. Landfester, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2720–2728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sorgenfrei, I. Meric, S. Banerjee, A. Akey, S. Rosenblatt, I. P. Herman and K. L. Shepard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 053105 CrossRef .
S. W. Lee, D. Zhang and I. P. Herman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 053113 CrossRef .
K. M. Ryan, A. Mastroianni, K. A. Stancil, H. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1479–1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. English, Can. J. Chem., 2015, 93, 888–890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grzelczak, J. Vermant, E. M. Furst and L. M. Liz-Marzán, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3591–3605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Boehm, L. Lin, K. Guzmán Betancourt, R. Emery, J. S. Mayer, T. S. Mayer and C. D. Keating, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 5779–5786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Courty, A. Mermet, P. A. Albouy, E. Duval and M. P. Pileni, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. P. Collier, A. T. Vossmeyer and J. R. Heath, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1998, 49, 371–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 3358–3371 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Freeman, K. C. Grabar, K. J. Allison, R. M. Bright, J. A. Davis, A. P. Guthrie, M. B. Hommer, M. A. Jackson, P. C. Smith, D. G. Walter and M. J. Natan, Science, 1995, 267, 1629–1632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Feldheim and C. D. Keating, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1998, 27, 1–12 RSC .
T. Teranishi, C. R. Chim., 2003, 6, 979–987 CrossRef CAS .
P. Brown and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8890–8891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-H. Lu, E. L. Salabas and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 1222–1244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Lisiecki, D. Parker, C. Salzemann and M. P. Pileni, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4030–4036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lalatonne, L. Motte, V. Russier, A. T. Ngo, P. Bonville and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1848–1854 CrossRef CAS .
C. Petit, V. Russier and M. P. Pileni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10333–10336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, C. B. Murray, D. Weller, L. Folks and A. Moser, Science, 2000, 287, 1989–1992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hoinville, A. Bewick, D. Gleeson, R. Jones, O. Kasyutich, E. Mayes, A. Nartowski, B. Warne, J. Wiggins and K. Wong, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 7187–7189 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peet, J. Y. Kim, N. E. Coates, W. L. Ma, D. Moses, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 497–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mei, Y. Diao, A. L. Appleton, L. Fang and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6724–6746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Sokolov, B. C. Tee, C. J. Bettinger, J. B.-H. Tok and Z. Bao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 45, 361–371 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rose, Z. Zhu, C. F. Madigan, T. M. Swager and V. Bulović, Nature, 2005, 434, 876–879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ding, J. Liu, G. Feng, K. Li, Y. Hu and B. Liu, Small, 2013, 9, 3093–3102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ahmed, S. W. Morton, P. T. Hammond and T. M. Swager, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4504–4510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pu, A. J. Shuhendler and J. Rao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 10325–10329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Shuhendler, K. Pu, L. Cui, J. P. Uetrecht and J. Rao, Nat. Biotechnol., 2014, 32, 373–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pu, A. J. Shuhendler, J. V. Jokerst, J. Mei, S. S. Gambhir, Z. Bao and J. Rao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elghanian, J. J. Storhoff, R. C. Mucic, R. L. Letsinger and C. A. Mirkin, Science, 1997, 277, 1078–1081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Choi, N.-H. Ho and C.-H. Tung, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 707–709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and L. Rothberg, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2004, 101, 14036–14039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, M. S. Han and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nie and S. R. Emory, Science, 1997, 275, 1102–1106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kneipp, H. Kneipp and K. Kneipp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1052–1060 RSC .
M. Moskovits, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2005, 36, 485–496 CrossRef CAS .
D. Graham, D. G. Thompson, W. E. Smith and K. Faulds, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 548–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hao and G. C. Schatz, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 357–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Imura, T. Nagahara and H. Okamoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12730–12731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Lakowicz, C. D. Geddes, I. Gryczynski, J. Malicka, Z. Gryczynski, K. Aslan, J. Lukomska, E. Matveeva, J. Zhang, R. Badugu and J. Huang, J. Fluoresc., 2004, 14, 425–441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Jain, S. Eustis and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18243–18253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Koole, P. Liljeroth, C. de Mello Donegá, D. Vanmaekelbergh and A. Meijerink, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10436–10441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. Kornowski, S. Förster and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12984–12988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Peretti, K. Lahlil, J.-P. Boilot and T. Gacoin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3295–3300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Murray, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2688–2720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, F. Patolsky, E. Katz, J. F. Hainfeld and I. Willner, Science, 2003, 299, 1877–1881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shenhar, T. B. Norsten and V. M. Rotello, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 657–669 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, A. Goswami, F.-X. Felpin, T. Asefa, X. Huang, R. Silva, X. Zou, R. Zboril and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3722–3811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
X. Huang, C. L. Tan, Z. Y. Yin and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2185–2204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Wang, Y. Song, Y. Liu, Q. Li, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 1743–1746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sun, H. Liu, W. Song, X. Wang, L. Jiang, L. Li and D. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 4663–4666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 230–234 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiong, X. Chen, X. Zhao, S. Bai, X. Huang and L. Chen, Solid State Sci., 2009, 11, 1612–1616 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, W. Wang and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3654–3656 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sata, K. Eberman, K. Eberl and J. Maier, Nature, 2000, 408, 946–949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Garcia-Barriocanal, J. Cezar, F. Y. Bruno, P. Thakur, N. Brookes, C. Utfeld, A. Rivera-Calzada, S. Giblin, J. Taylor and J. Duffy, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 82 CAS .
W. Liu, Z.-d. Zhang, J.-p. Liu, L.-j. Chen, L.-l. He, Y. Liu, X.-k. Sun and D. J. Sellmyer, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1832–1834 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, R. J. Wilson, A. Koh, A. Fu, A. Z. Faranesh, C. M. Earhart, S. J. Osterfeld, S. J. Han, L. Xu and S. Guccione, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1479–1483 CrossRef CAS .
I. Staude, M. Decker, M. J. Ventura, C. Jagadish, D. N. Neshev, M. Gu and Y. S. Kivshar, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1260–1264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Altewischer, M. Van Exter and J. Woerdman, Nature, 2002, 418, 304–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Giri, M. Patra and S. Majumdar, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2011, 23, 073201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Casavola, A. Falqui, M. A. García, M. García-Hernández, C. Giannini, R. Cingolani and P. D. Cozzoli, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 366–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tanase, A. K. Petford-Long, O. Heinonen, K. S. Buchanan, J. Sort and J. Nogués, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 014436 CrossRef .
O. Inganäs, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2633–2642 RSC .
D. S. Ginger and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 10622–10629 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halls, K. Pichler, R. Friend, S. Moratti and A. Holmes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 3120–3122 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Moon, J. K. Lee, S. Cho, J. Byun and A. J. Heeger, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 230–234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bueno and E. Leite, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8868–8877 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, X. Zhang, M. Chung, G. B. Less and A. M. Sastry, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7904–7929 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Wang, R. Tangirala, S. Raoux, J. L. Jordan-Sweet and D. J. Milliron, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 99–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Vineis, A. Shakouri, A. Majumdar and M. G. Kanatzidis, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3970–3980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nielsch, J. Bachmann, J. Kimling and H. Böttner, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 713–731 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Bux, R. G. Blair, P. K. Gogna, H. Lee, G. Chen, M. S. Dresselhaus, R. B. Kaner and J. P. Fleurial, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2445–2452 CrossRef CAS .
K. Biswas, J. He, I. D. Blum, C.-I. Wu, T. P. Hogan, D. N. Seidman, V. P. Dravid and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2012, 489, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Lum, D. Chandler and J. D. Weeks, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4570–4577 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Xue, S.-T. Jia, J. Zhang, L.-Q. Tian, H.-Z. Chen and M. Wang, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2008, 9, 035008 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Staude, M. Decker, M. J. Ventura, C. Jagadish, D. N. Neshev, M. Gu and Y. S. Kivshar, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1260–1264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2834–2846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bai, X. Tian, Y. Zheng, J. Ju, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5521–5525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, Y. Zhao and L. Jiang, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 485–489 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, H. Liu, D. Liu, X. Ma, X. Fang and L. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3915–3917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Reilly III, R. C. Tenent, T. M. Barnes, K. L. Rowlen and J. van de Lagemaat, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 615–624 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Gjonaj, J. Aulbach, P. Johnson, A. Mosk, L. Kuipers and A. Lagendijk, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sanders and M. Murray, Nature, 1978, 275, 201–203 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kiely, J. Fink, M. Brust, D. Bethell and D. Schiffrin, Nature, 1998, 396, 444–446 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. V. Titov and P. Král, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1213–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Mueggenburg, X.-M. Lin, R.
H. Goldsmith and H. M. Jaeger, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. X. Redl, K.-S. Cho, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, Nature, 2003, 423, 968–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Saunders and B. A. Korgel, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 61–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8741–8747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Kalsin, M. Fialkowski, M. Paszewski, S. K. Smoukov, K. J. Bishop and B. A. Grzybowski, Science, 2006, 312, 420–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3620–3637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheon, J.-I. Park, J.-S. Choi, Y.-W. Jun, S. Kim, M. G. Kim, Y.-M. Kim and Y. J. Kim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 3023–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 11967–11977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ye, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2613–2620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Luo and J. Fang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1821–1828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Evers, H. Friedrich, L. Filion, M. Dijkstra and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9655–9657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dong, X. Ye, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1804–1809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shechtman, I. Blech, D. Gratias and J. W. Cahn, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 1951 CrossRef CAS .
D. Levine and P. J. Steinhardt, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1984, 53, 2477 CrossRef CAS .
E. Abe, Y. Yan and S. J. Pennycook, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 759–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zeng, G. Ungar, Y. Liu, V. Percec, A. E. Dulcey and J. K. Hobbs, Nature, 2004, 428, 157–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, X. Ye, J. Chen and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2009, 461, 964–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, J. Wei, P. Bonville and M.-P. Pileni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4487–4493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cargnello, A. C. Johnston-Peck, B. T. Diroll, E. Wong, B. Datta, D. Damodhar, V. V. Doan-Nguyen, A. A. Herzing, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2015, 524, 450–453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Mundoor, B. Senyuk and I. I. Smalyukh, Science, 2016, 352, 69–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Urban, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 115–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, A. Dong, J. Cai, X. Ye, Y. Kang, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5103–5108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant, W. Zhang, T. Skeini, J. Lee, N. A. Kotov, J. M. Slocik and R. R. Naik, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 984–994 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kulakovich, N. Strekal, A. Yaroshevich, S. Maskevich, S. Gaponenko, I. Nabiev, U. Woggon and M. Artemyev, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1449–1452 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gueroui and A. Libchaber, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 166108 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov, J. Dulka and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2323–2330 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, P. Hernandez, J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 291–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, A. O. Govorov and G. W. Bryant, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 146804 CrossRef PubMed .
M.-T. Cheng, S.-D. Liu, H.-J. Zhou, Z.-H. Hao and Q.-Q. Wang, Opt. Lett., 2007, 32, 2125–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, T. Javed, T. Skeini, A. O. Govorov, G. W. Bryant and N. A. Kotov, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4819–4823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wargnier, A. V. Baranov, V. G. Maslov, V. Stsiapura, M. Artemyev, M. Pluot, A. Sukhanova and I. Nabiev, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 451–457 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, A. O. Govorov and N. A. Kotov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2063–2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, M. Ringler, A. Schwemer, D. V. Talapin, T. A. Klar, A. L. Rogach, J. Feldmann and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3274–3275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sitt, A. Salant, G. Menagen and U. Banin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2054–2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, J. Zhuang, J. Lynch, O. Chen, Z. Wang, X. Wang, D. LaMontagne, H. Wu, Z. Wang and Y. C. Cao, Science, 2012, 338, 358–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Wang, D. LaMontagne, Z. Wang and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6022–6025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, J. Moore, G. Radtke, H. Sirringhaus and S. O'Brien, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15702–15709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Smith, B. Goodfellow, D.-M. Smilgies and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3281–3290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, A. B. Herhold, C. S. Johnson and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1997, 276, 398–401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, R. Li, Z. Quan, W. S. Loc, W. A. Bassett, H. Xu, Y. C. Cao, J. Fang and Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4544–4549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Zhang, Self-assembled nanostructures, Springer Science & Business Media,  2003 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, S. Liu, D. Luo, Z. Xue, X. Yang, L. Gu, Y. Zhou and T. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8740–8748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Cooper, M. Myers, E. Chow, L. J. Hubble, J. M. Cairney, B. Pejcic, K.-H. Müller, L. Wieczorek and B. Raguse, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 1–13 CrossRef .
S. Tokonami, H. Shiigi and T. Nagaoka, Anal. Chem., 2008, 80, 8071–8075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Müller, J. Herrmann, B. Raguse, G. Baxter and T. Reda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 075417 CrossRef .
J. Gong, G. Li and Z. Tang, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 564–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu and Y. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6642–6643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sonnichsen, B. M. Reinhard, J. Liphardt and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Biotechnol., 2005, 23, 741–745 CrossRef PubMed .
F. S. Ou, M. M. Shaijumon and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 1853–1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cademartiri and K. J. Bishop, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 2–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Pinheiro, D. Han, W. M. Shih and H. Yan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 763–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Nie, D. Fava, E. Kumacheva, S. Zou, G. C. Walker and M. Rubinstein, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 609–614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sacanna, W. Irvine, P. M. Chaikin and D. J. Pine, Nature, 2010, 464, 575–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, J. K. Whitmer, S. Jiang, S. C. Bae, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Science, 2011, 331, 199–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. DeVries, M. Brunnbauer, Y. Hu, A. M. Jackson, B. Long, B. T. Neltner, O. Uzun, B. H. Wunsch and F. Stellacci, Science, 2007, 315, 358–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chu, B. Han, A. Zheng and F. Deng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12687–12695 CAS .
H. Zhao, S. Sen, T. Udayabhaskararao, M. Sawczyk, K. Kučanda, D. Manna, P. K. Kundu, J.-W. Lee, P. Král and R. Klajn, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 82–88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liao, J. S. Agustsson, S. Wu, C. Schönenberger, M. Calame, Y. Leroux, M. Mayor, O. Jeannin, Y.-F. Ran and S.-X. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 759–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. van der Molen, J. Liao, T. Kudernac, J. S. Agustsson, L. Bernard, M. Calame, B. J. van Wees, B. L. Feringa and C. Schönenberger, Nano Lett., 2008, 9, 76–80 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Coey and S. Sanvito, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2004, 37, 988 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-P. Lv, Z.-Z. Luan, H.-Y. Wang, S. Liu, C.-H. Li, D. Wu, J.-L. Zuo and S. Sun, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12205–12213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Huang, D. S. Chung and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 865–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, S. C. Warren, P. Fuller and B. A. Grzybowski, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 603–608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Howes, R. Chandrawati and M. M. Stevens, Science, 2014, 346, 1247390 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhan, G. Palui, M. Safi, X. Ji and H. Mattoussi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13786–13795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tomczak, R. Liu and J. G. Vancso, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 12018–12032 RSC .
H. Duan, M. Kuang and Y. A. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4372–4378 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, S. Liu, D. Gao, D. Hu, P. Gong, Z. Sheng, J. Deng, Y. Ma and L. Cai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8388–8391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, A. B. Greytak, J. Lee, C. R. Wong, J. Park, L. F. Marshall, W. Jiang, P. N. Curtin, A. Y. Ting, D. G. Nocera, D. Fukumura, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 472–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Treuel, S. Brandholt, P. Maffre, S. Wiegele, L. Shang and G. U. Nienhaus, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 503–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Sahlin and N. A. Peppas, J. Biomater. Sci., Polym. Ed., 1997, 8, 421–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tamagawa and Y. Takahashi, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2008, 107, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
P. Techawanitchai, M. Ebara, N. Idota, T.-A. Asoh, A. Kikuchi and T. Aoyagi, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 2844–2851 RSC .
S. Rose, A. Prevoteau, P. Elzière, D. Hourdet, A. Marcellan and L. Leibler, Nature, 2014, 505, 382–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, M. Kim, Y. Lee, H. S. Lee and H. Ko, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500661 Search PubMed .
J. Park, Y. Lee, J. Hong, M. Ha, Y.-D. Jung, H. Lim, S. Y. Kim and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4689–4697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, Y. Lee, J. Hong, Y. Lee, M. Ha, Y. Jung, H. Lim, S. Y. Kim and H. Ko, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12020–12029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Cong Yan
	Cong Yan is an assistant professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BSc (2004) from Peking University and his PhD (2008) from the University of Nottingham, UK. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at the Pierre and Marie Curie University, France. He joined the ICCAS in 2014. His research focuses on nanoparticle assemblies and the application of their mechanical properties.

Tie Wang
	Tie Wang is a professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS). He received his BSc (2002) from Xi’an Jiaotong University and his PhD (2007) from Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, China. Then he worked as a postdoctoral fellow at Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, NY and the University of Florida, Gainesville, FL. He joined the ICCAS with the award of the “Thousand Youth Talents Plan” in 2013. His research focuses on nanoparticle assemblies and their applications.

 	Fig. 1  Interactions of an attractive and repulsive nature between nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic and TEM image of the 1D nanoparticle superlattice formed from molecular clusters and the corresponding intensity profile (inset) along the chain length (indicated by the arrow). Reproduced from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) 2D close-packed Au nanoparticle superlattice with various structural building blocks. Insets are fast Fourier transforms and zoomed-in images correspondingly. The scale bars are 500 nm for the main image and 100 nm for the insets. Reproduced from ref. 122. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) Formation and deconstruction of PbS nanoparticle superlattice at different reaction times. Reproduced from ref. 135. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Difference in electron transport properties between single, 2D and 3D Ag nanoparticles. I–V and dI/dV−V curves of (a) a single Ag nanoparticle, (b) a 2D Ag nanoparticle film, and (c) a 3D Ag nanoparticle superlattice. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2001, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the γ-Fe2O3 nanoparticle and its 1D assembly chain. (b) Zero-field cooled (ZFC, opened square) and field cooled (FC, closed circle) magnetization of the chains, isolated nanoparticles and the aggregates normalized to 1 at 5 K in FC. Inset shows magnetization curve for the chains at 120 K corresponding to the blocking temperature. Reproduced from ref. 114. Copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of SPN, as well as a TEM image and a picture of the solution. (b) Comparison of photoacoustic properties of SPNs with those of single-walled nanotubes (SWNTs) and Au nanorods (GNRs). Reproduced from ref. 171. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of different types of binary cooperative complementary pairs.	 
EAA – EDA > UD
ji = −Di∇ci

 		 

 		 
P = ε0χeE
χe = εr − 1
χe = 0

 	Fig. 7  Illustration of the suitable distance between two nanoscopic components that should be allowed to match the characteristic range of certain physical interactions. Reproduced from ref. 2. Copyright 2016, Springer. With the permission of Springer.	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of BNSLs with different nanoparticle components and stoichiometries. The insets are the modelled unit cells of the corresponding three-dimensional structures. Reproduced from ref. 104. Copyright 2006, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structural models and TEM images of AB6 and bcc-AB6 BNSLs self-assembled from 4.6 nm Au and 14.0 nm Fe3O4 NCs. (b) Space-filling curves of CaB6 and bcc-AB6 structures and TEM image showing the coexistence of CaB6 and bcc-AB6 structures of Au and Fe3O4 BNSLs. The scale bars represent 50 nm. Reproduced from ref. 240. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) and (b) TEM image and schematic of the Type I assembly. (c) and (d) TEM image and schematic illustrations of Type II assembly. (e) and (f) TEM image and schematic illustrations of Type III assembly. Reproduced from ref. 241. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM images of ABC2-type ternary nanoparticle superlattice bilayers self-assembled from 16.5 nm Fe3O4, 7.0 nm Fe3O4, and 5.0 nm FePt NCs. (b) Low- and high-magnification HRSEM images, as well as structural models of ABC2-type Fe3O4 and FePt NCs. Reproduced from ref. 243. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TEM images of dodecagonal quasicrystalline superlattices self-assembled from Fe2O3/Au and PbS/Pd NCs. Reproduced from ref. 248. Copyright 2009, Nature Publishing Group. (b) TEM images of quasicrystalline superlattices and transitional domains of hcp phase Co and Ag NCs. The bottom-left ZFC/FC curves show the difference in behaviour between amorphous Co (red) and hcp Co (black) with Ag NCs. Reproduced from ref. 249. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Enhanced properties of binary cooperative complementary nanoparticle assemblies. Reproduced from ref. 251, 253, 258, 270 and 276. Copyright 2008, 2009, 2010, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM images of NaCl-type and CuAu-type BNSLs, as well as a CuAu-type BNSL annealed at 200 °C. The insets are the structural illustrations of the corresponding superlattices, as well as the zoomed-in TEM image. (b) Source-gate current versus source-gate voltage of single-component PbTe superlattice film, 1:1 PbTe/Ag2Te BNSL films and 5:1 PbTe/Ag2Te BNSL films. Reproduced from ref. 252. Copyright 2007, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of CdSe/CdS core–shell nanorod exhibiting a highly polarized emission (the polarization ratio is about 0.75). (b) Schematic illustration of CdSe/CdS core–shell nanorods self-assembled into single-domain needle-like superlattices and the corresponding SEM images. These superlattices could be assembled into unidirectional alignments with a remarkable polarization ratio (about 0.88). Reproduced from ref. 267. Copyright 2012, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic demonstration of the phase transformation of a CdSe nanoparticle from wurtzite to rock salt and vice versa under the application and release of pressure. (b) Schematic illustration of the structural transition of a PbS nanoparticle superlattice from rock salt to orthorhombic under pressure and the maintenance of this metastable phase when pressure is released. Reproduced from ref. 272. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  Illustration of potential application areas of cooperative and complementary ligand shells. Reproduced from ref. 282, 289, 290, 291, 297 and 299. Copyright 2008, 2010, 2013, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
