Heterogeneous photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C1EE01120K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C1EE01120K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2467-2481Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsHeterogeneous photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives

        
          
            Katsuya 
            Shimura
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hisao 
            Yoshida
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Applied Chemistry Graduate School of Engineering Nagoya University Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya, 464-8603, Japan. E-mail: yoshidah@apchem.nagoya-u.ac.jp;  Fax: +81-52-789-3178
Received 
      2nd February 2011
    , Accepted 28th March 2011First published on 17th May 2011AbstractHydrogen, a clean energy carrier, should be produced from not the irreproducible fossil fuels but renewable resources. Currently hydrogen is mainly produced by the reforming of petroleum and natural gas at high temperature, which consumes huge energy. Thus, development of an alternative hydrogen production method is absolutely imperative to mitigate the environmental and energy issues. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and renewable resources is one of the attractive systems, since it can utilize the solar energy. In this short review, we remind you that the systems of the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives, such as ethanol, glycerol, sugars and methane, should be considered as available candidates for the hydrogen production method from renewable resources and solar energy, and these systems have been improved by developments of new photocatalysts with some cocatalysts, modifications of photocatalysts, optimization of reaction conditions, and so on.Katsuya ShimuraKatsuya Shimura received his degrees of BEng (2006), MEng (2008) and PhD (2011) from Nagoya University. Presently, he works at Hokkaido University as a postdoctoral researcher. His current research focuses on the heterogeneous photocatalysis, especially for hydrogen production.Hisao YoshidaHisao Yoshida received his degrees of BEng (1991), MEng (1993) and PhD (1998) from Kyoto University. He has worked at Nagoya University, where he has been a research associate from 1995 and an associate professor from 2003 to the present. His current research focuses on the heterogeneous photocatalysis, especially for hydrogen production, methane activation and novel organic synthesis. He received the Catalysis Congress Prize of the International Association of Catalysis Societies in 2000 and the Prize for Young Scientists of Catalysis Society of Japan in 2003.

Broader context
Hydrogen, a clean energy carrier, attracts much attention as one of the energies for the next generation. However, almost all of the produced hydrogen comes from fossil resources now. Therefore, the present hydrogen fuel cannot be regarded as a truly environmentally benign one. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives such as ethanol, glycerol, sugars and methane is an attractive reaction to provide truly environmentally benign hydrogen, since this has a potential of converting solar energy and renewable resources into the chemical potential of the storable hydrogen. Various attempts have been done on the photocatalytic reaction systems to achieve more efficient hydrogen evolution, such as development of various photocatalysts and cocatalysts, modification of photocatalysts, the morphology control of photocatalyst, optimization of reaction conditions and so on. This article reviews the background, the fundamentals, the history and the recent developments of the photocatalytic hydrogen production systems from water and biomass derivatives.

1. Introduction
The depletion of fossil fuels and the worldwide spread of environmental problems due to fossil fuels have induced the development of the alternative energy production. Hydrogen is a storable and environmentally benign fuel, and can efficiently provide electricity by using fuel cells or motive power by hydrogen-fuel engine, without any emission other than water. Thus, hydrogen is considered as the ideal energy source. However, we must consider the current state that about 95% of hydrogen consumed in the world is produced from fossil fuels such as natural gas, petroleum and coal mainly by thermocatalytic and gasification processes at high temperature.1 The fossil resources are not feasible hydrogen resources since they cannot be replenished within the time scale of our lifetime and the additional emission of carbon dioxide from them will exceed the natural capacity and contribute to the global warming. Thus, the hydrogen produced in such ways cannot be regarded as the really environmentally benign fuel.
Biomass derivatives such as ethanol, glycerol, sugars and methane are from biological substrates such as plants, starch, oils and fats. They are possible hydrogen resources since they contain much hydrogen. Further, they are regarded as the renewable resources, which belong to the current carbon cycle (Fig. 1), i.e., even if the biomass and its derivatives are consumed for hydrogen production with carbon dioxide formation, the produced carbon dioxide can be again converted into biomass through the plant photosynthesis within the time shorter than our lifetime. This means that the carbon dioxide produced from the biomass should not contribute to the global warming in principle (carbon neutral) when the consumption of the biomass will not exceed the natural capacity to convert carbon dioxide into biomass. Thus, the biomass derivatives can be recognized as renewable hydrogen resources.
 Fig. 1  A carbon neutral cycle. 
In this short review, after introducing the possible hydrogen production methods other than photocatalysis briefly, we will describe the various attempts for photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives such as ethanol, glycerol, saccharides and methane.
2. Hydrogen production methods from biomass derivatives other than photocatalysis
Currently, possible hydrogen production methods from biomass fall roughly into two categories, i.e., thermal chemical process and biological process. A thermal chemical process is a method to decompose biomass thermally with or without catalysts, such as high temperature gasification and supercritical water gasification, while the biological process is a method to decompose biomass by fermentation, such as methane fermentation. Since methane is obtained as one of the main final products in either method, we must finally carry out the steam reforming of methane and successive water–gas shift reaction to obtain the maximum yield of hydrogen, which will be also mentioned.
2.1. Thermal chemical process2,3
In the high temperature gasification, biomass can be thermally decomposed in the presence of oxidants such as water and carbon dioxide. The obtained gas products are hydrogen, carbon monoxide, carbon dioxide and methane. They can be further converted into hydrogen and carbon dioxide by the steam reforming and the water–gas shift reaction. The gasification of biomass is usually carried out at high temperature like 1273 K, because gasification at low temperature produces a large amount of intermediates such as tar and char. This method should not be suitable for the biomass containing a lot of water from the viewpoint of energy efficiency due to a large specific heat capacity of water.
The use of a suitable catalyst can lower the reaction temperature. Although dolomite, which is a natural mineral containing CaCO3 and MgCO3, was examined as the catalyst, the activity of dolomite was not high.4,5 On the other hand, Rh catalysts are reported to show the excellent activity for the gasification of raw biomass such as wood powder.6,7 Ni-based catalysts have been studied a lot, since Ni is much cheaper than the precious metals. The current situation in the high temperature gasification was reviewed in ref. 8 and 9.
On the other hand, in the supercritical water gasification, biomass is decomposed to small molecules due to its high solubility and reactivity to the supercritical water. This method is suitable for the decomposition of the biomass including water. Supercritical water gasification is divided into two: one is carried out at higher temperatures than 773 K and the other is done at lower temperatures than 773 K. In the former condition, decomposition of biomass proceeds without the presence of catalyst, while, in the latter condition, the use of catalyst is necessary. For example, Ru catalyst has been reported to show high activity.10,11 Ni catalyst has also been extensively studied. Details of the supercritical water gasification of biomass were reviewed in ref. 9 and 12.
In the supercritical water, reactions shown in eqn (1)–(3), where cellulose is used as an example of biomass, would proceed to yield hydrogen, carbon dioxide and methane mainly. From the thermodynamic equilibrium, hydrogen was dominantly obtained at high temperature, while methane was the main product at low temperature.3 C6H10O5 + H2O → 6CO + 6H2, ΔH0298K = 310 kJ mol−1(1) CO + H2O→ CO2 + H2, ΔH0298K = −41 kJ mol−1(2) CO + 3H2 → CH4 + H2O, ΔH0298K = −206 kJ mol−1(3)
2.2. Biological process
Methane fermentation is a popular process for the conversion of biomass under an anaerobic condition. Fig. 2 shows some routes of methane fermentation, which are roughly divided into three steps. First, large molecules of organic compounds such as carbohydrates, proteins and fatty oils are decomposed to smaller molecules such as monosaccharides, amino acids and higher fatty acids by acid-producing bacteria and are further decomposed to lower fatty acids (e.g. propionic acid and butyric acid), lactic acid and ethanol. Then, these products are converted into hydrogen and acetic acid by the hydrogen-producing bacteria. Finally, they are transformed into methane and carbon dioxide by the methanogenic bacteria. The obtained methane can be converted into hydrogen by the conventional steam reforming and the water–gas shift reaction. Details of the hydrogen production from biomass by fermentation were reviewed by several researchers.13–15 Since the fermentation proceeds at ambient temperature, the reaction rate is low. Furthermore, the treatment of fermentation residues is also a serious problem.
 Fig. 2  Some routes of the methane fermentation. 
2.3. Steam reforming of methane
The steam reforming of methane (SRM) by using heterogeneous catalysts such as Ni or Ru catalysts has been industrially employed for hydrogen production from methane.16–18 The chemical equation of SRM is shown as eqn (4). To obtain the maximum yield of hydrogen from methane, the produced carbon monoxide is further reacted with water by using both Fe–Cr and Cu–Zn catalysts as shown in eqn (5), i.e., the water–gas shift reaction. CH4 + H2O → 3H2 + CO, ΔG0298K =142 kJ mol−1(4) CO + H2O → H2 + CO2, ΔG0298K = −29 kJ mol−1(5)
The positive and large Gibbs free energy change for SRM requires high temperature typically more than 1073 K, even in the presence of these catalysts. The steam reforming is also applied for the hydrogen production from other organic compounds such as hydrocarbons and alcohols.
3. The thermodynamic and electrochemical view
Before going to the main part of the present review, let us overview the thermodynamic and electrochemical basics of the reactions in the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives. Table 1 shows the changes of Gibbs free energy at 298 K for the reactions of water vapour with some small organic compounds and the water splitting.19 A reaction can proceed preferably when the change of Gibbs free energy is negative. On the other hand, a reaction with a positive value of the Gibbs free energy change is a thermodynamically unfavourable one. For example, the changes of Gibbs free energy for the steam reforming reactions of methane, carbon, ethane and ethanol (Table 1, entries 1, 2, 9 and 10) are largely positive values. This means that these reaction systems require energy supply and a part of the energy is stored as chemical potential in the products. This type of reaction can be called an uphill reaction. On the other hand, in the steam reforming reactions of methanol, carbon monoxide, formaldehyde, glycerol and glucose (Table 1, entries 4, 6, 8, 17 and 18), the changes of Gibbs free energy are negative values. This means that these systems must lose the chemical potential energy. This type of reaction can be called a downhill reaction. Here, it is noted that the changes of Gibbs free energy for the hydrogen production from water and organic compounds are obviously smaller than that for the water splitting (Table 1, entries 19 and 20). Thus, it is expected that these reactions can produce hydrogen more efficiently than the water splitting.
Table 1 Change of Gibbs free energy at 298 K for the reactions of hydrogen productiona




Entry
Chemical equation
ΔG0298K/kJ mol−1





a The changes of Gibbs free energy were calculated from the reported values of standard Gibbs energy of formation.19





1
CH4 + 2H2O(g) → CO2 + 4H2
114


2
C + 2H2O(g) → CO2 + 2H2
63


3
CH3OH(g) → HCHO(g) + H2
59


4
CH3OH(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + 3H2
−4


5
HCHO(g) + H2O(g) → HCOOH(g) + H2
−20


6
CO(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + H2
−29


7
HCOOH(g) → CO2 + H2
−43


8
HCHO(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + 2H2
−63


9
C2H6 + 4H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 7H2
158


10
C2H5OH(g) + 3H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 6H2
65


11
C2H5OH(g) → CH3CHO(g) + H2
36


12
CH3CHO(g) + 3H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 5H2
30


13
CH3CHO(g) + H2O(g) → CH3COOH(g) + H2
−13


14
CH3COOH(g) → CO2 + CH4
−71


15
CH3CH(OH)COOH(s) + 3H2O(g) → 3CO2 + 6H2
25


16
CH3CH(OH)CH3(g) → CH3COCH3(g) + H2
21


17
C3H8O3(l) + 3H2O(g) → 3CO2 + 7H2
−20


18
C6H12O6(s) + 6H2O(g) → 6CO2 + 12H2
−85


19
H2O(g) → H2 + 1/2O2
229


20
H2O(l) → H2 + 1/2O2
237





Table 2 shows the oxidative potential of some organic compounds.20,21 The oxidative potentials of these compounds are more negative than that of water. This means that these organic compounds can be more easily oxidized than water by oxidant or the holes in the valence band of the photoexcited semiconductor to release protons.
Table 2 Some electrochemical reactions with corresponding oxidative potentiala




Entry
Reaction

E
0ox/V vs. NHE (pH = 0)





a The oxidative potential was reported in ref. 20 and 21.





1
CH3CHO+ H2O + 2h+ → CH3COOH + 2H+
−0.12


2
CO + H2O + 2h+ → CO2 + 2H+
−0.12


3
HCHO + H2O + 4h+ → CO2 + 4H+
−0.07


4
C6H12O6 + 6H2O + 24h+ → 6CO2 + 24H+
−0.01


5
H2 + 2h+ → 2H+
0.00


6
CH3OH + H2O + 6h+ → CO2 + 6H+
0.03


7
C2H5OH + 3H2O + 12h+ → 2CO2 + 12H+
0.08


8
2CH3COOH + 2h+ → C2H6 + 2CO2 + 2H+
0.12


9
CH4 + 2H2O + 8h+ → CO2 + 8H+
0.17


10
C2H5OH + 2h+ → CH3CHO + 2H+
0.19


11
H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 + 2H+
1.23




4. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives
To realize sustainable society, hydrogen must be produced from renewable resources and natural energy. Photocatalytic water splitting (H2O → H2 + 1/2O2) is one of the ideal methods, since hydrogen can be produced from water by using solar energy. Since the discovery of the Honda–Fujishima effect,22 water splitting with photoenergy and photocatalysts has been widely studied all over the world.23,24 Various semiconductor materials (for example, metal oxide, oxynitride and sulfide), cocatalysts (for example, NiOx, RuO2 and Rh–Cr) and their modifications (for example, metal ion doping, combination with other semiconductor, and thermal treatment) have been examined. Nowadays, several photocatalytic systems driven in the visible light have been developed to utilize the main part of the solar spectrum.25–27 However, criteria for practical application have not been achieved yet.
Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives is also an attractive hydrogen production method. In this system, biomass derivatives and water can be converted to hydrogen and carbon dioxide by photoenergy and photocatalyst (Fig. 3). The formed carbon dioxide can be transformed into carbohydrates by photosynthesis in plants, or after the growth of plants the biomass can be degraded into small organic compounds (derivatives) such as ethanol and methane by fermentation. On the other hand, the formed hydrogen is used to yield electricity by using fuel cells or to supply motive power by hydrogen-fuelled engine with the formation of water only.
 Fig. 3  Carbon neutral cycle with photocatalysis. 
In the early 1980's, Kawai and Sakata reported that hydrogen could be efficiently produced from water and many kinds of organic compounds, i.e., active carbon,28 methanol,29 ethanol,30 saccharides,31 amino acids,32 polymers,32 and raw biomass32 (also fossil fuels33) over TiO2 loaded with Pt and/or RuO2 cocatalysts. Sato and White examined the hydrogen production from water vapour and organic compounds such as carbon monoxide,34 ethylene35 and carbon36 over Pt/TiO2. Harada et al. reported that hydrogen could be produced from water and lactic acid over Pt/TiO2 and Pt/CdS.37
After these early reports, the hydrogen production from water and methanol has been frequently applied as the test reaction that confirms the potential of the photocatalyst for hydrogen production.23,24
In the present century, the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives has become an active research field. For example, Kondarides et al. examined the photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous solution containing not only organic compounds such as azo-dyes,38 alcohols and organic acids,39 but also biomass (glycerol and carbohydrates)40 over Pt/TiO2. They confirmed the stoichiometry of the products and clarified that hydrogen and carbon dioxide were produced at room temperature and atmospheric pressure as shown in eqn (6) and Fig. 4. CxHyOz + (2x − z)H2O → (2x − z + y/2)H2 + xCO2(6)
 Fig. 4  Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives. 
Various attempts have been carried out to enhance the efficiency of these photocatalytic systems. Among the biomass derivatives, ethanol was most studied for the photocatalytic hydrogen production. In this chapter, we will review the photocatalytic hydrogen production from ethanol, glycerol, saccharides and methane in the presence of water.
4.1. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and alcohols over TiO2
Ethanol can be produced by conventional fermentation of sugars and starch. Thus, it is regarded as one of the representative renewable resources. Various studies for the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and ethanol have elucidated the reaction mechanism, the effect of the reaction condition and many active photocatalysts and cocatalysts. Here, the researches using TiO2 as the most famous photocatalyst will be described.

4.1.1. Reaction mechanism. 
Sakata and Kawai examined the photocatalytic reaction of water and ethanol over metal-loaded TiO2 in the solution without oxygen.30 The obtained products were hydrogen, acetaldehyde, acetic acid, methane and carbon dioxide. At the early stage of irradiation, a lot of acetaldehyde was produced but carbon dioxide was not obtained. These showed that the reactions successively proceeded as shown in eqn (7)–(9). C2H5OH → CH3CHO + H2(7) CH3CHO + H2O → CH3COOH + H2(8) CH3COOH → CH4 + CO2(9)
Assuming that the reactions shown in eqn (7)–(9) will be completed, a molar ratio of methane to hydrogen is expected to be 0.5. However, the result was that the ratio was ca. 0.1 even after the long reaction (>800 h). Thus, they suggested that the complete oxidation of acetaldehyde shown in eqn (10) may proceed simultaneously. CH3CHO + 3H2O → 5H2 + 2CO2(10)
Among these four reactions, the reactions (7) and (10) are the uphill reactions (Table 1, entries 11 and 12).
For the dehydration of ethanol (eqn (7)), some mechanisms were proposed. The first is that ethanol is directly oxidized by photoexcited holes into acetaldehyde and two protons (H+), and the protons are reduced by photoexcited electrons as shown in following equations (11) and (12).41 CH3CH2OH + 2h+ → CH3CHO + 2H+(11) 2H+ + 2e− → H2(12)
The second is that ethanol dissociatively adsorbed on the surface of TiO2. Then, adsorbed ethoxy radical species (CH3CH2O˙) on TiO2 would be directly oxidized by photoformed holes, while proton would be reduced on metal cocatalyst by photoformed electrons as shown in following equations (13)–(15):42,43 CH3CH2O–H + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3CH2O–Ti(s) + H–O(s)(13) CH3CH2O˙ + h+ → CH3CHO + H+(14) H˙ + H+ + e− → H2(15)where Ti(s) and O(s) show the surface Ti and O atoms on TiO2.
The third is that the active species originated from water would promote the activation of alcohols, for example, as shown in eqn (12), (16) and (17): H2O + h+ → H+ + ˙OH(16) CH3CH2OH + ˙OH + h+ → CH3CHO + H2O + H+(17)which is supported by the facts that water is necessary not only for the complete oxidation of alcohol into carbon dioxide but it also accelerates the reaction rate of the dehydration of alcohol.42,44,45 In addition, water as the solvent would promote the products desorption to enhance the reaction rate.
When the reaction was carried out in an aqueous alcohol solution containing HCl and H2SO4 or over photocatalysts having a lot of acid sites, acetal was obtained as the major product in the solution.46,47 This was because the acid-catalyzed reaction between ethanol and photoformed acetaldehyde could produce acetal as shown in eqn (18). 2CH3CH2OH + CH3CHO → CH3CH(OCH2CH3)2 + H2O(18)The decomposition of this acetal may consume the produced hydrogen to decrease the hydrogen production rate.46


4.1.2. Reactivity of various alcohols. 
The photocatalytic hydrogen production rate from an aqueous ethanol solution was compared with that from water and other organic chemicals such as alcohol, aldehyde and aliphatic acid.
When the hydrogen production rates from various neat alcohols were compared over Pt/TiO2, the hydrogen production rate decreased in the following order: methanol ≈ ethanol > 1-propanol ≈ 2-propanol > 1-butanol.43 The clear correlation was obtained between the hydrogen production rate and the polarity of alcohol. The same result was observed for the hydrogen production from aqueous C1–C4 alcohols over Pt/TiO2.48 Thus, the dissociative adsorption of alcohol over Pt/TiO2 shown in eqn (13) would mainly govern the reaction rate. Another possibility is that with increasing carbon chain lengths and branches, the steric hindrance in the molecule would decrease the hydrogen production rate.
The photocatalytic hydrogen production rate from an aqueous solution of methanol was compared with those from the oxidation products, formaldehyde and formic acid over SrTiO3 photocatalyst.49 The hydrogen production rate decreased in the following order: formic acid (33.3 μmol h−1) > formaldehyde (8.1 μmol h−1) > methanol (4.8 μmol h−1). This means that the rates for the consecutive reactions of the methanol oxidation are fast. In other words, the complete oxidation of methanol by water would be relatively easy to proceed. On the other hand, the oxidation products of ethanol showed a different reactivity. The hydrogen production rates from aqueous acetaldehyde and acetic acid over Pt/TiO2 were 1/3 and 1/8 as large as that from aqueous ethanol, respectively.50 This shows that the complete oxidation of ethanol into hydrogen and carbon dioxide would be rather difficult. The complete oxidation of 2-propanol into carbon dioxide would be further more difficult. It was reported that almost the equivalent moles of hydrogen and acetone were photocatalytically produced from 2-propanol over Pt/TiO242,51 and CdS44 even in the presence of water. These results show that the development of highly active photocatalyst would be required for the efficient hydrogen production from these alcohols other than methanol.


4.1.3. Effect of reaction conditions. 
The reaction conditions such as the concentration of alcohol, the solution pH and the reaction temperature are important factors to determine the hydrogen production rate.
It is obvious that the concentration of alcohols largely influences the hydrogen production rate. With increasing the concentration of alcohols, the hydrogen production rate first increased and then decreased in many cases.42,48,52,53 The increase can be understood by considering the chemical kinetics. On the other hand, the addition of an excess amount of alcohol would disturb the adsorption of water to decrease the photocatalytic activity.
The solution pH also influences the hydrogen production rate from aqueous alcohol. In an aqueous methanol solution with Pt/TiO2, the hydrogen production rate increased with an increase of pH until 6, and then decreased with a further increase of pH.48 The optimum pH was around 6, and the point of zero charge (PZC) of the TiO2 is known to be pHPZC = 5.8–6.0. At a pH lower than the pHPZC the TiO2 surface is positively charged, whereas at a pH higher than the pHPZC the TiO2 surface is negatively charged, as shown in eqn (19) and (20). TiIV–OH + H+ → TiIV–OH2+, pH < pHPZC(19) TiIV–OH + OH− → TiIV–O− + H2O, pH > pHPZC(20)
Therefore, at acidic pHs (pH < 5), the electrostatic repulsion between the positively charged surface of TiO2 and the proton (H+) would retard the adsorption of H+ to decrease the hydrogen production rate. At alkaline pHs (pH > 7), since the electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged surface of TiO2 and the lone-pair electron of the oxygen atom in alcohols would inhibit the adsorption of alcohol, the activity would decrease. When the charge of the photocatalyst surface was neutral, both proton and alcohol would more easily reach the photocatalyst surface and high photocatalytic activity could be obtained. The solution pH can also influence various factors such as the agglomeration of the photocatalyst particles, the redox potential of water and organic compounds, the band bending of the semiconductor and so on, which may influence the hydrogen production rate. The same tendency for the pH of the solution was reported for the hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol over Au/TiO241 and that from aqueous 2-propanol over CdS-based photocatalyst.54
Thermal acceleration of the photocatalytic reaction rate has been reported by many researchers so far, such as dehydration of various alcohols over metal-loaded TiO2,42,43,55,56 photocatalytic reaction of water and alcohol over metal-loaded TiO250,53,57 and Pt/SrTiO3,58 and the photocatalytic hydrogen production from water with carbon, carbon monoxide and glycerol over Pt/TiO2.34,36,59 Thermal activation energies of these photocatalytic systems were varied with the kinds of reactions, semiconductors and cocatalysts, or the concentration of organic compounds. However, they were typically less than 30 kJ mol−1, which was obviously lower than the activation energies for the conventional catalytic reactions. Thus, the thermal energy would influence only the mild activation steps such as the desorption of products53,59 and the migration of the photoexcited carriers.55,56


4.1.4. Effect of cocatalyst. 
Loading metal cocatalyst is the most popular way to increase the activity of the semiconductor photocatalyst. The work function of various metals60 and the reduction potential of metal ions19 are summarized in Table 3 for references.
Table 3 Work function and redox potential of metals




Metal
Work functiona
Reaction

E
0redox/V vs. NHEb(pH = 0)





a Values reported in ref. 60.
b Values reported in ref. 19.





Co
5.0
Co2+ + 2e− → Co
−0.29


Ni
5.15
Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni
−0.23


Cu
4.65
Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu
0.34


Ru
4.71
Ru2+ + 2e− → Ru
0.46


Rh
4.98
Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh
0.76


Ag
4.26
Ag+ + e− → Ag
0.80


Pd
5.12
Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd
0.92


Ir
5.27
Ir3+ + 3e− → Ir
1.16


Pt
5.65
Pt2+ + 2e− → Pt
1.19


Au
5.1
Au3+ + 3e− → Au
1.50




When the hydrogen production rates from aqueous ethanol were compared among four kinds of metal (Pt, Rh, Pd and Ni)-loaded TiO2 samples prepared by the photodeposition method, the activity decreased in the following order: Pt/TiO2 > Rh/TiO2 > Pd/TiO2 > Ni/TiO2 > TiO2.30 Pt/TiO2 showed the highest quantum yield (38% at 380 nm), which was more than 40 times higher than that for TiO2 alone (0.9%). Pt was effective for the increase of the activity even when the metal-loading was carried out by the impregnation43 and sonochemical methods.61 The high photocatalytic activity of the Pt-loaded sample was originated from the enhancement of the electron–hole separation at the interface between the semiconductor and the metal, and/or the catalytic activity of the Pt cocatalyst for the ethanol oxidation and the hydrogen evolution.
Nosaka et al. discussed the function of these metal cocatalysts for some photocatalytic reactions related to the reduction of proton, i.e., ammonia formation from azide ions and water, photocatalytic hydrogen production and dehydration of 2-propanol, over the metal (Pt, Rh, Pd, Au, Ni, Cu, Ag, Ru and Ir)-loaded TiO2 photocatalysts, and showed that the reaction rates for these reactions linearly increased with increasing work function of the metal cocatalyst.62 They suggested that the metal nanoparticles would produce an electric field gradient, causing an efficient electron–hole separation.
The effect of the loading methods was examined for Pt/TiO2 and Au/TiO2 photocatalysts.41 The cocatalysts were loaded by four preparation methods, i.e., deposition–precipitation, impregnation, photodeposition and physical mixing. The activity of the Au-loaded samples was generally about 30% lower than that of the Pt-loaded samples. The activity for the hydrogen production from the aqueous ethanol over the Au-loaded samples strongly depended on the preparation method, while the activities of the Pt-loaded samples were less sensitive to the preparation method. For both series of the samples, the samples prepared by the photodeposition method showed higher activity than those prepared by other preparation methods. The optimum loading amounts were 0.3–1 wt% for Pt-loaded samples and 1–2 wt% for Au-loaded samples. The exposed surface area of the cocatalyst had only a small influence on the hydrogen production rate. It is suggested that the active sites for the reaction may be the metal surface close to the TiO2 and the TiO2 surface around the perimeter of the metal nanoparticles. The reason why the activity decreased on the samples with higher loading amount of cocatalyst is suggested as follows: the metal particles may block the photoabsorption by TiO2 to decrease the surface concentration of the electrons and holes, or the deposited metal particles may act as the recombination centres for the photogenerated electrons and holes.
Pt/TiO2 prepared by a sonochemical method showed higher activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol than that prepared by the conventional impregnation method.61 This may come from that the sonication could make roughness on the surface of TiO2 and improve the dispersion of Pt. The photocatalytic activity of TiO2 loaded with Au-core/Pd-shell or Au–Pd random alloy in this method was higher than those of Pd/TiO2 and Au/TiO2.63
Metal oxide can also function as the cocatalyst. Loading of RuO2 increased the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 for hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol, although the activity of RuO2/TiO2 was smaller than those of Pt/TiO2 and Pd/TiO2.64 It was suggested that the RuO2 would also work as a hydrogen-evolution catalyst.
Non-noble metals were also examined as the cocatalyst of TiO2, since the costs of these metals were much lower than those of noble metals. The hydrogen production rate from aqueous ethanol over CoOx/TiO2 prepared by an impregnation method was much higher than that over the pure TiO2 (0.13 μmol h−1), although it decreased by a factor of 50% during the long reaction (from 16.1 to 8.0 μmol h−1 for 240 h).65 The leaching of the active CoOx species from the surface of TiO2 would be the main reason for the deactivation.
The hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol was examined for Cu, Ni or Ag-loaded TiO2 samples prepared by the in situ photodeposition method. Although no detectable hydrogen was produced over the bare TiO2, formation of hydrogen was observed over the metal-loaded TiO2 samples. Cu-loaded sample showed much higher activity than Ni or Ag-loaded sample.53 It was estimated that the high photocatalytic activity of the Cu-loaded sample would be originated from the adjustable junction or strong interaction between the Cu nanoparticles and the TiO2 surface, which would promote the electron migration from the conduction band of TiO2 to the metal nanoparticles. The high photocatalytic activity of Cu-loaded TiO2 was also reported by other researchers.66,67 CuOx-embedded TiO2 prepared by a water-in-oil microemulsion method showed a high quantum yield (27% at 365 nm) for the hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol.67 Furthermore, no deactivation was observed during 30 h of reaction and the leaching of Cu species was hardly observed.


4.1.5. Particle size, morphology and polymorphs of TiO2. 
The particle sizes of Pt and TiO2 also influence the hydrogen production rate from water and ethanol over Pt/TiO2.68 Loading a very small amount of Pt (smaller than 0.01 monolayer on TiO2) and the use of TiO2 with a particle size smaller than 0.4 μm remarkably increased the activity.
Pt/TiO2 photocatalysts with different polymorphs were examined for the hydrogen production from 2-propanol. Anatase TiO2 showed high photocatalytic activity for this reaction, while rutile TiO2 showed negligible activity.51 The low activity of the rutile TiO2 is attributed to the band structure. The flat band potential of rutile TiO2 exists at almost the similar level to the reduction potential of proton, while that of anatase TiO2 is shifted negatively by ca. 0.2 eV69 (Fig. 5). Thus, the energy of photoexcited electrons in the conduction band of anatase TiO2 would be higher than that for rutile TiO2. The activity of amorphous TiO2 was also negligible, since it would contain many recombination sites for the photoexcited electrons and holes.70
 Fig. 5  Band structure of TiO2 polymorphs at pH = 0.69,72,74 
Brookite TiO2 prepared by a solvothermal method followed by a hydrothermal treatment was as active as a commercial TiO2 (P-25) for the hydrogen production from 2-propanol.71 Brookite nanorods prepared by thermal hydrolysis of an aqueous solution of titanium bis(ammonium lactate) dihydroxide with high concentration of urea exhibited higher activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol than anatase nanoparticles with a larger surface area and commercial TiO2 (P-25).72 The flat band potential of the brookite nanorods was more cathodically shifted by 0.14 V than that of the anatase nanoparticles. Thus, this would be one possible reason for the high activity of the brookite sample. Photocatalytic activities of three kinds of TiO2 polymorphs for hydrogen production from methanol–water vapours were also examined.73 Anatase and brookite TiO2 samples showed similar photocatalytic activities, while the activity of rutile TiO2 was lower than those of the other two samples.
TiO2(B), which is another polymorph of TiO2, was examined for the photocatalytic dehydration of ethanol.75–77 Some TiO2(B) samples were prepared by a hydrothermal treatment of anatase TiO2 powder in 10 M NaOH, followed by washing with acid and calcination at various temperatures. The hydrothermal treatment at 387 K provided TiO2(B) nanotubes, while that at 403 K formed TiO2(B) nanofibers. With increasing calcination temperature, TiO2(B) transformed into anatase nanoparticles. The TiO2 nanotubes calcined at 673 K were composed of the mixture of TiO2(B) nanotubes and anatase nanoparticles, and showed the highest activity, which was 20% higher than that over the commercial TiO2 (P-25).
Pt/TiO2 nanosheets with exposed (001) facets were prepared by a hydrothermal route in a Ti(OC4H9)4–HF–H2O mixed solution followed by the photodeposition of Pt nanoparticles.78 The sample loaded with 2 wt% of Pt showed the highest activity (334 μmol h−1), which was much higher than a Pt/P-25 TiO2 sample (223 μmol h−1). The high photocatalytic activity would be originated from the synergistic effect of surface fluorination and exposed (001) facets.
The photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous alcohols over mesoporous TiO2 was examined by various researchers.48,50,53,79 For example, mesoporous TiO2 synthesized by the surfactant-assisted templating sol–gel method from laurylamine hydrochloride, tetraisopropyl orthotitanate and acetylacetone showed high activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol (331 μmol h−1), which was much higher than those over the commercial TiO2 samples, P-25 (31 μmol h−1) and ST-01 (84 μmol h−1).79
Anpo et al. developed an oxygen deficient TiO2 film on Ti metal that functioned upon visible light irradiation, which was prepared by a radio frequency magnetron sputtering deposition method, and examined the hydrogen production from aqueous alcohols in an H-type glass container.80 The atomic ratio of O/Ti in the TiO2 film decreased from 2.00 at the top surface to 1.93 at the inside of the film, i.e., the concentration of the oxygen vacancy increased with the depth from the surface, which may enable the visible light absorption. The separate evolution of pure hydrogen from the Ti metal side with deposited Pt could proceed under visible light irradiation.


4.1.6. Modification of TiO2. 
Doping metal or nonmetal ions have been frequently applied to increase the photocatalytic activity of TiO2 and other semiconductor photocatalysts. Doping of nonmetals (N, S, C, etc.)81–83 or transition metals with partially filled d orbitals (Cr, Ni, Rh, etc.)84–86 can lower the band gap of the semiconductor, since the doped ions can form the impurity levels in the forbidden band of the semiconductor. Since UV light is a minor portion (only 5%) in the solar light, narrowing the band gap of the semiconductor is necessary for the efficient utilization of the solar energy. For example, Muramatsu et al. prepared TiO2 thin film doped with sulfur (S) by atmosphere-controlled pulsed laser deposition and examined the hydrogen production from pure ethanol under the irradiation of both UV and visible light.87 UV-vis and XPS studies demonstrated that the sulfur atoms would substitute for the oxygen atoms of the TiO2 lattice to induce visible light sensitivity. Although the sulfur-doping decreased the crystallinity of TiO2, the photocatalytic activity of the S-doped TiO2 was more than two times higher than that of the bare TiO2. Furthermore, nickel deposition by the chemical vapour reductive deposition method drastically increased the activity several times as much as the Ni-free thin film.
On the other hand, doping metal ions such as alkali, alkaline earth and some lanthanide ions hardly influence the band structure of the semiconductor. However, doping these ions can sometimes increase the activity, since it would promote the migration of photoexcited carriers or give the positive effect on the particle size and the morphology of the photocatalyst.88–90 For example, a Pt/TiO2 sample doped with 0.5 mol% of Gd showed ca. 1.4 times higher activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol, than the non-doped TiO2 did.91

4.2. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and alcohols/acid over CdS
CdS has a small band gap (ca. 2.4 eV) and a high chemical potential of its conduction band (−0.9 V vs. NHE) as shown in Fig. 6.92 Thus, it is one of the promising materials for the hydrogen production under the irradiation of visible light. However, photocorrosion of the photocatalyst sometimes becomes a problem for the sulfide photocatalysts including CdS.
 Fig. 6  Band structure of CdS and TiO2. 

4.2.1. Catalyst modification. 
A Pt/CdS photocatalyst was prepared by the photodeposition method in a H2PtCl6 solution and examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous solutions of various alcohols.45 Although Pt/CdS without a pre-treatment was less active for these reactions, the activity was largely enhanced by an air-treatment at high temperature (ca. 773 K). The photodeposited species on CdS was PtS and this could be converted into metallic Pt through the thermal treatment. The metallic Pt would promote the migration of electrons to increase the photocatalytic activity.
RhOx/CdS was examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol.92 Treatment at high temperature (773 K) and etching with acetic acid increased the photocatalytic activity. Calcination at 773 K oxidized RhCl3 to Rh2O3 completely and improved the interaction between the Rh2O3 and the surface of CdS. Although the calcination formed CdO, CdSO4 and CdCl2 species on the surface of CdS, the chemical etching with acid would remove these species to make the surface clean. The strong interaction between the Rh2O3 cocatalyst and the CdS photocatalyst would provide the smooth charge transfer to increase the photocatalytic activity.
Li et al. found that a MoS2/CdS photocatalyst showed higher activity for the hydrogen production from water and lactic acid than Pt/CdS.93,94 The excellent catalytic activity of MoS2 for hydrogen evolution, together with an improvement in the junction between MoS2 and CdS, would be very important factors for the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity. It was also reported that loading NiS on CdS largely increased the hydrogen production rate from aqueous lactic acid.95 NiS/CdS photocatalyst prepared by a hydrothermal method showed a high quantum efficiency of 51.3% at 420 nm.
Combination of CdS photocatalyst with zeolite would be effective for controlling the particle size of CdS.96 Among the samples combined with zeolites, the photocatalytic hydrogen production rate from aqueous ethanol under the visible light irradiation decreased in the following order: the samples combined with zeolite-Y > SBA-15 > zeolite-L. The cavity size of zeolite would influence the particle size of CdS and the photocatalytic activity.
The CdS combined with KNbO3 showed a higher activity than that combined with zeolite.54,97 Loading quantum sized CdS (quantum dot) on KNbO3 would promote the separation of the photoexcited electrons and holes in CdS, since the electrons would be injected into the conduction band of KNbO3 (Fig. 7). Loading Ni/NiO on KNbO3 further increased the activity. Quantum yield of this Ni/NiO/KNbO3/CdS photocatalyst for the hydrogen production from aqueous 2-propanol was 8.8% (λ > 400 nm). A mixed-phase CdS matrix, which was composed of quantum-sized cubic-phase CdS and bulk-phase hexagonal CdS interlinked with platinum, also showed a high photocatalytic activity for the hydrogen production from 2-propanol.98
 Fig. 7  The mechanism of photosensitization with dye or quantum dot upon visible light irradiation. 


4.2.2. Reactivity of various organic compounds. 
The chemistry of hydrogen production from aqueous alcohols over CdS and related photocatalysts was different from that over TiO2 photocatalysts. The difference in the surface property and the band structure between TiO2 and CdS (Fig. 6) may cause the difference in the activities for the hydrogen production from water and various organic compounds. For example, the hydrogen production rate from aqueous alcohol solutions over the Ni/NiO/KNbO3/CdS photocatalyst decreased in the following order: 2-propanol > ethanol > methanol.54 For the Pt/CdS, the order of the photocatalytic activity was: ethanol > methanol ≈ n-propanol ≈ n-butanol > isobutanol > tert-butanol.45 For the MoS2/CdS, the hydrogen production rate decreased in the following order: lactic acid ≫ glycerol > ethylene glycol > ethanol > methanol.94 Different activities among these three photocatalysts may be originated from the kinds of cocatalyst or the structure of CdS. Unlike the TiO2, it is notable that the hydrogen production rate from aqueous methanol was quite small over some CdS-based photocatalysts.
The valence band position of a CdS1−xSex solid solution was controlled by varying the ratio of sulfur to selenium.99 The hydrogen production rate from aqueous solution of ethanol, methanol or Na2SO3 over the CdS and the solid solution samples monotonically decreased with increasing the ratio of Se, and CdSe (band gap, ca. 1.7 eV) produced no hydrogen. On the other hand, the hydrogen production rates from oxalic acid or formic acid over pure CdS and CdSe were high, while those over the solid solution of CdS and CdSe were very low. For the former group such as ethanol, the donor level of each reducing agent is relatively close to the valence band edge of the semiconductor, and it would strongly affect the reaction rate. On the other hand, for the latter group of the oxalic acid and formic acid, the donor level is negative enough to donate electrons to the valence band, and thus other properties such as the carrier mobility would largely influence the reaction rate. In other words, the low activity of the solid solution would be due to the presence of many trap sites in the bulk for the photoexcited carriers.

4.3. Hydrogen production from water and alcohols over other photocatalysts
The alkaline-earth titanates were well researched for the hydrogen production from aqueous alcohols.44,49,58,100,101 The hydrogen production rate from aqueous 2-propanol over alkaline-earth titanates prepared by a solid-state reaction method decreased in the following order: SrTiO3 (30 μmol h−1) > anatase-TiO2 (15 μmol h−1) > CaTiO3 (13 μmol h−1) > BaTiO3 (6 μmol h−1).49 The hydrogen production rates from aqueous alcohols over Pt/SrTiO3 decreased in the following order: methanol > ethanol > 2-propanol.58 This order was the same as that of TiO2, since potentials of the valence band edge and the conduction band edge in SrTiO3 are close to those in TiO2. Pt/CaTiO3100 and Pt/BaTi4O9101 samples prepared by a polymerized complex (PC) method showed much higher activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol than those prepared by a solid-state reaction method, since the samples prepared by the PC method were composed of homogeneous crystals and had relatively large surface area. Furthermore, the activity of CaTiO3 was drastically improved by Zr-doping.
Nanorods of vanadium dioxide (VO2) with body-centred-cubic (bcc) structure were synthesized, which exhibited a high quantum efficiency (38.7%) for the hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol.102
Some oxynitrides (TaON, Y2Ta2O5N2 and LaTaON2) were examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous alcohols under the visible light irradiation.103–105 In these cases, Ru-loaded samples showed much higher activity than the Pt-loaded samples. The high photocatalytic activity of the Ru-loaded samples would be attributed to the good contact with Ru and oxynitrides. A remarkable improvement in the hydrogen production rate was observed when both Pt and Ru were present. Co-loading of Ru and Pt may cause the facile electron migration from the conduction band of the semiconductor to the metal particles to increase the photocatalytic activity.104,105
Yoneyama et al. reported that the Si powder with n-type property (band gap, 1.1 eV) was modified with polypyrrole and Ag by simultaneous photodeposition, followed by further photodeposition of Pt on the Ag particles.21 The Si powder coated with polypyrrole and platinized Ag was more stable than the bare Si in an aqueous ethanol solution, and showed much higher activity for the hydrogen production than the bare sample. The quantum efficiency was 2.1% at 550 nm.
The highly dispersed photocatalyst106 was also active for the hydrogen production from aqueous alcohol. Mesoporous W-MCM-48 with a three-dimensional pore system was examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol.107 Tungsten oxide species were highly dispersed in the MCM-48 matrix without destroying the ordered mesoporous structure. W-MCM-48 showed detectable hydrogen evolution under UV-light irradiation, although bulk WO3 was not active for this reaction.
Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from aqueous ethanol solution of polytungstate was studied in the presence of colloidal metal catalysts.108 Rustamov et al. demonstrated that UV-vis and ESR spectra of the irradiated polytungstate solution containing ethanol indicated the subsequent formation of one- and two-electron reduced decatungstates (i.e. [W10O32]5− and [W10O32]6−, respectively). The addition of colloidal platinum increased the hydrogen production rate. The proposed reaction mechanism involved the reduction of polytungstate by two electrons and its subsequent reoxidation yielding hydrogen in the presence of colloidal platinum (Fig. 8).
 Fig. 8  Photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol solution over polytungstate with colloidal Pt cocatalyst. 
The semiconductor photocatalysts for the hydrogen production from aqueous methanol were also reviewed elsewhere.23,24
4.4. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and glycerol
When producing biodiesel from vegetable oil and animal fat, glycerol (glycerin, C3H5(OH)3) is produced as a by-product, which corresponds to 10 wt% of the biomass.109 Since the world demand for glycerol is limited, development of the technology to convert glycerol into useful chemicals attracts much attention. To use glycerol as the renewable resource for the hydrogen production is one of the most desirable ways.
Daskalaki and Kondarides examined the hydrogen production from aqueous glycerol over Pt/TiO2.59 The reaction proceeded with the formation of intermediates such as methanol and acetic acid, and eventually resulted in the complete conversion of glycerol to hydrogen and carbon dioxide (eqn (21)). C3H8O3 + 3H2O → 7H2 + 3CO2(21)
This is a down-hill reaction (Table 1, entry 17). TiO2 loaded with 0.1–0.5 wt% of Pt showed the highest activity and further increase of Pt content decreased the activity. The hydrogen production rate was higher in neutral and basic solution than in acid solution.
Metals other than Pt were examined as the cocatalyst on TiO2 for the hydrogen production from aqueous glycerol. The activity of Pd/TiO2 was 1.7 times higher than that of Au/TiO2 and was almost the same as that over Pt/TiO2.110 CuOx/TiO2 photocatalyst prepared by the water-in-oil microemulsion method also showed high activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous glycerol solution.67 The quantum yield was 29% at 365 nm.
Development of some modified TiO2 that can function in the visible light was also examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous glycerol. TiO2 doped with both B and N showed a higher activity under the irradiation of light including both UV and visible light than TiO2 doped with either B or N, and bare TiO2.111 The proposed reason for the increase of activity is that N-doping would promote the incorporation of B into the TiO2 lattice, and codoping of B would reduce the recombination of photoexcited carriers. Pt/TiO2 modified with heteropoly blue (HPB) showed the activity for the hydrogen production from aqueous glycerol under visible light.112 The electrons formed by the excitation of HPB upon visible light irradiation would migrate to TiO2, which would enable the hydrogen production (Fig. 7).
4.5. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and saccharides
Kawai and Sakata examined the photocatalytic hydrogen production from liquid water and carbohydrates, (C6H12O6)n, such as saccharose (n = 2), starch (n ≈ 100) and cellulose (n ≈ 1000 to 5000).31 The hydrogen production from water and sugars is a down-hill reaction (Table 1, entry 18). The RuO2/TiO2/Pt photocatalyst showed activity for these reactions. The evolved gases were mainly hydrogen and carbon dioxide, with a small amount of methanol and ethanol (less than 0.2% of the total amount). Carbon monoxide, methane and oxygen were not obtained. The atomic ratio of produced hydrogen to carbon dioxide was 3:1 to 4:1 at the initial stage and then became 2:1 as the stoichiometric ratio. The same phenomenon was observed for the photocatalytic reaction of liquid water and glucose (n = 1) over Pt/TiO2.113 The excess formation of hydrogen at the beginning of the reaction would be due to the dehydrogenation of carbohydrate with the production of CO, –CHO or –COOH groups. The terminal hydroxymethyl group of glucose would be sequentially oxidized into carbon dioxide (eqn (22)), and finally all carbons would be converted to carbon dioxide. R–CH2OH → R–CHO → R–COOH → R–H + CO2(22)where R is typically C5H9O5. When the photocatalytic hydrogen production rates from aqueous di-saccharides (lactose, cellobiose and maltose) solution were compared with those from aqueous solution of polysaccharides (starch and cellulose) over Pt/TiO2, the former were much higher than the latter.40 The reactivity of carbohydrates decreased with increasing molecular weight, since carbohydrates with a large molecular weight were insoluble in water.
When the hydrogen production from aqueous glucose was examined over several metal (1 wt%)-loaded TiO2 photocatalysts, the production rate decreased in the following order: Pd/TiO2 > Pt/TiO2 > Au/TiO2 ≈ Rh/TiO2 > Ag/TiO2 ≈ Ru/TiO2.114 Anatase TiO2 was more active than rutile TiO2. The hydrogen production rate was strongly dependent on the solution pH. When pH increased from 1 to 13, the hydrogen production rate gradually increased and reached maximum at pH = 11, followed by a drastic decrease with further increasing the solution pH, where the pKa of glucose (ca. 12.3) would influence the hydrogen production rate. At pH lower than the pKa, the glucose in the solution is mainly in the molecular form and would prefer to bond with undercoordinated surface Ti atoms through its oxygen atom of the hydroxyl group. With increasing the solution pH, the dissociative adsorption of glucose would become possible and it would enhance the activity. However, at pH higher than the pKa, glucose in the solution mainly exists as RCH2–O−. Thus, the electrostatic repulsion between the negatively charged TiO2 surface and RCH2–O− would inhibit the adsorption of glucose to decrease the hydrogen evolution rate. Therefore, the maximum activity would be obtained at the pH close to the pKa.
Sulfides such as ZnIn2S4 and CdS were also examined for the hydrogen production from aqueous glucose under visible light.115,116 In the case of ZnIn2S4, the highest hydrogen production rate was obtained at pH = 12.7115 which supports the above mechanism more clearly. The photocatalytic activity of ZnIn2S4 was increased by ZnS-coating. The ZnS on ZnIn2S4 promoted the adsorption of glucose, which would be one possible reason for the increase of the photocatalytic activity.
Photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous glucose solution was examined by using alkali tantalates.117 The order of the active photocatalyst was: NaTaO3 ≫ KTaO3 > LiTaO3. NiO-loading increased the hydrogen production rate over NaTaO3, which was more effective than Pt-loading.
The conduction band edge of Fe2O3 does not satisfy the potential for the hydrogen production. However, McFarland et al. found that Ti-doped Fe2O3 thin films modified by CoF3 were active for the hydrogen production from aqueous glucose.118 The modification of Fe2O3 surface with CoF3 negatively shifted the flat-band potential of Fe2O3 (Fig. 9). Thus, the hydrogen production was achieved without an extra bias. The incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE) was 3.7% at 400 nm.
 Fig. 9  Schematic energy level diagram of Fe2O3 based photocatalyst before and after CoF3 aqueous solution treatment. 
4.6. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and methane
The technology to convert methane into hydrogen is very important because methane is often obtained as the ultimate product from biomass. However, except for the combustion, the conversion of it usually requires much energy, i.e., high temperature, since methane is the most stable compound among hydrocarbons. It is reported that methane can be photocatalytically activated around room temperature or at a mild condition with or without the oxidant molecule such as oxygen and carbon dioxide.119 Among them, the photocatalytic reaction of water and methane has been also reported by a few groups.
Taylor et al. examined the reaction of methane and liquid water containing electron-transfer reagent (MV: methyl viologen) with a metal oxide photocatalyst (La-doped WO3 or TiO2) upon photoirradiation at a high pressure of 1.0 or 10.1 MPa.120 Hydrogen, methanol, ethane, oxygen, formic acid and carbon dioxide were produced. Methane conversion at 1.0 MPa was ca. 4%. The mechanism for the formation of methanol was proposed as shown in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic conversion of methane into methanol over La/WO3. 
Gondal et al. examined the photocatalytic conversion of liquid water and methane to methanol by using a visible laser light (514 nm) and a WO3 photocatalyst at room temperature.121 The products observed were methanol, oxygen and carbon dioxide. They also examined the reaction of methane and water over WO3, TiO2 (rutile) and NiO photocatalysts under the irradiation of a strong UV beam at 355 nm.122 The hydrogen and methanol were photocatalytically produced at room temperature. Maximum methane conversions were 29% for WO3, 21% for TiO2 and 20% for NiO, respectively.
Recently, we found that the photocatalytic steam reforming of methane (PSRM) shown in eqn (23) could proceed over Pt-loaded semiconductor photocatalysts around room temperature at atmospheric pressure.123 CH4 + 2H2O(g) → 4H2 + CO2(23)
This is an uphill reaction (Table 1, entry 1) so that a part of the photoenergy can be stored in the chemical potential of hydrogen through this photocatalytic reaction.
When Pt/TiO2 was photoirradiated in the flow of water vapour and methane around room temperature, hydrogen and carbon dioxide were the main products, and only trace amounts of ethane and carbon monoxide were also observed.124 After an induction period, the molar ratio of hydrogen to carbon dioxide in the outlet gas became close to 4. Thus, the main reaction is suggested as eqn (23). The reaction intermediates, possibly described as [CH2O]n, were formed on the catalyst surface, and reacted with water to produce hydrogen and carbon dioxide (Fig. 11). The accumulation of the surface intermediates depended on the activity of the photocatalyst, the methane concentration in the reaction gas, and the incident light intensity. The moderate accumulation of the surface intermediates considerably enhanced the entire reaction rate.
 Fig. 11  The proposed reaction mechanism for the PSRM over Pt/TiO2. 
The hydrogen production rate over Pt/NaTaO3:La was two times higher than that over Pt/TiO2 and the reaction selectively lasted for a long time without deactivation.125 The activity of NaTaO3 was much influenced by the crystallite size, doping metal ions and the cocatalyst. The highest activity was obtained over the NaTaO3 doped with La3+, where a moderate amount of La3+ substituted for Na+ without distorting the crystal structure of NaTaO3 and would increase the density and the mobility of carriers to improve the activity. A moderate amount of Pt nanoparticles loaded on NaTaO3:La mostly enhanced the activity among the examined metal particles. The heat treatment after the addition of Pt, which probably formed the practical metal–semiconductor junction, was required for the high and stable photocatalytic activity. The apparent quantum yield of the PSRM employing Pt/NaTaO3:La was 30% in the range of 240–270 nm.
The increase of the hydrogen production rate by introducing methane during water decomposition was demonstrated on Pt/CaTiO3 (Fig. 12).126 It is noted that even in the presence of methane both the PSRM and water decomposition proceeded in the case of Pt/CaTiO3. With increasing loading amount of Pt, the hydrogen production rate in the PSRM increased. Furthermore, the hydrogen production rate through the water decomposition (oxygen production) in the flow of water vapour and methane was higher than that in the flow of water. It is suggested that the activated methane species or the reaction intermediates would accelerate the water decomposition or suppress its reverse reaction. When CaTiO3 samples having different particle sizes, shapes, crystal defects and impurity phases were prepared by three preparation methods, i.e., co-precipitation, homogeneous precipitation and solid-state reaction methods,127 the highest activity for the PSRM was obtained over the sample prepared by the solid-state reaction method from anatase TiO2. This would be originated from the large size of crystallites and few crystal defects. These factors would be very important to prepare the catalyst for the PSRM.
 Fig. 12  Time course of the production rate over Pt/CaTiO3 in the flow of (A) H2O vapour (1.5%) and (B) a mixture of water vapour (1.5%) and methane (50%). 
Ga2O3 was also active for the PSRM.128 The activity was largely influenced by the crystal structure and surface area of the Ga2O3 samples as well as the cocatalyst. The Pt-loaded β-Ga2O3 photocatalyst with a high specific surface area of 10–20 m2 g−1 was effective for the PSRM without deactivation for a long time. The activity of the Pt/β-Ga2O3 sample was further enhanced by the addition of metal ions either into the bulk or on the surface. The improvement of the bulk processes such as carrier migration mainly enhanced the rate of the water activation, while that of the surface properties promoted the methane activation. Thus, the simultaneous modification in the bulk and on the surface realized further improvement.
The hydrogen production rate over the Ga2O3 photocatalyst increased with an increase of the reaction temperature before reaching ca. 343 K, and then it became constant.129 A Pseudo-Arrhenius plot for the production rate in the lower temperature range showed a straight line and the thermal activation energy was typically less than ca. 10 kJ mol−1, which varied with the irradiation light intensity, the crystallite size of Ga2O3 and the loading of metal cocatalyst. This study revealed that the lower thermal activation energy was given by the higher intensity of the irradiation light, the larger crystallite size of Ga2O3 particles and the larger particle size of cocatalyst. On the other hand, the higher thermal activation energy was given by the surface defects and/or the cocatalyst alloying. It was suggested that the thermal energy would promote the migration of photoexcited carriers both in the bulk of Ga2O3 and at the metal–semiconductor junction between the metal cocatalyst and Ga2O3.
5. Conclusions
Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives is an attractive reaction, since it has a potential of converting solar energy and renewable resources into the chemical potential of the storable hydrogen. As reviewed, various attempts had been done to achieve the efficient hydrogen evolution, such as development of various photocatalysts and cocatalysts, modification of photocatalyst, the morphology control of photocatalyst, optimization of reaction conditions and so on. So far, several photocatalysts showing high quantum efficiency under the UV light irradiation have been developed, which is summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Quantum yield for photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and organic compounds




Entry
Organic compound
Photocatalyst
Wavelength/nm
Quantum yield (%)
Ref.




1
Ethanol
Pt/TiO2 (rutile)
380
38

30



2
Pt/CaTi0.93Zr0.07O3
365
13

100



3
Pt/BaTi4O9
365
12

101



4
VO2
UV light
39

102



5
Pt(Ag)/Si/polypyrrole
550
2.1

21



6
Ethanol, methanol
Ru/TaON
420 < λ < 500
2.1, 0.8

103



7
Ethanol, glycerol
CuOx/TiO2 (anatase)
365
27, 29

67



8
Ethanol, glycerol, glucose
Pt/TiO2 (P-25)
365
50, 70, 63

40



9
Methanol
Pt/SrTiO3
UV light
1.9

58



10
2-Propanol
Ni/NiO/KNbO3/CdS

λ ≥ 400
8.8

97



11
Lactic acid
Pt/TiO2 (rutile), Pt/CdS
360, 440
71, 38

37



12
MoS2/CdS
420
7.3

94



13
NiS/CdS

λ ≥ 420
51

95



14
Saccharose
RuO2/TiO2/Pt
380
1.5

31



15
Methane
Pt/NaTaO3:La
240–270
30

125



16
Pt/Ga2O3
254
7.9

128





However, we can find only a few examples for the efficient system under the visible light. Development of more active photocatalysts driven in the visible light is the next important target. The expansion of these photocatalytic systems to raw biomass including many contaminations would be also necessary for their practical application. Improvement of photo-reactors would be also required to establish efficient hydrogen production systems by using solar energy.
Finally, it is indeed expected that these environmentally benign photocatalytic systems will become one of the hydrogen production methods in the near future.
Notes and references
H. Balat and E. Kirtay, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7416 Search PubMed .
M. Inaba, K. Murata, M. Saito and I. Takahara, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 432 Search PubMed .
A. Yamaguchi, N. Hiyoshi, O. Sato, K. K. Bando, M. Osada and M. Shirai, Catal. Today, 2009, 146, 192 Search PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 116, 5 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sutton, B. Kelleher and J. R. H. Ross, Fuel Process. Technol., 2001, 73, 155 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadullah, K. Tomishige and K. Fujimoto, Catal. Commun., 2001, 2, 63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Asadullah, T. Miyazawa, S. Ito, K. Kunimori and K. Tomishige, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 246, 103 Search PubMed .
M. M. Yung, W. S. Jablonski and K. A. Magrini-Bair, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 1874 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanksale, J. N. Beltramini and G. M. Lu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 166 Search PubMed .
K. C. Park and H. Tomiyasu, Chem. Commun., 2003, 694 RSC .
M. Osada, T. Sato, M. Watanabe, T. Adschiri and K. Arai, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 327 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, S. Z. Wang, D. H. Xu, Y. M. Gong, H. H. Ma and X. Y. Tang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 334 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Chong, V. Sabaratnam, Y. Shirai and M. A. Hassan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 3277 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, Q. Lai, C. Zhang, H. Zhao, K. Ma, X. Zhao, H. Chen, D. Liu and X.-H. Xing, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 2889 Search PubMed .
Y.-H. P. Zhnag, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 10334 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Rostrup-Nielsen, Catal. Today, 1993, 18, 305 CrossRef .
M. A. Peña, J. P. Gómez and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 144, 7 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Armor, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 176, 159 CrossRef CAS .

Kagakubinran Kisohen, The Chemical Society of JapanMaruzen, Tokyo, 3rd edn,  1984 Search PubMed .
V. P. Indrakanti, J. D. Kubicki and H. H. Schobert, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 745 RSC .
Y. Taniguchi, H. Yoneyama and H. Tamura, Chem. Lett., 1983, 269 Search PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37 CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sasaki, H. Nemoto, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17536 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem.
Soc., 2010, 132, 5858 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, Nature, 1979, 282, 283 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1980, 694 RSC .
T. Sakata and T. Kawai, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1981, 80, 341 CrossRef .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, Nature, 1980, 286, 474 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kawai and T. Sakata, Chem. Lett., 1981, 81 CAS .
K. Hashimoto, T. Kawai and T. Sakata, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 4083 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato and J. M. White, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 7206 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato and J. M. White, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1980, 70, 131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 336 CrossRef CAS .
H. Harada, T. Sakata and T. Ueda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 1773 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Patsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Today, 2007, 124, 94 CrossRef CAS .
D. I. Kondarides, V. M. Daskalaki, A. Patsoura and X. E. Verykios, Catal. Lett., 2008, 122, 26 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Bamwenda, S. Tsubota, T. Nakamura and M. Haruta, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1995, 89, 177 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ait-Ichou, M. Formenti, B. Pommier and S. J. Teichner, J. Catal., 1985, 91, 293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Yang, C.-H. Chang and H. Idriss, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 67, 217 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, S. Naito, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, Chem. Lett., 1982, 555 CAS .
Z. Jin, Q. Lin, X. Zheng, C. Xi, C. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Feng, H. Wang, Z. Chen and Z. Jiang, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 71, 85 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ohtani, M. Kakimoto, S. Nishimoto and T. kagiya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1993, 70, 265 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, C.-H. Lee, J.-H. Chao, C.-Y. Kuo, Y.-C. Cheng, W.-N. Huang, H.-W. Chang, Y.-M. Huang and M.-K. Shih, Catal. Lett., 2004, 98, 61 Search PubMed .
T. Sreethawong, T. Puangpetch, S. Chavadej and S. Yoshikawa, J. Power Sources, 2007, 165, 861 Search PubMed .
B. Zielinska, E. Borowiak-Palen and R. J. Kalenczuk, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1797 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, S. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Wang and Z. Mao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 1112 Search PubMed .
S. Nishimoto, B. Ohtani, H. Kajiwara and T. Kagiya, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1985, 81, 61 RSC .
G. L. Chiarello, M. H. Aguirre and E. Selli, J. Catal., 2010, 273, 182 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Korzhak, N. I. Ermokhina, A. L. Stroyuk, V. K. Bukhtiyarov, A. E. Raevskaya, V.
I. Litvin, S. Y. Kuchmiy, V. G. Ilyin and P. A. Manorik, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 198, 126 CrossRef .
J. Choi, S. Y. Ryu, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2371 RSC .
F. H. Hussein and R. Rudham, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1984, 80, 2817 RSC .
F. H. Hussein and R. Rudham, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1987, 83, 1631 RSC .
S. Naito, Can. J. Chem., 1986, 64, 1795 Search PubMed .
T. Puangpetch, T. Sreethawong, S. Yoshikawa and S. Chavadej, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2009, 312, 97 Search PubMed .
V. M. Daskalaki and D. I. Kondarides, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 75 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Michaelson, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 4729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizukoshi, Y. Makise, T. Shuto, J. Hu, A. Tominaga, S. Shironita and S. Tanabe, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2007, 14, 387 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nosaka, K. Norimatsu and H. Miyama, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 106, 128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mizukoshi, K. Sato, T. J Konno and N. Masahashi, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 94, 248 Search PubMed .
T. Sakata, K. Hashimoto and T. Kawai, J. Phys. Chem., 1984, 88, 5214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, G. Lu and S. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 181, 263 Search PubMed .
N.-L. Wu and M.-S. Lee, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 1601 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gombac, L. Sordelli, T. Montini, J. J. Delgado, A. Adamski, G. Adami, M. Cargnello, S. Bernal and P. Fornasiero, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 3916 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakata, T. Kawai and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1982, 88, 50 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ohtani, Y. Ogawa and S. Nishimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 3746 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kominami, Y. Ishii, M. Kohno, S. Konishi, Y. Kera and B. Ohtani, Catal. Lett., 2003, 91, 41 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kandiel, A. Feldhoff, L. Robben, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2050 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Chiarello, A. D. Paola, L. Palmisano and E. Selli, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 355 RSC .
A. D. Paola, M. Bellardita, R. Ceccato, L. Palmisano and F. Parrino, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15166 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Kuo, C.-Y. Kuo, C.-H. Liu, J.-H. Chao and C.-H. Lin, Catal. Lett., 2007, 113, 7 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Lin, J.-H. Chao, C.-H. Liu, J.-C. Chang and F.-C. Wang, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 9907 CrossRef CAS .
F.-C. Wang, C.-H. Lin, C.-W. Liu, J.-H. Chao and C.-H. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 13832 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, L. Qi and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13118 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sreethawong, Y. Suzuki and S. Yoshikawa, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 329 Search PubMed .
S. Fukumoto, M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi, M. Matsuoka and M. Anpo, Catal. Lett., 2009, 127, 39 Search PubMed .
R. Asahi, T. Morikawa, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Science, 2001, 293, 269 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohno, T. Mitsui and M. Matsumura, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 364 CrossRef CAS .
H. Irie, Y. Watanabe and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Lett., 2003, 32, 772 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Hwang, H. G. Kim, J. S. Lee, J. Kim, W. Li and S. H. Oh, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 2093 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and M. Sekizawa, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1371 RSC .
R. Konta, T. Ishii, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8992 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshinaga, K. Yamamoto, N. Sato, K. Aoki, T. Morikawa and A. Muramatsu, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 87, 239 Search PubMed .
T. Ishihara, H. Nishiguchi, K. Fukamachi and Y. Takita, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takata and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19386 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zalas and M. Laniecki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 89, 287 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lu and S. Li, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 97, 65 Search PubMed .
X. Zong, H. Yan, G. Wu, G. Ma, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7176 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, G. Wu, H. Yan, G. Ma, J. Shi, F. Wen, L. Wang and C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1963 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z. Zhong and R. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7631 RSC .
S. Y. Ryu, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18195 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Ryu, J. Choi, W. Balcerski, T. K. Lee and M. R. Hoffmann, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 7476 CrossRef CAS .
L. A. Silva, S. Y. Ryu, J. Choi, W. Choi and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12069 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kambe, M. Fujii, T. Kawai, S. Kawai and F. Nakahara, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 109, 105 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, S. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Liu and Z. Mao, Catal. Lett., 2007, 119, 148 Search PubMed .
W. Sun, S. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Liu and Z. Mao, Catal. Lett., 2008, 123, 282 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Z. Li, R. Vajtai, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1492 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hara, J. Nunoshige, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo and K. Domen, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3000 RSC .
M. Liu, W. You, Z. Lei, G. Zhou, J. Yang, G. Wu, G. Ma, G. Luan, T. Takata, M. Hara, K. Domen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2192 RSC .
M. Liu, W. You, Z. Lei, T. Takata, K. Domen and C. Li, Chin. J. Catal., 2006, 27, 556 Search PubMed .
H. Yoshida, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2003, 7, 435 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, A. Rodriguez, N. M. Dimitrijevic, T. Rajh and R. T. Koodali, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15728 Search PubMed .
M. I. Rustamov, N. Z. Muradov, A. D. Guseinova and Y. V. Bazhutin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1988, 13, 533 Search PubMed .
P. D. Vaidya and A. E. Rodrigues, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2009, 32, 1463 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bowker, P. R. Davies and L. S. Al-Mazroai, Catal. Lett., 2009, 128, 253 Search PubMed .
N. Luo, Z. Jiang, H. Shi, F. Cao, T. Xiao and P. P. Edwards, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 125 CrossRef CAS .
N. Fu and G. Lu, Catal. Lett., 2009, 127, 319 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. St John, A. J. Furgala and A. F. Sammells, J. Phys. Chem., 1983, 87, 801 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, J. Long, X. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung, Z. Ding, L. Wu, Z. Zhang, Z. Li and X. Fu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 6484 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, S. Peng, G. Lu and S. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7116 Search PubMed .
S. Peng, Y. Peng, Y. Li, G. Lu and S. Li, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2009, 35, 739 Search PubMed .
X. Fu, X. Wang, D. Y. C. Leung, W. Xue, Z. Ding, H. Huang and X. Fu, Catal. Commun., 2010, 12, 184 Search PubMed .
Y.-S. Hu, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Commun., 2009, 2652 RSC .
L. Yuliati and H. Yoshida, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1592 RSC .
C. E. Taylor, Catal. Today, 2003, 84, 9 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Gondal, A. Hameed and A. Suwaiyan, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 243, 165 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Gondal, A. Hameed, Z. H. Yamani and A. Arfaj, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 392, 372 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, S. Kato, K. Hirao, J. Nishimoto and T. Hattori, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 430 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, K. Hirao, J. Nishimoto, K. Shimura, S. Kato, H. Itoh and T. Hattori, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 5542 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimura, S. Kato, T. Yoshida, H. Itoh, T. Hattori and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 3493 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimura and H. Yoshida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 615 RSC .
K. Shimura, H. Miyanaga and H. Yoshida, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2010, 175, 85 Search PubMed .
K. Shimura, T. Yoshida and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11466 Search PubMed .

          K. Shimura, K. Maeda and H. Yoshida, J. Phys. Chem. C, DOI: 10.1021/jp110824n Search PubMed.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:
Katsuya Shimura	Katsuya Shimura received his degrees of BEng (2006), MEng (2008) and PhD (2011) from Nagoya University. Presently, he works at Hokkaido University as a postdoctoral researcher. His current research focuses on the heterogeneous photocatalysis, especially for hydrogen production.
Hisao Yoshida	Hisao Yoshida received his degrees of BEng (1991), MEng (1993) and PhD (1998) from Kyoto University. He has worked at Nagoya University, where he has been a research associate from 1995 and an associate professor from 2003 to the present. His current research focuses on the heterogeneous photocatalysis, especially for hydrogen production, methane activation and novel organic synthesis. He received the Catalysis Congress Prize of the International Association of Catalysis Societies in 2000 and the Prize for Young Scientists of Catalysis Society of Japan in 2003.

Broader context
Hydrogen, a clean energy carrier, attracts much attention as one of the energies for the next generation. However, almost all of the produced hydrogen comes from fossil resources now. Therefore, the present hydrogen fuel cannot be regarded as a truly environmentally benign one. Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives such as ethanol, glycerol, sugars and methane is an attractive reaction to provide truly environmentally benign hydrogen, since this has a potential of converting solar energy and renewable resources into the chemical potential of the storable hydrogen. Various attempts have been done on the photocatalytic reaction systems to achieve more efficient hydrogen evolution, such as development of various photocatalysts and cocatalysts, modification of photocatalysts, the morphology control of photocatalyst, optimization of reaction conditions and so on. This article reviews the background, the fundamentals, the history and the recent developments of the photocatalytic hydrogen production systems from water and biomass derivatives.


 	Fig. 1  A carbon neutral cycle.	 
C6H10O5 + H2O → 6CO + 6H2, ΔH0298K = 310 kJ mol−1	(1)
CO + H2O→ CO2 + H2, ΔH0298K = −41 kJ mol−1	(2)
CO + 3H2 → CH4 + H2O, ΔH0298K = −206 kJ mol−1	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Some routes of the methane fermentation.	 
CH4 + H2O → 3H2 + CO, ΔG0298K =142 kJ mol−1	(4)
CO + H2O → H2 + CO2, ΔG0298K = −29 kJ mol−1	(5)


1	CH4 + 2H2O(g) → CO2 + 4H2	114
2	C + 2H2O(g) → CO2 + 2H2	63
3	CH3OH(g) → HCHO(g) + H2	59
4	CH3OH(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + 3H2	−4
5	HCHO(g) + H2O(g) → HCOOH(g) + H2	−20
6	CO(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + H2	−29
7	HCOOH(g) → CO2 + H2	−43
8	HCHO(g) + H2O(g) → CO2 + 2H2	−63
9	C2H6 + 4H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 7H2	158
10	C2H5OH(g) + 3H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 6H2	65
11	C2H5OH(g) → CH3CHO(g) + H2	36
12	CH3CHO(g) + 3H2O(g) → 2CO2 + 5H2	30
13	CH3CHO(g) + H2O(g) → CH3COOH(g) + H2	−13
14	CH3COOH(g) → CO2 + CH4	−71
15	CH3CH(OH)COOH(s) + 3H2O(g) → 3CO2 + 6H2	25
16	CH3CH(OH)CH3(g) → CH3COCH3(g) + H2	21
17	C3H8O3(l) + 3H2O(g) → 3CO2 + 7H2	−20
18	C6H12O6(s) + 6H2O(g) → 6CO2 + 12H2	−85
19	H2O(g) → H2 + 1/2O2	229
20	H2O(l) → H2 + 1/2O2	237


1	CH3CHO+ H2O + 2h+ → CH3COOH + 2H+	−0.12
2	CO + H2O + 2h+ → CO2 + 2H+	−0.12
3	HCHO + H2O + 4h+ → CO2 + 4H+	−0.07
4	C6H12O6 + 6H2O + 24h+ → 6CO2 + 24H+	−0.01
5	H2 + 2h+ → 2H+	0.00
6	CH3OH + H2O + 6h+ → CO2 + 6H+	0.03
7	C2H5OH + 3H2O + 12h+ → 2CO2 + 12H+	0.08
8	2CH3COOH + 2h+ → C2H6 + 2CO2 + 2H+	0.12
9	CH4 + 2H2O + 8h+ → CO2 + 8H+	0.17
10	C2H5OH + 2h+ → CH3CHO + 2H+	0.19
11	H2O + 2h+ → 1/2O2 + 2H+	1.23

 	Fig. 3  Carbon neutral cycle with photocatalysis.	 
CxHyOz + (2x − z)H2O → (2x − z + y/2)H2 + xCO2	(6)

 	Fig. 4  Photocatalytic hydrogen production from water and biomass derivatives.	 
C2H5OH → CH3CHO + H2	(7)
CH3CHO + H2O → CH3COOH + H2	(8)
CH3COOH → CH4 + CO2	(9)
CH3CHO + 3H2O → 5H2 + 2CO2	(10)
CH3CH2OH + 2h+ → CH3CHO + 2H+	(11)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(12)
CH3CH2O–H + Ti(s)–O(s) → CH3CH2O–Ti(s) + H–O(s)	(13)
CH3CH2O˙ + h+ → CH3CHO + H+	(14)
H˙ + H+ + e− → H2	(15)
H2O + h+ → H+ + ˙OH	(16)
CH3CH2OH + ˙OH + h+ → CH3CHO + H2O + H+	(17)
2CH3CH2OH + CH3CHO → CH3CH(OCH2CH3)2 + H2O	(18)
TiIV–OH + H+ → TiIV–OH2+, pH < pHPZC	(19)
TiIV–OH + OH− → TiIV–O− + H2O, pH > pHPZC	(20)


Co	5.0	Co2+ + 2e− → Co	−0.29
Ni	5.15	Ni2+ + 2e− → Ni	−0.23
Cu	4.65	Cu2+ + 2e− → Cu	0.34
Ru	4.71	Ru2+ + 2e− → Ru	0.46
Rh	4.98	Rh3+ + 3e− → Rh	0.76
Ag	4.26	Ag+ + e− → Ag	0.80
Pd	5.12	Pd2+ + 2e− → Pd	0.92
Ir	5.27	Ir3+ + 3e− → Ir	1.16
Pt	5.65	Pt2+ + 2e− → Pt	1.19
Au	5.1	Au3+ + 3e− → Au	1.50

 	Fig. 5  Band structure of TiO2 polymorphs at pH = 0.69,72,74	 

 	Fig. 6  Band structure of CdS and TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 7  The mechanism of photosensitization with dye or quantum dot upon visible light irradiation.	 

 	Fig. 8  Photocatalytic hydrogen production from aqueous ethanol solution over polytungstate with colloidal Pt cocatalyst.	 
C3H8O3 + 3H2O → 7H2 + 3CO2	(21)
R–CH2OH → R–CHO → R–COOH → R–H + CO2	(22)

 	Fig. 9  Schematic energy level diagram of Fe2O3 based photocatalyst before and after CoF3 aqueous solution treatment.	 

 	Fig. 10  Proposed mechanism of photocatalytic conversion of methane into methanol over La/WO3.	 
CH4 + 2H2O(g) → 4H2 + CO2	(23)

 	Fig. 11  The proposed reaction mechanism for the PSRM over Pt/TiO2.	 

 	Fig. 12  Time course of the production rate over Pt/CaTiO3 in the flow of (A) H2O vapour (1.5%) and (B) a mixture of water vapour (1.5%) and methane (50%).	 

1	Ethanol	Pt/TiO2 (rutile)	380	38	
30

2	Pt/CaTi0.93Zr0.07O3	365	13	
100

3	Pt/BaTi4O9	365	12	
101

4	VO2	UV light	39	
102

5	Pt(Ag)/Si/polypyrrole	550	2.1	
21

6	Ethanol, methanol	Ru/TaON	420 < λ < 500	2.1, 0.8	
103

7	Ethanol, glycerol	CuOx/TiO2 (anatase)	365	27, 29	
67

8	Ethanol, glycerol, glucose	Pt/TiO2 (P-25)	365	50, 70, 63	
40

9	Methanol	Pt/SrTiO3	UV light	1.9	
58

10	2-Propanol	Ni/NiO/KNbO3/CdS	
λ ≥ 400	8.8	
97

11	Lactic acid	Pt/TiO2 (rutile), Pt/CdS	360, 440	71, 38	
37

12	MoS2/CdS	420	7.3	
94

13	NiS/CdS	
λ ≥ 420	51	
95

14	Saccharose	RuO2/TiO2/Pt	380	1.5	
31

15	Methane	Pt/NaTaO3:La	240–270	30	
125

16	Pt/Ga2O3	254	7.9	
128


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
