Recent advances in computational actinoid chemistry   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS15354H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS15354H
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5836-5865Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsRecent advances in computational actinoid chemistry†

        
          
            Dongqi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Wilfred F. 
            van Gunsteren
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zhifang 
            Chai
          
          
        
      a
aMultidisciplinary Initiative Center, Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 100049, Beijing, P.R. China. E-mail: dwang@ihep.ac.cn
bLaboratory of Physical Chemistry, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology, ETH, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland
Received 
      23rd December 2011
    First published on 9th July 2012AbstractWe briefly review advances in computational actinoid (An) chemistry during the past ten years in regard to two issues: the geometrical and electronic structures, and reactions. The former addresses the An–O, An–C, and M–An (M is a metal atom including An) bonds in the actinoid molecular systems, including actinoid oxo and oxide species, actinoid–carbenoid, dinuclear and diatomic systems, and the latter the hydration and ligand exchange, the disproportionation, the oxidation, the reduction of uranyl, hydroamination, and the photolysis of uranium azide. Concerning their relevance to the electronic structures and reactions of actinoids and their importance in the development of an advanced nuclear fuel cycle, we also mentioned the work on actinoid carbides and nitrides, which have been proposed to be candidates of the next generation of nuclear fuel, and the oxidation of PuOx, which is important to understand the speciation of actinoids in the environment, followed by a brief discussion on the urgent need for a heavier involvement of computational actinoid chemistry in developing advanced reprocessing protocols of spent nuclear fuel. The paper is concluded with an outlook.
Dongqi Wang
Dongqi Wang got his BSc from Lanzhou University, MSc from Peking University and PhD from The University of Hong Kong. During 2004–2011, he was a coworker of Prof. Walter Thiel (MPI für Kohlenforschung) on enzymatic reaction mechanisms (QM/MM), of Prof. Tom Ziegler (University of Calgary) on homogeneous catalysis (QM/MM), and of Prof. Wilfred F. van Gunsteren (ETH Zürich) on the folding equilibria of peptides and dynamics of proteins (MD). In 2011 he took a faculty position in the Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research focuses on computational actinoid chemistry (CAC), which covers the application of QM, MD and QM/MM methods in the study of actinoid chemistry towards the evaluation/development of an advanced nuclear fuel cycle and the understanding of actinoids in biological systems and in homogeneous catalysis.
Wilfred F. van Gunsteren
Wilfred F. van Gunsteren was born in 1947 in Wassenaar (The Netherlands). In 1968 he gained a BSc and in 1972 an MSc in physics at the Free University of Amsterdam; in 1974 he was awarded a “Meester” in Law, and in 1976 a PhD in nuclear physics. After postdoctoral research at the University of Groningen and at Harvard University he was, 1980–1987, a senior lecturer and, until August 1990, Professor for Physical Chemistry at the University of Groningen. In 1990 he became professor of Computer-Aided Chemistry at the ETH Zurich. He is corresponding member of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences, holder of a gold medal for research of the Royal Netherlands Chemical Society, and of the Max-Planck Forschungspreis für Chemie und Pharmazie (2002). His main interests center on the physical fundamentals of the structure, dynamics and function of biomolecules.
Zhifang Chai
Prof. Zhifang Chai is a radiochemist working at Institute of High Energy Physics, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He graduated from Fudan University, China, in 1964. As an Alexander von Humboldt fellow, he worked at Cologne University, Germany from 1980 to 1982. He is closely engaged in nuclear energy chemistry and nuclear techniques, and has authored or co-authored over 432 papers in peer-review journals and 10 books in the field of nuclear chemistry and nuclear techniques. He was or is a titular member of IUPAC, a fellow of RSC and many other domestic and international scientific communities. In 2005 he was awarded the George von Hevesy Award – the premier international award of excellence to honor outstanding achievements in radioanalytical and nuclear chemistry. In 2007 he was elected a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.
1 Introduction
The actinoid elements form a family that encompasses the fifteen elements from actinium (Ac) to lawrencium (Lr), with the atomic numbers extending from 89 to 103. Except for nobelium (No) and Lr, which have valence electron configurations of 5f147s2 and 5f146d17s1 respectively, all actinoid elements have unsaturated 5f orbitals. An understanding of actinoid chemistry represents challenges from both the experimental side, where the toxicity, radioactivity and short lifetime of nuclides may hinder the detailed study, and the theoretical side, where the treatment of relativistic effects becomes unavoidable. The diffuse 5f electrons make the bonding mode rather complicated to understand, and the large amount of electron correlation demands substantial computational effort and delicate treatment.
However, computational actinoid chemistry has enjoyed increasing interest for its potential to describe actinoid systems, and in some cases, its potential to replace experiments that require extreme conditions. Without doubt, computational actinoid chemistry is bound to pave the way to a better understanding of the behavior of actinoid systems. Actinoids are of fundamental interest not only because of their complex chemical nature, but also because of the application of actinoids in nuclear energy and organometallic chemistry.
• Actinoids are in the 7th row of the periodic table, and starting from actinoids, the f orbitals are possibly involved in the bonding interactions. The relatively loosely bound valence orbitals lead to multiple oxidation states of actinoids1 (see Table 1), and the large atomic radii and unsaturated d/f orbitals make it possible for the actinyl ion to have large coordination numbers (CN). This makes actinoids unique compared to lighter elements.
Table 1 Oxidation states of the actinoidsa




Element
Configuration
ON1b
ON2b
M3+
M4+





a Data from ref. 1.
b ON1: common oxidation number; ON2: known oxidation number.





Ac
6d17s2
3+
 
 
 


Th
6d27s2
4+
3+
5f1
 


Pa
5f26d17s2
5+
3+,4+
5f2
5f1


U
5f36d17s2
4+,6+
3+,5+
5f3
5f2


Np
5f46d17s2
5+
3+,4+,6+,7+
5f4
5f3


Pu
5f67s2
4+
3+,5+,6+,7+
5f5
5f4


Am
5f77s2
3+
2+,4+,5+,6+
5f6
5f5


Cm
5f76d17s2
3+
4+,5+
5f7
5f6


Bk
5f97s2
3+
4+
5f8
5f7


Cf
5f107s2
3+
2+,4+
5f9
5f8


Es
5f117s2
3+
2+
5f10
5f9


Fm
5f127s2
3+
2+
5f11
5f10


Md
5f137s2
3+
2+
5f12
5f11


No
5f147s2
2+
3+
5f13
5f12


Lr
5f146d17s2
3+
 
5f14
5f13




• To facilitate applications of actinoids, their physical and chemical properties need to be known. The increasing demand for nuclear fuel and the particular efficient behavior of actinoids in organometallic chemistry stimulate broad interest in the study of actinoid chemistry, from methods for efficient enrichment to an adequate long-term disposal of radiowaste, from their coordination preferences to their catalytic behavior. However, the toxicity, radioactivity, scarcity of the actinoids, and the short lifetime of many actinoids impede experimental studies. Theory provides a powerful alternative, and using computational methods, we are able to understand the actinoid chemistry and complement the experimental studies, leading to design of new experiments towards a better understanding without the need for exhaustive screening experiments.
In this paper, we give an overview of the advances in computational actinoid chemistry in the past 10 years. For reviews of previous work, please refer to ref. 2–9. Regarding the scope of the paper, we have reviewed mainly the studies on actinoid molecular systems. We note that there are contributions from both the molecular systems and the solid state of actinoid chemistry. These constitute a large family of research work from scientists with very different backgrounds. To better present the advance in computational actinoid chemistry in the past ten years, we have decided in the current paper to cover mainly the studies on the molecular systems except for the few studies on actinoid carbides and nitrides (Section 4.4.1) and the oxidation of PuOx (Section 4.3.3) due to their relevance to the bonding properties and reactions of actinoids, while leaving the other contributions on the solid state of actinoids to the future, e.g. the DFT lattice dynamics and thermodynamics of thorium and uranium,10 the multipoles in δ-Pu,11 the radiation damage in Pu12,13 and urania,14 the magnetic properties of UO2, PuO2 and UN,15 the magnetic structure of MFe4Al8 (M = Y, U).16 The paper is organized as follows: for the sake of completeness, we first briefly review relativistic effects and their theoretical treatments in Section 2, and then computational models that have been used in the study of actinoid chemistry in Section 3. In Section 4 we review the case studies of computational models in actinoid chemistry. The paper is concluded with an outlook.
2 Treatment of relativistic effects
Relativistic effects arise when the velocity of electrons approaches the speed of light, c. A direct consequence of the relativistic effect is the stabilization of the inner subshells (s, p or “core” orbitals) and the destabilization of outer subshells (d, f or valence orbitals),17 and it increases roughly as a function of Z2 (Z is the atomic number).9 Taking into account the relativistic effect, even only with the simpler scalar treatment, i.e. dropping the spin–orbit coupling terms, may significantly improve the predictions made in non-relativistic studies of model systems containing heavy atoms in (1) dissociation energies,18–22 (2) bond lengths and bond strengths,21,23,24 (3) dipole moments,20,21 (4) nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) shieldings25–29 and (5) electric field gradients (EFG).22,30–33 For example, in a Dirac–Hartree–Fock (DHF) study of the uranyl ion,30 the inclusion of relativistic effects leads to a bond length expansion, and the presence of the “U(6p) core-hole”, the depletion of charge out of the 6pσ orbital because of the overlap of O(2p) with the high lying antibonding U(6pσ) + O(2s) orbital exerts a large influence on the size of the EFG. According to ref. 34, the spin–orbit coupling (SOC) in the uranium(V) species may bring a stabilization energy of 7 kcal mol−1, and in the neptunium (Np) and plutonium (Pu) actinyl oxide-fluoride conproportionation reactions about −2.5 and 4.1 kcal mol−1 respectively.35 The relativistic effect is enhanced when intermediate hyper-conjugative interactions are present in a molecule, while very strong or very weak hyper-conjugative interactions do not contribute much to SOC on the vibrational frequencies of open-shell molecular cations such as C2H4XY˙+ (X = Cl or Br, Y = I).36
In the case of actinoids, the 5f electrons are more weakly bound than in the imaginary non-relativistic situation, thus have the tendency to be involved in covalent bonds, which stresses the importance of a relativistic treatment to obtain a reliable description of the electronic structure of molecules such as actinoids.
Techniques for the theoretical treatment of relativistic effects have been developed, evolving from the earlier Pauli approximation to the modern more sophisticated methods. The Pauli Hamiltonian captures the relativistic corrections by the mass–velocity, Darwin and spin–orbit terms, with the spin–orbit operator omitted in some cases leading to the simplest treatment. The Pauli Hamiltonian proved to be successful in yielding reasonable relativistic corrections to the energy for elements up to the second row of transition metals, while its use is limited by the variationally unstable character of the operators it encompasses, especially the mass–velocity term, which produces a strongly attractive potential for states of high momentum leading to variational collapse, and the Darwin term, which degenerates the Coulombic potential of a point-like nucleus to a singular Delta term.37 More sophisticated methods have been developed to avoid this and solve the Dirac equation in its four-component form or two-component ones by eliminating the two small components via, for example, the Foldy–Wouthuysen transformation.
For a free particle, the Dirac equation has the form:  (1)where c is the speed of light,  the momentum operator, α and β the Dirac matrices, with α usually given in terms of the Pauli matrices, and the wave functions ψ are four-component spinors, representing two components with large contribution while the other two have a small contribution. Programs with the four-component methods implemented are, for example, BDF,38 BERTHA,39 DIRAC,40 MOLFDIR41 and Priroda.42 However, due to the large number of basis sets that are required for a kinetic balance between the large- and small-components, the use of four-component methods is limited to only very small molecular systems. In practice, the small components can be decoupled and eliminated from the Hamiltonian with negligible influence, by means of methods such as infinite-order two-component theory (IOTC),43,44 normalized elimination of small components45 or Douglas–Kroll (DK) transformation,37,43,46–52 leading to the two-component approximation. The Zero Order Regular Approximation (ZORA)53–55 and the second-order Douglas–Kroll–Hess (DKH) Hamiltonian37,43,46–52 are two applications of the two-component approximation, both of which have been derived by means of a perturbative treatment. Depending on the absence or the presence of the spin–orbit operator in the Hamiltonian, the two-component approaches take only into account the spin-free scalar-relativistic effect, or also the spin-dependent spin–orbit-coupling (SOC) effect. Taking ZORA as an example: the ZORA equation includes the spin–orbit interaction,56 and reads  (2)where the term  represents the spin–orbit operator, which describes the interaction between the electron magnetic moments and the magnetic field. The computation of spin–orbit coupling is rather demanding, thus in cases when its contribution is not significant, such as in studies of thermochemistry, it can be safely neglected, leading to a scalar relativistic treatment.
Note that Visscher and van Lenthe57 have analyzed three ways of scalar relativistic treatment, i.e. the earlier work by Koelling and Harmon58 and Gollisch and Fritsche59 to exclude the spin–orbit interaction but retain the other relativistic kinematic terms such as mass–velocity, Darwin terms, the modified four-component Hamiltonian by Dyall,60 and the regular approximation of Hamiltonian by Sadlej and Snijders,61 and concluded that these methods give different eigenvalues and eigenvectors, stressing the importance of using a full representation of the four-component Hamiltonian as the reference method when benchmarking relativistic approaches. In another comparative study62 of scalar-relativistic ZORA and DKH density functionals with monohydrides, monooxides and monofluorides of lanthanum (La), lutetium (Lu), actinium (Ac) and lawrencium (Lr) as the testing set, the two methods were found to give very close predictions on the bond lengths, binding energies and vibrational constants. Besides the two-component methods, the scalar relativistic approximation has also been implemented with four-component Hamiltonians42 and applied, for example, in ref. 63 and 64.
The transition from the full four-component Dirac formulation to a quasirelativistic two-component approximation suffers from the problem of the so-called “change of picture”, and the contribution of this treatment has been discussed in, e.g.ref. 65. Note that methods that reduce the four-component Hamiltonian to a two-component one without the neglect of the “small component” have been developed by several groups, such as Dyall,66 Barysz and Sadlej,44 Kutzelnigg and Liu,67–69 Iliaš and Jensen et al.,70 Filatov,71 and Liu et al.72–74
Compared to the Hamiltonian methods, the relativistic pseudopotential (PP) method17,75–77 is a relatively cheap way to take into account relativistic effects, and is widely used in studies of heavy elements. Thanks to the contributions of Hay and Wadt,78–80 Dolg76,77,81–83 and other groups, the relativistic pseudopotentials have been widely used in computational organometallics. The idea underlying this method is to group the electrons of an atom into two regions based on a given radius, rc: the core region, where the electrons are hardly affected by the environment, and the valence shell, where the electrons dominate many properties encountered in quantum chemistry, such as chemical reactions and excitations.
According to the algorithms and the source of their reference data, two types of PPs have been developed, called shape-consistent (SCPP) and energy-consistent (ECPP) pseudopotentials respectively. The former takes the atomic valence orbitals and orbital energies from calculations with an all-electron basis set as the reference data, while the latter the quantum mechanical observables. In the endeavor towards an improvement of the quality of PPs, two types of ECPPs, Wood-Boring (WB) adjusted scalar-relativistic ab initio PPs and multi-configuration Dirac–Hartree–Fock/Dirac–Coulomb–Breit (MCDHF/DC+B) adjusted relativistic ab initio PPs, respectively, have been developed, with the former referenced to the relativistic energies using the WB scalar-relativistic Hamiltonian in the framework of the HF method with the angular momentum (LS) coupling, while the latter is referenced to the data obtained using Dirac–Coulomb (DC) Hamiltonian self-consistently and the Breit term in first-order perturbation theory (+B) and is presumed to be more accurate than the former.
In practice, for most of the heavy atoms, there are multiple options in choosing a PP based on the size of the “core” region. Regarding actinoids, the 5f orbitals may be defined in the “core” (f-in-core, large-core, LPP) or in the valence region (f-in-valence, small-core, SPP). Note that an appropriate LPP treatment of actinoid-bearing molecular systems should be based on the oxidation states of actinoids in the model system concerning the ability of 5f electrons to participate in the bond formation. In recent contributions, Dolg and coworkers have optimized the LPPs for An3+,84 An2+ and An4+,85 and An(V) and An(VI)86 to handle the different chemical conditions of actinoids. Though the f-in-core LPPs have been deliberately formulated to have the flexibility to treat the situation of fractional charge in actinoids, in general, the f-in-valence SPPs give a better description of the properties of actinoid molecular systems. However, there are studies87,88 showing that the performance of LPPs may be improved by applying core-polarization potentials (CPPs) to take into account both static (polarization of the core at the HF level) and dynamic (core–valence correlation) polarization of the PP core. The influence of the core size77 has been investigated for uranium chemistry with DFT methods64,89 and a multireference spin–orbit configuration interaction method with singles and doubles (MR-SOCISD).90 In general, the f-in-valence treatment shows better agreement with experimental data.64 There are cases in which the LPPs show equally good or better performance in computing vibrational frequencies and enthalpy changes of selected U(VI) compounds NUN, NUO+, CUO, UO3, and UF6.89 However, there is no obvious physical reason on why LPP is superior over SPP for these testing sets, and it is not clear under which condition it holds. It could be a consequence of a coincidental error cancellation due to the compatibility between the LPPs and basis sets and/or density functionals employed, as Odoh and Schreckenbach64 argued. The majority of the RECP studies always yields results that SPPs give results closer to the experimental values or the values from all-electron calculations, and the discrepancy between LPP and SPP results may be diminished by an adequate consideration of CPPs.87,88
In summary, the four-component relativistic methods hold the key to a relativistic system, however, their application is only feasible for small model systems due to the basis set size limit making a full relativistic description beyond our reach for most of the systems. Relativistic pseudopotential methods have proved to be an efficient way to obtain the geometry and relative energies for many model systems, using either the f-in-core or the f-in-valence treatment, with the latter in general giving better energetics than the former compared to the results from all-electron calculations. The core-polarization potential may be added to the f-in-core treatment to improve its prediction on the energetics of a reaction. However, the use of pseudopotential methods should be avoided when an accurate characterization of the electronic structure is needed, such as to calculate NMR parameters.
3 Computational models
It is a challenge to understand the electronic structure of actinoids theoretically due to the unsaturated d and f orbitals that are more pronouncedly involved in bonding interactions than in lighter elements. Since the discovery of actinoid elements, crystal field theory, ligand field theory and molecular-orbital based semiempirical methods have been exploited towards a better understanding of actinoid chemistry.
Taking advantage of the ever-increasing computational power, it is now feasible to consider the correlation and relativistic effects that are important for actinoid elements in a more refined way. In this section, we briefly review the computational models that have been used in the study of actinoid chemistry during the past ten years.
3.1 Density functional theory
Density functional theory has been successful in describing the chemistry of light atoms. The advantage of using DFT methods is that electron correlation is taken into account while the computational cost does not increase much compared to the HF method, making it possible to treat large systems at an affordable effort. In general the accuracy of the DFT methods is comparable with that of MP2 calculations for strong bonding interactions.
Over the years sophisticated non-relativistic DFT functionals at the generalized gradient approximations (GGA), meta-GGA and hybrid levels, e.g. Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE),91 Tao–Perdew–Staroverov–Scuseria (TPSS),92 PBE091,93 and B3LYP,94,95 have been developed into standard DFT methods and users can use these methods in a “black-box” manner. In the framework of DFT, relativistic effects can be taken into account by means of a relativistic effective core potential (RECP) for core electrons, ZORA, DKH, or Dirac-KS and other relativistic density functional theory formulations.96,97
An alternative to the standard DFT methods is the combination of the local-density approximation and dynamical mean-field theory98 (LDA + DMFT).99,100 This approach differs from the standard functionals by defining the thermodynamic potential Ω as a function of the local Green's function rather than the density matrix. Relativistic effects may be taken into account by including the spin–orbit interaction terms into the Hamiltonian. The method has been used to study the magnetic and spectral properties of uranium and plutonium monochalcogenides,101 and shows better agreement with experimental results102,103 than the LDA + U method does in the description of photoemission spectra, which confirms the importance of a proper treatment of dynamic correlations in the characterization of the electronic structure of actinoid compounds. However, one should keep in mind that at its current status, the method is flawed in not reproducing the narrow energy gap in PuSe and PuTe observed in experiment.104
DFT methods have been applied in a number of studies of actinoids, including the assessment of DFT functionals,105 the effect of exchange interaction in electronic structure calculations of actinoids106 in which a correct description of both screening and dynamical correlation effects is stressed, the characterization of the covalency of the f-element-chalcogen bond,107,108 the solvent effect on the relative stability of equatorial cis and trans conformers of uranyl phosphinimine and uranyl phosphine oxide complexes,109 the actinyl metal bonding in polypyrrolic macrocycles,110,111 the catalytic cycles for the reduction of [UO2]2+ by cytochrome c7 proteins,112 the structure and thermodynamics of the oxofluorides of uranium(IV), (V) and (VI),113 and polyhydrides of uranium114,115 and thorium,116 the coordination properties of actinyl(VI) complexes,34,117 the electron affinity of biscyclopentadienyl uranium complexes Cp*2UX2 (X2 = (BH4)2, Me2, (NEt2)Cl and (OEt)2),118 and solid state chemistry.10,106,119,120
In an all-electron, scalar relativistic calculation113 with a double-ζ quality basis set, PBE0 is found to outperform the other methods in the prediction of reaction enthalpies of 15 reactions, including the conproportionation reactions between oxides and fluorides of uranium(VI) and their dissociation and hydrolysis with a mean absolute error (MAE) of 7 kcal mol−1, which is comparable to the results from CCSD(T) calculations based on MP2 optimized geometries, while PBE shows the smallest MAE (less than 20 cm−1) in UO vibrational wavenumbers of the uranium oxides and oxofluorides compared to experimental data.
The deficiencies of DFT methods are also obvious. In its original formulation, the DFT method is only applicable for the lowest energy states of a certain symmetry and cannot describe the corresponding excited states properly. Though linear response theory has been adopted leading to the time-dependent (TD) DFT method, and the accuracy of vertical excitation energies for 104 singlet and 63 triplet states of a molecular test set including 28 medium-sized organic molecules was reported to be below 0.5 eV,121 its use in actinoid chemistry has only recently been evaluated.122 TD-DFT has been so far mainly used for molecular systems of light atoms. We note that after the pioneering work of Rajagopal,123 Gao et al.124,125 and Bast et al.126 have contributed to the formulation of four-component relativistic TD-DFT, and Wang et al.127 with the ZORA treatment, which makes it possible to calculate excited states of actinoids. In the latest benchmark of the relativistic TDDFT on uranyl systems including UO22+, NUO+ and NUN, Tecmer et al.122 have examined the performance of LDA, GGA (PBE, BLYP), meta-GGA (M06-L), hybrid (B3LYP, PBE0), meta-hybrid (M06, M06-2X), model potentials (SAOP) and range-separated hybrid (CAM-B3LYP) functionals, and concluded that compared to the CASPT2 and the Intermediate Hamiltonian Fock-space coupled cluster (IHFSCC) results, the hybrid functionals, both GGA and meta-GGA, outperform the others which suggests the importance of HF exchange. Meanwhile, the calculated excitation energies do not rely much on the choice of relativistic Hamiltonian and two-component methods can be safely used to study the spectra of actinoid molecular systems.122
In summary, the DFT methods have evolved into a powerful tool in predicting properties of model systems, ranging from the earlier LDA to the recently developed meta-GGA and hybrid meta-GGA methods, however, they show their limitations and no one method can be used as a universal solution that is applicable for all cases. For example, LDA is good in solid state physics, while not for molecular systems, and GGAs, which improve LDA by the inclusion of non-local correlation, show better predictions on the geometry of model systems, while tend to underestimate energetics significantly. Hybrid GGAs, such as B3LYP and B3PW91, which are mixed with a certain portion of HF exchange, display rather good performance in energetics compared to experimental data or high-level ab initio results, however, this does not always hold. Furthermore, they require more computational effort while not giving better geometries. The newly developed functionals, including those which are designed to take into account the dispersion correction which is a known deficiency in the DFT formulation, do improve the description of non-bonded interactions and give better energetics according to some benchmark studies, while in other studies, they do not show significant superiority over the hybrid GGA methods. Thus, careful calibration is recommended to confirm the balance between the functionals and the orbital functions and a decision should be made depending on the nature of the problems to be solved.
3.2 Wavefunction based ab initio methods
The last decades have witnessed the development of wavefunction based ab initio methods which have been reviewed and compared in, for example, ref. 128. In the wavefunction based ab initio methods, the electronic wavefunction is expanded as a sum of Slater determinants, which fulfils the antisymmetric character of fermions naturally, and then numerical procedures, such as variational methods and/or perturbation methods, are used to optimize the coefficients of the orbitals. The simplest method is the Hartree–Fock theory. In the formulation of the Hartree–Fock (HF) method, the mean-field approach allows electrons to ignore the Coulomb hole and thus the electrons may get too close to each other, leading to an overestimation of electron–electron repulsion. The post-HF methods have been developed towards a better treatment of electron correlation, which is important in the study of electronic structures and thermodynamics. This improves the accuracy of the results remarkably, but at the cost of an increased computational effort.
The full configuration interaction formulation (FCI)129 expands the total state in the HF determinants and all excited determinants to include electron correlations. In practice, FCI is affordable only for small systems, while for larger molecular systems approximations have to be adopted. One commonly used method is MP2,130 which takes the first level of the hierarchy of Møller–Plesset (MP) energy levels beyond the HF treatment, and the total energy is the sum of an HF term and a perturbation correction that improves the HF method.
CASSCF131 is another method that has seen wide applications. It stresses the evaluation of the non-dynamic correlation by constructing all possible configurations in the active orbital space (complete active space) to obtain an accurate description of the quasi-degenerate states. The effects of the choice of different active spaces and the outer RAS space excitations have been examined for the reaction of O2 with a Cu(I)–α-ketocarboxylate.132
A deficiency of CASSCF is the lack of dynamic correlation energy. This part is taken into account by means of perturbation theory, leading to the CASPT2133,134 method. CASPT2 evaluates the non-dynamic correlation energy in the CAS space, then second-order perturbation theory is applied on the wave function to obtain the dynamic correlation energy.
An alternative to incorporate electron correlation is to construct a coupled cluster wave function (CC) with the coupled-pair approximation,135 which takes the HF wavefunction as the zeroth order reference and accounts for the coupling of correlated electron pairs through the expansion of an exponential operator, exp(), with  the excitation operator. It has been suggested that at present the best trade-off of accuracy and efficiency is CCSD(T), which treats the triplet excitations in a perturbative way, and is formally scaled as N7 where N is the number of electrons.128 The Fock-space coupled cluster (FSCC) method, which is a multireference variant of the CC method, has been proven to be able to predict accurate transition energies between electronic states of a wide range of atomic and molecular systems.136,137 This method has been used to study the transition energies of lawrencium (Lr), for which the ionization potential, excitation energies and electron affinities have been calculated.138 The FSCC method suffers from the problem of intruder states that renders the convergence problematic. A remedy would be the use of the Intermediate Hamiltonian FSCC (IHFSCC) method,139 which was shown to give excitation energies consistent with experimental values. According to a study140 of the prediction of the transition energies of alkaline earth metal elements, IHFSCC can give results with an accuracy on the scale of meV.
Post-HF methods are in general superior to DFT methods in the precise prediction of excitation energies and geometry of the excited states, and they are required when making accurate predictions of the spectra of actinoids, especially those with short lifetime. For example, the multiconfiguration Dirac–Fock (MCDF) method has been used to assist the fermium (Fm) measurements.141
Note that to apply ab initio methods to large systems, approximations have to be used to make the calculations feasible. One of the most successful approximations is the so-called resolution-of-the-identity (RI) technique, or density fitting, which approximates the four-index electron repulsion integrals (ERIs) in terms of optimized auxiliary basis sets. The treatment is available for MP2142,143 and CC2144 methods, DFT,145,146 including the Dirac–Kohn–Sham two-component (DKS2-RI) method,147 and the computational cost can be scaled down significantly, for example, from N5 → N3 for MP2148 where N is the number of basis functions. Further speedup of RI-MP2 may be achieved using a graphical processing unit (GPU) and, according to Aspuru-Guzik et al.,149 a factor of 4.3 speedup was observed in single point energy calculations of linear alkanes using the compute unified basic linear algebra subprograms (CUBLAS) which support the compute unified device architecture (CUDA). The deficiency of this implementation is the loss of precision from 64-bit double precision numbers to 32-bit single precision floating point numbers due to the current GPU boards.
Among the above-mentioned ab initio methods, CASSCF and CASPT2 have seen wide application in the study of, for example, the electronic states of CeCp3+,150 neutral and cationic (+ and 2+) PuO and PuO2,151 UO2+ and [UO2(CO3)3]5−,152 AmOn and CmOn (n = 1, 2),153 the coordination of Cm(III) in water,154 the actinoid–actinoid bond in the actinoid diatoms Ac2, Th2, Pa2, and U2,155 the role of the 5f orbitals in bonding, aromaticity, and reactivity of planar isocyclic and heterocyclic uranium clusters, prototypical planar isocyclic cyclo-UnXn (n = 3, 4; X = O, NH) and heterocyclic cyclo-Un(μ2-X)n (n = 3, 4; X = C, CH, NH) clusters as well as the E@[c-U4(μ2-C)4] (E = H+, C, Si, Ge) and U@[c-U5(μ2-C)5] molecules including a planar tetracoordinate element E (ptE) and pentacoordinate U (ppU) at the ring centers,156 the UO2(OH)(H2O)n+, UO2(OH)2(H2O)n, NpO2(OH)(H2O)n, and PuO2(OH)(H2O)n+ (n < 21) complexes in aqueous solution,157 the ionization energies (IE) of the actinoid mono- and dioxides (from Th to Cm),158 the reduction potentials of AnO22+/AnO2+(An = U, Np, Pu, Am) and Fe3+/Fe2+ couples,159 and the Pu(VII)/Pu(VIII) couples in PuO2(CO3)3n− (n = 2, 3).160
3.3 Hybrid QM/MM treatment
To take into account the influence of the environment, e.g. the solvent and/or the protein in the molecular system, on the targeted properties or reactions in a model system, it is a sensible choice to handle the atoms in the environment explicitly. These atoms often constitute a large entity including thousands or even more atoms, and a treatment of the whole system with QM methods becomes infeasible.
A compromise between the accuracy of a description of the targeted properties or reaction and the efficiency of an adequate involvement of the environment is the combined Quantum Mechanics/Molecular Mechanics (QM/MM) method. With this methodology, the whole system is partitioned into “inner” and “outer” regions, with a higher level treatment (QM) of the former for accuracy of an answer to a targeted problem and a lower level treatment (MM) of the latter for an adequate inclusion of the solvent/protein influence. Accordingly, the total energy of the whole system contains three parts: the QM energy (EQM), the MM energy (EMM), and the interaction between the QM part and the MM part (EQM/MM). The coupling between the QM and MM parts is a key component in the framework of QM/MM methodology, and in some sense determines the quality of a method. The development of the coupling treatment has experienced two stages: mechanical and electronic coupling. The latter can handle to some extent the response of the QM region to the adjustment of the MM region, thus has been used in most of the modern applications. As an evolving methodology, QM/MM has been used in broad fields spanning from organic chemistry to bioinorganic chemistry, and many publications are also available to review the advance of the methodology and applications of QM/MM methods. Interested readers are referred to tutorial reviews on QM/MM for more details, such as ref. 161–163.
QM/MM methods have been used to study actinoid chemistry, for example, the coordination of uranyl in water164 and the solvation of the tetrahydroxouranylate [UO2(OH)4]2− ion complex in aqueous phase.165
3.4 Static vs. dynamic methods
The “mainstream” theoretical studies focus on the static properties of a molecular system, however, a close connection with experimental work, or the “reality”, requires a reasonable inclusion of the “time” term, i.e. a time-dependent treatment of the system is needed for a more realistic picture of the development of the dynamic properties of a model system and for an accurate statistical property by averaging a trajectory from an adequate sampling of the system. This requires part of (“droplet” model) or the whole (periodic boundary conditions) system to move as a function of time according to an equation of motion (EOM). The basic EOM is the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. However, the complexity in solving such an equation in a time domain makes the computational cost increase quickly with the size of the model systems, leading to the infeasibility to obtain a dynamic picture of the model systems. Thus, in practice, approximations are generally used to separate the motion of particles, e.g. nuclei and electrons, leading to the Born–Oppenheimer approximations. The heavier particles may move obeying classical mechanics, following the Newtonian equation of motion or the Langevin equation of motion.
A plain dynamics simulation in general has the difficulty to sample adequately rare events, and enhanced sampling techniques have been thus developed in order to obtain the free energy landscape at a cost within reach of available computational power. Depending on the type of the constrains that are imposed to the system, these techniques may be divided into two categories: (1) constraints that are used to construct the Hamiltonian, such as thermodynamic integration (TI) and free energy perturbation; (2) constraints that are used to construct the bias potential which is then added to the Hamiltonian, such as in the umbrella-sampling (US). All of the above-mentioned sampling techniques rely on a reasonable definition of a transition path, which is in some cases difficult. We note that algorithms that do not depend on the reaction path have been formulated based on a force-field description of the model systems, including enveloping distribution sampling (EDS)166–170 and overlap sampling/funnel sampling.171,172 One should note that the performance of these methods strongly depends on the accuracy of the Hamiltonians constructed for each end state.
As a frontier of computational chemistry, over the years numerous groups have contributed to the development and validation of sampling techniques towards accuracy and efficiency. Here we only briefly mention two types of relatively widely used methods, molecular orbital based and plane wave based methods.

Molecular orbital based methods. 
The model system is described by the atom centered Gaussian orbitals, and at each step of the simulation, a self-consistent-field (SCF) calculation is performed to obtain the forces on each atom which then drive the whole system to move to its new conformation.
In most of the implementations that are in the framework of QM/MM methodology, the definition of the particles in all partitions is fixed, i.e. the particles in the QM region and the MM region are not exchangeable. This is in some special cases arbitrary, for example, when the QM part has close contact with small molecules in the MM region, e.g. solvent molecules, these molecules may exchange with those which were defined in the QM region during the previous step while having now moved far away from the “core” regions. To describe the whole system more precisely, it is a sensible choice to update the list of particles defined in the different partitions according to their mutual interactions, though such kind of treatment may bring significant increase in computational cost due to the reconstruction and calculation of pair interactions and more importantly, the adaptivity of the energy and forces for the updated QM definition to the previous one to avoid artificial energy jump.
Note that approaches with an adaptive QM region are being developed and tested on solvated ion systems. A common treatment of this class of methods is to partition the whole system into subregions as the conventional QM/MM methods do, while it differs in the presence of a buffer region which allows the transition of particles migrating from the MM region to the QM region and vice versa. A few examples are the work by Rode et al.,173,174 Kerdcharoen and Morokuma,175 Truhlar and Lin et al.176,177 and other groups.178–181 We note that such an adaptive scheme has been used in the study of actinoids, such as the dynamics of [UO2+]182 and [UO22+]183 ions in water.


Plane wave based methods. 
Plane-wave methods have been used to study the dynamics of liquids and solids for their naturally periodic character. Among the implementations of plane-wave methods, the Car–Parrinello (CP) method184,185 has been proven to be useful in the dynamics of liquids, including molten systems, in an extended Lagrangian formalism, and when searching for stationary points through simulated annealing of a system.
In the Car–Parrinello (CP) method, the Lagrangian encompasses two sets of degrees of freedom contributed by nuclei (i) and electrons (cαβ), respectively, whose physical basis is the Born–Oppenheimer approximation, and reads  (3)where the first two terms are the kinetic terms of the nuclei and the electrons, and the latter two are the electric potential energies. This method has been successfully used in studies of actinoid chemistry, and among the case studies are the solvation of uranyl117,186,187 and the “yl”-oxygen exchange in aqueous phase.188 One needs to keep in mind that the choice of the fictitious electronic mass (μ) is not a trivial issue and should be reasonably defined. A recent comparative study189 on the properties of liquid water with CPMD and BOMD suggests that the value of μ should not be too large when using the CPMD method to collect long trajectories at relatively high temperatures to avoid significant drift of electronic kinetic energy.
Note that a variant of the CP method, which uses a mixed Gaussian orbital and plane waves (GPW) description of the model system,190 with the former to construct the wavefunction, and the latter to represent the electron density, and its augmented extension (GAPW)191 have been developed. This method has been used to study heterogeneous catalysis and dye-sensitized solar cells,192 taking advantage of massively parallel computing techniques.

4 Applications in actinoid chemistry
4.1 The role of 5f orbitals
Actinoids differ from the other elements by the appearance of valence 5f orbitals, and the role of 5f electrons remains to be understood. Compared to the 4f orbitals in lanthanoids, the 5f orbitals are more extended and less shielded by the outer 6s and 6p orbitals, thus have a stronger propensity to participate in bond formation.1 The unique feature of 5f electrons in the metallic states of actinoids has been reviewed.193 Here we concentrate on the role of 5f electrons in molecular actinoid systems.
U3+ has an ionic radius essentially identical to that of La3+, 1.03 Å194 and 1.032 Å,1 respectively, while U–Te (3.126 Å in a PBE study of La[N(TePH2)2]3107 and 3.164 Å in the crystal structure of U[N(TePiPr2)2]3195) has a significantly shorter bond length than La–Te (3.232 Å in a PBE study of La[N(TePH2)2]3108 and 3.224 Å in the crystal structure of La[N(TePiPr2)2]3195), suggesting a stronger interaction between U and Te than between La and Te, which is due to the participation of 5f orbitals in the bonding interaction. A natural orbital analysis predicts more covalent character for the bond U–Te (partial charges are 1.524e and −0.444e on U and Te) than La–Te (1.834e and −0.494e on La and Te).
Similar enhancement of metal–ligand bonding of actinoids compared to lanthanoids is also observed in other actinoid elements and ligands, for example, U–S relative to Ce–S in [M(Cp*)2(dddt)]− (dddt = 5,6-dihydro-1,4-dithiin-2,3-dithiolate),196 the U–N relative to La–N in [M(pyrazine)3I3],197 and the U–N in uranium tris-aryloxide derivatives,198 the U–carbene in M(L)[N(SiMe3)2Cl] (L = OCMe2CH2(CNCH2CHNDipp), Dipp = 2,6-iPr2C6H6)199 and M(L)ICp*2 (L = C3Me4N2)200 relative to the Ce–carbene bond, and the bonding in [M(N(EPR2)2)3] complexes (M = U, Pu, La, Ce; E = S, Se, Te; R = Ph, iPr, H).201
However, this seems not the case for all actinoids. In a systematic study on the covalency of the M–chalcogen bond (M = Ln, An),108 the Am(III) and Cm(III) complexes give a similar picture of molecular orbitals to the Eu complex, and the M–chalcogen has the feature of interaction between ionic metal and ligand. This was attributed to the half-filled 5f orbitals in these complexes, which is plausible according to the established knowledge that the empty, half-filled or filled d/f orbitals give a relatively stable electronic configuration of transition metals.
The participation of 5f-orbitals in metal–ligand bonding affects not only the bond strength, but also the geometry of the molecular systems. Studies have shown that the increase of the 5f composition in the molecular orbitals favors a linear structure.202,203 This was further confirmed in an investigation of early actinoid 6d05f0 MXq6 (M = Th, Pa, U, Np; X = H, F; q = −2, −1, 0, + 1) which were compared to their 5d0 analogues,204 in which the hydrides represent pure σ bonding model systems, while the fluorides represent π bonding ones, thus it is possible to distinguish the role of 5f orbitals in the bonding interaction. The actinoid hydrides and fluorides have been subjected to two types of calculations depending on whether the f functions were omitted or not. The former treatment leads to a d-only description of actinoids. Such an arbitrary treatment, in principle, can give instructive information on the correlation of f functions and the molecular properties including geometry and energy. Indeed, the d-only treatment of actinoids gives similar preference for the conformation of the molecular systems to their 5d0 counterparts, i.e. Hf, Ta, W and Re, while it is different from that described by a basis set with the presence of the f functions, suggesting a dominant role of 5f orbitals in the structural preferences of actinoid hydrides and fluorides.
The planar isocyclic and heterocyclic uranium clusters, cyclo-UnXn (n = 3, 4; X = O, NH), cyclo-Un(μ2-X)n (n = 3, 4; X = C, CH, NH) clusters, and the E@[c-U4(μ2-C)4] (E = H+, C, Si, Ge) and U@[c-U5(μ2-C)5] molecules serve as good candidates for studying the role of the 5f orbitals in bonding, aromaticity and reactivity of analogous systems.156 In these compounds, the bonding mode includes the contribution of σ,π, δ, ϕ bonds, and the participation of 5f orbitals of U atoms of the metallacycle ring is recognized from the highly delocalized molecular orbitals, which may be considered as a feature of the “all-metal” aromaticity of these compounds. The nucleus-independent chemical shift (NICS),205 including NICS(0), NICS(1), NICSzz(0) and the NICSzz(1) index, together with the NICS scan profiles further reflect the aromaticity of the planar isocyclic and heterocyclic uranium clusters. A point worth noting is that caution should be taken when the NICS index is used as the descriptor of aromaticity, because (1) relativistic effects should be treated adequately when heavy elements are present to avoid inaccurate or erroneous interpretation,206 (2) NICS values may be not suitable to discuss aromaticity in systems that exhibit a strong anisotropy or have no pz-orbital overlap to produce π clouds;207 (3) there are better aromaticity descriptors than NICS, such as electronic multicenter indices (MCI).208
The phenomenon that 5f electrons of actinoids are more actively involved in the bonding of molecular systems than the 4f electrons of lanthanoids has been widely accepted, while it is not completely solved how much they may modulate the reactivity of such kind of molecular systems. There is evidence in some reactions that the energy barrier is lower when promoted by an actinoid-containing catalyst than by other organometallic catalysts. Examples are the formation of bis(hydrazonato) complexes M(Cp)2[κ2-N2(CH2)(CH3)]2 (M = Zr, Th, U) through the migratory insertion of H2CN2 into the M–C bond of the mono(hydrazonato) species M(Cp)2[κ2-N2(CH2)(CH3)],209 where the barrier is calculated to be 18.8 and 0.5 kcal mol−1 for the Zr and Th cases, respectively, and is even lower in the U case.
The higher efficiency of organoactinoid molecular systems towards these reactions paves the road of actinoids in homogeneous catalysis, and the rational design of a new type of catalysts requires the knowledge of the mechanism how the organoactinoids behave in the reaction, including the origin of their catalytic reactivity, i.e. whether the reactivity is due to the participation of 5f electrons in the reactions or a consequence of other factors. This is an issue addressed in recent DFT work.210,211 According to a DFT study210 of the activation of a methane C–H bond by Cp2An(CH3)2 (Cp = C5H5, An = U, Np, Pu), a treatment of actinoid atoms with a large-core ECP in combination with a core polarization potential (CPP)87,88 gives roughly the same free activation energy as that with a small-core ECP, suggesting that the activity of actinoid molecular complexes is mainly determined by the polarization of the n = 5 electronic shell, rather than by the direct participation of 5f electrons in the reactions. Similar observations have been reported in a B3PW91 study of the ortho C–H bond activation of pyridine and its N-oxide derivatives promoted by Cp2An(IV)(CH3)2 and Cp2An(III)(CH3) (Cp = C5H5, An = U, Np, Pu).211
These results suggest that 5f electrons are able to play important roles in determining the geometry of actinoid molecular systems, however, they hardly participate actively in reactions. Such behavior of 5f electrons stresses the necessity of an adequate 5f treatment in the characterization of geometric and electronic properties of a molecular system, while in studies of reactions when only relative energies are of interest, a 5f-in-core treatment may be used where appropriate.
4.2 Geometry and electronic structure

4.2.1 An–O bond in actinoid oxo and oxide species. 
The uranyl ion has been the focus of many studies. Theoretically, due to its high symmetry and small size, it often serves as a benchmark for computational methods and understanding of the electronic structures of actinyl compounds.
In the uranyl ion, the formal charge of U is +6e, thus, from a point of view of valence bond theory, the valency electrons (5f36d17s2) are formally donated to the bound atoms that have stronger electron negativity. As mentioned above, the bonding modes of actinoid molecular systems are very complicated due to the participation of f and d orbitals in the bond interactions, and in many cases the bond An–L has the feature of being a covalent bond.
Despite the simplicity of the uranyl ion which contains only three atoms (UO22+), the characterization of its electronic structure has suggested various schemes. The application of ligand field theory to uranyl by McGlynn et al.212 presented a linear structure of the ion and a bonding mode with ligands being arranged hexagonally in the equatorial plane, which is perpendicular to the O–U–O axis. This study suffers from an ambiguity in the 5f treatment, which is not surprising concerning the state of quantum chemistry at that time. Over the years, with the advance of techniques and theory, the covalent feature of U–O bonding including the contribution from the 5f orbital received more and more support from both experimental and theoretical sides. The uranyl ion is described to have a bond mode of O2−U6+O2−, where the UO bond has a character of one σ and two π bonds, with the bonding molecular orbitals as σ2g σ2u π4g π4u, in which the 5fδ and 5fϕ are the lowest unoccupied orbitals.
Established knowledge has it that the composition of 6d and 5f orbitals is correlated in the bonding interaction of MO22+ and its geometry. In general, the increased 6d contribution gives a more bent geometry for O–M–O, while 5f prefers a linear one. For actinoids, the 5f character is found to increase steadily through the actinoid series, and the contribution from 6d remains similar, leading to linear geometries for the actinyl O–An–O skeleton.202,203
The AnO bond may be perturbed by the strong interaction between the oxo group and another metal, e.g. Fe2+, forming the actinyl cation–cation complexes.110,213 A B3LYP study110 has contributed to this issue. [AnVIO2L]/[AnVO2L]− (An = U, Np, Pu; L = Schiff-base polypyrrolic macrocycle ligand with 3d transition metal ions (Mn, Fe, Co and Zn) bound) were used as the model systems. The bridging oxo group is shared by the An and M, and its bonding interaction with An is weakened, as seen from the lengthening of the bond and the decrease in the Mayer bond orders compared to another oxo group (by about 0.04 Å and 0.2–0.4 Å respectively). The reduction potentials of the AnVI/V couples were calculated to be −1.10 eV for U, 0.25 eV for Np, and 0.01 eV for Pu after taking into account the “Hay correction”34 which is −0.31, −1.17, and −0.21 eV for U, Np, and Pu, respectively, based on spin–orbit CI calculations, and the DFT underestimation214,215 of the experimental [AnO2(H2O)5]2+/1+ redox potentials by 0.57 eV, 0.27 eV, and 0.48 eV for U, Np, and Pu.
In a PBE study of the binuclear U(VI) and U(V) complexes with a Pacman-polypyrrolic macrocyclic ligand,213 besides the bridging oxo group between the two U atoms, a second bridging group, either a second oxo or a hydrogen bond between the equatorial water of a U nucleus and the oxo of another, is also found to be possible. This influences the stability of the binuclear species, and changes the reactivity of the U–O bond in which the two uranyl are bridged by two oxo groups.213
Compared to the broad interest in the uranyl ion, studies of UO2+ are rather rare. The first report on it is a relativistic Dirac–Coulomb intermediate Hamiltonian Fock space coupled cluster (DC-IHFSCC) study216 which shows good agreement with a later experiment217 using the pulsed field ionization zero electron kinetic energy (PFI-ZEKE) technique for the prediction of the transition between the states 5fϕ5/2 and 5fδ3/2 (2736 cm−1vs. 2678 cm−1).
These results are refined by a recent relativistic CASSCF/CASPT2 study,152 in which the model systems include the bare UO2+ ion and the [UO2(CO3)3]5− complex. The active space is composed of 3 electrons in 13 MOs  corresponding to uranium 6p, 5f, 6d, and 7s and oxygen 2p atomic orbitals, and in the CASPT2 calculations 35 electrons were correlated by freezing the inner orbitals of U (below 5d) and O (1s). The ground state of UO2+ is characterized as 2Φ5/2u and [UO2(CO3)3]5− as 2Δ3/2u. The complexation with carbonate brings a “downfield” shift for the transition from the ground state to the antibonding  in the gas phase (7467 cm−1vs. 19049 cm−1). [UO2(CO3)3]5− has a hexagonal bipyramidal conformation, with a UO bond length of 1.898 Å which is longer than in the bare ion (1.742 Å). These values are comparable to the values of 1.933 Å in a MP2 study218 and 1.90 ± 0.02 Å in an EXAFS study.219
The formal charge of U in [UO2]+ is +5e, however, similar to that in [UO2]2+, the covalency of the U–O bond induces a substantial backdonation to stabilize the high valency moiety, causing the partial charge on U to be much lower than its formal charge. According to a BPW91 study, the partial charge of U in [UO2(H2O)5]2+ is +2.43e, and +2.19e in [UO2(H2O)5]+.220 The “yl”-O in the latter becomes more basic with a partial charge of −0.66e compared to the value of −0.43e in the former one. One should be aware that it is necessary to carefully choose an appropriate method for a reasonable population analysis. According to a comparative study, in the case of actinyls, natural population analysis is superior to Mulliken and Löwdin analysis.221
The dioxocation [Np(V)O2]+ has been crystallized in room-temperature ionic liquids, appeared as [BuMeIm]5[Np(IV)(Np(V)O2)3(H2O)6Cl12], which involves the so-called “cation–cation” interactions between [Np(V)O2]+ and Np4+, and was studied using a B3LYP functional with a Stuttgart–Dresden's small-core RECP treatment of Np.222 According to this work,222 one Np4+ cation interacts with three neptunyl dioxocations through the oxo group, in other words, the three neptunyl ions work as monodentate ligands. The B3LYP calculations give descriptions consistent with the X-ray structure that in all of the three neptunyl ions the “yl” bond involving the bridging oxo atom is longer than the other one, suggesting that the “cation–cation” interactions weaken the bridging “yl” bond. Other available experimental examples with the presence of “cation–cation” interactions between actinoid moieties at different oxidation states are the selenite [Np(IV)(Np(V)O2)2](SeO3)3,223 the mixed valence cluster complex [NpVIO2Cl2][NpVO2Cl(thf)3]2,224 the co-existence of Np(VI), Np(V) and Np(IV) in the crystallized K2[(NpO2)3B10O16(OH)2(NO3)2],225 and the first reported uranyl(VI)–uranyl(V) complex [UO2(salen)μ-K(18C6)][UO2(salen)]3(μ8-K)2.226
With the SO-CASSCF/SO-CASPT2 method, the ground and excited states of neutral and cationic PuO and PuO2 have been studied and the ionization energies (IE) were predicted to be 6.17 eV for PuO, 14.36 eV for PuO+, 6.20 eV for PuO2,151 in accord with the experimental values of 6.1 ± 0.2 eV for PuO,227,228 13.7 ± 0.8 eV for PuO+,229 and 7.03 ± 0.12 eV230 or 6.6 eV231–233 for PuO2. The ground state of PuO is dominated by two electronic states 7Π and 7Σ, and the former is characterized by two electronic configurations 7s15f1π5f2δ5f2ϕ and 7s15f1σ5f1δ5f1π5f2ϕ. For the ionization of PuO, first the electron in the 7s orbital is lost (giving PuO+), followed by the loss of the electron in the 5fϕ orbital.
A refinement of IE of PuO2158 has been obtained with the recently developed RASPT2 method.234,235 The RASPT2 method differs from CASPT2 in that the calculation is based on a RASSCF reference wave function, for which the active space is composed of three subspaces RAS1, RAS2, and RAS3, where RAS2 is identical to the active space in a CASSCF calculation, while RAS1 is the occupied orbital from which a limited number of electrons can be excited, and RAS3 is the virtual orbital to which a limited number of electrons can be excited. Thus, RAS1 and RAS3 offer the flexibility to construct additional configuration state functions (CSFs). In this study,158 the RAS2 is composed of 7s, 5fδ+, 5fδ−, 5fϕ+, 5fϕ−, and RAS1 (σg and πu the bonding orbitals between O and Pu) and RAS3 are defined to allow only single and double excitations between them. This treatment with an active space of (12/14)/(4/5)/2 gives a value of 6.32 eV for IE1, and 15.48 eV for IE2. With a larger active space of (16/19)/(4/5)/4, these values change to 6.09 eV and 15.07 eV respectively.
The same group158 has also investigated the IE of the oxides of several other actinoids, including Th, Pa, Np, Am, and Cm (see Fig. 1 for the ionization energy and Fig. 2 for the An–O bond length). In view of the IE of AnO2, Th (IE1) and Pa (IE2) do not fit the trend well. This may be explained in terms of the electronic configurations of the dioxides. The formal charge of actinoids in the dioxides is +4e. In their ground state, the two atoms, Th and Pa, have a valence electron configuration of [Rn]6d27s2 and [Rn]5f26d17s2, respectively, and each donates 4 electrons to O atoms, leading to an electronic configuration of [Rn] for Th4+ and [Rn]5f1 for Pa4+. This means that the IE1 of ThO2 and IE2 of PaO2 represent the energies that are required to remove one electron from the An–O bonding orbitals.
 Fig. 1  The ionization energies, IE1 and IE2, of AnO2 and AnO.158 
 Fig. 2  The An–O bond length of AnO2 and AnO.158 The “×” in the right panel represents the experimental values for ThO (black) and ThO+ (red),353 UO (black),354 and UO+ (red).355 
The Am–O bond in the AmO molecule has been characterized to be a triple bond, which may contain significant donation of the lone pair of the O atom to Am.153 In this molecule, there are seven unpaired electrons which are distributed over the 7s and six 5f orbitals. The dissociation energy is calculated to be 4.68 eV, significantly lower than the experimental estimate of about 5.7 eV.227 This ionization energy of AmO is calculated to be 6.3 eV with SOC correction, in accord with the experimental value of 5.9 ± 0.2 eV.227 In the case of CmO, the calculation gives a dissociation energy of 7.12 eV, close to the value of 7.5 eV derived from vaporization of Cm2O3.236 For the dissociation reactions of AmO2 and CmO2 that produce AmO + O and CmO + O, respectively, an energy of 6.03 eV and 4.62 eV is required according to the calculation. According to the orbital analysis, the unpaired electrons of AmO2 are in the 5f orbitals, and the Am–O bond is characterized as a triple bond, similar to what was found in UO22+.237
The bonding interaction between actinoids and chalcogen elements has been investigated with a PBE functional on the model systems M[N(EPR2)2]3 (M = La, Ce, Pr, Pm, Eu, U, Np, Pu, Am, Cm; E = O, S, Se, Te; R = H, iPr, Ph).107,108 The calculated Ln–chalcogen and An–chalcogen bond lengths are consistent with the experimental values. In view of the natural charge distribution, the ionic feature of the M–E bond decreases when going from O, S, Se to Te, in which U is the largest and La is the smallest, and from lanthanoids to actinoids. According to the population analysis, the former is due to the increased metal d (and s) participation in the bonding, while the latter originates from the larger 5f orbital involvement compared with 4f.


4.2.2 Actinoid–carbenoid complexes. 
Actinoid–carbenoid complexes represent a family of compounds that involve an interaction between a carbene R1R2C: (R1 and R2 are substituents) and an actinoid atom (An). The simplest compounds of this family have a structure of H2CAnH2, in which, e.g. for H2CThH2, an in-plane distortion in CH2 and out-of-plane distortion in ThH2 is observed in a B3LYP calculation, in which an SDD basis set was used for Th and 6-311++G(3df,3pd) for the other atoms, and is attributed to the agostic interaction between the methylene group and the Th atom.116 In such compounds, the interaction between the methylene C atom and the An atom is characterized to be a CAn bond. The conformation predicted by B3LYP calculations was later reproduced in a CASPT2 study,238 where the CAn bond is found to be shorter in CU than in CTh, and the agostic interaction increases from Th to U.
In a recent contribution, Li et al.239 have characterized two methylidene–actinoid halide complexes, [CH2 = AnFCl] (An = Th, U) (Fig. 3) by means of DFT (ZORA PW91 in combination with TZ2P quality Slater basis sets with frozen-core approximations), CCSD(T) (SDD treatment for actinoids), and matrix-isolation experiment, and found that with the decrease in the electronegativity of the halo substituent at the actinoid center, the CAn bond length decreases for both U and Th, and the agostic interaction is enhanced.
 Fig. 3  The agostic interaction between the alkyl hydrogen and actinoid atoms and the pyramidalization at the actinoid center.239 
Another recent work concerns the characterization of the UC bond in uranium–carbene complexes240 with the presence of one or more carbene moieties, (Ph2PS)2C: in the molecule. Such carbenoid species forms with the treatment of U(BH4)4 with a geminal dianionic bis-(diphenylthiophosphinoyl)methane (SCS) ligand, and the UC bond shows a nucleophilic character given its reactivity towards carbonyl derivatives, such as ketone or aldehyde, to form the alkene. In these complexes, both the 5f and 6d orbitals are suggested to contribute to the UC bond that has both σ and π character, according to the B3PW91 calculations, in which the uranium atom was treated with the Stuttgart RSC 1997 ECP.
The actinoid–carbenoid complexes containing two carbene moieties that are bound to Th have been also investigated in an experimental and computational study,241 in which the model compounds have the molecular formulae [(Ph2PS)2C]2Th(DME) and [(Ph2PS)2C3Th]Li2(DME). According to the B3LYP study, the interaction between Th and C is better described as a single bond with a lone pair on the carbon atom, Th+−C−, and the bond enthalpy mainly comes from the Coulombic interaction between the two atoms and a minor orbital contribution.


4.2.3 Metal–metal bond. 
The concept of metal–metal multiple bonds has been established after years of studies.242 This does apply to actinoids as well, and some investigations have been carried out to unravel the feature of the M–An bond111 and the An–An bond.155
M–An bond. 
A model system Cp3M–ECp (M = Nd, U; E = Al, Ga), which is used to mimic the experimental system (CpSiMe3)3M–ECp* (M = U, Nd; E = Al, Ga), has been the subject of a DFT study with five functionals B3PW91, B3LYP, BPW91, BLYP and PBE to compare the 4f vs. 5f metal–metal bonds,111 and among which the B3PW91 method gives bond dissociation energies closest to the experimental values. Cp*E are believed to be good σ-donors.243 According to the natural bond orbital/natural localized molecular orbital (NBO/NLMO) analysis, the bond U–E consists predominantly of an E → U σ-interaction arising from favorable overlap between the diffuse ligand lone pair and the primarily 7s/6d acceptor orbitals on U(III), with negligible U → E π-donation. In another complex [(tren-SiMe3)(THF)U-Ga(NArCH)2] (tren-SiMe3 = N(CH2CH2NSiMe3), Ar = 2,6-iPr2C6H3), 244 the DFT calculations suggest a strongly electrostatic U–Ga bond with π-donation from the Ga-heterocycle to an empty 5fz2y orbital of U.
An–An bond. 
Due to the large atomic radii and the diffuse 5f orbitals, the formation of an An–An bond is difficult, and if there is one, the bond mode in such kind of systems is rather complicated. Studies so far have been carried out only for diatomic actinoid systems155 and other small molecular systems, such as Th2H2,245 U2X6 (X = Cl, F, OH, NH2, CH3),246 [M2X8]2− (M = U, Np, Pu; X = Cl, Br, I),247,248 and An2II(C8H8)2 (An = Th, Pa, U, and Np).249
In the CASSCF/CASPT2 study of Ac2, Th2, Pa2, and U2,155 the bond in the former two systems (Ac2 and Th2) contains large contributions from the atomic 6d, 7s, and 7p orbitals.
As seen in Table 2, the bond length decreases from Ac to U, and the bond energy increases until Pa, while the bond energy of U drops significantly. This may originate from the different composition of the bonding orbitals. According to calculations,250 in U2, the bonding interactions include the contribution of 7s, 6d, and 5f, where the 7s and 6dπ orbitals form three relatively stronger bonds with one pair of electrons in each bond. The rest part of the bonding interactions are from four other singly occupied orbitals (6dσg, 6dδg, 5fδg, 5fπu), leading to a formal quintuple bond between the two U atoms. However, due to the population of electrons in the antibonding orbitals, the effective bond order (EBO) of U2, defined as , where bi is the occupation number in the bonding orbital i, and abi that in the corresponding antibonding, which allows fractional bond order, is calculated to be 4.2.155
Table 2 CASSCF/CASPT2 results on the chemical bond of actinoid diatomic systems155




 
Ground state

R
0 (Å)

D
0 (eV)
Bond order




Ac2

3Σg−(0g+)
3.63
1.19
2


Th2

3Δg(1g)
2.76
3.28
4


Pa2

3Σg−(0g+)
2.37
4.00
5


U2

7Og(8g)
2.43
1.15
5




In Fig. 4 the contribution of valence orbitals is displayed. The contribution of the 7s orbital increases steadily from Ac to U, while that of the bonding 6d orbital drops at U. The atomic promotion energy weakens the U–U bond. When going further to the heavier actinoids, the formation of an An–An bond becomes difficult or even impossible due to the large promotion energy.
 Fig. 4  The ground state of actinoid diatomic systems.155 
The An–An bond strength may be modulated by the chemical environment. In a PBE study, Wu and Lu251 found a triple bond between the two U atoms that are embedded in C60, and the configuration includes six 2-center 1-electron orbitals (5fπu)2(5fσg)1(5fδg)2(5fϕu)1. The ground state of U2@C60 (Ih) is characterized as 7A2u, and the valence state is [U2]6+@C606− or [U3+]2@C606−. This work has been extended by Infante et al.252 in a follow-on study and they proposed that the short U2 bond length in U2@C60 (Ih) is possibly due to the size of the cavity of C60, and when a fullerene with a larger cavity is used to embed U2, such as C70 and C84, the U atoms have stronger preferences to attach to the inner wall of the fullerene, rather than to form a U2 multiple bond. This suggests that the two encapsulated U atoms have much stronger propensity to interact with the more nucleophilic carbon atoms of the negatively charged fullerene rather than mutually.
Fullerene is known to have strong electron-withdrawing ability, and the electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged fullerene and the positively charged U atoms can be strong enough to eliminate the possibility for the formation of a U–U bond in the cavity. Accordingly, one may expect that there is little chance to observe an actinoid cluster in the confined cavity, however, this does not rule out the possibility for the existence of an actinoid cluster mediated by electronegative atoms such as C and N.

4.3 Reactions
The chemical processes involving actinoids have been studied extensively, including the behavior of actinyl species in condensed phase, the catalytic reactions promoted by organoactinoids, etc. In this section, we review the computational studies of the last decade on the reactions with molecular actinoid systems involved, including complexation in the condensed phase, redox reactions, hydroamination, and azide photolysis. For reviews of previous work, please refer to ref. 253.

4.3.1 Hydration and ligand exchange. 
The structure and thermodynamics of the linear actinyl ions in an aqueous environment is an active area in actinoid chemistry, important to environmental safety and reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. Located at the bottom of the periodic table, actinoids have large ionic radii which allow them to be coordinated with several ligands and to adopt a large coordination number (CN). Previous experimental studies have proposed hydration structures for actinoids with favorable large CN values,254–256 for example, for U(III), RU–O = 2.56 Å and CN = 9 ± 1;
for Pu(III), RPu–O = 2.51 Å and CN = 9 ± 1;
for Cm(III), RCm–O = 2.47 Å and CN = 9 ± 1;
and for Cf(III), RCf–O = 2.48–2.49 Å and CN = 8 or RCf–O = 2.51–2.54 Å and CN = 9.
Recently the hydration structure of Cf(III) has also been studied by coupling the highly refined EXAFS data with Monte Carlo simulations.257 The Cf(III)–water intermolecular potentials used in the MC simulations were fitted based on ab initio potential energy surfaces according to the QM methodology of Dolg et al.258 for An(III), where two methods were used, with the BP86 functional favoring the octacoordination, while MP2 favoring a higher coordination (9 for trivalent actinoids from actinium (89Ac) to mendelevium (101Md), and 8 for trivalent nobelium (102No) and lawrencium (103Lr)). The simulation indicates that the Cf(III) in an aqueous environment is mainly octacoordinated, and the average Cf–O distance is around 2.43 Å.
In a B3LYP study on the speciation of Cm3+ in aqueous phase,259 the aqueous cation complex is proposed to have a tricapped trigonal prismatic geometry with nine water molecules in the primary solvation shell. The nine Cm–O bonds almost uniformly read bond lengths in the range of 2.47–2.48 Å where only a marginal variation is found. This is in contrast to the geometric parameters in the crystal structure of another trivalent actinoid, Pu3+, which is solved to have a molecular formula [Pu(H2O)9][CF3SO3]3 with six shorter (Pu–OH2prismatic) and three longer (Pu–OH2equatorial) Pu–OH2 bonds with a variation of 0.098 Å.260 The larger difference in the bond distances between Pu3+ and the two types of water molecules has been attributed to the presence of the counterion, which was not taken into account in the B3LYP study of the aqueous Cm3+ complex.259 The recent single-crystal X-ray diffraction data of [Cm(H2O)9][CF3SO3]3 in both its solid and liquid state255 have probed the coordination environment of Cm3+ with six shorter and three longer Cm–OH2 bond distances, with a difference of 0.092 Å in the solid and 0.16 Å in solution. The MD study in the same work,259 with a TIP3P water model for the bulk and an electrostatic potential (ESP) fitted atomic charges of the [Cm(H2O9]3+ cation, suggests a residence time of 161 ps for the second-solvation shell water and a translational diffusion coefficient of 1.84 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 for [Cm(H2O9]3+ and 4.00 × 10−5 cm2 s−1 for the bulk water.
A recent MD study154 based on the force and energy terms calculated with CASSCF/CASPT2 methods suggests that CN = 9 dominates the hydration of Cm(III) at both 300 K and 473 K, with a probability of 95% and 80%, respectively, when using a cutoff of the first solvation shell of 3.4 Å, and 90% and 60%, respectively, when using a smaller cutoff of 3.0 Å. The probabilities obtained with the smaller cutoff of the first solvation shell are consistent with the experimental data.261
In a simulation of uranyl,262,263 which has two oxo-groups occupying the axial positions, five water molecules are found to coordinate to uranyl in the first shell, and the average U–OH2 distance is 2.4 Å. According to this study, the second hydration shell is about 4.7 Å away from the central uranyl moiety. This is supported by a recent ab initio QMCF MD study of a uranyl ion in an aqueous environment,183 in which the average U–OH2 distance is found to be 2.49 Å for the first solvation shell, and 4.3–5.0 Å for the second solvation shell. CN = 5 is also supported by an earlier B3LYP study,34 where the solvent effect is found to favor the configuration with five water molecules coordinated. The coordination of a sixth solvent molecule is endothermic by 5.7 kcal mol−1, which otherwise will be exothermic by 10 kcal mol−1 at 298 K in the gas phase. The value of CN = 5 for the equatorial coordination of a uranyl aqueous complex is consistent with the previous experimental studies using techniques of X-ray scattering,264 which suggests a predominant 5-coordinated UO22+ species with minor distribution of 4-coordinated species, high-energy X-ray scattering (HEXS)265 that the 5-coordinated complex is populated at about 86%, and is about 1.19 ± 0.42 kcal mol−1 more stable than its 4-coordinated counterpart, and EXAFS.266 The solvation free energy of a uranyl ion in water has been calculated to be −410 ± 5 kcal mol−1 (B3LYP/SCIPCM),267 or −407.2 kcal mol−1 (LCGTO-FF-DF/COSMO),268 or −413.5 kcal mol−1 (SC-ECP-B3LYP/CPCM),214,215 consistent with the best experimental value of −421 ± 15 kcal mol−1.229
Note that, according to an NMR experiment in basic solution,269 the equatorial coordination number shows pH-dependence, and the population of the 5-coordinated complex, in which hydroxide (OH−) is the ligand, is lower than that of the 4-coordinated complex UO2(OH)42−, which remains to be studied from the theoretical side. Meanwhile, the existence of these complexes with the equatorial coordination sites occupied solely by OH− suggests that in a strong alkaline environment hydroxide is a better ligand than water for uranyl.
In solution phase, the strength of the interaction between the ligands and the actinyl ions may depend on the nature of the ligands and solvent. According to a CPMD study,117 the interaction between [UO2]2+ and neutral ligands, such as water and tetramethylmalonamide (tmma), may be enhanced, while that with an anionic nitrate ligand is weakened.
The mechanism of ligand exchange has been studied, and three possible mechanisms (Fig. 5), dissociative (D), associative (A) and interchange (I) mechanisms, have been investigated for hydrated actinyl complexes, for example, [UO2(H2O)5]2+ and [UO2(oxalate)2(H2O)]2−,270 AmO2(H2O)52+, UO2(H2O)5+, NpO2(H2O)52+,220 UO2(OH)(H2O)n+, UO2(OH)2(H2O)n, NpO2(OH)(H2O)n, and PuO2(OH)(H2O)n+(n < 21) complexes.157 An assessment105 of the accuracy of several DFT functionals, including PBE, TPSS, BP86, BLYP, B3LYP and BHLYP, on the water exchange reaction in hydrated uranyl(VI), in both its ground state and its first excited state, by comparing with MP2, CCSD(T) and DFT-MRCI has appeared, and shows that DFT methods bring overestimation of the reaction energy for the associative pathway while underestimation for the dissociative pathway compared to the CCSD(T) results. However, such deviations display a dependence on the portion of HF exchange in the DFT functionals, and with the increase in the amount of HF exchange, the deviation decreases, suggesting a better performance of hybrid functionals than the pure DFT functionals in predicting the energetics of the model systems.
 Fig. 5  Three possible pathways for the water exchange. 
Following the D mechanism, the reaction energy for the dissociation of [UO2(H2O)5]2+ to give [UO2(H2O)4]2+ has been calculated to be 20.5 kcal mol−1 in the gas phase which drops to 2.2 kcal mol−1 in a continuum solvent, suggesting that in an aqueous environment the D mechanism is moderately endothermic.117 With the presence of explicit water, the free energy difference of the two states is 8.7 kcal mol−1 according to a CPMD simulation using the thermodynamic integration technique.186 In this work,186 the free energy barrier corresponding to the dissociation is 10.8 kcal mol−1, compared to a value of 9.1 kcal mol−1 derived from 17O NMR spectroscopy at 298 K.271 In an MP2 study,270 the dissociation mechanism requires a much higher activation energy compared to the A or I mechanism, and is thus kinetically unfavorable. According to the MP2 study on [UO2(H2O)5]2+ and [UO2(oxalate)2(H2O)]2−,270 the water exchange of the former follows an A or I mechanism, while for the latter an A mechanism is found. The activation energies inherent to the three mechanisms are 17.7, 4.5 or 5.0 kcal mol−1 for the former system, compared to the experimental value of 6.2 kcal mol−1,271 and 13.4, 2.9, and 12.7 kcal mol−1 for the latter, compared to the experimental value of 7.4 kcal mol−1.272 The mechanistic study of water exchange has been expanded to AmO2(H2O)52+ and isoelectronic UO2(H2O)5+ and NpO2(H2O)52+ complexes by the same group.220 The influence of the counterion on the structure and stability of aqueous uranyl(VI) complexes.,187 the complexation with anions,273,274 the water exchange mechanism in the first excited state of hydrated uranyl(VI),275 the water exchange with chloride276 have been also investigated.
The ligand exchange may also happen at the oxo group of actinyl complexes, which was probed in an 17O NMR study under highly alkaline conditions where (TMA)OH (tetramethylammonium hydroxide) at a concentration of 3.5 mol L−1 was used, while this did not happen in acidic HClO4 solution, suggesting the importance of a basic environment.277 The exchange of an oxo group with the equatorial oxygen atom has been observed and the activation energy has been measured to be 9.8 ± 0.7 kcal mol−1. The low energy is far from enough to overcome the barrier to break the strong Uoxo triple bond. A multistep mechanism has been proposed278 to explain the experimental observation of UO cleavage with a low barrier (Fig. 6(a)). The mechanism is based on an equilibrium between [UO2(OH)4]2− (aq) and [UO2(OH)5]2− (aq) with the presence of OH− (aq) at high concentration. According to the mechanism, the pentahydroxide uranyl ion may form a third U–oxo bond by releasing a molecule of water which is formed by a proton transfer from one OH− to another one in the equatorial plane. Then proton shuttling may deliver a hydrogen from the equatorial hydroxide to the axial oxo group through which the axial oxo group is reduced to a hydroxide group. According to the PBE calculations, the rate-limiting step is the coordination of a fifth hydroxide group, which sees an activation energy of 12.5 kcal mol−1. This value is reasonably comparable to the experimental value.277 One feature of this mechanism is the formation of [UO3(OH)3]3− which has been suggested to have a bond mode with three partial triple bonds between the metal and the oxo ligands.113 It is not captured in experiment, which may be due to its presence after the rate-limiting step.
 Fig. 6  Two possible “yl”-O exchange mechanisms of uranyl: mononuclear (a)118,278vs. binuclear (b)280,281 pathways. 
The mechanism has later been challenged by Szabo and Grenthe279 observing that there was no oxygen exchange between the “yl” group of uranyl and water in view of an unchanged uranyl 17O NMR signal with time. However, in a following-on CPMD/BLYP study, Bühl and Schreckenbach188 showed that an overall barrier of ΔA‡ = 12.5 ± 1.3 kcal mol−1 is inherent in the uranyl oxo exchange reaction, suggesting again that it is possible for the “yl” group of uranyl to exchange with water. The free activation energy is estimated to be 16 kcal mol−1 at the B3LYP level and 17 kcal mol−1 at the CCSD(T) level, in agreement with Clark et al.,277 who found ΔG‡ = 15.2 kcal mol−1. This study has invoked a reinvestigation280 of previous experimental work of Szabo and Grenthe,279 and the mechanism proposed by Shamov and Schreckenbach278 was found to be a plausible explanation of the oxo-exchange in uranyl hydroxide, while the earlier conclusion from the 17O NMR experiment279 is erroneous, possibly due to an incomplete analysis of the original experimental data which did not count for the enrichment in the uranyl oxygen signal. According to this work, the activation free energy corresponding to this process is ΔG‡ = 14.5 ± 0.6 kcal mol−1. We note that Szabo and Grenthe280 have also proposed the possible participation of a binuclear complex [(UO2(OH)42−)(UO2(OH)53−]. Such a binuclear complex may be involved in the transition state while not exist as a stable species, as implied by the measured rate, which is proportional to the total concentration of U(VI) in a quadratic manner (v ∝ [U(VI)]2total), and the equilibrium constant, which is found to be independent of the total concentration of uranium. The binuclear mechanism (Fig. 6(b)) has been investigated in a recent B3LYP study,281 which stresses the formation of an oxo bridge between the two U(VI) centers, and predicts an activation enthalpy of 22.6 kcal mol−1. These results do not conclude exclusively with one mechanism, either the mononuclear or the binuclear one, significantly superior over another one. A reasonable explanation may be that it depends on the concentration of U(VI) either one mechanism takes control the “yl”-oxygen exchange reaction or both of them work together.
The complexation of uranyl with ligands has also been studied for ionic liquids (ILs).282 IL is a medium composed of an anionic and a cationic part. The composition influences its physicochemical properties, such as viscosity, hygroscopy, miscibility with other media and electrochemical behavior, thus provides the possibility to meet the requirement of a given application by tuning these properties. Such kind of media has been used in spent nuclear fuel reprocessing taking advantage of their radiolytic stability. A recent MD and B3LYP study282 deals with the competitive complexation of uranyl cations with nitrate and chloride ions in an IL, which is composed of C4mim+Tf2N− (C4mim+: 1-butyl-3-methyl-imidazolium; Tf2N− = (CF3SO2)2N)−: bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide) and immiscible with water. According to an energy scheme that combines B3LYP (ΔECOMP, the energy change for the ligand exchange in gas phase) and MD (ΔECOMP–IL, and ΔEILIL), at the ratio U/Cl/NO3 = 1/2/2, the formation of UO2Cl(NO3)2− is a thermally neutral process, and that of UO2Cl2(NO3)22− and UO2Cl2(NO3)− is endothermic by 40 and 3 kcal mol−1, respectively; at higher Cl/U ratio (U/Cl/NO3 = 1/6/2), the formation of UO2Cl3(NO3)2− is clearly favorable thermodynamically (−47 kcal mol−1) over that of UO2(Cl4)2− (50 kcal mol−1). This work concludes that at low Cl/U ratio, Cl− and NO3− are competitive towards complexation with UO22+, while at high Cl/U ratio, uranyl shows preference for complexation with Cl−. Thus Cl− should be carefully removed after the synthesis of C4mim+Tf2N−, which sees the presence of Cl− and possibly appears as impurity eventually, if the possible interference of Cl− is to be avoided.
Given the importance of the hydrolysis of uranium hexafluoride (UF6) in the gas phase, which is used in nuclear fuel (UO2) fabrication, we briefly mention the recent DFT work by Hu et al.283,284 in which the reaction was found to proceed in a stepwise way, i.e. UF6 first reacts with one molecule of water to give UF5OH (IM1A in Fig. 7) with an activation energy of about 19 kcal mol−1. Subsequently, the newly formed UF5OH may experience decomposition, producing UOF4, with a barrier of 24 kcal mol−1 which may decrease to less than 10 kcal mol−1 upon an assistance from H2O or HF through hydrogen bonding,283 or react with UF6 or another molecule of UF5OH, and the release of one molecule of hydrofluoride, with a barrier of 12–16 kcal mol−1, generates a compound with a U–O–U moiety, which may be relevant to the packing of the final product UO2 cluster. Alternative pathways for the formation of UF5OH have been explored in a recent work285 in which the reaction of UF6 with a H2O molecule and another molecule of UF6, shuttled by a fluorine atom (TS1B and IM1B in Fig. 7), or with two H2O molecules, shuttled by a proton (TS1C and IM1C in Fig. 7), has been investigated, and the energy barriers corresponding to the two processes are 16.5 kcal mol−1 and 14.1 kcal mol−1, respectively, with the former endothermic by 4.3 kcal mol−1 while the latter exothermic by −3.3 kcal mol−1.
 Fig. 7  Schematic elucidation of the transition state (TS1X, X = A, B, C) and the corresponding intermediate (IM1X) in the three possible mechanisms (A,283 B and C285) for the hydrolysis of UF6 to produce UF5OH. 


4.3.2 Disproportionation reactions. 
In actinoid chemistry, disproportionation reactions happen to the relatively less stable An(V) species in the absence of other redox reagents. In the cases of Np, Pu and U, the significance of the disproportionation reactions of An(V) originates from their importance to the environment3,286 or as an important intermediate in redox reactions.287 Concerning the disproportionation in water, one or two water molecules that are in the inner-sphere solvation shells may be involved in the reaction.288 The underlying mechanism of the disproportionation reactions is not clear at the fundamental level, especially with respect to the differences between U, Pu and Np.
A possible mechanism has been proposed to start from the formation of an An(V)–An(V) “cation–cation” complex, as suggested by experiment,289 and involves two sequential protonation steps. As seen in Fig. 8, the first protonation may happen on the terminal AnO group, or the bridging O atom, and the second one on another oxygen which is to be protonated. This facilitates the electron transfer between the two An(V) atoms, and the addition of a water molecule breaks the bridging interaction and gives [AnO2(H2O)5]2+ and [An(OH)2(H2O)4]2+, where the latter is transformed into [An(H2O)6]4+ after receiving two protons (An4+(aq)). According to the BPW91 study,289 the disproportionation of U(V) and Pu(V) follows a similar pathway to the electron transfer happens after the first protonation. This study could not propose a definite mechanism for the disproportionation reaction of Np(V). Experimentally, the reaction of Np(V) displays a larger solvent kinetic isotope effect (SKIE) (2.5–2.7) than that of U(V) (0.98) and Pu(V) (1.17). This suggests that solvent may play a more significant role in the case of Np(V), which may be relevant to the high stability of Np(V) compared to the products of its disproportionation (VI and IV).
 Fig. 8  The disproportionation reaction of An(V).288 
In the disproportionation reaction of U(V), the formation of U(VI) has been found to slow down the rate of disproportionation.290 It is proposed that the formation of a U(V)–U(VI) complex in such a system may deactivate the U(V) species. Indeed, this process has been studied and previous work suggests that there could be several equilibrium processes which involve self-electron exchange:  UO2+(aq) + UO22+(aq) ↔ UO22+(aq) + UO2+(aq)(4) UO(V)2(OH)2UO(VI)2 ↔ UO(VI)2(OH)2UO(V)2(5)Eqn (4) presents the outer-sphere mechanism (OSM) of the self-electron exchange, and eqn (5) the inner-sphere mechanism (ISM). The bridging OH− in eqn (5) may be F− or CO32− depending on their availability in the solution.
In the presence of U(V) and U(VI), self-electron exchange may happen. In OSM (eqn (4)), the two species are assumed not to be connected by a bridging ligand but by two or more solvent molecules (Fig. 9), while in ISM (eqn (5)), they form a binuclear complex by means of a strong interaction with the bridging ligand.
 Fig. 9  The precursor and transition states of the (UO2)2(H2O)43+ complex in the outsphere mechanism.291 
According to the CASPT2 study,291 the activation free energy in the OSM is 4.5 kcal mol−1 (18.7 kJ mol−1), much smaller than in the ISM where a value of 8.6 kcal mol−1 (36.2 kJ mol−1) for a bridging hydroxide, 8.3 kcal mol−1 (34.6 kJ mol−1) for a bridging carbonate, and 9.0 kcal mol−1 (37.8 kJ mol−1) for a bridging fluoride was found. However, in OSM the two nuclei are separated by a long distance of 8.25 Å, enabling a significant contribution from the solvent which is about 4 kcal mol−1 (18 kJ mol−1), and decreasing the electron-transfer coupling element by a factor of more than 2. This leads to the OSM being less efficient than the ISM, for which the bridging carbonate and hydride pathways are more efficient. For the ISM, the rate-determining step might be the bridge formation but not the electron exchange.


4.3.3 Oxidation reactions. 
In homogeneous catalysis, the alkylation of excited actinoid metal atoms, through which the actinoid atoms are oxidized by hydrocarbons to form CAn bonds, has been used to generate model systems in order to understand the activation of hydrocarbon systems.292 The reaction with methane gives methylidene dihydride complexes,238 and the system with uranium114 displays more agostic distortion compared to the one with thorium.116
Regarding the reactivity towards ethane, thorium (Th) appears more reactive than uranium, according to a recent study.293 Furthermore, the products of the two reactions have different compositions. In the reaction of Th and ethane, after the insertion of the excited Th atom into the C–H bond, the intermediate CH3CH2–ThH may evolve in the ethylidene dihydride and trihydride through α-H transfer (eqn (6)) or to the metallacyclopropane dihydride (eqn (7)) through β-H transfer. Th* + C2H6 → CH3CH2–ThH → CH3(H)CThH2 → CH2CH–ThH3(6) Th* + C2H6 → CH3CH2–ThH → (CH2)2–ThH2(7)In the reaction of U with ethane, due to the high energies, the trihydride and the metallacyclopropane dihydride are not formed.
The possible mechanism of the corrosion of the uranium surface when exposed in air has been investigated with the B3LYP functional, and the uranium is found to be able to interact with an oxygen molecule either in the end-on (along the O–O axis) or side-on (perpendicular to the O–O axis) manner, leading to the formation of UO or UO2.294


4.3.4 Reduction of uranyl. 
[UO2]2+ is found both in aqueous solution and in the solid state, and shows high stability. The heat of formation (ΔfH°) has been measured to be 364 ± 15 kcal mol−1 229 and calculated to be 365 ± 10 kcal mol−1 295 with the PBEN functional.296 For comparison, the value for PuO22+ is measured to be 413 ± 16 kcal mol−1 229 and calculated to be 418 ± 15 kcal mol−1.297 The high stability of uranyl, together with its high solubility and mobility,298 makes it difficult to eliminate its environmental contamination, and calls for knowledge on the reduction of [UO2]2+ to states that are easy to handle. Efforts from experimental side in recent years cover the issues of, but are not limited to, the selective oxo silylation of uranyl in a well-defined rigid molecular framework in an anaerobic environment299 and the reversible axial oxo/alkoxide exchange, with the reduction reaction with either methanol or ether upon exposure to UV light in an inert atmosphere, and the reverse process upon the hydrolysis of the alkoxide.300
From the theoretical side, recent work contributes to the understanding of the possible mechanism for the reduction of uranyl through oxo-group silylation,301 in which first a dipotassium uranyl complex is formed. This complex is a highly oxidizing species, and it may readily react with silyl substrates (e.g. TMSX with X = Me or NMe2) through N–Si or C–Si homolysis to form the O–Si bond. The U(VI) is reduced to U(V), and a radical (Me or NMe2) is generated. The formation of a U–(KOH)2 complex (see Fig. 10) blocks the coordination of the silane substrate to the equatorial plane, and thus may promote the probability of the silylation of the U–O bond.
 Fig. 10  The U–(KOH)2 complex. See also Scheme 7 in ref. 301. 
The reduction of uranyl [UO2]2+ (VI/V) may also proceed through biocatalysis,112,287,302–304 where the catalysts can be, e.g. cytochrome c7 proteins.112 In this study, the binding site was located by force field calculations and uranyl is bound to the negatively charged residues, Asp27 and Glu31, which are in the vicinity, and it is about 11 Å away from the heme I, which may serve as the ultimate electron donor. This work proposes two different mechanisms to address the reduction of the hydrated uranyl cation by G. sulfurreducens and D. acetoxidans. The difference is in the initial electron transfer step from the heme to the substrate, where the substrate is a cation–cation complex in the case of D. acetoxidans, while in the case of G. sulfurreducens, it is the single uranyl cation, and after receiving an electron, the uranyl then forms a U(V)–U(VI) complex with another uranyl cation. After the formation of a U(V)–U(V) complex, disproportionation happens in both enzymes to give a U(VI)–U(IV) complex which eventually dissociates and produces the U(VI) and U(IV) species. The U(VI) species stays in the active site, waiting for the next catalytic cycle. The evolution of the intermediate structures along the catalytic pathway was found to be consistent with the time series of the spectrum over 24 hours in an EXAFS study,287 suggesting that the mechanism could be a plausible path for the reduction of uranyl in cytochrome c7.
In the presence of alcohol, [UO2]2+ may be reduced to [UO2]+ by means of photochemistry.305 A consensus mechanism includes a hydrogen abstraction process from the alcohol by the excited [UO22+]*.300 This happens at the axial-O site which may be activated by a base (forming a uranyl hydroxo dimer [(UO2)2(OH)2]2+)279 or through photoexcitation.306–308 A recent DFT and TDDFT study309 suggests that the interaction with the alcohol may enhance the reactivity of the axial O, and the excitation of [UO22+] in turn strengthens this interaction and facilitates hydrogen abstraction to reduce [UO22+] to [UO2+]. In the absence of alcohol, the excited [UO22+] triplet state displays a different character, and this mechanism may not hold any longer for the photon-induced process.
Reduction potential is an indicator to show how difficult it is to realize the reduction of actinyl species, and studies159 have shown that the CASPT2 and CCSD(T) methods may be used to estimate reasonably the reduction potentials of AnO22+/AnO2+ (An = U, Np, Pu, Am) by coupling to a Fe3+/Fe2+ pair. In general the calculation of a reduction potential often suffers from insufficient sampling under specific chemical conditions and lacks an accurate free energy difference of the couple, thus a precise agreement with the experimental values is beyond the reach of studies based on the geometric optimization of static structures. With the solvent effect treated with the CPCM model, CASPT2 gives the reduction potential of Fe(H2O)63+/2+ as 0.696 V, comparable to the experimental value of 0.771 V.310 The values for AnO22+/AnO2+ are 0.003, 1.525, 0.730, and 1.894 V for U, Np, Pu, and Am, compared to the experimental data311 of 0.088, 1.159, 0.936 and 1.591 V. The CCSD(T) method improves the reduction potential for the U(VI/V) couple (0.082 V) while overestimates the one for Fe(III/II) (1.119 V).
The rate constant of the process UO2+(aq) + Fe3+(aq) → UO22+(aq) + Fe2+(aq)(8)has been measured experimentally with a [H+] 1 M, and ionic strength 2.00 M which is 2.5 × 105 M−1 s−1 at 25 °C.312 Assuming that the electron transfer proceeds following the Outersphere mechanism, the CASSCF method gives a rate constant of 1.6 × 106 M−1 s−1.313


4.3.5 Hydroamination reactions. 
The hydroamination reaction represents a synthetic methodology to add an amine R2N– across an unsaturated C–C bond and form a regiospecific C–N bond. Intramolecular hydroamination/cyclisation (IHC) is an efficient way to synthesize a cyclic ring including a nitrogen atom with high selectivity. Organoactinoid molecules have been used for this purpose, and a plausible mechanism has been proposed.314–316 According to this mechanism, the reaction includes the processes below: (a) precatalyst activation; (b) cyclisation; (c) isomerisation of the allylic tether; (d) azacycle protonolysis.
This mechanism was proposed to be valid for both actinoids and lanthanoids. According to a recent TPSS study317 of the molecular system (4E,6)-heptadienylamine + [(CGC)Th(NMe2)2] (CGC = [Me2Si(η5-Me4C5)tBuN)]2−), although the two classes of catalysts promote the reaction in a similar way, they show different reactivity in the cyclisation and protonolysis steps due to the enhancement of the bond covalency of Th compared to Sm. In the case of Th, the exocyclic ring closure bears a moderate free energy of activation of 15.2–18.6 kcal mol−1, compared to the one of 4.9 kcal mol−1 in the case of Sm. The free energies of activation to the protonolysis are 8.3 and 10.4 kcal mol−1 respectively.


4.3.6 Uranium azide photolysis. 
Uranium nitride [UN]x is considered as one choice for a next generation of nuclear fuels as an alternative to the traditional mixed actinoid oxides because of their high melting point and thermal conductivity.318,319 Given the limited knowledge on UN, its chemical behavior remains to be understood. According to a recent study,320 a known way to prepare such compounds is from the photolysis of an azide (U–NNN) precursor. The UN moiety displays nucleophilicity and may interact with a C–H bond to form a C–N bond. In a recent DFT study320 in which SiH3 is used to mimic the SiMe3 in the prototype experiment, the whole reaction, including the formation of uranium nitride and its consumption in an insertion reaction of UN into a C–H bond, is a three-step process: the photolysis of azide to give nitride and releasing a N2 molecule, the hydrogen abstraction of UN from an alkyl group in the vicinity, and the formation of the C–N bond. The energetics of this process at both single (S) and triplet (T) states are given in Table 3.
Table 3 Energetics (kcal mol−1) of the formation of uranium nitride and its reaction with alkanea




Spin
Azide
TS1
IM1b
TS2
IM2
TS3
IM3





a Data from ref. 320.
b See Fig. 11 for a schematic elucidation of stationary points IM1, IM2 and IM3. TS1, TS2 and TS3 are the B3LYP-optimized transition states that connect the reactant (azide) and IM1, IM1 and IM2, IM2 and IM3 respectively.





Singlet
26.1
88.2
−11.3
24.7
−0.1
13.6
−10.3


Triplet
0.0
48.1
4.4
24.2
−8.9
−9.6
−36.2




 Fig. 11  Stationary points predicted by DFT calculations of the uranium azide photolysis.320 
For the reaction at the singlet state, IM1 involves a UN bond, while at the triplet state, it is a UN bond and the two unpaired electrons are on U and N respectively. To generate a stable uranium nitride, there should be an intersystem crossing (ISC) process from the triplet state to the singlet state. As seen in Table 3, the uranium nitride shows reactivity towards hydrogen abstraction, especially at the triplet state where the free energy barrier is about 20 kcal mol−1. This is not thermally facile, but certainly not prohibitive. Thus, to isolate uranium nitride species, its activity should be quenched. This remains to be explored. Available data suggest, for example, that the addition of a strong Lewis acid, B(C6F6)3, with the hope to protect the UN bond, deactivates the N2 loss of azide thus blocks the formation of uranium nitride.

4.4 Perspective on the application in nuclear energy
The energy problems we are facing and the disasters we have suffered in the civil nuclear energy programs make it an urgent need to understand the chemistry of actinoids that is relevant to the nuclear fuel cycle, including the front end, where the enrichment of fissile and fertile actinoids, and the development and fabrication of new generation of nuclear fuel is concerned, and the back end, where the spent fuel reprocessing, which encompasses the separation of fissile and fertile actinoids from the rest, the geological disposal of long-lived radioactive isotopes and the migration of poisonous species in the geosphere are concerned. This constitutes a vast knowledge base that we should master in order to utilize the nuclear energy in an efficient and safe way, most of which remains to be explored. The difficulties in operating an experiment call an active participation of theoretical studies to unravel the behavior of actinoids. Indeed, thanks to the advance in scientific computing techniques, there is a steady increase in the contributions from the theoretical side, and the contributions cover a broad field with the involvement of both chemists and physicists. In earlier parts of this paper, we have mentioned the studies on the environmental effect on the actinoid oxides and the potential use of ionic liquids in spent fuel reprocessing (Section 4.3.1). Below we briefly mention the advance in the characterization of actinoid carbides and nitrides and the oxidation of PuOx, followed by a perspective on how more rigorous theoretical studies are needed towards a better understanding of the behavior of actinoids, with spent fuel reprocessing as an example.

4.4.1 Actinoid carbides and nitrides. 
Actinoid carbides and nitrides are considered as promising candidates for next generation of nuclear fuels due to their ideal thermophysical properties,321 including the high melting point, high atom density, high thermal conductivity, and good compatibility with the coolant in Na cooled fast-breeder reactors, and the interest in understanding their chemical and physical properties is increasing.33,318–320,322,323
The available studies on the characterization of bonding interactions in actinoid carbides and nitrides are limited to the solid state. According to experimental studies, the 5f-electron localization, which validates the usage of the LSDA method, is enhanced with the increase in actinoid atomic number and the anion size. In the case of actinoid carbides and nitrides, the small anion size induces large orbital overlap and competes with the band formation, casting questions on the usage of either LSDA methods or strong correlation methods.
The metallic nature of ThC has been confirmed324 with the Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional,325,326 which incorporates a screened, short-range non-local Hartree–Fock type exchange. For the other actinoid carbides and nitrides, Petit et al.327 have used the self-interaction corrected local spin density (SIC-LSD) method328,329 to study the ground state electronic structure of actinoid carbides and nitrides. In this study, an increase of 5f-electron localization is recognized with the increase in actinoid atomic number, and this trend is more significant in the nitrides. UC and UN show similar DOSs, as observed in previous studies,330 and UC displays more f–p hybridization, suggesting a more covalent feature. In another study,330 UN was found to have bonding interactions of both metallic character, due to the hybridization of U 5f–5f and U 5f–6d states, and covalent character, due to the hybridization of 5f (U) and 2p (N). Going to Pu, the bonding interaction in PuN is more ionic compared to that in PuC, which has more covalent character.
The SIC-LSD study characterizes the ground states of the actinoid carbides and nitrides as UC (f0, U6+), NpC (f2, Np5+), PuC (f3, Pu5+), AmC (f6, Am3+), CmC (f7, Cm3+), UN (f1, U5+), NpN (f2/f3, Np5+/Np4+), PuN (f3, Pu5+), AmN (f6, Am3+), CmN (f7, Cm3+). From this scheme, with the increase in the atom number, both carbides and nitrides show preference for the trivalent ground-state configuration over both the tetravalent and pentavalent configurations.


4.4.2 Oxidation of PuOx in the environment. 
PuO2 has long been believed to be stable,331,332 and in a SIC-LSD study of crystalline PuO2 the tetravalent 5f4 of Pu is found to be more stable than the 5f5 and 5f3 configurations.333 However, experimentally PuO2 is found to be able to react with water to be further oxidized, leading to the formation of higher oxides, e.g. PuO2.27.286 According to the SIC-LSD study,333 there is an energy gain of about 6.9 kcal mol−1 (−22 mRy) due to the f-electron delocalization during the conversion  PuIVO2.25 → PuVO2.25(9)
This energy difference corresponds to a transformation of the system from an insulating state to a metallic state, and the balance between the localization and the delocalization of the third and the fourth f electrons may suggest an equilibrium between the Pu(IV) and Pu(V) configurations in the presence of neighbouring O impurities.
In a recent DFT study, Korzhavyi et al.334 proposed that the oxidation of PuO2 in water may be initiated by the radiolysis of water, which gives H2O2. Hydroperoxide is more active than water towards the oxidation of PuO2, and the system thus may involve the following processes  4PuO2 + H2O2(liq) → Pu4O9 + H2O(liq),(10) Pu4O9 + H2O2(liq) → 4PuO2 + H2O(liq) + O2(g).(11)
Thermodynamically these two processes are found to be favorable with a free enthalpy of −0.6 eV for the reaction of eqn (10) and −1.6 eV for the reaction of eqn (11). This explains the surface-catalyzed generation of oxygen for which it may be in turn responsible. However, the kinetic feasibility of the process is unknown, since no kinetic data are available.


4.4.3 What's more to contribute: spent fuel reprocessing as an example. 
There remains much to learn in the fields relevant to nuclear energy. Specifically, in terms of spent nuclear fuel reprocessing, the computational actinoid chemistry faces many challenges and opportunities, both in the spent nuclear fuel wet and dry reprocessing, with the former being widely used in current nuclear plant implementation and the latter being under development. We take neptunium (Np), protactinium (Pa) and plutonium (Pu) as examples to show the importance of applying computational methods to contribute to the development of the advanced reprocessing protocols of spent nuclear fuel.
Neptunium. 
Np comes into concern due to its isotope 237Np which is produced in the uranium fuel cycle, chemically as toxic as natural uranium and radiologically similar to 239Pu. Meanwhile, it can be used for the production of 238Pu, thus it is to be handled properly before the deposition of the spent nuclear fuel. In condensed phase, depending on the redox condition of the environment, 237Np may exist in its tetravalent or pentavalent state, the former with much stronger ability to complexation with ligands than the latter. The different complexation abilities of the two oxidation states call for development of novel chelators which are able to coordinate to both states to facilitate the separation of Np. Experimental studies have advanced in this respect, such as the complexation of Np(V) with diamide ligands tetraalkyl-3-oxa-glutaramide (R2NC(O)CH2)2O (R = iBu, Bu, nOct)335,336 and dipicolinic acid,337 and the speciation of Np in citrate medium.338 Theoretical studies are expected to support and, in some cases, to guide the experimental studies towards further progress in this field.
Protactinium. 
The significance of Pa in nuclear energy sits in its long lived isotope 231Pa, which is a by-product in the thorium fuel cycle, thus is important in nuclear waste management. In thorium fuel reactors, two isotopes of protactinium are produced, 233Pa, which is a β − emitter with a half-life time τ1/2 = 27d, and 231Pa, which is an α emitter with τ1/2 ≈ 32700 years.339 Proper disposal of protactinium in the waste requires knowledge of its thermodynamical properties. However, the strong tendency of Pa(V) to hydrolysis, which leads to deposition on the solid surface, or an irreversible polymerization at high concentration makes it difficult to obtain thermodynamic data of protactinium in aqueous phase. For this reason, theoretical studies are expected to explain the behavior of protactinium in aqueous phase and its migration in soil which is crucial to reach a deeper understanding of protactinium chemistry.
Limited available studies of protactinium have seen contributions from both experimental and theoretical sides. These include, but are not limited to, the structure of Pa(V) in acidic medium by means of X-ray absorption spectroscopy,340 where the Pa(V) is found to exist with a single oxo bond in concentrated sulfuric acid, while in hydrofluoride (HF) acid solution, the oxo bond is absent and the Pa(V) appears as a pure fluoro complex, [PaF7]2−, the hydration of Pa(V) by the B3LYP method,341 the complexation of Pa(V) with oxalate, which was found to be exothermic, by X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and capillary electrophoresis coupled with inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (CE-ICP-MS) from the experimental side and DFT methods from the theoretical side.342
Plutonium. 
The importance of plutonium has been recognized long time ago and much work, most of which are experimental in nature, has contributed to our knowledge of the properties of plutonium at its solid state or in solution phase. Important isotopes are 238Pu, which has been used for electricity production for, for example, unmanned spacecraft and interplanetary probes, and 239Pu, which is used in nuclear power generation and nuclear weapons. All these applications of Pu require knowledge on its solid state properties under various conditions, its behavior in the environment as a result of early time atmospheric testing of nuclear weapons and potential risk in nuclear energy, and its influence on health, etc., which calls for the contribution from the theoretical side to understand the electronic and geometric structures of Pu-containing compounds.

5 Conclusion and outlook
In this paper we try to cover recent advances in the field of computational actinoid chemistry in terms of computational models and electronic properties of molecular actinoid systems. DFT studies dominated the work in the past ten years, which is not surprising concerning the efficiency and accuracy of DFT methods in predicting the geometry and energy of the ground state of molecular systems. Amongst the variants in the hierarchy of DFT, LDA is mostly seen in the study of solid physics, while for molecular systems in gas and condense phases, GGA/hybrid-GGA and meta-GGA are confirmed to be better choices. Specifically, GGA functionals in general are able to give comparable results on geometry with hybrid functionals, while the latter show better performance in describing the thermochemistry of molecular systems, but with a bit more computational cost. In a study for relatively accurate energetics and characterization of the spin states, hybrid functionals, such as B3PW91, are recommended, however, one should be cautious on the choice of a functional as it depends on the nature of model system.
The contributions using wave function based ab initio methods, among which the CAS methods, are increasing due to the demand for a precise prediction of the ionization and excitation energies. Gagliardi and Roos et al. have shown how the bonding interactions between actinoid atoms or between actinoid and lighter atoms can be characterized by the methods of CAS/RAS family. These successful case studies certainly will promote the application of ab initio methods in computational actinoid chemistry. One method that seems promising while rarely seen in the studies of molecular actinoid systems is the IHFSCC method. As a newly developed CC method, further improvement and more applications are expected.
Concerning the applications, the significance of computational actinoid chemistry lies in its ability to complement experimental studies and, in some cases guide experimental studies. The importance of computational studies towards a better understanding of actinoid chemistry is being recognized, and the relevant studies cover a wide range of issues of actinoid chemistry, among which are the understanding the organometallic chemistry and the development of a new generation of nuclear fuels. The former is relevant to the spent nuclear fuel reprocessing and the catalytic reactions promoted by actinoids. The available work has shown that theoretical studies can provide valuable insights leading to an understanding of the properties of the molecular actinoid systems, and the mechanisms that the catalytic reactions follow. Due to the complex bonding modes in such kind of systems where the more diffuse 5f orbitals start to actively participate in the bonding interactions and more electron correlation to be handled, substantial computational effort is required for a precise description of the behavior of molecular actinoid systems which is important for their efficient application in organometallic chemistry and reprocessing of spent nuclear fuel. The latter concerns the development of new generation nuclear fuel as an alternative of the traditional actinoid oxides. Potential new materials are actinoid carbides and actinoid nitrides, for which we have only limited knowledge of their electronic properties and chemical behavior, which is crucial to develop new materials.
To reach a sustainable development of nuclear energy and other fields that are relevant to actinoids such as homogeneous catalysis, rigorous studies are needed, and the contributions from the theoretical side will be certainly crucial in assisting experiments and, when appropriate, guiding the experimental work.
One issue which is not mentioned above, while crucial in computational actinoid chemistry, is the application of supercomputing facilities. This is a long standing issue in computational science and not unique in computational actinoid chemistry. Thus we only briefly mention it here to stress its importance and make one aware of tools that have been adapted to the supercomputing techniques and are potentially useful in computational actinoid chemistry.
Theoretical studies of the characterization of accurate electronic structure of large actinoid molecular systems, the migration of actinoid molecular systems in a geological environment, and the presence of actinoids in biomolecules and their impact on the function of such kind of systems strongly depend on high performance computing facilities, and efficient parallel algorithms are required. Many modern programs, ranging from the force field level, for example, AMBER,343 CHARMM,344 GROMACS,345 GROMOS,346 NAMD,347 to the ab initio level, for example, ADF,348 CP2K,190 CPMD,184 DIRAC,40 Molcas,349 NWChem,350 Turbomole,351 VASP,352 have been parallelized to meet the demand of high-performance computing towards accuracy, size and efficiency, and some of these programs have been shown to have good scalability over thousands of processors, for which two examples are, at the force field level, NAMD, which has been applied in biomolecular simulations such as assemblages of proteins and cell membranes, and at the ab initio level, CP2K, which has been used to study heterogeneous catalysis and dye-sensitized solar cells, etc. These successful cases imply the feasibility to investigate dynamic properties of large scale actinoid-containing systems with high-level methods.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Center of Competence in Research (NCCR) in Structural Biology and by grant number 200020-121913 of the Swiss National Science Foundation, by grant number 228076 of the European Research Council, and by grant number Y1515540U1 of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in the framework of a Frontier of Novelty program, which is gratefully acknowledged. ZF Chai thanks National Natural Science Foundation of China for its support of Major Project of Nuclear Energy, grant number 91026000. Prof. Xiangyun Wang in Peking University, Beijing, China and Prof. Dr. Michael Bühl in University of St. Andrews, St. Andrews, UK are acknowledged for fruitful discussions.
References

          S. Cotton, Lanthanide and Actinide Chemistry, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.,  2006 Search PubMed .
G. Schreckenbach, P. J. Hay and R. L. Martin, Density Functional Calculations on Actinide Compounds: Survey of Recent Progress and Application to [UO2X4]2− (X = F, Cl, OH) and AnF6 (An = U, Np, Pu), J. Comput. Chem., 1999, 20, 70–90 CrossRef CAS .
W. Runde, The Chemical Interactions of Actinides in the Environment, Los Alamos Sci., 2000, 26, 392–411 CAS .
N. Kaltsoyannis, Recent developments in computational actinide chemistry, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 9–16 RSC .
Z. Szabó, T. Toraishi, V. Vallet and I. Grenthe, Solution coordination chemistry of actinides: Thermodynamics, structure and reaction mechanisms, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 784–815 CrossRef .
V. Vallet, P. Macak, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, Actinide chemistry in solution, quantum chemical methods and models, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 115, 145–160 CrossRef CAS .
I. May, R. Copping, S. M. Cornet, C. E. Talbot-Eeckelears, A. J. Gaunt, G. H. John, M. P. Redmond, C. A. Sharrad, A. D. Sutton, D. Collison, O. D. Fox, C. J. Jones, M. J. Sarsfield and R. J. Taylor, Actinyl Chemistry at the Centre for Radiochemistry Research, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 383–386 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schreckenbach and G. A. Shamov, Theoretical Actinide Molecular Science, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Kaltsoyannis, P. J. Hay, J. Li, J.-P. Blaudeau and B. E. Bursten, Theoretical studies of the electronic structure of compounds of the actinide elements, in The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements, ed. L. R. Morss, N. M. Edelstein, J. Fuger and J. J. Katz, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2008, pp. 1893–2012 Search PubMed .
J. Bouchet and G. Jomard, Lattice dynamics and thermodynamics of light actinides, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 271–273 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hotta, Multipoles in δ-Pu, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 162–167 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Dremov, F. A. Sapozhnikov, S. I. Samarin, D. G. Modestov and N. E. Chizhkova, Monte Carlo + molecular dynamics modeling of radiation damages in Pu, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 197–201 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jomard, L. Berlu, G. Rosa, P. Faure, J. Nadal and N. Baclet, Computer simulation study of self-irradiation in plutonium, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 310–313 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stan, J. C. Ramirez, P. Cristea, S. Y. Hu, C. Deo, B. P. Uberuaga, S. Srivilliputhur, S. P. Rudin and J. M. Wills, Models and simulations of nuclear fuel materials properties, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 415–423 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gryaznov, E. Heifetsa and D. Sedmidubsky, Density functional theory calculations on magnetic properties of actinide compounds, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12273–12278 RSC .
C. Cardoso, T. Gasche and M. Godinho, Magnetic structure of MFe4Al8, M = Y and U: a comparative study, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 075224 CrossRef .
P. Pyykkö, Relativistic Effects in Structural Chemistry, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 563–594 CrossRef .
L. Visscher, J. Styszyñski and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Relativistic and correlation effects on molecular properties. II. The hydrogen halides HF, HCl, HBr, HI, and HAt, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 1987–1994 CrossRef CAS .
W.-Z. Li, S.-F. Chen and Y.-J. Liu, Relativistic multireference calculation of photodissociation of o-, m-, and p-bromofluorobenzene, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 114303 CrossRef .
M. Urban and V. Kellö, Some Trends in Relativistic and Electron Correlation Effects in Electric Properties of Small Molecules, Adv. Quantum Chem., 2005, 50, 249–269 CrossRef CAS .
C. Thierfelder, P. Schwerdtfeger, A. Koers, A. Borschevsky and B. Fricke, Scalar relativistic and spin–orbit effects in closed-shell superheavy-element monohydrides, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 2009, 80, 022501 CrossRef .
M. Ilias, V. Kelloe and M. Urban, Relativistic effects in atomic and molecular properties, Acta Phys. Slovaca, 2010, 60, 259–391 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Wezenbeek, E. J. Baerends and T. Ziegler, Theoretical Study of the Relativistic Effects on the Bonds between HfCl3 and H and between ThCl3 and H, Inorg. Chem., 1995, 34, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
T. Saue, K. Faegri and O. Gropen, Relativistic effects on the bonding of heavy and superheavy hydrogen halides, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 263, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bouten, E. J. Baerends, E. van Lenthe, L. Visscher, G. Schreckenbach and T. Ziegler, Relativistic Effects for NMR Shielding Constants in Transition Metal Oxides Using the Zeroth-Order Regular Approximation, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 5600–5611 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schreckenbach, S. K. Wolff and T. Ziegler, NMR Shielding Calculations across the Periodic Table: Diamagnetic Uranium Compounds. 1. Methods and Issues, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 8244–8255 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Autschbach and T. Ziegler, Relativistic Computation of NMR Shielding and Spin–Spin Coupling Constants, in Encyclopedia of Nuclear Magnetic Resonance, John Wiley and Sons, Chichester,  2002, vol. 9, pp. 306–323 Search PubMed .

          J. Autschbach and S. Zheng, Relativistic Computations of NMR Parameters from First Principles Theory and Applications, in Annual Reports on NMR Spectroscopy, ed. G. A. Webb, Elsevier Inc,  2009, vol. 67, pp. 1–95 Search PubMed .

          J. Autschbach, Relativistic Effects on Magnetic Resonance Parameters and Other Properties of Inorganic Molecules and Metal Complexes, in Relativistic Methods for Chemists, ed. M. Barysz and Y. Ishikawa, Springer Science + Business Media B.V,  2010, pp. 521–598 Search PubMed .
W. A. de Jong, L. Visscher and W. C. Nieuwpoort, On the bonding the electric field gradient of the uranyl ion, THEOCHEM, 1998, 458, 41–52 CrossRef CAS ; W. A. de Jong, L. Visscher and W. C. Nieuwpoort, THEOCHEM, 2002, 581, 259 CrossRef .
F. Neese, A. Wolf, T. Fleig, M. Reiher and B. A. Hess, Calculation of Electric Field Gradients based on Higher-Order Generalized Douglas–Kroll Transformations, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 204107 CrossRef .
R. Mastalerz, G. Barone, R. Lindh and M. Reiher, Analytic High-Order Douglas–Kroll–Hess Electric-Field Gradients, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 074105 CrossRef .
S. Suzuki, M.-F. Li and T. Ariizumi, First-Principles Study of Structural, Electronic, Magnetic, Optical, and Magneto-Optical Properties of NpN, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2008, 77, 074703 CrossRef .
P. J. Hay, R. L. Martin and G. Schreckenbach, Theoretical Studies of the Properties and Solution Chemistry of AnO22+ and AnO2+ Aquo Complexes for An = U, Np, and Pu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 6259–6270 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schimmelpfennig, T. Privalov, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, 
            Ab initio Studies of Np and Pu Complexes and Reactions in the Gas Phase: Structures and Thermodynamics, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2003, 107, 9705–9711 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lee and M. S. Kim, Origin of the Large Spin–Orbit Effect in the Vibrational Frequencies of Haloalkane Cations, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2064–2066 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Reiher and A. Wolf, Relativistic Quantum Chemistry: The Fundamental Theory of Molecular Science, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2009 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, G. Hong, D. Dai, L. Li and M. Dolg, The Beijing 4-Component Density Functional Program Package (BDF), Theor. Chem. Acc., 1997, 96, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Grant and H. M. Quiney, Application of relativistic theories and quantum electrodynamics to chemical problems, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2000, 80, 283–297 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Bast, H. J. Aa. Jensen, T. Saue and L. Visscheret al., DIRAC, a relativistic ab initio electronic structure program (see http://dirac.chem.vu.nl) .
L. Visscher, O. Visser, H. Aerts, H. Merenga and W. C. Nieuwpoort, Relativistic quantum chemistry: the MOLFDIR program package, Comput. Phys. Commun., 1994, 81, 120–144 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Laikov and Y. A. Ustynyuk, PRIRODA 04: a quantum chemical program suite. New possibilities in the study of molecular systems with the application of parallel computing, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2005, 54, 820–826 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barysz and A. J. Sadlej, Two-component methods of relativistic quantum chemistry: From the Douglas–Kroll approximation to the exact two-component formalism, THEOCHEM, 2001, 573, 181–200 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barysz and A. J. Sadlej, Infinite-order two-component theory for relativistic quantum chemistry, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 116, 2696 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Dyall, A systematic sequence of relativistic approximations, J. Comput. Chem., 2002, 23, 786–793 CrossRef CAS .
M. Douglas and N. M. Kroll, Quantum electrodynamical corrections to the fine-structure of helium, Ann. Phys., 1974, 82, 89–155 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Hess, Applicability of the no-pair equation with free-particle projection operators to atomic and molecular-structure calculations, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1985, 32, 756–763 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Hess, Relativistic electronic-structure calculations employing a 2-component no-pair formalism with external-field projection operators, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1986, 33, 3742–3748 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jansen and B. A. Hess, Revision of the Douglas–Kroll transformation, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1989, 39, 6016–6017 CrossRef .
W. A. deJong, R. J. Harrison and D. A. Dixon, Parallel Douglas–Kroll energy and gradients in NWChem: Estimating scalar relativistic effects using Douglas–Kroll contracted basis sets, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 114, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Rösch, A. Matveev, V. A. Nasluzov, K. M. Neyman, L. Moskaleva and S. Krüger, Quantum chemistry with the Douglas–Kroll–Hess approach to relativistic density functional theory: Efficient methods for molecules and materials, in Theoretical and Computational Chemistry (Relativistic Electronic Structure Theory, Part 2: Applications), ed. P. Schwerdtfeger, Elsevier B.V,  2004, vol. 14, pp. 656–722 Search PubMed .
M. Reiher, Douglas–Kroll–Hess Theory: a relativistic electrons-only theory for chemistry, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 116, 241–252 CrossRef CAS .
E. van Lenthe, E. J. Baerends and J. G. Snijders, Relativistic regular two-component Hamiltonians, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 99, 4597–4610 CrossRef CAS .
E. van Lenthe, E. J. Baerends and J. G. Snijders, Relativistic total energy using regular approximations, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 9783–9792 CrossRef CAS .
E. van Lenthe, A. E. Ehlers and E. J. Baerends, Geometry optimization in the Zero Order Regular Approximation for Relativistic Effects, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 8943–8953 CrossRef CAS .
E. van Lenthe, J. G. Snijders and E. J. Baerends, The zero-order regular approximation for relativistic effects: the effect of spin–orbit coupling in closed shell molecules, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 105, 6505–6516 CrossRef CAS .
L. Visscher and E. van Lenthe, On the distinction between scalar and spin–orbit relativistic effects, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 306, 357–365 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Koelling and B. N. Harmon, A technique for relativistic spin-polarised calculations, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1977, 10, 3107–3114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gollisch and L. Fritsche, Relativistic one-particle equation for electron states of heavy metals, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1978, 86, 145–150 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Dyall, An exact separation of the spin-free and spin-dependent terms of the Dirac–Coulomb–Breit Hamiltonian, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 100, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Sadlej and J. G. Snijders, Spin separation in the regular Hamiltonian approach to solutions of the Dirac equation, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 229, 435–438 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hong, M. Dolg and L. Li, A comparison of scalar-relativistic ZORA and DKH density functional schemes: monohydrides, monooxides and monofluorides of La, Lu, Ac and Lr, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 334, 396–402 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Shestakov and N. S. Emelyanova, Application of scalar-relativistic DFT approach for calculation of structural and electronic properties of mercaptobenzothiazolyl lanthanide complexes with luminescent activity, THEOCHEM, 2010, 954, 124–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. O. Odoh and G. Schreckenbach, Performance of Relativistic Effective Core Potentials in DFT Calculations on Actinide Compounds, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 1957–1963 CrossRef CAS .
P. Turski and A. J. Sadlej, The change of picture contribution to relativistic corrections to second-order properties, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 338, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Dyall, Interfacing relativistic and nonrelativistic methods. I. Normalized elimination of the small component in the modified Dirac equation, J. Chem. Phys., 1997, 106, 9618–9626 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kutzelnigg and W. Liu, Quasirelativistic theory equivalent to fully relativistic theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 241102 CrossRef .
W. Kutzelnigg and W. Liu, Quasirelativistic theory I. Theory in terms of a quasi-relativistic operator, Mol. Phys., 2006, 104, 2225–2240 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu and W. Kutzelnigg, Quasirelativistic theory. II. Theory at matrix level, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 114107 CrossRef .
M. Iliaš, H. J. Aa. Jensen, V. Kello, B. O. Roos and M. Urban, Theoretical study of PbO and the PbO anion, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 408, 210–215 CrossRef .
M. Filatov, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 107101 CrossRef  . Comment on “Quasirelativistic theory equivalent to fully relativistic theory” [J. Chem. Phys., 123, 241102].
D. Peng, W. Liu, Y. Xiao and L. Cheng, Making four- and two-component relativistic density functional methods, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 104106 CrossRef .
W. Liu, New Advances in Relativistic Quantum Chemistry, Prog. Chem., 2007, 19, 833–851 CAS .
W. Liu, Ideas of relativistic quantum chemistry, Mol. Phys., 2010, 108, 1679–1706 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Christiansen, W. C. Ermler and K. S. Pitzer, Relativistic Effects in Chemical Systems, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 1985, 36, 407–432 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Dolg, Relativistic effective core potentials, in Theoretical and Computational Chemistry, ed. P. Schwerdtfeger, Elsevier B.V,  2002, vol. 11, pp. 793–862 Search PubMed .

          X. Cao and M. Dolg, Relativistic Pseudopotentials, in Relativistic Methods for Chemists, ed. M. Barysz and Y. Ishikawa, Springer Science + Business Media B.V,  2010, pp. 215–277 Search PubMed .
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, 
            Ab initio effective core potentials for molecular calculations. Potentials for the transition metal atoms Sc to Hg, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 270–282 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, 
            Ab initio effective core potentials for molecular calculations. Potentials for K to Au including the outermost core orbitals, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 299–310 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Wadt and P. J. Hay, 
            Ab initio effective core potentials for molecular calculations. Potentials for main group elements Na to Bi, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 284–298 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Dolg, Effective core potentials, in Modern methods and algorithms of quantum chemistry, ed. J. Grotendorst, John von Neumann Institute for Computing, Jülich, Germany, NIC Series,  2000, vol. 3, pp. 507–540 Search PubMed .
X. Cao and M. Dolg, Relativistic energy-consistent ab initio pseudopotentials as tools for quantum chemical investigations of actinide systems, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2006, 250, 900–910 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dolg and X. Cao, Relativistic Pseudopotentials: Their Development and Scope of Applications, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 403–480 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moritz, X. Cao and M. Dolg, Quasirelativistic energy-consistent
5f-in-core pseudopotentials for trivalent actinide elements, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 117, 473–481 CrossRef .
A. Moritz, X. Cao and M. Dolg, Quasirelativistic energy-consistent 5f-in-core pseudopotentials, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2007, 118, 845–854 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moritz and M. Dolg, Quasirelativistic energy-consistent 5f-in-core pseudopotentials for pentavalent and hexavalent actinide elements, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2008, 121, 297–306 CrossRef CAS .
W. Müller, J. Flesch and W. Meyer, Treatment of intershell correlation effects in ab initio calculations by use of core polarization potentials. Method and application to alkali and alkaline earth atoms, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 3297 CrossRef .
M. Foucrault, Ph. Millie and J. P. Daudey, Nonperturbative method for core-valence correlation in pseudopotential calculations: application to the Rb2 and Cs2 molecules, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 1257–1264 CrossRef CAS .
N. Iché-Tarrat and C. J. Marsden, Examining the Performance of DFT Methods in Uranium Chemistry: Does Core Size Matter for a Pseudopotential?, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 7632–7642 CrossRef .
E. V. Beck, S. R. Brozell, J.-P. Blaudeau, L. W. Burggraf and R. M. Pitzer, Assessment of the Accuracy of Shape-Consistent Relativistic Effective Core Potentials Using Multireference Spin–Orbit Configuration Interaction Singles and Doubles Calculations of the Ground and Low-Lying Excited States of U4+ and U5+, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 12626–12631 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized Gradient Approximation Made Simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS ; J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1396 CrossRef .
J. M. Tao, J. P. Perdew, V. N. Staroverov and G. E. Scuseria, Climbing the density functional ladder: nonempirical meta-generalized gradient approximation designed for molecules and solids, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 146401 CrossRef .
C. Adamo and V. Barone, Toward reliable density functional methods without adjustable parameters: the PBE0 model, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 110, 6158–6170 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, Density-functional exchange-energy approximation with correct asymptotic-behavior, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1988, 38, 3098–3100 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, W. Yang and R. G. Parr, Development of the Colle-Salvetti correlation-energy formula into a functional of the electron density, Phys. Rev. B, 1988, 37, 785–789 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Dreizler, Relativistic Density Functional Theory, in A Primer in Density Functional Theory, ed. C. Fiolhais, F. Nogueira and M. Marques, Springer-Verlag, Berlin Heidelberg,  2003, pp. 123–143 Search PubMed .

          C. van Wüllen, Relativistic Density Functional Theory, in Relativistic Methods for Chemists, ed. M. Barysz and Y. Ishikawa, Springer Science + Business Media B.V,  2010, pp. 191–214 Search PubMed .
A. Georges, G. Kotliar, W. Krauth and M. J. Rozenberg, Dynamical mean-field theory of strongly correlated fermion systems and the limit of infinite dimension, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1996, 68, 13–125 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Anisimov, A. I. Poteryaev, M. A. Korotin, A. O. Anokhin and G. Kotliar, First-principles calculations of the electronic structure and spectra of strongly correlated systems: dynamical mean-field theory, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 1997, 9, 7359–7367 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Lichtenstein and M. I. Katsnelson, 
            Ab initio calculations of quasiparticle band structure in correlated systems: LDA++ approach, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1998, 57, 6884–6895 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Pourovskii, M. I. Katsnelson and A. I. Lichtenstein, Correlation effects in electronic structure of actinide monochalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 115106 CrossRef .
T. Gouder, F. Wastin, J. Rebizant and L. Havela, 5f-Electron Localization in PuSe and PuSb, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 3378–3381 CrossRef CAS .
T. Durakiewicz, J. J. Joyce, G. H. Lander, C. G. Olson, M. T. Butterfield, E. Guziewicz, A.
J. Arko, L. Morales, J. Rebizant, K. Mattenberger and O. Vogt, Electronic structure of actinide antimonides and tellurides from photoelectron spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 70, 205103 CrossRef .
J. M. Fourniera, E. Pleskaa, J. Chiapusioa, R. J. Rossat-Mignoda, J. Spirletb and J. C. Vogt, Electrical resistivity of plutonium monochalcogenides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1990, 163, 493–495 Search PubMed .
P. Wåhlin, C. Danilo, V. Vallet, F. Réal, J.-P. Flament and U. Wahlgren, An Investigation of the Accuracy of Different DFT Functionals on the Water Exchange Reaction in Hydrated Uranyl(VI) in the Ground State and the First Excited State, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 569–577 CrossRef .
A. L. Kutepov, The effect of exact calculation of exchange interaction upon calculated electronic structure of actinides, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 174–176 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. M. Ingram, N. Kaltsoyannis, A. J. Gaunt and M. P. Neu, Covalency in the f-element-chalcogen bond computational studies of [M(N(EPH2)2)3] (M = La, U, Pu; E = O, S, Se, Te), J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 369–375 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. M. Ingram, M. J. Tassell, A. J. Gaunt and N. Kaltsoyannis, Covalency in the f Element-Chalcogen Bond. Computational Studies of M[N(EPR2)2]3 (M = La, Ce, Pr, Pm, Eu, U, Np, Pu, Am, Cm; E = O, S, Se, Te; R = H, iPr, Ph), Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 7824–7833 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. L. Häller, N. Kaltsoyannis, M. J. Sarsfield, I. May, S. M. Cornet, M. P. Redmond and M. Helliwell, A Structural and Theoretical Investigation of Equatorial cis and trans Uranyl Phosphinimine and Uranyl Phosphine Oxide Complexes UO2Cl2(Cy3PNH)2 and UO2Cl2(Cy3PO)2, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4868–4875 CrossRef .
J. J. Berard, G. Schreckenbach, P. L. Arnold, D. Patel and J. B. Love, Computational Density Functional Study of Polypyrrolic Macrocycles: Analysis of Actinyl-Oxo to 3d Transition Metal Bonding, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11583–11592 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Minasian, J. L. Krinsky, J. D. Rinehart, R. Copping, T. Tyliszczak, M. Janousch, D. K. Shuh and J. Arnold, A Comparison of 4f vs. 5f Metal–Metal Bonds in (CpSiMe3)3M–ECp* (M = Nd, U; E = Al, Ga; Cp* = C5Me5): Synthesis, Thermodynamics, Magnetism, and Electronic Structure, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13767–13783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sundararajan, A. J. Campbell and I. H. Hillier, Catalytic Cycles for the Reduction of [UO2]2+ by Cytochrome c7 Proteins Proposed from DFT Calculations, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 4451–4457 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Shamov, G. Schreckenbach and T. N. Vo, A Comparative Relativistic DFT and ab initio Study on the Structure and Thermodynamics of the Oxofluorides of Uranium(IV), (V) and (VI), Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 4932–4947 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Lyon, L. Andrews, P.-Å. Malmqvist, B. O. Roos, T. Yang and B. E. Bursten, Infrared Spectrum and Bonding in Uranium Methylidene Dihydride, CH2 = UH2, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 4917–4925 CrossRef CAS .
J. Raab, R. H. Lindh, X. Wang, L. Andrews and L. Gagliardi, A Combined Experimental and Theoretical Study of Uranium Polyhydrides with New Evidence for the Large Complex UH4(H2)6, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 6383–6387 CrossRef CAS .
L. Andrews and H.-G. Cho, Infrared Spectrum and Structure of CH2ThH2, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 6796–6798 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bühl, H. Kabrede, R. Diss and G. Wipff, Effect of Hydration on Coordination Properties of Uranyl(VI) Complexes. A First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6357–6368 CrossRef .
A. Elkechai, S. Meskaldji, A. Boucekkine, L. Belkhiri, D. Bouchet, M. Amarouche, C. Clappe, D. Hauchard and M. Ephritikhine, A relativistic DFT study of the electron affinity of the biscyclopentadienyl uranium complexes Cp*2UX2, THEOCHEM, 2010, 954, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
S. Elgazzar, J. Rusz and P. M. Oppeneer, 
            Ab initio computational and experimental investigation of the electronic structure of actinide 218 materials, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 235117 CrossRef .
M. Bertolus and M. Defranceschi, Toward the Comparison of Rare Earth Element and Actinide Behavior in Materials: A Computational Study of Ce- and U-Bearing Britholites, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19226–19232 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Silva-Junior, M. Schreiber, S. P. A. Sauer and W. Thiel, Benchmarks for electronically excited states: time-dependent density functional theory and density functional theory based multireference configuration interaction, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 104103 CrossRef .
P. Tecmer, A. S. P. Gomes, U. Ekström and L. Visscher, Electronic spectroscopy of UO22+, NUO+ and NUN: an evaluation of time-dependent density functional theory for actinides, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6249–6259 RSC .
A. K. Rajagopal, Time-dependent functional theory of coupled electron and electromagnetic fields in condensed-matter systems, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1994, 50, 3759–3765 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, W. Liu, B. Song and C. Liu, Time-dependent four-component relativistic density-functional theory for excitation energies, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 6658–6666 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao, W. Zou, W. Liu, Y. Xiao, D. Peng, B. Song and C. Liu, Time-dependent four-component relativistic density-functional theory for excitation energies. II. The exchange–correlation kernel, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 054102 CrossRef .
R. Bast, H. J. A. Jensen and T. Saue, Relativistic adiabatic time-dependent density functional theory using hybrid functionals and noncollinear spin magnetization, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2009, 109, 2091–2112 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, T. Ziegler, E. van Lenthe, S. van Gisbergen and E. J. Baerends, The calculation of excitation energies based on the relativistic two-component zeroth-order regular approximation and time-dependent density-functional with full use of symmetry, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 204103 CrossRef .
R. A. Friesner, 
            Ab initio quantum chemistry: methodology and applications, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 6648–6653 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Helgaker, P. Jorgensen and J. Olsen, Molecular Electronic Structure Theory, Wiley, Chichester,  2000 Search PubMed .
M. Head-Gordon, J. A. Pople and M. J. Frisch, MP2 energy evaluation by direct methods, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1988, 153, 503–506 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Roos, P. R. Taylor and P. E. M. Siegbahn,  A Complete, Active Space SCF Method (CASSCF) Using a Density Matrix Formulated Super-CI Approach, Chem. Phys., 1980, 48, 157–173 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Huber, A. R. M. Shahi, F. Aquilante, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, What Active Space Adequately Describes Oxygen Activation by a Late Transition Metal? CASPT2 and RASPT2 Applied to Intermediates from the Reaction of O2 with a Cu(I)-R-Ketocarboxylate, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 2967–2976 CrossRef CAS .
K. Andersson, P.-A. Malmqvist, B. O. Roos, A. J. Sadlej and K. Wolinski, Second-order perturbation theory with a casscf reference function, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 5483–5488 CrossRef CAS .
K. Andersson, P.-A. Malmqvist and B. O. Roos, Second-order perturbation theory with a complete active space self-consistent field reference function, J. Chem. Phys., 1992, 96, 1218–1226 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .
D. Mukherjee and S. Pal, Use of cluster-expansion methods in the open-shell correlation-problem, Adv. Quantum Chem., 1989, 20, 291–373 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kaldor and E. Eliav, High-Accuracy Calculations for Heavy and Super-Heavy Elements, Adv. Quantum Chem., 1998, 31, 313–336 CrossRef CAS .
A. Borschevsky, E. Eliav, M. J. Vilkas, Y. Ishikawa and U. Kaldor, Transition energies of atomic lawrencium, Eur. Phys. J. D, 2007, 45, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Malrieu, P. Durand and J. P. Daudey, Intermediate Hamiltonians as a new class of effective Hamiltonians, J. Phys. A: Math. Gen., 1985, 18, 809–826 CrossRef CAS .
T. Koren, E. Eliav, Y. Ishikawa and U. Kaldor, Intermediate Hamiltonian coupled cluster methods: meV accuracy for alkaline earth transition energies, THEOCHEM, 2006, 768, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sewtz, H. Backe, A. Dretzke, G. Kube, W. Lauth, P. Eberhardt Schwamb, K. Grüning, C. Thörle, P. Trautmann, N. Kunz, P. Lassen, J. Passler, G. Dong, C. Z. Fritzsche and S. Haire, First Observation of Atomic Levels for the Element Fermium (Z = 100), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 163002 CrossRef CAS .
F. Weigend and M. Häser, RI-MP2: first derivatives and global consistency, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1997, 97, 331–340 CrossRef CAS .
F. Weigend, M. Häser, H. Patzelt and R. Ahlrichs, RI-MP2: Optimized auxiliary basis sets and demonstration of efficiency, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 294, 143–152 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Hättig, Electronic Structure: Hartree–Fock and Correlation Methods, in Multiscale Simulation Methods in Molecular Sciences, ed. J. Grotendorst, N. Attig, S. Blügel and D. Marx, NIC Series,  2009, vol. 42, pp. 77–120 Search PubMed .
K. Eichkorn, O. Treutler, H. Öhm, M. Häser and R. Ahlrichs, Auxiliary basis sets to approximate coulomb potentials, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 242, 652–660 CrossRef CAS ; K. Eichkorn, O. Treutler, H. Öhm, M. Häser and R. Ahlrichs, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 242, 242–283 CrossRef .
K. Eichkorn, F. Weigend, O. Treutler and R. Ahlrichs, Auxiliary basis sets for main row atoms and transition metals and their use to approximate coulomb potentials, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1997, 97, 119–124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Komorovský, M. Repiský, O. L. Malkina, V. G. Malkin, I. Malkin and M. Kaupp, Resolution of identity Dirac–Kohn–Sham method using the large component only: calculations of g-tensor and hyperfine tensor, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 084108 CrossRef .

          R. Ahlrichs, S. Elliot and U. Huniar, Ab initio Treatment of Large Molecules, in Modern Methods and Algorithms of Quantum Chemistry, ed. J. Grotendorst, NIC Series,  2000, vol. 3, pp. 7–25 Search PubMed .
L. Vogt, R. Olivares-Amaya, S. Kermes, Y. Shao, C. Amador-Bedolla and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Accelerating Resolution-of-the-Identity Second-Order Møller–Plesset Quantum Chemistry Calculations with Graphical Processing Units, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 2049–2057 CrossRef CAS .
R. Coates, M. Coreno, M. DeSimone, J. C. Green, N. Kaltsoyannis, A. Kerridge, N. Narband and A. Sella, A mystery solved? Photoelectron spectroscopic and quantum chemical studies of the ion states of CeCp3+, Dalton Trans., 2009, 5943–5953 RSC .
G. La Macchia, I. Infante, J. Raab, J. K. Gibson and L. Gagliardi, A theoretical study of the ground state and lowest excited states of PuO0/+/+2 and PuO20/+/+2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7278–7283 RSC .
F. Ruipérez, C. Danilo, F. Réeal, J.-P. Flament, V. Vallet and U. Wahlgren, An ab initio Theoretical Study of the Electronic Structure of UO2+ and [UO2(CO3)3]5−, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 1420–1428 CrossRef .
A. Kovács, R. J. M. Konings, J. Raab and L. Gagliardi, A theoretical study of AmOn and CmOn (n = 1, 2), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1114–1117 RSC .
D. Hagberg, E. Bednarz, N. M. Edelstein and L. Gagliardi, A Quantum Chemical and Molecular Dynamics Study of the Coordination of Cm(III) in Water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14136–14137 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Roos, P. Malmqvist and L. Gagliardi, Exploring the Actinide–Actinide Bond: Theoretical Studies of the Chemical Bond in Ac2, Th2, Pa2, and U2, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 17000–17006 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Tsipis, C. E. Kefalidis and C. A. Tsipis, The Role of the 5f Orbitals in Bonding, Aromaticity, and Reactivity of Planar Isocyclic and Heterocyclic Uranium Clusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9144–9155 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cao and K. Balasubramanian, Theoretical studies of UO2(OH)(H2O)n+, UO2(OH)2(H2O)n, NpO2(OH)(H2O)n, and PuO2(OH)(H2O)n+(n < 21) complexes in aqueous solution, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 164504 CrossRef .
I. Infante, A. Kovacs, G. La Macchia, A. R. M. Shahi, J. K. Gibson and L. Gagliardi, Ionization Energies for the Actinide Mono- and Dioxides Series, from Th to Cm: Theory versus Experiment, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 6007–6015 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsushima, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, Quantum Chemical Calculations of Reduction Potentials of AnO22+/AnO2+(An = U, Np, Pu, Am) and Fe3+/Fe2+ Couples, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 9175–9182 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tsushima, Quantum Chemical Calculations of Reduction Potentials of the Pu(VII)/Pu(VIII) Couple, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 13059–13063 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin and D. G. Truhlar, QM/MM: what have we learned, where are we, and where do we go from here?, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2006, 117, 185–199 CrossRef .
S. C. L. Kamerlin, M. Haranczyk and A. Warshel, Progresses in Ab initio QM/MM Free Energy Simulations of Electrostatic Energies in Proteins: Accelerated QM/MM Studies of pKa, Redox Reactions and Solvation Free Energies, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1253–1272 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Senn and W. Thiel, QM/MM Methods for Biomolecular Systems, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1198–1229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hagberg, G. Roos Karlström and B. O. Gagliardi, The coordination of uranyl in water: a combined quantum chemical and molecular simulation study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14250–14256 CrossRef CAS .
I. Infante, B. Van Stralen and L. Visscher, A QM/MM Study on the Aqueous Solvation of the Tetrahydroxouranylate [UO2(OH)4]2− Complex ion, J. Comput. Chem., 2006, 27, 1156–1162 CrossRef CAS .
K.-K. Han, A new Monte Carlo method for estimating free energy and chemical potential, Phys. Lett. A, 1992, 165, 28–32 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Christ and W. F. van Gunsteren, Enveloping distribution sampling: a method to calculate free energy differences from a single simulation, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 184110 CrossRef .
C. D. Christ and W. F. van Gunsteren, Multiple free energies from a single simulation: extending enveloping distribution sampling to nonoverlapping phase-space distributions, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 174112 CrossRef .
C. D. Christ and W. F. van Gunsteren, Simple, efficient, and reliable computation of multiple free energy differences from a single simulation: A reference Hamiltonian parameter update scheme for enveloping distribution sampling (EDS), J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 276–286 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Christ and W. F. van Gunsteren, Comparison of three enveloping distribution sampling Hamiltonians for the estimation of multiple free energy differences from a single simulation, J. Comput. Chem., 2009, 30, 1664–1679 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu and D. A. Kofke, Phase-space overlap measures. I. Fail-safe bias detection in free energies calculated by molecular simulation, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 054103 CrossRef .
D. Wu and D. A. Kofke, Phase-space overlap measures. II. Design and implementation of staging methods for free-energy calculations, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 084109 CrossRef .
T. Kerdcharoen, K. Liedl and B. Rode, A QM/MM simulation method applied to the solution of Li+ in liquid ammonia, Chem. Phys., 1996, 211, 313–323 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Schwenk, H. H. Loeffler and B. M. Rode, Molecular dynamics simulations of Ca2+ in water: comparison of a classical simulation including three-body corrections and Born–Oppenheimer ab initio and density functional theory quantum mechanical/molecular mechanics simulations, J. Chem. Phys., 2001, 115, 10808–10813 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kerdcharoen and K. Morokuma, ONIOM-XS: an extension of the ONIOM method for molecular simulation in condensed phase, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 355, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heyden, H. Lin and D. G. Truhlar, Adaptive Partitioning in Combined Quantum Mechanical and Molecular Mechanical Calculations of Potential Energy Functions for Multiscale Simulations, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 2231–2241 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pezeshki and H. Lin, Adaptive-Partitioning Redistributed Charge and Dipole Schemes for QM/MM Dynamics Simulations: On-the-fly Relocation of Boundaries that Pass through Covalent Bonds, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2011, 7, 3625–3634 CrossRef CAS .
G. Csányi, T. Albaret, M. C. Payne and A. De Vita, “Learn on the Fly”: A Hybrid Classical and Quantum-Mechanical Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 175503 CrossRef .
R. E. Bulo, B. Ensing, J. Sikkema and L. Visscher, Toward a Practical Method for Adaptive QM/MM Simulations, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 2212–2221 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bernstein, J. R. Kermode and G. Csányi, Hybrid atomistic simulation methods for materials systems, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2009, 72, 026501 CrossRef .
I. Solt, Evaluating Boundary Dependent Errors in QM/MM Simulations, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 5728–5735 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Frick, T. S. Hofer, A. B. Pribil, B. R. Randolf and B. M. Rode, Structure and dynamics of the UO2+ ion in aqueous solution: an ab initio QMCF-MD study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11736–11743 RSC .
R. J. Frick, T. S. Hofer, A. B. Pribil, B. R. Randolf and B. M. Rode, Structure and Dynamics of the UO22+ Ion in Aqueous Solution: An ab initio QMCF MD Study, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 12496–12503 CrossRef CAS .
R. Car and M. Parrinello, Unified Approach for Molecular Dynamics and Density-Functional Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 2471–2474 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Marx and J. Hutter, Ab initio molecular dynamics: theory and implementation, in Modern methods and algorithms of quantum chemistry, ed. J. Grotendorst, John von Neumann Institute for Computing, Jülich, Germany, NIC Series 2000, vol. 3, pp. 329–477 Search PubMed .
M. Bühl, R. Diss and G. Wipff, Coordination Environment of Aqueous Uranyl(VI) Ion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13506–13507 CrossRef .
M. Bühl, G. Schreckenbach, N. Sieffert and G. Wipff, Effect of Counterions on the Structure and Stability of Aqueous Uranyl(VI) Complexes. A First-Principles Molecular Dynamics Study, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 9977–9979 CrossRef .
M. Bühl and G. Schreckenbach, Oxygen Exchange in Uranyl Hydroxide via Two “Nonclassical” Ions, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 3821–3827 CrossRef .
I.-F. W. Kuo, C. J. Mundy, M. J. McGrath and J. I. Siepmann, Time-Dependent Properties of Liquid Water: A Comparison of Car–Parrinello and Born–Oppenheimer Molecular Dynamics Simulations, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2006, 2, 1274–1281 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lippert, J. Hutter and M. Parrinello, A hybrid Gaussian and plane wave density functional scheme, Mol. Phys., 1997, 92, 477–488 CAS .
G. Lippert, J. Hutter and M. Parrinello, The Gaussian and augmented-plane-wave density functional method for ab initio molecular dynamics simulations, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1999, 103, 124–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guidon, J. Hutter and J. VandeVondele, Robust Periodic Hartree–Fock Exchange for Large-Scale
Simulations Using Gaussian Basis Sets, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2009, 5, 3010–3021 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Arko, J. J. Joyce and L. Havela, 5f-Electron Phenomena in the Metallic state, in The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements, ed. L. R. Morss, N. M. Edelstein, J. Fuger and J. J. Katz, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2008, pp. 2307–2379 Search PubMed .
R. D. Shannon, Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
A. J. Gaunt, B. L. Scott and M. P. Neu, A Molecular Actinide–Tellurium Bond and Comparison of Bonding in [MIIIN(TeP iPr2)23] (M = U, La), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 1638–1641 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roger, L. Belkhiri, P. Thuéry, M. Arliguie, A. Fourmigué, M. Boucekkine and M. Ephritikine, Lanthanide(III)/Actinide(III) Differentiation in Mixed Cyclopentadienyl/Dithiolene Compounds from X-ray Diffraction and Density Functional Theory Analysis, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 4940–4952 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mazzanti, R. Wietzke, J. Pécaut, J.-M. Latour, P. Maldivi and M. Remy, Structural and Density Functional Studies of Uranium(III) and Lanthanum(III) Complexes with a Neutral Tripodal N–Donor Ligand Suggesting the Presence of a U–N Back-Bonding Interaction, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 2389–2399 CrossRef CAS .
I. Castro-Rodrigues, K. Olsen, P. Gantzel and K. Meyer, Uranium Tris-aryloxide Derivatives Supported by Triazacyclononane: Engendering a Reactive Uranium(III) Center with a Single Pocket for Reactivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 4565–4571 CrossRef .
P. L. Arnold, Z. R. Turner, N. Kaltsoyannis, P. Pelekanaki, R. M. Bellabarba and R. P. Tooze, Covalency in Ce(IV) and U(IV) Halide and N-Heterocyclic Carbene Bonds, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 9623–9629 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gagliardi and C. J. Cramer, Quantum Chemical Characterization of the Bonding of N-Heterocyclic Carbenes to Cp2MI Compounds [M = Ce(III), U(III)], Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 9442–9447 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Gaunt, S. D. Reilly, A. E. Enriquez, B. L. Scott, J. A. Ibers, P. Sekar, K. I. M. Ingram, N. Kaltsoyannis and M. P. Neu, Experimental and Theoretical Comparison of Actinide and Lanthanide Bonding in [M(N(EPR2)2)3] Complexes (M = U, Pu, La, Ce; E = S, Se, Te; R = Ph, iPr, H), Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 29–41 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Dyall, Bonding and bending in the actinyls, Mol. Phys., 1999, 96, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Straka, K. G. Dyall and P. Pyykkö, 
            Ab initio Study of Bonding for f0 Actinide Oxyfluoride Species, Theor. Chem. Acc., 2001, 106, 393–403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Straka, P. Hrobárik and M. Kaupp, Understanding Structure and Bonding in Early Actinide 6d05f0 MX6q (M = Th-Np; X = H, F) Complexes in Comparison with Their Transition Metal 5d0 Analogues, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2591–2599 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, C. S. Wannere, C. Corminboeuf, R. Puchta and P. von Ragué, Schleyer Nucleus-Independent Chemical Shifts (NICS) as an Aromaticity Criterion, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 3842–3888 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Castro, E. Osorio, J. O. C. Jiménez-Halla, E. Matito, W. Tiznado and G. Merino, Scalar and Spin–Orbit Relativistic Corrections to the NICS and the Induced Magnetic Field: The case of the E122− Spherenes (E = Ge, Sn, Pb), J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 2701–2705 CrossRef CAS .
R. Islas, G. Martínez-Guajardo, J. O. C. Jiménez-Halla, M. Solà and G. Merino, Not All That Has a Negative NICS Is Aromatic: The Case of the H-Bonded Cyclic Trimer of HF, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 1131–1135 CrossRef CAS .
F. Feixas, J. O. C. Jiménez-Halla, E. Matito, J. Poater and M. Solà, A Test to Evaluate the Performance of
Aromaticity Descriptors in All-Metal and Semimetal Clusters. An Appraisal of Electronic and Magnetic Indicators of Aromaticity, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6, 1118–1130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cantat, C. R. Graves, K. C. Jantunen, C. J. Burns, B. L. Scott, E. J. Schelter, D. E. Morris, P. J. Hay and J. L. Kiplinger, Evidence for the Involvement of 5f Orbitals in the Bonding and Reactivity of Organometallic Actinide Compounds: Thorium(IV) and Uranium(IV) Bis(hydrazonato) Complexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17537–17551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Castro, A. Yahia and L. Maron, Are 5f Electrons Really Active in Organoactinide Reactivity? Some Insights from DFT Studies, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 990–994 CrossRef CAS .
L. Castro, A. Yahiaa and L. Maron, A DFT study of the reactivity of actinidocenes (U, Np and Pu) with pyridine and pyridine N-oxide derivatives, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 6682–6692 RSC .
S. P. McGlynn, J. K. Smith and W. C. Neely, Electronic Structure, Spectra, and Magnetic Properties of Oxycations. III. Ligation Effects on the Infrared Spectrum of the Uranyl Ion, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 35, 105–116 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-J. Pan and G. Schreckenbach, Binuclear Hexa- and Pentavalent Uranium Complexes with a Polypyrrolic Ligand: A Density Functional Study of Water- and Hydronium-Induced Reactions, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6509–6517 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Shamov and G. Schreckenbach, Density Functional Studies of Actinyl Aquo Complexes Studied Using Small-Core Effective Core Potentials and a Scalar Four-Component Relativistic Method, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 10961–10974 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Shamov and G. Schreckenbach, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 12072 CrossRef CAS  Erratum to “Density Functional Studies of Actinyl Aquo Complexes Studied Using Small-Core Effective Core Potentials and a Scalar Four-Component Relativistic Method”.
I. Infante, E. Eliav, M. J. Vilkas, Y. Ishikawa, U. Kaldor and L. Visscher, A Fock space coupled cluster study on the electronic structure of the UO2, UO2+, U4+, and U5+ species, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 124308 CrossRef .
J. M. Merritt, J. Han and M. C. Heaven, Spectroscopy of the UO2+ cation and the delayed ionization of UO2, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 084304 CrossRef .
L. Gagliardi, I. Grenthe and B. O. Roos, A Theoretical Study of the Structure of Tricarbonatodioxouranate, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 2976–2978 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Docrat, J. F. W. Mosselmans, J. M. Charnock, M. W. Whiteley, D. Collison, F. R. Livens, C. Jones and M. Edmiston, X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy of Tricarbonatodioxouranate(V), [UO2(CO3)3]5−, in Aqueous Solution, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 1879–1882 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vallet, T. Privalov, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, The Mechanism of Water Exchange in AmO2(H2O)52+ and in the Isoelectronic UO2(H2O)5+ and NpO2(H2O)52+ Complexes as Studied by Quantum Chemical Methods, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7766–7767 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Clark, J. L. Sonnenberg, P. J. Hay and R. L. Martin, Density and wave function analysis of actinide complexes: What can fuzzy atom, atoms-in-molecules, Mulliken, Löwdin, and natural population analysis tell us?, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 2563–2570 CrossRef CAS .
I. Charushnikova, E. Bossé, D. Guillaumont and P. Moisy, Crystal and Electronic Structure of a Mixed-Valent Np(IV)–Np(V) Compound: [BuMeIm]5[Np(NpO2)3(H2O)6Cl12], Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 2077–2082 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Almond, R. E. Sykora, S. Skanthakumar, L. Soderholm and T. E. Albrecht-Schmitt, Hydrothermal Synthesis, Structure, and Magnetic Properties of the Mixed-Valent Np(IV)/Np(V) Selenite Np(NpO2)2(SeO3)3, Inorg. Chem., 2004, 43, 958–963 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Cornet, L. J. L. Häller, M. J. Sarsfield, D. Collison, M. Helliwell, I. May and N. Kaltsoyannis, Neptunium(VI) chain and neptunium(VI/V) mixed
valence cluster complexes, Chem. Commun., 2009, 917–919 RSC .
S. Wang, E. V. Alekseev, W. Depmeier and T. E. Albrecht-Schmitt, Further insights into intermediate- and mixed-valency in neptunium oxoanion compounds: structure and absorption spectroscopy of K2[(NpO2)3B10O16(OH)2(NO3)2], Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3955–3957 RSC .
V. Mougel, P. Horeglad, G. Nocton, J. Pécaut and M. Mazzanti, Stable Pentavalent Uranyl Species and Selective Assembly of a Polymetallic Mixed-Valent Uranyl Complex by Cation–Cation Interactions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 8477–8480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Santos, J. Marcalo, J. P. Leal, A. P. de Matos, J. K. Gibson and R. G. Haire, FTICR-MS study of the gas-phase thermochemistry of americium oxides, Int. J. Mass Spectrom., 2003, 228, 457–465 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Gibson, R. G. Haire, J. Marcalo, M. Santos, A. Pires de Matos and J. P. Leal, Determination of the Ionization Energy of NpO2 and Comparative Ionization Energies of Actinide Oxides, J. Nucl. Mater., 2005, 344, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Gibson, R. G. Haire, G. Santos, J. Marcalo and A. Pires de Matos, Oxidation Studies of Dipositive Actinide Ions, An2+(An = Th, U, Np, Pu, Am) in the Gas Phase. Synthesis and Characterization of the Isolated Uranyl, Neptunyl and Plutonyl Ions: UO22+(g), NpO22+(g) and PuO22+(g), J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 2768–2781 CrossRef CAS .
J. Marcalo, M. Santos, J. K. Gibson and A. Pires de Matos, Gas-Phase Oxidation Reactions of Neptunium and Plutonium Ions Investigated via Fourier Transform Ion Cyclotron Resonance Mass Spectrometry, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 7190–7194 CrossRef .
J. Y. Colle, F. Capone, C. Ronchi and J. P. Hiernaut, Controversy on the First Ionization Potential of PuO2 (Nearly) Settled by New Experimental Evidence, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 12054–12058 Search PubMed .
M. Santos, J. K. Gibson, J. P. Leal, J. Marcalo, R. G. Haire and A. Pires de Matos, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 110, 4131–4132 Search PubMed  Comment on “Controversy on the First Ionization Potential of PuO2 (Nearly) Settled by New Experimental Evidence”.
R. G. Haire, Insights into the bonding and electronic nature of heavy element materials, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 444–445, 63–71 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Malmqvist, K. Pierloot, A. R. M. Shahi, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, The Restricted Active Space Followed by Second Order Perturbation Theory Method: Theory and Application to the Study of CuO2 and Cu2O2 Systems, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 204109 CrossRef .
A. R. M. Shahi, C. J. Cramer and L. Gagliardi, Second-order Perturbation Theory with Complete and Restricted Active Space Reference Functions Applied to Oligomeric Unsaturated Hydrocarbon, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 10964–10972 RSC .
P. K. Smith and D. E. Peterson, High-Temperature Evaporation and Thermodynamic Properties of Cm2O3, J. Chem. Phys., 1970, 52, 4963–4972 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pyykkö, J. Li and N. Runeberg, Quasirelativistic Pseudopotential Study of Species Isoelectronic to Uranyl and the Equatorial Coordination of Uranyl?, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4809–4813 CrossRef .
B. O. Roos, R. Lindh, H.-G. Cho and L. Andrews, Agostic Interaction in the Methylidene Metal Dihydride Complexes H2MCH2 (M = Y, Zr, Nb, Mo, Ru, Th, or U), J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 6420–6424 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Hu, J. Li, L. Andrews and J. T. Lyon, Chirality, Agostic Interactions, and Pyramidality in Actinide Methylidene Complexes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 9045–9049 CrossRef .
T. Cantat, T. Arliguie, A. Noël, P. Thuery, M. Ephritikhine, P. Le Floch and N. Mezailles, The UC Double Bond: Synthesis and Study of Uranium Nucleophilic Carbene Complexes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 963–972 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ren, X. Deng, G. Zi and D.-C. Fang, The ThC double bond: an experimental and computational study of thorium poly-carbene complexes, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 9662–9664 RSC .

          F. A. Cotton, C. A. Murillo and R. A. Walton, Multiple Bonds Between Metal Atoms, Springer Science, New York, NY, edn 3.  2005 Search PubMed .
T. Cadenbach, C. Gemel, R. Schmid, M. Halbherr, K. Ysenko, M. Cokoja and R. D. Fischer, Substituent-Free Gallium by Hydrogenolysis of Coordinated GaCp*: Synthesis and Structure of Highly Fluxional [Ru2(Ga)(GaCp*)7(H)3], Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3872–3876 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Liddle, J. McMaster, D. P. Mills, A. J. Blake, C. Jones and W. D. Woodul, σ and π Donation in an Unsupported Uranium–Gallium Bond, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1077–1080 CrossRef CAS .
M. Straka and P. Pyykkö, Linear HThThH: A Candidate for a Th–Th Triple Bond, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13090–13091 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cavigliasso and N. Kaltsoyannis, On the paucity of molecular actinide complexes with unsupported metal–metal bonds: a comparative investigation of the electronic structure and metal–metal bonding in U2X6 (X = Cl, F, OH, NH2, CH3) complexes and d-block analogues, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 6828–6839 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cavigliasso and N. Kaltsoyannis, Metal–metal bonding in molecular actinide compounds: electronic structure of [M2X8]2− (M = U, Np, Pu; X = Cl, Br, I) complexes and comparison with d-block analogues, Dalton Trans., 2006, 5476–5483 RSC .
G. Cavigliasso and N. Kaltsoyannis, Energy Decomposition Analysis of Metal–Metal Bonding in [M2X8]2− (X = Cl, Br) Complexes of 5f (U, Np, Pu), 5d (W, Re, Os), and 4d (Mo, Tc, Ru) Elements, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3557–3565 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, J. L. Sonnenberg and H. B. Schlegel, Theoretical Studies of An2II (C8H8)2 (An = Th, Pa, U, and Np) Complexes: The Search for Double-Stuffed Actinide Metallocenes, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6545–6551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gagliardi and B. O. Roos, Quantum chemical calculations show that the uranium molecule U2 has a quintuple bond, Nature, 2005, 433, 848–851 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu and X. Lu, Dimetalloendofullerene U2@C60 Has a U–U Multiple Bond Consisting of Sixfold One-Electron-Two-Center Bonds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2171–2177 CrossRef CAS .
I. Infante, L. Gagliardi and G. E. Scuseria, Is Fullerene C60 Large Enough to Host a Multiply Bonded Dimetal?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7459–7465 CrossRef CAS .

          C. J. Burns and M. S. Eisen, Homogeneous and Heterogeneous Catalytic Processes Promoted by Organoactinides, in The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements, ed. L. R. Morss, N. M. Edelstein, J. Fuger and J. J. Katz, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2008, pp. 2911–3012 Search PubMed .

          M. R. Antonio and L. Soderholm, X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy of the Actinides, in The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements, ed. L. R. Moss, N. M. Edelstein, J. Fuger and J. J. Katz, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2008, vol. 5, pp. 3086–3198 Search PubMed .
S. Skanthakumar, M. R. Antonio, R. E. Wilson and L. Soderholm, The Curium Aqua Ion, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 3485–3491 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lindqvist-Reis, C. Apostolidis, J. Rebizant, A. Morgenstern, R. Klenze, O. Walter, T. Fanghanel and R. G. Haire, The Structures and Optical Spectra of Hydrated Transplutonium Ions in the Solid State and in Solution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 919–922 CrossRef CAS .
E. Galbis, J. Hernández-Cobos, C. den Auwer, C. Le Naour, D. Guillaumont, E. Simoni, R. R. Pappalardo and E. S. Marcos, Solving the Hydration Structure of the Heaviest Actinide Aqua Ion Known: The Californium(III) Case, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3811–3815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wiebke, A. Moritz, X. Cao and M. Dolg, Approaching actinide(+III) hydration from first principles, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 459–465 RSC .
T. Yang and B. E. Bursten, Speciation of the Curium(III) Ion in Aqueous Solution: A Combined Study by Quantum Chemistry and Molecular Dynamics Simulation, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 5291–5301 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Matonic, B. L. Scott and M. P. Neu, High-Yield Synthesis and Single-Crystal X-ray Structure of a Plutonium(III) Aquo Complex: [Pu(H2O)9][CF3SO3]3, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 2638–2639 CrossRef CAS .. P. Lindqvist-Reis, R. Klenze, G. Schubert and T. Fanghänel, Hydration of Cm3+ in Aqueous Solution from 20 to 200 °C. A Time-Resolved Laser Fluorescence Spectroscopy Study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3077–3083 CrossRef CAS .L. Gagliardi and B. O. Roos, Multiconfigurational quantum chemical methods for molecular systems containing actinides, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 893–903 RSC .D. Hagberg, G. Karlström, B. O. Roos and L. Gagliardi, The Coordination of Uranyl in Water: A Combined Quantum Chemical and Molecular Simulation Study, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14250–14256 CrossRef CAS .J. Neuefeind, L. Soderholm and S. Skanthakumar, Experimental Coordination Environment of Uranyl(VI) in Aqueous Solution, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 2733–2739 CrossRef CAS .L. Soderholm, S. Skanthakumar and J. Neuefeind, Determination of actinide speciation in solution using high-energy X-ray scattering, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 383, 48–55 CrossRef CAS .P. G. Allen, J. J. Bucher, D. K. Shuh, N. M. Edelstein and T. Reich, Investigation of Aquo and Chloro Complexes of UO22+, NpO2+, Np4+, and Pu3+ by X-ray Absorption Fine Structure Spectroscopy, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 4676–4683 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Gutowski and D. A. Dixon, Predicting the Energy of the Water Exchange Reaction and Free Energy of Solvation for the Uranyl Ion in Aqueous Solution, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 8840–8856 CrossRef CAS .M. S. K. Fuchs, A. M. Shor and N. Roesch, The Hydration of the Uranyl Dication: Incorporation of Solvent Effects in Parallel Density Functional Calculations with the Program PARAGAUSS, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2002, 86, 487–501 CrossRef CAS .H. Moll, T. Reich and Z. Szabó, The hydrolysis of dioxouranium(VI) investigated using EXAFS and 17O-NMR, Radiochim. Acta, 2000, 88, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .V. Vallet, U. Wahlgren, B. Schimmelpfennig, Z. Szabó and I. Grenthe, The Mechanism for Water Exchange in [UO2(H2O)5]2+ and [UO2(oxalate)2(H2O)]2−, as Studied by Quantum Chemical Methods, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 11999–12008 CrossRef CAS .I. Farkas, I. Bányai, Z. Szabó, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, Rates and Mechanisms of Water Exchange of UO22+(aq) and UO2(oxalate)F(H2O)2−: A Variable-Temperature 17O and 19F NMR Study, Inorg. Chem., 2000, 39, 799–805 CrossRef CAS .Z. Szabó, W. Aas and I. Grenthe, Structure, Isomerism, and Ligand Dynamics in Dioxouranium(VI) Complexes, Inorg. Chem., 1997, 36, 5369–5375 CrossRef .A. Ikeda-Ohno, S. Tsushima, K. Takao, A. Rossberg, H. Funke, A. C. Scheinost, G. Bernhard, T. Yaita and C. Hennig, Neptunium Carbonato Complexes in Aqueous Solution: An Electrochemical, Spectroscopic, and Quantum Chemical Study, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 11779–11787 CrossRef CAS .J. Wiebke, A. Weigand, D. Weissmann, M. Glorius, H. Moll, G. Bernhard and M. Dolg, Combined Computational and Experimental Study of Uranyl(VI) 1:2 Complexation by Aromatic Acids, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6428–6435 CrossRef CAS .P. Wåhlin, V. Vallet, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, Water Exchange Mechanism in the First Excited State of Hydrated Uranyl(VI), Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 11310–11313 CrossRef .F. P. Rotzinger, Mechanism for the Substitution of an Aqua Ligand of UO2(OH2)52+ by Chloride, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 1654–1658 CrossRef CAS .D. L. Clark, S. D. Conradson, R. J. Donohoe, D. W. Keogh, D. E. Morris, P. D. Palmer, R. D. Rogers and C. D. Tait, Chemical Speciation of the Uranyl Ion under Highly Alkaline Conditions. Synthesis, Structures, and Oxo Ligand Exchange Dynamics, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 1456–1466 CrossRef CAS .G. A. Shamov and G. Schreckenbach, Theoretical Study of the Oxygen Exchange in Uranyl Hydroxide. An Old Riddle Solved?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13735–13744 CrossRef CAS .Z. Szabo and I. Grenthe, Reactivity of the “yl”-Bond in Uranyl(VI) Complexes. 1. Rates and Mechanisms for the Exchange between the trans-dioxo Oxygen Atoms in (UO2)2(OH)22+ and Mononuclear UO2(OH)2−nn Complexes with Solvent Water, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 9372–9378 CrossRef CAS .Z. Szabo and I. Grenthe, On the Mechanism of Oxygen Exchange Between Uranyl(VI) Oxygen and Water in Strongly Alkaline Solution as Studied by 17O NMR Magnetization Transfer, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 4928–4933 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsushima, yl-Oxygen Exchange in Uranyl(VI) Ion: A Mechanism Involving (U)2)2(μ-OH)22+via U–Oyl U Bridge Formation, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 1434–1439 CrossRef CAS .C. Gaillard, A. Chaumont, I. Billard, C. Hennig, A. Ouadi, S. Georg and G. Wipff, Competitive Complexation of Nitrates and Chlorides to Uranyl in a Room Temperature Ionic Liquid, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 6484–6494 CrossRef CAS  . Force field used in the MD simulations are from: C4mim+ in   J. de Andrade, E. S. Böes and H. Stassen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3546–3548 CrossRef  Tf2N− in   J. N. Canongia-Lopes and A. A. H. Padua, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 16893–16898 CrossRef  . UO22+ in   P. Guilbaud and G. Wipff, THEOCHEM, 1996, 366, 55–63 CrossRef  NO3− in   M. Baaden, F. Berny, C. Madic and G. Wipff, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 7659–7671 CrossRef .S.-W. Hu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-W. Chu and X.-Q. Liu, Theoretical Mechanism Study of UF6 Hydrolysis in the Gas Phase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 8877–8883 CrossRef CAS .S.-W. Hu, X.-Y. Wang, T.-W. Chu and X.-Q. Liu, Theoretical Mechanism Study of UF6 Hydrolysis in the Gas Phase (II), J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 9243–9248 CrossRef CAS .M. C. Lind, S. L. Garrison and J. M. Becnel, Trimolecular Reactions of Uranium Hexafluoride with Water, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2010, 114, 4641–4646 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Haschke, T. H. Allen and L. A. Morales, Reaction of Plutonium Dioxide with Water: Formation and Properties of PuO2+x, Science, 2000, 287, 285–287 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Renshaw, L. J. C. Butchins, F. R. Livens, I. May, J. M. Charnock and J. R. Lloyd, Bioreduction of uranium: environmental implications of a pentavalent intermediate, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 5657–5660 CrossRef CAS .H. Steele and R. J. Taylor, A Theoretical Study of the Inner-Sphere Disproportionation Reaction Mechanism of the Pentavalent Actinyl Ions, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 6311–6318 CrossRef CAS .N. N. Krot and M. S. Grigoriev, Cation–cation interaction in crystalline actinide compounds, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2004, 73, 89–100 CrossRef CAS .T. W. Newton and F. B. Baker, A Uranium (V)-Uranium (VI) Complex and Its Effect on the Uranium(V) Disproportionation Rate, Inorg. Chem., 1965, 4, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS .T. Privalov, P. Macak, B. Schimmelpfennig, E. Fromager, I. Grenthe and U. Wahlgren, Electron Transfer in Uranyl(VI)–Uranyl(V) Complexes in Solution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9801–9808 CrossRef CAS .J. J. Carroll, K. L. Haug, J. C. Weisshaar, M. R. A. Blomberg, P. E. M. Siegbahn and M. Svensson, Gas Phase Reactions of Second-Row Transition Metal Atoms with Small Hydrocarbons: Experiment and Theory, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 13955–13969 CrossRef CAS .H.-G. Cho, J. T. Lyon and L. Andrews, Reactions of Actinide Metal Atoms with Ethane: Computation and Observation of New Th and U Ethylidene Dihydride, Metallacyclopropane Dihydride, and Vinyl Metal Trihydride Complexes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 6902–6907 CrossRef CAS .M. Shuai, H. Hu, X. Wang, P. Zhao and A. Tian, Theoretical study on the reaction between uranium and O2, THEOCHEM, 2001, 536, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .L. V. Moskaleva, A. V. Matveev, S. Krüger and N. Rösch, The Heat of Formation of the Uranyl Dication: Theoretical Evaluation Based on Relativistic Density Functional Calculations, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 629–634 CrossRef .B. Hammer, L. B. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Improved adsorption energetics within density-functional theory using revised Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functionals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1999, 59, 7413–7421 CrossRef .L. V. Moskaleva, A. V. Matveev, J. Dengler and N. Rösch, The heat of formation of gaseous PuO22+ from relativistic density functional calculations, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 3767–3773 RSC .D. Rai, Solubility Product of Pu(IV) Hydrous Oxide and Equilibrium Constants of Pu(IV)/Pu(V), Pu(IV)/Pu(VI) and Pu(V)/Pu(VI) couples, Radiochim. Acta, 1984, 35, 97–106 CAS .P. L. Arnold, D. Patel, C. Wilson and J. B. Love, Reduction and selective oxo group silylation of the uranyl dication, Nature, 2008, 451, 315–318 CrossRef CAS .S. Kannan, A. E. Vaughn, E. M. Weis, C. L. Barnes and P. B. Duval, Anhydrous Photochemical Uranyl(VI) Reduction: Unprecedented Retention of Equatorial Coordination Accompanying Reversible Axial Oxo/Alkoxide Exchange, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14024–14025 CrossRef CAS .A. Yahia, P. L. Arnold, J. B. Love and L. Maron, The Effect of the Equatorial Environment on Oxo-Group Silylation of the Uranyl Dication: A Computational Study, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 4881–4888 CrossRef CAS .E. E. Roden and T. D. Scheibe, Conceptual and numerical model of uranium(VI) reductive immobilization in fractured subsurface sediments, Chemosphere, 2005, 59, 617–628 CrossRef CAS .M. Kalin, W. N. Wheeler and G. Meinrath, The removal of uranium from mining waste water using algal/microbial biomass, J. Environ. Radioact., 2004, 78, 151–177 CrossRef .A. J. Francis and C. J. Dodge, Bioreduction of Uranium(VI) Complexed with Citric Acid by Clostridia Affects Its Structure and Solubility, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 8277–8282 CrossRef CAS .R. Nagaishi, Y. Katsumura, K. Ishigure, H. Aoyagi, Z. Yoshida and T. Kimura, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 146, 157–161 CrossRef CAS .F. Réal, V. Vallet, U. Wahlgren and I. Grenthe, Ab initio Study of the Mechanism for Photoinduced Yl-Oxygen Exchange in Uranyl(VI) in Acidic Aqueous Solution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11742–11751 CrossRef .K. Pierloot, E. van Besien, E. van Lenthe and E. J. Baerends, Electronic spectrum of UO22+ and [UO2Cl4]2− calculated with time-dependent density functional theory, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 194311 CrossRef .R. G. Denning, Electronic Structure and Bonding in Actinyl Ions and their Analogs, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 4125–4143 CrossRef CAS .S. Tsushima, Photochemical Reduction of UO22+ in the Presence of Alcohol Studied by Density Functional Theory Calculations, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 4856–4862 CrossRef CAS .D. O. Whittemore and D. Langmuir, Standard electrode potential of Fe3+ + e− =
Fe2+ from 5–35 °C, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1972, 17, 288–290 CrossRef CAS .R. Guillaumont, T. Fanghänel, J. Fuger, I. Grenthe and V. Neck, Update on the Chemical Thermodynamics of Uranium, Neptunium, Plutonium, Americium and Technetium, Elsevier Science Publishing Co, Inc, New York,  2003, vol. 5 Search PubMed .T. W. Newton, The Kinetics of the Oxidation–Reduction Reactions of Uranium, Neptunium, Plutonium and Americium in Aqueous Solution, US Energy Research and Development, Administration,  1975 Search PubMed .U. Wahlgren, S. Tsushima and I. Grenthe, Some Quantum Chemical Aspects on Outer-Sphere Electron-Transfer Reactions: The U(V)/Fe(III)–U(VI)/Fe(II) System, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 9025–9027 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Stubbert, C. L. Stern and T. J. Marks, Synthesis and Catalytic Characteristics of Novel Constrained-Geometry Organoactinide Catalysts. The First Example of Actinide-Mediated Intramolecular Hydroamination, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 4836–4838 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Stubbert and T. J. Marks, Constrained Geometry Organoactinides as Versatile Catalysts for the Intramolecular Hydroamination/Cyclization of Primary and Secondary Amines Having Diverse Tethered C–C Unsaturation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4253–4271 CrossRef CAS .B. D. Stubbert and T. J. Marks, Mechanistic Investigation of Intramolecular Aminoalkene and Aminoalkyne Hydroamination/Cyclization Catalyzed by Highly Electrophilic, Tetravalent Constrained Geometry 4d and 5f Complexes. Evidence for an M–N σ-Bonded Insertive Pathway, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6149–6167 CrossRef CAS .S. Tobisch, Mechanistic Exploration of Intramolecular Aminodiene Hydroamination/Cyclisation Mediated by Constrained Geometry Organoactinide Complexes: A DFT Study, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 3441–3458 CrossRef CAS .M. Streit and F. Ingold, Nitrides as a nuclear fuel option, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2005, 25, 2687–2692 CrossRef CAS .C. B. Yeamans, G. W. C. Silva, G. S. Cerefice, K. R. Czerwinski, T. Hartmann, A. K. Burrell and A. P. Sattelberger, Oxidative ammonolysis of uranium(IV) fluorides to uranium(VI) nitride, J. Nucl. Mater., 2008, 374, 75–78 CrossRef CAS .R. K. Thomson, T. Cantat, B. L. Scott, D. E. Morris, E. R. Batista and J. L. Kiplinger, Uranium azide photolysis results in C–H bond activation and provides evidence for a terminal uranium nitride, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 723–729 CrossRef CAS .D. Srivastava, S. P. Garg and G. L. Goswami, Thermodynamic analysis of mixed carbide, carbonitride and nitride fuels for fast breeder reactors, J. Nucl. Mater., 1989, 161, 44–56 CrossRef CAS .H. Shibata, T. Tsuru, M. Hirata and Y. Kaji, First principles study on elastic properties and phase transition of NpN, J. Nucl. Mater., 2010, 401, 113–117 CrossRef CAS .M. Akabori, M. Takano, K. Minato and Y. Arai, Lattice thermal expansions of NpN, PuN and AmN, J. Nucl. Mater., 2008, 376, 114–118 CrossRef .I. S. Lim and G. E. Scuseria, A screened hybrid density functional study of metallic thorium carbide, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 460, 137–140 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Scuseria J. Heyd, Hybrid functionals based on a screened Coulomb potential, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207 CrossRef .J. Heyd and G. E. Scuseria, Assessment and validation of a screened Coulomb hybrid density functional, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 7274 CrossRef CAS .L. Petit, A. Svane, Z. Szotek, W. M. Temmerman and G. M. Stocks, Ground-state electronic structure of actinide monocarbides and mononitrides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 045124 CrossRef .A. Svane, Electronic structure of cerium in the self-interaction-corrected local-spin-density approximation, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 53, 4275–4286 CrossRef CAS .W. M. Temmerman, A. Svane, Z. Szotek, H. Winter and S. V. Beiden, On the implementation of the Self-Interaction Corrected Local Spin Density Approximation for d- and f-electron systems, in Electronic structure and Physical Properties of Solids The uses of the LMTO method Volume Lecture Notes in Physics 535, ed. H. Dreyssé, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2000, pp.
286-312 Search PubMed .M. Samsel-Czekala, E. Talik, P. de V. Du Plessis, R. Troć, H. Misiorek and C. Sulkowski, Electronic structure and magnetic and transport properties of single-crystalline UN, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 144426 CrossRef .C. Keller, in Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry, Actinides, ed. J. C. Bailar, H. J. Emeleus, R. Nyholm and A. F. Trotman-Dickenson, Pergamon, Oxford,  1973, vol. 5, pp. 219-276 Search PubMed .L. R. Morss, in The Chemistry of the Actinide Elements, J. J. Katz, G. T. Seaborg and L. R. Morss, Chapman and Hall, London, 2nd edn.  1986, vol. 2, pp. 1278–1360 Search PubMed .L. Petit, A. Svane, Z. Szotek and W. M. Temmerman, First-Principles Calculations of PuO2±x, Science, 2003, 301, 498–501 CrossRef CAS .P. A. Korzhavyi, L. Vitos, D. A. Andersson and B. Johansson, Oxidation of plutonium dioxide, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 225–228 CrossRef CAS .G. Tian, P. Zhang, J. Wang and L. Rao, Extraction of Actinide(III, IV, V, VI) Ions and TcO4− by NNN′′,N′′-Tetraisobutyl-3-Oxa-Glutaramide, Solvent Extr. Ion Exch., 2005, 23, 631–643 CrossRef CAS .G. Tian, J. Xu and L. Rao, Optical Absorption and Structure of a Highly Symmetrical Neptunium(V) Diamide Complex, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6200–6203 CrossRef CAS .G. Tian, L. Rao and S. J. Teat, Thermodynamics, Optical Properties, and Coordination Modes of Np(V) with Dipicolinic Acid, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 10158–10164 CrossRef CAS .L. Bonin, C. Den Auwer, E. Ansoborlo, G. Cote and Ph. Moisy, Study of Np speciation in citrate medium, Radiochim. Acta, 2007, 95, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .B. F. Myasoedov, H. W. Kirby and I. G. Tananaev, Protactinium, in The Chemistry of the Actinide and Transactinide Elements, ed. L. R. Morss, N. M. Edelstein, J. Fuger and J. J. Katz, Springer, Dordrecht, The Netherlands,  2008, pp. 161–252 Search PubMed .C. Le Naour, D. Trubert, M. V. Di Giandomenico, C. Fillaux, C. Den Auwer, P. Moisy and C. Hennig, First Structural Characterization of a Protactinium(V) Single Oxo Bond in Aqueous Media, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 9542–9546 CrossRef CAS .B. Siboulet, C. J. Marsden and P. Vitorge, What can quantum chemistry tell us about Pa(V) hydration and hydrolysis?, New J. Chem., 2008, 32, 2080–2094 RSC .M. Mendes, S. Hamadi, C. Le Naour, J. Roques, A. Jeanson, C. Moisy Den Auwer, P. Topin, S. Aupiais, J. Hennig and C. Di Giandomenico, Thermodynamical and Structural Study of Protactinium(V) Oxalate Complexes in Solution, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 9962–9971 CrossRef CAS .D. A. Case, T. E. Cheatham III., T. Darden, H. Gohlke, R. Luo, K. M. Merz Jr., A. Onufriev, C. Simmerling, B. Wang and R. Woods, The Amber biomolecular simulation programs, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1668–1688 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Brooks, CHARMM: The Biomolecular simulation Program, J. Comput. Chem., 2009, 30, 1545–1615 CrossRef CAS .B. Hess, C. Kutzner, D. van der Spoel and E. Lindahl, GROMACS 4: Algorithms for Highly Efficient, Load-Balanced, and Scalable Molecular Simulation, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2008, 4, 435–447 CrossRef CAS .M. Christen, P. H. Hünenberger, D. Bakowies, R. Baron, R. Bürgi, D. P. Geerke, T. N. Heinz, M. A. Kastenholz, V. Kräutler, C. Oostenbrink, C. Peter, D. Trzesniak and W. F. van Gunsteren, The GROMOS Software for Biomolecular Simulation: GROMOS05, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1719–1751 CrossRef CAS .J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, L. Kale and K. Schulten, Scalable molecular dynamics with NAMD, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1781–1802 CrossRef CAS .G. te Velde, F. M. Bickelhaupt, S. J. A. van Gisbergen, C. F. Guerra, E. J. Baerends, J. G. Snijders and T. Ziegler, Chemistry with ADF, J. Comput. Chem., 2001, 22, 931–967 CrossRef CAS .L. De Vico, F. Aquilante, L. Ferré, N. Ghigo, G. Malmqvist, P. Neogrády, P. Pedersen, T. B. Pitoák, M. Reiher, M. Roos, B. O. Serrano-Andrés, L. Urban, M. Veryazov and V. Lindh, MOLCAS 7: The Next Generation, J. Comput. Chem., 2010, 31, 224–247 CrossRef .M. Valiev, E. J. Bylaska, N. Govind, K. Kowalski, T. P. Straatsma, H. J. J. van Dam, D. Wang, J. Nieplocha, E. Apra, T. L. Windus and W. A. de Jong, NWChem: a comprehensive and scalable open-source solution for large scale molecular simulations, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2010, 181, 1477–1489 CrossRef CAS .R. Ahlrichs, M. Bär, M. Häser, H. Horn and C. Kölmel, Electronic structure calculations on workstation computers: the program system TURBOMOLE, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1989, 162, 165–169 CrossRef CAS .G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Ab initio molecular dynamics for liquid metals, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 47, 558 CrossRef CAS .V. Goncharov and M. C. Heaven, Spectroscopy of the ground and low-lying excited states of ThO+, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 124, 064312 CrossRef .J. Kaledin Han, L. A. Goncharov, V. Komissarov and A. V. Heaven, Accurate Ionization Potentials for UO and UO2: A Rigorous Test of Relativistic Quantum Chemistry Calculations, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7176–7177 CrossRef .M. C. Heaven, V. Goncharov, T. C. Steimle, T. M. Ma and C. Linton, The permanent electric dipole moments and magnetic g factors of uranium monoxide, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 204314 CrossRef .
Footnote† A simplified Chinese version of this paper was accepted for publication in Prog. Chem., 2011, 23, 1566–1581.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Dongqi Wang
	Dongqi Wang got his BSc from Lanzhou University, MSc from Peking University and PhD from The University of Hong Kong. During 2004–2011, he was a coworker of Prof. Walter Thiel (MPI für Kohlenforschung) on enzymatic reaction mechanisms (QM/MM), of Prof. Tom Ziegler (University of Calgary) on homogeneous catalysis (QM/MM), and of Prof. Wilfred F. van Gunsteren (ETH Zürich) on the folding equilibria of peptides and dynamics of proteins (MD). In 2011 he took a faculty position in the Institute of High Energy Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences. His current research focuses on computational actinoid chemistry (CAC), which covers the application of QM, MD and QM/MM methods in the study of actinoid chemistry towards the evaluation/development of an advanced nuclear fuel cycle and the understanding of actinoids in biological systems and in homogeneous catalysis.

Wilfred F. van Gunsteren
	Wilfred F. van Gunsteren was born in 1947 in Wassenaar (The Netherlands). In 1968 he gained a BSc and in 1972 an MSc in physics at the Free University of Amsterdam; in 1974 he was awarded a “Meester” in Law, and in 1976 a PhD in nuclear physics. After postdoctoral research at the University of Groningen and at Harvard University he was, 1980–1987, a senior lecturer and, until August 1990, Professor for Physical Chemistry at the University of Groningen. In 1990 he became professor of Computer-Aided Chemistry at the ETH Zurich. He is corresponding member of the Royal Dutch Academy of Sciences, holder of a gold medal for research of the Royal Netherlands Chemical Society, and of the Max-Planck Forschungspreis für Chemie und Pharmazie (2002). His main interests center on the physical fundamentals of the structure, dynamics and function of biomolecules.

Zhifang Chai
	Prof. Zhifang Chai is a radiochemist working at Institute of High Energy Physics, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. He graduated from Fudan University, China, in 1964. As an Alexander von Humboldt fellow, he worked at Cologne University, Germany from 1980 to 1982. He is closely engaged in nuclear energy chemistry and nuclear techniques, and has authored or co-authored over 432 papers in peer-review journals and 10 books in the field of nuclear chemistry and nuclear techniques. He was or is a titular member of IUPAC, a fellow of RSC and many other domestic and international scientific communities. In 2005 he was awarded the George von Hevesy Award – the premier international award of excellence to honor outstanding achievements in radioanalytical and nuclear chemistry. In 2007 he was elected a member of the Chinese Academy of Sciences.


Ac	6d17s2	3+	 	 	 
Th	6d27s2	4+	3+	5f1	 
Pa	5f26d17s2	5+	3+,4+	5f2	5f1
U	5f36d17s2	4+,6+	3+,5+	5f3	5f2
Np	5f46d17s2	5+	3+,4+,6+,7+	5f4	5f3
Pu	5f67s2	4+	3+,5+,6+,7+	5f5	5f4
Am	5f77s2	3+	2+,4+,5+,6+	5f6	5f5
Cm	5f76d17s2	3+	4+,5+	5f7	5f6
Bk	5f97s2	3+	4+	5f8	5f7
Cf	5f107s2	3+	2+,4+	5f9	5f8
Es	5f117s2	3+	2+	5f10	5f9
Fm	5f127s2	3+	2+	5f11	5f10
Md	5f137s2	3+	2+	5f12	5f11
No	5f147s2	2+	3+	5f13	5f12
Lr	5f146d17s2	3+	 	5f14	5f13
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 1  The ionization energies, IE1 and IE2, of AnO2 and AnO.158	 

 	Fig. 2  The An–O bond length of AnO2 and AnO.158 The “×” in the right panel represents the experimental values for ThO (black) and ThO+ (red),353 UO (black),354 and UO+ (red).355	 

 	Fig. 3  The agostic interaction between the alkyl hydrogen and actinoid atoms and the pyramidalization at the actinoid center.239	 

Ac2	
3Σg−(0g+)	3.63	1.19	2
Th2	
3Δg(1g)	2.76	3.28	4
Pa2	
3Σg−(0g+)	2.37	4.00	5
U2	
7Og(8g)	2.43	1.15	5

 	Fig. 4  The ground state of actinoid diatomic systems.155	 

 	Fig. 5  Three possible pathways for the water exchange.	 

 	Fig. 6  Two possible “yl”-O exchange mechanisms of uranyl: mononuclear (a)118,278vs. binuclear (b)280,281 pathways.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic elucidation of the transition state (TS1X, X = A, B, C) and the corresponding intermediate (IM1X) in the three possible mechanisms (A,283 B and C285) for the hydrolysis of UF6 to produce UF5OH.	 

 	Fig. 8  The disproportionation reaction of An(V).288	 
UO2+(aq) + UO22+(aq) ↔ UO22+(aq) + UO2+(aq)	(4)
UO(V)2(OH)2UO(VI)2 ↔ UO(VI)2(OH)2UO(V)2	(5)

 	Fig. 9  The precursor and transition states of the (UO2)2(H2O)43+ complex in the outsphere mechanism.291	 
Th* + C2H6 → CH3CH2–ThH → CH3(H)CThH2 → CH2CH–ThH3	(6)
Th* + C2H6 → CH3CH2–ThH → (CH2)2–ThH2	(7)

 	Fig. 10  The U–(KOH)2 complex. See also Scheme 7 in ref. 301.	 
UO2+(aq) + Fe3+(aq) → UO22+(aq) + Fe2+(aq)	(8)


Singlet	26.1	88.2	−11.3	24.7	−0.1	13.6	−10.3
Triplet	0.0	48.1	4.4	24.2	−8.9	−9.6	−36.2

 	Fig. 11  Stationary points predicted by DFT calculations of the uranium azide photolysis.320	 
PuIVO2.25 → PuVO2.25	(9)
4PuO2 + H2O2(liq) → Pu4O9 + H2O(liq),	(10)
Pu4O9 + H2O2(liq) → 4PuO2 + H2O(liq) + O2(g).	(11)
Footnote
† A simplified Chinese version of this paper was accepted for publication in Prog. Chem., 2011, 23, 1566–1581.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
