Dynamics of the photo-thermo-mechanical actuations in NIR-dye doped liquid crystal polymer networks   - Soft Matter (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SM00156J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SM00156J
(Paper)
Soft Matter, 2022, 18, 3358-3368Dynamics of the photo-thermo-mechanical actuations in NIR-dye doped liquid crystal polymer networks†

        
          
            Divya 
            Jayoti
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Akhil R. 
            Peeketi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ratna K. 
            Annabattula
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            S. Krishna 
            Prasad
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Nano and Soft Matter Sciences, Shivanapura, Bengaluru 562162, India. E-mail: skpras@gmail.com
bCenter for Responsive Soft Matter, Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai-600036, India
Received 
      31st January 2022
    , Accepted 29th March 2022First published on 30th March 2022AbstractWe describe photo-thermo-mechanical actuation and its dynamics in thin films of a liquid crystal networks (LCN) under near infrared (NIR) illumination through experiments and simulations. Splay aligned films of different thicknesses (25 μm to 100 μm) were obtained by crosslinking a mixture of mono-functional and bi-functional liquid crystal monomers. The NIR-driven thermo-mechanical actuation was achieved by adding an NIR dye to the monomer mixture. The absorption of incoming radiation by the dye molecules raises the local temperature of the film causing an order–disorder (nematic–isotropic) transition, thereby resulting in a macroscopic shape change. We have investigated the effect of film thickness, NIR laser power and dye concentration on the tip displacement of the films in a cantilever configuration. The experimental findings and finite element simulation results are in reasonably good quantitative agreement. Despite using lower NIR powers than typically employed, the films show high actuation and large displacements. After achieving saturation in actuation, the films exhibit a flutter behavior which is discussed in light of the observed overshoot in the tip displacement for certain intensities and thicknesses. Finally, using a solar simulator, we also show the visible light response of the film.
1 Introduction
Stimuli responsive systems using different soft material assemblies like shape memory composites, bio-polymers, hydrogels and liquid crystalline systems have been attracting attention for the last two decades.1–6 Among these, liquid crystals (LCs) are an exciting class of soft condensed matter, characterized by a combination of long range orientation order and fluidity.7,8 After revolutionizing the display technology for more than two decades, LC science is undergoing an active transformation and is finding new applications in biology, medicine, energy, environment and opto-electronic devices.9,10 Apart from the conventional liquid crystals viz. thermotropic and lyotropic, liquid crystal polymers (LCPs) are another class of material systems wherein the LC mesogens form a part of the polymer chain resulting in the formation of LCPs.11 The polymer main chains or side chains are cross-linked together to form liquid crystal networks (LCNs).12–14 They exhibit excellent mechanical and physical properties arising from the interplay between the orientation order and anisotropy of LC subunits which are integrated into the elastic polymeric network.15,16 On applying thermal energy, these liquid crystal networks (LCNs) undergo reversible conformational changes due to the order–disorder transition that takes the system to the isotropic state.17,18 This feature makes them promising candidates for realizing the escalating demands of Micro-Electro-Mechanical Devices (MEMs), bio-MEMs and soft robotic devices, and 4d printable structures.19–24
Depending on the chemical constituents, the LCNs are capable of shape change under the influence of an external stimulus (heat, light, humidity, pH, electric and magnetic fields).22,25,26 Among these stimuli, light is a widely studied and the most sought after stimulus as it involves contact-less manipulation and easy control. Hence, incorporation of a judicious quantity of photo-absorbing materials such as nanoparticles, dyes, azo compounds, and stilbenes into these systems can introduce additional functionality and aid the light absorbing characteristics of the LCN materials.27–31 Manipulating the chemical structure of LCNs to get better control over actuation properties is challenging as it involves a complex organic synthesis. Hence, photo-absorbers are introduced to LCNs, that capture incoming radiation and bring about the order–disorder transition and thereby a deformation.30,32 Azobenzene derivatives have been a popular choice as UV irradiation effectuates trans–cis isomerization which is associated with the shape change of the molecules.33,34 However, UV light is not a preferred trigger for bio-based applications due to possible harmful effects on living tissues. Wu et al.29 bypassed UV light by using upconversion nanophosphors that absorb in NIR and then induce trans–cis isomerization. But, one can directly use different visible/NIR absorbers referred to as photo-thermal (PT) agents that can convert light to heat energy bringing about order–disorder transition and associated mechanical deformation. Among NIR and visible absorbers, gold nanoparticles35 and rods,36,37 carbon nanotubes,38 graphene oxide,39etc., are popular. However, due to reasons of immiscibility, aggregation and compatibility with LC networks beyond certain threshold concentrations, inorganic nanoparticles are not the best of the photo thermal agents.14 Organic dyes are preferred photo-thermal agents (PT) in preparing liquid crystalline actuators as their compatibility with LC hosts allows large sized uniform films to be obtained with ease. But, deployment of organic NIR dyes,28 which may be more favorable, requires investigation of the influence of a variety of parameters such as size and shape, aggregation, concentration, and stability over extended periods of time. Also recalling that NIR absorbing photo-thermal agents are preferred for an additional reason that solar radiation consists of 50% near-infrared radiation which could be tapped as a naturally available stimulus.4 Researchers have used bilayer and trilayer films employing a light absorbing backing layer or an inactive polymer layer. For example, a multi wavelength-active LCN actuator responsive to three wavelength bands (520, 808, 980 nm) and an ensuing bilayer liquid crystal elastomer were reported.40 Another study involved a triple layer actuator comprising a top layer of reduced graphene, an intermediate inactive polymer layer and the bottom layer formed by a liquid crystal network, which showed bending of up to 50° when illuminated with an NIR beam of ∼2 W cm−2.41 Even in single layer films, researchers have used considerable high intensities like 4 W cm−2 for 80 μm films.28 Even on combining the photo-thermal actuation with trans–cis isomerization, around 4 W cm−2 to 7 W cm−2 were required to bring about the desired actuation.42
Taking into account the above discussion, we report a film actuator comprising an NIR-dye as an absorber incorporated into a mixture of two commercially available polymerizable liquid crystal monomers and driven by NIR radiation of 808 nm. We would like to highlight that the NIR-LCN reported here has a broad absorption in the visible and NIR range. So, one doesn't need to use a different dye in order to get multi-wavelength responsive systems as reported in the literature.40 We have discussed in detail the influence of film thickness, laser power and other parameters on the photo-thermo-mechanical actuation via experiments and simulations. The NIR-laser induced actuation in cantilever configuration estimated through finite element simulations show good quantitative agreement with the experiments. Bidirectional actuation is achieved in the fabricated single layer films owing to the dual (in-plane and out-of-plane) antagonistic orientation situation of the LC monomers at the two bounding plates used for preparing the film. The dynamics of actuation as well as relaxation is seen to be fast, occurring in the sub-second regime. The films showed an over-shoot under certain configurations. More attractively, solar radiation-driven actuation of significant magnitude is demonstrated. Another interesting feature, a flutter-like actuation – a small magnitude fast oscillation of film position – is observed, and discussed.
2 Methods
2.1 Fabrication of NIR-LCN films
The LCN film is fabricated from an optimized mixture comprising the two LC monomers, 4-methoxy benzoic acid 4-(6-acryloyloxy-hexyloxy)phenyl ester (RM105, 76 mol%) and 1,4-bis[4-(3-acryloxypropyloxy)benzoyloxy]-2-methyl benzene (RM257, 22 mol%), and a small concentration of an NIR dye, 2-(2-(2-chloro-3-(2-(1,1,3-trimethyl-1H-benzo[e]indol-2(3H)-ylidene)ethylidene)cyclohex-1-enyl)vinyl)-1,1,3-trimethyl-1H-benzo[e]indolium 4-methylbenzenesulfonate (1 mol%). All the materials were procured from Synthon Chemicals, Germany. Irgacure 651 (2,2-dimethoxy-1,2-diphenylethan-1-one), taken at 1 mol%, was used as the photoinitiator. The molecular structures of these chemicals are shown in Fig. 1a. The films obtained by using the sandwich geometry in which the sample to be polymerized is contained between two glass plates (see Fig. 1b) one of which is treated to induce homeotropic (H) alignment and the other a planar (P) alignment of the LC molecules (see Fig. 1c).43 Unless stated otherwise, the used films had a hybrid alignment, i.e., planar on one side (P-side) and homeotropic on the other (H-side). As we shall see later, this antagonistic alignment at the two surfaces leads to a splay-bend deformation of the nematic director through the thickness of the prepared film. The gap between two plates was maintained by using Mylar spacers of varying thicknesses, in the range 25 μm to 100 μm, and fixed using UV-curable glue. A variable high-power UV source from Hamamatsu was used for photo polymerization and a 365 nm filter in addition to an IR filter was kept between the source and the sample. The intensity of the radiation was fixed at desired values and monitored using a Hamamatsu UV power meter. The mixture obtained by stirring together the aforementioned components at 80 °C, was filled into the hybrid sandwich cell by capillary action and polymerized with the UV radiation of 10 mW cm−2 intensity for an hour. The cells were kept in hot water for glue softening and separation of the plates. The film was then gently peeled off the plates and cut to the desired length of 20 mm × 3 mm such that its length was parallel to the LC director on the planar side. The obtained films were almost flat with much less or no pre-bending as compared to what we observe in the literature30,44,45 due to the polymerization at room temperature.46 The initial flat shape makes it easier to get bending in the desired direction in comparison with the pre-bent films, where the film has to first become flat in shape and then bend in the desired direction. UV-Vis absorption measurements were carried out using a PerkinElmer spectrometer (Lambda 750). X-ray diffraction experiments were performed uisng a Panalytical X'Pert diffractometer with a CuKα beam and focusing elliptical mirror optics ( = 0.15418 nm).
 Fig. 1  (a) Chemical constituents of NIR-LCN and their composition; where relevant, the transition temperatures are also provided. (b) Schematic showing the preparation of mono-layered LCN having hybrid geometry. (c) LC director variation along the film thickness, d for a splay aligned film. 
2.2 Photo-actuation
For the actuation experiments, the films, cut to the desired size (20 mm × 4 mm), were clamped to a mechanical support to allow uninhibited movement during actuation (see Fig. 2). To prevent any heat loss, the clamp was thermally isolated from the rest of the support. The NIR actuation was induced by an 808 nm diode laser (spot size of 4 mm × 3 mm) with a maximum output of 500 mW. A neutral density (ND) filter inserted in the path before the film allowed for variation of the actual intensity irradiating the sample. The homeotropic side of the film was illuminated in all the experiments unless stated otherwise. The photo-thermo-mechanical actuation of the film was video-imaged with a camera of 20 MP resolution running at 30 frames per second. The captured images were analyzed frame-by-frame to detect the tip and then the displacement of the tip from the initial position is estimated using image processing in MATLAB, which provided a reliable and accurate measurement of the actuation process and the temporal dependence of the instantaneous position of the film with a time resolution of 33 ms.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the experimental set up to measure actuation: (a) NIR laser off and (b) NIR laser on. The laser irradiation (maximum power 500 mW) is controlled by using ND filters whose optical density ranges from 0.3–1.0. 
2.3 Finite element simulations
The temporal light-actuated thermo-mechanical response of the NIR-LCN films is simulated using an implicit dynamic solution procedure available in the commercial finite element software, ABAQUS.47 The splayed film is modeled as a bi-layer composite shell with equal thickness for planar and homeotropic layers. 4-Noded shell elements with reduced integration (S4R) and a mesh size of 0.2 mm are used to discretize the NIR-LCN films. Fig. 2 schematically illustrates the illumination condition (corresponding to the area of the laser irradiation) and initial configuration of the film where the film is normal to the light propagation direction. Upon illumination, the film bends and the component of the intensity that is normal to the surface decreases. Moreover, a portion of the incident intensity gets reflected by the film. Considering this reflection and the efficiency of light to heat conversion48 by the NIR-dye, we assumed that only half of the incident intensity is used for heat generation. Hence, the apparent intensity Ia that is normal to the surface can be estimated as (1)where, P(x, y) is the laser output power (P(x, y) = 0 in the regions outside the laser spot), A is the laser illumination area and θ is the angle between the light-propagation direction and the local normal to the film surface, t is the time and x, y are the local coordinates. As the film bends substantially, a certain region of the film gets shadowed and doesn't receive illumination. This shadowing effect is also implemented in the model by setting the value of Ia to zero for the shadowed region. At any given instant, the rise in temperature of the film depends on the light-energy absorbed, local heat conduction and the convective heat loss to the surroundings resulting in the following governing equation, (2)
Here, T is the temperature, d is the film's thickness, da is the attenuation depth, k is the thermal conductivity, ρ is the density, Cp is the specific heat, h is the convective heat transfer coefficient and T∞ is the ambient temperature. The convective heat transfer at the edges of the film is also considered. As the through-thickness (z) variation of the temperature is negligible,32 we considered that the temperature changes only in the length and width directions. Eqn (2) is solved using a finite element approach and the temperatures at each instant are fed to Abaqus solver through the UTEMP subroutine. For a given temperature rise (ΔT), the photo-thermal strain can be estimated in terms of the coefficient of thermal expansion tensor (αij) as, εptij = αijΔT. The unknown displacements are estimated by solving for the mechanical dynamic equilibrium. Since the films undergo large shape changes, a finite strain frame-work is used in the finite element solution procedure. As the elastic anisotropy has negligible influence on the actuations,49 the films are assumed to be elastically isotropic. The transverse isotropic nature of the LCNs is considered in the estimation of the thermo-mechanical strain. The parameters used in the model are as mentioned in Table 1.
Table 1 Parameters used for the finite element simulations




Laser power, P = 50 mW to 250 mW
Convection coefficient, h = 25 W m−2 K−1


Thickness, d = 25 μm to 100 μm
Ambient temperature, T∞ = 23 °C


Attenuation depth, da = 20 μm
Coefficient of thermal-expansion, α11 = −15 × 10−5 °C−1


Density, ρ = 1.35 g cm−3
Ratio of thermal-expansion coefficients, 


Thermal conductivity, k = 0.45 W m−1 K−1
Elastic modulus, E = 1 GPa


Specific heat, Cp = 5 kJ kg−1 K−1
Poissons ratio, ν = 0.3




3 Results and discussion
We begin by looking at the absorption characteristics of the bare LCN material without (LCN) and with the NIR dye (NIR-LCN). Fig. 3a shows the absorbance spectra for the films of the two materials; for comparison, the spectrum for 0.001 mM of the dye contained in dichloromethane is also shown. The strongest absorption is at 825 nm for the dye in the solution, with two additional, albeit weak, maxima around 752 nm and 410 nm. As per the design, the bare LCN has a single absorption peak at 371 nm, and none in the visible or near-IR region. On the other hand, the NIR-LCN film, having only 1 mol% of the NIR dye, shows a drastically different spectrum. Above 600 nm, the absorption has a flat hat-like profile, with the maximum value stretched over a large wavelength region of ∼250 nm. Besides, the absorption maximum of bare LCN at 371 nm and the barely visible peak of the dye at ∼405 nm combine to provide a broader and much stronger absorption maximum with a peak at 411 nm, but stretching up to ∼550 nm. Thus, there is a significant absorption over almost the entire visible region, and importantly, in the near-IR region. In fact, the NIR-LCN film does get actuated if irradiated with white light. The optical microscopy images, before and after cross-linking as shown in Fig. 3b show the planar side of the film showing with the LCN aligned along the rubbing direction.
 Fig. 3  (a) The absorbance spectra of bare LCN, NIR dye and NIR-LCN in the visible and IR region. The wavelengths of the peaks for NIR-LCN are indicated. (b) Optical micrographs of the NIR-LCN film before (top) and after (bottom) cross linking, with the arrow indicating the rubbing direction and the orange scale bar indicates 100 μm. (c) X-ray diffraction profiles of bare LCN and NIR-LCN. 
The X-ray diffraction profiles for both bare LCN and NIR-LCN films are presented in Fig. 3c. In the wide angle region, a broad and diffuse maximum is observed for both samples at 2θ ∼ 20°, indicating the non-crystalline character of the material. The low-angle peak at 2θ ∼ 3° is also diffuse, as expected for the nematic character. This peak being fractionally sharper for the NIR-LCN composite than for the bare LCN sample suggests that in the former, not only is the nematic ordering retained, but also slightly enhanced due to the similarity in the structures of the dye and the liquid crystalline monomers.
3.1 Photo-thermo-mechanical actuation
To ascertain the extent of the conversion from light energy to thermal energy (which subsequently gets transformed to mechanical output) we mapped the temperature distribution over the illuminated spot on the film. The images presented in Fig. 4 obtained at the instant of turning the laser on and 2 s later show that the temperature rises to 93 °C and stays uniform over the entire illuminated region except at the extremities. The consequent large magnitude and fast actuation as well as relaxation are illustrated in the time sequence photographs depicted in Fig. 5 from both experiments and simulations for a 25 μm film illuminated with 250 mW laser power (see Video S1 for simulations, ESI†). The difference in time scales of experiments and simulation is explained in the following sections. Additionally, we investigate the influence of thickness of films, laser power and dye concentration on the dynamics of photo-thermo-mechanical actuation of the NIR-LCN films.
 Fig. 4  The temperature of the film on shining an NIR laser, depicted by a white spot using IR imaging, reached 93 °C within 3 s of illumination. 
 Fig. 5  The snapshots of a 25 μm thick NIR-LCN film at different time instants from the experiments and simulations when illuminated with a 250 mW laser power. The vertical green dashed lines in the experiments act as a guide to the eye. In the simulations, the grey film represents the initial position. 

3.1.1 Influence of thickness. 
We studied the magnitude of tip displacement of the NIR-LCN films in cantilever configuration for three different thicknesses – 25, 50 and 100 μm through experiments (see Fig. 6a) and simulations (see Fig. 6b) when illuminated with 250 mW and refer to the films as F25, F50 and F100, respectively in the text to follow. When the NIR is on, the strip actuates to the maximum (depending upon the spot of illumination) and relaxes as the NIR is switched off. The deformation increases quite rapidly, exhibits a small overshoot in the case of F25 and F50, and then settles down to the saturation/equilibrium value. When the laser is turned off, the relaxation occurs somewhat slower than actuation for all the films. For a given difference in strain between the top and bottom layers, the bending curvature decreases with increase in film thickness.32,44,50 Hence, the magnitude of the actuation or the tip displacement also decreases with an increase in the film thickness as seen in both experiments and simulations (see Fig. 6a and b). Moreover, the total internal heat generation (see eqn (1)) is also inversely proportional to the film thickness resulting in a slower rise in tip displacement for F100 compared to the F25 and F50. Fig. 6c shows the time evolution of temperature for the films at a specific location chosen such that it sees light as long as the laser is on (see the location pointed by arrows in Fig. 6d). In contrast to the tip displacement, we see that the maximum temperature achieved is higher for the F100 as observed from simulations in Fig. 6c. As soon as the laser is switched on, the temperature rise is faster for thinner films due to higher internal heat generation. After 2.14 seconds, the F25 film has bent considerably (see Fig. 6d) and is receiving less illumination than earlier and also compared to films F50 and F100 (see Fig. 6d). Hence, the temperature in F25 decreases after 2.14 seconds and saturates to an equilibrium value. The films F50 and F100, due to lesser bending are still receiving enough illumination resulting in higher equilibrium temperatures compared to F25 (see the temperature attained at 14 seconds in Fig. 6c and d) which is not in accordance with eqn (2). Therefore, the tip displacement is higher for the thinner films and the temperature rise is higher for the thicker films. Here, we would like to mention that the F100 used in experiments was slightly shorter in length than the other two and hence a large difference in actuation magnitude. But, we also simulated F100 with a 20 mm length and got similar results with the tip displacement varying by only 2 mm to 4 mm. The relaxation also follows similar behavior and hence the relaxation of F25 is faster as the heat loss is slower in thicker films as observed in Fig. 6c. Also recalling the liquid crystal physics, we know that the surface anchoring effects in the mid-section of the thick films becomes very weak due to which the LC director can assume random configurations resulting in a slower response.51
 Fig. 6  The tip displacement for the 25, 50 and 100 μm NIR-LCN films in a cantilever configuration as extracted through (a) experiments (the dashed vertical lines for each curve represent the corresponding laser switching off time) and (b) simulations. (c) The temperature evolution as a function of time from simulations for a point that is initially located at 4.8 mm from the fixed end along the length and middle along the width (pointed by arrow in (d)). (d) The temperature contours for the 25, 50 and 100 μm NIR-LCN films at 2.4 s and 14 s from the simulations. (e) The normalized tip displacements of 50 μm (blue) and 100 μm (green) films during the multiple actuation cycles from the experiments. 
In both experiments and simulations, there is a displacement (as well as temperature) overshoot for thinner films (≤50 μm) as seen in Fig. 6a–c. As explained previously, the total heat generation is higher in thin films causing an initial rapid increase in the temperature except for F100 and drives the F25 & F50 film to the point where they are unable to sustain the actuation as they no longer see the full laser spot. Therefore, the temperature reduces as seen in Fig. 6c and the films come back to a sustainable new equilibrium position (see Fig. 6a and b). This is not seen in F100 as the film doesn't bend beyond a point where it ceases to see illumination. More detailed experiments and simulations tailored for overshoot will throw light on the exact dynamics behind the phenomena. We conclude this section with a remark that a nearly uniform and fatigue free response was seen over a number of actuation cycles, as shown in Fig. 6e for the 50 and 100 μm LCN films. In fact, the magnitude and time characteristics of the response remained unaltered when experiments were conducted after a lapse of three months indicating good long-term stability of the films also shown in the Video S2 (ESI†) for F100.


3.1.2 Influence of laser power. 
Among various factors that are known to control the magnitude of actuation, two primary parameters are the concentration of the photo-thermal additives and the intensity of the incoming radiation. The content of the used photo-thermal agent cannot be arbitrarily high. For example, consider that carbon based nanofillers that absorb in the IR regime are used as PT agents.52 Owing to high intramolecular interactions, these materials are known to form agglomerates causing light to be absorbed inhomogeneously in the network, a feature certainly not desirable for practical applications. On the other hand, if the intensity of light is high, the dyes used undergo photobleaching, again undesirable. Thus, by keeping the dye concentration as well as the irradiation levels to a minimum while achieving maximum mechanical output is ideal for practical applications. Since the dye concentration is already fairly low (1 mol%) in all our experiments, we performed the actuation experiments and simulations by varying the laser power as shown in Fig. 7a and b. Experimentally, this was done by introducing ND filters (Thor Labs) of different optical densities to vary the laser power from 50 mW to 250 mW beyond which the films burnt. The temperature evolution with time for the same location as discussed in Section 3.1.1 is plotted in Fig. 7c. The equilibrium tip displacements and temperatures and their rate of increase increased with the increase in laser power. We need a certain minimum laser power for the actuation to begin and after a point a further rise in laser power doesn't change the behavior as seen for 200 mW and 250 mW. We would like to mention here that we notice a slight difference in magnitude of tip displacement between experiments and simulations for different laser powers. In addition to the minor experimental errors, this difference is because we have considered the coefficient of thermal expansion (αij) to be independent of temperature in simulations. But, experimentally it is noticed that αij vary as the temperature of the film changes. The values of αij are low and nearly constant until the glass transition and thereafter increase abruptly.44,45 Hence, the tip displacement (see Fig. 7a, b and d) is much lower in experiments than simulations for 50 mW illumination for which the temperature rises only up to 50 °C (see Fig. 7c). Fig. 7d shows the equilibrium tip displacement obtained for all intensities experimentally (red) and via simulations for two values of α11 as −15 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-1) and −7 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-2). It can be noticed that the simulations and experiments match closely at 50 mW for low value of αij, whereas, at higher powers, the higher value of αij shows a good match. Compared to the literature reports28,41,42 we have used lower intensities while having a decent actuation even at 50 mW. We also reduced the dye concentration to 0.1 mol% (see Fig. 7e) for 50 μm. It is interesting to note that the maximum tip displacement is almost equal in both the cases but the tip displacement in 0.1 mol% is quite slow and it saturates around 5 seconds in contrast to 2 seconds for 1 mol%. The reason for this behavior being the low heat generation due to lower absorption in 0.1 mol% dye LCN.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) The temporal variation of the tip displacement for different NIR laser powers obtained from (a) experiments and (b) simulations. (c) The temporal variation of temperature from simulations for a point that is initially located at 4.8 mm from the fixed end along the length and middle along the width. (d) The equilibrium tip displacement as a function of NIR power from experiments and simulations with α11 as −15 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-1) and −7 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-2). (e) The temporal variation of tip displacement as observed from experiments for two dye concentrations. (f) The flutter behaviour of the NIR-LCN film after reaching an apparent equilibrium, obtained with a laser intensity of 250 mW and film thickness of 50 μm. 
An interesting feature of the NIR-LCN film observed in the present work is the flutter or self-oscillation. When under continuous IR irradiation, the film first reaches maximum deflection, then oscillates about a mean position as long as the illumination is on. The tip displacement for 250 mW in the high actuation region is shown in Fig. 7f on an enlarged scale to illustrate the flutter behavior. The cause for this oscillating behavior is briefly discussed here. The spot size of laser beam is 4 mm × 3 mm, which along the length direction is smaller than the film size. On actuation, the illuminated area keeps continuously changing as the film moves away from its mean position. Consequently, at the maximum deflection point the film is at a position where it no longer receives as much NIR spot as earlier and tries to relax, but in the process comes into the full beam region for a brief while, gets actuated, and goes up again. This sequence keeps on repeating as long as the NIR is on. Most of the oscillatory behavior reported in the literature53–55 is with the films bending towards the light source and oscillation happens due to self-shadowing. In contrast, the films in this work were actuated in H–P configuration where they bend away from the light (see Video S3, ESI†). We hypothesise that the small chaotic oscillations reported here are a result of film overshoot and not self shadowing. This feature can be of potential interest in applications involving sunlight as a trigger source.


3.1.3 Bidirectional actuation. 
It is known that in LC actuators, the standard configuration used is to have uniaxial planar aligned strips, in which upon irradiation the film is expected to bend only in one direction. In some cases, a backing metal film that alters the thermo-mechanical and thermal conducting properties is used to achieve bidirectional actuation. For example, Zhang et al.56 prepared a film having graphene and azo LCN as two layers which responded to both UV and NIR light while showing direction dependent actuation. Since we used hybrid geometry30 wherein the LC director orientations are antagonistic – planar (P side) and homeotropic (H side) – at the two surfaces, bidirectional actuation (bending towards and away from light) is anticipated.
To begin with, we checked the absorption spectra as plotted in Fig. 8a in the wavelength region of interest (700 nm to 900 nm). To obtain the extent of absorption anisotropy, UV-Vis spectroscopy was performed on NIR-LCN films pre-treated for planar (labeled P–P) and homeotropic (H–H) alignment. The NIR dye used being dichroic, has its absorption magnitude dependent on the orientation of its molecules with respect to the incoming beam (see Fig. 8b) and absorbs more when the molecules are parallel to the actuating beam. The peaks as well as the integrated absorption values are, in contrast to the H–H film, more than doubled for the P–P film. Therefore, it is expected that the illuminated H side (H–P) will allow light to penetrate deeper than the illuminated P side (P–H). But for a hybrid film, light has to traverse both homeotropic (H) and planar (P) regions. Therefore, even if light penetrates deeper when the H-surface is illuminated than when the P-surface is illuminated, the total light energy absorbed will be same for both the cases.32 This is also corroborated by the magnitude as well as the dynamics of the actuation and relaxation processes being comparable as both curves are precisely the mirror images of each other in both simulations and experiments plotted in Fig. 8c. Images of the actuation obtained with P and H surfaces facing the laser are also shown in Fig. 8c as insets. The direction of movement is opposite in the two cases: the film moves towards (phototropic) and away (apheliotropic) from the source for the P–H and H–P configurations, respectively. Recalling the oscillatory behavior discussed earlier in Section 3.1.2, we mentioned that in the H–P configuration, flutter is due to the overshoot. This is confirmed in Fig. 8c where one can see that the flutter is more pronounced in the P–H configuration which is due to self shadowing behavior in contrast to the H–P film, where flutter is hardly seen as this is due to the overshoot.
 Fig. 8  (a) The absorption spectra for NIR-LCN in the H–H and P–P configurations. (b) A schematic depicting the LC director orientation through the thickness of the film for both configurations w.r.t. incident light. (c) The temporal variation of the tip displacement from experiments (orange) and simulations (black) for the homeotropic surface (above) and planar surface (below) facing the laser along with the snapshots of the NIR-LCN films at maximum actuated state showing bending away (above) and bending towards (below) the light source. 

3.2 Visible actuation
Let us recall that the UV-Vis absorption spectra for the NIR-LCN (see Fig. 3a) exhibit absorption over a wide wavelength range in the visible as well as in the near IR region. Thus, as expected, the films are responsive and get actuated by not only NIR beams, but also by intense red and blue lasers. To expand the functioning further, we also checked the response of the films to sunlight, by using a solar simulator. The real time actuation obtained with a setting of 1.3 sun illumination is shown in Fig. 9 and Video S4 (ESI†). The strip shows actuation which is not as fast as in the case of NIR irradiation but can be certainly optimized, attempts for which are underway.
 Fig. 9  Snapshots of the NIR-LCN film under a solar simulator: (a) off and (b) on. The red bar serves as a reference line which is parallel to the table surface. 
4 Summary and conclusions
A soft actuator using a liquid crystal network doped with an NIR dye has been fabricated and studied via both experiments and finite element simulations. We optimized the concentration of constituent mono- and bi-functional liquid crystalline monomers to achieve films with no or hardly any pre-bending. This actuator performs actuation on shining NIR radiation (808 nm) from a diode laser. Robust actuation and relaxation within several hundred microseconds were realised in cantilever configuration. Increasing the thickness of the LC actuator resulted in a slower response and lower magnitude as confirmed by both simulations and experiments. The observed overshoots in 25 μm and 50 μm films have been discussed in terms of heat generation and film thickness. The maximum laser power used was limited to 250 mW, lower than most of the literature reports. The orientation (P–H, H–P) dependent bending (towards and away, respectively from light) was also discussed. The wide absorption band in the NIR-LCN film motivated us to check for actuation under solar irradiation and we found that the film shows a good response in solar environment with a potential for further optimization to enhance responsiveness.
Author contributions
D. Jayoti: conceptualization, methodology, experimental investigation, writing – original draft and visualization. A. R. Peeketi: conceptualization, methodology, software, computational modeling, writing – original draft and visualization. R. K. Annabattula: conceptualization, methodology, resources, writing – review & editing, supervision and funding acquisition. S. Krishna Prasad: conceptualization, methodology, resources, writing – review & editing, supervision and funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors would like to thank Dr DS Shankar Rao, CeNS for help with the X-Ray measurements and Prof. Fujita, NIIMS, Tsukuba, Japan for the sample Irgacure 651. We also thank CRF, CeNS for the help in performing SEM studies. Divya Jayoti would like to acknowledge financial support from CSIR, New Delhi in the form of research associateship (09/1243(0001)/19-EMR-1). R. K. Annabattula gratefully acknowledges the financial support from Science and Engineering Research Board, India, through a core research grant: CRG/2018/002365. A. R. Peeketi acknowledges the financial support through Prime Minister's Research Fellowship for conducting doctoral research at IIT Madras. We acknowledge the generous financial support from IIT Madras under the institutes of eminence (IoE) scheme funded by Ministry of Education, Government of India. The authors acknowledge the use of the computing resources at HPCE, IIT Madras.
References
C. De las Heras Alarcón, S. Pennadam and C. Alexander, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 276–285 RSC .
I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 511–524 RSC .
H. Meng and G. Li, Polymer, 2013, 54, 2199–2221 CrossRef CAS .
Leeladhar, P. Raturi and J. P. Singh, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–9 CAS .
V. P. Anju, R. Pratoori, D. K. Gupta, R. Joshi, R. K. Annabattula and P. Ghosh, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 4162–4172 RSC .
G. Manikandan, A. Murali, R. Kumar and D. K. Satapathy, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 8880–8888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Chandrasekar, Liquid Crystals, Cambridge University Press, New York, 2nd edn,  1992 Search PubMed .

          P. Collings and M. Hird, Introduction to Liquid Crystals, Taylor & Francis,  2009 Search PubMed .
S. J. Woltman, G. D. Jay and G. P. Crawford, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 929–938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Petsch, R. Rix, B. Khatri, S. Schuhladen, P. Müller, R. Zentel and H. Zappe, Sens. Actuators, A, 2015, 231, 44–51 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. White and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Finkelmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1987, 26, 816–824 CrossRef .
Y. Yu and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 5416–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Warner and E. M. Terentjev, Liquid Crystal Elastomers, Clarendon Press, Oxford,  2003 Search PubMed .
V. Cresta, G. Romano, A. Kolpak, B. Zalar and V. Domenici, Polymers, 2018, 10, 773 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Kato, J. Uchida, T. Ichikawa and B. Soberats, Polym. J., 2018, 50, 149–166 CrossRef CAS .

          P. G. de Gennes and J. Prost, The Physics of Liquid Crystals, Oxford University Press, New York, 2nd edn,  1993 Search PubMed .
H. Finkelmann, E. Nishikawa, G. Pereira and M. Warner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 015501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Bisoyi and Q. Li, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 15089–15166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pang, J.-a. Lv, C. Zhu, L. Qin and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900255 CrossRef .
K. Mehta, A. R. Peeketi, L. Liu, D. Broer, P. Onck and R. K. Annabattula, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 041306 CAS .
M. P. Da Cunha, M. G. Debije and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6568–6578 RSC .
M. del Pozo, J. A. H. P. Sol, A. P. H. J. Schenning and M. G. Debije, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2104390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Fernández, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 12–14 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hiraoka, S. Taira, Y. Hoshino, T. Ishihara, K. Yamada and M. Oshima, Liq. Cryst., 2020, 47, 1535–1545 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Chen, X. Qian, N. Liu, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6740–6746 CAS .
F. Ge, R. Yang, X. Tong, F. Camerel and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11758–11763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Yao, T. Yang, R. Yin, F. Li and Y. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15810–15813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Da Cunha, E. A. van Thoor, M. G. Debije, D. J. Broer and A. P. H. J. Schenning, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 13502–13509 RSC .
A. H. Gelebart, G. Vantomme, E. W. Meijer and D. J. Broer, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606712 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Peeketi, N. Swaminathan and R. K. Annabattula, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 129, 145107 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrett, J.-i. Mamiya, K. G. Yager and T. Ikeda, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1249 RSC .
D. J. Broer, J. Lub and G. N. Mol, Nature, 1995, 378, 467–469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, J. S. Evans, T. Lee, B. Senyuk, P. Keller, S. He and I. I. Smalyukh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 241901 CrossRef .
X. Lu, H. Zhang, G. Fei, B. Yu, X. Tong, H. Xia and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. Montazami, C. M. Spillmann, J. Naciri and B. R. Ratna, Sens. Actuators, A, 2012, 178, 175–178 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. A. Lee, C. P. Ambulo, H. B. Lee, S. H. Kim, V. V. Naik, C. S. Haines, A. E. Aliev, R. Ovalle-Robles, R. H. Baughman and T. H. Ware, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905063 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wei, Z. Wang, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 1009–1016 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zuo, M. Wang, B.-P. Lin and H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4539 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dong, X. Tong, H. Zhang, M. Chen and Y. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1383–1388 RSC .
H. Shahsavan, S. M. Salili, A. Jákli and B. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604021 CrossRef PubMed .
G. N. Mol, K. D. Harris, C. W. M. Bastiaansen and D. J. Broer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1155–1159 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. H. P. Sol, A. R. Peeketi, N. Vyas, A. P. H. J. Schenning, R. K. Annabattula and M. G. Debije, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1726–1729 RSC .
M. P. Da Cunha, A. R. Peeketi, K. Mehta, D. J. Broer, R. K. Annabattula, A. P. H. J. Schenning and M. G. Debije, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11029–11032 RSC .
H. Zeng, O. M. Wani, P. Wasylczyk, R. Kaczmarek and A. Priimagi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701814 CrossRef PubMed .

          M. Smith, ABAQUS/Standard User's
Manual, Version 6.9, Dassault Systèmes Simulia Corp,  2009 Search PubMed .
A. Pascciak, A. Pilch-Wróbel, Ł. Marciniak, P. J. Schuck and A. Bednarkiewicz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 44556–44567 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Modes, M. Warner, C. Van Oosten and D. Corbett, Phys. Rev. E: Stat., Nonlinear, Soft Matter Phys., 2010, 82, 041111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Timoshenko, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1925, 11, 233–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Van Oosten, D. Corbett, D. Davies, M. Warner, C. W. Bastiaansen and D. J. Broer, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8592–8596 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. L. Zhang, Q. D. Chen and H. B. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–23 Search PubMed .
T. J. White, N. V. Tabiryan, S. V. Serak, U. A. Hrozhyk, V. P. Tondiglia, H. Koerner, R. A. Vaia and T. J. Bunning, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 1796–1798 RSC .
S. Serak, N. Tabiryan, R. Vergara, T. J. White, R. A. Vaia and T. J. Bunning, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 779–783 RSC .
M. P. da Cunha, A. R. Peeketi, A. Ramgopal, R. K. Annabattula and A. P. H. J. Schenning, ChemistryOpen, 2020, 9, 1149 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, J. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Xu and A. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6727–6735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supplementary videos are attached along with the manuscript submission. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sm00156jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Chemical constituents of NIR-LCN and their composition; where relevant, the transition temperatures are also provided. (b) Schematic showing the preparation of mono-layered LCN having hybrid geometry. (c) LC director variation along the film thickness, d for a splay aligned film.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the experimental set up to measure actuation: (a) NIR laser off and (b) NIR laser on. The laser irradiation (maximum power 500 mW) is controlled by using ND filters whose optical density ranges from 0.3–1.0.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Laser power, P = 50 mW to 250 mW	Convection coefficient, h = 25 W m−2 K−1
Thickness, d = 25 μm to 100 μm	Ambient temperature, T∞ = 23 °C
Attenuation depth, da = 20 μm	Coefficient of thermal-expansion, α11 = −15 × 10−5 °C−1
Density, ρ = 1.35 g cm−3	Ratio of thermal-expansion coefficients, 
Thermal conductivity, k = 0.45 W m−1 K−1	Elastic modulus, E = 1 GPa
Specific heat, Cp = 5 kJ kg−1 K−1	Poissons ratio, ν = 0.3

 	Fig. 3  (a) The absorbance spectra of bare LCN, NIR dye and NIR-LCN in the visible and IR region. The wavelengths of the peaks for NIR-LCN are indicated. (b) Optical micrographs of the NIR-LCN film before (top) and after (bottom) cross linking, with the arrow indicating the rubbing direction and the orange scale bar indicates 100 μm. (c) X-ray diffraction profiles of bare LCN and NIR-LCN.	 

 	Fig. 4  The temperature of the film on shining an NIR laser, depicted by a white spot using IR imaging, reached 93 °C within 3 s of illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  The snapshots of a 25 μm thick NIR-LCN film at different time instants from the experiments and simulations when illuminated with a 250 mW laser power. The vertical green dashed lines in the experiments act as a guide to the eye. In the simulations, the grey film represents the initial position.	 

 	Fig. 6  The tip displacement for the 25, 50 and 100 μm NIR-LCN films in a cantilever configuration as extracted through (a) experiments (the dashed vertical lines for each curve represent the corresponding laser switching off time) and (b) simulations. (c) The temperature evolution as a function of time from simulations for a point that is initially located at 4.8 mm from the fixed end along the length and middle along the width (pointed by arrow in (d)). (d) The temperature contours for the 25, 50 and 100 μm NIR-LCN films at 2.4 s and 14 s from the simulations. (e) The normalized tip displacements of 50 μm (blue) and 100 μm (green) films during the multiple actuation cycles from the experiments.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) The temporal variation of the tip displacement for different NIR laser powers obtained from (a) experiments and (b) simulations. (c) The temporal variation of temperature from simulations for a point that is initially located at 4.8 mm from the fixed end along the length and middle along the width. (d) The equilibrium tip displacement as a function of NIR power from experiments and simulations with α11 as −15 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-1) and −7 × 10−5 °C−1 (Sim-2). (e) The temporal variation of tip displacement as observed from experiments for two dye concentrations. (f) The flutter behaviour of the NIR-LCN film after reaching an apparent equilibrium, obtained with a laser intensity of 250 mW and film thickness of 50 μm.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The absorption spectra for NIR-LCN in the H–H and P–P configurations. (b) A schematic depicting the LC director orientation through the thickness of the film for both configurations w.r.t. incident light. (c) The temporal variation of the tip displacement from experiments (orange) and simulations (black) for the homeotropic surface (above) and planar surface (below) facing the laser along with the snapshots of the NIR-LCN films at maximum actuated state showing bending away (above) and bending towards (below) the light source.	 

 	Fig. 9  Snapshots of the NIR-LCN film under a solar simulator: (a) off and (b) on. The red bar serves as a reference line which is parallel to the table surface.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Supplementary videos are attached along with the manuscript submission. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2sm00156j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
