Functionalized self-assembly of colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) nanorods on solid substrates for device applications   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR01974B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR01974B
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8066-8079Functionalized self-assembly of colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) nanorods on solid substrates for device applications†

        
          
            Fen 
            Qiao‡
*a, 
      
        
          
            Xuewan 
            Wang‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Wang
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            He
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Xie
          
        
      *d
aSchool of Energy & Power Engineering, Jiangsu University, Zhenjiang, 212013, P R China. E-mail: fqiao@ujs.edu.cn
bSchool of Chemical and Biomedical Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 70 Nanyang Drive, 637457, Singapore
cSchool of Physics and Materials Science, Radiation Detection Materials & Devices Lab, Anhui University, Hefei 230601, P.R. China. E-mail: hegang@ahu.edu.cn
dState Key Laboratory of Silicate Materials for Architectures, Wuhan University of Technology, No. 122, Luoshi Road, Wuhan 430070, P. R. China. E-mail: xiey@whut.edu.cn
Received 
      20th March 2017
    , Accepted 16th May 2017First published on 17th May 2017AbstractIn comparison to randomly oriented nanorods (NRs), self-assembly of the colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) NRs into well-organized large-scale structures results in unique collective properties. Moreover, the anisotropic structural features of self-assemblies preserved from colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) NRs have opened up exciting opportunities in the field of nanotechnology applications. We present the latest strategies for the self-assembly of colloidal NRs on solid substrates, and further focus on the self-assembled NRs for applications in devices. Advanced progress in the preparation of NR building blocks on the basis of nanofabrication techniques and comprehensive studies on the interactions of NRs with substrates will remarkably expand the application of colloidal semiconductor NRs. Understanding and mastering the driving forces behind the assembly of the NRs is the key goal of engineering future functional structures based on NRs.
1. Introduction
Colloidal nanocrystals (NCs) with size-, structure-, composition-dependent physical and chemical properties have become of particular interest for electronic, optical and photovoltaic (PV) device applications.1–12 In recent decades, their syntheses have been extensively studied, with size and shape being well controlled by a variety of approaches, including the template method, hot-injection route, polymer controlled growth and liquid-phase colloidal synthesis. Compared with the randomly orientated nanorods (NRs), self-assembly of colloidal NRs into highly ordered architectures may lead to unexpected synergistic effects or create novel physiochemical properties, which remarkably expands the applicable potential of colloidal NRs in the various devices and promotes our understanding of the mechanisms (i.e., the driving forces) of the self-assembly of colloidal NRs. Directed self-assembly of colloidal NRs on various substrates follows the basic principles of the common self-assembly process, which requires carefully designing and screening the building blocks. This process can be easily facilitated by modulating the driving forces for self-assembly, which may give rise to novel two-dimensional (2D) or three-dimensional (3D) structures.
In this review, we briefly introduce the synthesis of colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) NRs and then present an overview of the different strategies and possible tools that have been developed for direct self-assembly of NRs on specific substrates. Subsequently, the applications of NR assemblies for specific applications in the fields of photodetectors, lasers and solar cells are discussed.
2. Synthesis of colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) NRs
Various synthetic strategies have been developed to control the size, shape, composition, crystal structure, size dispersity and surface properties of colloidal NRs, such as the template method, hot-injection route, polymer controlled growth, and liquid-phase colloidal synthesis.13–27 The hot-injection seeded growth approach is a widely exploited strategy to synthesize high-quality colloidal NRs.13,15,18,22,24,26 As shown in Fig. 1A, a high concentration of monomers is injected into a solvent at elevated temperature, which results in the near instantaneous generation of semiconductor nuclei, where the temperature drops significantly and the subsequent monomer consumption occurs primarily for the growth of the NRs. Such growth of anisotropic elongated rod-like structures involves the formation of specific crystalline phases, in which the surfactant molecules bind to individual crystallographic planes (Fig. 1B).35
 Fig. 1  (A) A sketch of a typical setup for the hot-injection synthesis of colloidal NRs. (B) Schematic illustration of CdSe NRs produced in the seed-mediated synthesis with wz-CdSe seeds, and typical TEM images of wz-CdSe NRs.35 Reprinted from ref. 35 with permission. (C) Sketch of the seeded growth approach based on the surface selective adhesion model, and TEM image of CdSe/CdS NRs.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. 
Cadmium alkyl phosphonate is a typical chemical precursor for the synthesis of colloidal CdSe NRs with controlled sizes and shapes.24,29 Dimethyl cadmium (Cd(CH3)2) as the cadmium precursor has also been well developed.24,30 Manna et al. synthesized CdSe NRs using Cd(CH3)2 as the cadmium precursor and a mixture of trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) and hexylphosphonic acid (HPA) as the surfactant.31 However, Cd(CH3)2 is highly toxic, pyrophoric, expensive, unstable at room temperature and explosive at elevated temperatures, which requires restricted equipment and conditions for the related synthesis reaction and is thus not feasible for large-scale operation.29 CdO is a good alternative precursor for the synthesis of high quality CdSe NRs with uniform size.32,33 However, the growth of NRs is fast and sensitive to subtle changes in the reaction conditions (e.g. precursor injection speed), thus it is difficult to achieve monodispersity and to control the aspect ratio of the NRs. Peng et al. reported the concept of ‘size-distribution focusing’ to achieve the narrow size distribution of NRs.24,28 Judicious replenishment of the monomer is an important feature of this strategy. The timely separation of the nucleation step from the nanocrystal growth step is highly desirable for the monodispersed samples. This can be achieved by rapid injection of suitable precursors into a high temperature reaction solvent, which generates transient supersaturation of monomers and induces a nucleation burst. The growth of wurtzite CdSe nanocrystals is highly anisotropic when the system is kinetically overdriven by an extremely high monomer concentration. When the overall growth rate is fast, growth is generally faster along its c-axis; if the overall growth rate is slow, a nearly spherical shape that minimizes surface area is favored. If the growth rate is increased significantly, the result is a rod-like shape, with the long axis being the c-axis of the wurtzite crystal structure. As the monomer concentration is depleted during growth, the aspect ratio gradually decreases to nearly one (ordinary quantum dots), but the short axis grows significantly. The rod morphology can be maintained by multiple injections, which replenishes the monomer, resulting in bigger rods.24
Peng et al. found that the growth speed of the CdSe NRs was dramatically reduced while replacing HPA with a longer alkyl chain phosphonic acid (e.g. tetradecylphosphonic acid, TDPA), which produced NRs with very small aspect ratio without further addition of precursors during the growth process.34 Since the average aspect ratio increased quickly just after injection, it is necessary to change the surfactants that are used. Generally, pure TOPO is not a suitable surfactant for growing rod-like CdSe in a controllable manner because the growth in pure TOPO occurs so quickly at the high monomer concentrations desired for the growth of rods, which results in rod-like particles that are often insoluble and too big in all three dimensions. The addition of a molecule such as hexyl-phosphonic acid (HPA), which coordinates more strongly than TOPO to cadmium, can be used to adjust the growth rate.24 To control the length and width of CdSe NRs, Li et al. chose a mixture of HPA and TDPA to adjust the growth rate along the c-axis. The HPA/TDPA molar ratio was very sensitive for determining the diameter and aspect ratio of the NRs at the beginning of the growth and the speed of the shape evolution.36 In addition, CdSe NRs with improved size distribution were achieved by the separate addition of Cd and Se precursors. Rice et al. presented a seed-mediated approach for the growth of colloidal CdSe NRs, in which wurtzite CdSe (wz-CdSe) seeds were chosen as nucleation sites for subsequent growth. The synthesized colloidal wz-CdSe NRs are shown in Fig. 1B.35
Peng and Carbone et al. synthesized monodisperse CdSe/CdS core–shell NRs with tunable size and aspect ratio by using CdSe as the seeds.18,24 Selective adhesion of surfactants during the process of synthesis was found to be crucial for the final shape of the NRs. For example, the increase in HPA concentration selectively enhanced the growth of CdSe/CdS core–shell NRs along the [001] direction (Fig. 1C).
3. Self-assembly of colloidal CdX (X = S, Se) NRs
Ordered arrays of NRs are interesting as they mimic the organization of atoms into NCs and exhibit collective properties that are distinct from their randomly distributed counterparts.36–38
A considerable amount of work has been reported on the assembly of CdX (X = S, Se) NRs into highly ordered structures by the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method, solvent evaporation, external electrical field modulation, template-assisted assembly, organic complex mediated self-assembly, etc. In the following, these methods are discussed and compared in detail.
3.1. Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method
As a widely explored technique for fabricating thin films of NPs of metal, oxides and metal chalcogenides,39–49 the LB method has become a promising approach to organizing large-areas of highly ordered monolayers of various nanostructures, such as quantum dots (QDs), nanocubes, nanowires (NWs) and NRs, which offers a flexible pathway for the bottom-up assembly of various nanomaterials into large areas of well-organized structures of anisotropic building blocks.45–54 In the case of the self-assembly of NRs, hydrophobic colloidal NRs capped with hydrophobic ligands are uniformly dispersed in organic solvents, which can be directly spread evenly on the surface of water. At the air–water interface, the randomly orientated NRs are slowly compressed using a barrier. During the compression process, the surface pressure is monitored (Fig. 2);52,53 uniform and lamellar thin films of the self-assembled NRs are fabricated upon compression.
 Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the Langmuir–Blodgett apparatus for nanowire assembly at the air–water interface. Photographs of the self-assembly process at different compression stages. And surface pressure curve recorded during the LB NR monolayer assembly.52 Reprinted from ref. 52 with permission. (B) Schematic illustration of the Langmuir–Blodgett apparatus for NRs assembly at the air–water interface. Compression using a set of barriers induced NRs with hydrophobic ligands to align parallel to the barriers.53 Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. 
The organization of NRs at the water–air interface is affected by particle size, capping ligands and surface pressure. For example, the hydrophobic interaction between the ligands attached on the surface of NRs can drive the self-assembly process. The changes in surface pressure at different stages of compression, during which the entropy of the self-assembled structure, the directional capillary force and van der Waals attraction have to be considered, which lead to different phases of the NRs assemblies at the water–air interface. The evolution of the phase transformation is usually confirmed by using morphological characterization. For instance, Kim et al. investigated the pressure-induced transition from monolayer to multilayer NR assembly (i.e. isotropic-2D nematic-2D smectic-3D nematic phase transition).50 It was found that low surface pressure resulted in raft-like aggregates of NRs, which were dispersed on the surface in a mostly isotropic state and the monolayers of NRs in a nematic arrangement were obtained. Increasing surface pressure upon further compression led to NR assemblies in a smectic arrangement, accompanied by the formation of layer-by-layer (LBL) stacking of ribbon-like NR superstructures. Finally, a transition from 2D smectic NR ordering to disordered 3D nematic configuration occurred at higher pressure.
The LB strategy is a powerful approach to constructing macroscopic and ultrahigh-density assembly structures, which plays a key role in many functional NR-based devices. This technique is suitable for various NRs in different morphologies and sizes, which can form assembled structures with large surface areas and controllable interstitial particle distances. Moreover, LB films can be assembled on substrates in different shapes.55 Depending on suitable surface passivation chemistry, the LB technique can be applicable to various NR systems with collective physical properties and functional nanodevices.50
3.2. Evaporation-mediated assembly
Evaporation mediated self-assembly has been widely used in the fabrication of large-scale colloidal NRs superlattices on solid substrates.56–75 Two typical experimental setups for evaporation mediated self-assembly of NRs on a substrate are schematically depicted in Fig. 3A–B, in which the solvent is evaporated at a fine controlled rate.63,75 The conventional evaporation approaches to self-assembly involve the gentle evaporation of a colloidal solution of NCs, in which the NC concentration plays a critical role.58,77 Compared to dilute solutions, relatively higher concentrations of solutions favor the alignment of CdSe NR tracks and result in smectic superstructures.58 The CdS NR stripes formed at relatively low concentrations are proposed to be related to the interparticle attractions; drop-casting NRs of higher concentrations changes the orientational alignment with respect to their packing direction, which leads to the formation of bunches in a smectic phase.77 Kang et al. fabricated exclusive self-assemblies of TOP and TDPA-capped CdS NRs by using a facile and straightforward bottom-up solution process without additional external direction-controlling procedures such as external electric field and polymer matrix.77 In their work the first portion of NRs was supposed to be perpendicular to the substrate, and served as a nucleation site for the neighboring NRs which tended to assemble in the same direction with the assistance of the hydrocarbon chains or the interactions among NRs. The resulting thin film of self-bundled arrays of NRs exhibited optical emission that was nearly free from the defect-states, which greatly facilitated applications in the fields of light-emitting and photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 3  Evaporation-mediated assemblies of NRs on substrates. (A) Schematic representation shows the progression of the evaporation-mediated NRs self-assembly at different stages of droplet drying.75 Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission. (B) Schematic diagram of a more tightly controlled evaporation-mediated assembly setup. A short-walled container filled with NRs solution (with the substrate at the bottom) was set on a hotplate, and placed inside a Teflon evaporation chamber. A controlled flow rate of dry nitrogen was supplied to control the solvent evaporation rate.63 Reprinted from ref. 63 with permission. (C) Top and cross section SEM images of multilayers of CdSe/CdS NRs on Si substrates formed by slow solvent evaporation.67 Reprinted from ref. 67 with permission. (D) TEM images of CdSe NR tracks assembled into extended lamella-like superstructures, shown at various magnifications.56 Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. 
In general, controlled solvent evaporation can cause weak attractive forces (e.g. van der Waals forces, electrostatic repulsive interaction, surfactant interaction, hydrophobic interaction, entropic depletion interactions, and capillary forces) between the dispersed NRs, which result in the self-organization of adjacent NRs (Fig. 3C).64,67,69,70 Ghezelbash et al. reported that CdS NRs self-assembled into networks of stripes of several micrometers, while drop-cast from the dispersions at sub-monolayer coverage, in which the pattern formation of the stripes was proposed to be kinetically mediated by solvent evaporation.76 The stripes were several NRs thick, with NRs assembled side-by-side with their long axes parallel to the stripe direction, which were induced by the dipole–dipole attractive forces and van der Waals attraction. He et al. reported that the self-assembled CdSe NRs were formed at the oil–toluene–water interface, and the interfacial tension was included to be the operating force of the assembly.61 Zhuang et al. found that the anisotropic interparticle interactions as well as the solvophobic interactions between NRs, and the surrounding solvent played major roles in controlling the shape of the cylindrical crystalline CdSe/CdS NRs. Moreover, the structure of the monolayer or multilayer could be adjusted through the volume of NRs.62 During the drying process, the pinned edge of a drying droplet would cause capillary flow of material from the droplet volume to the pinning site, which resulted in a coffee ring region. Querner et al. reported that millimeter-long smectic assembled CdSe NRs were rapidly achieved under non-equilibrium conditions utilizing the capillary flow in a drying droplet of a pinned droplet (Fig. 3D).56 It rapidly achieved smectic superstructures, up to the millimetre scale, which was considerably larger than previously reported CdSe NRs assemblies.
To avoid the temperature gradients and local flows in solution, Talapin et al. prepared CdSe NRs superlattices into nematic, smectic, and crystalline solids by adding a nonsolvent (methanol/2-propanol, 1:1 mixture) to destabilize the toluene dispersion of NRs.58 The versatility of the method was also demonstrated by using highly luminescent CdSe/CdS NRs heterostructures for the assembly. Self-assembled colloidal CdSe/CdS NRs exhibited anisotropic optical properties with characteristic birefringence, which was considered as the first report to induce the organisation of NRs building blocks into highly luminescent 3D superlattices.58
Introduction of external additives such as excess surfactants, solvent, precipitants and polymers have also been explored to achieve self-assembly in the solution before the deposition and evaporation on the substrates.57,58,78–82 Baranov et al. exploited an additive-induced depletion attraction between colloidal NRs for direct assembly of micrometer-sized sheets of NRs in solution.57 The resulting assemblies of sheets chemically modified in a cloudy solution, could be directly used as building blocks for fabrication of micrometer-sized layers of ordered NRs on a variety of substrates by dipping or drop-casting, followed by solvent evaporation. Compared to the spherical NC, self-assembly of NRs requires both positional and orientational ordering. Liquid crystalline-like assembly in both smectic and nematic phase-like superstructures was reported for CdSe NRs.66 However, NR assemblies with long-range order have been proven to be more difficult to fabricate by means of slow solvent evaporation methods alone.67 Colloidal NRs could be aligned in both vertically and laterally ordered arrays through a wide variety of forces or effects,18,65,68,77 such as van der Waals, magnetic forces, interactions with applied electric fields, substrate template effects or depletion forces.59,60,62 For instance, Carbone et al. developed an approach for aligning CdSe/CdS NRs arrays via solvent evaporation at the toluene–water interface or under the applied electric field.18
Evaporation-mediated assembly has been shown to be capable of creating highly ordered NRs assemblies on a wide range of substrates. However, this approach necessitates appropriate drying conditions and warrants careful control over various parameters, such as solvent choices, concentration of the parent solution of NRs, evaporation rate, effect of substrates, and driving forces.
3.3. External electrical field directed assembly
Colloidal NRs carry a net charge or a permanent electric dipole moment, and an electric field can be a perfect medium to direct their self-assembly. While the total electric dipole moment from the electric field gives an alignment energy that can overcome the thermal excitation energy, the NRs will experience a torque and tend to align with their longitudinal axis oriented along the direction of the electric field. Alternating current electric fields can also be employed to direct the formation of 1D NR assemblies, which can avoid the interference of electro-osmotic and electrochemical effects that are present with direct current electric fields.70 Singh et al. prepared vertically aligned CdS and CdSe NR assemblies by electrophoretic deposition.71 The presence of charge and dipole on the NRs allowed both electric field driven deposition and orientation order to form close packed arrays. As shown in Fig. 4A, the uniform layers of CdS NRs arrays were obtained through electrophoretic deposition, and the CdSe NRs were horizontally aligned with the substrate due to the reduced net charge.72 There is a minimum value of electric field strength for alignment to occur; otherwise it will lead to random dipole orientation.
 Fig. 4  External field directed assemblies on substrates. (A) Electrophoretic deposition experimental information showing (a) the schematic diagram of the experimental setup; (b) a uniform layer of vertically aligned CdS NRs; (c) horizontally aligned CdSe NRs obtained via electrophoretic deposition; (d) CdSe NRs horizontally aligned to the substrate due to the reduced net charge.72 Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission. (B) A coplanar arrangement of Au electrodes results in NRs that are aligned in the plane of the substrate (a); (b) the TEM image shows CdSe NRs (shown as red bars) aligned along the electric field streamlines (shown in yellow).73 Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. (C) (a–c) SEM images showing aligned arrays of NRs, the red box marks the region that is displayed in (b); (c) an area of NRs assembled in ribbon like structures.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. 
Typically, the placement of the electrodes plays an important role in the electric field direction and thus dictates the final orientation of the NRs with respect to the substrate. When the electrodes are arranged in a coplanar manner, the NRs will align parallel to the plane of the substrate. In contrast, a top-down arrangement of the electrodes results in NRs oriented vertically with respect to the substrate. CdSe or CdTe NRs (10 μL) in a hexane/octane solution were dropcast onto each device, while voltage was applied to the electrodes. The NR solution concentration was varied from 1 × 1012 to 1 × 1014 rods per mL in order to explore the NR response to the applied field in the limit of weak (diluted solutions) and strong (moderately concentrated solutions) NR–NR interactions. Applied voltages were varied from ±5 to ±10 V because the electrode gaps became unstable for larger voltages. Some electrode gaps were biased during drop-casting, while the rest were left floating in order to facilitate control studies.73 It was found that the densely packed hexagonal arrays of NRs were aligned along the direction of the applied field, due to the permanent dipole moment of the NRs and the inherent dielectric properties, and the corralling of the NRs was driven to minimise the interfacial energy between the array of NRs and the surrounding polymer. It was found that the NRs can be polarized and they behaved like liquid crystals in the external electric field; the presence of sufficient anisotropy in the NR morphology could induce ordering in the orientation, even with a rather small dipole moment. Moreover, a coplanar arrangement of Au electrodes could also induce CdSe NRs aligned in the plane of the substrate, which aligned along the electric field streamlines (Fig. 4B).73 Gupta et al. observed that the orientation of CdSe NRs could be controlled by combining the forces of an applied electric field and interfacial energy.74 Hu et al. demonstrated that the position and orientation of colloidal CdTe and CdSe NRs could be adjusted through the electric field generated by nano-patterned electrodes.73 Combination of the external field directed assembly with controlled evaporation technique allowed for fabricating a much higher degree of positional orders of NR arrays. Ryan et al. adopted a similar method to align CdS NRs into perpendicular orientated arrays through the combination of a direct current electric field and the slow evaporation method. The CdS NRs in toluene were trapped between parallel electrodes and allowed to dry under a DC electric field (1 V μm−1). Gentle evaporation was achieved through near-saturation of the entire assembly in a toluene atmosphere, and the solvent evaporation gradually decreased the diameter of the trapped droplet, packing the NRs into a 2D supercrystal. It was observed that a higher degree of positional order was present with a slower rate of the solvent evaporation.65 Carbone et al. reported that the asymmetric CdSe/CdS NRs were uniformly self-assembled over areas on the scale of tens of micrometers, which was indicated by the electric field (Fig. 4C).18
External field directed assembly has proven to be effective in producing NR superlattices with a high degree of orientational order by driving NRs to align their long axes along the external electric field direction. The inherent scalability of the electrophoretic deposition technique facilitates the self-assembly of arrays with device scale areas and thus makes this method attractive for large scale NR films for applications in the fields of electronics, photonics and PVs.
3.4. Template assisted assembly
Due to the anisotropic nature of 1D NRs, only certain assembled orientations are accessible. The geometry and surface chemistry of the template play a significant role, which can introduce additional active sites for the selective deposition of NRs. Modulating the geometry and surface chemistry of templates through various techniques such as optical, electron beam lithography and microcontact printing, can create a solid substrate with precise spatial and chemical control of templates.
For the template-assisted assembly, a wide range of materials can be utilized as templates for guiding colloidal NRs into ordered structures.82–89 Most templates for NRs are surface-modified solid substrates containing geometrically constrained sites or chemically functionalized regions; the template with specific size and morphology can impose strict restrictions on the anisotropic deposition and orientation of NRs on the substrate.87,90,91 A block copolymer thin film with nanoscopic channels (width: 30 nm) was used to selectively align CdSe NRs in parallel along the channel walls (Fig. 5A). The length of the NRs relative to the channel width was critical in controlling the orientation and the lateral position of the rods. A small channel width cannot deposit the rods within the channels, but an excessively large width will lead to disordered structures. The template with cylindrical domains was reported to be useful in assembling NRs through pore confinement.87 Nanoscopic domains of block copolymers could also be chosen as templates to direct the self-assembly of colloidal NRs into different structures (e.g. end-to-end; side-by-side arrangement) under appropriate conditions.81–86
 Fig. 5  Template assisted assemblies on substrates. (A) Schematic of the assembly process of PEDO-covered CdSe NRs within the channels of the template: (a) flotation of the template on an aqueous solution of PEO-covered NRs; (b) PEO-covered NRs within the channels and on the PS template surface; (c) NRs isolated in the channels following rinsing of the template. (d, e) TEM micrographs showing distribution of CdSe NRs on lamellar and cylindrical templates after washing with water.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. (B) Schematic illustration of the process for the preparation of freestanding PDMS thin films embedded with unidirectionally aligned needle-like CdSe/CdS superparticles: (a) flow-assisted unidirectional alignment of needle-like CdSe/CdS superparticles; (b) proposed model for the process of forming needle-like superparticles; (c) SEM images of needle-like superparticles and (d) SEM image of laterally aligned needle-like superparticles on a Si3N4 pattern made via photolithography.88 Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. 
Wang et al. reported that needle-like CdSe/CdS supercrystalline colloidal particles exhibited both 1D lamellar and 2D hexagonal order along directions parallel and perpendicular to the long axis of constituent NRs, respectively.88 Those needle-like superparticles were further aligned on a patterned solid surface through capillary forces and were transferred into macroscopic and freestanding polymer films (Fig. 5B), which showed strong linearly polarized PL with an enhanced polarization ratio and potential application in polarized light emitting diodes (LED) as energy down-conversion phosphors. In addition, selective facets of nanoplates can also be used as templates for colloidal NRs arrays.88 Wu et al. reported a seeded growth approach for the controlled epitaxial growth of three types of hierarchical nanostructures, which were controlled by the growth of CdS and CdSe NRs arrays on the selected facets of hexagonally shaped nanoplate seeds (Fig. 6).89 The wurtzite and zinc blende type polymorphs of semiconductors were used to determine the facets for selective epitaxial growth of 1D NRs arrays, resulting in the formation of different hierarchical 3D nanostructures. The results revealed the significance of seed engineering in the controlled synthesis of well-defined crystal structures, which offered a good platform for the construction of multicomponent nanostructures with different functions and exhibited great potential application in solar energy conversion and photocatalysis.
 Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a type A, type B and type C nanostructures (a–c); the corresponding TEM images of CdSe type A nanostructures (d), dark-field STEM image of CdSe type B nanostructures (e), and TEM image of CdSe type C nanostructures (f).89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. 
It is noteworthy that the template properties (e.g. feature size, surface functionality) can be flexibly tailored to match the NRs properties (e.g. dimensions, surface reactivity) and to achieve a particular assembly structure. As more materials with novel properties are attracting interest as building blocks for NRs self-assembly, it is anticipated that a variety of new templates with controlled properties will be developed in the coming years.
3.5. Organic complex mediated self-assembly
To ensure a uniform dispersion of NRs in organic solvent, colloidal NRs are usually capped with organic surfactant molecules with long alkyl chains in the synthesis process. Alkyl phosphonates of cadmium are a key precursor for colloidal CdSe and CdSe/CdS NRs with controlled sizes and shapes.15,18
During the synthesis process, one or more kinds of alkylphosphonic acids with different alkyl chain lengths are decomposed in the presence of cadmium oxide and surfactants (e.g. alkylphosphine oxides, alkylphosphines or alkylamines). Such species are perfectly soluble at the growth temperatures, but tend to form a gel at low temperature, due to the formation of a network of bonds between cadmium ions and phosphonate molecules. In addition, there are excess surfactants and/or unreacted precursors, as well as by-products formed during the synthesis, which require complicated purification processes due to their similar solubility characteristics to colloidal NRs.
Qiao et al. developed a simple thermal annealing technique to self-assemble CdSe/CdS NRs into parallel or vertically aligned superlattice structures (e.g. monolayer or multilayer). The results showed that control over organic molecule complexes in the washing process or thermal annealing led to the formation of monolayer or multilayers of NRs aligned in parallel, as shown in Fig. 7.92,93
 Fig. 7  (a, c) TEM images of laterally aligned patterns formed by CdSe/CdS NRs by adjusting the cadmium complex.92,93 Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 and 93. (b, d) SEM images of the multilayer films of vertically or parallel aligned NRs on Si/SiO2 substrate.93 Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. 
It would be interesting in the future to investigate the effects of the concentration of the CdSe/CdS solution and their aspect ratio on the self-assembly pattern, as well as to optimize them for photo-sensitive detection of various photovoltaic devices. Further work on the systematic control of different surfactants in superlattice structures, and their effect on the sensitivity of photo detection along with the mechanism of superlattices, are required to be carried out and will be addressed in the future.
4. Applications in various devices
As II–VI semiconductor compounds, colloidal CdSe and CdSe/CdS NRs have been applied to many areas, due to the suitable band gap and strong photoresponse in the visible region. Their anisotropic structures give rise to anisotropic physical characteristics, displaying polarized optical and electric properties at the nanometer scale. Assembly of these NRs into ordered microscopic and even macroscopic structures make them attractive candidates widely used in various functional devices, such as photodetectors,94–100 lasers,101–105 and solar cells,106–112 light-emitting diodes (LED) and liquid-crystal display (LCD).113–127
4.1. Photodetectors
Recently, the application of colloidal semiconductor NRs as photodetectors has received increasing attention, due to their size-tuneable electronic structures, surface chemistry, surface trap engineering, compositional flexibility, and low cost for device manufacturing. A typical structure of the photoconductive detector is depicted in Fig. 8A.94 Ohmic contacts are attached to a thin film of a semiconductor. Photodetectors change their electrical conductivity under illumination, due to the generation of additional mobile charge carriers. Smaller electrode spacing is favourable for the efficient collection of photogenerated charge carriers, thus substrates with lithography-defined electrodes are another common structure for NRs assembly.94
 Fig. 8  (A) A sketch of a typical thin film photoconductive photodetector. (a) An interdigitated electrode structure is deposited onto the surface of active colloidal semiconductor NCs, and (b) the NCs layer is deposited on top of the pre-patterned electrode structure.94 Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. (B) Photodetector of aligned CdSe NRs. SEM images of aligned CdSe NRs between gold electrodes (a) before and (b) after treatment with hydrazine. An enlargement of a smaller area of aligned NRs is shown in the inset. (c) SEM image of randomly aligned hydrazine treated CdSe NRs between gold electrodes. (d) Comparison between photo I–V curves measured on disordered (blue curve) and NRs arrays with smectic order.95 Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. 
CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS NRs have been widely exploited as promising materials for photodetectors. Steiner et al. fabricated photodetectors with well aligned CdSe NRs arrays via slow evaporation on lithographically patterned silicon substrate. It was found that the NRs tended to be aligned vertically to the electrodes surface and to be ordered in ribbons running parallel to the surface. Voids and cracks occurred in the NRs film after treatment with hydrazine, probably caused by the reduction in inter-rod distance during the hydrazine treatment, as shown in Fig. 8B.95 The photocurrent of the trioctylphosphine (TOP)-capped NRs was also relatively low, which was attributed to the large spacing between adjacent NRs, the insulating nature of surface ligands, and high potential barriers for interparticle charge tunnelling.
To improve the interparticle charge transport, colloidal NRs can be treated with small molecular linkers (e.g. alkylamines, butylamine, sodium hydroxide or 1,4-phenylenediamine). Steiner et al. treated the CdSe NRs with small molecular linkers (hydrazine or 1,4-phenylenediamine linker molecules) to improve the interparticle charge transport.95 The improvement of photocurrent in this case was attributed to an increase in the exciton ionization efficiency, due to a decrease in interparticle spacing and better surface passivation. The photocurrent was found to be considerably enhanced by exchanging the TOPO–TOP capping ligands with hydrazine, as shown in Fig. 8B(d). The improvement of the photocurrent was attributed to an increase in the exciton ionization efficiency, due to the decreased interparticle spacing and better surface passivation. Persano et al. fabricated oriented layers of CdSe/CdS NRs by drop casting the NRs solution on pre-patterned substrates.96 The thermally annealed samples showed that an increase in photoconductivity (>1 order of magnitude), and in transient time constants (>1 order of magnitude) could be achieved, which were assigned to changes in the surface chemistry of the NRs. Annealing can remove the water molecules from the NR surface, and consequently, those surface trap states could contribute to the photoconductivity by acting as intermediate states in the charge transport between NRs.96
This mechanism would also explain why the low conductivity and short transient times were recovered after storing the samples for some time under ambient conditions. Due to the aspect ratio of the NRs (∼10), the site-to-site potential in the parallel configuration is 1 order of magnitude larger, which leads to the significantly higher photoconductivity in the parallel configuration. The fits of the current–voltage characteristics of the photocurrent yield a barrier height of 1.2 eV and 0.3 eV and a rod to rod distance of 0.8 nm and 1.1 nm for NRs aligned parallel and perpendicular to the electric field, respectively, which resulted from the difference in confinement length along, and perpendicular to the NR axis.96
In addition, the Au-decorated CdSe NRs by wet chemical synthesis methods is a promising alternative to photodetectors, due to the large spectral range of enhanced optical absorption, more efficient change transfer and separation. Mokari et al. reported that the hybrid CdSe–Au nanostructures displayed modified optical properties caused by the strong coupling between the Au and semiconductor parts.97 The conductive AFM results showed that a small tunnelling current was flowing through the tips composed of Au, whereas the central part of the NR consisting of the semiconductor was nonconductive at those conditions; it revealed the notably higher conductance of the Au tips. Such Au-tipped nanostructures offered natural and convenient contact points for self-assembly and electrical devices, which could solve the difficult problem of connecting colloidal NRs to the external contacts. Sheldon et al. designed CdSe NRs-gold domain hybrid nanostructures and found an increase in the conductance of five to six orders of magnitude in comparison to that of bare CdSe NRs.98 The light scattering effect on the Au nanoparticles and the Schottky fields at the interfaces of metal and semiconductor contributed to the enhanced photocurrent.
The CdSe NRs arrays and networks decorated or welded by Au spheres exhibited enhanced dark currents and photocurrents, which were mediated by the morphology of the hybrid structures; the electrical behaviour at RT showed that the charge transport was dominated by the Schottky-Richardson barrier mode under reverse bias, when considering the spherical Au nanoparticles for the barrier lowering due to the image changes at the metal–semiconductor interfaces in the assembly.99,100 These works demonstrate the increasing sophistication of high-quality electrical devices achievable via self-assembly, and verify this process as an excellent route to the next generation of electronic and optoelectronic devices utilizing colloidal NRs.
4.2. Laser application
Colloidal NRs based on II–VI semiconductors possess interesting characteristics (e.g. high quantum yield, tuneable emission wavelength, and polarized emission), which make them interesting optical gain materials for laser applications. In particular, colloidal NRs offer strong quantum confinement along two spatial directions, while their absorption cross section is significantly increased with respect to that of the spherical quantum dots that have similar optical features. As a result, they show much longer gain lifetimes than quantum dots. Moreover, heterostructures like CdSe/CdS NRs exhibit extremely bright luminescence,18 low-threshold optical gain,101 and lasing from self-assembled coffee rings,102 which offer suitable ways to construct optical resonators. Zavelani-Rossi et al. reported that the gain lifetimes in core/shell CdSe/CdS NRs exceeded 300 ps at room temperature, and such long gain lifetimes resulted from the significant reduction of Auger recombination in NRs.103 It showed that the ordered striped edges of the coffee stain acted as optical interfaces and the novel microlasers could solely be fabricated by deposition of droplets of NRs solution on flat substrates. As Fig. 9 shows, they further fabricated micro-lasers by self-assembled CdSe/CdS NRs and formed optical micro-resonators by their well-defined coffee stain ring assembly. Laser emission in the red and blue-green spectral region from NRs with different lengths was obtained, demonstrating lasing from both core and shell transitions with low pumping thresholds, and the spectral region of emission was determined essentially by the NR length. The same group presented a new controllable and reproducible technique to produce microlasers, based on CdSe/CdS NRs with emission from core or shell transitions in the red or blue-green spectral region. Compared to many substrates used in nanophotonics, this deposition technique provides a new possibility for the integration of narrow band emitters in the visible spectral range.104
 Fig. 9  Lasing from self-assembled NRs cavities. SEM images of a self-assembled coffee stain consisting of densely packed NRs: (a) the entire area of a typical coffee stain; (b–d) higher magnification images of the central and outer regions of the coffee stain ring; (e) SEM image of the coffee stain deposit formed by jet deposition of NRs in toluene, overlaid with laser emission spectra in the red and green. The borders of the coffee stain ring are well defined and function as a resonant cavity able to sustain lasing.103 Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. 
Stasio et al. obtained self-assembled single mode lasers from water soluble NCs by controlling the architecture and surface chemistry of the dot-in-rods.105 The water solubility enabled novel routes for NC self-assembly in three dimensions using superhydrophobic surfaces, leading to suspended hollow dome-shaped structures of sub-millimeter size that could be detached from the substrates and function as optical components.105
Self-assembled microcavities constructed by asymmetric CdSe/CdS core/shell NRs provide a simple solution-based approach, which is appealing for lasers. Further developments in this direction could emerge from the ability to deposit colloidal NRs from solution via flexible liquid-based technologies (e.g. ink jet printing) that can be engineered into integrated substrates, flexible deposition technologies incorporated with tuneable surface modification (e.g. surface tension, contact angle, etc.) of the substrate could be the next potential direction in the application of integrated nanophotonics. This would provide a new generation of photonic devices integrated onto substrates for lab-on-a-chip or for other compact, integrated applications.103,104 Flexible deposition technologies (e.g. ink jet printing) can be engineered into an integrated substrate, incorporated with tuneable surface modification (e.g. surface tension, contact angle, etc.) with the substrate being the next potential direction in the application of integrated nanophotonics.
4.3. Solar cells
Self-assembled colloidal semiconductor NRs arrays on substrates show the potential for use as solar cells, due to their unique alignment and innovative charge separation properties. The efficiency of solar cells would also benefit from the size, ordering, orientation, and close packing of anisotropic NRs.106 In earlier work, a typical solar cell structure based on organic–inorganic thin film has been studied intensively, in which colloidal CdSe NRs were blended with a conductive polymer to improve the light collection, the charge separation and transport through the active volume of the device. The main advantages of such structures are the efficient electron–hole pair separation at the polymer–NC interface, and easy electron transport along the rods.110–112
To increase the exciton dissociation efficiency and facilitate the carrier transport properties, the best device structure would be the interdigitated donor–acceptor heterojunction morphology in the active layer. Many hybrid solar cells based on CdSe NRs arrays have been prepared, which require charge-separating networks for optimal performance. Although well-ordered inorganic NRs arrays with spacing shorter than the exciton diffusion length of a donor polymer have been prepared by chemical bath deposition (CBD),111 chemical solution routes,108 and sol–gel reaction,109 it is still difficult to produce a larger area with uniform spacing.
Many groups have chosen different templates to form ordered NRs array structures with the spacing shorter than the exciton diffusion length, which could also be easily achieved over a large area with controllable spacing. Schierhorn electrochemically deposited vertically aligned CdSe NRs arrays onto an ITO substrate using porous aluminium oxide as a hard template, and then fabricated CdSe/poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) hybrid solar cells with ultrahigh density arrays of the CdSe NRs.110 It was found that the short-circuit current densities were linearly improved with NR length. The increased light absorption by the NRs resulted in enhanced exciton generation in the inorganic phase, and the power conversion efficiency was increased to 1.38% for cells with NRs 612 ± 46 nm long. Wang et al. successfully fabricated CdS/CdSe NR arrays through a CBD using hydrothermally synthesized CdS NRs as the template.111 CdSe layer encapsulated CdS NRs enhanced the visible-light absorption and photocurrent performance. A tandem structure of the energy bands of CdS/CdSe was also formed as a result of the Fermi level alignment, which was attributed to the efficient separation of photogenerated charges. CdS/CdSe core–shell arrays gave a maximum photocurrent of 5.3 mA cm−2 and the photoconversion efficiency of 1.6%, which were much higher than those of the bare CdS and CdSe; respectively.
Kwon fabricated hybrid solar cells based on CdSe NRs arrays and P3HT, in which the ultrahigh density CdSe NRs arrays were oriented vertically to the ITO substrate using a nanoporous block copolymer template (Fig. 10a and b).112 The CdSe NRs were successfully prepared inside the nanoporous template, and after the nanoporous template was removed, an ultrahigh density array (4 × 1011 in−2) of vertically aligned CdSe NRs was achieved on the ITO substrate (Fig. 10c and d). The vertical orientation of the CdSe NRs on the ITO substrate was maintained even after the template was removed (Fig. 10e). The short-circuit current of a solar cell based on CdSe NRs arrays/P3HT was three times larger than that of the counterpart solar cell based on CdSe/P3HT bilayer thin film. The power conversion efficiency of the CdSe NRs array/P3HT hybrid solar cell was twice that of the solar cell based on the bilayer thin film type of CdSe/P3HT. The superior performance was attributed to the efficient charge separation at the interface and fast charge transport through the vertically oriented CdSe NRs. However, most of the excitons generated in the polymer would recombine before reaching the junction. Therefore, decreasing the distance between nanopillars or replacing the P3HT with a low-absorbance charge-separating, hole-transporting material should result in a significant increase in cell efficiency and would be an intriguing strategy for fabricating high-efficiency nanostructured photovoltaics (Fig. 10f).96
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CdSe NRs/P3HT hybrid solar cells; (b) AFM phase image of a nanoporous template. FESEM images of (c) the cross-sectional view of as-deposited CdSe in the nanoporous template, (d) 60° tilted image, and (e) the cross-sectional view of CdSe NRs after removing the nanoporous template. (f) The J–V characteristics measured under the illumination of AM 1.5 G full sunlight (100 mW cm−2); the inset corresponds to dark current measurement.112 Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. 
Further studies on the physical properties arising from superstructure organization and coupling effects among colloidal NRs will be carried out. This should promote further exploitation of these NRs into functional, nanocrystal-based solar cells by the introduction of a proper buffer layer (e.g. ZnO, TiO2), which should lead to further exploitation of colloidal NRs in self-assembled functional structures and devices. The surface modification treatments (e.g. optimizing the dimensions; modifying interfacial energy; functionalized ligands) are also future research areas for highly efficient functional devices.
4.4. LED and LCD
Since colloidal CdX NRs show narrow bands and linearly polarized emission, their alignment on a scale large enough to be compatible with the technology makes it possible to obtain unique properties for optoelectronic devices, including light-emitting diodes (LED) and liquid-crystal displays (LCD).
In the early work, various device architectures have been developed for LEDs, such as double layer, multilayer and hybrid.113–118 Despite such configurations allowing the independent optimization of materials for charge injection, transport, and emission, the incompatible solvents for the QD and hole transport layers can lead to significant de-wetting and aggregation of the QDs.116 In addition, the elegant phase separation process and device performance are sensitive to the surface properties of QDs, QD size distribution, organic host matrix, and processing conditions.119,120 It is therefore desirable to be able to disperse uniform, nonaggregated QD layers of any thickness from a submonolayer to a multilayer onto a compatible organic hole transport layer (HTL) that does not exhibit significant background electroluminescence.
In the subsequent years, efforts were exploited to produce ordered and large scale assemblies of shape controlled nanocrystals needing further advancements for their technological potential.119,120 Rizzo et al. reported a novel deposition technique that enabled the formation of smectic/nematic nanorod superstructure films and described how to integrate them as an emissive layer into a hybrid organic/inorganic LED.120
Castelli et al. demonstrated high efficiency QD-LEDs featuring all-solution-processed organic charge transport layers, which outperformed all previously reported QD-LEDs based on all-organic interlayers.121 Without using an advanced factory facility, they obtained a record EQE (6.1%) and very limited efficiency roll-off, suggesting enormous potential improvements by using optimized industrial fabrication equipment (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  (a) Device structure of a multilayer QD-LED: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/polar-polymer-ETL/Ba/Al. (b) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy image of a representative DiR-LED showing the multiple layers of material with distinct contrast. (c) Scanning electron micrographs of the active layer of CdSe/CdS DiR-QDs prior to deposition of the overlayers. (d) Flat-band energy level diagram of the device and schematic representation of a CdSe/CdS DiR QD. (e) Chronological evolution of the EQE values of QD-LEDs embedding organic CTLs. (f) Electroluminescence spectra of the devices embedding the different polar/ionic polymer ETLs, compared to the control LEDs and to the PL spectrum of the DiRs on glass (gray line). (g) Corresponding chromaticity coordinates in the CIE chromaticity diagram, highlighting the vicinity of the color coordinates to the spectral locus.121 Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. 
The anisotropic CdSe/CdS nanorod heterostructures are viable candidates for use in LCD devices.122–126 Talapin reported emission polarization in macroscopic semiconductor–polymer composite films containing CdSe/CdS NRs and colloidal CdSe nanoplatelets.127 An array of unidirectionally aligned nanocrystals could provide a source of macroscopic polarized emission, which can be imagined as a backlighting layer in LCD devices (Fig. 12a). Significant optical anisotropy and emission polarization were observed for 2D CdSe nanoplatelets with the electronic structure of quantum wells (Fig. 12b). The polymer films with aligned CdSe/CdS dot-in-rod and rod-in-rod nanostructures showed more than 2-fold enhancement of brightness, compared to the emitter layers with randomly oriented nanostructures (Fig. 12c–f), which could be explained as the combination of linearly polarized luminescence and directional emission from individual nanostructures. The aligned nanorod arrays served as optical funnels, absorbing unpolarized light and re-emitting light from deep-green to red with quantum efficiencies of over 90% and high degrees of linear polarization.
 Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of a liquid-crystal display (LCD) using anisotropic nanocrystals as the backlight source, which could absorb unpolarized light from blue LED emitters and re-emit linearly polarized light with near unity quantum efficiency and polarization direction aligned with the vertical polarizer filter.127 (b) Polarization dependence of emitted light for samples of CdSe/CdS dot-in-rods before (squares) and after (circles) stretching. (c–e) Emission with photoselected polarization parallel (black curves) and perpendicular (red curves) to the direction of stretching for three types of nanocrystals: dot-in-rods (35 × 5 nm; 3.5 nm core), rod-in-rods (5.2 × 45 nm; 3.8 × 9.0 nm core), and CdSe NPLs. (f) Mapping of fluorescence polarization for ∼103 μm2 areas of polymer films containing rod-in-rods before and after alignment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. 
Further large improvements could also be achieved by optimizing the QD active layer in terms of emission quantum yield. The performance of LED or LCD might be further improved by optimizing the energy levels and morphology of the organic semiconductor layers, in particular by inclusion of multiple HTLs to better balance carrier transport and injection into the QD emissive layer, as well as by using directional emissive QDs, and by optimizing the photonic structure of the devices.
5. Conclusions
The self-assemblies of colloidal CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS NRs have recently received broad research interest, due to their outstanding anisotropic structural properties. Different strategies (e.g. the Langmuir–Blodgett method, slow evaporation, external electrical field, template-assisted assembly, organic complex mediated self-assembly) have been developed for the self-assembly of colloidal CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS NRs into well-defined structures on various substrates. In particular, the evaporation-mediated self-assembly can strengthen the relatively weak attraction forces to induce NRs aggregation with minimized free energy. The electric-field-assisted and template-assisted assembly is able to make use of external facilitations and induce building blocks orientated according to electric fields or template constraints. In the case of self-assembly mediated by organic surfactant molecules capped around NRs, the NRs can be aligned parallel to the substrate along with melted organic molecules during the annealing process. Moreover, the amount of organics strongly influences the nature of the self-assembly patterns. Several studies have been focused on developing strategies for orienting CdSe NRs and CdSe/CdS NRs arrays during self-assembly, which were regarded as the ideal assembly configurations for many nanocrystal devices. Different applications based on the optical, electronic, photovoltaic properties of the self-assemblies have been demonstrated.
It is still challenging to achieve a high degree of order that extends over large areas, which is crucial and desirable for fabricating integrated devices. This will be overcome in the future through the integration of combined nanofabrication and processing techniques. The fabrication of ordered assemblies from NRs building blocks over large areas and understanding and mastering the driving forces behind the assembly are the key goals for the engineering of future devices.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51406069); China Postdoctoral Science Foundation Special Project (no. 2016 T90426); China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (no. 2015 M581733); Jiangsu Planned Projects for Postdoctoral Research Funds (no. 1501107B); Training Project of Jiangsu University Youth Backbone Teacher; National Natural Science Foundation of China (51572002).
Notes and references
C. R. Kagan, E. Lifshitz, E. H. Sargent and D. V. Talapin, Science, 2016, 353(6302), aac5523 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. A. Akkerman, M. Gandini, F. Di Stasio, P. Rastogi, F. Palazon, G. Bertoni, J. M. Ball, M. Prato, A. Petrozza and L. Manna, Nat. Energy, 2016, 2, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. T. Diroll, D. Jishkariani, M. Cargnello, C. B. Murray and B. Donnio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(33), 10508–10515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. M. Kurley, J. C. Russell, J. Jang and D. V. Talapin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7464–7467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Alam, M. Labine, C. J. Karwacki and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(2), 2880–2886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kholmicheva, N. Razgoniaeva, P. Yadav, A. Lahey, C. Erickson, P. Moroz, D. Gamelin and M. Zamkov, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(3), 1477–1487 CAS .
B. T. Diroll, I. Fedin, P. Darancet, D. V. Talapin and R. D. Schaller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(35), 11109–11112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Vaxenburg, A. Rodina, E. Lifshitz and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(4), 2503–2511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mukherjee, S. J. Lim, T. P. Wrobel, R. Bhargava and A. M. Smith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(34), 10887–10896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Stasio, J. Q. Grim, V. Lesnyak, P. Rastogi, L. Manna, I. Moreels and R. Krahne, Small, 2015, 11(11), 1328–1334 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Coropceanu, A. Rossinelli, J. R. Caram, F. S. Freyria and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(3), 3295–3301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dong, S. Pal, J. Lian, Y. Chan, O. V. Prezhdo and Z. H. Loh, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(10), 9370–9378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Kang, C. W. Lai, H. C. Peng, J. J. Shyue and P. T. Chou, Small, 2007, 3, 1882–1885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, J. H. Nelson, E. V. Shevchenko, S. Aloni, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2951–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Khon, N. N. Hewa-Kasakarage, I. Nemitz, K. Acharya and M. Zamkov, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5929–5936 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Yong, Y. Sahoo, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2447–2458 CAS .
L. Carbone, C. Nobile, M. De Giorgi, F. D. Sala, G. Morello, P. Pompa, M. Hytch, E. Snoeck, A. Fiore, I. R. Franchini, M. Nadasan, A. F. Silvestre, L. Chiodo, S. Kudera, R. Cingolani, R. Krahne and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2942–2950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, Y. Xie, J. Lu, Y. Xiong, S. Zhang, Y. Qian and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 748–753 RSC .
S. Chen, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Yan and W. Tan, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 166, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sapra, J. Poppe and A. Eychmuller, Small, 2007, 3, 1886–1888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-K. Koh, A. C. Bartnik, F. W. Wise and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3909–3913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Lian, M. Lin and Y. Chan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 672–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng, L. Manna, W. D. Yang, J. Wickham, E. Scher, A. Kadavanich and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 2000, 404, 59–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Feng, D. Fan, F. Fan and C. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 5312–5318 CAS .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Gotzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson and H. W. J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Shiang, A. V. Kadavanich, R. K. Grubbs and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 17417–17422 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Peng, J. Wickham and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1998, 120, 5343–5344 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 183–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Dognega, S. G. Hickey, S. F. Wuister, D. Vanmaekelbergh and A. Meijerink, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 489–496 CrossRef .
L. Manna, E. C. Scher and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 12700–12706 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Qu and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2049–2055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. G. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 3343–3353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Peng and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1389–1395 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Rice, A. E. Saunders and M. P. Stoykovich, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6669–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, S. Banerjee, S. Jia, M. L. Steigerwald and I. P. Herman, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19(10), 2573–2580 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(18), 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, N. Zhao and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40(2), 656–671 RSC .
S. Y. Zhang, M. D. Regulacio and M. Y. Han, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(7), 2301–2323 RSC .
S. K. Ophir, Y. B. Shahar, U. Banin and D. Mandler, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 1, 1300030 CrossRef .
T. Paik, B. T. Diroll, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(20), 6662–6669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, C. Wang, J. Xu, J. Zheng, K. M. Gattás-Asfura and R. M. Leblanc, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5377–5382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Martín-García and M. M. Velázquez, Langmuir, 2014, 30(2), 509–516 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Wu and H. Zhang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 207, 347–360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Mahmoud and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14618–14625 CAS .
Y. Xie, S. Guo, C. Guo, M. He, D. Chen, Y. Ji, Z. Chen and X. Wu, Langmuir, 2013, 29(21), 6232–6241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-J. Shen, Y.-L. Lee and Y.-M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9556–9564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Gattás-Asfura, C. A. Constantine, M. J. Lynn, D. A. Thimann, X. Ji and R. M. Leblanc, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14640–14646 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kwan, F. Kim, J. Akana and P. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 5, 447–448 RSC .
F. Kim, S. Kwan, J. Akana and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4360–4361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Li, J. Hu, W. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 349–351 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tao, F. Kim, C. Hess, J. Goldberger, R. He, Y. Sun, Y. Xia and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1229–1233 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang and F. Kim, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 503–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Wang, D. Lamontagne, Z. Wang, Z. Wang and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18225–18228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, F. Kim, A. R. Tao, S. Connor and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 896–900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Querner, M. D. Fischbein, P. A. Heiney and M. Drndic, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2308–2314 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baranov, A. Fiore, M. Van Huis, C. Giannini, A. Falqui, U. Lafont, H. Zandbergen, M. Zanella, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 743–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. Kornowski, S. Forster and H. Weller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12984–12988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, C. B. Murray, A. V. Titov and P. Kral, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1213–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wetz, K. Soulantica, M. Respaud, A. Falqui and B. Chaudret, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2007, 27, 1162–1166 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Q. Zhang, S. Gupta, T. Emrick, T. P. Russell and P. Thiyagarajan, Small, 2007, 3, 1214–1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhuang, A. Shaller, J. Lynch, H. Wu, O. Chen, A. D. Q. Li and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6084–6085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Baker, A. Widmer-Cooper, M. F. Toney, P. L. Geissler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. M. Bishop, C. E. Wilmer, S. Soh and B. A. Grzybowski, Small, 2009, 5, 1600–1630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Ryan, A. Mastroianni, K. A. Stancil, H. T. Liu and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1479–1482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. S. Li, J. Walda, L. Manna and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 557–560 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zanella, R. Gomes, M. Povia, C. Giannini, Y. Zhang, A. Riskin, M. Van Bael, Z. Hens and L. Manna, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2205–2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed and K. M. Ryan, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2480–2485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Min, M. Akbulut, K. Kristiansen, Y. Golan and J. Israelachvili, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 527–538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kinge, M. Crego-Calama and D. N. Reinhoudt, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 20–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Singh, N. J. English and K. M. Ryan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 1608–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Gill, P. Liu and K. M. Ryan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, D3019–D3024 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, M. D. Fischbein, C. Querner and M. Drndic, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2585–2591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gupta, Q. Zhang, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2066–2069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, R. D. Gunning, S. Ahmed, C. A. Barrett, N. J. English, J.-A. Garate and K. M. Ryan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1562–1569 RSC .
A. Ghezelbash, B. Koo and B. A. Korgel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1832–1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Kang, C.-W. Lai, H.-C. Peng, J.-J. Shyue and P.-T. Chou, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 750–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, N. Zhao and E. Kumacheva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 656–671 RSC .
D. Baranov, A. Fiore, M. van Huis, C. Giannini, A. Falqui, U. Lafont, H. Zandbergen, M. Zanella, R. Cingolani and L. Manna, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 743–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Baker, A. Widmer-Cooper, M. F. Toney, P. L. Geissler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 195–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zanella, R. Gomes, M. Povia, C. Giannini, Y. Zhang, A. Riskin, M. Van Bael, Z. Hens and L. Manna, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2205–2209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, U. Banin and R. Shenhar, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2774–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ploshnik, A. Salant, U. Banin and R. Shenhar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 11885–11893 RSC .
J. Kao, K. Thorkelsson, P. Bai, B. J. Rancatore and T. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2654–2678 RSC .
K. Thorkelsson, A. J. Mastroianni, P. Ercius and T. Xu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 498–504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Thorkelsson, J. H. Nelson, A. P. Alivisatos and T. Xu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4908–4913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, S. Gupta, T. Emrick and T. P. Russell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3898–3899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, X. Wang, D. LaMontagne, Z. Wang and Y. C. Cao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6022–6025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Wu, J. Z. Chen, C. L. Tan, Y. H. Zhu, Y. Han and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 470–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Artemyev, B. Möller and U. Woggon, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 509–512 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Jones, K. D. Osberg, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Langille and C. A. Mirkin, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3736–3827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qiao, J. M. Bian and A. M. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2014, 135, 165–167 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qiao, W. Xu, M. Liu, J. Yang, X. Cui, Q. Wang and J. Bian, Mater. Lett., 2016, 180, 85–88 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Steiner, D. Azulay, A. Aharoni, A. Salant, U. Banin and O. Millo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 195308 CrossRef .
A. Persano, M. De Giorgi, A. Fiore, R. Cingolani, L. Manna, A. Cola and R. Krahne, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1646–1652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Mokari, E. Rothenberg, I. Popov, R. Costi and U. Banin, Science, 2004, 304, 1787–1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Sheldon, P. E. Trudeau, T. Mokari, L. W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3676–3682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lavieville, Y. Zhang, A. Casu, A. Genovese, L. Manna, E. Di Fabrizio and R. Krahne, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2940–2947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lavieville, Y. Zhang, E. D. Fabrizio and R. Krahne, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 111, 185–188 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krahne, M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 063105 CrossRef .
I. Gur, N. A. Fromer, M. L. Geier and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2005, 310(5747), 462–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, M. G. Lupo, R. Krahne, L. Manna and G. Lanzani, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 931–935 RSC .
M. Zavelani-Rossi, R. Krahne, G. Della Valle, S. Longhi, I. R. Franchini, S. Girardo, F. Scotognella, D. Pisignano, L. Manna, G. Lanzani and F. Tassone, Laser. Photonics Rev., 2012, 6, 678–683 CrossRef CAS .
F. Di Stasio, J. Q. Grim, V. Lesnyak, P. Rastogi, L. Manna, I. Moreels and R. Krahne, Small, 2015, 11, 1328–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Accardo, F. Di Stasio, M. Burghammer, C. Riekel and R. Krahne, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 524–528 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Lin, C.-W. Chen, T.-H. Chu, W.-F. Su, C.-C. Lin, C.-H. Ku, J.-J. Wu, C.-H. Chen, W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425–2427 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiro, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley and J. N. J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635–7639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei, K. Hirota, K. Tajima and K. Hashimoto, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5080–5087 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schierhorn, S. W. Boettcher, J. H. Peet, E. Matioli, G. C. Bazan, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6132–6136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Shi and L. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4021–4025 CAS .
S. Kwon, M. Shim, J. I. Lee, T.-W. Lee, K. Cho and J. K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 4571–4576 RSC .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, O. Onitsuka and M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1316–1318 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W. K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nature, 2002, 420, 800–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chaudhary, M. Ozkan and W. C. W. Chan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 2925–2927 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe-Sullivan, W. K. Woo, J. S. Steckel, M. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Org. Electron., 2003, 4, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe-Sullivan, J. S. Steckel, W. K. Woo, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1117–1124 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Muller, M. A. Petruska, M. Achermann, D. J. Werder, E. A. Akhadov, D. D. Koleske, M. A. Hoffbauer and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1039–1044 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rizzo, C. Nobile, M. Mazzeo, M. D. Giorgi, A. Fiore, L. Carbone, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, ACS. Nano, 2009, 3(6), 1506–1512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castelli, F. Meinardi, M. Pasini, F. Galeotti, V. Pinchetti, M. Lorenzon, L. Manna, I. Moreels, U. Giovanella and S. Brovelli, Nano Lett., 2015, 15(8), 5455–5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, L.-S. Li, W. Yang, L. Manna, L.-W. Wang and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 292, 2060–2063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Talapin, R. Koeppe, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, J. M. Lupton, A. L. Rogach, O. Benson, J. Feldmann and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 1677–1681 CrossRef CAS .
I. Coropceanu, A. Rossinelli, J. R. Caram, F. S. Freyria and M. G. Bawendi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3295–3301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1821–1825 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. L. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Cunningham, J. B. Souza, I. Fedin, C. She, B. Lee and D. V. Talapin, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(6), 5769–5781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01974b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) A sketch of a typical setup for the hot-injection synthesis of colloidal NRs. (B) Schematic illustration of CdSe NRs produced in the seed-mediated synthesis with wz-CdSe seeds, and typical TEM images of wz-CdSe NRs.35 Reprinted from ref. 35 with permission. (C) Sketch of the seeded growth approach based on the surface selective adhesion model, and TEM image of CdSe/CdS NRs.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Schematic illustration of the Langmuir–Blodgett apparatus for nanowire assembly at the air–water interface. Photographs of the self-assembly process at different compression stages. And surface pressure curve recorded during the LB NR monolayer assembly.52 Reprinted from ref. 52 with permission. (B) Schematic illustration of the Langmuir–Blodgett apparatus for NRs assembly at the air–water interface. Compression using a set of barriers induced NRs with hydrophobic ligands to align parallel to the barriers.53 Reprinted with permission from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 3  Evaporation-mediated assemblies of NRs on substrates. (A) Schematic representation shows the progression of the evaporation-mediated NRs self-assembly at different stages of droplet drying.75 Reprinted from ref. 75 with permission. (B) Schematic diagram of a more tightly controlled evaporation-mediated assembly setup. A short-walled container filled with NRs solution (with the substrate at the bottom) was set on a hotplate, and placed inside a Teflon evaporation chamber. A controlled flow rate of dry nitrogen was supplied to control the solvent evaporation rate.63 Reprinted from ref. 63 with permission. (C) Top and cross section SEM images of multilayers of CdSe/CdS NRs on Si substrates formed by slow solvent evaporation.67 Reprinted from ref. 67 with permission. (D) TEM images of CdSe NR tracks assembled into extended lamella-like superstructures, shown at various magnifications.56 Reprinted with permission from ref. 56.	 

 	Fig. 4  External field directed assemblies on substrates. (A) Electrophoretic deposition experimental information showing (a) the schematic diagram of the experimental setup; (b) a uniform layer of vertically aligned CdS NRs; (c) horizontally aligned CdSe NRs obtained via electrophoretic deposition; (d) CdSe NRs horizontally aligned to the substrate due to the reduced net charge.72 Reprinted from ref. 72 with permission. (B) A coplanar arrangement of Au electrodes results in NRs that are aligned in the plane of the substrate (a); (b) the TEM image shows CdSe NRs (shown as red bars) aligned along the electric field streamlines (shown in yellow).73 Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. (C) (a–c) SEM images showing aligned arrays of NRs, the red box marks the region that is displayed in (b); (c) an area of NRs assembled in ribbon like structures.18 Reprinted with permission from ref. 18.	 

 	Fig. 5  Template assisted assemblies on substrates. (A) Schematic of the assembly process of PEDO-covered CdSe NRs within the channels of the template: (a) flotation of the template on an aqueous solution of PEO-covered NRs; (b) PEO-covered NRs within the channels and on the PS template surface; (c) NRs isolated in the channels following rinsing of the template. (d, e) TEM micrographs showing distribution of CdSe NRs on lamellar and cylindrical templates after washing with water.87 Reprinted with permission from ref. 87. (B) Schematic illustration of the process for the preparation of freestanding PDMS thin films embedded with unidirectionally aligned needle-like CdSe/CdS superparticles: (a) flow-assisted unidirectional alignment of needle-like CdSe/CdS superparticles; (b) proposed model for the process of forming needle-like superparticles; (c) SEM images of needle-like superparticles and (d) SEM image of laterally aligned needle-like superparticles on a Si3N4 pattern made via photolithography.88 Reprinted with permission from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a type A, type B and type C nanostructures (a–c); the corresponding TEM images of CdSe type A nanostructures (d), dark-field STEM image of CdSe type B nanostructures (e), and TEM image of CdSe type C nanostructures (f).89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a, c) TEM images of laterally aligned patterns formed by CdSe/CdS NRs by adjusting the cadmium complex.92,93 Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 and 93. (b, d) SEM images of the multilayer films of vertically or parallel aligned NRs on Si/SiO2 substrate.93 Reprinted with permission from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) A sketch of a typical thin film photoconductive photodetector. (a) An interdigitated electrode structure is deposited onto the surface of active colloidal semiconductor NCs, and (b) the NCs layer is deposited on top of the pre-patterned electrode structure.94 Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. (B) Photodetector of aligned CdSe NRs. SEM images of aligned CdSe NRs between gold electrodes (a) before and (b) after treatment with hydrazine. An enlargement of a smaller area of aligned NRs is shown in the inset. (c) SEM image of randomly aligned hydrazine treated CdSe NRs between gold electrodes. (d) Comparison between photo I–V curves measured on disordered (blue curve) and NRs arrays with smectic order.95 Reprinted with permission from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 9  Lasing from self-assembled NRs cavities. SEM images of a self-assembled coffee stain consisting of densely packed NRs: (a) the entire area of a typical coffee stain; (b–d) higher magnification images of the central and outer regions of the coffee stain ring; (e) SEM image of the coffee stain deposit formed by jet deposition of NRs in toluene, overlaid with laser emission spectra in the red and green. The borders of the coffee stain ring are well defined and function as a resonant cavity able to sustain lasing.103 Reprinted with permission from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CdSe NRs/P3HT hybrid solar cells; (b) AFM phase image of a nanoporous template. FESEM images of (c) the cross-sectional view of as-deposited CdSe in the nanoporous template, (d) 60° tilted image, and (e) the cross-sectional view of CdSe NRs after removing the nanoporous template. (f) The J–V characteristics measured under the illumination of AM 1.5 G full sunlight (100 mW cm−2); the inset corresponds to dark current measurement.112 Reprinted with permission from ref. 112.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Device structure of a multilayer QD-LED: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/polar-polymer-ETL/Ba/Al. (b) Cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy image of a representative DiR-LED showing the multiple layers of material with distinct contrast. (c) Scanning electron micrographs of the active layer of CdSe/CdS DiR-QDs prior to deposition of the overlayers. (d) Flat-band energy level diagram of the device and schematic representation of a CdSe/CdS DiR QD. (e) Chronological evolution of the EQE values of QD-LEDs embedding organic CTLs. (f) Electroluminescence spectra of the devices embedding the different polar/ionic polymer ETLs, compared to the control LEDs and to the PL spectrum of the DiRs on glass (gray line). (g) Corresponding chromaticity coordinates in the CIE chromaticity diagram, highlighting the vicinity of the color coordinates to the spectral locus.121 Reprinted with permission from ref. 121.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Scheme of a liquid-crystal display (LCD) using anisotropic nanocrystals as the backlight source, which could absorb unpolarized light from blue LED emitters and re-emit linearly polarized light with near unity quantum efficiency and polarization direction aligned with the vertical polarizer filter.127 (b) Polarization dependence of emitted light for samples of CdSe/CdS dot-in-rods before (squares) and after (circles) stretching. (c–e) Emission with photoselected polarization parallel (black curves) and perpendicular (red curves) to the direction of stretching for three types of nanocrystals: dot-in-rods (35 × 5 nm; 3.5 nm core), rod-in-rods (5.2 × 45 nm; 3.8 × 9.0 nm core), and CdSe NPLs. (f) Mapping of fluorescence polarization for ∼103 μm2 areas of polymer films containing rod-in-rods before and after alignment. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr01974b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
