Evolving aprotic Li–air batteries  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CS00003B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CS00003B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 8045-8101Evolving aprotic Li–air batteries

        
          
            Zhenzhen 
            Wu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yuhui 
            Tian†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Liguang 
            Wang
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Shangshu 
            Qian
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tianpin 
            Wu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shanqing 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Lu
          
          
        
      *b
aCenter for Catalysis and Clean Energy, School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Queensland 4222, Australia. E-mail: s.zhang@griffith.edu.au
bCollege of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: junzoelu@zju.edu.cn
cInstitute of Zhejiang University-Quzhou, Quzhou 324000, China
Received 
      2nd January 2022
    First published on 1st September 2022AbstractLithium–air batteries (LABs) have attracted tremendous attention since the proposal of the LAB concept in 1996 because LABs have a super high theoretical/practical specific energy and an infinite supply of redox-active materials, and are environment-friendly. However, due to the lack of critical electrode materials and a thorough understanding of the chemistry of LABs, the development of LABs entered a germination period before 2010, when LABs research mainly focused on the development of air cathodes and carbonate-based electrolytes. In the growing period, i.e., from 2010 to the present, the investigation focused more on systematic electrode design, fabrication, and modification, as well as the comprehensive selection of electrolyte components. Nevertheless, over the past 25 years, the development of LABs has been full of retrospective steps and breakthroughs. In this review, the evolution of LABs is illustrated along with the constantly emerging design, fabrication, modification, and optimization strategies. At the end, perspectives and strategies are put forward for the development of future LABs and even other metal–air batteries.
Zhenzhen Wu
Dr Zhenzhen Wu is a postdoc research fellow at the University of Queensland, Australia. Dr Wu obtained her PhD degree in late 2021 at Griffith University, Australia. She was a postdoctoral research fellow at the Centre for Catalysis and Clean Energy (CCCE) at Griffith University from October 2021 to March 2022. Her research focuses on functional organic materials for battery energy storage, including organic electrode materials and organic electrolyte additives. To date, she has published over 30 papers in the clean energy field.
Yuhui Tian
Mr Yuhui Tian received his BSc and MSc degrees from Jiangsu University, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Shanqing Zhang at Griffith University, Australia. His current research interests include the DFT-guided design and synthesis of functional materials for electrocatalysis and rechargeable metal–air batteries.
Hao Chen
Dr Hao Chen was awarded his PhD degree in 2021 at the School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Australia. From May 2021 to May 2022, he worked as a research fellow at the School of Mechanical, Medical and Process Engineering, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is now a research fellow at Griffith University. His current research interests include the development of functional binders, solid-state electrolytes, and high-voltage cathodes for next-generation lithium–ion batteries.
Tianpin Wu
Dr Tianpin Wu is the principle beamline scientist working at beamline 9-BM of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. Her expertise is in energy storage and catalyst materials characterization by X-ray absorption spectroscopy. She received her undergraduate degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), and her PhD degree in Physical and Analytical Chemistry from the University of Utah. Following two and half years of postdoctoral research in the Division of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at Argonne National Laboratory, she joined the X-ray Science Division as a physicist in 2012.
Shanqing Zhang
Prof. Shanqing Zhang obtained his PhD degree in electrochemistry in 2001 at Griffith University, Australia. He was awarded the Australia Research Council Future Fellowship for 2009–2013 and promoted to full professor and theme leader at Griffith University in 2016. Currently, Prof. Zhang is working on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials and functional polymers for energy conversion and storage devices as well as the development of sustainable recyclable battery technology.
Jun Lu
Dr Jun Lu completed his PhD in 2009 from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah. He then worked as a post-doctoral researcher under a DOE-EERE postdoctoral fellowship (Vehicles Technology Program (2011–2013)) at Argonne National Laboratory, before being promoted to a chemist at Argonne National Laboratory. Dr Lu currently holds a chair professorship at Zhejiang University of China. Dr Lu's research interests mainly focus on Li-ion battery technology, including Li–O2 batteries with both open and closed configurations, high energy cathode materials for Li-ion batteries, high energy silicon anodes, solid-state electrolytes, cathode design for Li-S batteries, and new materials for Na-ion and Na–air batteries.
1. Introduction
1.1 Background to LABs
Energy storage will become more and more critical in the future. Currently, over 80% of domestic and industrial global power consumption comes from fossil fuels, such as coal, petroleum, oil shales, and natural gas.1 The unprecedented consumption of these fossil fuels has caused the depletion of natural resources and produces a large amount of greenhouse gas (e.g., CO2), leading to the ecological deterioration of our environment. Tremendous efforts and investments have been devoted to searching for reliable, renewable, and eco-friendly energy to match the growth of a sustainable modern society. Clean energies, like hydroelectric power, solar cells, and wind turbines, are considered sustainable energy sources, but suffer from discrete production and supply because of the different geographical locations, amount of sunshine, seasons, and weather, respectively.
Electrochemical energy storage (EES) technologies are regarded as an uninterrupted green power supplier, which could be applied to large-scale energy stations, electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and portable electronic devices. Lithium–ion batteries (LIBs), currently the most popular EES, have been commercialized by Sony Co. for almost 30 years since 1991. To date, the commercial LIBs in today's typical EVs can supply an energy density of ca. 260 W h kg−1 at the cell level, which corresponds to 170–200 W h km−1.2,3 Both Battery 500 consortium in the US and NEDO in Japan proposed a driving distance of 500–600 km per charging, corresponding to an energy density of 500 W h kg−1 at the cell level.4 This specification almost reaches the limits of the current cathode materials of LIBs. In sharp contrast, rechargeable lithium–oxygen batteries (LOBs) that use pure oxygen as an effective cathode material have attracted substantial attention because of a high theoretical specific energy of 11429 W h kg−1 (excluding the mass of oxygen) and a practical capacity of 1700 W h kg−1, matching the usable energy density of gasoline.5 What's more, oxygen supply is almost infinitely accessible from air. The LOBs capable of using oxygen directly from the air without significantly sacrificing performance and stability are commonly called lithium–air batteries (LABs). Because LABs are still in their infancy and LOBs are the inevitable development stage of LABs, this review covers the state-of-the-art development of both LABs and LOBs.
Similar to any typical configuration of an electrochemical battery, a LAB cell constitutes an anode, a functional electrolyte, and a cathode (see Scheme 1). In the discharge process, the lithium anode releases Li+ ions into the electrolyte while the oxygen cathode absorbs O2 outside of the cell and Li+ in the electrolyte (Scheme 1a). In contrast, in the charge process, the lithium anode stores the lithium ions (Li+) from the electrolyte while the oxygen cathode releases Li+ ions into the electrolyte and O2 gas to the environment (Scheme 1b). The anode of LABs is mainly a lithium metal anode. The oxygen cathode includes porous host materials and the catalysts for the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The cathode substrate typically consists of porous carbon materials. The aprotic electrolytes play considerable roles in the reversibility and rechargeability of LABs, which is the main focus of this work. On the cathode, the porous substrates (e.g., porous carbon) absorb O2 molecules from the air stream. The O2 molecules (air) are reduced under the catalytic effect of catalysts, and then react with Li+ (electrolyte) and the electrons (external circuits) to form Li2O2 or other products in the porous matrix. A Li+ transport membrane is inserted between the cathode and anode to facilitate lithium ion diffusion and prevent the contamination of the different layers. The typical charge–discharge profile in LABs using a carbon-based air cathode is depicted in Scheme 1c. The theoretical voltage of the O2/Li2O2 couple is calculated as 2.96 V (vs. Li/Li+). Both the charge and discharge processes suffer from the overpotential phenomenon due to reaction polarization and materials instability.
 Scheme 1  The configuration design and discharge (a) and charge (b) mechanism of Li–air batteries, and the corresponding charge/discharge profiles (c). The potential is relative to Li/Li+. 
1.2 Evolution of LABs
Early electrochemistry in the 1960s, especially in the ORR and the OER, has constructed a significant theoretical foundation for the establishment of LABs.6,7 In the 1980s, significant efforts were devoted to the development of aqueous LABs systems in an alkaline electrolyte (e.g., KOH) or quasi-neutral electrolyte (e.g., NaCl and KNO3), which are not rechargeable.8 In 1996, the first recharging LABs were invented using a Li metal anode, the aprotic polymeric gel electrolyte system, and cobalt phthalocyanine incorporated carbon composites as the O2 cathode host (see Scheme 2).9 The resultant LABs could not control the charge over-potentials, leading to a short cycle life of only three cycles. Then, Li2O2 was identified as the dominant discharge product. The generated Li2O2 is an insulator that blocks electron transfer and sets a significant barrier for the charge/discharge process. It was inspiring that this work demonstrated that the concept of rechargeable LABs was possible. However, the realization of the LAB technology encountered severe challenges, including the irreversibility and instability of the cathode, electrolyte, and anode in the LAB systems, leading to little significant development of LABs for almost ten years from 1996 to 2006, i.e., the germination period. First, understanding the complete mechanism of the charge/discharge process was unclear at that time due to the lack of efficient catalysts and rational cathode design, and even characterization means to identify charge/discharge intermediates. In particular, the cleavage of the O–O bond cannot be suitably controlled, limiting both the kinetics and rechargeability of the cathode.10 The formation of Li2O2, Li2O, Li2CO3, and LiOH on the cathode surface could significantly interfere with the charge/discharge processes.11 Second, the electrolytes that could affect the discharge capacity, dissolved O2 ratio (mA h mL−1), and Li+ ion transportation were unavailable for LABs.12 Moreover, during this period, most explorations for LABs involve the use of alkyl carbonates as the solvent, including propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC), diethyl carbonate (DEC), and dimethyl carbonate (DMC). A misunderstanding that carbonate solvents could enhance compatibility with the Li anode in LABs and increase cycling stability directed research down the wrong path (see Scheme 2).13 Until 2010, the incompatibility of carbonates in LAB chemistry was formally confirmed.14 Third, the lithium anode reacts violently with contaminants in the air and the electrolyte, leading to serious degradation (e.g., dendrites, passivation, and corrosion) in the semi-open systems. These issues make the proper working of the LABs difficult, let alone being commercialized.
 Scheme 2  The evolution and major milestones of LABs. 
Fortunately, during these ten years, some achievements in other EES fields have paved the way for the vigorous development of rechargeable LABs. For the O2 cathode, the use of O2 as an active electrode material was not a new concept before the advent of LABs, but had already been used as the foundation of fuel cells.15 In other words, the LABs could be regarded as semi-fuel cells because of their similarity in battery processes: H+ goes through the electrolyte to meet the O2 at the cathode and form H2O products in fuel cells while the Li+ meets the O2 at the air cathode and produces Li2O2 in the LABs.16–18 Also, the reformation of noble metals (e.g., Pt, Co, Ru, and Pd) and carbon construction in fuel cells are analogous to those in LABs.19–21 The O–O breakage mechanism in fuel cells could be adopted for rechargeable LABs, which will be explained in more incredible detail in Section 3.1.
For anode protection and electrolyte technologies, PolyPlus Battery Co., a California company, developed the usage of water-stable glass-ceramic electrolytes in 2004 to make the lithium anode in LABs chemically stable and electrochemically active in both aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes.22 The Ohara Corp. also exploited single lithium-conducting NASICON-type glass-ceramics, which were composed of Li2O/Al2O3/Ge2O/P2O5 and Li2O/Al2O3/TiO2/P2O5, to simultaneously protect the lithium anode and improve the lithium diffusion rate.23,24 At the same time, Excellatron Solid State LLC, a US technology company, also introduced innovative film-protection technologies to make the LABs commercially viable.25
In 2006, Bruce et al. fabricated a Li2O2 electrode that could be recharged for 50 cycles with 60% capacity retention, and directly observed the released oxygen in the charging process and the reversible formation of Li2O2 in the battery process.26 Different chemical states of manganese oxides (e.g., β-MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4) were used as the electrocatalysts on porous carbon cathodes, providing a lower charging potential after the addition of catalysts. The observations from this successful work significantly inspired the rapid development of liquid organic solvent-based electrolytes, carbon substrates, and catalyst-based oxygen cathode hosts for stable and safe LABs. In 2010, with the upsurge in interest and need for EES devices, the Battery 500 project by IBM and the EU-founded LABOHR (Li–air Battery with Split Oxygen Harvesting and Redox Processes) project made a strategic decision. It announced the commercialization of LABs in automotive propulsion applications.5
In the next ten years, i.e., the growing period, the LABs underwent a leap forward in reversibility, cyclability, safety, and high gravimetric energy densities to be a consumable in electric energy markets. A clear understanding of the electrochemical mechanisms in LABs, including the principal reactions and parasite reactions, is the key to addressing the low chargeability and Coulombic Efficiency (CE) of the battery process. For O2 cathodes, many novel air-electrodes were developed and optimized for the fast transport of all reactants (i.e., O2 molecules, Li+ ions, and electrons) to the catalytically active sites, and suitable space for the deposition of the discharged products. Cost-effective catalysts were tried and used to reduce the over-potentials between the charge–discharge reactions. For anodes, various protection strategies, such as the separator modification, ex situ/in situ protective layer deposition, and lithium alloy alternation, were applied to minimize Li metal deterioration and the dendritic growth on the lithium metal anode. For example, in 2019, Nafion-Al2O3 composite layers were coated on the Li anode surface to protect the Li anode from pulverization and side reactions.27
For the electrolyte, the second generation of electrolytes was cultivated to withstand the high oxidation potentials and decomposition in the presence of oxygen species and other contaminants. A range of non-carbonate electrolytes based on ethers, sulfoxides, amides, nitriles, and ionic liquids have been investigated experimentally and theoretically. Although they have been found more stable than organic carbonates, no single solvent investigated so far could satisfy all the criteria imposed by the LAB system. The Li2O2 crystalline growth mechanism was for the first time proposed in 2012, in which the toroid-like Li2O2 has a higher discharge capacity than film-like Li2O2. After this work, rationally matching organic solvents with other electrolyte components (e.g., functional additives and high-concentration Li salts) was published to control the discharge products of LABs. In 2013, the redox mediator (RM) was first proposed as a special additive in the electrolyte to promote ORR and OER kinetics, resulting in reduced overpotentials and enhanced energy efficiency.28 In-depth investigation of RM focused on the study of complex battery chemistry and more options for RMs. More recently, in 2021, Yu et al. assembled an actual LAB with a solid-state electrolyte and achieved a major breakthrough in energy density, safety, and stability. It is envisaged that the concept of solid-state LABs will evolve in the near future.29
1.3 Scope of this review article
Although state-of-the-art LABs cannot be used extensively straight away, it is a promising technology beyond the horizon of lithium–ion batteries. In accordance with the carbon neutrality goals by 2050, we review the historical progress of LABs and put forward perspectives with an emphasis on the materials science and electrocatalysis of LABs. For the O2 cathode, carbon-based cathodes (i.e., porous carbon substrates and their catalytic properties) and carbon-free cathodes (i.e., metal-based catalysts) are discussed due to their high capacity and long cycling stability. For the anode, we cover the anode issues and protection methods to maintain the stability of the lithium anode during cycling. For the electrolyte, the solvents, salts, electrolyte additives, and RMs are systematically introduced to establish the second generation of electrolytes with high mass (e.g., ions, oxygen) diffusion capability and anti-oxidation ability.
With the rapid development of LAB research and nanotechnologies, the cell configuration of LABs has undergone a significant change. The LAB system started from the gas/solid two phase reaction to gas/liquid/solid three phase reactions and has returned to the gas/solid two phase reaction to enable high battery capacity, long cycle durability, outstanding safety, and low cost.
We hope to provide readers with a clear development pathway that leads to understanding energy storage mechanisms and the various technological signs of progress of LABs. This work could enable the transfer of knowledge and technological advances of current LABs to other battery technologies to promote their development and commercialization.
2. The germination period of LABs (before 2010)
2.1 The search for air cathodes
The air-electrodes (cathodes) of LABs have been intensely researched since the advent of rechargeable LABs in 1996. In LABs, the “integration” chemistry between oxygen and lithium ions dominates the cathode reactions, providing a promise to next-generation battery chemistry. The air-electrode can be understood as an open structure containing conductive substrates and solid electro-catalysts to draw active oxygen molecules from the air. Early on, commercial carbonaceous materials were adopted as the cathode hosts due to their excellent electronic conductivity, low cost, and availability. Noble metal and available metal oxides were selected as the electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER reactions. It is well-established that pristine cathodes commonly suffered from obstacles such as intrinsically slow reactions, high overpotentials, and poor CEs of oxygen chemistry. Fortunately, during the same period, significant development of nanomaterials and nanotechnology offered a vast choice of electrode materials and battery design for LABs.

2.1.1 Air cathode substrate. 
Commercial porous carbons, particularly Ketjen Black (KB),30 BP2000,31 and super P,32 were chosen as the cathode matrix for almost all LABs (Fig. 1a). This is mainly because of their excellent electronic conductivity for electron transfer, large surface area for the immobilization of the catalysts, abundant reaction sites for electrochemical reactions, suitable porous volume for containing reactants (O2 and Li+), and discharge products. The low mass of carbonous materials enables the reduction of the whole mass of the electrode, resulting in higher specific capacity when these carbon cathodes are compared with lithium metal.
 Fig. 1  The physicochemical properties of conventional carbonaceous materials for air-electrodes in early LABs. (a) The specific capacity of commercial carbons from different producers. Reproduced from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing. (b) Oxygen diffusion at different electrode depths under different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. (c) The porosity of carbonaceous materials: pore size (c1) and pore types (c2) on the discharge behaviour in LABs. Reproduced from ref. 34. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. 
In 2017, Salomon found the oxygen diffusion equation related to the electrode depth, shown in Fig. 1b, which can be summarized asC = αexp[(−xR)/(8640 × α × D)]where C, α, D, and x represent the concentration of oxygen, the Bunsen solubility coefficient, oxygen diffusion coefficient, and the distance from the outside of the cathode, respectively. In Fig. 1b, a large concentration of oxygen was accumulated at the cathode–oxygen interface, where the electrode depth is near 0 cm. This position is significant to deposit the majority of the discharge products. There are strong relationships between oxygen concentration at the electrode depth and current density, i.e., low current density allows for fast oxygen penetration on the cathode.
In 2008, Bruce et al. recognized that the porosity of electrodes plays an important role in constricting the discharge depth for a long-life LAB.35 This conclusion was based on the surface area and the pore size/volume of porous carbon in the battery performance. The surface area of porous carbon has a direct relationship with the performance of LABs due to the large surface area that can be used to load more catalysts and allow for more active sites for oxygen reactions. In dramatic contrast, other studies produced different conclusions that suggest the discharge capacity is more likely related to the pore volume/pore size than the surface area (Fig. 1c1).31,36 In particular, Ketjen Black, a commercial carbon with the highest pore volume (7.6 cc g−1) and a large number of mesopores, presented higher capacity than other commercial porous carbons under the same test conditions. Significant differences could be observed between active carbon (AC) and super P.36 AC has the highest surface area of 2100 m2 g−1 and a small pore size of 2 nm, while Super P has a low surface area of 62 m2 g−1 but a large pore size of 50 nm. Super P presented a higher discharge capacity (1736 mA h g−1) than AC (414 mA h g−1), further illustrating that the pore volume is the main factor determining the capacity.
The micropores, mesopores, and macropores have different reaction kinetics, including oxygen transport and reduction (Fig. 1c2). In the discharge process, the oxygen first penetrates throughout the carbon electrode via the gas phase or the dissolved oxygen form in the electrolyte. Thus, the tri-phase regions, the junctions between the electrolyte, carbon, and oxygen, are the possible sites to form Li2O2 and obtain a high capacity. The micropores are too small to fully utilize the interior carbon surface as the entrance is easily blocked or sealed by the poor electrically conductive Li2O2 or electrolyte, leading to a low specific capacity. Yang et al. suggested that pores with diameters smaller than 10 nm are insufficient to maintain oxygen diffusion and host the discharge products.36 Macropores have few tri-phase junctions because the electrolyte easily floods them. What's more, the volumetric energy density of the air-electrode is limited by the macroporous carbons. The mesopore, represented by the Ketjen black, is verified as the most suitable for oxygen reactions. Ketjen black undergoes a significant expansion process when soaked in an organic electrolyte, automatically resulting in greater porosity of the wetted cathode and thus more triple-phase reaction points. As a result, as shown in Fig. 1c2, the optimized mesoporosity facilitates high oxygen diffusivity and reactivity and thus yields a high density of discharge products (normally Li2O2).


2.1.2 Electrocatalysts. 
It is generally believed that catalysts are critical in enhancing round-trip efficiency during the generation/dissociation between the discharge products and O2 in the air-electrode.37 In 2007, based on the electrolytic manganese dioxide (EMD), Bruce et al. confirmed the positive effects of catalysts on the air cathode. The result shows that catalysts increase the capacity up to 1000 mA h g−1 and reduce the charging voltage by around 0.5 V (Fig. 2a). This catalyst inherently reduces the charge potentials to facilitate the charge reactions, avoiding the oxidation and degradation of the electrolyte. Furthermore, the catalysts aid the discharge reactions kinetics and thus increase the specific capacity of the air-electrode. The commercial application of fuel cells in EVs has gained substantial progress, but most LABs remain in their conceptual/prototype stages. Thus, many ORR catalytic materials applicable to fuel cells also could be used in LABs due to their similar ORR mechanism process. But the OER catalysts in fuel cells have adverse effects in LABs in some cases. For example, the direct use of popular fuel cell catalysts, such as Pt, for the LAB OER can degrade aprotic electrolytes. Thus, more efforts need to focus on the OER catalysts in LABs to reduce discharge products.
 Fig. 2  The roles of the catalysts in LABs. (a) The catalysts (e.g., electrolytic manganese dioxide, EMD) can reduce the over-charged phenomenon, which is revealed by the voltage variation between the charge–discharge curves without catalysts (a1) and with catalyst (a2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2007 Elsevier B.V. (b) Noble metals and their corresponding alloy catalysts to facilitate the reactions between Li+ and O2. (b1) Volcano plots of noble metal on ORR activity as a function of the oxygen-binding energy ΔE0 based on DFT calculations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (b2) The charge–discharge profiles of LOBs with carbon (black) and PtAu/C (red) air-electrode in the 3rd cycle at 0.04 mA cm−2 based on the electrode areas. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) The selection of metal oxide catalysts, such as those with different morphologies and crystalline MnO2, with low cost and high cycling stability. (c1) Cycling ability of various MnO2 catalysts, such as α-MnO2 with bulk and nanowire forms, β-MnO2 with bulk and nanowire forms, λ-MnO2, γ-MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4, at 70 mA g−1 in 1 atm of O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. EMD was the previous report for comparison here. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (c2) Voltage profiles of α-MnO2 nanowires between 2.0 and 4.15 V (vs. Li/Li+). 
Noble metals, such as Pt,21,38 Au,39,40 and Pd,41–43 were intensively studied as catalysts in early LAB research due to their excellent electrocatalytic properties and high stability. Theoretically, the activation barrier is strongly affected by the adsorption energy of the intermediate oxygen species on the catalyst surface. Appropriate adsorption energy is required to achieve a low activation barrier and high catalytic activities for each reaction step. Very strong adsorption makes the desorption process difficult, while weak adsorption makes the reactants hard to adsorb on the active sites. Generally, volcano plots are used to depict the tendency of ORR catalytic activity, as shown in Fig. 2b1. From the volcano chart of various noble metals as a function of their activity, Pt and Pd are found to be the most effective catalysts for oxygen reactions. Many experimental investigations also focused on the activities of the precious metals to choose the most effective catalysts for Li2O2 formation and decomposition. Yang et al. conducted parallel experiments of the most common noble metal catalysts (e.g., Pd, Pt, Ru, and Au) in the aprotic systems with the electrolyte of LiClO4 in DME via rotating-disk electrode (RDE).21 They concluded a similar ORR activity trend for Li2O2 formation, in the order of Pd > Pt > Ru = Au. As for the OER activity study, Yun et al. assessed noble metal nanomaterials (e.g., Pt, Pd, and Ru) with the support of rGO as an OER electrocatalyst in LABs in LiCF3SO3 and TEGDME electrolytes.45 Their experiment showed fluctuating voltage profiles on Pt- and Pd-rGO electrodes and the lowest charge potentials and stable cycling ability on the Ru-rGO electrode. Obvious electrolyte decomposition was observed on Pt-rGO and Pd-rGO hybrid materials via SEM, XPS, and FT-IR. The Ru nanoparticles delivered the best catalyzed Li2O2 reconversion performance and maintained electrolyte stability.
Noble metals are scarce and expensive, which seriously limit their large-scale application. Low-cost and efficient alternative catalysts are conceived to address this issue. One of the most feasible strategies is to alloy the precious metals with other cheaper metals such as transition metals. Pt/Au alloy was the most reported noble metal alloy catalyst for LOBs in the early stage. Adzic et al. demonstrated that a Pt-based alloy, modified Pt nanoparticles with Au clusters, could be used to minimize the dissolution of Pt and accelerate both the ORR during discharging and OER during charging.40 In this work, the Pt-Au alloy is a bifunctional catalyst that enhances ORR activity and mediates OER activity. As shown in Fig. 2b2, the charge–discharge voltage gap in the PtAu/C electrode is significantly smaller than that in the pure carbon electrode. During the discharge (ORR) process, the discharge voltage of the PtAu/C electrode is obviously higher than that of the pure carbon electrode by ∼150–360 mV. During the charge (OER) process, the charge voltage platform of the PtAu/C electrode (∼3.6VLi) is lower than that of the carbon electrode (∼4.5VLi) by ∼900 mV. The reduced voltage gap between the charge and discharge illustrates an increased round-trip efficiency of about 77% for the as-prepared LOBs with the PtAu/C air-electrode, significantly resulting in better cycling performance.
Even though the effect of these bifunctional Pt-alloy catalysts has been verified by electrochemical characterization, the specific mechanism remains unclear. Additionally, non-noble metals (e.g., Cu and Co) also are good candidates to adjust the electronic structure of noble metals and form alloying metals to enhance their catalytic activity. For example, PdCu alloy nanoparticles successfully reduced the overcharge potential to ∼3.4 V for the OER reaction.46 Theoretical calculation reveals that the electron transfer from Cu atoms to Pd atoms reduces the adsorption power of Li2O2 on the Pd surface. A similar mechanism of weak adsorption strength was also reported in PtCo bimetallic alloy, bringing a low overpotential of ∼0.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) at 1000 mA h g−1 and 200 mA g−1.47
Transition-metal oxides, or carbides/nitrides, are alternative cathode electrocatalysts to replace expensive noble metals. They usually have the advantages of high natural reserves, low cost, and reasonable stability in aprotic electrolytes. In the early stage of LABs, the most widely studied catalysts were Mn-based oxides (i.e., MnO2), which were used in the report of the first rechargeable Li2O2 by Bruce et al. in 2006.26 Bruce et al. emphasized that MnO2 distinctly accelerated the OER process to decompose the discharge products. The MnO2 catalyst is a large family ascribed to their various crystallographic structures (e.g., α, β, δ, γ, and λ forms) and different morphologies (e.g., nanowires and nanotubes). For each polymorph, α, β, and γ-forms commonly exhibit the tunnel structure, δ-form has a layered structure, and λ-form has a 3D structure. The different MnO2 forms significantly influence their catalytic reactivity in Li2O2 crystal growth and decomposition.
To find the most effective MnO2 catalysts, in 2008, Bruce et al. prepared and compared almost all types of manganese oxides, including α-MnO2 in bulk and nanowires, β-MnO2 in bulk and nanowires, λ-MnO2, γ-MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4, as cathode catalysts in LOBs using 1 M LiPF6 in PC electrolyte. According to their experiments shown in Fig. 2c, α-MnO2 nanowires present the best catalytic performance, including a high specific capacity of 3000 mA h g−1, and a comparably stable discharge and charge voltage of around 2.7 V and 4.0 V, respectively. Better capacity performance and cycle life of α-MnO2 were also obtained in the TEGDME-based electrolytes.48 The intrinsic electronic conductivity of α-MnO2 is essential for electrochemical reactions. More importantly, the large 2 × 2 tunnel structure at the α-MnO2 crystal facilitates the nucleation, growth, and distribution of the discharge products, which enhance the recharge process of materials decomposition in OERs.49 This mechanism was further confirmed in subsequent studies via the combined application of in situ high-energy synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD) and DFT simulations.50 This work suggests that the α-MnO2 crystal could expand and contract anisotropically at the Li–ion insertion/extraction reactions. As a result, α-MnO2 nanoparticles undergo strain during the discharge/discharge reactions. And the LixOy is inserted into the “2 × 2” tunnels of MnO2.
There is another interesting question, why do α-MnO2 materials with different morphologies possess the same chemical composition and electronic conductivity but different electrochemical performance? In 2009, Chen et al. proposed that the exposed facets of MnO2 closely correlate with the ORR catalytic activity but did not establish a precise mechanism between the morphology and catalytic activity.51 Subsequent research revealed that the Mn oxidation states on the α-MnO2 surface affect the MnO2 morphology and the related catalytic properties.52 XPS analysis revealed a more deficiently coordinated oxygen environment in α-MnO2 NWs than in α-MnO2 NTs. The abundant Mn3+ exposed on the α-MnO2 surface induces the generation of nanowires (NWs) rather than nanotubes (NTs). The α-MnO2 NW catalysts have a lower oxidation-state surface, enabling the homogeneous nucleation and accommodation of Li2O2. This result suggests another effective strategy to enhance the ORR and OER performance in LABs by tuning the surface oxidation states of the catalyst materials.

2.2 The search for 1st generation electrolytes
Inspired by the successful application of alkyl carbonates in rechargeable Li–ion batteries,53 early studies on aprotic LOBs mainly involved the utilization of organic carbonates such as propylene carbonate (PC), ethylene carbonate (EC), diethyl carbonate (DEC), dimethyl carbonate (DMC) and their mixtures as the solvents.54,55 The rich contents of the CO bond are critical to the desired properties of an electrolyte, such as high dielectric constants, low viscosity, and high solubility of the Li salt.
Ionic liquids (ILs) are also known as room temperature molten salts. Early studies on O2 reduction in ILs showed that ILs could support the generation of stable superoxides.56 These studies evoked attempts to use ILs in Li–O2 batteries (LOBs). ILs were first employed as the electrolyte solvent in LOBs in 2005, using imidazolium-based 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)amide (EMITFSI) IL as the solvent and LiTFSI as the salt in the primary cell.57 Promising battery performances with 56 days of working time and a high capacity of 5360 mA h g−1 were achieved. In this case, the negligible vapor pressure of ionic liquids allows effective suppression of electrolyte evaporation. Moreover, the hydrophobicity of ILs can prevent the corrosion of lithium anode from water. These merits rendered ILs suitable for LOBs operated in an open environment.
Read et al. extended their investigation on a mixture of 1,3-dioxolane (DOL) and 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME) as the electrolyte solvent in 2005.58 They found that the viscosity of ether-based electrolytes was lower than that of carbonate-based electrolytes with similar oxygen solubility. Thus, oxygen transport was facilitated in the cell, resulting in high discharge capacity and good rate capability. In 2006, Bruce et al. first demonstrated the rechargeability of LOBs with a PC-based electrolyte for 50 cycles.59 Later, as demonstrated by Fuminori et al. from Toyota, the rechargeability was extended to 100 cycles in the LiTFSI/PC electrolyte.14 At the same time, they found that the main product formed during discharge was not the ideal Li2O2 but the carbonate species (Li2CO3) and lithium alkylcarbonate (RO–(CO)–OLi, R = alkyl group), suggesting the possibility of electrochemical decomposition of the carbonate-based electrolyte solvent in an O2 atmosphere.14
As early as 2003, the instability of carbonate-based electrolytes in LOBs had already been pointed out by Read et al.,55 but this problem has not been paid much attention to, possibly due to the lack of convincing evidence.
The O2− generated from initial oxygen reduction was thought to be responsible for the decomposition of carbonate solvents. Bruce et al. proposed a possible reaction mechanism for the formation of multiple discharge products in the carbonate electrolytes (see Fig. 3a).60 The O2− formed from the reduction of O2 could attack the methylene group, resulting in ring opening and the formation of the peroxoradical species (ROO−). As shown in the Figure, the peroxoradical species 2 would lose O2 to form Li alkoxycarbonate radical 3, forming Li propylene decarbonate 4. Intermediate 2 would also undergo oxidative decomposition reactions in the presence of O2 to form H2O, CO2, Li formate, and Li acetate. The H2O formed in the oxidative decomposition reactions can react with the Li propylene dicarbonate to form Li2CO3, CO2, and the corresponding alcohol. The reaction between O2− and CO2 can lead to the formation of Li2CO3. Further characterization techniques, such as X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) data, in situ differential electrochemical mass spectroscopy (DEMS), nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), spectroscopic characterization studies, and quantum chemical calculations provided evidence for the decomposition of organic carbonates with various decomposition products (Fig. 3b1–b4).53,60–63 This triggers the question, where does the rechargeability of LOBs with organic carbonate electrolytes originate from? The differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) coupled with isotopic labeling of 18O was used to investigate the reversibility of the cell. The result showed that O2 was evolved accompanied by CO2.53 The evolved CO2 was likely from the oxidative decomposition of lithium carbonates, and alkyl carbonates arose from the high charging potential.64 These findings further confirm the instability issue of carbonate solvents in LOBs.
 Fig. 3  The decomposition mechanism of carbonate solvents in early LABs: (a) the proposed pathways of the decomposition of carbonate-based electrolytes during discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) The evidence of decomposition mechanism; (b1) XRD patterns of the air electrodes discharged at different depths of discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V. (b2) The FTIR spectrum of a composite electrode discharged in 1 M LiPF6/PC to 2 V in O2 and the reference spectra of Li2O2, Li2CO3, and the electrode before discharge are also shown. (b3) SERS on an Au electrode in 1 M LiPF6/PC under O2 at open circuit potential and after discharge to 2.0 V. (b4) 1H solution NMR spectrum of the discharged composite electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
3. The growing period of LABs (after 2010)
3.1 Energy storage reaction mechanism
LABs have been suffering from significant challenges, including poor cycling lifetime of <100 cycles, low rate-capability of <1 mA cm−2, and low round-trip efficiency of 65–70% for a long time.65 All these issues stem from the insufficient understanding of the charge/discharge reaction routes and the discharge products on the cathode, the unstable presence of the reactive intermediates (e.g., LiO2, 1O2), and the slow reaction kinetics of the common discharge product Li2O2. An in-depth understanding of the principal electrocatalytic reactions (e.g., ORR and OER) and the parasitic reactions (e.g., carbon erosion, binder degradation, and electrolyte decomposition) is the prerequisite and basis for building advanced cathode, electrolyte, and anode for the LAB technology.
The two-electron/one-electron/one-electron/four-electron reactions are systematically introduced in the principal electro-catalysis mechanism. In general, the two-electron transferring reaction with the final discharge products of Li2O2 is regarded as the primary reaction since the advent of reversible LABs. The reaction pathways are significantly controlled by the oxygen intermediate (LiO2) state, resulting in different discharge products such as LiO2, Li2O, and LiOH using different catalysts, redox mediators, and electrolyte additives. Furthermore, the growth of Li2O2 crystals, such as the morphology (toroidal-like and film-like) and the influential factors, is included.
Furthermore, we mainly discussed their effects on the carbon, binder, and electrolyte for the parasitic reactions. The carbon defects formed naturally are the reactive sites for carbon erosion, resulting in the collapse of the carbon frameworks. The active oxygen species (O2˙−) could easily attack the organic binders and decompose them into non-functional organic molecules. The singlet oxygen (1O2) also emerges as the major reason for electrolyte degradation.

3.1.1 Principal mechanism. 
Electro-catalysis mechanism at the discharging process. 
Lithium peroxide (Li2O2) is the electrochemically deposited product on the air-electrode in most reported aprotic LABs during discharge reactions (or ORRs). Then the Li2O2 reversibly decomposes into O2 and Li+via the OERs during the charging process. In 2012, Bruce et al. made a pioneering breakthrough in the fundamental research of LABs. >99% pure Li2O2 was obtained as the discharged product using a nanoporous Au electrode in a DMSO-based electrolyte.69 The whole Li2O2 formation/decomposition allows for ∼95% capacity retention up to 100 cycles. The ideal reactions on the air-electrode in aprotic LABs are listed in Fig. 4. The properties of Li2O2 determine the thermodynamics and kinetics of the electrochemistry of LABs. According to the standard two-electron reaction in Fig. 4, the reversible generation and decomposition of Li2O2 deliver an equilibrium potential of 2.96 V (vs. Li/Li+) and a theoretical energy density of 3500 W h kg−1 (based on the mass of Li2O2).26 However, Li2O2 is an insulator with a low ionic conductivity of ∼4 × 10−19 S cm−1 and low electronic conductivity of ∼5 × 10−20 S cm−1, seriously limiting the current flow on the air cathode.70 In addition, Li2O2 is insoluble in most organic solvents used in LAB electrolytes at room temperature. All these drawbacks of Li2O2 induce the passivation of the cathode surface in ORR and large polarization in OER, resulting in low round-trip efficiency, poor-rate, and cycling performance. For example, in 2013, a large discharge overpotential of ∼0.46 V (vs. Li/Li+) and a charge overpotential of over 1.3 V (vs. Li/Li+) were found in Amine et al. reports, where the LABs use super P cathode and the 1 M LiCF3SO3-TEGDME electrolyte at 100 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1.71 Thus, the oxidation and reduction chemistry of oxygen is critical to the performance of the aprotic LABs.
 Fig. 4  The two-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of Li2O2. (a) The overall reaction equation of lithium ions and the oxygen on the cathode. (b) The proposed discharge reaction mechanism from O2 to Li2O2 with solution-growth mediation and surface-growth mediation (b1), and the verification via in situ SERS in 0.1 M LiClO4-ACN electrolyte (b2-1) and the comparison in different DN solvents (b2-2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 and 67. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The possible charging reactions routes from Li2O2 to O2 (c1) and the verification of RRDE observation during charge and discharge reactions (c2) and O K-Edge XANES of various charging stages (c3) in the solvent of TEGDME and Me-Im. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc. 
It is most widely accepted that the general reduction chemistry of oxygen in discharging can be illustrated as follows:
(i) The generation of O2−/LiO2 intermediates: O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2
(ii) The second electron reduction: 
Or
(iii) Disproportionation reaction: 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2
LiO2 is soluble in the electrolyte and thus presents a reversible balance between the solid-state on the cathode surface (marked as ) and soluble state in the electrolyte (marked as O2−(sol)), shown as  
Generally, the O2 reduction can be classified into two models based on O2−/LiO2 existing in the solution-state or solid-state, named solution-growth or surface-growth models, as shown in Fig. 4b1. O2 first carries out a one-electron reduction and forms O2−/LiO2 during the discharge process. In the surface-growth model,  adsorbs on the cathode surface and is mainly reduced by the second electron to generate the film-like Li2O2 with the typical thickness of < 10 nm. In the solution-growth pathway, LiO2 dissolves in the electrolyte in equilibrium and forms Li+(sol) and O2−(sol). Then the O2−(sol) mainly undergoes a disproportionation reaction with Li+ in the electrolyte and generates Li2O2(sol) and O2(g).65,72 The generated Li2O2 is insoluble in the electrolyte, tending to precipitate onto the cathode surface and growing into large toroidal-like Li2O2 nanocrystals with a typical size of <2 μm. The key distinction between these two mediation methods is the amount of superoxide (O2−) dissolved in the electrolyte or LiO2 retained on the cathode surface. Thus, identifying the O2−/LiO2 intermediate is critical to reveal the growth mechanism of Li2O2 from O2 and Li+ on the cathode. A wide range of experimental techniques, especially in situ spectroscopy characterization studies, have been developed to detect these oxygen intermediates to decrease the influence of their instability in the electrolyte.

In situ surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) is the most sensitive method to characterize the adsorbed species on the solid surface. As early as 2011, Bruce et al. directly observed two strong peaks at 1137 and 808 cm−1 at a reducing potential of 2.2 V in in situ SERS, assigned to LiO2 and Li2O2, respectively.66 This in situ SERS was conducted in an LOB cell using an Au electrode and 0.1 M LiClO4-ACN electrolyte. As depicted in Fig. 4b(2-1), a set of successive peaks from 2 min to 16 min was collected at 2.2 V. After a quick discharge from OCV of 3.2 V, two new peaks were detected at 2.2 V, which is the nO–O stretch of LiO2 at 1137 cm−1 and Li2O2 peak at 808 cm−1. The LiO2 peak progressively disappeared with the appearance of the Li2O2 peak at 2.2 V. These results demonstrated no disproportionation but second electron reduction from  to Li2O2. During charging, Li2O2 undergoes one-step decomposition to O2 without the formation of LiO2. In 2014, Bruce et al. again used in situ SERS to detect the change of oxygen intermediates during the ORR on the Au electrode surface.67 This is one of the most critical LAB studies as they propose the donor number of solvents to evaluate the ORR. This study applied four typical electrolyte solvents, including high donor-number (DN) solvents, Me-Im and DMSO, and low DN solvents, DME and ACN. Different peak positions could be easily illustrated in DMSO and ACN solvents, as shown in Fig. 4b(2-2). In DMSO, a peak at 1117 cm−1 was obtained, which is ascribed to the presence of superoxide anions O2−. While in ACN, the O2− peak was captured at a higher frequency of 1128 cm−1. This difference corresponds with the strong O–O bond in adsorbed  than in solvated O2−. These results illustrate that the reaction intermediates can be changed along with the solvation effect of the solvents. The high DN solvents have a strong solvation effect toward Li+ or the oxygen species in the electrolyte, mainly resulting in the dissolution of LiO2. On the contrary, in the low DN solvents, the weak effect of Li+ or the oxygen species by the solvents mainly yields the adsorption of LiO2 on the cathode surface.
In 2015, in situ UV-vis was applied by Ye et al. on the Au electrode and 0.1 M LiClO4–DMSO electrolyte.73 An absorption peak located at 252 nm corresponds to the superoxide species in the aprotic electrolyte because of the transition from 1πu to 1πg in O2−. Interestingly, quantitative estimation of the amount of superoxide species formed in DMSO was realized based on the in situ UV-vis results at 252 nm. According to the UV-vis results sweeping from the OCP (ca. 3.1 V) to 2.0 V where both the electrochemical and chemical pathways happen, ca. 73% of ORR electrocatalysis was due to LiO2 formation in the solution, and ca. 27% was due to Li2O2 production on the electrode surface. These values are the reason for the lower calculated value of O2− from UV-vis than that in CV after one-electron reduction of O2 in the DMSO electrolyte system.
In 2017, in situ TEM was introduced to observe the LiO2 intermediate in solid-state LOB cells directly.74 The sequential nucleation and subsequent growth of hollow spheres were visually observed on the CNTs/RuO2 cathode. The hollow spherical structure was created after the generation and release of O2 gas, where the Li2O was formed at the outer shell, and Li2O2 was formed at the inner-shell surfaces. In the in situ selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) model, the LiO2 crystalline was identified after the initial 5 s; then Li2O2 showed after 30 s in the presence of LiO2, and then LiO2 gradually disappeared in the following 70 s. Based on this observation, LiO2 was the discharge intermediate and subsequently disproportionated into the final discharge products, Li2O2 and O2. The TEM observed reaction pathway in the aprotic electrolyte is different from the most widely accepted mechanism. More in situ characterization techniques should be used for a better understanding of the ORR in aprotic LABs.
Charge process. 
For an ideal charge reaction, Li2O2 on the cathode could be decomposed into Li+ and O2. In a typical charge voltage profile (as shown in Scheme 1c), the initial charging voltage is around 3.0 V, higher than the theoretical thermodynamic potential at 2.96 V. The voltage sharply increases with the charging progress, causing a large charge overpotential beyond 0.5 V. This overpotential in the charging process is much higher than that in the discharge process (ca. 0.2 V). At the early stages of charge, a high potential around 3 V is required for Li2O2 oxidation.75 After the initial charge stage, the side products deposited on the electrode cause an increased overpotential.76 It is supposed that the extremely high overpotential is mainly due to the OER preferentially occurring at the solid interface between Li2O2 and the air-electrode, which has been observed by in situ TEM and in situ SERS. In 2013, in situ TEM evaluation was for the first time used by Yang et al. to observe the oxidization of Li2O2 on the CNTs in all-solid LABs.77 The OER preferentially takes place at the Li2O2|CNTs interface. In 2015, in situ TEM was used in LABs using Au electrode and 1 M LiTFSI-DMSO electrolyte.78 The electrochemical decomposition of Li2O2 from the Au substrate interface was observed during the charge (OER). This is mainly due to the poor electronic conductivity of Li2O2, which significantly restricts the electron transfer from the Li2O2 products to the cathode surface.
As mentioned above, in situ SERS is an effective real-time characterization technique for studying the reaction mechanism on the surface of the material. In 2016, Peng et al. studied the OER in LOBs using Au electrode and Li+-DMSO electrolyte.79 After the ORR in the discharge, the mixed Li216O2 and Li218O2 were deposited on the Au electrode. Li216O2 prefers to deposit intimately on the electrode surface, while Li218O2 forms on the Li216O2 surface. In situ SERS, used to observe the subsequent charging (OER) reaction, recorded the earlier decomposition of Li216O2 instead of Li218O2. These results illustrate that the OER occurs at the Li2O2|electrode interface rather than the Li2O2|electrolyte interface. From this point of view, the nature of the electrode surface significantly changes the OER performance, which provides a rational design strategy for better catalytic efficacy to Li2O2 decomposition.
The charge reactions for Li2O2 oxidation are not simple mirror behaviors of the discharge reactions because of their different electrochemical profiles and overpotential. The charging process involves multiple steps, bringing many challenges to understanding the mechanism and improving battery performance. In an early study of OER in LABs, the LiO2 intermediate was not observed upon charging in the ACN-based electrolyte. A direct 2-electron transfer reaction was proposed as follows:Li2O2(s) → Li+(sol) + O2(sol) + 2e−.
With the introduction of more advanced mechanism research techniques, the most reasonable OER mechanism was widely accepted: solid-phase mediation and liquid-phase mediation, as summarized in Fig. 4c. Initially, a solid reaction occurs: solid Li2O2 is oxidized into solid Li-deficient Li2−xO2 as an intermediate. Then, the solid-phase mechanism occurs in the low donicity solvents: the solid Li2−xO2 continues to lose electrons and is oxidized into O2 on the electrode surface. In the high donicity solvent, liquid-phase oxidation occurs as the main reaction: the Li2−xO2 is further delithiated into LiO2, which naturally dissolves into the electrolyte, then disproportionates into Li2O2 and O2. A mixed solid-liquid phase transformation of LiO2 is involved in the liquid-mediated mechanism.
In 2014, Wagemaker et al. verified the presence of a Li-deficient intermediate (i.e., Li2−xO2) via the operando X-ray diffraction, supporting the solid-phase pathway in TEGDME electrolyte.80 A continuous weakening of the Li occupancy peak was observed at the second charge stage, ascribed to the delithiation of Li2O2 crystalline and the generation of Li2−xO2 intermediate. At the same time, this solid-phase reaction pathway was also observed by Lu et al. using the potentiostat intermittent titration technique (PITT) in DME electrolyte.81 The growth of Li vacancies in the plateau region was observed in the PITT results.
Importantly, it has been proposed that LiO2 is formed in the liquid-phase mediated process but not in the solid-phase mediated process. Thus, the characterization of LiO2 is essential for liquid-phase reactions. In 2018, Lu et al. directly observed the presence of a soluble LiO2 intermediate on the rotating ring disc electrode (RRDE) for the first time (Fig. 4c2). They compared the different Li2O2 decomposition routes in the solid or solution phase up on charge through the change of different donicity solvents, including low donicity solvents (e.g., TEGDME and DME) and high donicity solvents (e.g., DMSO and Me-Im). The RRDE result shows unambiguous LiO2 in DMSO-based electrolyte but not in TEGDME-based electrolyte.
Furthermore, the presence of LiO2 on the carbon surface was also detected by X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectroscopy (Fig. 4c3). It can be concluded that LiO2 is generated as the charging intermediate on the solid surface and subsequently dissolves in the electrolyte. Based on their conclusion, the solid-phase mechanism and liquid-phase mechanism are strongly controlled by the donicity of the solvent. The high donicity solvents preferentially induce the liquid-phase mechanism accompanied by the solution pathway and soluble LiO2 intermediates. The low donicity solvents allow the solid-phase mechanism accompanied by the formation of the solid Li2−xO2 intermediate.
For a long time, lithium superoxide (LiO2) appeared in the LAB research literature as the intermediate product of oxygen chemistry between O2 and Li2O2 (Fig. 5a). In 2014, Curtiss et al. pointed out that LiO2 might have a long lifetime in some particular forms, indicating the possibility to form pure LiO2 in reversible ORR and OER in LABs.83 In 2016, Lu et al. verified the stable formation of LiO2 crystalline on the suitable graphene-based air-electrode (Fig. 5b).82 In this modified cathode, LiO2 enables repeated charging and discharging in a very low charge potential (ca. 3.2 V). A more negligible voltage hysteresis around 0.5 V during the discharge and charge process was obtained due to the formation and decomposition of LiO2 (Fig. 5c). The majority charge capacity from LiO2 oxidation was achieved below 3.5 V. The ratio of OER/ORR in the initial cycle is near 1, but the cycle life is only maintained for 40 cycles under 1000 mA h g−1. The Ir3Li intermetallic compound formed on the large Ir agglomerates during the discharge process, which has a similar crystalline lattice to LiO2. The Ir3Li intermetallic possibly acts as a template to grow the crystalline LiO2, like the nucleation and growth of many other crystallines on the template.84 At the same time, the electrolyte solvent above the LiO2 surface further inhibits the disproportionation of LiO2 crystalline and thus retains the stability of the generated LiO2. The reversible LiO2 on the Ir-based graphene cathodes provides a new pathway to tune the discharge products for better LAB performance.
 Fig. 5  The one-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of LiO2. (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of LiO2 with the effect of Ir catalysts by lattice match at the contacting interface. (b) The HEXRD patterns of Li2O2 over time. (c) Discharge–charge profiles and cycling ability of the Ir-rGO cathode at 100 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Lithium oxide (Li2O) is another type of rechargeable product accompanied by 4-electron transferring reactions and a high energy density of 5200 W h kg−1. The stability of Li2O is much higher than that of Li2O2 and LiO2, spontaneously alleviating the possible instability issues in the LABs. The generation of Li2O or Li2O2 is highly temperature-controlled, as shown in Fig. 6a. Li2O2 is thermodynamically produced via the electrochemical reactions at room temperature, while the situation changes when the temperature increases to 150 °C. In 2018, Nazar et al. designed a molten salt electrolyte (LiNO3/KNO3) accompanied by a Ni-based cathode and Li metal anode to realize a high operating temperature of 150 °C in the LOB cell.85 Online mass spectrometry observations on the charge and titration experiments on the discharge verified the formation of Li2O through the four-electron O2 reduction reaction (Fig. 6b). Due to the reversibility of Li2O, the designed battery presents a major discharge/charging plateau at around 2.7 V/3.0 V and a long cycle life of 150 cycles with the capacity being maintained at 0.2 mA cm−2 and 0.5 mA h cm−2 (Fig. 6c). As illustrated by the authors, the Ni-based catalysts are critical to cleave and reform the O–O bond upon discharge/charge. The reaction mechanism is summarized in Fig. 6d and e: Li2O2 is first formed on the Ni-based catalyst surface via a two-electron reaction, subsequently followed by the disproportionation of Li2O2 to Li2O and O2, and finally crystalline Li2O nucleation and growth via solution-mediation. This work illustrates novel battery configuration design and discharged products with high energy density, laying the foundation for future LABs.
 Fig. 6  The four-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of Li2O. (a) Energy of Gibbs reaction for the generation of Li2O and Li2O2 as a function of temperature (°C). (b) Online mass spectrometry observation of the OER at 1st charge in a carbon cathode (black curve) and a Ni-based cathode (red curve) in a molten salt Li–O2 cell. (c) Voltage curves up to 150 cycles at 0.2 mA cm−2 in the molten salt Li–O2 cell with a Ni-based cathode. (d and e) The proposed ORR reaction equations (d) and ORR pathway (e) with the formation of LiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Lithium hydroxide (LiOH) is regarded as a promising alternative discharge product stemming from the aqueous or aprotic-aqueous LABs, which can be rechargeable in aprotic LABs in the presence of a suitable amount of H2O in the electrolyte. In an early study of aprotic LOBs, LiOH, like Li2CO3, confused researchers for a long time because it always showed up as the side products contaminated by other air gases in the LABs and resulted in high charge overpotentials.86 In 2012, Hubert et al. first introduced water (H2O) into the organic electrolyte of aprotic LABs to increase the discharge capacity by up to 14-fold than that in a sealed cell without H2O additives.87 But this battery configuration failed to cycle because it lacked anode protection and reasonable electrolyte composition. In subsequent reports, both LiOH and Li2O2 appear as discharge products with enhanced specific capacity.88 The amount of H2O additive in the electrolyte plays a critical role in the discharge products and specific capacity of the LABs. The low concentrated H2O in the electrolyte would induce the coexistence of LiOH and Li2O2, making the electrochemical reactions challenging to control. The high water concentration can increase the charge overpotential and thus limit the discharge capacity due to a large amount of insulating LiOH aggregate and cover on the cathode. With the development of catalysts and electrolytes, rechargeable LiOH could be the pure discharge product via the four-electron reaction. Theoretically, the generation of LiOH from the O2 and H2O requires a ΔG° of 1281.6 kJ mol−1, presenting an E° of 3.32 V and a high theoretical capacity of 3707.4 W h kg−1. To date, three mediation pathways, namely, the RM-induced, solid catalyst-induced, and electrolyte cation additive-induced, have been discovered for the rechargeable LiOH-only in the ORR and OER reactions.
In 2015, Clare et al. introduced LiI RMs into the H2O containing DME-based electrolyte and the rGO air-electrodes to realize the reversible formation and decomposition of LiOH during the ORR/OER process.92 In this case, LiI functioned as more than RMs to reduce the charging potential. Together with H2O, LiI facilitated the growth of large LiOH, which contributed to the observed high capacity. Moreover, LiI enabled a chemical pathway to remove LiOH at low overpotentials (Fig. 7a1), potentially addressing the instability issues associated with Li2O2 formation in conventional LOBs. In Fig. 7a2, XRD patterns of the rGO electrodes discharged with LiI show the presence of pure LiOH crystals, which disappear after the charging process. This result is also supported by the solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance (ssNMR) result. Compared with SP, TiC, rGO, and SP + LiI systems, the addition of LiI to rGO electrodes presents a low and flat voltage plateau at around 2.95 V, illustrating the outstanding electrochemical performance of the as-designed electrolyte and electrode. This significantly reduced charge potential is because the interconnected macroporous network in rGO facilitates the diffusion of redox mediators even though they are filled with solid discharge products. As a result, impressive performance with a long cycle life (2000 cycles) and high energy efficiency (93.2%) was achieved.
In the same year (2015), Zhou et al. designed a super P carbon cathode decorated with Ru and MnO2 solid catalysts, Ru/MnO2/SP cathode, and a H2O-containing DMSO-based electrolyte in LOB cells.90 The solid catalyst-based reaction mechanisms are proposed in Fig. 7b1. The primary discharge product is still Li2O2. The water molecules spontaneously adsorb on the surface of Li2O2 nanoparticles, forming LiOH and H2O2 in the (i) reaction. H2O2 is decomposed into H2O and O2 under the effect of MnO2 solid catalyst in the (ii) conversion reaction. As to the charging process, being catalyzed by Ru nanoparticles, LiOH regenerates into Li+, O2, and H2O in the (iii) reaction.
In the charge/discharge profiles (Fig. 7b2), the DMSO electrolyte with 120 ppm water could decrease the potential charge plateau to 3.2 V, much smaller than that in dried DMSO electrolyte (ca. 3.65 V). The charge potential increases slightly when the H2O concentration increases to 281 ppm because the surrounding H2O on the Li2O2 surface increases its oxidation potential. The voltage profiles at different cell cycles using the as-prepared ppm-level H2O-contained electrolyte system are illustrated in Fig. 7b3. Almost overlapping discharge/charge curves are obtained for the first 150 cycles. The charge potential shows a slightly higher trend beyond 150 cycles because of the electrolyte instability at many cycles.
More recently, in 2020, Lu et al. reported a rechargeable LiOH formation/decomposition by adding a simple cation additive (Na+) to the TEGDME-based electrolyte. The solvation environment of the Li ions and catalyst is tuned by Na+, leading to the reaction pathway toward forming a pure LiOH discharge product.91 The possible three routes of discharge reactions are listed in Fig. 7c1. The O2 is first reduced into Li2O or Na2O. In pathway A, the disproportionation of LiO2 is more favorable than that of NaO2, generating Li2O2 and O2. The pathway B of TEGDME decomposition provides the active H2O to form LiOH in the primary reaction. In pathway C, LiOH formation is more favored as the sole discharge product precipitate from the reaction of LiO2 with H2O since NaOH has a higher solubility than LiOH. XRD patterns shown in Fig. 7c2 present the strong signals of LiOH on the cathode in a 0.5 M Na+ added electrolyte after discharge, while no LiOH peak is characterized after charge. Combined with the Raman spectra, it can be concluded that LiOH is reversible during the charge/discharge process. Three electrolytes, including 1 M Li+ dissolved in the TEGDME electrolyte with 0 M, 0.1 M, and 0.5 M Na+ additives, were applied in the electrochemical experiments. The voltage profiles show a decreasing trend of overpotential from 0 M to 0.1 M and then 0.5 M, illustrating that the 0.5 M Na+ additive is the best electrolyte with a low charge overpotential less than 0.5 V.
 Fig. 7  The four-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of LiOH. (a) The report of reversible LiOH under the catalysis of RMs (i.e., LiI) in the DME electrolyte. (a1) The proposed mechanisms for the formation and decomposition of LiOH under the mediating effect of LiI in Li–O2 cells. (a2) XRD patterns of the as-prepared air-electrode at pristine, discharged, and charged states in a 0.05 M LiI/0.25 M LiTFSI/DME electrolyte. (a3) Discharge–charge profiles with different air cathodes, such as Super P, TiC, and rGO, in a 0.25 M LiTFSI/DME electrolyte with a fixed capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at 0.02 mA cm−2. For comparison, another super P and rGO electrodes were also tested in 0.05 M LiI in LiTFSI/DME electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) The evolution of the LiOH discharge product through the catalytic reaction on the air-electrode by Ru/MnO2 on the super P substrate and a trace amount of water in the electrolyte. (b1) The proposed catalytic mechanism, including spontaneous process (i), the promotion of MnO2 nanoparticles in Ru/MnO2/Super P (ii), and the oxidation of LiOH over the Ru nanoparticles at the low charge potential (iii). (b2) Voltage profiles of the 5th cycle at 500 mA g−1 in the Ru/MnO2/SP (cathode)|DMSO-based electrolytes|Li foil (anode) of Li–O2 cell. 0, 120, and 281 ppm of H2O were added to the electrolyte for comparison. (b3) Voltage profiles of the as-prepared air-electrode in Li–O2 battery during 200 cycles at 500 mA g−1 to test their cycling stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) The formation of LiOH discharge product after the tuned solvation environment of the catalyst and the Li+ ion by the cation additives (e.g., Na+) in the electrolyte. (c1) The schematic illustration of possible ORR routes with Li+ and Na+ during the discharge process. M represents Li or Na. (c2) XRD patterns of the air-electrode at pristine, discharged and recharged states in the electrolyte of 1 M Li+ + 0.5 M Na+. (c3) Voltage profiles with different amounts of Na+ addition (0, 0.1 and 0.5 M) in 1M Li+ electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Crystal growth of Li2O2. 
Li2O2 could grow into different morphologies with various thicknesses and sizes, such as Li2O2 films,93,94 Li2O2 particles,95 and toroidal-shaped Li2O2.94,96,97 The morphological information is strongly related to the chemical structure, such as chemical composition, crystallinity, and crystalline facet, resulting in different battery performance. Generally, LOBs with toroidal-like Li2O2 can deliver a relatively high energy density because oxygen can easily diffuse through the non-uniform surface in toroidal particles during the late stage of the discharge.98 Conversely, the film-like Li2O2 would gradually cover the cathode surface and block airflow, resulting in insufficient charge transfer and even battery death.99,100
Understanding the formation and growth mechanism of Li2O2 is critical to improving the performance of the LOBs. As discussed above, two Li2O2 growth pathways, namely, surface and solution pathways, have been proposed depending on the solubility of oxygen reductive species (LiO2).101,102 In the surface growth mechanism, LiO2 deposited on the electrode surface and intermediately are reduced into film-like Li2O2 by the second electron. By contrast, toroidal-like Li2O2 is formed through the soluble oxygen species (O2−(sol)) in the solvent-mediated pathway.103 In most cases, both morphological evolution pathways coexist during discharge.104 Shao-Horn et al. employed electron microscopy measurements to monitor the morphological growth of Li2O2 upon discharge.105 They observed large toroidal Li2O2 particles grown from thin Li2O2 plates, following the theoretical Wulff shape and the layer-by-layer growth mechanism. Then, Wang and Lu further confirmed the coexistence of toroidal Li2O2 and film-like Li2O2 on the electrode surface through isotope-labeling techniques and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS).106 They first discharged the cell under 16O2 to 1000 mA h gC−1 and then under 18O2 gas for another 1000 mA h gC−1. Subsequent SEM and ToF-SIMS measurements revealed that the toroidal Li2O2 particles were Li216O2 inside and Li218O2 outside, indicating that the toroidal Li2O2 particles enable aggregation into big nanoparticles. Moreover, with the electrode surface being covered by Li2O2, the solution-growth model can transform into the surface-growth model, resulting in the morphological transformation into thick Li2O2 film.
The morphology of Li2O2 crystals can be mainly controlled by five factors, namely, potential, current density, electrolyte solvents, H2O content, and temperature. These parameters can alter LiO2 solvation and stabilization to influence the reaction routes through surface or solution pathways. The two electrochemical parameters, i.e., potential and current density, can directly determine the state of LiO2. Yang et al. systematically studied the amount of soluble LiO2 intermediates in the electrolyte and the solid species on the electrode at different ORR overpotentials through the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) method and electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM), respectively. In their study, the potential is the controlling factor to determine the amount of soluble LiO2 and the morphologies of Li2O2 (Fig. 8a). At high overpotentials, a large concentration of  is characterized on the cathode surface, illustrating the surface-mediated mechanism. SEM images also revealed film-like Li2O2. At low overpotentials, a high amount of soluble LiO2 is tested in the electrolyte, showing the solution-mediated mechanism. Morphological observation shows a toroidal-like Li2O2 as a result. The influence of current density on Li2O2 formation was revealed by Nazar et al. (Fig. 8b). They found that slow current density induces the generation of toroidal-like Li2O2 through the solution-mediated pathway, while high current density favors the deposition of film-like Li2O2 through the surface-mediated pathway. At a low current density, accompanied by the slow electron transfer rate at the surface, LiO2 is sufficiently solvated with significant solubility in the electrolyte, leading to the disproportionation of LiO2 and thus the formation of toroidal-like Li2O2. Conversely, high current density on the electrode surface promotes the second-electron reduction and then the film-like Li2O2 aggregation.
 Fig. 8  The generation of toroidal-like and film-like Li2O2 depends on different factors, including (a) potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. (c) Electrolyte solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Water content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
The electrolyte configurations, including the solvents and amount of H2O additives, are other significant factors controlling the morphology of Li2O2 crystals. In 2010, Hendrickson et al. proposed the Hard–Soft Acid–Base (HSAB) theory, where the hard Lewis acidic Li+ cations have a strong affinity for hard Lewis basic anions such as O22− and O2−, but low affinity for soft Lewis basic anions such as O2−. However, the acidity of Li+ is generally reduced because of its coordination with solvent molecule ligands (SML) and the formation of [Li(SML)n]+ complex in the electrolyte solution. [Li(SML)n]+ is a soft Lewis acid having an increased affinity for soft Lewis base O2− and thus increases the stabilization of O2− in the electrolyte. The Li+ ion solvation capability is correlated with the Guttman donor number (DN), and O2− solvation is correlated with the acceptor number (AN).112 Therefore, the DN of the electrolyte significantly controls the ORR pathway (Fig. 8c). In a high-DN solvent, the strong solvation effect allows for Li+-containing intermediate species (e.g., LiO2) in the electrolyte, inducing the solution-mediated pathway for the growth of large toroidal-like Li2O2. In a low-DN solvent, the weak solvation effect cannot maintain the stability of LiO2 in the electrolyte, leading to the surface-mediated mechanism for the aggregation of film-like Li2O2. Furthermore, the amount of water additive in the electrolyte changes the reaction pathways and finally alters the morphologies of the discharge products.110 With the increasing amount of H2O, the Li2O2 crystals evolve from large toroidal particles in the dry electrolyte to large layered particles and eventually into large sheets in the electrolyte with excess water, which is mainly due to the transformation of the discharge product from Li2O2 into LiOH (Fig. 8d).
Zhang et al. found the morphological evolution of Li2O2 with a change in temperature (Fig. 8e).111 The ultra-small spheres generated at the low temperatures of −20 °C and −10 °C could evolve into tiny single-layers at 0 °C and 10 °C, which then gradually stacked together into toroid-like particles of different sizes from 20 °C to 40 °C. Interestingly, when the temperature is below 0 °C, Li2O2 mainly nucleates and forms ultrasmall nanoparticles because of the sluggish growth of Li2O2 nanocrystals at the low temperature. As a result, the discharge capacity is different with changes in the temperature. At 0.1 mA cm−2, the capacity at −20 °C is as high as 17716 mA h g−1, which will be decreased to 2930 mA h g−1 at an elevated temperature of 0 °C. When the temperature is further increased to 40 °C, the capacity could increase again up to 7492 mA h g−1. The different capacity performance between −20 °C and 40 °C is mainly because the dominant discharge processes change at around 0 °C. The solution-mediated pathway are prevalent in discharge reactions between the −20 and 0 °C. In comparison, the electrochemical kinetics of ORR and the surface-mediated pathway mainly control the discharge reactions between 0 and 40 °C. Below 0 °C, the superoxide intermediate has a much longer lifetime at a lower temperature, resulting in a high discharge capacity at −20 °C. The limited lifetime of superoxides and low ORR electrochemical kinetics lead to a low capacity at around 0 °C. Above 0 °C, the ORR electrochemical kinetics become dominant and increase with the increase of temperature, thus achieving a higher discharge capacity at 40 °C.
Oxygen pressure could play a very significant role in performance.113,114 Higher pressure enables more O2 to reach the active carbon sites and thus a higher discharge capacity. Hickey et al. found that the discharge capacity increased by 10% as the O2 pressure increased from 1 atm to 10 atm. Besides, the discharge capacity could be also enhanced from 1400 mA h g−1c to 2100 mA h g−1c at 100 μA cm−2 at the same pressure change. A better capacity retention ratio also has been obtained at higher O2 pressure.
The interface properties of the cathode materials are another significant parameter for the formation routes of Li2O2, which inherently influence the adsorption capacity of superoxide (O2−/LiO2) intermediates on the cathode surfaces. The RuO2/CNTs were configured to reduce the surface-binding energy for the superoxide species, resulting in micrometer-sized flower-like Li2O2.115 Similarly, some cathode designs, such as NiFeOx nanofibre/CNT116 and Pd nanoparticle doped hollow carbon,117 achieve thin film-like Li2O2 through suppressing the adsorption of superoxide on the substrate surfaces.


3.1.2 Parasitic reactions. 
Erosion at the carbon electrode. 
Carbon is the most widely used cathode material in aprotic LOBs because of its lightweight, high electronic conductivity, easy process, and low price. Carbon presents relative stability in the presence of active oxygen species. However, carbon materials usually suffer from corrosion because of the natural defects and functional groups on the carbon surface.118 This carbon degradation occurs mainly at high overpotentials.119
In 2012, Luntz et al. for the first time showed that carbonaceous materials have higher oxidative activity in the presence of Li2O2.120 They found that Li2CO3 is generated accompanying Li2O2 at the carbon surface via the reaction ofLi2O2 + C + 0.5O2 → Li2CO3and2Li2O2 + C → Li2O + Li2CO3
But their result seems to be a misunderstanding because it is rare in the ether-electrolyte on discharging. In the same year, Zhang et al. proposed the opposite conclusion that Li2CO3 formation is mainly because of electrolyte decomposition rather than carbon erosion. They detected a similar amount of Li2CO3 on the 13C-enriched carbon and natural carbon via solid-state 13C nuclear magnetic resonance measurements. Fig. 9a1 points out the widely accepted parasitic reactions on carbon, which was published by Peter et al. in 2013. The potential of 3.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) is the critical point in distinguishing carbon stability or decomposition. Between 2.0 and 4.0 V (vs. Li/Li+), both the electrolyte decomposition and carbon erosion occur accompanied by the continuous accumulation of Li2CO3, resulting in electrode passivation, interfacial resistance augments, and capacity decay. During the discharge, electrolyte decomposition dominates the side reactions both in the DMSO and tetraglyme solvents, resulting in the formation of Li2CO3. On the following charge with the potential set up to 3.5 V, carbon decomposes and generates the side products (e.g., Li2CO3 and Li carboxylates). When the charge potential goes above 4 V, more Li2CO3 is deposited due to electrolyte oxidation. DMSO and tetraglyme are selected in this experiment because of their high stability. The cathode is composed of 13C to facilitate the characterization of CO2 evolved from the carbon electrode. The results are illustrated in Fig. 9a2–a5. The moles of evolved CO2 species are collected at different charge/discharge potentials. 12CO2 and Org 12CO2 are the decomposed side products from the electrolyte where C is not marked. 13CO2 arises from the carbon electrode where the C is labeled as the 13C. The 12CO2 and Org 12CO2 are detected in the charge and discharge stages, revealing the ever-present electrolyte decomposition during cycling. 13CO2 presents an increasing trend as the potential is enhanced in the charging process, indicating that carbon decomposition appears in the charge state.
Chemical degradation of polymeric binders. 
Binders are significant components that connect the catalysts and the carbon on the cathode, but usually are not discussed in the literature. Binders occupy ca. 10–20 wt% of the total mass and should remain inactive during the catalytic reactions. However, binders could be easily attacked by the active oxygen species because of their organic nature and location on the surface of conductive agents.123 Binder decay is another reason for cathode passivation and exfoliation. In 2012, Nazar et al. investigated possible binder degradation pathways in the presence of superoxide O2− (Fig. 9b).121 O2− is produced through the dissolution of KO2 in crown ether solution, where K+ and O2− exist as complexes. In many experiments, KO2 has been widely used as the O2− source to estimate materials stability in the LABs.124 Different configurations of electrolyte and binder are prepared. Both the main reactions routes (Fig. 9b1–b3) and side reactions routes with the binder decomposition (Fig. 9b4–b5) are studied in their work. The XRD patterns show several pure Li2O2 peaks in the configuration without the addition of binders, while the cells with the binders (e.g., PVDF and Nafion) present prominent peaks belonging to LiF and KF. The fluorinated side products are generated from binder degradation. O2−, a strong base species, has high ability to attack the PVdF polymer backbone and subsequently generate the conjugated double bond and F−, which can be described as follows:LiO2(s) + -(CH2-CF2)-(s) → HO2 + -(CH = CF)-(s) + LiF(s)2HO2 → H2O2 + O2(g)
 Fig. 9  The parasitic reactions on the air cathode. (a) The carbon erosion phenomenon was observed at different cell voltages, schematically illustrated in (a1), and the characterization of moles of CO2 evolved from the cathodes in DMSO and tetraglyme electrolyte (a2–a5). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) The investigation of binder degradation on the cathode. (b1–b5) The possible reactions mechanisms of superoxide (O2˙−) with and without binders in Li–O2 cells, including (b1) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME, (b2) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME + Carbon, (b3) electrochemical cell in the presence of a carbon catalyst, (b4) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME/PVdF, and (b5) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME/PVdF/α-MnO2 catalyst. (b6–b7) Corresponding XRD patterns of the (b1–b3) configuration and the different cathode components in (b1) configuration. The dashed vertical black lines (b6–b7) indicate the Li2O2 peaks. “” is the residual KO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of electrolyte decomposition reactions induced by reactive oxygen species (O2˙−, Li2O2, Li2−xO2, and O2), including nucleophilic attack, acid/base reaction, auto-oxidation, and proton mediated degradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
In 2013, Zhang et al. tested the stability of various binders, such as poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), PVDF, PTFE, and carboxymethyl cellulose (CMC), by balling them with KO2 and Li2O2.125 The results suggest that most of the binders are unstable in the presence of superoxide and carbonate electrolyte due to the high oxidation environment at the binder surface. Polyethylene (PE) is the most stable binder in superoxide and peroxide, which might help build a robust binder for LABs.125–127
Decomposition of aprotic electrolytes. 
Understanding the degradation mechanism of organic electrolytes is essential for developing electrolytes with desirable properties for practical LABs. As discussed above, reactive oxygen species (e.g., O2−, Li2O2, Li2−xO2, and 1O2) are generated during the discharging and charging process. These oxygen species are highly reactive toward organic solvents due to their oxidability, nucleophilicity, and basicity, resulting in the degradation of organic electrolytes.128,129
There are four kinds of electrolyte decomposition mechanisms in LOBs induced by these oxygen species, including nucleophilic attack, acid/base reaction, auto–oxidation, and proton-mediated degradation (Fig. 9c). O2− is a negatively charged radical, which is prone to attacking the positively charged C atoms adjacent to the heteroatom (e.g., CO) in organic species. This reaction is known as the nucleophilic attack process. The α-H or β-H atoms, besides the C atoms of organic species, could be extracted as the acid resources, which can react with the reduced oxygen species (bases) in aprotic media through the acid–base pathway.130 The autoxidation caused by superoxide radicals and dissolved molecular O2 triggers the formation of peroxy radicals and further solvent decomposition.131,132
Moreover, protons are able to induce serious damage to the electrolyte. On the one hand, the discharge product would be converted from Li2O2 to LiOH after introducing protons (e.g., H2O) into the aprotic solvents.133,134 The oxidation voltage of LiOH (above 3.0 V) is higher than that of Li2O2, imposing the risk for the electrochemical oxidation of organic solvent molecules.135–137 On the other hand, more oxygen species dissolve into the electrolyte due to their coupling effects. The high concentrations of protonated superoxides, peroxides, and hydroxides can potentially induce the decomposition of the electrolyte via nucleophilic attacks and acid–base reactions.138 Worse still, protons could be generated during the side reactions of electrolytes, further accelerating proton-mediated deterioration.139


3.1.3 Singlet Oxygen (1O2) in LOBs. 
Recently, singlet oxygen (1O2), a strong oxidizing agent, has appeared to be the potential cause of electrolyte degradation and has received considerable investigation.140–142 It was proposed as a possible charging product in LOBs by Hassoun et al. in 2011.143 They hypothesized that the observed charging potential of 3.2 V (vs. Li/Li+) could result from the triplet oxygen formation mix at 2.91 V (vs. Li/Li+) and singlet oxygen generation at 3.9 V (vs. Li/Li+) but without experimental proof. The experimental evidence was given by Wandt et al. in 2016.140 They detected the evolution of 1O2 at potentials >3.5 V in the charging process of LOBs by using a spin trap 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone (4-Oxo-TEMP). A follow-up study by Freunberger et al. found that 1O2 could be produced during both the discharging and charging processes by utilizing 1O2 trap 9,10-dimethylanthracene (DMA).141 The side-products (Li2CO3, Li acetate, and Li formate) in the DME-based electrolyte caused by 1O2 were similar to those induced by reduced oxygen species, implying the parasitic reactions between organic solvents and 1O2. Thus, 1O2 is a big obstacle to the cycling of the LOBs.
It is clear that 1O2 can be produced from reactions that release molecular oxygen. But a detailed mechanistic origin of the formation of 1O2 in LOBs has remained elusive. Previously, it was suspected that the oxidation of Li2O2 or LiO2 occurring at charging voltages could be responsible for generating 1O2.140,141 However, theoretical and mechanistic considerations suggest that a direct 2e− Li2O2 oxidation and 1e− oxidation of LiO2 would be impossible.144 Instead, a chemical disproportionation of superoxide species to peroxide and oxygen (2LiO2 → (LiO2)2 → Li2O2 + 1O2) has been proposed as a more convincible pathway toward 1O2 generation on either discharge or charge.145 Freunberger et al. suggested that the governing factor of 1O2 generation might lie in the Lewis acidity of cations in the electrolyte.145 In the presence of stronger Lewis acidic cations, such as H+ and Li+, the peroxides are stabilized, thus driving the disproportionation reactions. Weak Lewis acids such as TBA+ alone do not drive disproportionation. However, when combined with strong Lewis acids, it strongly reduces the reaction barriers toward 1O2 and causes substantially larger fractions of 1O2. Besides, 1O2 could come from side reactions. Mahne et al. found a correlation between the fraction of generated singlet oxygen and the concentration of trace water. They assumed that H2O or other proton sources would protonate superoxide ions to form the HO2 radical. The following reactions finally lead to 1O2: 2HO2 → H2O4 → H2O2 + 1O2.145
Electrochemical oxidation of Li2CO3 has recently been revealed as another pathway toward 1O2 evolution. Li2CO3 can be electrochemically decomposed via 2Li2CO3 → 4Li + 4e− + 2CO2 + 1O2 (E0 = 3.82 V vs. Li/Li+). However, no evolution of O2 has been observed as expected, triggering the debate about the third O atom in CO32−. Previous explanations have proposed the formation of superoxide or “nascent oxygen”, which could react with cell components in a reaction path involving carbon. But a definitive proof for these mechanisms was missing.146,147 Mahne et al. proposed that the electrochemical oxidation of Li2CO3 formed highly reactive 1O2, which triggered the parasitic reaction of 1O2 with battery components.148 They examined the Li2CO3-packed working electrodes in the presence of a DMA trap and detected the generation of DMAO2 when applying voltages above 3.8 V vs. Li/Li+. Quantitative analysis suggested that the generated 1O2 from the electrochemical Li2CO3 oxidation would account for the missing O2. The formed 1O2 reacted with the cell components rather than being, even in part, deactivated to 3O2. In the presence of the 1O2 quencher 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (DABCO) that deactivated 1O2 to 3O2, O2 evolution started together with CO2 evolution at ∼3.8 V at a similar growing rate as the voltage increased.
However, it is difficult to identify the source of 1O2 correctly because of the complex and heterogeneous nature of the LOB system and the short life span of singlet oxygen. A recent insight suggests that the experimental evidence for detecting 1O2 is not fully conclusive.144 Some false-positive results cannot be excluded from trapping and quenching experiments. For example, the reaction between CO2 and superoxide in electrolytes gives rise to peroxycarbonates, which can also oxidize 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone (4-oxo-TEMP) to 4-oxo-TEMPO.149 This is possible in LOBs as CO2 could be evolved from the decomposition of Li2CO3. Thus, the proof of 1O2 formation should be reconsidered carefully. A comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of 1O2 generation, deactivation, and reaction is also required in future studies.

3.2 The search for 2nd generation electrolyte
To make efficient cell configurations and study the working mechanisms of the LABs, the ideal electrolytes are required to exhibit the following features: (1) robust chemical stability against reactive intermediates and products during charge and discharge; (2) compatibility with Li metal anode and other cell components; (3) high boiling point and low volatility due to the open cell system; (4) high oxygen solubility and oxygen diffusivity to facilitate the ORR and OER on the air electrode; and (5) low viscosity to improve the rate performance of the oxygen electrode. The organic carbonates (i.e., the first-generation electrolytes) are unstable in the presence of superoxide radical intermediates. Thus, many efforts have been paid to second-generation electrolytes to search for non-carbonate solvents and other significant components as a whole. Specifically, the promising electrolyte systems could be configured through solvents, salts, functional additives, and RMs to satisfy the above-mentioned criteria.

3.2.1 Solvent-based design. 
Ethers. 
Following early studies by Read et al.,58 ether-based solvents, including DME,150 tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether (TEGDME),151 DOL58,152 and 2-methyl tetrahydrofuran (2-Me-THF),152 have been widely investigated after the germination period. The chemical inertia of the ether groups is much higher than that of the carboxyl groups in conventional organic carbonates.153 Better stability was expected with ether-based solvents. McCloskey et al. employed in situ quantitative gas-phase mass spectrometry (DEMS) with ex situ XRD and Raman analysis to study the fundamental chemistry of the DME solvent-based LOBs.53,150 Li2O2 was identified as the major discharge product. O2 was produced during charging, although the amount was lower than that of O2 consumed during discharge. Zhang et al. reported on tri(ethylene glycol)-substituted trimethylsilane (1NM3), in which the ether groups were attached to a trimethylsilane.154 Both experimental and computational evidence showed the good stability of oligoether substituted silane against oxygen reduction species during discharge. However, the cycling performance of the 1NM3-based electrolyte is poor due to a lack of reversibility. In 2012, Bruno et al. reported that the LOBs with the TEGDME-LiCF3SO3 electrolyte could be operated effectively for 100 cycles without obvious capacity decay.153 XRD patterns revealed the formation and disappearance of Li2O2 after complete discharge and charge, respectively, indicating the excellent reversibility of the cell. Further studies showed that the chain length of the ether solvents affects the corresponding properties. Increasing the chain length of linear glymes can lower the vapor pressure to limit the electrolyte loss via evaporation. However, the solvent viscosity also increases with the chain length of linear glymes, leading to sluggish transport capability.155 Doron et al. examined the effect of glyme selection on the cycling behavior of LOBs.156 The cycling duration of cells with different electrolytes followed the trend G2 (diglyme) > G1 (monoglyme) ≫ G3 (triglyme), G4 (tetraglyme). The result indicates that cells with longer glymes are less stable during cycling.
Compared to carbonates, ether-based electrolytes are relatively more stable.122 Consequently, they have been widely used as the solvent in the LOB literature. However, degradation was still observed in ether-based electrolytes. In another study by McCloskey et al., the successful cycling of the cell was confirmed by the capacity increases during the initial cycles (Fig. 10a1).157 However, the capacity degradation and charge/mass imbalance suggested the side reactions occurring in ether-based electrolytes (Fig. 10a2–a4). Subsequent investigations further confirmed the instability of ether-based electrolytes.132,160–163 H abstraction and auto-oxidation were suspected as the leading cause for the formation of a series of side-products.132,152
Another possible explanation for the instability of glymes is associated with the nucleophilic attack of O2˙− during the discharge of LOBs, as proposed by Freunberger et al. in Fig. 10b.152 However, different results were reported in some literature via the KO2 screening test.63,124 Reactive impurities might cause these contradictory results observed in glyme solvents, such as vinyl ethers and vinyl esters with unsaturated-oxygenated hydrocarbons.164 In contrast, Bryan et al. proposed that the instability was likely due to the parasitic reactions induced by formed Li2O2.165 During discharge, parasitic side reactions between TEGDME solvent and Li2O2 would consume the generated Li2O2, reducing Li2O2 yield and generating side products such as Li formate, Li acetate, and Li carbonates. Upon charge, the deviation of Li2O2 oxidation and O2 evolution implied that Li2O2 would react with TEGDME electrochemically at oxidative potentials. Thus, the primary source that induces the parasitic processes in ether-based solvents still requires a better understanding.
 Fig. 10  The search for second-generation solvents for LABs. (a) DME-based electrolyte: (a1) potential profiles for five discharge/charge cycles of a DME-based cell. (a2) Oxygen consumption/evolution during discharge/charge. (a3) OER/ORR and CO2 evolved during charge divided by ORR. (a4) e−/O2 for discharge and charge of each cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Proposed mechanism for reactions in ether-based electrolytes that occur during discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) DMSO-based electrolyte: (c1) charge/discharge curves and (c2) cycling profile for a LOB cell with a 0.1 M LiClO4-DMSO electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) Proposed mechanism for reactions occurring during discharge in the DMF solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) MeCN-based electrolyte: (e1) galvanostatic discharge–charge curve for a MeCN cell. (e2) Oxygen consumption and evolution during discharge and charge. (e3) Gas evolution rates for H2, CO2, and O2 during cell charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To address the autoxidation problem and improve the stability of the ether-based electrolytes, many approaches have been proposed, including increasing lithium salt concentration, controlling the extent of the discharge/charge process, and modifying the molecular structure. In a highly concentrated electrolyte, all DME molecules are coordinated with salt cations, and the scission of the C–H bond in DME molecules becomes more difficult. Therefore, the decomposition of a highly concentrated electrolyte can be mitigated.166 However, the high concentration of the electrolyte usually exhibits high viscosity, which is unfavorable for ion and oxygen diffusion. A detailed discussion on the impact of the concentration of electrolytes is presented in the next section.
The extent of the discharge/charge process can be controlled by setting the capacity and voltage constraints at each cycle.153,167 Generally, the quantity of side reaction products correlates with the amount of charge passed. Thus, restricting the capacity range results in fewer side products and less polarisation after a given number of cycles. Another benefit of shallow cycling is less mechanical stress on the electrode, which aids capacity retention. Although some improvements in cyclability can be achieved via such a method, it merely postpones and does not eliminate the inevitable accumulation of side products. Moreover, the maximum cell capacity is inevitably limited. Another effective strategy is to substitute the most susceptible H with the protective groups, as demonstrated by Adams et al.; they replaced β-H in DME with protective methyl (–CH3).168 When the resulting 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-dimethoxybutane (DMDMB) was used as the electrolyte, the formation of side products was significantly suppressed, and the cyclability was greatly enhanced compared with that of DME.
DMSO. 
As a highly polar versatile solvent, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) demonstrates high electrochemical reversibility for the O2/O2− couple, good stability, and long lifetimes of the superoxide radical anion.169–172 Greatly enhanced reversibility and cycling stability with desirable mass/charge balance have been achieved in LOBs with DMSO-based electrolytes, as Bruce et al. reported (Fig. 10c).158 Moreover, DMSO exhibits a high DN value (DN = 30) and is thus capable of stabilizing Li+ and promoting solution growth of Li2O2 with low discharge overpotentials and high discharge capacities.102
In the studies by Zhang et al.97 and Trahan et al.,173 both Li2O2 and LiOH were observed in the discharge product associated with DMSO-based electrolytes. Since the water content in the pristine electrolyte is far from the concentration required for the direct conversion of discharged Li2O2 to LiOH,174 the formation of LiOH from the chemical reaction between Li2O2 and trace water in aprotic electrolytes could be excluded. This triggered further explorations to reveal the chemical reactivity of DMSO with superoxide-like species, which would induce the formation of LiOH and decomposition of DMSO.165,175–179 In 2014, Shao-Horn et al. examined the reactivity of DMSO with Li2O2.176 They found that Li2O2 particles formed upon discharge gradually converted into LiOH upon prolonged exposure to a DMSO-based electrolyte, and the amount of LiOH increased over time. They proposed that proton abstraction was facilitated by solid-state or near-surface superoxide-related species after discharge. However, on a lab scale, the discharge time of LOBs using DMSO-based electrolytes is relatively short, resulting in insignificant DMSO decomposition. Other investigations further support the insufficient stability of the DMSO solvent with the observation of carbonate species180 and the formation of dimethyl sulfone (DMSO2)177,178 and lithium sulfate/sulfonate/sulfone as by-products.179 These findings suggest that DMSO might not be a suitable solvent for rechargeable LOBs with a long cycle life. Generally, the compatibility of DMSO with Li metal is poor due to the failure to form a stable passivation layer (SEI).179,181 Although this issue may be addressed by using electrolyte additives,181 or increasing the concentration of the solution,182 DMSO is hygroscopic, which prevents its utilization in the final device open to the air atmosphere.
Amides. 
Amides are another type of polar solvent. Amide-based electrolytes, including linear N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),159N,N-dimethylacetamide (DMA),183N-methylacetamide (NMA),184 hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA)185 and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP),186,187 have been investigated. The N in amide (OC–N) has a lower electron negativity than the O in the ester (OC–O). The N atom acts as a better electron-donating group, making the C center in OC–N less positive than that in OC–O. Therefore, the amide is expected to be a more stable electrolyte toward nucleophilic attacks.63,186 Computational calculations have shown that the free energy barrier for the nucleophilic attack on amides is indeed greater than that on DMSO and esters.63 Higher activation energy for proton abstraction by O2 means that amides are much more stable against auto-oxidation.132
Nevertheless, the stability of amide-based solvents is not conclusive in experimental studies. Bruce et al. investigated DMF, DMA, and NMP solvents. It was found that highly pure Li2O2 was formed in the first discharge and was then completely removed on the subsequent charge.159 However, their results also showed that the degree of side reactions increased upon cycling along with the accumulation of Li2CO3, HCO2Li, and CH2CO2Li at the cathode (Fig. 10d). Peng et al. reported on hexamethylphosphoramide (HMPA) based Li–O2.185 The strongly solvating properties of the HMPA electrolyte enable the dissolution of the significant discharge product, Li2O2, and the potential side reaction products (Li2CO3 and LiOH). The passivation/clogging issues of the porous cathode during discharge can be significantly alleviated. As a result, improved capacity, rate capability, voltaic efficiency, and cycle life were achieved in comparison with ether-based solvents.
Apart from the undisputed stability, the high vapor pressure of small alkyl-amide solvents (e.g., DMA = 293 Pa at 25 °C) could be a concern for long-term operation.188 Enhancing the molecular weight can reduce the high vapor pressure and mitigate this issue. Another significant disadvantage of amide-based solvents is their high reactivity toward lithium metal. The reaction between the two is extremely fast and does not allow reversible lithium metal cycling for rechargeable LOB operation.189 This problem can be mitigated by using LiNO3 as a passivation agent to stabilize the SEI,190,191 or using a Li+ conducting ceramic film protect layer185 as discussed above.
Nitriles. 
Organic nitriles are another family of solvents that were investigated as an alternative to carbonates. They have been used as the solvent for the study of O2 reduction.192,193 Computational study also shows relatively high activation barriers for nucleophilic reactions of O2−.63 The excellent stability of CH3CN (MeCN) toward O2− radicals enables its utilization for mechanistic investigations of aprotic-based LOBs. McCloskey systematically investigated nitrile electrolytes in LOBs. A two-electron pathway was observed during discharging, while O2 was evolved during charging (Fig. 10e1–e3). A high rechargeability (OER/ORR) of 88% was achieved.157
Acetonitrile electrolytes exhibit both high electrochemical stability and chemical stability against nucleophilic attack. Nevertheless, the stability of acetonitrile-based solvents is still insufficient for practical LOB applications. Gregory et al. screened several aliphatic nitrile solvents through the combination of experimental and computational investigations.186 They proved that although nitrile-based electrolytes were stable toward the O2− radical intermediate by using cyclic voltammetry (CV) results, they would suffer from base-mediated self-condensation or hydrolysis in the presence of adventitious moisture as evidenced by the chromatography-mass spectrometry (GCMS) measurements in the presence of KO2.
On the other hand, unlike DMSO, nitriles exhibit a relatively low DN (DN = 14). Such weak coordination nature would lead to the growth of a Li2O2 film on the electrode surface. As a result, maximum capacities in nitrile-based media would be limited compared to high DN solvents.102 Moreover, acetonitrile might not be suitable for electrolyte solvent in open to air systems because of its high volatility.194,195 Even though this can be alleviated via higher molecular weight and lower volatility nitriles, its high reactivity toward lithium metal prevents its further use without additives or protective layers for LOBs.196
Sulfone. 
It is well known that an electrolyte for LOBs should endure high overpotential during charge.197 Sulfones have been studied previously for application in high-voltage Li-ion batteries and displayed a large electrochemical window (oxidation onset potential of >5 V vs. Li/Li+). Zhang et al. compared the oxidation potential of several electrolytes (DMSO, DMF, PC, TEGDME, and tetramethylene sulfone (TMS)). It was found that TMS exhibited the highest oxidation potentials (5.6 V vs. Li/Li+), indicating the highest resistance toward electrooxidation. A high capacity, good round-trip efficiency, and cycle life were achieved on LOBs with the TMS electrolyte.197 DFT calculations showed that nucleophilic attack on sulfone was not as thermodynamically and kinetically favorable as carbonate solvents (i.e., PC and EC), but the calculated free energy barriers (ΔGact) of sulfones were not as high as some of the ether- (i.e., DME and TEGDME), amide- (i.e., NMP) and nitrile-based (i.e., BN and MeCN) solvents.63 Therefore, like ether- and amide-solvents, sulfones would undergo a possible decomposition. In 2014, Bruce et al. investigated and compared three commercially available sulfones (i.e., ethyl vinyl sulfone (EVS), tetramethylene sulfone (TMS), and ethyl methyl sulfone (EMS)) as the solvents for LOBs.198 The vinyl group in EVS is easily attacked by the superoxide radicals, rendering EVS unstable in the LOB environment.
Another challenge is that the melting points of many sulfone-based solvents are above room temperature, e.g., butyl sulfone (44 °C) or 1-fluoro-2-methyl-sulfonyl benzene (50 °C), precluding room temperature operation of LOBs. Ethyl vinyl sulfone is a liquid at room temperature. However, the vinyl group on EVS renders it unstable due to an attack by superoxide.198 Although EMS (27.4 °C) and TMS (36.5 °C) are in their solid-state at room temperature, the addition of Li salts (e.g., LiTFSI) can decrease their melting points so that they become viscous liquids at room temperature.198 However, the low temperature may lead to the failure of the battery, making it a challenge for cold weather operation.199 It has also been suggested that sulfones do not form a stable SEI in contact with low-voltage anodes such as Li or graphite.200 These challenges prevent the long-term application of sulfone-based electrolytes.
ILs. 
Certain properties of ionic liquids (ILs) are desirable for application in LOBs, such as negligible volatility, a wider electrochemical window, and lower flammability. The extra bonus of ILs is their high thermal stability, which can enhance the safety of batteries.201 ILs are also less likely to be attacked by O2− due to the poor-leaving alkyl groups bonded to the N atom.202 To date, many ILs have been explored as solvents for LOBs. The common cations include imidazolium (e.g., EMI or BMI), pyrrolidinium (e.g., PYR14), and piperidinium (e.g., PP13). Examples of commonly used anions are BF4−, PF6−, TFSI, FSI, IM14, and BETI and TFSA−. The piperidinium- and pyrrolidinium-based electrolytes were reported to be stable against O2− attack and achieved good battery cyclability at least within the time scale of the measurements,203–206 whereas imidazolium-based ILs, such as butyl-3-methylimidazolium (BMI) cations, were found to react with O2− to produce 1-butyl-3-methyl-2-imidazolone.207 Some studies reported the decomposition of IL-based electrolytes via acid–base chemistry,130,157,208,209 suggesting that they might not have sufficient long-term stability against the oxygen species produced during discharge or charge.
Several drawbacks of ILs may become limiting factors for their large-scale application. Apart from the high fabrication cost, the poor diffusive mobility of Li+ and dissolved O2 in ILs may restrict the rate performance of the battery. The oxygen supply has been identified as the rate-limiting step for generating lithium–oxygen compounds (LiOx) in IL-based electrolytes.210 In comparison with DME and DMSO, ILs have a much higher viscosity, leading to high mass-transfer resistance and a high interface polarization voltage.196
On the other hand, mixing ILs with molecular solvents (e.g., glymes, amides) is an effective strategy to improve the power capacities. Through carefully balancing different components, the resultant mixture solvents could combine the attributes of the various components. For example, Croce et al. first reported the TEGDME and Pyrr14TFSI mixture solvent. The addition of ILs enhanced the conductivity of the electrolyte, as evidenced by EIS spectra. As a result, slightly higher discharge voltage and significantly reduced charge voltage could be observed for the Li/air cell with the mixing electrolyte.211 In a later study, Wang et al. mixed Pyrr14TFSI with DME as the LOB solvents. A good cycling behavior with a low charging overpotential was achieved in an LOB with such a mixed electrolyte. On the one hand, the presence of Pyrr14TFSI could stabilize O2− species and tune the reaction pathway to the one-electron route. On the other hand, the poor O2 diffusivity of Pyrr14TFSI could be improved by adding DME that favors O2 diffusion.212
Although significant progress has been made in only a decade, no solvent has been found to ultimately withstand nucleophilic attack from the highly reactive reduced oxygen species while still being compatible with a Li metal anode.213 The stability of the solvent in rechargeable LOBs is the major issue that needs to be solved. Despite exhibiting some intrinsic flaws, ethers, DMSO, DMA, and ILs are still the most frequently used solvents in academic studies so far. There is no doubt that the search for aprotic solvents for LOBs will continue. More advanced and stable solvents will be vital in pursuing long-term cycling and practical application of LOBs.


3.2.2 Salt-based design. 
Li salt is another critical component in electrolytes. Li salt in electrolytes can provide sufficient Li+ cations to react with O2 reduction species and form Li–O compounds. At the same time, the conductivity of electrolytes, which depends on ion concentration and association strength of the anionic species, can be enhanced to a considerable level; otherwise, it is difficult for the insulating pure organic molecules to be applied in LOBs. Moreover, the Li salt used for nonaqueous battery electrolytes plays a vital role in SEI layer formation and current collector passivation. As early as 2006, Read dissolved different Li–salts in a DME + DOL mixture solvent.58 The discharge capacity decreased in the following order LiBr > LiTriflate > LiTFSI > LiBETI. The results show that Li-salts can influence the properties of electrolytes, such as viscosity, oxygen solubility, and conductivity, and eventually affect battery performance.
Compared with solvents, the choice of lithium salts is quite limited. To date, Li salts used for LOBs include lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6), lithium perchlorate (LiClO4), lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4), lithium tetracyanoborate (LiB(CN)4), lithium triflate (LiSO3CF3), lithium hexafluoroarsenate (LiAsF6), lithium nitrate (LiNO3), lithium bis{(trifluoromethyl)sulfonyl}imide (LiTFSI), lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI),217 and lithium bis{(perfluoroethane)sulfonyl}imide (LiBETI) and lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB).155,218
LiPF6. 
In early studies, the Li salt used for LOBs was the same as that for LIBs, such as LiPF6, LiBF4, and LiBOB. The excellent balance between ionic mobility and dissociation constant makes LiPF6 the most commonly preferred salt in nonaqueous solvents.219 However, it is believed that PF6− can react with trace amounts of water in a nonaqueous solvent to yield HF.219,220 In 2011, the XPS study by Ostwald et al. reported that LiF could be readily formed when Li2O2 was exposed to a LiPF6-containing electrolyte.221 The formation of LiF could be caused by the reaction of Li2O2 with LiPF6 and HF. This finding indicates the potential instability of LiPF6 for LOBs. In addition, the deterioration of LiPF6 could occur at 70 °C. The high moisture sensitivity and poor thermal stability of LiPF6 could restrict its applications and lead to safety concerns and manufacturing difficulties.219 Amine et al. reported that the decomposition of LiPF6 in the 1NM3 solvent triggered the decomposition of the solvent. Conversely, such phenomena were not observed in LiTFSI- and LiCF3SO3-based 1NM3 electrolytes.222 Thus, the stability of the electrolyte strongly depends on the compatibility of lithium salts with the solvent.
LiBF4. 
LiBF4 shows improved performance at elevated temperatures in comparison with LiPF4. But HF can also be generated via the hydrolysis of BF4−. Moreover, the moderate ion conductivity of LiBF4 has been a significant obstacle to its application. Boron-centered LiBOB is an appealing salt with non-corrosivity and non-toxicity. The negative charge on the anion is delocalized by eight oxygen atoms in the two oxalate groups, which endow it with weak coordinating ability. It has been frequently used as an active participant to form stable SEI to protect anodes.223–225 Ostwald's study also showed that the surface of Li2O2 was coated with rich boron oxide and carbonate species after exposure to a LiBOB-containing electrolyte solution, suggesting the decomposition issue of the LiBOB salt.221 Therefore, LiBOB and LiBF4 have been gradually abandoned in recent studies of LOBs.
Revealing the degradation mechanism of Li salts helps to guide the design of a stable and efficient LOB system. In 2011, Nazar et al. proposed the possible decomposition mechanism of LiBOB (Fig. 11a), which involved the nucleophilic substitution reaction at the boron center by superoxide radicals, followed by a series of reduction and gas (e.g., CO, CO2, O2) evolution reactions.214 The resulting solid side-product, Li2C2O4, was identified by XRD and infrared spectroscopy. Li2C2O4 might be filled into the pores of the cathode, thus leading to the fading of the discharge capacity.
 Fig. 11  The search of Li salts for LOBs: (a) LiBOB: illustration of a plausible decomposition mechanism of LiBOB attacked by superoxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b1) First cycle discharge–charge voltage profiles and (b2) cycling stability of LOBs with various salts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) LiNO3: (c1) illustration of the RM properties of NO2− formed by the reductive decomposition of NO3−. (c2) Voltage profiles in DEGDME-based electrolyte solvent with LiNO3 or LiTFSI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. 
LiTFSI. 
Sulfonate-based anions, such as Tf−, FSI− and TFSI−, are insensitive to ambient moisture and present good thermal stability.226,227 The best-known salt is LiTFSI, which is indefinitely stable at temperatures as high as 100 °C.228 In 2013, Zhou et al. reported enhanced cycling performance of an LOB using a relative higher LiTFSI salt concentration in triglyme (G3) and tetraglyme (G4) solvents. It was proposed that the appropriate coordination of Li+ with glymes might provide O2− radicals favorable accessibility to Li+, thus avoiding superoxide attack on glyme molecules.166 The degradation of LiTFSI and LiTf has been reported with the formation of LiF and -CF3.160,165,195 Moreover, LiTFSI is highly corrosive to aluminum, which is commonly used as the cathode current collector.229 Therefore, the compatibility of Li salts with other cell components (e.g., solvent, separator, and electrode materials) should also be considered. Recently, Peng et al. reported a novel lithium salt Li[(CF3SO2)(n-C4F9SO2)N] (LiTNFSI) dissolved in the TEGDME solvent for LOBs.230 In comparison with LiTFSI, the decomposition of –CF3 and –C4F9 in LiTNFSI led to the formation of inorganic and organic F-containing components, respectively, constructing a stable, uniform, and O2-resistive SEI on the Li anode. As a result, Li dendritic growth and parasitic side reactions during cycling were effectively inhibited, and thereby, the overall reversibility of LOBs was significantly enhanced. LiFSI in alkyl carbonate has excellent conductivity, even better than LiPF6 in an alky carbonate solvent.231 It has been reported that FSI− anions react with Li metal, generating a complex including LiSO2F, LiF, and NSO2−,232 which contribute to the formation of the SEI layer. However, FIS− anion-based ILs have been reported to present poor chemical reversibility in the LOB system, indicating insufficient stability.233
In 2013, Zhang et al. systemically investigated the stability of seven salts in TEGDME electrolytes during the discharge/charge processes.215 As shown in Fig. 11b1, the discharge capacity of the LOBs is strongly influenced by the selection of salt and follows the order of LiTFSI > LiTf ≈ LiPF6 > LiClO4 > LiBF4, LiBr, LiBOB. It should be noted that residual water in salts may also affect the discharge chemistry and the products formed during the discharge.234 Furthermore, XRD, XPS, and NMR analyses demonstrated that LiBF4 and LiBOB went through decomposition with the formation of LiF and Li2C2O4, respectively. In electrolytes of LiTFSI, LiTf, and LiPF6, minor signs of the electrolyte salt decomposition during the discharge process were detected, indicating their limited stability. By contrast, LiBr and LiClO4 were found to be stable during discharge (Fig. 11b2). For LiBr, two voltage plateaus during charge can be observed corresponding to the oxidation of Br− ions (3Br− → Br3− + 2e− at 3.6 V (vs. Li+/Li) and Br3− → 3/2Br2 + e− at 3.9 V (vs. Li+/Li)). Br− anion can function as the redox mediator to mediate Li2O2 formation and decomposition. This will be discussed in detail in Section 3.2.4.
LiClO4. 
High rechargeable LOBs have been reported with the utilization of LiClO4 salt.235,236 Nevertheless, the stability of LiClO4 seems to be controversial. Younesi et al. exposed Li2O2 in the TEGDME electrolyte containing 0.1 M LiClO4 for 48 h. The XPS analysis showed related peaks for LiCl and LixClOy on the surface of Li2O2, suggesting the decomposition of the LiClO4 salt in contact with Li2O2.237 Real LOB tests showed that decomposition products from LiClO4 were detected in the PC solvent. In contrast, no degradation of LiClO4 was detected in the mixed EC + DEC solvent.238 LiClO4 also shows explosion risk, hindering its industrial application.
LiNO3. 
LiNO3 can offer numerous potential benefits for optimizing electrolytes, Li anodes, and cathodes in the LOB system. First, it is suggested that LiNO3 can react with Li metal anodes via the following reaction:2392Li + LiNO3 → Li2O + LiNO2.
The insoluble Li2O contributes to the formation of a stabilized SEI, which can inhibit further side reactions between electrolyte and the Li metal anode.183,240 The soluble NO2− anions could subsequently react with dissolved O2 and regenerate NO3− anions190LiNO2 + ½O2 → LiNO3.
Secondly, LiNO3 can benefit both the ORR and OER processes, as suggested by Sharon et al.216 They demonstrated that the strong Li+–NO3− interactions in solution were able to reduce the Lewis acidity of the Li+ ions, thus facilitating the stabilization of superoxide and peroxide moieties and promoting the growth of a thick Li2O2 layer and a relatively high specific capacity. In addition, the NO2− anions generated from the reduction of NO3− could be oxidized at the cathode during charging and generate NO2.216 Then, NO2 reacts with Li2O2 to form O2, Li ions, and NO2− (Fig. 11c1). Consequently, the decomposition of Li2O2 could be accelerated under the assistance of the NO2−/NO2 redox mediator, and the LiNO3-based cell enabled a charge voltage below 4.0 V (Fig. 11c2). Moreover, it has also been reported that LiNO3 serves as a protecting agent to passivate the carbon electrode against parasitic reactions.241
Significant properties of Li salts. 
The concentration of Li salt plays a significant role in determining the conductivity and Li+ transport rate of electrolytes. The commonly used salt concentration in the LOB literature is around 1 M. Several research groups have investigated the impact of high salt concentration on LOB performance. From the commercial perspective, a higher salt concentration means an increase in the cost of electrolytes. However, such a strategy also provides new possibilities to address the instability issue of electrolytes in LOBs. DFT calculations by Liu et al. suggested that the C–H bond scission of a DME molecule would be more difficult when it coordinated with Li+ ions (Fig. 12a1–a2).242Fig. 12b1–b2 show that the LOB with 3 M LiTSFI-DME electrolyte presents a prolonged cycle life compared to cells using 1 M and 2 M electrolytes. This work agrees with Zhou's work mentioned previously.166 It indicates that a high concentration of Li-salt can reduce the availability of reactive solvents and enhance the stability of the electrolyte by forming a stable salt–solvent complex. In addition, the concentrated electrolyte can build a stable SEI layer at the interface between the Li anode and electrolyte, which allows reversible Li plating/stripping and prevents electrolytes from continuously reacting with the Li metal.182 Another benefit of high concentration Li-salt is that the corrosion of the current collector can be suppressed by forming a passivation film.243
Despite these benefits, they are at the cost of O2 solubility, ionic mobility, and viscosity of electrolytes, which would lead to poor rate performance and high overpotential of LOBs. To overcome these challenges of the highly concentrated electrolytes, Zhang et al. recently proposed to regulate Li+ solvation at a medium concentration. Fig. 12c1–c2 show a smoother surface of Li in DMA electrolyte with 2 M LiTFSI + 1 M LiNO3 in comparison with 5 M LiNO3 and 4 M LiTFSI. This is because the optimized electrolyte with 2 M LiTFSI + 1 M LiNO3 in DMA can facilitate the formation of a LiF and LiNxOy-rich SEI film to protect the Li anode from dendrite growth and corrosion (Fig. 12d), and enable faster mass transfer and electrode kinetics, eliminating the disadvantages of the high concentration electrolytes. The LOB with 2 M LiTFSI + 1 M LiNO3 in DMA electrolyte delivered a low overpotential and remarkable electrochemical performance for 180 cycles.213
 Fig. 12  Effect of salt concentration: (a) computational simulations of the Gibbs activation energy barriers for C–H bond scission in (a1) CH2 groups and (a2) CH3 groups in DME, Li(DME)2, and Li(DME)3 from attack by O2−. (b) Discharge and charge curves of LOBs using electrolytes with three salt concentrations; cycled voltage profiles of the cells using LiTFSI–DME electrolytes with salt concentrations of (b1) 1 M, (b2) 2 M, and (b3) 3 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. SEM images of lithium deposition morphology in (c1) 5 M LiNO3, (c2) 4 M LiTFSI, and (c3) 2 M LiTFSI + 1 M LiNO3. (d) Schematic illustrations of lithium deposition evolution in different types of electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 1989 The Electrochemical Society. 
Analogous to the solvents with high DNs, the stabilization of the superoxide in electrolytes can be facilitated by the assistance of salts. In 2015, McCloskey et al. studied the effects of salt anions on electrochemistry and the morphology of the discharge product.244 By appropriate selection of salt anions with high DNs, they found that the solution-mediated growth mechanism and the formation of a toroidal product are possible due to the increased stability of O2− in the electrolyte. As a result, high capacities could be achieved for LOBs via combining Li salt with high DNs and solvents with low DNs. This strategy alleviates the challenge faced by the solvents and weakens the degradation of the electrolyte. As O2 is the reactant during ORR, its concentration will significantly affect the reaction kinetics. Lindbergh found that Li salt anions would affect the O2 solubility in the electrolyte.245 DFT calculations suggest that the strongest interaction energy is between O2 and TFSI anions compared with ClO4−, Tf anions, and DMSO molecules, consistent with the observed largest solubility electrolytes containing LiTFSI.
Based on the above discussion, there is no doubt that Li salts are equally crucial to solvents. Ideal Li salts for LOBs should have good solubility and easy dissociation for rapid ion transport. Good compatibility with other cell components (e.g., solvent, separator, and electrode materials) is also an important criterion.246,247 In addition, analogous to the solvents, the salts should possess considerable stability against aggressive O2−/Li2O2 species for stable long-term operation.226 From the commercial perspective, Li salts should be low cost, non-toxic, and easy to manufacture. To date, each salt that has been investigated has its advantages and drawbacks. Considering the trade-off of both aspects, LiTf and LiTFSI are still among the most frequently used Li salts for LOBs. As Li salts are usually dissolved in a certain solvent, the search for stable Li salts cannot be realized without a stable solvent. Therefore, the exploration of stable electrolytes for LOBs should combine both the solvent and the Li salt as a whole and investigate the influence on the electrochemical behaviours.


3.2.3 Electrolyte additives. 
To tailor the LOB system for desirable performance, a small amount of inorganic salts or organic compounds is usually added to the electrolyte to alter the chemical kinetics and suppress undesirable side reactions. These compounds are referred to as electrolyte additives. The weight percentage of the electrolyte additive in the electrolyte usually does not exceed 5%. Such a small amount can significantly affect the properties of electrolytes (e.g., oxygen solubility and ionic conductivity) and even the mechanism of LOBs. Due to their crucial roles, electrolyte additives have drawn significant interest in LOB research. There are different functionalities of additives, such as additives for increasing O2 and Li2O2 solubility, additives for inhibition of side reactions, and additives for stabilizing the intermediates. The utilization of these functional additives not only accelerates the ORR and OER processes in LOBs but also dramatically impacts the stability of solvents.
Early studies on additives mainly focused on how to increase the capacity of LOBs. The initial step during discharge involves the dissolution of O2 in the electrolyte. Thus, oxygen solubility and transport in electrolytes directly impact the discharge performances (e.g., discharge capacity and rate capacity).55 It has been proposed to utilize fluorinated compounds, such as methyl nonafluorobutyl ether (MFE), tris(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl) phosphite (TTFP),250 and perfluorotributylamine (FTBA),251 as additives to increase O2 solubility in non-aqueous electrolyte systems. The enhanced dissolution kinetics and oxygen solubility can lead to improved discharge performances. However, the increased oxygen solubility may also cause oxygen crossover towards the Li anode, resulting in self-discharge.252 Proper SEI control and anode protection are needed when adjusting the O2 solubility of electrolytes.253 On the other hand, the discharge performance of LOBs is affected by a combination of various factors. When the oxygen solubility reaches a certain level, the specific capacity of the carbon cathode will no longer increase.254
Another restraining factor is the formation of insoluble discharge products (Li2O and Li2O2), which accumulate on the air electrode and progressively clog pores for oxygen diffusion, mechanically limiting the capacity of LOBs. A sample strategy to increase the solubility of Li2O/Li2O2 is to use additives that can bind to the O2−/O2− anions strongly enough to overcome the corresponding lattice energy.253 Encouragingly, Lewis acids, such as tris(pentafluorophenyl) borane (TPFPB), and boron esters, have been proposed as a functional additive, which could serve as the anion receptor and help to partially dissolve Li2O or Li2O2 by coordination with the oxide or peroxide anions.253,255 This coordination could significantly enhance the discharge performance of LOBs.
H2O proton additives. 
H2O from the air and electrolyte contaminants can significantly affect the battery chemistry in LABs. Meini et al. found that even the presence of a trace amount of H2O in electrolytes could increase the discharge capacity of an LOB to an order of magnitude.174 This inspired the use of H2O as an electrolyte additive. Luntz et al. intentionally added a trace amount of water to the electrolyte. A higher discharge capacity was achieved on the cell-containing 500 ppm of H2O than that of dry electrolyte with H2O < 12 ppm (Fig. 13a1–a2).101 The promotion effect of H2O has also been reported by other groups.256–258 Even at high discharge currents where film-like discharge products tend to form, an increase in discharge capacity was observed when water was added. It is known that the solid Li2O2 could be chemically dissolved by H2O via2Li2O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH + O2orLi2O2 + 2H2O → 2LiOH + H2O2.
Consequently, the early passivation of the cathode surface by Li2O2 can be alleviated, leading to increased capacity. However, Li2O2 is still the main discharge product in H2O-containing cells, with no observation of LiOH in XRD, Raman spectroscopy, and FTIR.101,258 This phenomenon triggers the question: how does H2O improve the capacity and induce the formation of toroidal discharge products?101
Aetukuri et al. proposed that the existence of H2O could trigger this dissolution process by solvating O2− efficiently due to its high acceptor number (AN). Consequently, the formation of large Li2O2 toroids via the solution-based mechanism is promoted, increasing capacity.101 Another explanation is that H2O serves as the proton-based phase transfer catalyst, enabling the protonation of superoxide via259–261H2O + 2O2− ↔ HO2− + O2 + OH−H2O + 2LiO2 ↔ LiOOH + O2 + LiOH.
The soluble HO2− and LiOOH subsequently precipitate in the form of Li2O2:HO2− + 2Li+ + OH− ↔ Li2O2 + H2OLiOOH + LiOH ↔ Li2O2 + H2O.
Thus, the overall reaction can be summarized as the two-electron reduction of O2 with Li2O2 as the final discharge product from the solution pathway. The generated HO2− and LiOOH intermediates have also been detected by Raman spectroscopy, further supporting the proton-transfer mechanism in H2O-containing LABs.258,262 Zhou et al. further proposed that the HO2− intermediate would chemically react with H2O (HO2− + H2O → Li2O2 + 2H2O), generating the more stable H2O2, which would further react with the hydroxide to generate Li2O2, accompanied by the restoration of H2O.258
Notably, the positive effect of H2O on the discharging process is correlated with the solvents, in which the thermodynamics and kinetics of H2O-participated reactions may be different due to solvation effects. For instance, Li2O2 is detected as a discharge product in ether-based electrolytes,101,260 while LiOH and Li2O2 usually coexist with trace moisture in the DMSO-based electrolyte.173,176 Shao-Horn et al. combined electrokinetic and morphological analyses with first-principles calculations to elucidate the difference of discharge products in H2O-containing solvents. They proposed that change in the discharge product could be attributed to proton availability, which depends on the dissociation constant (pKa) of H2O in solvents. The higher pKa values of water in solvents (e.g., DME) lead to less proton availability and the formation of Li2O2. Otherwise, LiOH would produce increased proton availability in DMSO and MeCN solvents. Moreover, if an excessive amount of H2O is present in the electrolyte, the discharge product will be disk-shaped LiOH instead of the typical toroidal-shaped Li2O2, resulting in decreased battery capacity due to high surface coverage LiOH on the cathode. Zhou et al. found that the conversion of toroidal Li2O2 discharge product to large sheets of LiOH was more obvious as the H2O content reached 4600 ppm.133
Although the beneficial effect of water has been identified, the side reactions triggered by water should not be neglected. Even a small amount of H2O can lead to the corrosion of Li metal anode, and large amounts of LiOH would block the generation and transfer of Li+, thus shortening the cycle life of LABs.134 Insights into how the presence of water affects the SEI formation and stability of Li salts are rarely reported but can provide invaluable information for the LOB community. As the presence of H2O leads to complexity in battery chemistry, the H2O content should be carefully controlled to regulate the battery chemistry. To avoid uncertainty and reduce the risk, strategies for enhancing battery tolerance toward the H2O containment are critical for the practical operation of LABs in the open air. Choices other than H2O that can facilitate these solution-based processes while introducing no parasitic reactions are preferable.
Other proton additives. 
Inspired by the successful use of H2O, other proton additives, such as methanol and perchloric acid, have been considered to achieve the promoted solution mechanism.101 In 2017, Bruce et al. reported the addition of weak acid phenol to a TEGDME-based electrolyte.248 The proton of phenol enabled the conversion of insoluble Li2O2 to its soluble protonated analogue (LiOOH) and recrystallized as larger particles by an Ostwald ripening process. As a result, the discharge capacity is significantly enhanced (Fig. 13b1–b2). Like the effect of water, Zhou et al. added urea hydrogen peroxide (UH2O2) to the electrolyte. H2O2 could assist the decomposition of LiOH, while urea could induce faster Li+ diffusion and improve ion transport. The charge potential of the UH2O2-contained cell decreased significantly to ∼3.26 V. Furthermore, undesirable side reactions associated with H2O were inhibited.134 Moreover, the corrosion of Li-metal by urea hydrogen peroxide was limited.
It should be noted that the introduction of proton additives inevitably induces corrosion of the Li anode. Furthermore, protic chemicals can be oxidized at high charge potentials, leading to the rapid consumption of protons.260 Moreover, some other radical reactive species, such as HOO˙ and HOO−, can be formed by introducing proton sources, which can trigger the possible decomposition of organic solvents.260,262 Therefore, further careful evaluation and systematic study are still needed for these types of additives.
Functional additives for stable SEI formation. 
When Li metal is exposed to the electrolyte solution, a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) can form at the anode/electrolyte interface and temporarily passivate the Li anode. The SEI layer can protect the Li anode and electrolyte from further parasitic reactions and stabilize the Li anode during striping and plating.263 However, when DMSO, DMA, and acetonitrile are used as the solvent and in contact with Li metal, no stable SEI can be formed,181,191 leading to the continuous corrosion of Li and early failure of the cell. Functional additives provide a simple and effective routine for improving SEI formation. Dan et al. reported the addition of 2% N,N-dimethyltrifluoroacetamide (DMTFA) to LiTFSI/DMA electrolyte as an SEI stabilizing additive in LOBs. Theoretical calculations suggested that α-fluorinated amides readily exhibited reductive energy for C–F bond dissociation at the bare Li surface to form insoluble LiF. Further experimental characterization studies confirmed the formation of LiF, which played a critical role in stabilizing the Li/electrolyte interface.191
Recently, Zhou et al. reported the addition of a halide ester additive, 2,2,2-trichloroethyl chloroformate (ClC(O)OCH2CCl3, TCCF), to LITFSI-TEGDME electrolyte for LOBs.249 The LOBs with this additive demonstrated an outstanding rate capability of 2005 mA h g−1 with a remarkably lowered charge potential. A stable and uniform SEI layer with rich LiCl formed on the surface of the Li anode, accelerating the electronic transport during Li plating/stripping and suppressing parasitic reactions between the Li anode and the electrolyte (Fig. 13c1–c6).

1O2 quencher additives. 
As 1O2 has been identified as the cause for parasitic reactions associated with the carbon cathode and electrolyte degradation during cycling,140,141 it has been proposed to study whether it is possible to quench 1O2 once it is formed or decrease its formation to alleviate its damaging effects. This is essential for the practical applications of LABs. Encouragingly, functional additives can behave as the 1O2 quencher to chemically or physically deactivate it. A suitable 1O2 quencher should meet the following requirements: first, it should effectively and rapidly capture 1O2 so that it can kinetically compete with 1O2 relaxation to triplet oxygen (3O2) and other reactions. Second, it should exhibit good selectivity and not react with other oxygen-containing species, except 1O2. Third, the 1O2 quencher and the corresponding products after reacting with 1O2 should possess good stability and compatibility with other battery components, to avoid introducing other side reactions.
Eichel et al. first employed 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-4-piperidone (4-oxo-TEMP) as the trapping agent for 1O2 in LOBs.140 A stable radical 4-oxo-TEMPO can be formed via the reaction between 4-oxo-TEMP and 1O2 (Fig. 13d) and be identified via the EPR spectrum. Such a trapping reaction is in kinetic competition with 1O2 relaxation to triplet oxygen and other reactions, suppressing undesirable side reactions. A later study by Freunberger et al. used 9,10-dimethylanthracene (DMA) as the trapping agent, which meets all the requirements for 1O2 quenchers.141 DMA can selectively and rapidly react with 1O2 forming the corresponding endoperoxide (DMA-O2). Both DMA and DMA-O2 are electrochemically stable in the potential range of 2–4 V (vs. Li/Li+). However, the chemical trapping process is irreversible so the quencher could be consumed with continuous cycling of LOBs. Therefore, physical quenching is preferred because the quencher is not consumed. The quenching process involves the formation of several complex intermediates, which finally dissociate to 3O2 and the regeneration of the quencher. Accordingly, Eichel et al. further added 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane (DABCO) to LOBs.140 The 1O2-related parasitic reactions were significantly reduced due to the physical deactivation of 1O2 to 3O2 by DABCO without consuming itself. However, DABCO is not electrochemically stable above 3.6 V, hence limiting its use in rechargeable LOBs. Recently, the same authors further developed DABCOnium, the mono alkylated form of DABCO, as an efficient 1O2 quencher with the oxidation stability increasing to 4.2 V vs. Li/Li+.264
 Fig. 13  Investigation of selected electrolyte additives: (a) effect of water on LABs: (a1) XRD patterns of the electrodes after discharge using the LiTFSI/DME electrolyte with different H2O contents. (a2) Gravimetric discharge capacities for LABs with different water contents in the electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Phenol: discharge curves of the cells (b1) with and (b2) without phenol at various current densities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 248. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) 2,2,2-Trichloroethyl chloroformate (TCCF): optical and SEM images of Li anode surfaces in the electrolyte (c1–3) without TCCF and (c4–6) with 2% TCCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) 2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-4-piperidone (4-Oxo-TEMP): the reaction of 4-Oxo-TEMP with singlet oxygen forms stable 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (4-Oxo-TEMPO). Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group. 
Overall, the addition of functional additives can alleviate some of the issues associated with conventional organic solvents, bringing new opportunities to their applications in LOBs. Combining suitable solvents and functional additives is required to pursue a more stable electrolyte system and better battery performance.


3.2.4 All-solid-state LABs. 
Solid-state electrolytes have remerged as a next-generation technology to address the critical concerns of safety issues, decomposition and volatilization of organic electrolytes, lithium corrosion, and dendrite growth in conventional LABs.265 However, the introduction of solid-state electrolytes causes some new challenges to LABs, including (1) current solid-state electrolytes possess low ionic conductivity, poor electrochemical stability, and poor chemical stability against the lithium anode and components of air;266 (2) solid-state electrolytes exhibit poor interfacial contact, including the contact inside electrodes and the contact between the electrodes and solid-state electrolytes;267 and (3) the high electronic conductivity of solid-state electrolytes induces short circuits in the batteries.268 To date, the simultaneous achievement of high environmental adaptability and superior electrochemical performance remains a big challenge in solid-state LABs (Fig. 14a). Overall, the development of solid-state LABs is still at the infant stage.
 Fig. 14  Schematic and characterization of the zeolite solid electrolyte. (a) Radar chart of the capabilities of electrolytes to solve the main problems associated with LABs. As shown in blue, solid-state LABs with conventional solid electrolytes can effectively solve several core issues of traditional LABs with liquid electrolytes. However, a solid-state LAB with LiXZM as the inorganic solid electrolyte possesses improved stability and interfacial compatibility, and low electronic conductivity, as shown in orange. (b) Schematic of the integrated solid-state LABS with C-LiXZM and the conduction mechanism of Li ions in LiX. (c and d) Comparison of the in situ zeolite membrane growth method adopted in this work (c) and the traditional preparation method for inorganic solid electrolytes (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited. 
Recently, a milestone of solid-state LABs was achieved by Yu et al.29 In this study, a highly stable, integrated, flexible solid-state LAB with a lithium-ion-exchange zeolite X (LiX) zeolite membrane (LiXZM) was synthesized as a solid-state electrolyte for LABs (Fig. 14b). The as-prepared LiXZM showed high ionic conductivity, low electronic conductivity, and excellent stability towards lithium metal and air components. More importantly, the integrated carbon nanotubes (CNTs) between cathode and LiXZM could significantly reduce the interfacial resistance (Fig. 14b). To ensure the feasibility of LiXZM for LABs, dip-coating and wiping seeded growth methods were employed to obtain the homogeneous and dense structure of LiXZM (Fig. 14c), thereby achieving smooth ionic migration among the crystal. In sharp contrast, a LiX zeolite pellet (LiXZP) prepared by pressing tablets exhibited inevitable interspaces among the crystals, resulting in significant potential barriers for ion migration (Fig. 14d). In addition, the LiXZM electrolyte was highly stable towards air and lithium metal and had excellent mechanical durability to prevent the formation of lithium dendrites. As a result, the as-prepared LABs delivered a capacity of 12020 mA h g−1 of carbon nanotubes, and had a cycle life of 149 cycles at a current density of 500 mA g−1 and a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Due to their electrochemical performance, safety, flexibility, and environmental adaptability, the highly stable, flexible, and integrated solid-state LAB with a LiX zeolite membrane may hold promise for next-generation energy storage.
Overall, using solid-state electrolytes can fundamentally solve some inherent problems of LABs. However, currently, a minimal number of SSEs are available, and the fabrication of these SSEs is commonly at a small scale and extremely expensive, which restricts SSEs from large-scale applications. To date, more ionic conductive, large-scale, and low-cost solid-state electrolytes are being enthusiastically explored.269


3.2.5 Redox mediator-based systems. 
Working mechanism of RMs in LABs. 
Redox mediators (RMs), also known as redox shuttle and soluble catalyst, are homogeneously dissolved in the electrolyte to mediate the electrochemical reaction pathway in the electrolyte.272 They are a class of soluble redox-active species and can be oxidized or reduced in the solution phase, followed by chemical reactions with the target reactants. In the case of LOBs, the operation mechanism of RM is illustrated in Fig. 15a.
 Fig. 15  The working mechanism of RMs in LABs: (a) schematic illustration of the reactions at the cathode in the presence of RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The suitable redox potential range of RMs for LABs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 271. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The simplified process for discharge can be described as follows:1942RM + 2e− → 2RM−2RM− + 2Li+ + O2 → 2RM + Li2O2.
The electrode chemistry starts with the reduction of the RM to RM−. The RM− then participates in the formation of Li2O2. However, the actual process is rather complex, involving different intermediates.261 The reduction of O2 can be achieved via various possible pathways with the eventual formation of Li2O2 and regeneration of RM:273,274Pathway 1: RM− + O2 + Li+ → RM + LiO2or: RM− + O2 → RMO2−,Pathway 2: 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2LiO2 + RM− → Li2O2 + RMor: 2RMO2− + 2Li+ → Li2O2 + O2 + 2RM,Pathway 3: RMO2− + RM− + 2Li+ → Li2O2 + O2 + 2RM.
The solution-based formation of Li2O2 by using RMs can avoid the direct growth of Li2O2 on the cathode surface, thus lowering discharge overpotential and promoting discharge capacity.275 Due to the high reactivity of superoxide species, it is highly desirable that the mediators can quickly reduce superoxide to peroxide during the discharge process.276
In terms of the charging process, RMs are oxidized at the electrode and diffuse into the electrolyte (RM ⇌ RM+ + e−); the oxidized state of RM (RM+) in turn oxidizes the solid Li2O2 on the electrode, leading to O2 evolution and regeneration of RM:2RM+ + Li2O2 ⇌ 2RM + 2Li+ + O2.
In such a process, RM acts as a molecular electron–hole transfer agent, helping electrons pass through the insulating Li2O2.246,277 Consequently, the charging potential can be significantly reduced, thus promoting the rechargeability of the cell and increasing the energy efficiency.246
Based on the above discussion, the addition of RM to the electrolyte is a promising way to promote battery performance. Several requirements should be fulfilled for RMs in the LOBs and LABs. The selection of RMs should start with the consideration of redox potential. RMs can be divided into discharge mediators and charge mediators according to the reaction mechanisms. The redox potential of RMs is the natural selection criteria (Fig. 15b). The redox potentials of discharge RMs should be close to the equilibrium potential of the O2/Li2O2 redox pair while enabling the quick reduction of superoxide to peroxide.278 As for charge mediators, the oxidation potential should be moderately higher than the theoretical decomposition of Li2O2 (2.96 V vs. Li/Li+).279 The oxidation potential of the charge mediator should be lower than the oxidation potential of the target products so that the charge mediator is oxidized before the electrochemical oxidation of Li2O2. At the same time, the redox potential of the charge mediator should be as low as possible to minimize the charge potential so that the degradation reactions induced by the high potential can be avoided.261
The RM should be highly dissolvable in the electrolyte and not react with electrolyte solvents or the Li metal anode.282 RM should be compatible with other battery components to avoid parasitic reactions. Moreover, the chemical stability of the charge RM and its oxidized form against the reactive oxygen species should be considered as a primary selection criterion.
Since the mediation process involves the shuttling of RM between the target reactant and cathode, the mass transport of RM should not be ignored. Higher diffusion ecoefficiency enables more contact area with electrode space, thus promoting a more homogeneous reaction. However, the shuttle effect would be encouraged by high diffusivity, which hinders the energy efficiency of the battery and degrades the cycle performance of the cell.271
Besides the electrocatalytic properties, some RMs also can promote oxygen solubility.283 These RMs are FePc,284 Heme,285 PTIO,286 2,6-di-tert-butyl-hydroxytoluene (BHT),287 and RuBr3. Thus, the formation of Li2O2 can be stabilized by the resultant solvated complexing molecules, while the decomposition of Li2O2 can be facilitated by the oxidated RMs, achieving excellent cycle performance. Similarly, 6-ethoxy-2,2,4-trimethylquinoline (EQ) could solvate Li+, facilitating the formation of solution-grown Li2O2. The EQ/EQ+ redox couple could effectively catalyze the decomposition of Li2O2 at low charge overpotential, thus enlarging the discharge capacity and reducing the charge polarization simultaneously.288
Moreover, the anions and cations in dissolved RMs can independently work as the RM for the discharge and charge process. Pang et al. proposed 1,10-diheptyl-4,40-bipyridinium (heptyl viologen) dibromide (HeptVBr2) as a bifunctional RM.289 The dissolved HeptV2+ and Br− worked as the discharge mediator and charge mediator, respectively, promoting the formation of Li2O2 and lowering the charging potential. As a result, the overall potential gap between charge and discharge was reduced with no Li2O2 residue after discharge.
Early study of RMs in LABs. 
The concept of RM was first proposed in the 1980s with the use of LiBr and LiI for overcharge protection in LIBs.290,291 Inspired by these pioneer studies, Chase et al. applied RM in rechargeable metal–air batteries in 2012, laying the foundation for future application in LOBs.292 RMs for LOBs were first reported by Bruce et al. in 2013, with the addition of tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) in the DMSO solvent for the charge reaction.277 During charging, TTF is oxidized to TTF+, which subsequently oxidizes the insulating solid Li2O2 and converts to TTF. In the practical battery tests, the cell containing TTF presented a very modest increase in charging potential and significantly improved rechargeability compared to the cell without TFF (Fig. 16a1). The cycle life could last for 100 cycles (Fig. 16a2) with complete reversibility of Li2O2 formation/decomposition on each cycle as evidenced by FTIR and in situ SERS data (Fig. 16a3–a4).277
 Fig. 16  The typical RMs in the early study of LABs. (a) Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF): (a1) first-cycle discharge/charge curves with and without TTF. (a2) Cycling stability of LOB with TTF. (a3) FTIR and (a4) in situ SERS spectra for 1, 20, and 100 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidinyloxyl (TEMPO): (b1) proposed catalytic cycle for the electrochemical charging mediated by TEMPO. (b2) DEMS analysis of the evolved gases during the charge of the LOB with 10 mM TEMP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright the Owner Societies. (c) Nitroxides: (c1) chemical structures of the investigated nitroxides. (c2) CV curves of 10 mM TEMPO 4, 10 mM 4-methoxy-TEMPO 5, 10 mM AZADO 6, 10 mM 1-Me-AZADO 7, 10 mM TMAO 8 and (c3) 10 mM 2,2,5-trimethyl-4-phenyl-3-azahexane-3-nitroxide 9, 10 mM tert-amyl-tert-butyl nitroxide 10 in 1 M LiTFSI/diglyme. (c4) The first cycle of LOB cells with and without 1-Me-AZADO 7. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 1988 The Electrochemical Society. (d) Iron-phthalocyanine (FePc): (d1) possible discharging route and (d2) charging route of FePc as the RM in LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Since then, various RMs have been explored for the ORR and OER in LOBs.246 In 2014, Owen et al. employed ethyl viologen ditriflate (EtV(OTf)2) as the discharge mediator for LOBs in the Py14TFSI-based electrolyte.276 The cell capacity was enhanced with a lower voltage drop compared to that of the EtV2+ free-cell. Moreover, it was found that reduced EtV+ could react with O2−. Due to the shortened superoxide lifetime, the durability of LOBs could be increased. However, given its shortcomings (e.g., smaller redox potential than decomposition of Li2O2, toxicity, and slow diffusion), ethyl viologen is not optimal for RM for LOBs. In the same year, Janek et al. utilized a four-α-methyl group functionalized 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidinyloxyl (TEMPO) as a charge mediator (Fig. 16b1).280 With high electrochemical stability, fast diffusion kinetics, and an appropriate redox (∼3.7 V vs. Li+/Li), TEMPO enabled the battery to achieve a reduced charging potential (by 500 mV) and double cycle life. Moreover, it was found that the amount of released CO2, from the oxidation of decomposition products from electrolytes and cathodes, decreased with the assistance of TEMPO (Fig. 16b2). The authors further extended their investigation to other nitroxide-based molecules (Fig. 16c1).281 1-Me-AZADO was found to be the most efficient redox mediator providing charging potentials below 3.6 V vs. Li/Li+ (Fig. 16c2–c4).
Iron phthalocyanine (FePc) has been previously explored as a molecular electrocatalyst for ORR.284 In 2014, it was first adopted as an organometallic RM for LOBs.273 FePc could chemically reduce O2 and oxidize Li2O2 through redox chemical reactions. When FePc served as the discharge mediator, the O2 molecule was attached to the Fe center and then went through a two-step transformation mechanism FePc–O2 → FePc–O2− → (FePc–LiOOLi) (Fig. 16d1). Then, LiOOLi would separate from FePc and get incorporated into the crystal lattice of Li2O2. In this case, the FePc–O2 molecule serves as a shuttle of electrons from the carbon cathode to a nucleated solid Li2O2 site. As for the charging process, the (FePc–O2)− can diffuse back through the electrolyte to the carbon surface. The FeIII/FeII couple (3.55 V) in the FePc molecule allows the oxidation of Li2O2 with the regeneration of FePc and evolution of O2 (Fig. 16d2). The FePc-containing cell presented a two-times larger capacity and lowered OER overpotential of 400 mV than batteries without FePc. Later studies reported that other metallic organics such as iron porphyrin,285tertbutyl cobalt phthalocyanine (*tb-CoPc),296 binuclear cobalt phthalocyanine (bi-CoPc),297 cobalt bis(terpyridine) (Co(Terp)2),298 and N,N′-bis(salicylidene)ethylenediaminocobalt(II) (CoII-salen)299 were effective in lowering the charging potentials and prolonging the cycle life of LOBs.
LiI RMs. 
An essential and controversial RM, LiI, was first reported for LOBs by Lim et al.282 In the charging process, I− ions are initially oxidized on the electrode surface to I3− or I2. Subsequently, the oxidized reactors (I3− or I2) chemically react with Li2O2, producing Li+ and O2 gas, with a reverse reaction into the initial I− ions. Lim et al. combined LiI in the TEGDME solvent with porous carbon nanotube fibril air electrodes.282 The charging potential of the constructed LOB was below 3.3 V (Fig. 17a). A stable cyclability over 900 cycles was achieved with a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 (Fig. 17b). The reversible formation/decomposition of Li2O2 was investigated further using TEM analysis (Fig. 17c–e). Raman spectroscopy indicates that I2 and I3− species return to the initial I− ion state upon reaction with Li2O2 during the charging process (Fig. 17f). When Li2O2 was injected into the I2-containing TEGDME solution, oxygen gas evolved (Fig. 17g), indicating a rapid reaction between the redox mediator and the Li2O2via I2 + Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2I− + O2.
 Fig. 17  The exploration of LiI as an RM in LABs. (a) Discharge/charge profiles of CNT fibril electrodes without a catalyst, with the Pt catalyst, and with the LiI catalyst. (b) Electrochemical profiles of the LOB cell with LiI. TEM images of the air electrode using LiI after (c) the first discharge and (d) the first cycle. (e) The corresponding diffraction patterns of the electrode before cycle, post-discharge, and after the first cycle. (f) Raman spectra of the as-prepared electrolytes after the first discharge and after the first cycle. (g) Gas analysis of the evolved oxygen after injection of Li2O2 powder into 0.05 m I2 dissolved in the TEGDME solvent. The side reactions occur in the presence of LiI RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) The possible reaction mechanisms of ether solvents in LOBs containing LiI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (i) Proposed Electrochemistry in LiI-containing LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V. (j) The reaction rate constants for I3− oxidizing Li2O2 as a function of the equilibrium potentials of I−/I3−. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2021 by Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Kwak et al. reported that the concentration of LiI could affect the electrochemistry in LOBs.293 XRD patterns (Fig. 17h) indicated that a high concentration of LiI in the TEGDME solvent could produce LiOH as the primary discharge product. Meanwhile, electrolyte degradation was facilitated. A possible mechanism was proposed in Fig. 17i. Lithium peroxide or superoxide formed by ORR would react with organic solvent molecules via E2 elimination, resulting in the generation of LiOOH. The presence of LiI accelerates the decomposition of LiOOH to LiOH and LiOI. The resultant products would continue to react with LiOOH, leading to the generation of O2, LiI, and more LiOH accumulated on the cathode. The operando UV-visible spectroscopy study by Landa-Medrano et al. confirmed the oxidation of the discharge products by I3−.300 The side reactions on an electrolyte with the formation of OI− were also detected. They pointed out that OI− might also come from the reaction between I2 and H2O viaI2 + H2O → HOI + I− + H+
The presence of side reactions may influence the cycle life of real LOBs using LiI as a redox mediator.
However, McCloskey et al. reported different battery chemistry involving H2O and LiI.294 They found that no O2 evolution was observed through careful characterization studies during the charging process. LiOH would react with I2 or I3− to form H2O and IO3−:3016LiOH + 3I2 ⇌ 6Li+ + IO3− + 5I− + 3H2O6LiOH + 3I3− ⇌ 6Li+ + IO3− + 8I− + 3H2O.
They proposed that the low charge overpotential observed in LiI-containing LOBs stemmed from iodo-oxygen electrochemistry rather than reversible oxygen reduction and evolution (Fig. 17j).294 In 2019, Yang et al. reported that the oxidizing power of LiI RM was dependent on the solvent.302 In low DN solvents, such as DME, neither Li2O2 nor LiOH could be oxidized by the I−/I3− RM. Conversely, in a high DN solvent (such as DMA, DMSO, and 1-methylimidazole (Me-Im)), stronger solvation of Li+ and I− ions promotes the oxidizing power of I3−, enabling the effective oxidation of Li2O2 and evolution of O2. LiOH also reacted with I3− in high DN electrolytes during the charging process. The resultant IO− intermediate could either form IO3−via disproportionation or attack solvent molecules. Liu et al. further indicated that the equilibrium of water, iodide, and oxygen in their motivating work is rather complex, and the role of iodo-oxygen species on the LiOH oxidation mechanism is poorly understood.301,303 Therefore, the exact mechanism of I−/I3− and I3−/I2 redox couples toward Li2O2/LiOH oxidation is controversial and still needs further investigations.
Recently, Cao et al. investigated the correlation between the kinetics of mediated Li2O2 oxidation and the redox potential of I−/I3− redox couple by adjusting the Li+ concentration in the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 17j, the reaction rate constant at lower potentials switches to much higher levels. A threshold appears at around 3.56 V (vs. Li/Li+), corresponding to the oxidation of Li2O2.295 The author proposed that whether I3− could oxidize Li2O2 or not depends on the position of the redox potential of I3−/I− below or above such threshold, providing another possible explanation for electrolyte-dependent oxidizing power of LiI redox couples.
LiBr RMs. 
Similar to LiI, another halide salt, LiBr, can also work as the RM for LOBs.304 The oxidation potentials for Br3−/Br− (3.48 V vs. Li/Li+) and Br3−/Br2 (vs. Li/Li+4.02 V) couples are higher than those of I3−/I− and I3−/I2,305,306 In 2016, Sun et al. used LiBr as a charge mediator in diglyme solution for LOBs.306 As shown in Fig. 18a1, similar CV curves can be observed for both LiI- and LiBr-containing cells, apart from a voltage difference in the redox peaks. The first oxidation peaks correspond to the oxidation of I− to I3− (3.25 V) and Br− to Br3− (3.78 V), while the second oxidation peaks involve the transition of I3− to I2 (3.83 V) and Br3− to Br2 (4.13 V). A better performance was achieved in the cell with diglyme electrolyte containing LiBr than the cell with LiI due to fewer side effects (Fig. 18a2). Unlike LiI, LiBr does not promote the generation of LiOH during discharge. The discharge product was only Li2O2 and could be fully decomposed at low potentials (Fig. 18a3–a4).
 Fig. 18  Study of LiBr RMs in LABs. (a1) CV curves on Pt electrodes in different electrolytes. (a2) Voltage profiles of the first cycles of LOBs with different electrolytes (the inset shows the typical toroid deposits of Li2O2 on the cathode surface after ORR in the LiBr containing solution). XRD patterns of carbon cathodes discharged to 2 V using (a3) diglyme/LiBr and (a4) diglyme/LiI based electrolyte solutions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. Voltage and gas evolution profiles during charging (b1) without and (b2) with 10 mM LiBr as a mediator. (b3) Statistics based on at least three replications. (b4) Schematic illustration of the different reaction mechanisms when charged with and without LiBr. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Theoretically, the oxidation potential of the Br3−/Br2 redox couple is higher than the potential for decomposition of Li2CO3. This means that in addition to decomposing Li2O2, LiBr also enables the oxidation of the insulating Li2CO3 by-product on the cathode, which may benefit cell reversibility. Liang and Lu revealed that LiBr could shift the charge reaction from a conventional electrochemical pathway to a chemical pathway.304 Online electrochemical mass spectrometry (OEMS) and 1H NMR showed that the O2 recovery efficiency is significantly enhanced from 0.79 to 0.86 by using LiBr (Fig. 18b1–b2), and the generation of parasitic gases (H2 and CO) associated with the side reactions was significantly reduced. They proposed that the charging process in the LiBr-containing cell bypasses the formation of highly reactive Li2−xO2 species, which would result in the evolution of H2 and CO through electrolyte decomposition (Fig. 18b3). As evidenced by the reduced onset voltage of CO2 evolution, the author proposed the mechanism of LiBr-assisted Li2CO3 oxidation (Fig. 18b4):3Br3− → Br2− + 2e−3Br2 + Li2CO3 → 3Br2− + 2Li+ + CO2+ + 0.5O29Br2 + 3Li2CO3 + 2C → 6Br3− + 6Li + 4CO2+ + CO.
As the oxidation potentials of carbonate-based side-products generally range from 3.4–4.0 V (vs. Li/Li+),60 both LiI and LiBr are believed to facilitate the decomposition of these side-products. This finding further extends the critical role of RMs in the LOB system. It should be noted that the corrosive/reactive nature of both I2 and Br2 enables them to react aggressively with the cell components, thus leading to early cell failure. Therefore, the formation of I2/Br2 should be regulated. This can be achieved by controlling the operational conditions of the cells (e.g., by limiting the capacity).306
DBBQ RMs. 
In 2016, 2,5-di-tert-butyl-1,4-benzoquinone (DBBQ) was reported to mediate the discharge reaction by Bruce et al.275 DBBQ was capable of promoting the solution growth of the Li2O2 film via the solution-phase pathway, inhibiting the direct generation of Li2O2 by the solid-phase pathway. The discharge voltage of LOBs with DBBQ in both DME and TEGDME solvents increased twice, and the specific capacities were 80 to 100 times larger than those of the DBBQ-free cells. Unlike conventional RMs that serve as the soluble electrocatalyst and redox shuttle, it was proposed that DBBQ went through the following steps during discharge:DBBQ(sol) + Li+ + e− → LiDBBQ(sol)LiDBBQ(sol) + O2 ↔ LiDBBQO2(sol)LiDBBQ(sol) → Li2O2(s) + O2(sol) + 2DBBQ(sol)LiDBBQ(sol) + LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + 2DBBQ(sol).
The DBBQ is reduced at the electrode surface and coupled with Li+ to form LiDBBQ complexes. Then, LiDBBQ binds with O2 to produce the LiDBBQO2 intermediate, which disproportionates or reacts with another LiDBBQ, to form Li2O2via solution-phase growth. This DBBQ-mediated route avoids the formation of the reactive LiO2 intermediate, thus lowering the free energy and enhancing electrolyte durability.
To promote the OER and ORR processes simultaneously, two types of RMs can be combined and serve independently during the charging and discharging process.286 Wang et al. used 2,5-di-tert-butyl-p-benzoquinone (DTBBQ) for facilitating ORR and tris{4-[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]phenylamine} (TMPPA) for OER in redox flow LOBs.274 Bruce et al. added DBBQ and TEMPO to the electrolyte for charge and discharge, respectively.307 The synergistic effects generated by dual RMs enable the cell to present high specific capacity and good rechargeability.
Stability of RMs. 
RMs for LOBs have grown substantially with various organic and inorganic materials being investigated in recent years.248,311–313 The Li2O2 growth pathway has not only been regulated for enhanced capacity by the incorporation of a selective mediator, but the charging potential has also been successfully reduced below 4.0 V, resulting in enhanced round-trip efficiency and suppressed undesirable side reactions. Although advances have been made, RMs for LOBs are still in infancy. Some new scientific problems that arise from RMs still need to be clarified to find the most suitable RMs for practical application.
The first issue is the stability of RMs. Some organic RMs may suffer from similar decomposition issues as the electrolyte. Amin et al. comprehensively reviewed 20 RMs via cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic cycling tests under identical conditions. The stability for tested RMs followed the order of halides > organics > organometallics. Six RMs (LiI, LiBr, TTF, tetramethyl-pphenylenediamine (TMPD), FC, and (dimethylaminomethyl)ferrocene (DAMFC)) are selected as “primary” choices based on their electrochemical performance. Further theoretical calculations indicate the possible decomposition of TTF, TMPD, FC, and DAMFC induced by 1O2 (Fig. 19a). By contrast, inorganic LiI and LiBr have been identified as not susceptible to 1O2 and demonstrated better stability than organics.308 The resistance of organic RMs toward oxidative species strongly correlates with its molecule structure. For example, the molecule structure of benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-4,8-dione (BDTD) does not have α-H, thus more stable toward the oxidative LiO2 and 1O2 than DBBQ.314
 Fig. 19  The stability assessment of RMs in the electrolyte. (a) Free energy changes and barriers for the reactions between LiI, LiBr, TMPD, TTF, FC, and DAMFC with singlet oxygen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Molecular orbital energies of RMs and TEGDME. HOMO and LUMO energies of original RMs (black bar) and first oxidized RMs (red bar). The dotted blue line represents the theoretical formation energy of Li2O2, and the redox potential of RM+ + e− → RM reactions are indicated in the yellow region, which is required to be higher than 2.96 V. The dotted black line represents the HOMO energy of TEGDME. The grey-shaded area indicates the relative instability of molecules possibly reacting with TEGDME. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic illustration of (c) the shuttle mechanism in LiI-containing LOBs and (b) design of a self-defense mechanism in InI3-containing LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310. Copyright 2018 The Electrochemical Society. 
Kwak et al. proposed that the inertness of the oxidized forms of RMs and the reactivity with 1O2 play the dominant role in the stability of RMs.315 They evaluated the oxidation stability of several organic RMs via in situ gas analysis and reactivity test with reactive oxygen species (1O2, O2− and Li2O2). The inertness of organic RMs (i.e., 10-isopropylphenothiazine (PPT), TEMPO) toward O2− and Li2O2 accounted for 2e−/O2 during discharging. By contrast, the reactivity of 1O2 toward some RMs would derivate the reaction beyond the ideal two-electron transfer process. Notably, the reduction of 1O2 also occurred via one-electron transfer when contacting TTF or DMPZ due to their lower redox potential than that of 1O2 reduction. The nitroxyl-radical-containing molecules, like TEMPO and AZADO, were more stable toward reactive oxygen species than others.
In addition, the instability issue may also come from the side reaction between oxidized mediators and electrolytes.316 Kang et al. suggest that whether the oxidized RM will oxidize the solvent can be judged by comparing the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level of the oxidized RM and the HOMO level of the solvent (Fig. 19b). When the singly occupied orbital (SOMO) energy of oxidized RM is lower than the HOMO energy of solvents, the RM can react with the electrolyte, such as ferrocene (FC), trimethylaniline (TMA), and phenylpyrrolidine (PPD) in the purple box. Otherwise, the RM is stable in TEGDME solvents, such as DMPZ and TTF, in the green box.309 In general, the lower the HOMO level of the solvent, the more stable it is against solvent oxidation.
Due to their mobile nature, soluble RMs in the electrolyte could diffuse across the separator and be chemically reduced at the Li anode. Such parasitic reactions may lead to the loss of both the RM and electrical energy efficiency and even cause an internal short circuit.280,312 In 2015, Zhou et al. designed a visual beaker cell with an MWCNT cathode and a LiI RM in a DMSO-based electrolyte.310 They observed that I3− ions at the cathode would diffuse toward the metallic Li anode accompanied by the color change from yellow to light-colored. Such phenomena confirmed the parasitic reaction between I3− and Li anode (Fig. 19c).
Strategies to minimize or eliminate such parasitic shuttle are critical to ensure the effectiveness of redox mediation in LOBs. In this regard, Zhou et al. proposed the utilization of InI3 as a self-defending RM.310 The mechanism is shown in Fig. 19d. During charging, the In3+ ions in the DMSO electrolyte would first deposit on the Li anode surface, forming a thin indium layer due to the lower standard reduction potential of Li+ (−3.040 V vs. SHE) than that of In3+ (−0.340 V vs. SHE). The formed indium layer may resist attack by the soluble I3−, as the reaction between indium and iodine needs a high temperature of at least 100 °C in practice. Consequently, the InI3-containing LOBs could achieve a highly efficient and stable cycling performance.
The catalytic activity of RMs. 
Apart from the instability issue, understanding the influencing factors of RMs on the catalytic decomposition of Li2O2 is important for selecting a desirable RM for better battery performances. Kwak et al. evaluated the catalytic activity of several widely explored RMs, including PPT/PPT+ (3.88 V vs. Li/Li+), TEMPO/TEMPO+ (3.76 V vs. Li/Li+), TTF/TTF+ (3.43 V vs. Li/Li+), DMPZ/DMPZ+ (3.29 V vs. Li/Li+), and TMPD/TMPD (3.24 V vs. Li/Li+), via measuring the charging overpotential. The order of charging potentials followed PPT > TEMPO > TTF > DMPZ > TMPD, consistent with the redox potentials of these RMs, implying that the overall charging process could be determined by the electrochemical oxidation potentials of RMs.315 In another study, however, Peng et al. compared the charging potential of several RMs, which followed the order of AZADO < TEMPO < LiBr < TTF.317 Considering the higher redox potential of TEMPO than AZADO, it seems that there is no dependence of RM's redox potential on the chemical reaction kinetics for Li2O2 decomposition. Meanwhile, they showed that the single-electron-reaction RMs (e.g., TEMPO, AZADO) exhibited a more stable and lower charging potential than single-electron-reaction RMs (e.g., TTF, LiBr).317 The catalytic activity of RMs was linked to the corresponding molecular structures. The smaller steric effects endowed AZADO with higher catalytic activity, thus a lower charging overpotential.
As the LOB system is integral and complex, the actual activity and reaction mechanism of RMs would vary with the corresponding concentration, electrolytes (e.g., solvents, salts, H2O), and electrode materials, thus resulting in non-determinacy of RMs. As both stability and activity of RMs are two important factors affecting the LOBs, the selection of the most effective RMs remains a challenge. More influencing factors governing the catalytic properties of RMs need to be elaborated to provide more mechanistic insights into regulating the cycling of LOBs.

3.3 Design of robust and high-performance air cathodes
The advanced design of air cathodes plays a crucial role in enhancing the catalytic activity for ORR and OER, preventing the parasitic reactions in the carbon substrates and polymeric binders, and obtaining outstanding electrochemical performance in LABs. The air cathode could be modified to satisfy the following requirements: (i) high chemical/electrochemical stability and minimum side reactions for the wide range of potentials; (ii) high specific areas and mesoporous volumes for the sufficient storage of discharge products (Li2O2); (iii) high mass conductivity for the diffusion of O2 and Li+ ions, and high electronic conductivity for the fast reaction kinetics; and (iv) robust and high catalytic activity for Li2O2 growth. The conductive substrates and catalysts should be considered integrally to be efficient air cathodes. Based on materials engineering, the typical air cathodes, including the carbon-based and carbon-free (metal), will be discussed from their surficial properties, materials structure, and chemical compositions. It is interesting that the large overpotential drop does not necessarily secure better catalytic activity of OERs in some cases. In particular, some reported materials (i.e., Au and Pt nanoparticles) could significantly decrease the overpotential; they are in fact enhancing electrolyte decomposition instead of the OERs.150,318

3.3.1 Carbon-based air cathode. 
Defects on the carbon surface. 
Highly conductive and porous carbons materials are the preferred choice to construct the breathing-electrode due to their tunable porosity (e.g., surface area, pore size, and morphology), surface environment (e.g., oxygen functional groups and defectives), and graphitization/crystallization. The defects (e.g., intrinsic defects, heteroatoms doped defects, and edges detects) on the carbon surface are directly related to the electrode erosion and decomposition in LABs. On the one hand, the natural defects on the cathode surface are the preferential sites for Li2O2 adsorption.319 On the other hand, natural imperfections could have adverse effects on battery reactions. The superoxide radicals are highly active with the defects and form the carbonate and epoxy groups on the carbon surface, which seriously limit the reversibility and cycling ability in LABs.
There are three routes to reduce the side effects of natural defects and even improve catalytic activity through the favorable modification of the defects. First, natural defects could be minimized in the carbon with enhanced crystallinity. The carbon used in the cathode is marked by 13C, treated at 1600, 2000, and 2800 °C. The Ig/Id ratio in the Raman test increases with increasing temperature, illustrating that the carbon becomes more ordered and fewer defects are present on the carbon crystal (Fig. 20a1). As a result, the charge/discharge profiles are retained for more than 40 cycles for the carbon with enhanced crystallinity and increase slightly up to 60 cycles. While the pristine carbon cathode presents only 18 cycles and continuously increasing overpotential, failing the cells (Fig. 20a2).
 Fig. 20  The roles of the defects of carbonaceous catalysts on the electrocatalytic performance of ORR and OER. (a) The reduction of natural carbon defects through the tuning of carbon crystallinity to suppress side reactions. (a1) Raman spectra of the pristine carbon with defects and heat-treated carbon at 1600, 2000, and 2800 °C with decreasing amounts of defects, denoted as 13C, 13C_1600, 13C_2000, and 13C_2800 in the figure. (a2–a3) Charge–discharge performance and the corresponding FE-TEM images of pristine 13C (a2) and 13C_2000 (a3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) The generation of artificial defects on the carbon surface through plasma treatment in argon to enhance the electrochemical performance of the air-electrode: (b1) verification of artificial defects on the VACNT carbon through the XPS spectra. (b2) Comparison of water contact angles of pristine VACNTs and the as-prepared defective VACNTs. (b3) Initial charge–discharge curves of the carbon cathode in the ionic liquid PP13TFSI-based electrolyte at 0.1 mA cm−2 during the voltage range of 2.0–4.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Generation of electrocatalysts (e.g., Pd film) on carbon defects to increase the utilization of the defective sites: (c1) Schematic of the cathode architecture and reaction process before and after the Pd film selectively growth on the carbon defects. (c2) Voltage profiles of pristine carbon cathode and Pd coated carbon cathode at 0.5 mA h cm−2 and 50 μA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd. 
Second, artificial defects could be created on the carbon surface by advanced techniques (e.g., plasma), positively affecting the capacity and overpotential with protecting the ionic liquid electrolyte. In a study by Liu et al., argon plasma was used to treat the vertically aligned CNTs (VACNTs) to make defects on the VACNT surfaces artificially.321 XPS results show a much higher O/C ratio in the defective VACNTs than that in pristine VACNTs (Fig. 20b1). The dangling carbon bonds on the carbon surface, formed after breaking C–C covalent bonds, absorb the oxygen-containing groups. The water contact angle on the VACNT surface reduces from 140.47° in the pristine state to 43.9° under the defective conditions. That is due to the introduction of oxygen functional groups changing the carbon surface from hydrophobic to hydrophilic (Fig. 20b2). The hydrophobicity or hydrophilicity of the cathode materials could significantly influence the side reactions on the cathode/electrolyte surface. The TEGDME-based electrolyte presents fewer side reactions on the hydrophobic carbon. In contrast, the PP13TFSI-based electrolyte is stable enough to avoid the side reactions in both hydrophilic and hydrophobic carbon. Moreover, the charge/discharge profiles show the reduced overpotential in the defective VACNTs (Fig. 20b3). The battery performance could not solely be affected by the hydrophility/hydrophilicity of the carbon materials, it also depends on specific electrolyte systems. In the TEGDME-based electrolyte, the defective carbon leads to electrolyte decomposition and carbonate formation, damaging the battery life. In contrast, the passivation effect of ionic liquid electrolytes (e.g., PP13TFSI) on the defective carbon surfaces can suitably manipulate the interface between the electrode and the electrolyte. In the presence of the stable PP13TFSI electrolyte, the oxygen groups on the defective carbon surface can provide many nucleation sites for small Li2O2 particle growth, resulting in increased capacity and reduced overpotential. Besides the O-functionalization, other heteroatom doping (e.g., N,323 S,324,325 B,326,327 and P328) is an excellent way to produce defective sites and increase the positive charge density of the carbon surface. Significantly, the doped N-atoms on the carbon surface has a robust electronic affinity to adsorb O2 molecules and weaken the O–O bond, facilitating the 4-electron reaction ways for oxygen reduction.329,330
Third, immobilizing electrocatalyst nanoparticles (e.g., Pd) onto the carbon defects is also an effective way to modify the surface of the carbon materials. Lu et al. designed a Pd/C cathode architecture through impregnation chemistry to take advantage of the carbon defects, as depicted in Fig. 20c1.322 The defect-induced side reactions are expected to be primarily suppressed due to the decreasing amount of natural defects. The Pd nanoparticles in the defects work as a catalyst to lower the charge potentials and promote Li2O2 decomposition. The positive effect of this design is revealed in the charge/discharge profiles (Fig. 20c2), where the charge potential of 3.2 V in the modified carbon is much lower than that of 4.2 V in pristine carbon.
Protective layers on the carbon surface. 
The construction of protective layers on the carbon surface is another feasible strategy to increase the stability of commercial carbon materials. Moreover, both the porous carbon supporter and catalytic species are considered together to design the idea of breathing-electrode for LABs. In 2013, Lu et al. were the first to propose a nanostructured cathode concept utilizing Al2O3 coating layers and atomically deposited Pd nanoparticles on the carbon surface (Fig. 21a1).71 The protective Al2O3 layers address the electrolyte decomposition, but increase the surface resistance of the super P electrode. The Pd nanoparticles deposited on the surface have two functions: (1) increasing the electronic conductivity on the carbon surface; and (2) working as effective catalysts to promote Li2O2 formation and decomposition. The Pd-catalysed Li2O2 is expected to be nanocrystalline with good electronic conductivity. The success of this design is verified by the SEM observation (Fig. 21a2). The charge/discharge profiles reveal the synaptic effects of the Pd catalysts and Al2O3 layers, which significantly reduce the charge overpotential to 3.2 V in the modified carbon from ∼ 4.2V in the pristine super P cathode (Fig. 21a3). Interestingly, the discharge potential (ca. 2.7 V) in the super P cathode with intrinsic defect sites is similar to that in the Pd/C/Al2O3 cathode. Still, the charge potential is quite different between these two cathodes. These results further illustrate that the intrinsic defects are helpful for the generation of Li2O2 during discharge but damage the carbon during the charge, which corresponds with the above section.
 Fig. 21  The protective layers of carbonaceous materials prohibit parasite reactions. (a) Al2O3–Pd coated carbon cathode: (a1) Scheme of the novel air-electrode architecture. The Al2O3 coating layers, the coated Pd nanoparticles, and the nanocrystalline Li2O2 reduce the charge overpotential. (a2) HRTEM of the as-prepared carbon materials in the presence of Al2O3 and Pd nanoparticles on the surface. (a3) Charge–discharge profiles to 1000 mA h g−1 with respect to the Super P, Al2O3 coated Super P, Pd, and Al2O3-coated Super P. The electrolyte is LiCF3SO3-TEGDME. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (b) In2O3–RuOx coated carbon nanopaper (In2O3–RuOx@CNp): (b1) schematic illustration of the In2O3–RuOx@CNp configuration, where CNp is coated by the In2O3 film and catalytic RuOx nanoparticles. (b2) TEM image of the as-obtained materials. (b3) Cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 and fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 331. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Oxygen selective low-density polyethylene (LDPE) film was applied on the CNT cathode to prevent water erosion from the ambient air and stabilize RMs in the battery process. (c1) The mechanism of the LDPE-film on the air-electrode. (c2) The O2 and H2O permeability for various oxygen selective membranes. (c3) Cycling ability of the LABs with and without the LDPE film at 2000 mA g−1 in ambient air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. 
Kim et al. proposed another functional composite configuration of the carbon surface, which is based on In2O3 atomic overlayers further functionalized by RuOx nanoparticles (Fig. 21b1–b2).331 The carbon fibers are synthesized as the porous structure for facile O2/Li+ transportation and free-standing structure to exclude the binder oxidation. The In2O3 layers are unreactive with the oxygen intermediates (e.g., O2−, LiO2) and exhibit a high electronic conductivity of 6.3–10 × 10−5 Ω cm. The RuOx is highly electrocatalytic for ORR and OER in reducing the reaction barriers and overpotentials. For this efficient cathode design in LABs, the maintained charge/discharge potentials are obtained up to 150 cycles (Fig. 21b3). This long cycling success suggests that the electron conductive layer with the deposited catalyst nanoparticles is essential to suppress the oxidation of electrolyte or carbon and lower the overpotentials.
Oxygen selective membrane (OSM) is efficient for cathode protection. It can rule out unwanted contaminants (e.g., water and CO2) from the gas line, retain high O2 permeability, and simultaneously suppress electrolyte evaporation. OSM is obtained as polymeric films with good stability, hydrophobic properties, and certain porosity. The nonpolar molecular structure of OSM has high permeability of nonpolar O2 molecules and prevention of polar H2O. CO2 molecules can be captured by the functional groups on the OSM surface, such as -OH, -NH2, and -CO.333 Besides, some additional agents such as silicone oil are also a good choice to increase the solubility and diffusion of the O2 molecules on the OSM. The OSM can be used outside or inside the air cathode or combined with the cathode materials in the cell configuration. In 2010, the first OSM, high viscosity silicone oil infiltrated in the porous PTFE, was applied in LABs in ambient air with 20–30% relative humidity (RH).334 This membrane allows the passing of O2 but blocks H2O. The OSM-protected LABs work for 16.3 days in 20% RH, while the bare battery only lasts for 5.5 days. In addition, various polymers (e.g., perfluoropolyether and polyaniline) are another resource as OSMs. In 2017, the low-density polyethylene (LDPE) film was employed as an OSM to reject water erosion and maintain the positive effects of RMs (LiI) (Fig. 21c1).332 Compared with the reported OSM, this LDPE film is good at selectively permeating O2 and blocking H2O (Fig. 21c2). The cycling life in the different situations is presented in Fig. 21c1, where the cells with LDPE and LiI can run for 350 cycles while the cells without the protection of LDPE only work up to around 100 cycles.
Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC). 
Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC) is a practical design strategy to integrate catalysts and carbon matrix in terms of porosity (e.g., pore size, pore-volume, and pore structure) and surface modification allowing fast reactant diffusion, high catalyst utilization, and sizeable Li2O2 storage space. The HPC is a suitable alternative to commercial carbons to fabricate the air-breathing electrode. In 2011, Zhang et al., for the first time, prepared the HPC electrode via functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs).335 The graphene sheets are functionalized with defective lattice and oxygen-containing groups. The FGSs are developed into a 3D “broken egg” structure with interconnected pore channels at micro- and nano-scales (Fig. 22a1). The “shells” of the “broken eggs” consist of nanopores and large tunnels, which is an ideal design for air-breathing. These robust tunnels enable continuous O2 and electrolyte supply into the whole electrode, superior to other commercial carbons. These nanopores on the “shells” supply triphase regions (solid–liquid–gas) for oxygen reduction. The defective lattice sites on the FGSs control the formation of nanometer-sized Li2O2 products (Fig. 22a2). The pouch-type cells are configured and tested in an ambient environment with 20% RH for the practical characterization of this unique FGS type HPC air-electrode (Fig. 22a3). A high capacity above 5000 mA h g−1 is obtained at a current density of 0.1 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 22  Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC) enhances the mass transport/storage of oxygen gas (air), electrolyte, and discharged products. (a) Functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs) as HPC air-electrodes: (a1) SEM image of the pristine state; (a2) SEM image of the discharged state; (a3) discharge curve and the image of the LAB pouch cells in the air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Macroporous active carbon fibers (MACFs) as the binder-free and self-standing HPC structure: (b1) SEM image of the pristine state; (b1) and the discharged state; (b3) the cycling performance at 300 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The carbonized and activated wood (CA-wood) with the Ru nanoparticles as a “breathable” air-electrode with open and interconnected macropores. (c1) SEM image of the pristine state; (c2) and the discharged state; (c3) the charge–discharge curves at 0.5 mA cm−2, 0.2 mA cm−2, and 0.1 mA cm−2. Specifically, the schematic diagram of active mass diffusion (the insertion in c1) and Li2O2 growth in the discharge process (the insertion in c2) are presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 337. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2016, a biomimetic technique was employed to fabricate a self-standing HPC without using a binder.336 Unlike FGS constructed “broken egg,” a hierarchical macroporous active carbon fiber (MACF) was prepared to integrate the macroporous carbon spheres (ca. 180 nm) into macroporous carbon fibers (20–50 nm in pore diameter) (Fig. 22b1). The RuO2 nanoparticles are decorated with binder-free MACFs to enhance their electrocatalytic activity. This hierarchically porous structure of MACFs benefits from the high transportation flux of O2 and Li+ and avoids discharge product aggregation (Fig. 22b2). In addition, the MACF cathode provides sufficient and uniform triphase regions to facilitate oxygen reduction and oxidation, showing a small discharge potential above 2.0 V even after 154 cycles (Fig. 22b3).
Considering that the complicated channels in previous porous carbon are insufficient for fast reactant transportation, aligned open microchannels were innovatively constructed in 2018 to improve the mass diffusion pathway (Fig. 22c1). This work uses a wood-like 3D porous carbon matrix for Ru nanoparticle accommodation.337 These open and aligned microchannels have specifically avoided the formation of Li2O2 bulk, as shown in Fig. 22c2. As presented in Fig. 22c3, the specific area capacities of the CA-wood/Ru cathodes can reach 8.58, 7.01, and 4.51 mA h cm−2 at a current density of 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5 mA cm−2, respectively. Slight growth of overpotentials of 1.03, 1.22, and 1.29 V is obtained with the increased current density. In summary, the HPC carbon is an ideal matrix to achieve: (1) high conductivity and large specific areas for Li2O2 formation and decomposition; (2) binder-free structure to hinder the side reactions; and (3) suitable catalyst loading sites for high round-trip efficiency.


3.3.2 Carbon-free air cathodes. 
Co-Based electrocatalysts. 
The instability of carbonaceous materials motivated the boom of carbon-free materials for air-electrodes. The free-standing design is conceived to fabricate the most carbon-free (metal-based) cathode by directly growing the catalyst nanoparticles on a porous current collector. This advanced structure is feasible to avoid binder/carbon erosion and enhance catalytic capability. In 2009, Nickel foam was first chosen as a cathode support to penetrate the NMP/PVDF/carbon slurry, enabling rapid oxygen diffusion on the open frameworks and high electron transfer on the low-resistance pathway.338 This work paved the way for the building of the free-standing cathode. Inspired by the requirement for low cost and high efficiency, cobalt oxide (Co3O4) nanorods were deposited on the Ni-foam to prepare the first example of a free-standing metal cathode in 2011 (Fig. 23a1–a2).339 This new air-electrode provides open porous systems for mass transportation and accessibility, abundant catalytic sites for reactants, intimate contact for Li2O2 with the catalyst, and high structural rigidity to reduce volume expansion during the charge/discharge process. Proper electrode construction facilitates cheap Co3O4 catalysts to obtain a similar charge voltage to the expensive Pt/Au catalysts. Another facile free-standing structure is designed using Co3O4@Co core–shell nanoparticles assembled in a nanosheet-like array, where the nanoparticles consist of the metal Co core and the Co3O4 shells (Fig. 23b1–b2). The XRD results verify this designed structure (Fig. 23b3). The defected Co3O4 surface offers high ORR catalytic activity while the Co metal core enhances the conductivity of the whole network.
 Fig. 23  A Co-based electrocatalytic cathode facilitates a high round-trip efficiency. (a) The Co3O4@Ni nanorod electrocatalytic cathode is the first free-standing air-electrode design: (a1) schematic reaction mechanism of the electrode materials during the LAB battery process. (a2) SEM images of the Co3O4@Ni structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Freestanding Co3O4@Co core–shell electrode: (b1) the fabrication route and schematic illustration of the Co3O4@Co electrode during the battery process. (b2) SEM image of the Co3O4@Co materials. (b3) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Free-standing CuCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode materials: (c1) SEM image; and (c2) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2018 Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (d) A free-standing NiCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode: (d1) SEM image; (d2) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (e) A free-standing MnCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode: (e1) HR FE-SEM image; (e2) cycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 343. Copyright 2008 Electrochemical Society. 
Binary metal oxide catalysts are attractive catalysts for enhanced electron transfer, oxygen intermediates adsorption, and, ultimately, outstanding electrocatalytic performance. Among them, Co-containing binary metal oxides have been intensely studied as the free-standing form. CuCo2O4 is synthesized as free-standing nanowires on nickel foam (Fig. 23c1–c2).341 HR-SEM images exhibit a nanowire interlaced umbrella-like structure. The free-standing CuCo2O4 cathode is suitable for electronic conductivity. It tolerates the volume expansion during the battery process. The experiments delivered long cycling stability up to 146 cycles with 91.1% capacity retention at 0.1 mA cm−2 and 500 mA h g−1. NiCo2O4, which is fabricated as a hierarchically carbon-free structure, is also a superior catalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction (Fig. 23d1–d2).342 The SEM image shows the scale-like NiCo2O4 with a thickness of 60–100 nm. XRD patterns show prominent NiCo2O4 peaks. MnCo2O4, which is the partial substitution of Co atoms with Mn atoms in CoOx, is prepared to increase the catalytic ability of Co sites.344 Park et al. synthesized a free-standing MnCo2O4 nanoneedle array on the Ni matrix as the oxygen electrode (Fig. 23e1–e2).343 The nanoneedle array enabled facile Li2O2 deposition. The two pairs of redox couples, including Mn2+/Mn3+ and Co2+/Co3+, provide oxygen vacancies on the catalyst surface, benefiting oxygen adsorption during the oxygen reduction reactions. As a result, this MnCo2O4@Ni cathode shows a high specific capacity of 10000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1, a low initial charging potential of around 3.5 V at 7000 mA h g−1 and a long cycling time of 120 cycles at 1000 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1.
Ti-Based electrocatalysts. 
Ti-Based catalysts, a vast family containing oxides, nitrides, and carbides, are feasible cathode candidates due to their sufficient electronic conductivity and excellent stability to resist nucleophilic attack. TiO2 is famous for its high chemical/electrochemical stability in harsh environments, but it produces poor catalytic performance because of its low electronic conductivity. Modified by oxygen deficiencies on the surface, the white TiO2 could transform into black TiO2. The as-prepared black TiO2 has numerous Ti3+ ions and oxygen vacancies, triggering high electronic conductivity and electrocatalytic activity.348,349 Park et al. designed a carbon and binder-free electrode through the integration of black TiO2 with an ordered macro-/mesoporous architecture (Fig. 24a1).345 This structured TiO2 has high electronic conductivity, interconnected micrometer-sized channels, and a mesoporous surface, which provide a fast diffusion pathway for various masses (e.g., electrons, ions, oxygens, and LiI RMs). A high specific capacity of ∼7500 mA h g−1 is obtained at 500 mA g−1 and 2.2–4.5 V (Fig. 24a2). As a result, the toroid-like Li2O2 regularly grows and stacks on the highly ordered TiO2 architecture with increasing discharge capacity, which is visibly witnessed in Fig. 24a3–a6. Ti4O7, another form of titanium oxide with oxygen vacancies and Ti3+ ions in the crystalline lattice, has excellent electrical conductivity.350 To improve the specific capacity, Magneli’ phase Ti4O7 (M-Ti4O7) nanospheres are prepared and deposited with a highly active catalyst RuO2 to form bifunctional RuO2@M-Ti4O7 cathodes. The as-prepared RuO2@M-Ti4O7 delivers a low overpotential of 0.9 V, significantly lower than that of common TiO2 nanospheres (1.91 V) and M-Ti4O7 nanospheres (1.53 V).
 Fig. 24  Ti-based catalysts for superior energy density and stability during electrocatalytic reactions. (a) Black TiO2@Ni mesh with a hierarchically-ordered-porous structure: (a1) SEM images of the as-prepared materials; (a2–a6) the voltage profiles of the black TiO2 and the complementary scheme of Li2O2 growth in the ordered electrode architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) RuOx/TiN nanotube arrays: (b1) reaction mechanism to facilitate the O2 reactions and suppress the generation of Li2CO3. (b2) Voltage profiles of the LOBs with TiN, RuOx/TiN, and RuOx/super P cathode. (b3–b4) Electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) test of the related gases at the (b3) discharge and (b4) charge of LOBs using the RuOx/TiN air cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (c) TiC electrode nanoparticles: (c1) SEM image. (c2–c3) Electrochemical performance of TiC cathodes in DMSO solvent. (c4) PXRD patterns during cycling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. 
Titanium nitride (TiN) has attracted extensive attention as the electrocatalyst for ORR. However, TiN nanoparticles have poor capacities and severe polarization. For improving their utilization, the self-standing TiN nanotube arrays (TiN-NTA) are electrodeposited with RuOx on its interface, called RuOx/TiN NTA (Fig. 24b1). The vertically aligned NTA offers a high electron transfer rate through the walls of the nanotubes and fast oxygen diffusion from the vertical channels. RuOx can facilitate the OER process in aprotic LOBs. As a result, the charge voltage in the RuOx/TiN NTA electrode is lower than that in the TiN NTA electrode and the RuOx electrodes (Fig. 24b2). Differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) is applied to analyze the discharge and charge process of ORR and OER (Fig. 24b3–b4) in an O2/Ar flow. During discharge, O2 is reduced below 2.9V, illustrating the formation of Li2O2. No CO2 or H2 peaks are detected in this process. During charge, the Li2O2 oxidation accelerates below 3.5 V. The steady O2 consumption in ORR, but vibrant O2 consumption peaks in OER illustrate the different routes of Li2O2 formation and decomposition during discharge and charge. A trace amount of CO2 is detected at the end of charge profiles, showing electrolyte decomposition and the formation of carbonates.
Titanium carbide (TiC) is the most promising catalyst in advanced cathodes due to its lightweight, low cost, ease of handling, high stability, and high specific capacity. In 2013, Bruce et al. constructed a stable TiC-based cathode for aprotic LOBs, which significantly suppressed the side reactions from the electrolyte and electrode decay compared with carbon electrodes. It also presents better Li2O2 formation/decomposition with high reversibility than nanoporous Au electrodes (Fig. 24c1). In DMSO electrolyte, the TiC-based cathode delivers a discharge potential of 2.7 V and a specific capacity of 360 mA h g−1 (calculated from the total mass of the electrode) (Fig. 24c2). Furthermore, around 98% capacity is retained after 100 cycles in the TiC cathode compared to 95% for the nanoporous Au electrode under the same testing conditions (Fig. 24c3). PXRD results display the reversible formation and decomposition of discharge products (Li2O2) in DMSO electrolytes.
Novel nanostructured electrocatalysts. 
Besides these noble metal and transition metal oxides, some novel nanostructured catalysts are cultivated with specific properties to enhance ORR and OER kinetics. The perovskite-based electrocatalysts, arising from the ORR catalysts in fuel cells, present high electronic/ionic conductivity and bi-functional catalytic activity in LOBs.354 The general formula of the perovskite is ABO3, where A is the alkaline earth element, B is the transition metal element, and the oxygen is coordinated with B in six numbers. CaMnO3,355 LaNiO3,356 and LaFeO3357 have been reported as effective perovskite-based catalysts with good cell performance. The ABO3 perovskite is accessible for partial cation substitution at A and B sites, generating  and  type perovskites to improve the catalytic activity for ORR and OER.358–361 In 2013, an efficient perovskite catalyst, porous nanotubes La0.75Sr0.25MnO3 (PNT-LSM), was reported for the first time with good round-trip efficiency in LOBs.352 The hollow and porous tubular structure increases the mass diffusion of reactants and the dense active catalytic sites (Fig. 25a1–a2). The initial charge–discharge profiles at 0.025 mA cm−2 show the reduced overpotential of the PNT-LSM/KB cathode compared with the KB cathode: the discharge voltage plateau in PNT-LSM is much higher about 30–50 mV than that in KB, and the charge voltage in PNT-LSM is much lower, about 200 mV, than that in KB (Fig. 25a3).
 Fig. 25  Novel nanostructured catalysts with specific properties for electrocatalytic oxygen reactions. (a) The perovskite-based electrocatalysts (e.g., La0.75Sr0.25MnO3 nanotubes, PNT-LSM) in the air-electrode for their high electronic/ionic conductivity and outstanding catalytic activity: (a1) HR-TEM images of the as-prepared PNT-LSM and (a2) schematic illustration of oxygen diffusion through the structure of the porous nanotube. (a3) Initial charge–discharge profile of Li–O2 cells with PNT/KB or KB air-electrode at 0.025 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Organic electrode materials (OEMs) and tubular polypyrrole (TPPY) cathode for their inherent flexibility and metal-free materials resources: (b1) TEM image of TPPy. (b2) Uniform O2 distribution across the porous TPPY cathode. (b3) Schematic illustration of the discharge/charge process on the TPPy structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) MOF-based catalysts with open metal sites for enhanced O2 binding and large ordered porosity for products storage. (c1) Illustration of oxygen diffusion through MOF materials. (c2) The comparison of oxygen adsorption for various MOFs at 273 K low-pressure isotherms with the adsorption amount of 1 atm. (c3) Discharge curves of Li–O2 cells with different MOFs and super P composition in an O2 atmosphere at 50 mA g−1 at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Organic electrode materials (OEMs) appear in LOBs as the cathode because of their unique properties of high flexibility, eco-friendliness, and tunability, promoting the development of wearable LOB devices. The most widely used OEMs in air-electrodes are conductive polymers, such as polyaniline (PANI),362 polypyrroles (PPy),363 and poly(3,4-ethylene dioxythiophene) (PEDOT),364 which are electronically conductive and stable in the organic electrolyte. However, traditional OEMs have huge bulk with limited porosity. In 2012, tubular PPy (TPPy) was designed for air-electrodes, built with good conductive networks to allow a uniform oxygen gas transfer pathway through the inner hollow channels and sufficient electronic transfer through the walls of the nanotubes (Fig. 25b1–b2). However, it is still challenging to identify the stability of OEMs in contact with discharge intermediates (e.g., O2−) and discharge products (Li2O2). More efforts are needed to explore novel OEMs and other LOB cell configurations.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged as a novel family of advanced catalysts in the air-electrode, featuring controlled pore size distribution, ultrahigh porosity, and easy tailorability. Most importantly, MOFs have unique advantages, including metal sites for enhanced O2 binding, high catalytic activity, and large ordered porosity for mass transport and product storage (Fig. 25c1).365 Various MOFs, such as MOF-5, HKUST-1, and M-MOF-74 (M = Co, Mg, and Mn), were investigated as air-electrodes. Compared with the low O2 adsorption in super P (0.7 mg g−1), the MOFs present a relatively high O2 uptake capability, as shown in Fig. 25c2. The discharge capacities of super P, Co-MOF-74, HKUST-1, Mg-MOF-74, and Mn-MOF-74 are 2170, 3630, 4170, 4560, and 9420 mA h g−1, respectively, when the cells are tested in 50 mA g−1. The much higher capacity in the MOF-based cathode than pure super P cathode illustrates the significant role of open metal sites and ordered porosity in MOFs for oxygen reactions. It is suggested that the electronic conductivity of the MOF-based cathode can be improved to decrease electrochemical polarization by adding conductive species or synthesizing intrinsically electronic conductive MOFs. The Mn, Ni, and Co metal atoms are the suggested central ions in MOFs, which have shown high battery performance in the examples of Mn2(DOBDC),366 Ni(4,4′-bipy)(H3BTC),367 and Co-MOF-74.368 Besides, morphological structure is another important criterion in the energy conversion process of MOFs. Downsizing the particle size is a general and effective way to accelerate the charge-transport route and enhance the activity of oxygen reactions.368 The thin 2D nanosheet is also a preferred morphology to own many open sites and high specific areas.369

3.4 Stabilization of the lithium anode
There is no doubt that the batteries in EVs have higher safety standards than gasoline vehicles. The overcharging issues or internal shorts, common in LIBs, are not present in LABs as the reactant O2 is real-time supplied and not stored in the battery. However, the lithium metal anode is well-known as one of the main safety hazards in LABs, which occurs due to dendrite aggregation and various corrosion reactions with the contaminants.

3.4.1 Challenges of lithium anodes. 
Common lithium anode problems. 
Historically, the discovery of interfacial reactions on metallic lithium anode can be ultimately traced back to lithium metal batteries (LMBs). Lewis and Keyes first reported the secondary LMB assembled using lithium metal in 1913.370 It was not until 1987 that Semkow and Sammells attempted the first account of LABs in solid-state ZrO2 electrolyte.371 The first generation of the lithium–ion battery was commercialized by Sony Co. in 1991, leading to the materials science revolution in LMBs in the following years.372 From the perspective of historical development, the explosive increase in lithium metal anode research of the antecedent LMBs laid a solid foundation for the germination of LABs.
Lithium metal has high energy density and high operation voltage compared with other anode candidates (e.g., sodium, potassium, and so on) as metallic lithium occupies a high Fermi energy level, thus presenting a relatively negative reductive potential. However, pure LMB inevitably suffers from severe degradation on the lithium metal surfaces, including rough lithium dendrites, passivated solid electrolyte interphase (SEI), and large volume changes. The significant challenges in the usage of lithium metal cause irreversible capacity fading, shorter cycle life, and low safety. Brissot dedicated ca. ten years to study the lithium metal issues in battery cycling. The in situ visualizations were applied to real-time observe the lithium dendritic growth process in a lithium/PEO-LiTFSI/lithium battery in 1998 (Fig. 26a).373–378 They found that dendrites mainly form on the surface of lithium metal under an inhomogeneous electric field. The porous and structurally open lithium dendrite layer on the anode substrate, to some extent, cannot block the accelerating corrosion by the electrolyte and loss of the lithium anode materials during electrochemical cycling. Most importantly, after the lithium dendrites continuously grow and accumulate on the anode interfaces, they crack the separator, giving rise to battery internal-short circuiting and even catastrophic fire or explosion. Another severe issue of the lithium electrode is the multiple stacking layers of side products (Fig. 26b), well known as the natural SEI passivation layer first reported by Peled in 1979.379 The electrochemically unstable lithium metal presents high activity in consuming the electrolyte, producing the isolated and dead lithium complex in the rough and fragile SEI layer. Peled persistently studied the interfacial behavior model of alkali and alkaline earth metals in different electrolyte systems for over 15 years. He fundamentally proposed that the SEI plays a prominent role as a mass diffusion barrier for electrons, salt anions, and solvent molecules between the electrode and the electrolyte.380,381 Until 1997, according to Peleds’ reports, the actual morphology and chemical composition of the SEI was still mosaic and vague.382 Later research revealed that the SEI probably consists of two phases, including an inorganic layer with LiF and Li2CO3, and an organic layer with different hydrocarbon moieties such as ROCO2Li or RCOO2Li, from the electrolyte.383–386
 Fig. 26  The challenges of the lithium anode in LABs. (a) Li dendrite with a typical arborescent-like structure at a high current density of 0.7 A cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 1997 Electrochemical Society. (b) Spontaneous SEI on lithium or carbon electrode, which reduces conductivity and mass transport of the anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) O2-Induced side reactions at the Li anode in an ether-based electrolyte decomposed through the possible routes with the unidentified products in (c1). Specifically, the attack of oxygen crossover to TEGDME (ether) solvent may lead to LiOH, lithium alkyl carbonates, and other carbonates from the resulting aldehydes on the anode surface (c2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All energetics are calculated at the B3LYP/6-31+G(d) level of theory with enthalpies (eV) in solution (e = 21) at 298 K. (d) CO2-Induced side reactions lead to the formation of Li2CO3, which is evidenced by the SEM image (d1) and EELS spectra (d2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) RM-Induced side reactions (e.g., 10-methylphenothiazine, MPT) for the failure of a lithium anode, resulting in the production of lithium oxide (Li2O, Li2O2, green colour), lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, blue color), lithium hydroxide (LiOH, orange color), organolithium compounds (yellow color), and MPT decomposition products (violet color). Reprinted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (f) H2O-induced side reactions with the generation of specific side products LiOH verified by operando XRD observation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. (f1) Voltage profile of the operando Li–O2 battery during the cycling time. The curve marks of i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, vii, viii, v, and ix are the collection points on the XRD data. (f2–f4) Three representative XRD packs were obtained from stages i, iii, and ix; each pack contains seven selected XRD patterns collected at different interfacial depths. (f5) Schematic diagram of O2 flow and cell connections from the 1st cell to the 6th cell through a single pathway. (f6) Table of the discharge capacity and the cell weight change after discharge for each cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 1913 American Chemical Society. 
Before people revisited the LABs in 2006, three main mechanisms were generally put forward to explain the formation of lithium dendrites and SEI. Aurbach, in 1995, believed that the SEI layer is formed but later broken because the uneven current distribution at a specific site results in different lithium growth/deposition speeds.392 The lithium dendrites grew at the SEI broken sites with higher conductivity of lithium ions. Later, in 1999, Brissot suggested that the dendrite growth was due to the variation of ion concentration on lithium surfaces induced by local inhomogeneities or high current density.374 Later, the defect stimulation mechanism was introduced by Gireaud in 2006.393 He used homogeneous lithium deposition to achieve uniform morphology and dead dendrites on the surface, addressing the anode material drawbacks (e.g., defects sites, grain boundaries, and ridge-lines).
When considering the anode problems of LABs, which differ from previous lithium metal batteries working in closed electrochemical environments, more rigorous problems of lithium electrode corrosion should be faced mainly because of its open system with complicated contaminants (e.g., O2, N2, CO2, H2O) in the gas supply line and electrolyte. Interestingly, the lithium dendrite scenario was excluded to some extent in the LABs because external mechanical pressure on the lithium electrode positively affects the uniform plating of lithium and electrode stability.394–396
Contaminative gas and RM induced side reactions. 
As mentioned above, lessons of side reactions on lithium anode surfaces were learned from the early study of LMBs. Later, extensive investigation of the lithium anode in LABs critically examined the formation conditions and mechanism of SEI layers. As in situ/ex situ characterization technologies were introduced, it was found that the lithium metal electrode in LABs degrades mainly because of the parasitic reaction induced by the oxygen species crossover (e.g., O2, H2O, CO2) and electrolyte decomposition, causing the accumulation of insulating side products on the lithium surface.
LABs are semi-open cells in an oxygen-rich environment, where O2 inflows and reacts at the cathode. However, the oxygen inevitably dissolves into the electrolyte and passes through the separator to the lithium anode. A complex electrolyte decomposition reaction could be induced on the surface of lithium metal in the presence of oxygen. To date, this oxygen/superoxide corrosion effect has been regarded as the significant inducement of lithium anode decay in LABs (Fig. 26c). In 2013, Assary et al., for the first time, investigated the reaction of O2 crossover on the lithium electrode using an ether-based (TEGDME) electrolyte in a Li–O2 battery through DFT prediction and in situ characterization.387 The DFT calculation predicts possible electrolyte decomposition pathways under the effect of O2 and Li electrodes shown in Fig. 26c2 and the final multiple oxidative products including LiOH, Li2CO3, and lithium alkyl carbonates. At the same time, in situ high-energy XRD and FTIR were used to observe the deposition of these insoluble side products on the Li electrode during cycling. These block the Li+ migration into the anode, resulting in higher resistance and poor cycle performance. Later, transmission electron microscopy (TEM) was used to study the artificial SEI formation in Li–O2 batteries. The SEI components were regulated to form crystalline or polycrystalline Li2O in electrolytes with soluble O2 or amorphous-like organic-based layers without O2.397
CO2 (0.04 V mol% in dry air) is another toxic contaminant in the LABs, undergoing parasitic reaction on the lithium anode and commonly forming Li2CO3,2Li + 0.5O2 + CO2 → Li2CO3.
According to the early study of CO2-induced impacts on the cathode side of LABs, Li2CO3 significantly improves the over-potential. It decreases energy efficiency because it is difficult to decompose during the charging process.398 In contrast, later studies reveal that the Li2CO3 film on the lithium anode surface acts as a protective layer to avoid impure gas (e.g., N2 and O2) penetration but favours lithium ion transport. Asadi et al. reported a long cycled Li–O2 battery within an air-like atmosphere where the Li2CO3/C layer artificially coats the lithium surface,388 as4Li(s) + 3CO2(g) → 2Li2CO3 + C(s).
The dense anode protection layer comprised of rod-shaped Li2CO3/C is pre-synthesized in pure CO2. The Raman spectra, XPS, and EELS (electron energy loss spectroscopy) are used to confirm the presence of Li2CO3 and carbon in the layer (Fig. 26d). In addition, the decoration of the nanosheet-like Li2CO3 protection film on the anode surface also suppresses the parasitic reaction of oxygen intermediates and H2O.399 The knowledge gained from examining the impact of Li2CO3 illuminated the generation and processing of Li–CO2 batteries where CO2 is the active material.
The trace amount of H2O crossover arising from electrolyte decomposition could diffuse into the anode surface and react with lithium metal to form an insoluble LiOH layer. In 2013, Shui et al. visually observed the accumulation of the LiOH irreversible phase on lithium anodes in both the charge and discharge processes through operando techniques including synchrotron X-ray diffraction (μ-XRD) and 3D micro-tomographic technique390 (Fig. 26f1–f4). The LiOH layers provide many voids and holes with microscopic channels, serving as a sustained lithium–ion transport pathway. The continuous consumption of metallic lithium and electrolyte in the discharge and charge process gradually increases the thickness of the LiOH layer, and finally, the battery cannot survive. Additionally, the effects of moisture contamination on the morphology and composition of the LiOH based SEI layer were later quantified by Cho et al. through SEM and XRD observation.391 The significant increase in capacity and weight following the oxygen feed lines was evaluated by the connective order of the 1st to 6th setup battery (Fig. 26f5–f6). H2O reactions at the cathode causes the increased capacity:2H2O + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2LiOH + H22H2O + Li2O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → 4LiOH.
The excess weight on cells is attributed to the water-induced corrosive reaction on the lithium anode:2H2O + 2Li → 2LiOH + H2.
It should be mentioned that the complicated electro-active components in the air (e.g., SOx, NOx, and N2) make the anode chemistry become more intricate. With the in-depth charge–discharge reaction in the long cycle, these side reactants continuously react with lithium metal and exacerbate the corrosive effect on the anode surface. Among them, the influence of N2, with the high volume ratio of ∼78 V mol% in the Earth's atmosphere, should be considered because it is thermodynamically preferable to be reduced into Li3N products at around 1 V. Like the influence of CO2, extensive research has demonstrated the reversible N2 reaction in Li–N2 batteries via XPS, XRD, FTIR, and colorimetric methods.400 Therefore, further research on the challenges of lithium anode allows the development of LAB technology from Li–oxygen battery to Li–CO2 or Li–N2 battery and provides a theoretical basis for the proposed protection strategy.
Redox mediators (RMs) were first introduced in LABs in 2012 because they enable effective reduction of Li2O2 decomposing voltage through reaction with the intermediate charge carriers (RM+) in the air electrode (Fig. 26e). However, the soluble RM+ inevitably shuttle from cathode to anode and then continuously corrode the Li metal, leading to the loss of RMs and high overpotential. A few studies have reported the shuttle effect and decomposition of RM+ such as FePc+401 and TWMPO+402 on the lithium anode, but the fading mechanism is yet to be unexplained. In 2017, Seongmin et al. utilized MPT as RMs to specifically study the stability of lithium metal.389 They proposed that the electrochemical degradation of MPT+ damages the Li2O protection layer at the anode surface, and a thick side product layer is accumulated. Therefore, the feasible utilization of RMs in the LAB systems should be considered in further studies.


3.4.2 Protection of the lithium anode. 
Normalization of primary working conditions. 
Crucial physical factors, including operation temperature, assembly pressure, and battery testing setup, have been investigated to generalize the primary working conditions. In 2001, the battery operation temperature, especially the electrolyte temperature, was found to improve the cycling efficiency of the Li anode (Fig. 27a1).410 The Li metal precycled at a low temperature (as low as −20 °C) in LiPF6 salts mixed in carbonate electrolyte (e.g., PC, DMC, and EC) for ten cycles generally has positive effects on initial Li deposition and subsequent cycling at room temperature. Even with elevated current density, interface reactions and dendrite formation in the Li plating process are effectively reduced through the low-temperature precycling method (Fig. 27a2). Furthermore, Li deposition morphology is greatly dependent on the operated current density.411 The bare lithium surface is uneven with many defects, increasing the difficulty in maintaining homogeneous current distribution, especially in a high current density. So, despite the power density, the low current density is preferred to alleviate the current polarization on the lithium surface to increase the reversibility and stability of LABs. In addition, the high battery assembling pressure enables compact lithium deposition and uniformizes the lithium electrode surface, leading to fewer lithium dendrites (Fig. 27a3).396,412 This suppression effect has a more significant influence on the anode part of LABs than in traditional LMBs due the difficultly in applying uniform pressure on the Li anode in the closed system. So, higher inner pressure helps protect the lithium anode from dendritic lithium in LABs. Overall, the non-chemical factors provide an initial experimental basis for investigating LABs.
 Fig. 27  The protection strategies on lithium anode. (a) The working condition normalization: (a1) temperature, (a2) current density, and (a3) pressure. (b) The modification of a separator: the poreless PU separator, for enhanced electrolyte wetting and gas/water permeation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 403. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The prelithiated anode on the 3D conductive substrates, such as the lithiated 3D-CSC anode with the homogenously deposited lithium metal on the 3D-CSC scaffold, to form a smooth and stable lithiated surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 404. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The ex situ coated protective layer, such as the Al2O3-PVdF-HFP composite protective layer (CPL) coated Li electrode, to protect the Li metal electrode from attack by RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) In situ deposition of artificial SEI: as the protective layer on the Li anode surface, such as the in situ reaction of 1,4-dioxacyclohexane (DOA, e1) and PTFE molecule (157 helix type of PTFE, e2) with the lithium anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 405–407. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Alternation by lithium metal alloy: (f1) the utilization of LixSi alloy as the anode in LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 408. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f2–f3) The application of LiAlx alloy in LOBs, which was pretreated at a high current density and then cycled at a low current density, resulting in the ultralong cycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 409. Copyright 2001 Elsevier Science B.V. 
Separator modification for Li anode protection. 
The modified separator is a simple way to diffuse the crossover and Li-ion selectively, and most importantly, protects the Li anode from contamination by RMs, moisture, and oxygen species. For example, the poreless polyurethane (PU) separator is designed to alternate the porous polyolefin (PE) through the polymerization of the hard domain, i.e., 4,4-diphenylmethane diisocyanate (MDI), and soft domain, i.e., polytetramethylene glycol (PTMEG) and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), as shown in Fig. 27b.403 The MDI molecules interact through π–π and hydrogen bonding, resulting in mechanical rigidity and elasticity. The PTMEG and PEO segments provide the PU separator with good softness. The polarity of PEO endows the PU with good electrolyte wettability and a favorable Li-ion diffusion rate. As a result, the Gurley time quantitatively reveals that the PU separator is fully air-impermeable. A smaller contact angle of 9° in PU than that of 53° in PE illustrates the liquid-impermeable properties of the PU separator. The LOBs using PU separator have an additional 56 cycles than those using a PE separator, getting to 110 cycles. Furthermore, the PE separator protects the Li anode from RM erosion, extending the LOBs by >200 cycles.
3D porous scaffold for prelithiated anode. 
A three-dimensional (3D) porous scaffold is a general method to deposit lithium and build a robust lithium anode to enhance the utilization of active lithium with high specific capacity. 3D cross-stacking aligned carbon nanotubes (3D-CSC) were prelithiated and used in LOBs.404 The CNTs are extremely lightweight, ca. 0.07 mg cm−2, and own high electronic conductivity, minimizing the negative effect of the nonreactive segments. The porous and expanded scaffold enables uniform Li+ flux and less volume expansion during cycling, resulting in dendrite-free morphology with stable SEI layers (Fig. 27c). The prelithiated 3D-CSC (Li/3D-CSC) anode has a high reversible capacity of 3656 mA h g−1, approximating the theoretical value of pure Li (3861 mA h g−1). And this anode configuration exhibits 5-fold cycling performance compared with that in bare Li anodes.
Protection layers of the Li anode. 
Lithium–ion conductors, such as Li3N,413 Cu3N,414 lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON),415,416 and PEOxLi-salt,413,417 are most likely coated on the lithium anode as ex situ protective layers (Fig. 27d). These protective layers usually are water-stable, having high Li-ion conductivity and outstanding stability with lithium metal. The Li3N takes advantage of the high electric conductivity of 10−3 S cm−1. LiPON has expansive electrochemical windows between 0 and 5.5 V (vs. Li/Li+) and good conductivity of around 2 μS cm−1. Another approach is to construct ionically conductive poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO) and the lithium salt mixture, namely PEOxLi–salt, as an effective polymer buffer layer to minimize the lithium problem.413,417 For example, the combination of PEO and LiTFSI with 18O/1Li, abbreviated as PEO18LiTFSI polymer composite, enables low interfacial resistance and good protection of lithium anode in both aqueous and organic electrolytes. The excellent performance is because of its inherent soft property, good chemical compatibility with lithium metal, and high ionic conductivity of 5 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C. Interestingly, the ionic conductivity of PEO can be significantly enhanced by combining ceramic nanoparticles like BaTiO3,413 Al2O3, and SiO2. Besides applying a soft polymer protective segment, Li-ion conducting glass or ceramic materials (e.g., LISICON-type and NaSICON-type) are chosen as the solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) to cover lithium metal and protect them from atmospheric pollution.
Inspired by the spontaneously formed brittle and heterogeneous SEI, in situ construction of a homogenous and highly Li-ion conductive artificial protective layer (or SEI) on the anode surface is an effective way to minimize the irreversible “dead lithium” and electrolyte consumption (Fig. 27e). Beyond the natural SEI, the artificial SEI is observed through in situ reactions at the lithium anode. For example, 1,4-dioxacyclohexane (DOA) treats the Li anode to form the poly (DOA) as an in situ protective layer on the Li metal surface (Fig. 27e1). The artificial SEI usually is incorporated with element doping to enhance the ionic/electronic conductivity. The most representative example is fluorinated SEI. Fluorinated SEI has a long history as the main practical component for minimizing lithium anode corrosion and exhaustion. Theoretically, LiF intrinsically has a large bandgap (13.6 eV), low Li+ surface diffusion barrier, and wide electrochemical stability window to assist the lithium deposition even at a high working voltage.418–420 First, the in situ electrochemical deposition of fluorinated SEI on lithium surface is considered as a reliable protective layer through the introduction of electrolyte additives such as HF or FEC. Takehara et al. reported that the trace amount of HF in the electrolyte reacts with the essential lithiated salts such as Li2CO3, LiOH, and Li2O in the native layer to form LiF.421 The dense and artificial LiF-SEI plays a critical role in smoothing the lithium anode's morphology and reducing the reactivity of the lithium electrode with organic solvents or dissolved O2.
In 2015, fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) was first proposed as an effective and low-cost film-forming additive to in situ coat the LiF protective layer on the Li anode (Fig. 27e2).422 During repeated cycling, the Li metal is electrochemically treated with FEC and the in situ formed Li2CO3, LiF, polyene, and C–F species on the Li anode surface. When applying this FEC-treated protective layer on the Li anode, the Li–O2 battery delivered long-term cycling more than 100 times at 300 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1. Later, LiTFSI salt had a similar decomposition reaction to form LiF-rich protection films on the Li anode surface.423 However, the electrochemically deposited fluorinated SEI is usually accompanied by solvent decomposition, leading to multiple components in the SEI with different Li plating/stripping reactions in different areas and eventual damage of the integrity of SEI. The in situ deposited SEI is thin and fragile to support superior long-term operation. Thus, LiF/F-doped carbon films were designed and controlled to obtain uniform composition, robust, and high-quality protection layers to maintain the distance between lithium metal and electrolyte for LABs.407 As shown in Fig. 27e2, a fluorine-rich carbon layer around ∼20 μm in thickness on the Li anode surface was obtained via the in situ reaction between molten lithium and PTFE.407 The C–F polar bond in the carbon surface enables it to act as Li+ adsorption sites to increase the Li+ flux and pre-homogenize the electronic structure at the anode/electrolyte surface. Consequently, F-doped carbon helps prolong the service time of anodes up to 180 cycles at 1 Ah g−1 and 0.3 A g−1 in LOBs, while the bare lithium electrode can only produce 78 cycles under the same conditions.
Alternation of lithium alloy. 
Lithium alloy is an excellent alternative for replacing pure Li anode and enhancing anode stability during cycling. Lithiated silicon-carbon nanotubes (LixSi-CNTs) are reported to provide limited lithium resources in LOBs (Fig. 27f1).408 The LOBs using the LixSi-CNT anode deliver a specific capacity of 1913 mA h g−1 in the half-cell and 1653 mA h g−1 in the full cell. The capacity of the LixSi-CNT electrode is decreased in the presence of O2, due to the excess agglomeration of Li2O2 on the cathode and the formation of LiOH on the anode. Later, LixAl alloy was demonstrated as an anode for LOBs (Fig. 27f2–f3).409 Al atoms accumulate into the lithium anode to form the LixAl alloy surface through in situ high-current pre-treatment. A stable Al2O3-containing SEI protective layer is formed on the surface of the LiAlx anode to minimize parasitic reactions and O2 crossover. In practical usage, LiAlx pretreatment is necessary. The pretreated LixAl alloy anode exhibits 667 cycles in LOBs, while pristine LixAl alloy only has 17 cycles.

4. Conclusions and perspective
4.1 Conclusions
Although tremendous effort has been devoted to the research and development of LABs, and extensive achievements in relevant reaction mechanism exploration and technological development in cathodes, anodes, and electrolytes have been made in the last two decades, LABs are at the initial technology stage in comparison to the specific capacity, power density, and stability of current LIBs. Most cell performance for aprotic LABs is usually reported at a relatively low current density and a small areal capacity (<1.0 mA h cm−2), limiting the practical application of the state-of-the-art LABs. In this review, we have presented the significant progress in the working mechanism, air-electrode, electrolyte, and anode of aprotic LABs before and after 2010, i.e., the germination period and growing period, respectively. During the germination period, the essential design criteria of air-electrodes were developed to achieve reversible LABs: (1) the mesoporous type and large pore volume of the cathode substrates are essential for mass transportation and discharge product accommodation; (2) the application of catalytic materials is necessary to reduce overpotentials and polarization of the ORR and OER; and (3) more electrolytes need to be found to replace the unstable carbonate-electrolytes. During the growing period, the most critical factors for the rechargeability, stability, and applicability of aprotic LABs, including fundamental understanding of the electrochemical mechanisms, the design of the substrates and catalysts on the O2 cathode, chemical and electrochemical stabilities of the electrolyte, and the protection of the Li electrode, are studied to generate higher capacity and long cycling life. A variety of strategies have been proposed to address these substantial challenges to aprotic LABs in this work. In addition, we would also like to extend the findings and technologies developed from LAB research to other metal–air batteries.
4.2 Perspective

4.2.1 Electrochemistry at the electrode. 
The porosity and configuration of the air cathode affect the specific capacity of the cell and the formation of the discharge product (Li2O2) on the porous O2 cathode. An effective cathode should have low electronic resistance, short mass diffusion pathways, sufficient porosity, high catalytic activity, and good stability at high potential with the activated oxygen species. Porous carbon and porous carbon-free materials are the dominant choices for the O2–cathode. For the carbon-based cathode, much focus is paid to surface engineering and nanostructured design of commercial carbon materials, including the construction of surface defects, protective layers, and hierarchically porous structure for enhanced catalytic activity, less carbon erosion, and favorable mass transportation. For the carbon-free based cathode, a variety of transition metal and metal oxides are applied to configure the porous free-standing catalytic electrode to guarantee the mass transportation of electrons/ions/oxygen and achieve a mechanically robust air-electrode with low cost. Furthermore, some novel nanostructured catalysts, such as perovskites, OEMs, and MOFs, present good electrochemical performance and extend the range of electrocatalysts. The nanostructured substrates and efficient catalysts of the air-electrode could significantly affect the specific capacity, rate capability, and cycling efficiency of aprotic LABs.
The lithium electrode has been a long-term problem in LIBs and LABs, although long-term cycling of the Li anode has been demonstrated. As previously mentioned, most LABs are still at the stage of LOBs that use pure O2 in a closed system. Significant interference from CO2 and H2O in the air (an open system) could dramatically shorten the cycling life of the LOBs. To protect the Li electrode from the crossover oxygen, controlling electrolyte reactions at the Li electrode through suitable layers or a passivation layer will be essential for achieving good performance in aprotic LABs. This functional layer should meet two criteria: (1) facilitate the rapid transport of Li+ to support current flow, and (2) avoid the reaction between O2 and lithium anode by prohibiting O2 diffusion from the O2 cathode to the lithium anode. Engineering a functional layer with a nanometer-scale thickness could be an excellent strategy to meet these criteria and address the stability of the anode. A high lithium-ion-conducting solid electrolyte interlayer between the lithium anode and the cathode could be an excellent strategy to prevent the reaction of the lithium anode with CO2 and H2O in the air. This interlayer could also protect the Li anode from shuttle reactions of a redox mediator.29


4.2.2 Further exploration of stable and functional electrolytes. 
In parallel with the importance of the electrode, LAB electrolytes (both solvents and lithium salts) play a critical role in developing an aprotic LAB cell and determining the rechargeability of LABs. As shown in Scheme 2, the development of new electrolytes stimulates the evolution of LABs. The functions and stability of the electrolyte are highly dependent on the stability of the solvents. It is well recognized that carbonate-based electrolytes could decompose in the presence of superoxide radicals. Nevertheless, despite the severe instability of carbonate-based electrolytes, many experimental results and conclusions have resulted from such an electrolyte system. However, the validity of such a conclusion needs to be re-evaluated and studied in a more stable electrolyte system, such as an ether-based electrolyte. Nevertheless, the stability of most electrolytes during the charge/discharge process, especially under high voltage, is still not precise. The current research priority is searching for an electrolyte in an oxygen-rich electrochemical environment. Therefore, more attention should focus on integrating solvents and other electrolyte components as a whole instead of solvent alone. In particular, suitable salts, functional additives, and RMs could be regarded as indispensable parts of the electrolyte system for LOBs and help overcome some flaws of the currently used solvents to some extent.
Searching for promising electrolytes is extremely challenging. Even in commercialized LIBs, side reactions in the battery cannot be avoided entirely. It is necessary to investigate how side reactions and induced side-products affect the rechargeability, performance, and life span of LABs. What's more, the reasonably integrating currently discovered electrolytes and the cathode might be a low cost and highly efficient architecture for practical applications and determination.
Solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) that present safety and electrochemical stability are recognized as a next-generation solution in LIBs, and also apply to LABs. But both these rechargeable batteries systems are equally challenging to develop. Conventional SSEs developed for LIBs are unsuitable for direct use in LABs due to the instability of SSEs towards lithium metal and/or air and the high resistance at the interfaces of the electrode materials. Nevertheless, ultrathin, high-ion-conductive lithium-ion-exchanged zeolite X (LiX) membrane is fabricated as the sole solid electrolyte for solid-state LABs. Due to the seamless integration of SSEs and electrodes, the integrated solid-state LABs delivered even better cyclic performance than LABs containing organic liquid electrolytes. This suggests that SSEs could be a promising avenue to realize actual LABs that use O2 directly from the air.29


4.2.3 Further exploration of reaction mechanisms by emerging advanced characterization technologies. 
The mechanisms involved in LABs need to be explored further to address the as-aforementioned concerns of LABs. For example, the mechanism of Li2O2 growth on the carbon electrode during cell discharge and the subsequent dissolution of Li2O2 during cell charge is still debatable. Advanced research techniques from both theoretical modeling and experimental tools are necessary to clarify these matters for developing more efficient catalysts in aprotic LABs.
Theory and computational modeling (such as DFT and MD) appear to be a powerful approach to analyze and predict battery properties (e.g., voltage, capacity, life, and so on). The well-established artificial neural network combined with the data obtained from experimental measurements and first-principles calculations might help identify the key factors of battery performance, guide the search for the most optimized electrolytes and catalysts, and modify the optimal Li–O bond formation and deformation of Li2O2. In this way, the labor and material cost for the experiments are significantly reduced, and the commercialization of LABs could be accelerated. Take the DFT in screening solvent degradation as an example, the reactions between reduced reactive oxygen species and solvent molecules, reaction-free energy, or activation energy could be calculated for possible reaction pathways involving nucleophilic or proton abstraction.63,424 The abundant evaluation methods via computational chemistry can help design stable electrolyte systems beyond the trial-and-error approach. However, the accuracy and performance of the computational methods depend heavily on the quality and scale of the database since unbalanced data would lead to underfitting problems and biased predictions.
The multiple advanced characterization techniques are also suggested to obtain comprehensive and multifaceted experimental evidence of the possible reaction mechanism. The ex situ characterization techniques, including FT-IR, Raman, XPS, NMR, XRD, SEM, TEM, and so on, have been verified to detect the valuable information efficiently. The in situ observation will play a more critical role in obtaining high-precision data of the electrode, electrolyte, and their interfaces of the LABs. With the use of the specifically-designed reactors, the in situ synchrotron X-ray technique is envisaged to insightfully detect the atomic-leveled structure information during the charge and discharge. For example, in situ high-energy X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS), especially hard X-rays, have remarkable penetrating ability to study the elemental, electronic, and atomic information. The local structure information around selected atoms could be obtained from the XAS. Besides, in situ synchrotron X-ray photoelectron spectra, X-ray diffraction patterns, and X-ray Raman scattering are good choices to extract reliable and in-time data.


4.2.4 Beyond LABs to the novel metal–air batteries. 
Other metal–air batteries (MABs), including Na–air batteries, K–air batteries, Mg–air batteries, and Zinc–air batteries, share similar battery chemistry to LABs and have a much higher theoretical energy density than lithium–ion batteries.Anode: M ⇌ M+ + e−Cathode: xM+ + O2+ xe− ⇌ MxO2 (x = 1 or 2).
MABs are frequently promoted to future electrochemical energy storage for electric vehicles or grid energy storage applications. Similar to LABs, the full potential of MABs is limited by challenges associated with the metal anode, air cathode, and electrolyte.425 The research outcomes, including fundamental discovery and technological advances of LABs, could be adopted to other MABs to resolve these challenges. For example, the challenges of LABs mentioned above, such as anode stabilization, O2 crossover suppression, and CO2 management, need to be carefully addressed to make Li–air technology a practical reality. This is also applicable to non-aqueous MABs, including Na–air and K–air, which have not received as much research attention. Compared to Li–air, the lower charging overpotentials of Na–air and K–air batteries are obviously attractive for higher power density since their discharge products are mainly superoxides. Still, currently, Na–air and K–air batteries suffer from even more problematic cycle life.
Compared with other alkaline metal–air batteries, Zn–air batteries are more closely approaching practical application in ambient air due to the stable nature of anode metal Zn. The aqueous electrolytes can achieve higher safety, better ionic conductivity, less toxicity, and lower cost. However, the Zn–air batteries are limited in their lifespan due to the evaporation of electrolytes, contamination from CO2 and moisture, and the non-uniform deposition, dissolution, and corrosion of Zn. Lessons learned from the LABs can be applied in Zn–air batteries, resulting in a more reliable battery system that can be operated in the open air. For example, Zn passivation would also be suppressed by using highly concentrated alkaline solutions and electrolyte additives (e.g., SiO32−).
Furthermore, the photo-assisted Li–O2 batteries emerged as a combination of solar cells and Li–O2 batteries, undergoing the “photo-assisted charging process” in the oxygen cathode. In this kind of battery, the photovoltage of the photoelectrode compensates for the charging voltage on the oxygen electrode, leading to decreased overvoltage in the charging process. In 2014, Wu et al. were the first to design the photo-assisted Li–O2 battery by adding the triiodide/iodide (I3−/I−) redox shuttle into the electrolyte and using a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoelectrode. During the charging process, the I3− ions generated on the illuminated photoelectrode diffuse to the oxygen cathode and help to oxidize Li2O2. Thus, this device charges with a “negative” overpotential, which was thermodynamically impossible in a previous study.426 Besides, the semiconductor photoelectrode (e.g., various decorated TiO2 electrodes),427–429 metal oxides,430 metal sulfides,431 and graphitic carbon nitride432,433 also can assist the Li–O2 battery without a redox shuttle. Generally speaking, the conduction band (CB) potential of the photoelectrode should be low to reduce the charge voltage. To date, the photo-assisted Li–O2 batteries are still at the early development stage and need a lot of effort to achieve meaningful performance.

Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Australia Research Council Discovery Projects (DP210103266). J. Lu acknowledges the financial support from the start-up research funding of Zhejiang University.
References
W. Wang, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
J. Janek and W. G. Zeier, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bresser, K. Hosoi, D. Howell, H. Li, H. Zeisel, K. Amine and S. Passerini, J. Power Sources, 2018, 382, 176–178 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Liaxg and A. L. Juliard, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1965, 9, 390–394 Search PubMed .
A. Kozawa, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1964, 8, 20–39 CAS .

          D. Linden, New York, 1984.
K. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Bi, R. Wang, Y. Li, G. Jiang, L. Li, C. Zhong, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Matter, 2020, 2, 32–49 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, M. Ding, X. Li, C. Li, Z. Li and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1190 CrossRef CAS .
A. Débart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani, S. Yokoishi and H. Iba, Electrochem, 2010, 78, 403–405 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691–714 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pointon, B. Lakeman, J. Irvine, J. Bradley and S. Jain, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 750–756 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bai, V. Viswanathan and M. Z. Bazant, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14165–14172 RSC .
A. Zahoor, M. Christy, Y.-J. Hwang and K.-S. Nahm, J. Electrochem. Sci. Technol., 2012, 3, 14–23 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dicks, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 128–141 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Cheekatamarla and C. Finnerty, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 490–499 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19048–19051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. J. Visco, Advanced Lithium Anodes for Li/Air and Li/Water Batteries, Polyplus Battery Company Co. Inc.,  2005 Search PubMed .
J. Fu, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 104, 191–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 96, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
R. Padbury and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4436–4444 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Débart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novák and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, J. Park, T. T. Nguyen, H. Kim, H. R. Byon, M. Jang and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3857–3862 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chi, M. Li, J. Di, P. Bai, L. Song, X. Wang, F. Li, S. Liang, J. Xu and J. Yu, Nature, 2021, 592, 551–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-G. Zhang, D. Wang, W. Xu, J. Xiao and R. E. Williford, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4332–4337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Wang, W. Xu, D. Wang, R. E. Williford, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A487 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park, S. Park, S. Lee, H. Lee, H. Jang and W. Cho, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2010, 31, 3221–3224 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kowalczk, J. Read and M. Salomon, Pure Appl. Chem., 2007, 79, 851–860 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tran, X.-Q. Yang and D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2057–2063 CrossRef CAS .
A. Débart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521–4524 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-h Yang, P. He and Y.-y Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1127–1130 CrossRef CAS .
V. Giordani, S. A. Freunberger, P. Bruce, J.-M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A180 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Assary, L. A. Curtiss, P. C. Redfern, Z. Zhang and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12216–12223 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, D. G. Kwabi, K. P. Yao, J. R. Harding, J. Zhou, L. Zuin and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2999–3007 RSC .
Y.-C. Lu, Z. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng and K. Scott, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 108, 140–151 CrossRef .
A. K. Thapa, K. Saimen and T. Ishihara, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A165 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thapa and T. Ishihara, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7016–7020 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, H.-G. Jung, J. Kim, X. Luo, J. Lu, L. Curtiss, K. Amine, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4261–4268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Luo, X. W. Gao, D. Q. Shi, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang and H. K. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3031–3038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Kim, H.-J. Kim, S. Back, K. W. Nam, Y. Jung, Y.-K. Han and J. W. Choi, Sci. Rep, 2014, 4, 1–9 Search PubMed .
T. T. Truong, Y. Liu, Y. Ren, L. Trahey and Y. Sun, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8067–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-C. Gao, A.-H. Lu and W.-C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4095–4101 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, L. Trahey, Y. Ren, M. K. Chan, C. Lin, J. Okasinski and M. M. Thackeray, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7389–7398 RSC .
F. Cheng, J. Shen, W. Ji, Z. Tao and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 460–466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Song, J. Jung, Y.-U. Heo, Y. C. Lee, K. Cho and Y.-M. Kang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20075–20079 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161–1166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1190–A1195 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, K. Mutolo, M. Ervin, W. Behl, J. Wolfenstine, A. Driedger and D. Foster, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1351–A1356 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. AlNashef, M. L. Leonard, M. C. Kittle, M. A. Matthews and J. W. Weidner, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, D16–D18 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kuboki, T. Okuyama, T. Ohsaki and N. Takami, J. Power Sources, 2005, 146, 766–769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A96–A100 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ogasawara, A. Debart, M. Holzapfel, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 1390–1393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, Z. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, J. Hu, D. Wang, D. Hu, W. Xu, G. L. Graff, Z. Nie, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 5674–5678 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Veith, N. J. Dudney, J. Howe and J. Nanda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14325–14333 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, M. Blanco, S. Zecevic, K. Sasaki, J. Uddin, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 12399–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Gallant, D. G. Kwabi, R. R. Mitchell, J. Zhou, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2518–2528 RSC .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Bardé, P. Novák, D. Graham, J. M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351–6355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Johnson, C. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, P. C. Ashok, B. B. Praveen, K. Dholakia, J.-M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 1091–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, N.-C. Lai, Y.-R. Lu, Y. Zhou, C.-L. Dong and Y.-C. Lu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2364–2380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Radin and D. J. Siegel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2370–2379 RSC .
J. Lu, Y. Lei, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, P. Du, J. Wen, R. S. Assary, U. Das, D. J. Miller and J. W. Elam, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, Rosy, D. Sharon, C. Xia, H. Kim, L. R. Johnson, P. G. Bruce, L. F. Nazar, Y.-K. Sun, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, S. A. Freunberger and D. Aurbach, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6626–6683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu and S. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12236–12250 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, B. Liu, S. Song, W. Xu, J.-G. Zhang and C. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, R. Black, E. J. Berg and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1292–1298 RSC .
Y. S. Mekonnen, J. M. Garcia-Lastra, J. S. Hummelshøj, C. Jin and T. Vegge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18066–18073 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, R. R. Mitchell, Y. Liu, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson, J. Y. Huang, S. X. Mao and Y. Shao-Horn, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2209–2214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kushima, T. Koido, Y. Fujiwara, N. Kuriyama, N. Kusumi and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8260–8265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, E. Wang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5201–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganapathy, B. D. Adams, G. Stenou, M. S. Anastasaki, K. Goubitz, X.-F. Miao, L. F. Nazar and M. Wagemaker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16335–16344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 93–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Y. J. Lee, X. Luo, K. C. Lau, M. Asadi, H.-H. Wang, S. Brombosz, J. Wen, D. Zhai and Z. Chen, Nature, 2016, 529, 377–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Das, K. C. Lau, P. C. Redfern and L. A. Curtiss, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 813–819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Pouget, P. H. Bomans, J. A. Goos, P. M. Frederik, G. de With and N. A. Sommerdijk, Science, 2009, 323, 1455–1458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, C. Kwok and L. Nazar, Science, 2018, 361, 777–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11062–11067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meini, M. Piana, N. Tsiouvaras, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A45 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, X. Dong, S. Yuan, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, M. Leskes, W. Yu, A. J. Moore, L. Zhou, P. M. Bayley, G. Kim and C. P. Grey, Science, 2015, 350, 530–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, S. Wu, T. Zhang, P. He, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
X. Bi, M. Li, C. Liu, Y. Yuan, H. Wang, B. Key, R. Wang, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, L. A. Curtiss and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 22978–22982 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, M. Leskes, W. Yu, A. J. Moore, L. Zhou, P. M. Bayley, G. Kim and C. P. Grey, Science, 2015, 350, 530–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Viswanathan, K. S. Thygesen, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov, G. Girishkumar, B. D. McCloskey and A. C. Luntz, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Guo, E. Wang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5201–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, Z. L. Wang, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6948–6950 RSC .
J. Lu, L. Li, J. B. Park, Y. K. Sun, F. Wu and K. Amine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5611–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Radin, C. W. Monroe and D. J. Siegel, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3017–3022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lau and L. A. Archer, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5995–6002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Aetukuri, B. D. McCloskey, J. M. Garcia, L. E. Krupp, V. Viswanathan and A. C. Luntz, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 50–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Johnson, C. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, P. C. Ashok, B. B. Praveen, K. Dholakia, J. M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 1091–1099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Kwak, Rosy, D. Sharon, C. Xia, H. Kim, L. R. Johnson, P. G. Bruce, L. F. Nazar, Y. K. Sun, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, S. A. Freunberger and D. Aurbach, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6626–6683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2921–3004 RSC .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, Y. Shao-Horn and C. V. Thompson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1060–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and Y. C. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6962–6966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Kwabi, M. Tułodziecki, N. Pour, D. M. Itkis, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1204–1212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. Adams, C. Radtke, R. Black, M. L. Trudeau, K. Zaghib and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1772–1778 RSC .
H.-D. Lim, B. Lee, Y. Bae, H. Park, Y. Ko, H. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2873–2888 RSC .
S. Wu, J. Tang, F. Li, X. Liu and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16860–16863 RSC .
B. Liu, W. Xu, J. Zheng, P. Yan, E. D. Walter, N. Isern, M. E. Bowden, M. H. Engelhard, S. T. Kim and J. Read, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2525–2530 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, M. Konishi, K. Noi, M. Deguchi, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 126, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Nemanick and R. P. Hickey, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 248–251 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kuepper and U. Simon, Sustain. Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1992–2000 RSC .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-W. Chang, Y. Wang, D.-P. Liu, Y. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9620–9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, B. Zhang, Z. Bai, R. Guo, Z.-L. Xu, Z. Sadighi, L. Qin, T.-Y. Zhang, G. Chen, B. Huang and J.-K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8290–8299 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2438 CrossRef PubMed .
B. M. Gallant, R. R. Mitchell, D. G. Kwabi, J. Zhou, L. Zuin, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20800–20805 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ottakam Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 494–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. Hummelshøj, J. Nørskov and A. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J.-H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yao, Q. Dong, Q. Cheng and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11344–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Amanchukwu, J. R. Harding, Y. Shao-Horn and P. T. Hammond, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .
K. Takechi, S. Higashi, F. Mizuno, H. Nishikoori, H. Iba and T. Shiga, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, A27–A29 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nasybulin, W. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, X. S. Li and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, X. Lin, H. Yadegari, W. Xiao, Y. Zhao, K. R. Adair, R. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1473–1484 RSC .
J. Heine, U. Rodehorst, J. P. Badillo, M. Winter and P. Bieker, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 155, 110–115 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khetan, H. Pitsch and V. Viswanathan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2419–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Feng, M. Chen, L. Giordano, M. Huang, W. Zhang, C. V. Amanchukwu, R. Anandakathir, Y. Shao-Horn and J. A. Johnson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23987–23998 RSC .
X. Yao, Q. Dong, Q. Cheng and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11344–11353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Crounse, L. B. Nielsen, S. Jørgensen, H. G. Kjaergaard and P. O. Wennberg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3513–3520 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev and F. Faglioni, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7128–7138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, J. Tang, F. Li, X. Liu and H. Zhou, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16860–16863 RSC .
S. Wu, Y. Qiao, S. Yang, M. Ishida, P. He and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Harding, Y. C. Lu, Y. Tsukada and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10540–10546 RSC .
C. Ling, R. Zhang, K. Takechi and F. Mizuno, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 26591–26598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, W. Zhang, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Science, 2016, 352, 667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 558, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Ryan, L. Trahey, J. S. Okasinski, A. K. Burrell and B. J. Ingram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6915–6919 RSC .
J. Wandt, P. Jakes, J. Granwehr, H. A. Gasteiger and R. A. Eichel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6892–6895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahne, B. Schafzahl, C. Leypold, M. Leypold, S. Grumm, A. Leitgeb, G. A. Strohmeier, M. Wilkening, O. Fontaine, D. Kramer, C. Slugovc, S. M. Borisov and S. A. Freunberger, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–9 Search PubMed .
A. C. Luntz and B. D. McCloskey, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17056 CrossRef .
J. Hassoun, F. Croce, M. Armand and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2999–3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schurmann, B. Luerssen, D. Mollenhauer, J. Janek and D. Schroder, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 12445–12464 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Mourad, Y. K. Petit, R. Spezia, A. Samojlov, F. F. Summa, C. Prehal, C. Leypold, N. Mahne, C. Slugovc, O. Fontaine, S. Brutti and S. A. Freunberger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2559–2568 RSC .
S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1650–1654 RSC .
Z. Zhao, J. Huang and Z. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3874–3886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahne, S. E. Renfrew, B. D. McCloskey and S. A. Freunberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5529–5533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, M. J. Nava, G. K. Chow, N. Lopez, G. Wu, D. R. Britt, D. G. Nocera and C. C. Cummins, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6117–6122 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby and A. C. Luntz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18038–18041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, B. Sun, X. Xie, K. Kretschmer and G. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 183, 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609–8613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Jung, J. Hassoun, J. B. Park, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 579–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Lu, R. S. Assary, P. Du, H.-H. Wang, Y.-K. Sun, Y. Qin, K. C. Lau, J. Greeley, P. C. Redfern, H. Iddir, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25535–25542 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qiao, X. Judez, T. Rojo, M. Armand and H. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 070534 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, D. Hirshberg, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 3269–3272 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, T. Mori, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, M. Sherwood and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3043–3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, F. Barde and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7952–7957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sharon, V. Etacheri, A. Garsuch, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 127–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and K. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 64, 29–34 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, L. Zhang, M. Song, X. Wang, J. Mei, L. W. M. Lau and Y. Chen, J. Solid State Electron., 2013, 17, 2865–2870 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Schwenke, S. Meini, X. Wu, H. A. Gasteiger and M. Piana, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 11830–11839 RSC .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Valery, A. C. Luntz, S. R. Gowda, G. M. Wallraff, J. M. Garcia, T. Mori and L. E. Krupp, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2989–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, T. Zhang, Y. Yamada, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 532–538 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Lim, K. Y. Park, H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8374–8376 RSC .
B. D. Adams, R. Black, Z. Williams, R. Fernandes, M. Cuisinier, E. J. Berg, P. Novak, G. K. Murphy and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400867 CrossRef .
D. T. Sawyer and L. R. Jr. Julian, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1966, 12, 90–101 CAS .
D. T. Sawyer and J. S. Valentine, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sawyer, G. Chiericato, C. T. Angelis, E. J. Nanni and T. Tsuchiya, Anal. Chem., 1982, 54, 1720–1724 CrossRef CAS .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178–9186 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Trahan, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, A259–A267 CrossRef .
S. Meini, M. Piana, N. Tsiouvaras, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2012, 15, A45–A48 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, M. Afri, M. Noked, A. Garsuch, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3115–3119 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Kwabi, T. P. Batcho, C. V. Amanchukwu, N. Ortiz-Vitoriano, P. Hammond, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2850–2856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mozhzhukhina, L. P. Méndez De Leo and E. J. Calvo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 18375–18380 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, Z. Liu, G. Kim, J. T. Frith, N. Garcia-Araez and C. P. Grey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16057–16062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, D. J. Lee, J.-N. Lee, J. Song, Y. Lee, M.-H. Ryou, J.-K. Park and Y. M. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 123, 419–425 CrossRef CAS .
R. Younesi, P. Norby and T. Vegge, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, A15–A18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roberts, R. Younesi, W. Richardson, J. Liu, J. Zhu, K. Edstrom and T. Gustafsson, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, A62–A65 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, W. Xu, P. Yan, S. T. Kim, M. H. Engelhard, X. Sun, D. Mei, J. Cho, C.-M. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602605 CrossRef .
W. Walker, V. Giordani, J. Uddin, V. S. Bryantsev, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2076–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Giordani, V. S. Bryantsev, J. Uddin, W. Walker, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 3, A11–A14 CrossRef .
B. Zhou, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Ma, W. H. Zhang, Z. Fu and Z. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701568 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Bryantsev, J. Uddin, V. Giordani, W. Walker, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 160, A160–A171 CrossRef .
H. Wang, K. Xie, L. Wang and Y. Han, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 263–271 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nasirzadeh, D. Zimin, R. Neueder and W. Kunz, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2004, 49, 607–612 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, D. Hirsberg, M. Afri, A. Garsuch, A. A. Frimer and D. Aurbach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15207–15213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Uddin, V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3760–3765 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, V. Giordani, W. Walker, J. Uddin, I. Lee, A. C. T. van Duin, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 11977–11988 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vasudevan and H. Wendt, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 392, 69–74 CrossRef .
C. Shi and F. C. Anson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2000, 484, 144–149 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lai, Y. Xing, N. Chen, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2974–2997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J.-G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240–247 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, W. Luo, J. Chen, S. Chou, H. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Sustain. Syst., 2018, 2, 1700183 CrossRef .
D. Xu, Z.-l Wang, J.-j Xu, L.-l Zhang, L.-m Wang and X.-b Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11674–11676 RSC .
F. Bardé, Y. Chen, L. Johnson, S. Schaltin, J. Fransaer and P. G. Bruce, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 18892–18898 CrossRef .
C. Liang, F. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Chen, D. Liu and Z. Luo, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 2568–2572 RSC .
A. Abouimrane, I. Belharouak and K. Amine, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1073–1076 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Elia, J. Hassoun, W. J. Kwak, Y. K. Sun, B. Scrosati, F. Mueller, D. Bresser, S. Passerini, P. Oberhumer, N. Tsiouvaras and J. Reiter, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6572–6577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Balaish, A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2801–2822 RSC .
M. Hayyan, F. S. Mjalli, M. A. Hashim, I. M. AlNashef, S. M. Al-Zahrani and K. L. Chooi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 664, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
F. Soavi, S. Monaco and M. Mastragostino, J. Power Sources, 2013, 224, 115–119 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Cui, W. G. Fan and X. X. Guo, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 251–255 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, K. Takechi, S. Higashi, T. Shiga, T. Shiotsuki, N. Takazawa, Y. Sakurabayashi, S. Okazaki, I. Nitta, T. Kodama, H. Nakamoto, H. Nishikoori, S. Nakanishi, Y. Kotani and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 228, 47–56 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hayyan, F. S. Mjalli, M. A. Hashim and I. M. AlNashef, J. Mol. Liq., 2013, 181, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Piana, J. Wandt, S. Meini, I. Buchberger, N. Tsiouvaras and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1992–A2001 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Schwenke, J. Herranz, H. A. Gasteiger and M. Piana, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A905–A914 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nakamoto, Y. Suzuki, T. Shiotsuki, F. Mizuno, S. Higashi, K. Takechi, T. Asaoka, H. Nishikoori and H. Iba, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 19–23 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cecchetto, M. Salomon, B. Scrosati and F. Croce, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, Q. Dong, I. Madden, X. Yao, Q. Cheng, P. Dornath, W. Fan and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8371–8376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, G. Huang, J.-Y. Du, J.-Z. Wang, Y. Wang, Z.-J. Wu and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3075–3081 RSC .
S. H. Oh, T. Yim, E. Pomerantseva and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A185–A188 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nasybulin, W. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, Z. Nie, S. D. Burton, L. Cosimbescu, M. E. Gross and J.-G. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 2635–2645 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sharon, D. Hirsberg, M. Afri, F. Chesneau, R. Lavi, A. A. Frimer, Y. K. Sun and D. Aurbach, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16590–16600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Behl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 2305–2310 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ponrouch, D. Monti, A. Boschin, B. Steen, P. Johansson and M. R. Palacín, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22–42 RSC .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4303–4417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Barlowz, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 362–364 CrossRef .
S. Oswald, D. Mikhailova, F. Scheiba, P. Reichel, A. Fiedler and H. Ehrenberg, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2011, 400, 691–696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, J. Lu, K. C. Lau, X. Luo, J. Bareno, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, Z. Zhang, L. A. Curtiss, Y. K. Sun and K. Amine, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 5572–5581 RSC .
W. Xu and C. A. Angell, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, E1–E4 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, S. Zhang, B. A. Poese and T. R. Jow, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, A259–A262 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zinigrad, L. Larush-Asraf, G. Salitra, M. Sprecher and D. Aurbach, Thermochim. Acta, 2007, 457, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, P. He and H. Zhou, Green Energy Environ., 2019, 4, 3–19 CrossRef .
R. Younesi, G. M. Veith, P. Johansson, K. Edström and T. Vegge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1905–1922 RSC .
L. A. Dominey, V. R. Koch and T. J. Blakley, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 1551–1554 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Krause, W. Lamanna, J. Summerfield, M. Engle, G. Korba, R. Loch and R. Atanasoski, J. Power Sources, 1997, 68, 320–325 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tong, J. Huang, Z. Zhou and Z. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704841 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-B. Han, S.-S. Zhou, D.-J. Zhang, S.-W. Feng, L.-F. Li, K. Liu, W.-F. Feng, J. Nie, H. Li and X.-J. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3623–3632 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Shkrob, T. W. Marin, Y. Zhu and D. P. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19661–19671 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, J. Højberg, K. B. Knudsen, R. Younesi, P. Johansson, P. Norby and T. Vegge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18084–18090 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Veith, J. Nanda, L. H. Delmau and N. J. Dudney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1242–1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Barde, P. Novak, D. Graham, J. M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351–6355 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin, F. Björefors, P. Johansson and K. Edström, Chem Mater., 2012, 25, 77–84 CrossRef .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin and K. Edstrom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1333–1341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aurbach, E. Pollak, R. Elazari, G. Salitra, C. S. Kelley and J. Affinito, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A694–A702 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, X. Huang, S. Chen, J. Zhang and G. Wang, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11115–11120 RSC .
Rosy, S. Akabayov, M. Leskes and M. Noked, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29622–29629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, W. Xu, P. Yan, X. Sun, M. E. Bowden, J. Read, J. Qian, D. Mei, C.-M. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
K. Matsumoto, K. Inoue, K. Nakahara, R. Yuge, T. Noguchi and K. Utsugi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 234–238 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Burke, V. Pande, A. Khetan, V. Viswanathan and B. D. McCloskey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 9293–9298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lindberg, B. Endrődi, G. Åvall, P. Johansson, A. Cornell and G. Lindbergh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1913–1920 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, M. Ding, X. Li, C. Li, Z. Li and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001789 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Veith and N. J. Dudney, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A658–A663 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Z. P. Jovanov, Y. Chen, L. R. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6539–6543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, F. Zhang, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2355–2359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Zhang and J. Read, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2867–2870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Zheng, X.-Q. Yang and D. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3697–3702 RSC .
R. S. Assary, J. Lu, P. Du, X. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Shanmukaraj, S. Grugeon, G. Gachot, S. Laruelle, D. Mathiron, J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 3055–3062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Xiao, D. Wang, J. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A219–A224 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, H. S. Lee, H. Li, X. Q. Yang, J. McBreen and L. Q. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1195–1197 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, S. Wu, D. Li, T. Zhang, P. He, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. G. Kwabi, T. P. Batcho, S. Feng, L. Giordano, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24944–24953 RSC .
Y. Qiao, S. Wu, J. Yi, Y. Sun, S. Guo, S. Yang, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4960–4964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Chin, G. Chiericato, E. J. Nanni and D. T. Sawyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 1296–1299 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Schwenke, M. Metzger, T. Restle, M. Piana and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A573–A584 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, J. P. Vivek, E. W. Zhao, J. Lei, N. Garcia-Araez and C. P. Grey, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6558–6625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, Q. Liu, Y. Rong, H. Chen, J. Yang, C. Jia, L. J. Yu, A. Karton, Y. Ren, X. Xu, S. Adams and Q. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, J. Wang, F. Ding, X. Chen, E. Nasybulin, Y. Zhang and J.-G. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 513–537 RSC .
Y. K. Petit, C. Leypold, N. Mahne, E. Mourad, L. Schafzahl, C. Slugovc, S. M. Borisov and S. A. Freunberger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6535–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, P. He and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701602 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. Li, Z. Cheng, C. Li, X. Zhang, S. Guo, P. He and H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 439–443 CrossRef CAS .
T. Famprikis, P. Canepa, J. A. Dawson, M. S. Islam and C. Masquelier, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 1278–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Mahne, O. Fontaine, M. O. Thotiyl, M. Wilkening and S. A. Freunberger, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6716–6729 RSC .
I. Landa-Medrano, I. Lozano, N. Ortiz-Vitoriano, I. Ruiz de Larramendi and T. Rojo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8746–8764 RSC .
H. D. Lim, B. Lee, Y. Bae, H. Park, Y. Ko, H. Kim, J. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2873–2888 RSC .
D. Sun, Y. Shen, W. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Yi, W. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wang, D. Wang and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8941–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Zhu, X. Wang, C. Jia, J. Yang and Q. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6191–6197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. Johnson and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 882–888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, J. T. Frith, N. Garcia-Araez and J. R. Owen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 1705–1708 RSC .
Y. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, O. Fontaine and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 489–494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pande and V. Viswanathan, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 2, 60–63 CrossRef .
N. Feng, P. He and H. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 600–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Bergner, A. Schurmann, K. Peppler, A. Garsuch and J. Janek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15054–15064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Bergner, C. Hofmann, A. Schurmann, D. Schroder, K. Peppler, P. R. Schreiner and J. Janek, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31769–31779 RSC .
H. D. Lim, H. Song, J. Kim, H. Gwon, Y. Bae, K. Y. Park, J. Hong, H. Kim, T. Kim, Y. H. Kim, X. Lepro, R. Ovalle-Robles, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3926–3931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Lee, W.-J. Kwak and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15512–15516 RSC .
R. Cao, R. Thapa, H. Kim, X. Xu, M. Gyu Kim, Q. Li, N. Park, M. Liu and J. Cho, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2076 CrossRef PubMed .
W. H. Ryu, F. S. Gittleson, J. M. Thomsen, J. Li, M. J. Schwab, G. W. Brudvig and A. D. Taylor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, G. Xu, Y. Zhang, S. Fang, P. Nie, L. Wu and X. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2659–2666 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yu, W. Yang, R. Liu, L. Qin, Y. Lei, L. Liu, D. Zhai, B. Li and F. Kang, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 79, 68–72 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wan, Y. Sun, Z. Li, W. Wang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 40, 159–165 CrossRef .
H. Liu, M. Liu, L. Yang, Y. Song, X. Wang, K. Yang and F. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6567–6570 RSC .
W. K. Behl and D. T. Chin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Behl and D. T. Chin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 135, 16–21 CrossRef .

          G. V. Chase, S. Zecevic, T. W. Wesley, J. Uddin, K. A. Sasaki, P. G. Vincent, V. Bryantsev, M. Blanco and D. D. Addison, US Pat., 0028137 A1,  2012 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, D. Hirshberg, D. Sharon, H.-J. Shin, M. Afri, J.-B. Park, A. Garsuch, F. F. Chesneau, A. A. Frimer, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8855–8864 RSC .
C. M. Burke, R. Black, I. R. Kochetkov, V. Giordani, D. Addison, L. F. Nazar and B. D. McCloskey, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 747–756 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, X. Shen, A. Wang, F. Yu, Y. Wu, S. Shi, S. A. Freunberger and Y. Chen, Nat. Catal., 2022, 5, 193–201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Matsuda, S. Mori, Y. Kubo, K. Uosaki, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 620, 78–81 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Jia, H. Wan, Z. Peng, Y. Bi, Y. Liu, Z. Peng, Q. Wang, H. Li, D. Wang and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 36, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. C. Yao, J. T. Frith, S. Y. Sayed, F. Bardé, J. R. Owen, Y. Shao-Horn and N. Garcia-Araez, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 16290–16297 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, J. Wang, Z. Li, J. Wang, D. H. Gregory and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2073–2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Landa-Medrano, M. Olivares-Marín, R. Pinedo, I. Ruiz de Larramendi, T. Rojo and D. Tonti, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 59, 24–27 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, G. Kim, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, E. Castillo-Martinez, P. M. Bayley, Z. Liu and C. P. Grey, Science, 2016, 352, 667 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Leverick, M. Tułodziecki, R. Tatara, F. Bardé and Y. Shao-Horn, Joule, 2019, 3, 1106–1126 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, G. Kim, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, E. Castillo-Martinez and C. P. Grey, Science, 2016, 352, 667 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang and Y. C. Lu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7574–7583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Batteries Supercaps., 2019, 2, 803–819 CrossRef .
W.-J. Kwak, D. Hirshberg, D. Sharon, M. Afri, A. A. Frimer, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2334–2345 RSC .
X. Gao, Y. Chen, L. R. Johnson, Z. P. Jovanov and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17118 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, N. Dandu, S. Rastegar, S. N. Misal, Z. Hemmat, A. T. Ngo, L. A. Curtiss and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000201 CrossRef CAS .
H.-D. Lim, B. Lee, Y. Zheng, J. Hong, J. Kim, H. Gwon, Y. Ko, M. Lee, K. Cho and K. Kang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16066 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, K. Liao, P. He and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1024–1030 RSC .
N. Feng, X. Mu, X. Zhang, P. He and H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3733–3739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, G. Wang, J. Jin, L. Zhang and Z. Wen, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 342–349 CrossRef .
X.-G. Wang, Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14239–14243 RSC .
X. Liu, P. Zhang, L. Liu, J. Feng, X. He, X. Song, Q. Han, H. Wang, Z. Peng and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 10607–10615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, J. Park, H. Kim, J. M. Joo, D. Aurbach, H. R. Byon and Y.-K. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2122–2129 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Kwak, H. Kim, H.-G. Jung, D. Aurbach and Y.-K. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A2274–A2293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Ding, S. Zhang, W. Yan, Z.-F. Ma, X. Yuan, L. Mai and J. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 43, 97–119 CrossRef .
C. J. Barile and A. A. Gewirth, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A549–A552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nakanishi, F. Mizuno, K. Nobuhara, T. Abe and H. Iba, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4794–4803 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bae, Y. S. Yun, H.-D. Lim, H. Lee, Y.-J. Kim, J. Kim, H. Park, Y. Ko, S. Lee and H. J. Kwon, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8160–8169 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, W. Fan, X. Guo, F. Meng and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21567–21575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, B. Zou, X. Bi, M. Li, J. Wen, F. Huo, K. Amine and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2782–2786 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, Y. Tang, D. Wang, R. Li, T.-K. Sham and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20170–20174 RSC .
J.-H. Kim, A. G. Kannan, H.-S. Woo, D.-G. Jin, W. Kim, K. Ryu and D.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18456–18465 RSC .
F. Wu, Y. Xing, L. Li, J. Qian, W. Qu, J. Wen, D. Miller, Y. Ye, R. Chen and K. Amine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23635–23645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, J. Zhu, F. Du, J. Liu and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22412–22418 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, J. Wu, C. Jin, J. Tian, P. Strasser and R. Yang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4890–4896 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Bao, C. He, Y. Chen, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6826–6833 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, K. Neyerlin, T. S. Olson, S. Pylypenko, J. Bult, H. N. Dinh, T. Gennett, Z. Shao and R. O'Hayre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1437–1446 RSC .
J.-W. Jung, D.-W. Choi, C. K. Lee, K. R. Yoon, S. Yu, J. Y. Cheong, C. Kim, S.-H. Cho, J.-S. Park and Y. J. Park, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 193–202 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Pan, Y. Zhang, X. Cheng, L. Liu and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704378 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ruan, J. Sun, S. Song, L. Yu, B. Chen, W. Li and X. Qin, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 96, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, W. Xu and W. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7438–7444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf and I. A. Aksay, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Yin, J. J. Xu, Q. C. Liu and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7494–7500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, S. Xu, Y. Li, J. Dai, A. Gong, M. Zhu, C. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Chen and Y. Yao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701203 CrossRef .
S. Beattie, D. Manolescu and S. Blair, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 156, A44 CrossRef .
Y. Cui, Z. Wen and Y. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4727–4734 RSC .
C. Shen, Z. Wen, F. Wang, T. Wu and X. Wu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4149–4153 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Wang, D. Rooney and K. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8711–8714 RSC .
J. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Wen, H. Hu, Y. Zhu and V. Thangadurai, Ionics, 2019, 25, 1669–1677 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kalubarme, H. S. Jadhav, D. T. Ngo, G.-E. Park, J. G. Fisher, Y.-I. Choi, W.-H. Ryu and C.-J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. Liang, H. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, J. Kim, S. Lee, S. Wi, C. Kim, S. Hyun, S. Nam, Y. Park and B. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700814 CrossRef .
Y. Chang, S. Dong, Y. Ju, D. Xiao, X. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Shang, L. Gu and Z. Peng, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500092 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. O. Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng, Y. Chen, Z. Liu and P. G. Bruce, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1050–1056 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-N. Pei, L. Gong, A.-Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, J.-J. Chen, Y. Mu and H.-Q. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–10 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, C. Pan and W. Xiao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3471–3482 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, G.-H. Lee, J.-C. Kim and D.-W. Kim, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2601–2610 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wu, Z. Guo, X. Yin, Q. Pang, B. Tu, L. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3258–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Xu, D. Xu, Z. L. Wang, H. G. Wang, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3887–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, Z. Wen, X. Liang, Y. Lu, J. Jin, M. Wu and X. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7893–7897 RSC .
J. Sunarso, S. S. Hashim, N. Zhu and W. Zhou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 61, 57–77 CrossRef .
X. Han, Y. Hu, J. Yang, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1497–1499 RSC .
Y. Wu, T. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Xin, X. He, D. Zhang and J. Shui, Sci. Rep, 2016, 6, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-J. Xu, Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, F.-Z. Meng and X.-B. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2213–2219 RSC .
Y. Zhao, L. Xu, L. Mai, C. Han, Q. An, X. Xu, X. Liu and Q. Zhang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 19569–19574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, H. Chen, L. Xia, S. Wang, L.-X. Ding, D. Li, K. Xiao, S. Dai and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22478–22486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fabbri, R. Mohamed, P. Levecque and O. Conrad, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1061–1070 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. You, J. Yuan, Y.-X. Yin, Y.-T. Li, S. Xin and D. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6520–6528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fu, Z. Wei, X. Lin, T. Huang and A. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 195–199 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ma, Z. Wen, J. Jin, Y. Lu, K. Rui, X. Wu, M. Wu and J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nasybulin, W. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, X. S. Li, M. Gu, D. Hu and J.-G. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 29, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. D. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 CrossRef .
D. Wu, Z. Guo, X. Yin, Q. Pang, B. Tu, L. Zhang, Y.-G. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3258–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu, Z. Zhu, F. Cheng, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11833–11840 RSC .
W. Yan, Z. Guo, H. Xu, Y. Lou, J. Chen and Q. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1324–1330 RSC .
M. Yuan, R. Wang, W. Fu, L. Lin, Z. Sun, X. Long, S. Zhang, C. Nan, G. Sun, H. Li and S. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11403–11413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. N. Lewis and F. G. Keyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1913, 35, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Semkow and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2084 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rosso, T. Gobron, C. Brissot, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 804–806 CrossRef .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 1999, 81, 925–929 CrossRef .
M. Rosso, C. Brissot, A. Teyssot, M. Dollé, L. Sannier, J.-M. Tarascon, R. Bouchet and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 5334–5340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J. N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 4393 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel, P. Baudry and S. Lascaud, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1569–1574 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brissot, M. Rosso, J.-N. Chazalviel and S. Lascaud, J. Power Sources, 2001, 94, 212–218 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 2047 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 253–266 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky, G. Ardel and V. Eshkenazy, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2197–2204 CrossRef CAS .
E. Peled, D. Golodnitsky and G. Ardel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L208 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 1379–1394 CrossRef CAS .
N. Munichandraiah, L. Scanlon and R. Marsh, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 206–218 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, Y. Talyosef, B. Markovsky, E. Markevich, E. Zinigrad, L. Asraf, J. S. Gnanaraj and H.-J. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 50, 247–254 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Assary, J. Lu, P. Du, X. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Asadi, B. Sayahpour, P. Abbasi, A. T. Ngo, K. Karis, J. R. Jokisaari, C. Liu, B. Narayanan, M. Gerard and P. Yasaei, Nature, 2018, 555, 502–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ha, Y. Kim, D. Koo, K.-H. Ha, Y. Park, D.-M. Kim, S. Son, T. Yim and K. T. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10609–10621 RSC .
J.-L. Shui, J. S. Okasinski, P. Kenesei, H. A. Dobbs, D. Zhao, J. D. Almer and D.-J. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. Cho, J. Trottier, C. Gagnon, P. Hovington, D. Clément, A. Vijh, C.-S. Kim, A. Guerfi, R. Black and L. Nazar, J. Power Sources, 2014, 268, 565–574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, A. Zaban, Y. Gofer, Y. E. Ely, I. Weissman, O. Chusid and O. Abramson, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 76–84 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gireaud, S. Grugeon, S. Laruelle, B. Yrieix and J.-M. Tarascon, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1639–1649 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wilkinson and D. Wainwright, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 355, 193–203 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirai, I. Yoshimatsu and J. I. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2300 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hirai, I. Yoshimatsu and J. I. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 611 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitta and H. Sano, Microscopy, 2020, 69, 227–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-K. Lim, H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, D.-H. Seo, H. Gwon, J. Hong, W. A. Goddard III, H. Kim and K. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9733–9742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, G. Huang, J. L. Ma, J. Wang, D. Y. Yang, X. Y. Yang, Y. Yu and X. B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16661–16667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, D.-Y. Yang, G. Huang and X.-B. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 632–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, Y. Shen, W. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Yi, W. Yin, D. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Wang and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8941–8946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Kim, J. K. Park and H. T. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 857–863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. G. Kim, J. S. Kim, J. Min, Y. H. Lee, J. H. Choi, M. C. Jang, S. A. Freunberger and J. W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1747–1756 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, M. Liao, H. Sun, Y. Yang, C. Tang, Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. Xu, L. Zhang and B. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2437–2442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. G. Wang, C. Wang, Y. N. Chen, Z. Xie and Z. Zhou, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 12996–13000 CrossRef .
C. Quarti, A. Milani and C. Castiglioni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 706–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, G. Huang, J. Z. Wang, K. Li, J. L. Ma and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Kwak, H.-J. Shin, J. Reiter, N. Tsiouvaras, J. Hassoun, S. Passerini, B. Scrosati and Y.-K. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10467–10471 RSC .
H. Guo, G. Hou, D. Li, Q. Sun, Q. Ai, P. Si, G. Min, J. Lou, J. Feng and L. Ci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30793–30800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ishikawa, Y. Tasaka, N. Yoshimoto and M. Morita, J. Power Sources, 2001, 97, 262–264 CrossRef .
I. W. Seong, C. H. Hong, B. K. Kim and W. Y. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2008, 178, 769–773 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, E. Zinigrad, Y. Cohen and H. Teller, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148, 405–416 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, N. Imanishi, S. Hasegawa, A. Hirano, J. Xie, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and N. Sammes, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2009, 12, A132 CrossRef CAS .
D. Capsoni, M. Bini, S. Ferrari, E. Quartarone and P. Mustarelli, J. Power Sources, 2012, 220, 253–263 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Dudney, J. Power Sources, 2000, 89, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .
K.-I. Chung, W.-S. Kim and Y.-K. Choi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 566, 263–267 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and J. Yang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1092 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, W. Xue, M. Gobet, S. G. Greenbaum, C. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Yang, Y. Li and J. Li, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 1156–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xie, L. Liao, Y. Gong, Y. Li, F. Shi, A. Pei, J. Sun, R. Zhang, B. Kong and R. Subbaraman, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao3170 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Liao, F. Shi, T. Lei, G. Chen, A. Pei, J. Sun, K. Yan, G. Zhou and J. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11550–11558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shiraishi, K. Kanamura and Z. Takehara, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1999, 29, 867–879 CrossRef .
Q. C. Liu, J. J. Xu, S. Yuan, Z. W. Chang, D. Xu, Y. B. Yin, L. Li, H. X. Zhong, Y. S. Jiang and J. M. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5241–5247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H.-R. Wang, J. Wang and T. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 670–677 CrossRef .
V. S. Bryantsev and M. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 379–383 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1370–1377 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Gong, T. Wang, H. Xue, X. Fan, B. Gao, H. Zhang, L. Shi, J. He and J. Ye, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 13, 49–56 CrossRef .
X.-y Yang, X.-l Feng, X. Jin, M.-z Shao, B.-l Yan, J.-m Yan, Y. Zhang and X.-b Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16411–16415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tong, C. Luo, J. Li, Z. Mei, M. Wu, A. P. O'Mullane and H. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 20909–20913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, H. Xue, T. Wang, H. Gong, B. Gao, W. Xia, C. Jiang, J. Li, X. Huang and J. He, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5931–5939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiao, Y. Liu, K. Jiang, X. Li, Y. He, Q. Li, S. Wu and H. Zhou, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700284 CrossRef .
G. Liao, Y. Gong, L. Zhang, H. Gao, G.-J. Yang and B. Fang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2080–2147 RSC .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .

Footnote† Equal contribution authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Zhenzhen Wu
	Dr Zhenzhen Wu is a postdoc research fellow at the University of Queensland, Australia. Dr Wu obtained her PhD degree in late 2021 at Griffith University, Australia. She was a postdoctoral research fellow at the Centre for Catalysis and Clean Energy (CCCE) at Griffith University from October 2021 to March 2022. Her research focuses on functional organic materials for battery energy storage, including organic electrode materials and organic electrolyte additives. To date, she has published over 30 papers in the clean energy field.

Yuhui Tian
	Mr Yuhui Tian received his BSc and MSc degrees from Jiangsu University, China, in 2016 and 2019, respectively. He is currently a PhD candidate under the supervision of Prof. Shanqing Zhang at Griffith University, Australia. His current research interests include the DFT-guided design and synthesis of functional materials for electrocatalysis and rechargeable metal–air batteries.

Hao Chen
	Dr Hao Chen was awarded his PhD degree in 2021 at the School of Environment and Science, Griffith University, Australia. From May 2021 to May 2022, he worked as a research fellow at the School of Mechanical, Medical and Process Engineering, Queensland University of Technology (QUT), Australia. He is now a research fellow at Griffith University. His current research interests include the development of functional binders, solid-state electrolytes, and high-voltage cathodes for next-generation lithium–ion batteries.

Tianpin Wu
	Dr Tianpin Wu is the principle beamline scientist working at beamline 9-BM of the Advanced Photon Source, Argonne National Laboratory. Her expertise is in energy storage and catalyst materials characterization by X-ray absorption spectroscopy. She received her undergraduate degree in Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC), and her PhD degree in Physical and Analytical Chemistry from the University of Utah. Following two and half years of postdoctoral research in the Division of Chemical Sciences and Engineering at Argonne National Laboratory, she joined the X-ray Science Division as a physicist in 2012.

Shanqing Zhang
	Prof. Shanqing Zhang obtained his PhD degree in electrochemistry in 2001 at Griffith University, Australia. He was awarded the Australia Research Council Future Fellowship for 2009–2013 and promoted to full professor and theme leader at Griffith University in 2016. Currently, Prof. Zhang is working on the design and synthesis of nanomaterials and functional polymers for energy conversion and storage devices as well as the development of sustainable recyclable battery technology.

Jun Lu
	Dr Jun Lu completed his PhD in 2009 from the Department of Metallurgical Engineering at the University of Utah. He then worked as a post-doctoral researcher under a DOE-EERE postdoctoral fellowship (Vehicles Technology Program (2011–2013)) at Argonne National Laboratory, before being promoted to a chemist at Argonne National Laboratory. Dr Lu currently holds a chair professorship at Zhejiang University of China. Dr Lu's research interests mainly focus on Li-ion battery technology, including Li–O2 batteries with both open and closed configurations, high energy cathode materials for Li-ion batteries, high energy silicon anodes, solid-state electrolytes, cathode design for Li-S batteries, and new materials for Na-ion and Na–air batteries.

 	Scheme 1  The configuration design and discharge (a) and charge (b) mechanism of Li–air batteries, and the corresponding charge/discharge profiles (c). The potential is relative to Li/Li+.	 

 	Scheme 2  The evolution and major milestones of LABs.	 

 	Fig. 1  The physicochemical properties of conventional carbonaceous materials for air-electrodes in early LABs. (a) The specific capacity of commercial carbons from different producers. Reproduced from ref. 31. Copyright 2010 IOP Publishing. (b) Oxygen diffusion at different electrode depths under different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 33. Copyright 2007 International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry. (c) The porosity of carbonaceous materials: pore size (c1) and pore types (c2) on the discharge behaviour in LABs. Reproduced from ref. 34. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 
C = αexp[(−xR)/(8640 × α × D)]

 	Fig. 2  The roles of the catalysts in LABs. (a) The catalysts (e.g., electrolytic manganese dioxide, EMD) can reduce the over-charged phenomenon, which is revealed by the voltage variation between the charge–discharge curves without catalysts (a1) and with catalyst (a2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 13. Copyright 2007 Elsevier B.V. (b) Noble metals and their corresponding alloy catalysts to facilitate the reactions between Li+ and O2. (b1) Volcano plots of noble metal on ORR activity as a function of the oxygen-binding energy ΔE0 based on DFT calculations. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society. (b2) The charge–discharge profiles of LOBs with carbon (black) and PtAu/C (red) air-electrode in the 3rd cycle at 0.04 mA cm−2 based on the electrode areas. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (c) The selection of metal oxide catalysts, such as those with different morphologies and crystalline MnO2, with low cost and high cycling stability. (c1) Cycling ability of various MnO2 catalysts, such as α-MnO2 with bulk and nanowire forms, β-MnO2 with bulk and nanowire forms, λ-MnO2, γ-MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4, at 70 mA g−1 in 1 atm of O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2008 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. EMD was the previous report for comparison here. Reprinted with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. (c2) Voltage profiles of α-MnO2 nanowires between 2.0 and 4.15 V (vs. Li/Li+).	 

 	Fig. 3  The decomposition mechanism of carbonate solvents in early LABs: (a) the proposed pathways of the decomposition of carbonate-based electrolytes during discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) The evidence of decomposition mechanism; (b1) XRD patterns of the air electrodes discharged at different depths of discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2011 Elsevier B.V. (b2) The FTIR spectrum of a composite electrode discharged in 1 M LiPF6/PC to 2 V in O2 and the reference spectra of Li2O2, Li2CO3, and the electrode before discharge are also shown. (b3) SERS on an Au electrode in 1 M LiPF6/PC under O2 at open circuit potential and after discharge to 2.0 V. (b4) 1H solution NMR spectrum of the discharged composite electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  The two-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of Li2O2. (a) The overall reaction equation of lithium ions and the oxygen on the cathode. (b) The proposed discharge reaction mechanism from O2 to Li2O2 with solution-growth mediation and surface-growth mediation (b1), and the verification via in situ SERS in 0.1 M LiClO4-ACN electrolyte (b2-1) and the comparison in different DN solvents (b2-2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 66 and 67. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) The possible charging reactions routes from Li2O2 to O2 (c1) and the verification of RRDE observation during charge and discharge reactions (c2) and O K-Edge XANES of various charging stages (c3) in the solvent of TEGDME and Me-Im. Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Inc.	 

 		 
Li2O2(s) → Li+(sol) + O2(sol) + 2e−.

 	Fig. 5  The one-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of LiO2. (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of LiO2 with the effect of Ir catalysts by lattice match at the contacting interface. (b) The HEXRD patterns of Li2O2 over time. (c) Discharge–charge profiles and cycling ability of the Ir-rGO cathode at 100 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, a division of Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 6  The four-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of Li2O. (a) Energy of Gibbs reaction for the generation of Li2O and Li2O2 as a function of temperature (°C). (b) Online mass spectrometry observation of the OER at 1st charge in a carbon cathode (black curve) and a Ni-based cathode (red curve) in a molten salt Li–O2 cell. (c) Voltage curves up to 150 cycles at 0.2 mA cm−2 in the molten salt Li–O2 cell with a Ni-based cathode. (d and e) The proposed ORR reaction equations (d) and ORR pathway (e) with the formation of LiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2018 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  The four-electron electrochemical reactions with the discharge products of LiOH. (a) The report of reversible LiOH under the catalysis of RMs (i.e., LiI) in the DME electrolyte. (a1) The proposed mechanisms for the formation and decomposition of LiOH under the mediating effect of LiI in Li–O2 cells. (a2) XRD patterns of the as-prepared air-electrode at pristine, discharged, and charged states in a 0.05 M LiI/0.25 M LiTFSI/DME electrolyte. (a3) Discharge–charge profiles with different air cathodes, such as Super P, TiC, and rGO, in a 0.25 M LiTFSI/DME electrolyte with a fixed capacity of 500 mA h g−1 at 0.02 mA cm−2. For comparison, another super P and rGO electrodes were also tested in 0.05 M LiI in LiTFSI/DME electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2015 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) The evolution of the LiOH discharge product through the catalytic reaction on the air-electrode by Ru/MnO2 on the super P substrate and a trace amount of water in the electrolyte. (b1) The proposed catalytic mechanism, including spontaneous process (i), the promotion of MnO2 nanoparticles in Ru/MnO2/Super P (ii), and the oxidation of LiOH over the Ru nanoparticles at the low charge potential (iii). (b2) Voltage profiles of the 5th cycle at 500 mA g−1 in the Ru/MnO2/SP (cathode)|DMSO-based electrolytes|Li foil (anode) of Li–O2 cell. 0, 120, and 281 ppm of H2O were added to the electrolyte for comparison. (b3) Voltage profiles of the as-prepared air-electrode in Li–O2 battery during 200 cycles at 500 mA g−1 to test their cycling stability. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (c) The formation of LiOH discharge product after the tuned solvation environment of the catalyst and the Li+ ion by the cation additives (e.g., Na+) in the electrolyte. (c1) The schematic illustration of possible ORR routes with Li+ and Na+ during the discharge process. M represents Li or Na. (c2) XRD patterns of the air-electrode at pristine, discharged and recharged states in the electrolyte of 1 M Li+ + 0.5 M Na+. (c3) Voltage profiles with different amounts of Na+ addition (0, 0.1 and 0.5 M) in 1M Li+ electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 8  The generation of toroidal-like and film-like Li2O2 depends on different factors, including (a) potential. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 108. (c) Electrolyte solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Water content. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 111. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
Li2O2 + C + 0.5O2 → Li2CO3
2Li2O2 + C → Li2O + Li2CO3
LiO2(s) + -(CH2-CF2)-(s) → HO2 + -(CH = CF)-(s) + LiF(s)
2HO2 → H2O2 + O2(g)

 	Fig. 9  The parasitic reactions on the air cathode. (a) The carbon erosion phenomenon was observed at different cell voltages, schematically illustrated in (a1), and the characterization of moles of CO2 evolved from the cathodes in DMSO and tetraglyme electrolyte (a2–a5). Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) The investigation of binder degradation on the cathode. (b1–b5) The possible reactions mechanisms of superoxide (O2˙−) with and without binders in Li–O2 cells, including (b1) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME, (b2) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME + Carbon, (b3) electrochemical cell in the presence of a carbon catalyst, (b4) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME/PVdF, and (b5) KO2 + LiPF6/TEGDME/PVdF/α-MnO2 catalyst. (b6–b7) Corresponding XRD patterns of the (b1–b3) configuration and the different cathode components in (b1) configuration. The dashed vertical black lines (b6–b7) indicate the Li2O2 peaks. “” is the residual KO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of electrolyte decomposition reactions induced by reactive oxygen species (O2˙−, Li2O2, Li2−xO2, and O2), including nucleophilic attack, acid/base reaction, auto-oxidation, and proton mediated degradation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  The search for second-generation solvents for LABs. (a) DME-based electrolyte: (a1) potential profiles for five discharge/charge cycles of a DME-based cell. (a2) Oxygen consumption/evolution during discharge/charge. (a3) OER/ORR and CO2 evolved during charge divided by ORR. (a4) e−/O2 for discharge and charge of each cycle. Reprinted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Proposed mechanism for reactions in ether-based electrolytes that occur during discharge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2012 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) DMSO-based electrolyte: (c1) charge/discharge curves and (c2) cycling profile for a LOB cell with a 0.1 M LiClO4-DMSO electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (d) Proposed mechanism for reactions occurring during discharge in the DMF solvent. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (e) MeCN-based electrolyte: (e1) galvanostatic discharge–charge curve for a MeCN cell. (e2) Oxygen consumption and evolution during discharge and charge. (e3) Gas evolution rates for H2, CO2, and O2 during cell charge. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  The search of Li salts for LOBs: (a) LiBOB: illustration of a plausible decomposition mechanism of LiBOB attacked by superoxide. Reprinted with permission from ref. 214. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (b1) First cycle discharge–charge voltage profiles and (b2) cycling stability of LOBs with various salts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 215. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) LiNO3: (c1) illustration of the RM properties of NO2− formed by the reductive decomposition of NO3−. (c2) Voltage profiles in DEGDME-based electrolyte solvent with LiNO3 or LiTFSI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2004 American Chemical Society.	 
2Li + LiNO3 → Li2O + LiNO2.
LiNO2 + ½O2 → LiNO3.

 	Fig. 12  Effect of salt concentration: (a) computational simulations of the Gibbs activation energy barriers for C–H bond scission in (a1) CH2 groups and (a2) CH3 groups in DME, Li(DME)2, and Li(DME)3 from attack by O2−. (b) Discharge and charge curves of LOBs using electrolytes with three salt concentrations; cycled voltage profiles of the cells using LiTFSI–DME electrolytes with salt concentrations of (b1) 1 M, (b2) 2 M, and (b3) 3 M. Reprinted with permission from ref. 242. Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. SEM images of lithium deposition morphology in (c1) 5 M LiNO3, (c2) 4 M LiTFSI, and (c3) 2 M LiTFSI + 1 M LiNO3. (d) Schematic illustrations of lithium deposition evolution in different types of electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 1989 The Electrochemical Society.	 
2Li2O2 + 2H2O → 4LiOH + O2
Li2O2 + 2H2O → 2LiOH + H2O2.
H2O + 2O2− ↔ HO2− + O2 + OH−
H2O + 2LiO2 ↔ LiOOH + O2 + LiOH.
HO2− + 2Li+ + OH− ↔ Li2O2 + H2O
LiOOH + LiOH ↔ Li2O2 + H2O.

 	Fig. 13  Investigation of selected electrolyte additives: (a) effect of water on LABs: (a1) XRD patterns of the electrodes after discharge using the LiTFSI/DME electrolyte with different H2O contents. (a2) Gravimetric discharge capacities for LABs with different water contents in the electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Phenol: discharge curves of the cells (b1) with and (b2) without phenol at various current densities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 248. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) 2,2,2-Trichloroethyl chloroformate (TCCF): optical and SEM images of Li anode surfaces in the electrolyte (c1–3) without TCCF and (c4–6) with 2% TCCF. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (d) 2,2,6,6-Tetramethyl-4-piperidone (4-Oxo-TEMP): the reaction of 4-Oxo-TEMP with singlet oxygen forms stable 4-oxo-2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-1-piperidinyloxy (4-Oxo-TEMPO). Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic and characterization of the zeolite solid electrolyte. (a) Radar chart of the capabilities of electrolytes to solve the main problems associated with LABs. As shown in blue, solid-state LABs with conventional solid electrolytes can effectively solve several core issues of traditional LABs with liquid electrolytes. However, a solid-state LAB with LiXZM as the inorganic solid electrolyte possesses improved stability and interfacial compatibility, and low electronic conductivity, as shown in orange. (b) Schematic of the integrated solid-state LABS with C-LiXZM and the conduction mechanism of Li ions in LiX. (c and d) Comparison of the in situ zeolite membrane growth method adopted in this work (c) and the traditional preparation method for inorganic solid electrolytes (d). Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2021 Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 15  The working mechanism of RMs in LABs: (a) schematic illustration of the reactions at the cathode in the presence of RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 270. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The suitable redox potential range of RMs for LABs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 271. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
2RM + 2e− → 2RM−
2RM− + 2Li+ + O2 → 2RM + Li2O2.
Pathway 1: RM− + O2 + Li+ → RM + LiO2
or: RM− + O2 → RMO2−,
Pathway 2: 2LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2
LiO2 + RM− → Li2O2 + RM
or: 2RMO2− + 2Li+ → Li2O2 + O2 + 2RM,
Pathway 3: RMO2− + RM− + 2Li+ → Li2O2 + O2 + 2RM.
2RM+ + Li2O2 ⇌ 2RM + 2Li+ + O2.

 	Fig. 16  The typical RMs in the early study of LABs. (a) Tetrathiafulvalene (TTF): (a1) first-cycle discharge/charge curves with and without TTF. (a2) Cycling stability of LOB with TTF. (a3) FTIR and (a4) in situ SERS spectra for 1, 20, and 100 cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 277. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) 2,2,6,6-Tetramethylpiperidinyloxyl (TEMPO): (b1) proposed catalytic cycle for the electrochemical charging mediated by TEMPO. (b2) DEMS analysis of the evolved gases during the charge of the LOB with 10 mM TEMP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright the Owner Societies. (c) Nitroxides: (c1) chemical structures of the investigated nitroxides. (c2) CV curves of 10 mM TEMPO 4, 10 mM 4-methoxy-TEMPO 5, 10 mM AZADO 6, 10 mM 1-Me-AZADO 7, 10 mM TMAO 8 and (c3) 10 mM 2,2,5-trimethyl-4-phenyl-3-azahexane-3-nitroxide 9, 10 mM tert-amyl-tert-butyl nitroxide 10 in 1 M LiTFSI/diglyme. (c4) The first cycle of LOB cells with and without 1-Me-AZADO 7. Reprinted with permission from ref. 281. Copyright 1988 The Electrochemical Society. (d) Iron-phthalocyanine (FePc): (d1) possible discharging route and (d2) charging route of FePc as the RM in LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  The exploration of LiI as an RM in LABs. (a) Discharge/charge profiles of CNT fibril electrodes without a catalyst, with the Pt catalyst, and with the LiI catalyst. (b) Electrochemical profiles of the LOB cell with LiI. TEM images of the air electrode using LiI after (c) the first discharge and (d) the first cycle. (e) The corresponding diffraction patterns of the electrode before cycle, post-discharge, and after the first cycle. (f) Raman spectra of the as-prepared electrolytes after the first discharge and after the first cycle. (g) Gas analysis of the evolved oxygen after injection of Li2O2 powder into 0.05 m I2 dissolved in the TEGDME solvent. The side reactions occur in the presence of LiI RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) The possible reaction mechanisms of ether solvents in LOBs containing LiI. Reprinted with permission from ref. 293. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (i) Proposed Electrochemistry in LiI-containing LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 294. Copyright 2015 Elsevier B.V. (j) The reaction rate constants for I3− oxidizing Li2O2 as a function of the equilibrium potentials of I−/I3−. Reprinted with permission from ref. 295. Copyright 2021 by Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 
I2 + H2O → HOI + I− + H+
6LiOH + 3I2 ⇌ 6Li+ + IO3− + 5I− + 3H2O
6LiOH + 3I3− ⇌ 6Li+ + IO3− + 8I− + 3H2O.

 	Fig. 18  Study of LiBr RMs in LABs. (a1) CV curves on Pt electrodes in different electrolytes. (a2) Voltage profiles of the first cycles of LOBs with different electrolytes (the inset shows the typical toroid deposits of Li2O2 on the cathode surface after ORR in the LiBr containing solution). XRD patterns of carbon cathodes discharged to 2 V using (a3) diglyme/LiBr and (a4) diglyme/LiI based electrolyte solutions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 306. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. Voltage and gas evolution profiles during charging (b1) without and (b2) with 10 mM LiBr as a mediator. (b3) Statistics based on at least three replications. (b4) Schematic illustration of the different reaction mechanisms when charged with and without LiBr. Reprinted with permission from ref. 304. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
3Br3− → Br2− + 2e−
3Br2 + Li2CO3 → 3Br2− + 2Li+ + CO2+ + 0.5O2
9Br2 + 3Li2CO3 + 2C → 6Br3− + 6Li + 4CO2+ + CO.
DBBQ(sol) + Li+ + e− → LiDBBQ(sol)
LiDBBQ(sol) + O2 ↔ LiDBBQO2(sol)
LiDBBQ(sol) → Li2O2(s) + O2(sol) + 2DBBQ(sol)
LiDBBQ(sol) + LiDBBQO2(sol) → Li2O2(s) + 2DBBQ(sol).

 	Fig. 19  The stability assessment of RMs in the electrolyte. (a) Free energy changes and barriers for the reactions between LiI, LiBr, TMPD, TTF, FC, and DAMFC with singlet oxygen. Reprinted with permission from ref. 308. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Molecular orbital energies of RMs and TEGDME. HOMO and LUMO energies of original RMs (black bar) and first oxidized RMs (red bar). The dotted blue line represents the theoretical formation energy of Li2O2, and the redox potential of RM+ + e− → RM reactions are indicated in the yellow region, which is required to be higher than 2.96 V. The dotted black line represents the HOMO energy of TEGDME. The grey-shaded area indicates the relative instability of molecules possibly reacting with TEGDME. Reprinted with permission from ref. 309. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. Schematic illustration of (c) the shuttle mechanism in LiI-containing LOBs and (b) design of a self-defense mechanism in InI3-containing LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 310. Copyright 2018 The Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  The roles of the defects of carbonaceous catalysts on the electrocatalytic performance of ORR and OER. (a) The reduction of natural carbon defects through the tuning of carbon crystallinity to suppress side reactions. (a1) Raman spectra of the pristine carbon with defects and heat-treated carbon at 1600, 2000, and 2800 °C with decreasing amounts of defects, denoted as 13C, 13C_1600, 13C_2000, and 13C_2800 in the figure. (a2–a3) Charge–discharge performance and the corresponding FE-TEM images of pristine 13C (a2) and 13C_2000 (a3). Reprinted with permission from ref. 320. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) The generation of artificial defects on the carbon surface through plasma treatment in argon to enhance the electrochemical performance of the air-electrode: (b1) verification of artificial defects on the VACNT carbon through the XPS spectra. (b2) Comparison of water contact angles of pristine VACNTs and the as-prepared defective VACNTs. (b3) Initial charge–discharge curves of the carbon cathode in the ionic liquid PP13TFSI-based electrolyte at 0.1 mA cm−2 during the voltage range of 2.0–4.5 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 321. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (c) Generation of electrocatalysts (e.g., Pd film) on carbon defects to increase the utilization of the defective sites: (c1) Schematic of the cathode architecture and reaction process before and after the Pd film selectively growth on the carbon defects. (c2) Voltage profiles of pristine carbon cathode and Pd coated carbon cathode at 0.5 mA h cm−2 and 50 μA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 322. Copyright 2012 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 21  The protective layers of carbonaceous materials prohibit parasite reactions. (a) Al2O3–Pd coated carbon cathode: (a1) Scheme of the novel air-electrode architecture. The Al2O3 coating layers, the coated Pd nanoparticles, and the nanocrystalline Li2O2 reduce the charge overpotential. (a2) HRTEM of the as-prepared carbon materials in the presence of Al2O3 and Pd nanoparticles on the surface. (a3) Charge–discharge profiles to 1000 mA h g−1 with respect to the Super P, Al2O3 coated Super P, Pd, and Al2O3-coated Super P. The electrolyte is LiCF3SO3-TEGDME. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (b) In2O3–RuOx coated carbon nanopaper (In2O3–RuOx@CNp): (b1) schematic illustration of the In2O3–RuOx@CNp configuration, where CNp is coated by the In2O3 film and catalytic RuOx nanoparticles. (b2) TEM image of the as-obtained materials. (b3) Cycling performance at a current density of 0.2 mA cm−2 and fixed capacity of 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 331. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Oxygen selective low-density polyethylene (LDPE) film was applied on the CNT cathode to prevent water erosion from the ambient air and stabilize RMs in the battery process. (c1) The mechanism of the LDPE-film on the air-electrode. (c2) The O2 and H2O permeability for various oxygen selective membranes. (c3) Cycling ability of the LABs with and without the LDPE film at 2000 mA g−1 in ambient air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 332. Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 22  Hierarchically porous carbon (HPC) enhances the mass transport/storage of oxygen gas (air), electrolyte, and discharged products. (a) Functionalized graphene sheets (FGSs) as HPC air-electrodes: (a1) SEM image of the pristine state; (a2) SEM image of the discharged state; (a3) discharge curve and the image of the LAB pouch cells in the air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Macroporous active carbon fibers (MACFs) as the binder-free and self-standing HPC structure: (b1) SEM image of the pristine state; (b1) and the discharged state; (b3) the cycling performance at 300 mA g−1 and 1000 mA h g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2017 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The carbonized and activated wood (CA-wood) with the Ru nanoparticles as a “breathable” air-electrode with open and interconnected macropores. (c1) SEM image of the pristine state; (c2) and the discharged state; (c3) the charge–discharge curves at 0.5 mA cm−2, 0.2 mA cm−2, and 0.1 mA cm−2. Specifically, the schematic diagram of active mass diffusion (the insertion in c1) and Li2O2 growth in the discharge process (the insertion in c2) are presented. Reprinted with permission from ref. 337. Copyright 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  A Co-based electrocatalytic cathode facilitates a high round-trip efficiency. (a) The Co3O4@Ni nanorod electrocatalytic cathode is the first free-standing air-electrode design: (a1) schematic reaction mechanism of the electrode materials during the LAB battery process. (a2) SEM images of the Co3O4@Ni structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b) Freestanding Co3O4@Co core–shell electrode: (b1) the fabrication route and schematic illustration of the Co3O4@Co electrode during the battery process. (b2) SEM image of the Co3O4@Co materials. (b3) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 340. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Free-standing CuCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode materials: (c1) SEM image; and (c2) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2018 Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. (d) A free-standing NiCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode: (d1) SEM image; (d2) XRD spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature. (e) A free-standing MnCo2O4@Ni electrocatalytic cathode: (e1) HR FE-SEM image; (e2) cycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 343. Copyright 2008 Electrochemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Ti-based catalysts for superior energy density and stability during electrocatalytic reactions. (a) Black TiO2@Ni mesh with a hierarchically-ordered-porous structure: (a1) SEM images of the as-prepared materials; (a2–a6) the voltage profiles of the black TiO2 and the complementary scheme of Li2O2 growth in the ordered electrode architecture. Reprinted with permission from ref. 345. Copyright 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) RuOx/TiN nanotube arrays: (b1) reaction mechanism to facilitate the O2 reactions and suppress the generation of Li2CO3. (b2) Voltage profiles of the LOBs with TiN, RuOx/TiN, and RuOx/super P cathode. (b3–b4) Electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) test of the related gases at the (b3) discharge and (b4) charge of LOBs using the RuOx/TiN air cathode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (c) TiC electrode nanoparticles: (c1) SEM image. (c2–c3) Electrochemical performance of TiC cathodes in DMSO solvent. (c4) PXRD patterns during cycling. Reprinted with permission from ref. 347. Copyright 2015 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 25  Novel nanostructured catalysts with specific properties for electrocatalytic oxygen reactions. (a) The perovskite-based electrocatalysts (e.g., La0.75Sr0.25MnO3 nanotubes, PNT-LSM) in the air-electrode for their high electronic/ionic conductivity and outstanding catalytic activity: (a1) HR-TEM images of the as-prepared PNT-LSM and (a2) schematic illustration of oxygen diffusion through the structure of the porous nanotube. (a3) Initial charge–discharge profile of Li–O2 cells with PNT/KB or KB air-electrode at 0.025 mA cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 351. Copyright 2017 Elsevier Ltd. (b) Organic electrode materials (OEMs) and tubular polypyrrole (TPPY) cathode for their inherent flexibility and metal-free materials resources: (b1) TEM image of TPPy. (b2) Uniform O2 distribution across the porous TPPY cathode. (b3) Schematic illustration of the discharge/charge process on the TPPy structure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 352. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) MOF-based catalysts with open metal sites for enhanced O2 binding and large ordered porosity for products storage. (c1) Illustration of oxygen diffusion through MOF materials. (c2) The comparison of oxygen adsorption for various MOFs at 273 K low-pressure isotherms with the adsorption amount of 1 atm. (c3) Discharge curves of Li–O2 cells with different MOFs and super P composition in an O2 atmosphere at 50 mA g−1 at room temperature. Reprinted with permission from ref. 353. Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 26  The challenges of the lithium anode in LABs. (a) Li dendrite with a typical arborescent-like structure at a high current density of 0.7 A cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 376. Copyright 1997 Electrochemical Society. (b) Spontaneous SEI on lithium or carbon electrode, which reduces conductivity and mass transport of the anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 382. Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) O2-Induced side reactions at the Li anode in an ether-based electrolyte decomposed through the possible routes with the unidentified products in (c1). Specifically, the attack of oxygen crossover to TEGDME (ether) solvent may lead to LiOH, lithium alkyl carbonates, and other carbonates from the resulting aldehydes on the anode surface (c2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 387. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All energetics are calculated at the B3LYP/6-31+G(d) level of theory with enthalpies (eV) in solution (e = 21) at 298 K. (d) CO2-Induced side reactions lead to the formation of Li2CO3, which is evidenced by the SEM image (d1) and EELS spectra (d2). Reprinted with permission from ref. 388. Copyright 2017 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) RM-Induced side reactions (e.g., 10-methylphenothiazine, MPT) for the failure of a lithium anode, resulting in the production of lithium oxide (Li2O, Li2O2, green colour), lithium carbonate (Li2CO3, blue color), lithium hydroxide (LiOH, orange color), organolithium compounds (yellow color), and MPT decomposition products (violet color). Reprinted with permission from ref. 389. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. (f) H2O-induced side reactions with the generation of specific side products LiOH verified by operando XRD observation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 390. Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. (f1) Voltage profile of the operando Li–O2 battery during the cycling time. The curve marks of i, ii, iii, iv, v, vi, vii, viii, v, and ix are the collection points on the XRD data. (f2–f4) Three representative XRD packs were obtained from stages i, iii, and ix; each pack contains seven selected XRD patterns collected at different interfacial depths. (f5) Schematic diagram of O2 flow and cell connections from the 1st cell to the 6th cell through a single pathway. (f6) Table of the discharge capacity and the cell weight change after discharge for each cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 391. Copyright 1913 American Chemical Society.	 
2Li + 0.5O2 + CO2 → Li2CO3.
4Li(s) + 3CO2(g) → 2Li2CO3 + C(s).
2H2O + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2LiOH + H2
2H2O + Li2O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → 4LiOH.
2H2O + 2Li → 2LiOH + H2.

 	Fig. 27  The protection strategies on lithium anode. (a) The working condition normalization: (a1) temperature, (a2) current density, and (a3) pressure. (b) The modification of a separator: the poreless PU separator, for enhanced electrolyte wetting and gas/water permeation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 403. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The prelithiated anode on the 3D conductive substrates, such as the lithiated 3D-CSC anode with the homogenously deposited lithium metal on the 3D-CSC scaffold, to form a smooth and stable lithiated surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 404. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The ex situ coated protective layer, such as the Al2O3-PVdF-HFP composite protective layer (CPL) coated Li electrode, to protect the Li metal electrode from attack by RMs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 402. Copyright 2016 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) In situ deposition of artificial SEI: as the protective layer on the Li anode surface, such as the in situ reaction of 1,4-dioxacyclohexane (DOA, e1) and PTFE molecule (157 helix type of PTFE, e2) with the lithium anode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 405–407. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH GmbH. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Alternation by lithium metal alloy: (f1) the utilization of LixSi alloy as the anode in LOBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 408. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. (f2–f3) The application of LiAlx alloy in LOBs, which was pretreated at a high current density and then cycled at a low current density, resulting in the ultralong cycling performance. Reprinted with permission from ref. 409. Copyright 2001 Elsevier Science B.V.	 
Anode: M ⇌ M+ + e−
Cathode: xM+ + O2+ xe− ⇌ MxO2 (x = 1 or 2).
Footnote
† Equal contribution authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
