Photocurrent generation by immobilized cyanobacteria via direct electron transport in photo-bioelectrochemical cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CP00494A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CP00494A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 7862-7871Photocurrent generation by immobilized cyanobacteria via direct electron transport in photo-bioelectrochemical cells†

        
          
            Narendran 
            Sekar
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yogeswaran 
            Umasankar
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ramaraja P. 
            Ramasamy
          
        
      *
      Nano Electrochemistry Laboratory, College of Engineering, The University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. E-mail: rama@uga.edu;  Fax: +1-706-542-3804;   Tel: +1-706-542-4101
Received 
      2nd February 2014
    , Accepted 26th February 2014First published on 27th February 2014AbstractCyanobacteria possess unique and exciting features among photosynthetic microorganisms for energy conversion applications. This study focuses on production of direct electricity using a cyanobacterium called Nostoc sp. (NOS) as a photo-biocatalyst immobilized on carbon nanotubes on the anode of photo-bioelectrochemical cells. By illuminating with light (intensity 76 mW cm−2) the NOS immobilized on a carbon nanotube (CNT) modified electrode generated a photocurrent density of 30 mA m−2 at 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). The contribution of different photosynthetic pigments in NOS to the light capture was analyzed and chlorophyll-a was found to be the major contributor to light capture followed by phycocyanin. Further investigation using a set of inhibitors revealed that the electrons were redirected predominantly from PSII to the CNT through the plastoquinone pool and quinol oxidase. A rudimentary design photosynthetic electrochemical cell has been constructed using NOS/CNT on the anode and laccase/CNT on the cathode as catalysts. The cell generated a maximum current density of 250 mA m−2 and a peak power density of 35 mW m−2 without any mediator. By the addition of 1,4-benzoquinone as a redox mediator, the electricity generation capability was significantly enhanced with a current density of 2300 mA m−2 and a power density of 100 mW m−2. The power densities achieved in this work are the highest among ‘non-engineered’ cyanobacteria based electrochemical systems reported to date.
1. Introduction
Cyanobacteria are commonly used in the production of fuels, hydrogen and other value-added chemicals.1 A relatively simple cellular organization and ease of genetic manipulations in cyanobacteria have given a competitive edge over their photosynthetic counterpart (green algae) for these applications.2 In particular, the electrogenic properties of cyanobacteria are being explored for direct electricity generation in photo-bioelectrochemical cells.2,3 The direct electricity generation using cyanobacteria features greater advantages over the green algae or other dissimilatory metal reducing microorganisms such as Geobacter sp. and Shewanella sp., because cyanobacteria can operate without any external fuel to generate electricity from the photosynthetic electron transport chain (P-ETC). Moreover, cyanobacteria, evolved over 2.5 billion years ago, have greater evolutionary significance, easily adapting to varying environmental conditions and are excellent candidates for solar based energy conversion processes. Though the photosynthetic electrochemical cell technology is not mature enough for practical applications, continuous advancements in the area could potentially make this technology an alternative to present day photo-voltaics or similar technologies in the future. Photosynthetic electrochemical cells offer unique advantages over any parallel technology in terms of biodegradability, low-cost and non-dependency on inorganic materials.
Photosynthesis based energy conversion has been explored using isolated photosynthetic reaction centers (PSRCs)4–7 such as thylakoids8–11 or photosystems PSII12–14 and PSI15–18 in the anode of photo-electrochemical cells. However, there are major drawbacks of using PSRCs as they require expensive, labor-intensive procedures for isolation, employ complex immobilization strategies,19 expensive metals as immobilization supports and exhibit inferior long-term stability for practical applications. The use of the whole cell of a cyanobacterium as a photo-biocatalyst in electrochemical cells would overcome these caveats. Cyanobacteria contain both P-ETC and respiratory electron transport chain (R-ETC) reactions occurring in their thylakoid membranes, while the higher plant thylakoid membranes carry out only P-ETC reactions. The excess light energy quenched by PSII can be dissipated to the quinol oxidases of R-ETC in cyanobacteria, thereby providing greater stability on electrode surfaces compared to isolated PSRCs or thylakoids of higher plants.
Previously, cyanobacteria such as Anabaena variabilis,20Synechococcus sp.,21Synechocystis sp.,22 and other fresh water photosynthetic organisms have been used to illustrate photo-electrochemical response in aerobic photosynthetic microbial fuel cells (PMFC).3,21–23 While these early attempts formed a basis for utilizing cyanobacteria in PMFC for the generation of electric current, the majority of the work in this area focused on employing redox-mediators to carry out extracellular electron transport between the cyanobacteria and the electrode. From a power generation standpoint, direct electron transfer (DET) is always beneficial over mediated transfer as it minimizes the over-potential losses for bio-electrochemical reactions and simplifies the electrochemical cell design and operation. Cyanobacteria are capable of extracellular electron transfer through membrane bound cytochromes similar to that of metal reducing microorganisms.24,25 Moreover, Gorby et al. discovered the presence of electrically conductive nanowires in cyanobacterium Synechocystis PCC-6803 using scanning tunneling microscopy,26 which would highly facilitate the extracellular electron transport through DET. In our previous work we demonstrated photocurrent generation using spinach-thylakoids immobilized on carbon nanotube modified electrodes as photo-biocatalysts in photo-electrochemical cells.9 In this work, we investigated the DET ability of a cyanobacterium called Nostoc sp. ATCC 27893 (NOS) for photocurrent generation in a photo-electrochemical cell. This was achieved by immobilizing NOS on carbon nanotube modified electrodes. To our knowledge, there are no previous reports on wiring cyanobacteria onto carbon nanotubes for electricity production. The schematic of NOS immobilized on the carbon nanotube modified electrode and the relevant electron transfer pathways are illustrated in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of electron transport pathways in a cyanobacterium immobilized on a CNT modified electrode. Black solid arrows represent the photosynthetic linear electron transport chain, black broken arrows represent the cyclic electron transport pathway in photosynthesis, pink broken arrows represent the respiratory electron transport chain, and red stars represent blocking sites of inhibitors: (1) DCMU, (2) DBMIB, (3) KCN and (4) antimycin A. The extracellular electron transport pathways from P-ETC to CNT are identified using site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors. Dark blue block arrows represent extracellular electron transport from PSII to CNT via the PQ pool and bd-quinol oxidase, and yellow block arrows represent mediated electron transport between BQ and CNT. (Abbreviations: CM: cytoplasmic membrane; TM: thylakoid membrane; NDH: NADH dehydrogenase; SDH: succinate dehydrogenase; ARTO: alternate respiratory transport oxidase; Cyt Cox: cytochrome C oxidase; PSII: photosystem II; Cyt b6f: cytochrome b6f complex; PC: plastocyanin; PSI: photosystem I; Fd: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin NADP+ reductase; FPR: ferredoxin plastoquinone reductase; PQ: plastoquinone; PQH2: plastoquinol; BQ: 1,4-benzoquinone oxidized form; BQH2: hydroquinone). 
2. Materials and methods
2.1 Materials
Multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNT) of 10 nm diameter and 1–2 μm length (Dropsens, Spain) were used as immobilization supports for the cyanobacteria and 1-pyrenebutanoic acid succinimidyl ester (PBSE) (Anaspec) was used as a molecular tethering agent to attach the laccase enzyme (Trametes versicolor, Sigma) to the CNT. 3-(3,4-Dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea (DCMU) (Tokyo Chemical Industry), 2,5-dibromo-3-methyl-6-isopropylbenzoquinone (DBMIB) (Aldrich), potassium cyanide (KCN) (Fisher Scientific), and antimycin A (AMA) (Sigma Scientific) were the photosynthesis inhibitors used in this study. All other chemicals were purchased from Amresco, EMD, Acros Organics, J. T. Baker or Alfa Aesar. Monobasic and dibasic salts of potassium phosphate (BDH) were used to prepare the phosphate buffer solutions. All buffers were prepared using nanopure distilled water (dd water).
2.2 Cyanobacterial culture
Fresh cultures of Nostoc sp. ATCC 27893 (NOS) and Anabaena variabilis ATCC 29413 (AV) were procured from Biorefining and Carbon Cycling Research Laboratory at the University of Georgia. The cultures were propagated in 100 mL shake flask cultures using modified BG11 medium. The BG11 medium (per L) consists of 0.02 g Na2CO3, 1.07 g NaNO3, 10 mL of stock solution I (0.1 g L−1 Na2Mg EDTA, 0.6 g L−1 ferric ammonium citrate, 0.6 g L−1 citric acid·1H2O, 3.6 g L−1 CaCl2·2H2O), 10 mL of stock solution II (7.5 g L−1 MgSO4·7H2O), 10 mL of stock solution III (6.1 g L−1 K2HPO4) and 1 mL of microelement solution (2.86 g L−1 H3BO3, 1.81 g L−1 MnCl2·4H2O, 0.222 g L−1 ZnSO4·7H2O, 0.079 g L−1 CuSO4·5H2O, 0.05 g L−1 CoCl2·6H2O, 0.018 g L−1 NaMoO4). The cyanobacterial cultures were inoculated in the autoclaved media and grown at 25 ± 2 °C at 100 rpm in 12:12 h light–dark cycles illuminated using fluorescent lamps (80 μmol m−2 s−1). The growth was monitored by measuring optical density of the cultures at 750 nm using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer (Genesys 10S, Thermo Scientific).
2.3 Electrode preparation
SpectraCarb 2050-L carbon paper (CP) was used as the base electrode. The CP was treated with a boiling mixture of 1 M HNO3 and 0.5 M H2SO4 (1:4 ratio) for an hour and washed with dd water. The geometric surface area of CP was 0.0254 cm2. The CNT solution (1 mg mL−1) was prepared in dimethyl formamide and suspended to form a uniform slurry by sonicating it for 15 min in an ultrasonic homogenizer. 5 μL of CNT was drop-cast on the CP, dried in an oven to make a CNT modified CP. The fresh cyanobacterial culture was washed using phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 7) and resuspended in the same buffer. 5 μL of the culture was loaded onto CNT modified CP and allowed to air dry at room temperature. The NOS (or AV)/CNT modified CP was used as the working electrode (or photo-anode in the full cell) for the electrochemical experiments.
2.4 Electrochemical studies
Electrolyte solutions were purged with N2 for 30 min to remove dissolved oxygen. Open circuit potential (OCP), current vs. time (i–t curve) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) studies were conducted using a CHI potentiostat (920c and 401a models, CH Instruments Inc). Ag/AgCl/Sat. KCl was used as the reference electrode and a platinum wire was used as the counter electrode. A Dolan-Jenner Industries Fibre-Lite lamp (model 190) with a light intensity of 76 mW cm−2 was used for illumination. Bacterial cell loading was optimized by measuring the photocurrent generated upon loading various amounts (5, 10, 15, 20, 25 μL) of culture on the CNT modified CP electrode. The stability of the cyanobacteria immobilized anode was tested by measuring its photocurrent generating capability every day until 10 days. The absorption spectra of NOS and AV were recorded using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer in the range between 400 nm and 700 nm. The monochromatic light from a monochromator (Oriel QE/IPCE measurement kit, Newport) was used to illuminate light of different wavelengths. For the inhibitor studies, the fresh culture was incubated with the inhibitor for 1 hour and washed with phosphate buffer (100 mM, pH 7) before immobilizing on the CNT and then the photocurrent density was measured electrochemically. Solutions of DCMU, DBMIB and AMA were made in 100% ethanol, and KCN solution was prepared in dd water and appropriate dilutions were made to vary the concentration of inhibitors. The photo-electrochemical full cell was developed using NOS/CNT modified CP as the anode and laccase/CNT as the enzymatic cathode. A molecular tethering approach developed in our previous work was used to immobilize laccase onto CNT.27–29 100 mM phosphate buffer with pH 5.8 was used as the electrolyte in the full cell.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Characterization of immobilized cyanobacteria on CNTs
The immobilization of cyanobacteria on a CNT modified CP has been characterized using scanning electron microscopy (FEI Inspect F FEG-SEM) and the images are shown in Fig. 2. Fig. 2a shows the image of the CNT modified CP and Fig. 2b and c show the images of NOS and AV on CNT modified CP, respectively. Fig. 2b and c clearly show the direct physical attachment of the outer membrane of NOS and AV with the underlying CNT. Immobilization of cyanobacteria directly on CP with CNT modification established such intimate connections through multiple attachment sites. Here, CNT serves both as an immobilization support and a current collector. The physical attachment of bacteria with CNT would help in extracellular electron transport from the cells to the CNT through the outer membrane redox proteins.
 Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) CNT modified CP, (b) NOS immobilized on CNT modified CP and (c) AV immobilized on CNT modified CP. The attachment sites indicated by arrows can be clearly seen from the images in (b) and (c). 
3.2 Photo-electrochemical activity

Fig. 3a shows the comparison of the open circuit potential (OCP) profiles of bare electrodes and NOS or AV immobilized electrodes under alternate light–dark conditions. As shown in Fig. 3a, the OCP decreased upon illumination by light, and increased when light was switched off (dark) for both NOS and AV. By comparison, the OCP of bare CNT control electrodes (no cyanobacteria) was unaltered in both light–dark phases. The decrease in the OCP caused by light in cyanobacteria immobilized electrodes is due to the mixed potential effect caused by the oxygen released due to the photosynthetic activity of cyanobacteria and is similar to the effect we have observed in our previous study with plant-thylakoids.9 The effect of photosynthesis on the extracellular electron transport in cyanobacteria is clearly manifested in the amperometric response of the NOS and AV immobilized electrodes under alternate light–dark phases as shown in Fig. 3b. The photo-induced current generation increased when illuminated with light and decreased during dark due to a complete shut off of light driven electron transport reactions in the linear photosynthetic pathway. In a separate set of experiments, the loading of cyanobacteria on CNT electrodes was optimized for the highest current generation and the results are given in the ESI† (Fig. S1). The photocurrents peaked at a loading of 2.2 mg cm−2 for NOS and 5 mg cm−2 for AV, beyond which the photocurrents decreased possibly due to the formation of a thick non-conducting mat of cells on the CNT. The variation in both OCP and current density during light–dark cycles was higher for NOS compared to AV. This concurs with previous reports suggesting higher electrogenic activity for NOS compared to other cyanobacteria studied.3 For this reason, the following studies were carried out only using NOS immobilized electrodes for further investigations.
 Fig. 3  Electrochemical characterization of NOS and AV immobilized on CNT modified CP under alternative light and dark conditions. (a) Comparison of open circuit potential variations of NOS/CNT, AV/CNT and bare CNT modified CPs. (b) Photocurrent densities measured as a function of time at an applied voltage of 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for NOS/CNT, AV/CNT and bare CNT modified CPs. 
The impedance characteristics of the NOS immobilized electrode were studied using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy in a three-electrode system. Fig. 4 shows the Nyquist plot obtained with NOS/CNT under light and dark conditions. The diameter of the semicircle in the Nyquist plot represents the polarization resistance (Rp). From Fig. 4, it is clear that Rp of the NOS/CNT anode (8.2 kΩ cm2) was less than that of the control (CNT without bacteria (22 kΩ cm2)). Similarly, the Rp of NOS/CNT was lower under light conditions (8.2 kΩ cm2) compared to dark (14.2 kΩ cm2), suggesting the enhancement of electro-kinetics under light due to photosynthesis.
 Fig. 4  Nyquist plot showing impedance behavior of CNT modified CP with and without NOS under light and dark conditions. The insets are the simple Randles circuit used to fit the impedance data and the table shows polarization resistance of the different electrodes under study. 
3.3 Photocurrent stability
It is noteworthy to point out that Nostoc sp. could withstand desiccation (nutrient and water deprivation) to a significant extent. Particularly the mechanism of desiccation tolerance has been extensively studied in Nostoc sp.,30 therefore making it an excellent candidate for long term generation of photocurrent. This has been experimentally verified in our ‘accelerated’ stability studies, where the photocurrent generation of NOS immobilized electrodes was monitored at 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for a period of 10 days using forced desiccation. It can be observed from Fig. 5 that the generated photocurrent stabilized after the first day, for up to 5 days after which the cells became inactive. However upon immersing the electrode in a nutrient containing BG11 medium on day 6, almost all the photo-activity resumed on day 7. This result suggests that when continuously provided with minimal nutrients (note that nutrients are different from fuel or substrate), the cyanobacteria can retain almost all of its activity for a prolonged period, which is critical in designing practical power generation systems based on cyanobacteria.
 Fig. 5  Stability of photocurrent generation in the NOS immobilized electrode. 
3.4 Role of individual photosynthetic pigments
The photosynthetic pigments play a crucial role in capturing the sunlight and initiate the charge separation inside the reaction centers of photosystems. The proportion of different pigments present in a cyanobacterium is under regulation of light. The major photosynthetic pigment present in cyanobacteria is chlorophyll-a (Chl-a), which is present as a special pair of chlorophylls in both PSII and PSI. In addition, cyanobacteria also possess accessory pigments such as phycocyanin (PhyC), phycoerythrin (PhyE) and allophycocyanin, which together form a fluorescent antenna complex called phycobilisome.31 In association with both PSII and PSI, the phycobilisomes capture light in a range of wavelengths not utilized by Chl-a and transfer the energy to Chl-a. The absorption spectrum of NOS in the visible region is shown in Fig. 6b. The peaks at wavelength 440 nm and 680 nm correspond to Chl-a and peaks at 500 nm and 640 nm correspond to PhyE and PhyC respectively. In order to investigate the contribution of different photosynthetic pigments towards the photocurrent generation, the current density was measured by illuminating NOS with monochromatic light of different wavelengths such as 440, 500, 550, 600, 640 and 680 nm as shown in Fig. 6a. It was observed that the monochromatic light of wavelength 640 nm resulted in the maximum photocurrent, followed by 440, 680, 500 and 550 nm in that order. No appreciable current had been observed with 600 nm light. Since the intensity of light varies with the wavelength, the measured photocurrent density was normalized with the light intensity at the corresponding wavelength, and the normalized photocurrent profiles are shown in Fig. 6b. The photocurrent generated at wavelengths of Chl-a (both 440 and 680 nm) was found to be maximum followed by that of PhyC. It was evident that Chl-a contributed largely towards the light energy capture leading to greater photocurrent generation. Among the phycobiliproteins, PhyC captured the most light. This observation was also confirmed by fluorescence measurements as shown in Table S1 (ESI†). NOS produced significant fluorescence at an excitation/emission pair of 590 ± 10 nm/645 ± 20 nm, corresponding to C-phycocyanin and 530 ± 12.5 nm/645 ± 20 nm corresponding to R-phycocyanin.32 No such fluorescence was seen in the control samples. Though PhyC contributes to the light energy capture, it is important to note that unlike Chl-a of PSII or PSI, PhyC by itself could not induce the charge separation and initiate the electron transfer. It rather just captures the light at 640 nm and transfers the energy to Chl-a. Besides Chl-a and PhyC, PhyE also contributed significantly leading to photocurrent generation as seen in Fig. 6a. Exploring the role of these photosynthetic pigments in greater detail is beyond the scope of this work and hence is reserved for a future study.
 Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent response of NOS/CNT modified CP to monochromatic lights of different wavelengths. (b) Line chart shows the absorption spectrum of NOS in the visible region and the bars represent normalized current density generated by NOS in the wavelengths studied (refer text). The photosynthetic pigment Chl-a contributed maximum to the light capture followed by PhyC. 
3.5 Extracellular electron transfer pathways
Detailed mechanistic analyses of energy capture and extracellular electron transfer in cyanobacteria at the molecular level would provide meaningful insights into their photo-bioelectrochemical characteristics. This has been accomplished with the help of site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors that can be used to envisage the possible electron transfer pathways from the bacteria to the electrode. The fresh culture of NOS was treated with various site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors before immobilization on the CNT/CP, and electrochemical studies were performed to monitor photo-electrochemical activity. Fig. 7a shows the photocurrent generated by NOS treated with various concentrations of DCMU (0.05, 0.1, 0.5 and 1 mM). Compared to the control (NOS without inhibitor), the photocurrents of DCMU-inhibited NOS fell by nearly 80% for all concentrations of DCMU examined. DCMU is known to bind to both QA and QB sites in PSII, arresting the transfer of electrons from PSII to plastoquinone (PQ) (site 1 in Fig. 1). While the binding of DCMU to both quinone sites are mutually exclusive (i.e., cannot bind to both the sites at the same time), binding to QB completely blocks the electron transfer, whereas binding to QA only slows down the electron transfer and it requires high DCMU concentration.33 Since the inhibition was found to be maximal even with an ultra-low concentration of DCMU (0.05 mM), it could be concluded that DCMU was bound to the QB site and inhibited the electron flow in our case.34 The greatest evolutionary advantage of cyanobacteria is that they possess intersecting P-ETC and R-ETC in thylakoid membranes.35 While both photosynthesis and respiration take place in the thylakoid membranes, only respiration occurs in the cytoplasmic membrane. The PQ pool, cytochrome b6f (Cyt b6f) and PC are shared by both the photosynthesis and respiration in thylakoid membranes (Fig. 1). This organization offers competitive advantage for the cyanobacteria to redirect the excess electrons from P-ETC towards R-ETC if the PQ pool is over-reduced (to PQH2). This is not possible in higher plants and algae where photosynthesis and respiration are spatially separated from each other and happen in two different organelles called chloroplast and mitochondria, respectively. The transfer of electrons from PQ to Cyt b6f is the rate-limiting step in the photosynthesis.36 When PSII is exposed to high intensity light, the PQ pool will be predominantly in reduced form leading to photo-damage of PSII. However, the cyanobacteria combat this phenomenon by elevating the level of antioxidant pigments such as carotenoids37 and/or by oxidizing the PQH2 through a terminal oxidase called bd-quinol oxidase.38 The same concept was also witnessed by Pisciotta et al., who correlated the electrogenic activity of cyanobacteria with overflow metabolism, when the cells are exposed to high intensity light.24 Furthermore bd-quinol oxidase is present in both thylakoid and cytoplasmic membranes.39 In our case we believe that the reduced PQ pool is being oxidized by bd-quinol oxidase, which then delivers the electrons to CNT thereby generating photocurrent. This directly corroborates the observation in Fig. 7a that most of the photocurrent was contributed by the PSII.
 Fig. 7  Effects of site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors on the photocurrent generation in NOS: (a) DCMU, (b) DBMIB, and (c) KCN, AMA and AMA + DCMU. The insets in (a) and (b) represent the percentage of photocurrent inhibition by NOS at different concentrations of inhibitors. Control represents no inhibitor case. 

Fig. 7b shows the effect of various concentrations of DBMIB (10 μM, 25 μM, 50 μM, 0.5 mM, 1 mM) on the photocurrent generation by NOS. The photocurrents decreased by up to 40% at low concentrations of DBMIB (10 and 25 μM) compared to the no-inhibitor case, but increased at higher concentrations. This enhancement in photocurrent by up to 200% at high DBMIB concentrations is quite interesting and can be attributed to the redox properties of the compound, which acts as an electron transfer mediator between the cyanobacteria and the electrode. Similar observations about DBMIB have been made by others.3,21 DBMIB is a PQ analogue and exhibits its effect by binding to the Qo site of the Cyt b6f complex (Fig. 1), where DBMIB has multiple functions depending on the concentration.

Case (i) DBMIB binding at the Qo site of Cyt b6f. 
At low concentrations, DBMIB inhibition at the Qo site of Cyt b6f (site 2 in Fig. 1) prevents the oxidation of PQH2 to PQ, thereby preventing the transfer of electrons from PQ to the Cyt b6f complex.40,41 Since the electron transfer from PQ to Cyt b6f is rate-limiting,36 the blocking of Cyt b6f by DBMIB would redirect the electrons from PQ to the electrode via the bd-quinol oxidase in the cytoplasmic membrane (dark blue block arrows in Fig. 1).


Case (ii) DBMIB binding at the QB site of PSII. 
However, at high concentrations, DBMIB also displaces PQ at the QB site of PSII (site 1 in Fig. 1), thereby ‘out-circuiting the PQ pool’ and accepts electrons directly from QB.42,43 In such a situation it can act as a redox shuttle and transfer electrons to an external electron acceptor or directly to the electrode itself as observed in our results. A control experiment with DBMIB in the absence of cyanobacteria showed direct electrochemical redox activity for DBMIB on the electrode (ESI,† Fig. S2).


Case (iii) DBMIB binding at the Qi site of Cyt b6f. 
Furthermore, there also exists an extra heme called heme-x (X in Fig. 1) in the Cyt b6f complex at the Qi site, which involves in cyclic electron transfer from ferredoxin (Fd) or ferredoxin NADP+ reductase (FNR) to PQ through ferredoxin plastoquinone reductase (FPR) (broken black arrows in Fig. 1), thereby completing the Q cycle.44,45 If high DBMIB concentration displaces the PQ from the QB site of PSII, then it could likely displace PQ from the Qi site of the Cyt b6f complex, thereby shuttling the electrons as a mediator directly from heme-x to an external electron acceptor or electrode without the assistance from PQ as given in case (ii).
It was found that incubating NOS in KCN containing media resulted in ∼40% decrease in photocurrent densities (Fig. 7c), but the results did not show a definitive concentration dependent trend as with that of other inhibitors (data not shown). KCN is known to inhibit the copper containing PC and arrest the transfer of electrons from the Cyt b6f complex to PSI46,47 (site 3 in Fig. 1). KCN inhibition can also be used to qualitatively identify the contribution of PSI to the overall photocurrent generation.9 Since KCN inhibition resulted in decreased photocurrents, it is fair to conclude that PSI also contributed towards the measured photocurrents in our experiments.

Fig. 7c represents the photocurrent produced by NOS in the presence of either AMA or DCMU or both. AMA inhibits the FPR, thereby hindering the cyclic electron transport (Fig. 1).48,49 The AMA (10 μM) inhibition decreased the photocurrents by only 10%, hence it can be concluded that the contribution of cyclic electron transport to the measured photocurrents is marginal (∼10%) compared to the contribution from PSII (∼80%). No additional inhibitory effect was found at higher (>10 μM) AMA concentrations (data not shown). It is also important to note that the addition of both AMA (10 μM) and DCMU (0.1 mM) did not completely block the photocurrents, suggesting that in addition to PSII and cyclic electron transport, there could be other sources (such as PSI) contributing to the photocurrent generation to a small extent (see Fig. 7c). This hypothesis has also been supported by the fact that KCN treated NOS produced more than 10% of photocurrent, which enforces us to believe that inhibition of the cyclic electron transport chain at PC (by KCN) and FPR (by AMA) is completely different. The inhibition by KCN produces more current than the inhibition by AMA, which implies that the electrons are also exiting from a site downstream of PC and upstream of FPR, more likely from either Fe–S of PSI or Fd or FNR.

3.6 Power generation in a photo-bioelectrochemical cell
A rudimentary photo-bioelectrochemical cell was constructed using NOS/CNT modified CP as the anode and laccase/CNT modified CP as the cathode. Laccase and other multicopper oxidases have been demonstrated to catalyze bio-electrochemical oxygen reduction with high efficiency on CNT supports.27–29,50,51
The electrolyte was 0.1 M, pH 5.8 phosphate buffer. No external mediator was added to the system. Upon illumination by light, water was oxidized at the anode generating protons, electrons and oxygen. While the anode captures the electrons for photo-electricity generation, the protons and oxygen move towards the cathode through the electrolyte. At the cathode, protons, oxygen and electrons combine to form water through a bio-electrochemical reduction reaction catalyzed by laccase. The overall process generates electricity from light using photosynthesis carried out by NOS. It should be noted that we did not provide any additional CO2 to the cyanobacteria other than that is naturally available in the headspace. Polarization tests were performed at different applied voltages and the steady state photocurrents were measured at each voltage under both light (76 mW m−2) and dark conditions. The OCP was found to be 0.57 V and 0.59 V under light and dark conditions, respectively. As shown in Fig. 8a, a maximum current density of 240 mA m−2 under light and 180 mA m−2 under dark conditions were achieved. The peak power densities were 35 mW m−2 and 24 mW m−2 under light and dark conditions without the addition of any mediators. This is the highest power density reported for any ‘non-engineered’ cyanobacteria based photo-bioelectrochemical system power generation using direct electron transport.
 Fig. 8  Polarization and power density curves of the photo-bioelectrochemical cell with a NOS/CNT anode and a laccase/CNT cathode. (a) DET based power generation without any mediator under light and dark conditions. (b) Comparison of DET and mediated electron transfer using BQ as a mediator. 
The spent electrolyte after electrochemical experiments was also tested for the presence of any redox mediator secreted by NOS using cyclic voltammetry. As found in our previous work, the electrochemical technique has been found to be very effective in detecting even sub-nanomolar concentrations of mediators in the anolyte of microbial fuel cells.52,53 In this work, no representative redox peaks were seen in the voltammograms of the spent electrolyte (Fig. S3, ESI†), which confirms that the cyanobacteria do not utilize any redox mediators for external electron transport in our system and the role of direct electron transfer in photocurrent generation in NOS immobilized electrodes is substantiated. While the photocurrent generated in the presence of light was due to photosynthesis, the current generated in the dark can be attributed to the extracellular electron transport resulting from the respiratory electron transport pathway. Cyanobacteria are known to contain functional R-ETC in both the outer membrane and the thylakoid membrane. With NADH or succinate as the substrate, quinones and c-type cytochromes of the R-ETC might transfer electrons extracellularly and contribute to the anode current observed under dark conditions.
Redox mediators are generally used to facilitate the electron transport between the bacteria and the electrode under conditions where DET is ineffective. Even though, the DET was established in the case of NOS/CNT in the current study, 1,4-benzoqinone (BQ) was used as a supplement to examine the effect of a mediator on power generation. Fig. 8b shows the polarization and power density curves obtained from the full cell using BQ (2 mM) as a mediator. As seen in Fig. 8b, a maximum current density of 2330 mA m−2 and peak power density of 100 mW m−2 were achieved, which is a huge enhancement by the addition of BQ as a mediator in the electrolyte. It is noteworthy to point out that the electrochemical cell was neither optimized for power generation nor was enriched with CO2 for increased photosynthetic activity. Benzoquinone is similar in structure to the PQ except in lacking the isoprene chain of PQ. BQ being lipophilic might diffuse through both outer and thylakoid membranes of cyanobacteria and gets reduced by the electrons from P-ETC.23 BQ could possibly compete with PQ in electron collection sites as explained in Section 3.5, i.e., the QB site of PSII and heme-x in the Qi site of Cyt b6f and mimic the role of highly concentrated DBMIB (see Fig. 7b), thereby enhancing the power density to nearly two orders of magnitude. Tables 1 and 2 compare the power and current densities obtained in this study with the values reported in the literature so far for cyanobacteria based electrochemical systems based on direct and mediated electron transport. The power density achieved with the BQ mediator for NOS/CNT is the highest ever achieved with similar systems studied so far.
Table 1 Comparison of photo-electrochemical cell power densities reported using cyanobacteria as the photo-biocatalyst on the anode via direct electron transport




S. no
Cyanobacteria
Anode
Cathode
Current density (mA m−2)
Power density (mW m−2)
Light intensity normalized power density (mW m−2 mWlight−1)a
Ref.




ITO-PET: Indium tin-oxide coated polyethylene terephthalate.a Calculated from the power density, light intensity and electrode area given in the respective paper.




1

Nostoc sp.
CNT/CP

Laccase/CNT/CP
240
35
18.13
This work


2
Freshwater photosynthetic biofilm
Poly pyrrole/carbon paint
Pt/carbon cloth
30
1.3
1.78
Zou et al. (2009)22


3
Mixed photosynthetic bacteria
Nanostructured poly pyrrole/carbon paint
Pt/carbon cloth
120
6
5.71
Pisciotta et al. (2010)3


4

Synechococcus sp. WH 5701
ITO-PET


93
8.5
0.68
McCormick et al.25




Table 2 Comparison of photo-electrochemical cell power densities reported in the literature using cyanobacteria as the photo-biocatalyst on the anode via mediated electron transport




S. no
Cyanobacteria
Anode
Cathode
Mediator
Current density (mA m−2)
Power density (mW m−2)
Light intensity normalized power density (mW m−2 mWlight−1)a
Ref.




BOX: bilirubin oxidase; DMBQ: 2,6-dimethyl-1,4-benzoquinone; ABTS: 2,2′-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzthiazoline-6-sulfonic acid).a Calculated from the power density, light intensity and electrode area given in the respective paper.




1

Nostoc sp.
CNT/CP

Laccase/CNT/CP
BQ
2334
100
51.8
This work


2

Synechococcus

Carbon felt
ABTS/BOX/carbon felt
DMBQ
444
58
17.2
Tsujimura et al. (2001)54




4. Conclusions
We have demonstrated direct electron transfer based electrogenic activity of Nostoc sp. for photosynthesis-assisted power generation in an electrochemical cell. The contribution of different photosynthetic pigments to photocurrent generation has been found to vary greatly, with chlorophyll-a being the major contributor. The extracellular electron transfer pathways between the cyanobacterium and the CNT have been elucidated with the help of photosynthesis inhibitors. The route H2O → PSII → PQ → bd-quinol oxidase → CNT has been found to be the major pathway by which the light induced electrons generate photocurrent by direct electron transport. The cyclic electron transport chain also contributed to the photocurrent generation in a smaller amount. The photo-electrochemical cell developed using immobilized Nostoc sp. as the photo-biocatalyst on the anode, and laccase modified CNT on the cathode generated an average power density of 35 mW m−2 (18 mW m−2 mWlight−1) without any exogenous mediator, which is highest among the ‘non-engineered’ photo-electrochemical systems to date. The photo-electrochemical cell demonstrated is rudimentary, which has not been engineered for geometry, electrode shape, size, physical properties, internal impedance, fluid flow, mass transport, or other parameters. However engineering optimizations such as better cell design, usage of three dimensional brush electrodes, reduced electrode spacing, etc., could result in much higher power densities than reported here and would be part of our future research. The photocurrent generation was found to be fairly stable in our studies if the nutrient supply is not deprived. Upon addition of 1,4-benzoquinone mediator, the power density increased by nearly two orders of magnitude. This work also demonstrates that photo-bio anodes made of whole cells of microorganisms such as NOS would be highly beneficial for fuel cell applications than using isolated thylakoids or photosystems which require intensive isolation procedures, as well as suffer from a high degree of instability when immobilized on electrodes. Moreover, cyanobacteria are also known to survive under different environmental conditions such as varying levels of CO2, light exposure and dryness and therefore offer many advantages for practical photosynthesis based energy conversion applications. Research on antenna pigments and light harvesting complexes are crucial in revealing the nature's astounding capability of solar energy conversion. A detailed investigation of the mechanism of electron transport and the localization of redox active proteins in various membrane systems of the cyanobacteria would be highly useful for developing genetically engineered cyanobacteria with controllable electron transfer pathways and enhanced electrogenic capabilities.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful to The University of Georgia Research Foundation (Grant # FRG 2254) for financial support. The authors would also like to thank Prof. K. C. Das and Dr Manjinder Singh for providing cyanobacteria cultures for this work. We acknowledge Mr Rachit Jain and Prof. Yajun Yan for help with fluorescence measurements.
References
N. Quintana, F. Van der Kooy, M. D. Van de Rhee, G. P. Voshol and R. Verpoorte, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 91, 471–490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rosenbaum, Z. He and L. T. Angenent, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 259–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Pisciotta, Y. Zou and I. V. Baskakov, PLoS One, 2010, 5, 10 Search PubMed .
E. Katz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 365, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Solov'ev, E. Katz, V. A. Shuvalov and Y. E. Erokhin, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1991, 26, 29–41 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz, A. Y. Shkuropatov and V. A. Shuvalov, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1990, 23, 239–247 CrossRef CAS .
E. Katz, A. Y. Shkuropatov, O. I. Vagabova and V. A. Shuvalov, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1989, 976, 121–128 CrossRef .
K. H. Sjoholm, M. Rasmussen and S. D. Minteer, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, G7–G9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. O. Calkins, Y. Umasankar, H. O'Neill and R. P. Ramasamy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1891–1900 CAS .
R. Carpentier, S. Lemieux, M. Mimeault, M. Purcell and D. C. Goetze, Bioelectrochem. Bioenerg., 1989, 22, 391–401 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Lam, E. F. Irwin, K. E. Healy and L. W. Lin, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 117, 480–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, J. Wasserman, A. Trifonov, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 7 Search PubMed .
A. Badura, D. Guschin, B. Esper, T. Kothe, S. Neugebauer, W. Schuhmann and M. Rogner, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 1043–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vittadello, M. Y. Gorbunov, D. T. Mastrogiovanni, L. S. Wielunski, E. L. Garfunkel, F. Guerrero, D. Kirilovsky, M. Sugiura, A. W. Rutherford, A. Safari and P. G. Falkowski, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 471–475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ulas and G. W. Brudvig, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13260–13263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Faulkner, S. Lees, P. N. Ciesielski, D. E. Cliffel and G. K. Jennings, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 8409–8412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Terasaki, N. Yamamoto, T. Hiraga, I. Sato, Y. Inoue and S. Yamada, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 499, 153–156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mershin, K. Matsumoto, L. Kaiser, D. Y. Yu, M. Vaughn, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. D. Bruce, M. Graetzel and S. G. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 7 Search PubMed .
N. Lebedev, S. A. Trammell, A. Spano, E. Lukashev, I. Griva and J. Schnur, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12044–12045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, R. Tamamushi and T. Ogawa, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., B, 1985, 35B, 191–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yagishita, T. Horigome and K. Tanaka, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 1993, 56, 393–399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zou, J. Pisciotta, R. B. Billmyre and I. V. Baskakov, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 939–946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Torimura, A. Miki, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 496, 21–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pisciotta, Y. J. Zou and I. V. Baskakov, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2011, 91, 377–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. McCormick, P. Bombelli, A. M. Scott, A. J. Philips, A. G. Smith, A. C. Fisher and C. J. Howe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4699–4709 CAS .
Y. A. Gorby, S. Yanina, J. S. McLean, K. M. Rosso, D. Moyles, A. Dohnalkova, T. J. Beveridge, I. S. Chang, B. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, D. E. Culley, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini, E. A. Hill, L. Shi, D. A. Elias, D. W. Kennedy, G. Pinchuk, K. Watanabe, S. Ishii, B. E. Logan, K. H. Nealson and J. K. Fredrickson, PNAS, 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Umasankar, D. B. Brooks, B. Brown, Z. Zhou and R. P. Ramasamy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201301306 .
N. S. Parimi, Y. Umasankar, P. Atanassov and R. P. Ramasamy, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Ramasamy, H. R. Luckarift, D. Ivnitski, P. Atanassov and G. R. Johnson, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 6045–6047 RSC .
M. Potts, Eur. J. Phys., 1999, 34, 319–328 Search PubMed .
R. MacColl, J. Struct. Biol., 1998, 124, 311–334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Herrero and E. Flores, The cyanobacteria. Molecular biology, genomics and evolution, Caister Academic Press, Norfolk, UK,  2006 Search PubMed .
B. D. Hsu, J. Y. Lee and R. L. Pan, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1986, 141, 682–688 CrossRef CAS .
A. Trebst, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 1978, 284, 591–599 CrossRef CAS .

          W. F. Vermaas, Photosynthesis and Respiration in Cyanobacteria, Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Nature Publishing Group,  2001 Search PubMed .
B. V. Trubitsin, V. V. Ptushenko, O. A. Koksharova, M. D. Mamedov, L. A. Vitukhnovskaya, I. A. Grigorev, A. Y. Semenov and A. N. Tikhonov, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 2005, 1708, 238–249 CAS .

          W. W. Adams, C. R. Zarter, K. E. Mueh, V. Amiard and B. Demmig-Adams, Advances in Photosynthesis and Respiration, Springer, Dordrecht,  2006, vol. 22, pp. 49–64 Search PubMed .
S. Berry, D. Schneider, W. F. Vermaas and M. Rogner, Biochemistry, 2002, 41, 3422–3429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. I. Kufryk and W. F. Vermaas, J. Bacteriol., 2006, 188, 1286–1294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Roberts, M. K. Bowman and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 7707–7716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Roberts and D. M. Kramer, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 13407–13412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Guikema and C. F. Yocum, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1978, 189, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kouchkovsky and F. Kouchkovsky, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1974, 368, 113–124 CrossRef .
J. L. Cape, M. K. Bowman and D. M. Kramer, Trends Plant Sci., 2006, 11, 46–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Zhang, A. Primak, J. Cape, M. K. Bowman, D. M. Kramer and W. A. Cramer, Biochemistry, 2004, 43, 16329–16336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Izawa, R. Kraayenhof, E. K. Ruuge and D. Devault, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1973, 314, 328–339 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ouitrakul and S. Izawa, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1973, 305, 105–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Hosler and C. F. Yocum, Plant Physiol., 1987, 83, 965–969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Joet, L. Cournac, E. M. Horvath, P. Medgyesy and G. Peltier, Plant Physiol., 2001, 125, 1919–1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lau, E. R. Adkins, R. P. Ramasamy, H. R. Luckarift, G. R. Johnson and P. Atanassov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 162–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Umasankar and R. P. Ramasamy, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 2546–2549 CAS .
J. Roy, H. R. Luckarift, C. Lau, A. Falase, K. E. Garcia, L. K. Ista, P. Chellamuthu, R. P. Ramasamy, V. Gadhamshetty, G. Wagner, Y. A. Gorby, K. H. Nealson, O. Bretschger, G. R. Johnson and P. Atanassov, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10020–10027 RSC .
R. P. Ramasamy, V. Gadhamshetty, L. J. Nadeau and G. R. Johnson, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 104, 882–891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tsujimura, A. Wadano, K. Kano and T. Ikeda, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2001, 29, 225–231 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00494aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of electron transport pathways in a cyanobacterium immobilized on a CNT modified electrode. Black solid arrows represent the photosynthetic linear electron transport chain, black broken arrows represent the cyclic electron transport pathway in photosynthesis, pink broken arrows represent the respiratory electron transport chain, and red stars represent blocking sites of inhibitors: (1) DCMU, (2) DBMIB, (3) KCN and (4) antimycin A. The extracellular electron transport pathways from P-ETC to CNT are identified using site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors. Dark blue block arrows represent extracellular electron transport from PSII to CNT via the PQ pool and bd-quinol oxidase, and yellow block arrows represent mediated electron transport between BQ and CNT. (Abbreviations: CM: cytoplasmic membrane; TM: thylakoid membrane; NDH: NADH dehydrogenase; SDH: succinate dehydrogenase; ARTO: alternate respiratory transport oxidase; Cyt Cox: cytochrome C oxidase; PSII: photosystem II; Cyt b6f: cytochrome b6f complex; PC: plastocyanin; PSI: photosystem I; Fd: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin NADP+ reductase; FPR: ferredoxin plastoquinone reductase; PQ: plastoquinone; PQH2: plastoquinol; BQ: 1,4-benzoquinone oxidized form; BQH2: hydroquinone).	 

 	Fig. 2  Scanning electron microscopy images of (a) CNT modified CP, (b) NOS immobilized on CNT modified CP and (c) AV immobilized on CNT modified CP. The attachment sites indicated by arrows can be clearly seen from the images in (b) and (c).	 

 	Fig. 3  Electrochemical characterization of NOS and AV immobilized on CNT modified CP under alternative light and dark conditions. (a) Comparison of open circuit potential variations of NOS/CNT, AV/CNT and bare CNT modified CPs. (b) Photocurrent densities measured as a function of time at an applied voltage of 0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) for NOS/CNT, AV/CNT and bare CNT modified CPs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Nyquist plot showing impedance behavior of CNT modified CP with and without NOS under light and dark conditions. The insets are the simple Randles circuit used to fit the impedance data and the table shows polarization resistance of the different electrodes under study.	 

 	Fig. 5  Stability of photocurrent generation in the NOS immobilized electrode.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Photocurrent response of NOS/CNT modified CP to monochromatic lights of different wavelengths. (b) Line chart shows the absorption spectrum of NOS in the visible region and the bars represent normalized current density generated by NOS in the wavelengths studied (refer text). The photosynthetic pigment Chl-a contributed maximum to the light capture followed by PhyC.	 

 	Fig. 7  Effects of site-specific photosynthesis inhibitors on the photocurrent generation in NOS: (a) DCMU, (b) DBMIB, and (c) KCN, AMA and AMA + DCMU. The insets in (a) and (b) represent the percentage of photocurrent inhibition by NOS at different concentrations of inhibitors. Control represents no inhibitor case.	 

 	Fig. 8  Polarization and power density curves of the photo-bioelectrochemical cell with a NOS/CNT anode and a laccase/CNT cathode. (a) DET based power generation without any mediator under light and dark conditions. (b) Comparison of DET and mediated electron transfer using BQ as a mediator.	 


1	
Nostoc sp.	CNT/CP	
Laccase/CNT/CP	240	35	18.13	This work
2	Freshwater photosynthetic biofilm	Poly pyrrole/carbon paint	Pt/carbon cloth	30	1.3	1.78	Zou et al. (2009)22
3	Mixed photosynthetic bacteria	Nanostructured poly pyrrole/carbon paint	Pt/carbon cloth	120	6	5.71	Pisciotta et al. (2010)3
4	
Synechococcus sp. WH 5701	ITO-PET	
	93	8.5	0.68	McCormick et al.25


1	
Nostoc sp.	CNT/CP	
Laccase/CNT/CP	BQ	2334	100	51.8	This work
2	
Synechococcus
	Carbon felt	ABTS/BOX/carbon felt	DMBQ	444	58	17.2	Tsujimura et al. (2001)54
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: See DOI: 10.1039/c4cp00494a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2014
