A-site perovskite oxides: an emerging functional material for electrocatalysis and photocatalysis   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA09756J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA09756J
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6650-6670A-site perovskite oxides: an emerging functional material for electrocatalysis and photocatalysis†

        
          
            Xue 
            Li‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Haitao 
            Zhao‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Liang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yonglan 
            Luo
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guang 
            Chen
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xifeng 
            Shi
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Siyu 
            Lu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Shuyan 
            Gao
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jianming 
            Hu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Liu
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Xuping 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Physics and Electrical Engineering, Chongqing Normal University, Chongqing 401331, China. E-mail: hujianming@cqnu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, Sichuan, China. E-mail: liuqian@uestc.edu.cn; xpsun@uestc.edu.cn
cGreen The Key Laboratory of Life-Organic Analysis and Key Laboratory of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Qufu Normal University, Qufu 273165, Shandong, China
dCollege of Chemistry, Chemical Engineering and Materials Science, Shandong Normal University, Jinan 250014, Shandong, China
eGreen Catalysis Center and College of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China
fSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Henan Normal University, Xinxiang 453007, Henan, China
Received 
      6th October 2020
    , Accepted 9th February 2021First published on 10th February 2021AbstractCatalysts for electrochemical and photochemical reactions play critical roles in energy storage and conversion as well as degradation of organic pollutants. Due to their unique structure, composition flexibility and high stability, A-site perovskite oxides are promising candidates in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. In this article, we review the recent progress of A-site perovskite oxides as an emerging functional material in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. Firstly, we summarize the different factors affecting the structure and composition of A-site perovskite oxides. Then, the performance of A-site perovskite oxides (bimetallic, ternary metal, multimetallic and oxynitride) in electrocatalysis and photocatalysis is systematically discussed. Particularly, the rational optimization strategies (such as doping, introducing defects, and surface modification) of A-site cation perovskite oxides (A = La, Sr, Ba, Ca, Ag, Bi, Na, K) are also described to further enhance the performance. Finally, we conclude the challenges and prospects of A-site perovskite oxides to improve the (electro) photocatalytic activity, conductivity and stability.Xuping SunXuping Sun received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. During 2006–2009, he carried out postdoctoral research at Konstanz University, University of Toronto, and Purdue University. In 2010, he started his independent research career as a full Professor at CIAC and then moved to Sichuan University in 2015. In 2018, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, where he founded the Research Center of Nanocatalysis & Sensing. He was recognized as a highly cited researcher (2018–2020) in both areas of chemistry and materials science by Clarivate Analytics. He published over 490 papers with total citations over 42000 and an h-index of 108. His research mainly focuses on the rational design of functional nanostructures toward applications in electrochemistry for energy conversion and storage, sensing, and the environment.
1. Introduction
Effective energy development and environmental protection are of utmost importance to sustainable development.1 However, due to the consumption of fossil fuels with serious environmental pollution issues, the conversion and storage of clean energy as well as pollutant degradation have become the major challenges.2 One of the most promising ways to solve these problems is to develop electrochemical processes that can convert water, carbon dioxide and nitrogen in the atmosphere into useful and valuable products (hydrogen,3 hydrocarbons,4,5 oxygenates,6 ammonia,7,8etc.). However, these processes need electrocatalysts to speed up the reactions by lowering the energy barrier (the maximum energy state between two reaction intermediates) of the short-lived transition state.9 Electrocatalysis (EC), a catalytic process aided by applied electricity, is deemed to convert electrical energy to chemical energy,10 while photocatalysis (PC) is used to transform solar energy to chemical energy.11 Similarly, both processes require efficient catalysts to improve the reaction efficiencies. Among them, noble metals (e.g., Au, Ag, Pd, and Ir) are promising for most (electro) photocatalytic reactions because of their excellent performance,12–16 but the high cost of such catalysts limits their wide application. Thus, designing and developing earth-abundant alternatives are of great importance for such applications.
Due to their unique structure and composition flexibility as well as high stability, perovskite oxides (ABO3) have been extensively explored as a class of versatile materials for EC and PC applications.17–20 In particular, perovskite oxides have been widely used in electrocatalysis with the following two advantages: (1) low cost with an easy synthetic process which allows for superior stoichiometric control, reproducibility and homogeneity;21 (2) extraordinary capability of accommodating a wide range of substituting and doping elements to modulate their properties.22,23 At the same time, perovskite oxides offer exciting opportunities for application in PC. It should be pointed out that halide perovskites have also attracted increasing interest in PC applications because of their excellent photovoltaic properties such as an extremely high optical absorption coefficient,24 super long carrier diffusion length and low-temperature solution processability.25,26 However, the practical utilization of halide perovskites in PC is rather challenging due to their vulnerability to moisture, temperature, environment and toxicity.
The catalytic activity of perovskite oxides is affected by many factors, among which, the A-site cations of perovskite oxides play a vital role in catalytic activities. Firstly, the different cation radii of A sites will lead to the change of the crystal structure. The electronegativity of the A-site ion will cause the octahedron to tilt, and different degrees of tilting of the octahedra give rise to different crystal fields, which result in different electronic and optical properties. Meanwhile, the A-site cations within perovskites play a critical role in determining the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activities, as the A–O interactions may shift the redox energies of the B-site cations. For a fixed B oxidation state, a slight increase of the B–O distance is observed as the radius of the A-site cation increases, which can promote an optimal electronic configuration of the B-sites for the four-electron ORR. Besides, the electronic conductivity can also be affected by A-site cations, because the 4f electrons of the A-site cations contribute to the density of states around the Fermi level. Secondly, the introduction of A-site deficiency results in the expansion of the lattice due to the increase of oxygen vacancies and optimization of the eg occupancy of the B-site transition metal, which greatly improves the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) activity of catalysts. Thirdly, the adjustment of A-site stoichiometry can effectively change B-site ions' valence and oxygen vacancy concentration. Recent developments in A-site occupied alkaline-earth or rare-earth metal perovskite oxides are worth paying attention to due to their promising technological application.27 Controlling the size of the A-site cations can also effectively manipulate the crystal structures and physical properties of these perovskite oxides.28 Therefore, developing and designing different A-site cations, the substitution/doping and introducing defects at A-sites in perovskite oxides (A-site perovskite oxides) to improve the catalytic activity are critical for different applications.
Although there are recent reviews on perovskite oxides as promising inorganic catalysts in chemical reactions,9 solid-oxide fuel cells (SOFCs),29 photoelectrochemical water splitting,30 and energy conversion and environmental treatment.31 The literature about the effect of different A-site cations on structure and performance of perovskite oxides has not been covered yet. Moreover, with the development of various perovskite oxides, enormous progress of A-site perovskite oxides has been made in recent years. Therefore, it is of interest to investigate the influence of A sites in perovskite oxides.21,32
In this review, we firstly introduce the structures and components of various A-site cations of perovskite oxides, and the influence of introducing defects, doping and substitution of A-sites on performance. Secondly, we discuss the applications of different perovskite oxides (bimetallic, ternary metal, multimetallic and oxynitride) as catalysts in EC and PC. Thirdly, the performance of perovskite oxides based on A site elements (A = La, Sr, Ba, Ca, Ag, Bi, Na, K) in EC and PC is highlighted, and the optimization strategies of A-site perovskite oxides are also discussed. Finally, the challenges and opportunities in this research field related to designing more advanced (electro) photocatalysts are discussed.
2. Structure and composition of A-site perovskite oxides
A-site perovskite oxides are ceramic materials that belong to the class of mixed oxides with a general formula of ABO3. A stands for an alkaline-earth or rare-earth metal cation, occupying the 12-fold coordinated cub-octahedral cages of the oxygen sub-lattice, and B denotes a transition-metal cation (e.g., Mn, Co, Fe, Nb, Ta, and Ti) surrounded by six oxygen atoms in an octahedral coordination.33 The metal at A sites usually has a stable valence (e.g., La3+ and Sr2+) and is hard to reduce. Besides, the doping or substitution at A site cations also has a significant effect on the catalytic performance.33,34 In general, in an ideal cubic symmetrical structure of ABO3 perovskite oxides, the A-site cation is coordinated with twelve oxygen ions, while the B site cation forms a BO6 octahedron complexing with six oxygen ions. Most importantly, in order to form the perovskite structure, the radii of A site and B site ions need to satisfy eqn (1):35 (1)where t is the tolerance factor. rA, rB and rO represent the ionic radii of the A site cation, the B site cation and the oxygen anion, respectively. Stable perovskites usually satisfy 0.78 < t ≤ 1.05. When t is 1, it is an ideal perovskite structure. If the t value exceeds this range, it would belong to another structure type. This can cause the crystal lattice to deform in a certain direction to form other crystallographic structures, such as tetragonal, orthogonal, and trigonal structures.36 Different crystalline structures are found to be vital in tailoring the electronic and geometric structures of (electro) photocatalysts to enhance their catalytic performance.37 The different structures between perovskite oxides and spinel oxides should be clarified clearly. Compared with perovskite oxides, the general formula of spinel-type oxides is AB2O4, which consists of cation A typically charged as 2+ at tetrahedral sites and cation B charged as 3+ at octahedral sites. In addition, depending on how the cation occupies each octahedral or tetrahedral site, the spinel is either called normal or an inverse spinel structure.38
There are several typical types of A-site perovskite crystal structures and spinel oxides as presented in Fig. 1. The structures of A-site perovskite oxides can directly affect the performance of catalysts.39 Currently, various methods have been emerged to fabricate the perovskite oxides, such as precipitation,40 complexation,41 sol–gel,42 and Pechini methods.43,44 Of note is that the morphology and crystal structure of perovskite oxides correlated with the synthetic method, further affecting its catalytic performance.45 For example, the sol–gel method, as a well-established method to make perovskite-type complex oxides, offers a high purity of phase structures with precise control of the composition and lower temperature for materials' sintering, but it normally produces perovskites with large and agglomerated particles. Besides, the precipitation method can be used to prepare perovskites with their size on the nanoscale, even featuring various structural morphologies such as nanoparticles, nanodots and nanowires or complex structures. For instance, Valant et al.46 synthesized BiFeO3 through a solid-state reaction. The sample's crystallite size was 78.5 nm and the specific surface area was 1.2 m2 g−1. In contrast, Huo et al.47 reported BiFeO3 with a rhombohedral structure (Fig. 1a), high crystallization (crystallite size was 13.3 nm) and high specific surface area (28.1 m2 g−1), which was synthesized by a solvothermal process assisted by the chelating effect of citric acid. Not surprisingly, the photoactivity of this catalyst was higher than that of BiFeO3 synthesized via a solid-state reaction for organic dyes under visible-light irradiation. Jung et al.48 reported LaCoO3, which was prepared using a microwave-assisted method. The crystallite size of particles was determined and the particle size of this catalyst was extremely small. Meanwhile, the authors also attempted to prepare such a catalyst by different methods. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy suggested that the different preparation methods would affect the distribution of oxygen species in the surface layer of the catalysts. It is well accepted that a hollow structure is highly desirable for electrocatalytic reactions because of its numerous catalytically active sites and high surface areas, favorable for enhanced mass transport.49 Kim et al.50 also synthesized LaCoO3via a hydrothermal reaction, forming hollow nanospheres after heat treatment. Powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) analysis indicated that the rhombohedral phase of LaCoO3 perovskite had a unit cell with octahedral CoO6 subunits connected with each other through corner-sharing oxygen ions (Fig. 1b).
 Fig. 1  Crystal structures of different A-site perovskite oxides. (a) Structure of the rhombohedral cell in perovskite-type BiFeO3. Color codes are Bi (blue), Fe (black) and O (red). Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier; (b) schematic illustration of rhombohedral structured LaCoO3 perovskite. Color codes are La (green), Co (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society; (c) hexagonal BaTiO3. Color codes are Ba (grey), Ti (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier; (d) crystal structure of porous CaMnO3. Color codes are Ca (purple), Mn (green), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) orthorhombic structure. Color codes are [FeO6] Oh (orange), [CoO6] Oh (blue), La (green), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 61 with permission from the American Chemical Society; (f) unit-cell polyhedral structure of BaBi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−x at room temperature. Color codes are Ba (green), Co2, Bi, and Sc (purple), Co1 (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) crystal structure with CuO4 tetrahedra and CoO6 octahedra. Color codes are Cu (green), Co (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Doping has been extensively adopted to tailor the properties of oxide materials both physically and chemically,51 such as the lattice structure,52 electronic structure,53 lattice defects and diffusion behavior.54 All of this could improve their catalytic performance for various redox reactions. Meanwhile, the introduction of foreign cations into the oxide lattice can also change the concentration of oxygen vacancies, inducing phase transition or even structural distortion.55 Oxygen vacancies are responsible for the change of the perovskite crystal structure. And catalytic activity is strongly related to oxygen vacancy concentration, resulting in a distorted structure that is non-cubic. Notably, the concentration of defects rises with increasing annealing temperature.56 Studies further show that oxygen vacancy concentration (the channel for oxygen ion transport) is among the main factors influencing the rate of oxygen diffusion in perovskites.57,58 Chen et al.59 reported a new type of oxygen-deficient BaTiO3–x synthesized by using a sol–gel method. As seen from Fig. 1c, the TiO6 octahedra share both corners and faces. Moreover, the structures of orthorhombic and polyhedral unit cells (Fig. 1d–f) were also investigated.60–62 Concerning doping, most of the work is conducted on doping rare earth metals at A-sites and transition metals at B-sites in contrast to their properties. There are several different doping methods. (i) A site doping (A1–xA′xBO3); (ii) B site doping (AB1−xB′xO3); (iii) A/B site doping (A1−xA′xB1−yB′yO3). Wang et al.63 fabricated mesoporous thin-walled spinel-type oxides CuCo2O4@C with abundant nitrogen-doped nanotubes via a coaxial electrospinning technique. The sample's structure was of cubic spinel-type (Fig. 1g), and the unit cell structure consists of CuO4 tetrahedra and CoO6 octahedra. Xue et al.64 also reported La1−xAgxMnO3 (LAM) perovskites doped with Ag. The doping of 30% Ag in the A site of LMO (LAM-30) could effectively improve its ORR catalytic activity. The result shows that the properties and structures of perovskite oxides can be modified by doping of A-site cations.
3. Applications of A-site perovskite oxides in electrocatalysis
Perovskite oxides are extensively investigated as catalysts in energy storage67 and electrocatalysis17,18 due to their exceptional stability, electronic structure,53 ionic conductivity,65 electron mobility,66 and redox behaviour. As aforementioned, the A-site cations within perovskite oxides play a critical role in determining their catalytic activity, as different A-site cations can induce different crystal structures, oxygen vacancy concentration change, and variation of B-site ion's valence. In addition, the catalytic performance of perovskite oxides with different A-sites is presented in Table S1.†
Recently, Celorrio et al.68 investigated a set of perovskite-type manganites (AMnO3) with different A site elements (Sr, La, Ca and Y) as electrocatalysts for the ORR. It was found that AMnO3 with both the largest and smallest ionic radii (Sr = 1.32 Å and Y = 1.04 Å) of A site elements showed an inferior onset potential (ca. 0.65 V), while LaMnO3 (ca. 0.76 V) with an ionic radius of 1.17 Å demonstrated an optimal onset potential among all four samples, revealing that the different ionic radii of A site elements can profoundly influence the overall catalytic performance. On the other hand, the Mn–O bond length would simultaneously increase/decrease when the A-site element changes, which also influences the catalytic performance. Therefore, interesting trends behind the activity change arising from A-site substitution can be used for the rational design of perovskite oxide electrocatalysts. However, in more cases, the effects of the A-site were rather complex to assess. To further illustrate how A-site elements influence the catalytic performance of perovskite oxides, examples based on recent research progress reflecting optimization strategies are discussed in the following sections.
3.1 Bimetallic A-site perovskite oxides
It is expected that the “advantageous properties of both components” can be combined within one material.69 A widely investigated bimetallic system is based on Ru and Ir with the aim of combining the excellent catalytic activity of ruthenium oxide (RuO2) and the high electrochemical stability of iridium oxide (IrO2).70 In recent years, various bimetallic oxides, such as SrRuO3 (ref. 71) and Y2Ir2O7,72 have been investigated to either reduce the corrosion of RuO2 or decrease the amount of Ir while keeping their electrocatalytic properties. However, the low electrocatalytic activity and poor intrinsic properties of perovskite oxides limit their applications. Interestingly, partial A-site substitution with other transition metals and engineering A-site deficiency of perovskite oxides are effective strategies to tailor their intrinsic properties. Therefore, it is extremely desirable to develop bimetallic perovskite oxides with different A-site cations to serve as electrocatalysts. In this section, the performance of perovskite oxides with different A site elements (A = La, Sr, Ba, Ca) is discussed.

3.1.1 La-Based perovskite oxides. 
La is an environmentally friendly rare earth material and considered to be biocompatible.73 It is found that the reactivity toward partial oxidation can be continuously improved by varying the A site cations of perovskite oxides from Eu to La. The phenomenon could be attributed to the relatively larger ionic radius of La3+, which led to lowered B–O bond strength.74 Therefore, La has been widely used in the synthesis of perovskite oxides, which exhibited excellent performance in different fields of catalysis in recent years.
LaCoO3 (LCO), with a simple chemical formula, has been regarded as a promising candidate for the OER and ORR due to its potential for performance improvement with various synthetic routes, exhibiting superior activity compared to other perovskite oxides.75,76 To further improve its electrocatalytic performance, Wang's team reported that cation deficiency was introduced into the A-site of perovskite LCO to boost the electrocatalytic activity.77 It manifested that the particle size of the samples decreases with the increase of A-site deficiency, which was around 50–100 nm for pristine LaCoO3, 40–80 nm for La0.95CoO3−δ and 30–70 nm for La0.90CoO3−δ (Fig. 2a–c). Besides, oxygen vacancies can be created with A-site deficiency introduction into LCO. The weight percentage of the highly oxidative oxygen species (O22−/O−) for La0.90CoO3−δ is larger than that for both La0.95CoO3−δ and LaCoO3. The highly oxidative oxygen species (O22−/O−) are closely related to the surface oxygen vacancies, which play an important role in the ORR/OER electrocatalytic activity improvement. As shown in Fig. 2d, the A-site deficient La0.90CoO3−δ exhibited the best ORR catalytic performance based on the current density measured. The potential for the catalysts to reach a current density of 1 mA cm−2 was 0.662 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) for La0.90CoO3−δ more positive than 0.635 V for La0.95CoO3−δ and 0.594 V for LCO. The ORR activities were also revealed by the Tafel slope (Fig. 2e). The OER performance of the as-prepared perovskites was further investigated. Mass activities (Fig. 2f), which were obtained by the normalization of the current density with the catalyst loading, further confirmed the OER activity trend. Besides, A-site cation deficient La0.90CoO3−δ exhibited a smaller Tafel slope (Fig. 2g). The LaMnO3-based perovskite is one of the most promising catalysts for applications in clean energy conversion and pollution control. The oxidation state of the B site cation can be easily regulated through doping/substituting the A-site of the perovskite lattice to improve the catalytic activity.78,79 Li et al.78 reported that La1.15MnO3+δ with excess La at the A site possesses a lowered average oxidation state of the Mn cation and abundant oxygen vacancies, which provide more active sites for peroxymono-sulfate activation.heir work provides a new effective strategy to tailor the oxidation state of B-site metals and defects of perovskite oxides through manipulating A-site cation stoichiometry. Yan et al.80 also synthesized perovskite/carbon nanocomposites (La0.99MnO3.03/C) via a rapid gel auto-combustion approach at a low temperature of 180 °C as a superior electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction in Zn–air batteries. It is worth mentioning that the nanocomposites can efficiently catalyze Zn–air batteries and deliver a peak power density of 430 mW cm−2, an energy density of 837 W h kgZn.−1 and 340 h stability at a current rate of 10 mA cm−2. These superior electrochemical performances can be attributed to the following aspects: (1) the non-stoichiometry at the A site made the multivalent Mn with eg filling close to one; (2) homogeneous dispersion of small-sized LaMnO nanoparticles; (3) relatively high specific surface area and pore volume; (4) strong interaction between the perovskite oxide and carbon substrate.
 Fig. 2  TEM images of the as-prepared different A-site deficient (a) LaCoO3, (b) La0.95CoO3−δ and (c) La0.9CoO3−δ. The scale bar is 100 nm; (d) ORR polarization of LaCoO3, La0.95CoO3–δ and La0.9CoO3−δ at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH solution; (e) Tafel plots of LaCoO3, La0.95CoO3−δ and La0.9CoO3−δ; (f) mass activities at 1.6 V vs. RHE; (g) Tafel plots. Adapted from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In previous studies, LaNiO3 (LNO) has shown the capability to catalyze the ORR.81–83 Different structural designs such as porous LaNiO3 nanocubes82 and hollow LaNiO3 (ref. 83) have been designed to enhance the ORR performance. Different from structural design, introducing A-site cation deficiency into perovskite oxides to improve their electrocatalysis is relatively simple.77,84,85 Choi et al.86 reported that 5 atom% A-site (La) deficiency in LaNiO3 could result in an increase of the Ni–O–Ni bond angle and expansion of the bandwidth, enhancing the charge transfer ability. A-site cation deficient films were deposited on NdGaO3 substrates by a pulsed laser deposition method using La1−xNiO3 (x = 0, 0.05, 0.1, 0.15) targets. Soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) revealed that A-site cation deficiency reduced the effective tolerance factor and increased oxygen distortion. To demonstrate the effect of A-site cation deficiency, the electrocatalytic activities were tested in 1 M NaOH solution. The experiment showed that the La0.95NiO3 film with 5% A-site cation deficiency exhibited enhanced OER performance, whereas the high A-site deficient LaNiO3 showed reduced OER activities.
Zhu et al.87 also reported a simple and effective strategy for enhancing ORR and OER electrocatalytic activity in alkaline solution by tuning A-site cation deficiency in LaFeO3. La1−xFeO3−δ perovskites with different A-site deficiency extents (x = 0, 0.02, 0.05, 0.1, 0.2) were synthesized by a sol–gel process. PXRD showed that for the A-site cation deficient La1−xFeO3−δ perovskites, the main peaks shifted slightly to higher angles compared to those for pristine LaFeO3, implying a lattice shrinkage due to the smaller number of Fe cations. Among all of the A-site cation deficient samples, La0.95FeO3−δ had the smallest particle size and the largest surface area, which exhibited excellent ORR and OER performance (Fig. 3a–d). In particular, the significant enhancement can be attributed to the following two key factors: (1) surface oxygen vacancies as reflected by the highly oxidative oxygen species were created in A-site cation deficient perovskites (Fig. 3e); (2) a small number of Fe4+ species with an optimal eg orbital filling existed in the A-site cation deficient perovskites. Their work highlighted the importance of tuning cation deficiency in perovskites as an effective strategy for enhancing ORR and OER activity. Nitrogen fixation through an electrocatalytic N2 reduction reaction (NRR) is treated as the most promising approach for ammonia synthesis, which is attributed to its environmentally benign and energy-saving properties, and could be powered by renewable solar and wind energy. Recently, Yu et al.88 reported a La-based perovskite oxide (La2Ti2O7) and it was anticipated to be active in catalysing the NRR. In a 0.1 M HCl electrolyte, the catalyst showed a high NH3 yield rate of 25.15 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 with a faradaic efficiency of 4.55% at −0.55 V vs. RHE, and high electrochemical stability.
 Fig. 3  LaFeO3 with different A-site deficiency, (a) LSV curves for the ORR on a RDE (1600 rpm) comprised of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1), together with LSV curves for a glassy carbon (GC) electrode and GC-supported carbon electrode; (b) Tafel plots of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts; (c) LSV curves for the OER on a RDE (1600 rpm) comprised of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1); (c) Tafel plots of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts; (d) schematic illustration of the formation of oxygen vacancies and Fe4+ in A-site-deficient La1−xFeO3−δ perovskites. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


3.1.2 Sr-Based perovskite oxides. 
Sr at the A-site can promote OER active sites and significantly improve the surface intrinsic activity at the perovskite surface.89–91 In 2010, Galal et al.92 firstly prepared SrPdO3via the citrate method. Its catalytic activity toward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) was investigated. After modifying the electrode surface with carbon paste, it showed up to 100 times higher efficiency towards electrocatalytic production of hydrogen and exhibited catalytic activity toward the HER with an activation energy of 27.9 kJ mol−1 for SrPdO3. Because the bond angle controls the charge hybridization between the B cation d-orbitals and O 2p-orbitals, the electronic structure and magnetism can be remarkably dependent on the A site cation and its radius. It must also be mentioned that the electro-transport and magnetism of perovskite alkaline-earth ruthenate oxides are sensitive to the lattice distortion associated with the A site cation size.93,94 Wang's team prepared a set of SrRuO3-based samples with identical averaged A-site size but different A-site cation disorder (size mismatch).93 The above experiment demonstrated that the high stability of orthorhombic-SrRuO3 originated from the electro-transport and magnetism against the A-site disorder. Kim et al.71 also reported a nano-scaled SrRuO3 perovskite, which was prepared by a simple and scalable flame synthesis method. The electrochemical performance tested in different electrolytes (0.1 M KOH and 0.1 M HClO4, respectively) indicated that in an acidic electrolyte, the Tafel slope values were obtained to be much lower than those in alkaline (52 and 74 mV dec−1 for acidic and alkaline, respectively).


3.1.3 Ba-based perovskite oxides. 
Ba has a large ionic radius, and the content of Ba will also affect the morphology and determine the performance.95,96 For instance, Jin et al.97 studied the relationship between ferromagnetism and ionic size of A-site (rA) in ARuO3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba).97 The striking difference of the magnetic properties between SrRuO3 and CaRuO3 made cubic perovskite BaRuO3 become an interesting candidate because of the larger A-site ionic radius in BaRuO3. The significant structural changes as a function of rA were summarized. It mainly includes the following two aspects: (1) the bending of the B–O–B bonds decreases from 148.6° in CaRuO3 to 162.6° in SrRuO3 and finally to 180° in cubic BaRuO3; (2) as the ionic radius increases, the bond length of B–O becomes longer. A high activity for the ORR can be achieved for some oxides with poor apparent oxygen-ion conductivity but a high concentration of oxygen vacancies in their lattice structures. It should be pointed out that when the A-sites of perovskite oxides were completely replaced by Ba2+ with a low valence state (2+), such oxides usually possess high oxygen vacancy concentrations.98 The BF-derived SOFCs achieved a high power output with a peak power density of 870 mW cm−2 and very fast oxygen surface exchange kinetics (strongly correlated with the surface oxygen vacancy concentration) of the BF oxide.


3.1.4 Ca-based perovskite oxides. 
Ca is used for the formation of A-sites in perovskite oxides because of its stable chemical properties and easy availability.99 For example, Li et al.100 reported that CaCoO3 with a small lattice parameter and small surface oxygen separation showed more stable performance in improving OER activity. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, CaCoO3 has a notably shorter Co–O bond length than SrCoO3 (1.87 Å vs. 1.92 Å) because of the smaller ionic radius of Ca2+ than Sr2+ ions at A-sites. The shorter Co–O bond length may not only lower the onset potential but also increase the activity by reducing the surface oxygen separation. Therefore, CaCoO3 has a higher OER activity than other A-site perovskite oxides (Fig. 4c–f). In Kim's work,101 Ca2Mn2O5 was successfully obtained from the parent CaMnO3via a reductive annealing process. Such a transformation allows for enriched oxygen vacancies and tuning of both A-site and B-site elements' electronic configurations, leading to an optimized unit cell structure with enhanced OER performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Electronic spin states of the octahedral site Co ions of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr) and Co3O4; (b) schematic band diagrams of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr). IS, intermediate spin; OER performance of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr), RuO2, LaCoO3, and Co3O4; (c) LSV at 1600 rpm in 0.1 M KOH; (d) overpotential required at 10 mA cm−2; (e) Tafel slopes; (f) chronoamperometric curves in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at 1.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted from ref. 100 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.1.5 Other A-site perovskite oxides. 
Except for La, Sr, Ba, and Ca, bimetallic perovskite oxides with other rare earth metals at A sites (such as Y,102 Gd,103 and Pr,104) have also been demonstrated as electrocatalysts showing high electrocatalytic activities due to their excellent electronic conductivity and expansion coefficients.105 Study demonstrated that Y cations at the A sites of pyrochlores have been speculated as a driving force for lattice distortion or to induce mobile oxygen vacancies.106,107 ACoO3−δ perovskites with different A-sites showed an unique behaviour of electrical conductivity and electronic structures. With increasing radii of A, the Co–O bond length and Co–O–Co bond angle increase.108 Jadhao et al.109 investigated the effect of rare earth metal ions at A sites with different sizes on the electronic and magnetic properties of cobaltates. Mossbauer spectra of YCoO3 at different temperatures against an Fe enriched iron absorber were analyzed. The high-spin Fe3+/low-spin FeIII ratio at low temperatures was considerably lower in YCoO3 than in LaCoO3 and other light cobaltates. This result could be explained in terms of the effect of the A ion size on the crystal field splitting. Meanwhile, the electron transport properties of YCoO3 were different from those of HoCoO3 but were closer to those of DyCoO3 due to the radius of Dy3+ being exactly equal to that of Y3+. There is also a comparison between ErCoO3 and YCoO3. Firstly, they have a similar orthorhombic crystal in the structure. Secondly, the room temperature isomer shift of Fe3+ in ErCoO3 was 0.73 mm−1 compared to 0.70 mm−1 in YCoO3. The higher value of the isomer shift in ErCoO3 was consistent with the change in the degree of covalency of the Co–O bond expected with the change in the size of the A site metal ion. Besides, among the different rare earth elements that form A-site perovskites, the thermal expansion coefficient of cobaltites decreases in the order of La, Pr, Nd, Sm, and Gd.110 Thus, GdCoO3 becomes a potential electrode material. Lenka's team recently reported GdCoO3 powder, which was synthesized by the solution polymerization method, and investigated its application as a cathode material in SOFCs.111
Compared with La, the Pr cation at the A site in perovskites is expected to enhance the catalytic activities and oxygen diffusivity due to the coexistence of Pr3+ and Pr4+ cations.112 The electrochemical properties of PrNiO3−δ as a cathode for SOFCs were reported by Vibhu et al.113

3.2 Ternary metallic A-site perovskite oxides
Owing to extensive oxygen non-stoichiometry in the crystal structure, ternary metallic perovskite oxides also widely investigated as electrocatalysts.114–117 In light of the composition, they can be divided into double A site perovskite oxides (AA′B2O5+δ)118 and metal-doped bimetallic A-site perovskite oxides.119 Especially, the former has a layered structure with alternating layers of |AOδ|BO2|A′O|BO2, where A, A′, and B represent a large-radius alkaline-earth metal, a small-radius lanthanide element, and transition metal element, respectively.120 Of particular note is that the A-site cation size mismatch (MA), which is defined as the difference between the average ionic radii of the A′-site and A-site and the average ionic radius of the A-site, plays an essential role in the surface chemistry and electrochemical performance of the double perovskite catalyst. The latter represent that A-site of bimetallic perovskite oxides is partially substituted with low-valence metal ions.122 In this case, oxygen vacancies would be generated after doping, further leading to the unstable oxidation states of B-site transition metal ions.51,64,83,123 These features may lead to an enhancement of oxygen mobility and kinetics, thus achieving high electrocatalytic activities. Consequently, the recent progress of ternary metallic A-site perovskite oxides is systemically discussed in the following section.

3.2.1 La-based perovskite oxides. 
As mentioned above, La-based A-site perovskite oxides have become one of the most popular materials in electrocatalysis, since they came into being as a potential electrocatalyst in the 1970s.124 The electrocatalytic performance of LaFeO3 can be improved through A-site defect introduction, and it facilitated the creation of Fe4+ with an eg orbital filling of 1.87 This has been proven to improve the electron configuration for boosting ORR activity.
In addition, doping at the A-site is also a reasonable optimization strategy. For example, Sun et al.125 reported that the thermal treatment cycle executed on Ag doped LaFeO3 (La0.95Ag0.05FeO3−δ) could stepwise switch on two different reaction sites (a certain number of oxygen vacancies and Fe4+ with an optimal electron configuration) for the ORR. The unique synergistic effects between two separate kinds of reaction sites enable the speed-up of oxygen adsorption, activation and O2− transportation. Notably, the tertiary thermal treatment step enabled the reconstruction of an A-site deficient perovskite, which can create oxygen vacancies. The oxygen vacancies in the A-site deficient perovskite could act as valid sites for binding oxygen and could enhance the electronic conductivity and ionic migration.126 By substitution in the A-site, the ORR and/or OER activities of LaMnO3 can be greatly improved. From the structural features of LaMnO3 (LMO), it is known that the oxidation state of Mn ions as well as the oxygen vacancies generated in the structure can be controlled by substitution with an external cation at the A-site of the perovskite structure.127,128
Cerium (Ce) is often reported as a good accelerator of the perovskite crystal lattice. Zhang's group reported La1−xCexMnO3 (LCMx, x = 0, 0.05, 0.10, and 0.15) by A-site substitution of LaMnO3 as an ORR electrocatalyst of a Zn–air battery.129 It is worth mentioning that the doping of 10% Ce cations into A site LMO could improve its catalytic activity toward the ORR, providing a limiting current density of 5.64 mA cm−2, which was slightly higher than that of the Pt/C catalyst (5.37 mA cm−2). Besides, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) showed that the relative area ratio of Mn4+ increased from 45.4% over LMO to 49.9% over LCMO0.1, suggesting that part of Mn3+ had a tendency to oxidize to Mn4+ when the A site cation was substituted by a certain amount of Ce. Therefore, Mn4+ can alleviate the exchange of metal–oxygen covalent bonds and benefit the exchange of O22−/OH−. Their experimental results further confirmed the effect of doping the A-site on B-site's properties and the improvement of catalytic performance. Miao's team also prepared a series of La1−xYxMnO3 (LYM) perovskites with the doping of Y at the A site.130 LYM with different Y doping amounts from x = 0 to x = 0.25 at the A site was systematically examined as a bifunctional catalyst for the ORR and OER. La0.9Y0.1MnO3 with an optimal Y doping amount achieved much improved ORR/OER activities among all the samples.
Studies also demonstrated that La3+ cations at A sites can be partially substituted by metal cations with a lower oxidation state such as Sr2+.131,132 Recently, She et al.133 synthesized and investigated a series of Sr-doped La-based perovskite oxide catalysts (La1−xSrxFeO3−δ, LSF). When x = 0.8, the structure was cubic and had lower deviation, which corresponded to the best OER performance (the overpotential of LSF-0.8 at 10 mA cm−2 current density could reach the level of 0.37 V). The improved specific activity of LSF-0.8 was clearly linked to the optimum number of surface oxygen vacancies and surface Fe oxidation states. This can be explained by the fact that the partial substitution of La3+ at the A site by Sr2+ facilitated a progressive structural change from an orthorhombic to a cubic structure, an increase in the oxygen non-stoichiometry (δ) and a change in the oxidation state of iron (Fe). The work provides a promising guideline for constructing efficient water oxidation catalysts based on A-site substitution of perovskite oxides. Stoerzinger and co-workers also fabricated high-quality epitaxial La1−xSrxMnO3 thin films.134 They measured the extent of surface hydroxylation and absorption of water on La1−xSrxMnO3 films at five different percentages of Sr (replacing La) on the A site of the perovskite oxides. The substitution of Sr at the A-site can form more hydroxyl species, which can inhibit the kinetics of adsorption of molecular O2 on the oxide surface. Besides, decreasing the Fermi level of p-type La1−xSrxMnO3 relative to the electron energy corresponding to the equilibrium redox potential of the ORR would increase the driving force for La1−xSrxMnO3 for the adsorption of hydroxide species. The A-site deficiencies in perovskite materials can manipulate the B-site element valence as well, exposing more active sites for the ORR.135 Xue et al.136 prepared a series of (La1−xSrx)0.98MnO3 (LSM, x = 0.2, 0.3, 0.4 and 0.5) perovskites with different A-site deficiency extents by a modified solid–liquid method (Fig. 5a). The structure, morphology, valence state and oxygen adsorption behaviours of these LSM samples were characterized. When x = 0.3 (LSM30), the percent of Mn4+ of LSM30 was much higher than those of other samples, which indicated that decreasing the A-site stoichiometry could effectively tailor the Mn valence of LSM. Besides, the Mn–O hybridized bond was considerably enhanced, which meant that the oxygen adsorption ability of the LSM30 electrocatalyst with A-site deficiencies was significantly improved. As can be seen from Fig. 5b, LSM30 powder aggregated slightly, and its average particle size is smaller than 200 nm and shows a relatively narrow distribution. Fig. 5c shows that LSM30 possessed the most positive reduction peak appearing at 0.68 V with the highest peak current density of 0.48 mA cmdisk−2. From Fig. 5d, the LSM30 catalyst presented the lowest ring current among a series of LSM samples. Notably, among all the prepared samples, the LSM30 catalyst, with 50% C, exhibited the best ORR catalytic activity and had much higher durability than commercial 20% Pt/C.
 Fig. 5  (a) The general crystal structure of perovskite A-site deficiency; (b) representative SEM micrograph of LSM30; (c) ORR catalytic activities of different catalysts: the CV curves; (d) rotating ring-disk electrode polarization curves at a rate of 1600 rpm. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier B.V. 


3.2.2 Sr-based perovskite oxides. 
As aforementioned, studies show that tailoring A-site stoichiometry can effectively change B-site ions' valence and oxygen vacancy concentration according to the electrical neutrality principle, which will change the physical and chemical properties of perovskites and then improve the electrocatalytic activity. Da and co-workers fabricated SrxCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (x = 0.9, 0.95, 1) perovskites with A-site deficiency, which displayed a good OER activity.137 Among them, Sr0.95Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (S0.95CF) showed the best activity (smallest overpotential of 370 mV), which could be attributed to the increase of oxygen vacancies and optimization of the eg occupancy of B-site transition metal, leading to the introduction of A-site deficiency and the expansion of the lattice. After a durability test, an unusual activation process with enhanced OER activity was observed for all the prepared A-site perovskites. The result showed that tailoring the A-site deficiency of perovskites is a valid strategy to improve OER activity. Su et al.138 prepared different A′-site deficient perovskite oxides (SrCo0.9Ti0.1O3−δ (SCT, Fig. 6a) and SrFe0.9Ti0.1O3−δ (SFT)) through a typical sol–gel route, and their catalytic activities for the OER in alkaline medium were comparatively studied. In terms of stability, the SCT electrocatalyst delivered a better stable performance until the 100th cycle (Fig. 6c). However, an obvious decay in performance with cycling was demonstrated in the SFT electrode, as can be seen from Fig. 6d, and the total attenuation of the current density at 1.75 V after 100 cycles was 54.9%. As shown in Fig. 6b, SCT offered a stable current over the same operational period (10 h). However, the IrO2 catalyst exhibited an anode current loss of 16.1% after continuous operation for 10 h. The inset in Fig. 6b shows the chronopotentiometric responses of SCT and IrO2 catalysts at a constant current of 10 mA cm−2. SCT possessed an unchanged operating potential of 1.73 V within 5 h, whereas the potential increased obviously with time for the IrO2 catalyst under the same conditions, indicating the deactivation of IrO2. Besides, SCT was experimentally demonstrated as a promising alternative OER electrocatalyst, which possessed a lower overpotential (510 mV) and lower Tafel slope (88 mV dec−1) compared with SFT.
 Fig. 6  (a) Crystal structure diagram of SCT; (b) chronoamperometric responses of SCT and IrO2 electrodes at constant potentials of 1.83 V (for SCT) and 1.74 V (for IrO2) to ensure an initial current density of 10 mA cm−2. Inset: chronopotentiometric responses of SCT and IrO2 electrodes at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2; (c, d) corresponding capacitance-corrected OER activities of these two electrocatalysts in the 2nd and 100th cycles, respectively. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, building ternary perovskites (A1−xA'xBO3) by partial doping at the A site in Sr-based perovskite oxides is also an effective way to enhance the electrocatalytic properties. Ali et al.119 reported an improved catalytic activity for Sr2PdO3 with different A-site cation doping elements (La3+, Nd3+, and Gd3+) for the HER in fuel cells. Sr2PdO3 is an orthorhombic A2BO3 perovskite, in which Pd2+ is surrounded by four O atoms in a planar arrangement, whereas Sr2+ is surrounded by seven O atoms. The authors discussed not only the enhancement in the catalytic activity by A-site cation doping and the formation of ternary perovskites but also the effect of the dopant sizes. They found that the average particle size of Sr2PdO3 was decreased by substitution at the A site due to the partial substitution of the larger Sr2+ ions (132 Å) by smaller La3+ (106 Å), Nd3+ (99 Å), and Gd3+ (94 Å). As expected, when tested in 0.1 M H2SO4 solution at ambient temperature, the Gd3+-doped Sr2PdO3 exhibited the highest catalytic activity for the HER among all the prepared samples, including an exchange current density (io) of −54.55 μA cm−2, a Tafel slope of −230.7 mV dec−1, and a transfer coefficient of 0.27.


3.2.3 Other A-site perovskite oxides. 
Besides La, Sr, and Ba-based perovskite oxides, much attention has also been focused on other ternary metallic A-site perovskite oxides and they have been extensively studied because of their high electrochemical activity. For example, Yagi et al.139 designed CaCu3Fe4O12 (CCF), which possessed high OER catalytic activity, and it could compare with or exceed those of state-of-the-art catalysts such as the gold standard RuO2. Excellent performance was mainly reflected by the CCFO's Tafel slope (51 mV dec−1) and the overpotential (310 mV). Zhang's group prepared a series of compounds, namely, AMn3V4O12 (A = Na+, Ca2+, and La3+) with a focus on the effect of A-site substitution.140 It was observed that the Mn–Mn distance and the V–O–V bond angle increased as the A-site ions changing from Na to La. More interestingly, the doped electrons of the A′-site Mn ions were localized and responsible for their magnetic properties. Their work shows us the possibility for designing suitable A-site substitution for improved catalytic properties.
It is worth noting that the incorporation of Ba2+ ions into the perovskite structure expands the unit cell sizes, indicating that Ba plays an important role in improving the electrochemical reaction.96 Li et al.141 reported a series of A-site rich perovskites Ba2xCoMoO6 (x = 1, 1.1, 1.2, and 1.3), which were synthesised by a solid-state reaction method. A-site rich can effectively tailor the structure and generate more OER active sites. Among all the prepared samples, Ba2.4CoMoO6 exhibited improved OER catalytic activity with a low overpotential (423 mV) corresponding to a desired current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a low Tafel slope (79 mV dec−1) compared with the parent oxide (Ba2CoMoO3, 522 mV and 114 mV dec−1 respectively).

3.3 Multimetallic A-site perovskite oxides
Multimetallic oxides are compounds of oxygen and four or more metallic elements. Some researchers have intensively studied perovskites with both A and B-site cation substitution (A1−xA'xB1−yB'yO3−δ), where A or A′ is a rare-earth or alkaline-earth metal and B or B′ is a transition metal. These perovskites are the basis of a large variety of important technological applications, ranging from materials in advanced electronic devices to industrial catalysts.142 Among all of these perovskites, Zhao et al.143 reported the rational design and synthesis of perovskite PrBa0.5Sr0.5Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ (PBSCF) nanofibers as a highly efficient and robust catalyst for the OER. The structure can be changed to some extent through excess of Sr doping at A′-site, which is attributed to the larger ionic radius of Sr2+ than Ba2+. In order to enhance the electrochemical performance while maintaining the structure, half of the Ba atoms at the A′-site were usually substituted by Sr. Xu's team confirmed the remarkable effectiveness of perovskite oxides as candidates for HER catalysis in alkaline media.144 By modifying the surface electronic structures and properties through simple A site praseodymium doping, a Pr0.5(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (Pr0.5BSCF) catalyst that enabled high-efficiency basic HER electrocatalysis was obtained. The overpotential observed on Pr0.5BSCF was 100 mV lower than that on Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3–δ (BSCF, 230 mV relative to 342 mV) at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with a Tafel slope of 45 mV dec−1. The catalyst afforded steady bulk hydrogen production at a large current density of 50 mA cm−2 for 25 h. As more Pr cations (x > 0.5) occupied the lattice sites of the A-site cations, the sample experienced a structural transformation from cubic to orthorhombic symmetry, but the specific surface areas of various PrxBSCF powders were invariant. Jung et al.145 proposed that La0.3(Ba0.5Sr0.5)0.7Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (La0.3–5582) with excellent performance could be used as a bifunctional catalyst for the ORR and OER. The excellent ORR performance is mainly due to the doping of A-sites. When the 0.3 mol% of La2O3 was doped to BSCF in the placement of A-site cations, the catalytic activity in BSCF-based perovskite oxide approached to the performance of RuO2. Guan's team applied coordination rationales to introduce A-site ionic electronegativity as an efficient unifying descriptor to predict the HER activities.146 Different lanthanide elements, with the features of lanthanide contraction in the ionic radius and Gd break in ionic electronegativity, can well regulate the A-site properties in the perovskite structure (Fig. 7a and b). The HER performance of different concentrations of Gd to substitute the A-site was studied. As shown in Fig. 7c–f, a correlation between HER activity and A-site ionic electronegativity is illustrated. Therefore, the efficiency of screening highly HER active perovskites will be enhanced and an enormous amount of time and expenses for catalyst design or selection will be saved through the simple A-site ionic electronegativity descriptor. Zhou et al.147 also synthesized scandium and niobium cation (Sc3+ and Nb5+) doped A-site strontium cobaltite perovskites to form SrSc0.025Nb0.025Co0.95O3−δ (SSNC1) and SrSc0.175Nb0.025Co0.8O3−δ (SSNC2) as a family of highly active and durable electrocatalysts for the OER in alkaline solution. These A-site doped perovskites not only showed up to a 50-fold increase in the intrinsic activity compared to the gold-standard OER electrocatalysts, but also showed excellent durability. In lower potential ranges (<1.6 V), the Tafel slope can reach 55 mV dec−1, lower than those of RuO2 (∼80 mV dec−1) and SrCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (∼90 mV dec−1). In the higher overpotential range (>1.6 V), the Tafel slope of these catalysts increased to ∼70 mV dec−1, while the slopes increased to 145 and 150 mV dec−1 for SrCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ and RuO2, respectively.
 Fig. 7  (a) Values of the ionic radius and ionic electronegativity for La3+, Pr3+, Sm3+, Gd3+, and Ho3+ cations with 12-fold coordination, which exhibit the lanthanide contraction and gadolinium break phenomena, respectively; (b) inductive effects and electron exchange interactions between A-sites and B-sites in perovskites from molecular orbital theory; correlation with intrinsic HER activity. HER activity trends of the oxide at an overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 as a function of (c) A-site ionic electronegativity, and (d) A-site ionic radius for single and double perovskites studied here. Plots of Tafel slope values as a function of (e) A-site ionic electronegativity (the rate-determining steps estimated from the Tafel slope are shown in pink and purple dashed lines); and (f) A-site ionic radius for the prepared single and double perovskites. Adapted from ref. 146 with permission from Springer Nature. 
4. Applications of A-site perovskite oxides in photocatalysis
The unique merits of perovskite oxides, such as higher conduction band levels,148 more than one ordered metal sublattice,149 and visible-light photoresponse ability,150 make them an astute candidate as a photocatalyst with an ability of creating electron-hole pairs. In particular, the band gap and ionic radius can be freely tuned by using appropriate A-site elements in perovskite oxides, achieving high photocatalytic activity.151,152 Moreover, doping at the A-site as another strategy can change the band gap and crystal structure as well.153,154 Therefore, in the following section, we discuss perovskite oxides featuring different A-sites and the A-site element regulatory strategies for improving their photocatalytic performance. In addition, the photocatalytic performance of perovskite oxides with different A-site cations is presented in Table S2.†
4.1 Bimetallic A-site perovskite oxides
Taking the simplest perovskite (the general formula ABO3) for example, the perovskite crystal structure has corner connected BO6 octahedra and 12 oxygen coordinated A-cations, located in between the eight BO6 octahedra. The unique crystal structure of octahedral connection results in a cubic lattice. The structure of ABO3 perovskite oxides are cubic lattice. Owing to the different ionic radius and electronegativity of A- and B-site cations, the slight distortion of crystal structure will be observed, further affecting the band structure, electron and hole transport properties, photoluminescence, and dielectric behaviour. It is worth mentioning that bimetallic A-site perovskite oxides might offer significant advantages over the corresponding binary oxides.167 Therefore, the properties and applications of bimetallic A-site perovskite oxides in photocatalysis are discussed below.

4.1.1 Ag-based perovskite oxides. 
Ag as a noble-metal plays a vital role in the field of photocatalysis. Much work so far has been focused on Ag-based complex oxides, such as La-doped AgNbO3 (ref. 155) and Ag2Ta4O11 (ref. 156), which are reported as promising visible light sensitive photocatalysts with a band-gap of less than 3.1 eV. However, the durable operation of Ag-based photocatalysts is difficult to realize owing to their usually high photocorrosion feature.
Therefore, designing and developing rational photocatalysts of Ag-based perovskite oxides are still a tremendous challenge.
As a green and environment-friendly technique, photocatalysis has been regarded as an important field for the treatment of organic pollutants. In 2009, Singh et al.157 used an ion-exchange reaction of NaSbO3 with AgNO3 to synthesize AgSbO3, which exhibited impressing optical absorption behaviour capable of absorbing UV and visible light with a wavelength of λ ≤ 500 nm. The decrease in the concentration of the dye solutions in the presence of catalysts in the dark and under direct irradiation of the solutions without the aid of catalysts was negligible. The catalyst showed excellent decomposition rates for the organic compounds under UV and visible light irradiation.
Kato et al.158 investigated the photophysical and photocatalytic properties of perovskite-type materials AgMO3 (M: Ta and Nb) consisting of Ag+ and d0 ions, and the effect of A-site Ag+ on the band structure was also analysed. As illustrated in Fig. 8, a hybrid orbital of Ag 4d and O 2p formed a valence band at a more negative level than O 2p orbitals, which resulted in the band gaps of 3.4 and 2.8 eV for AgTaO3 and AgNbO3, respectively, smaller than those of NaTaO3 (4 eV) and NaNbO3 (3.4 eV), even if the crystal structures of AgMO3 were similar to those of NaMO3. The authors also analysed the reasons for the different positions of the PXRD peaks at different A sites. It can be mainly attributed to the differences in the ionic radii of the cations (Ag+ > Na+) occupying the A-site of the perovskite structure. The activity of water splitting into H2 (13 μmol h−1) and O2 (1 μmol h−1) could be increased by one order of magnitude under pure water conditions. Ju et al.159 prepared a novel nanomaterial of Ag/AgVO3 (loading Ag nanoparticles onto β-AgVO3 nanowires) through a facile hydrothermal method and investigated its photocatalytic activity for the degradation of bisphenol A (BP A) under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 8  Band structures of NaTaO3, AgTaO3, NaNbO3, and AgNbO3. Adapted from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.2 Sr-based perovskite oxides. 
SrTiO3 (STO) is a classic photocatalyst that has been reported to be active for overall water splitting, pollutant degradation and energy conversion under UV light since 1980.160 Meanwhile, it is a typical perovskite oxide that is capable of tuning chemical and physical properties by altering its composition. Pristine STO with a wide bandgap of 3.3 eV exhibits super photic, thermal, and chemical stability, and it is thus widely investigated as a photocatalyst.161 For instance, Cai et al.162 synthesized a set of ATiO3 perovskites (A = Ba, Pb, and Sr) and investigated the influence of different A-site elements on the structure and morphology. Among them, the ionic radius of Sr is the smallest (1.44 Å), which contributed to STO have a different cubic crystal structure from BaTiO3 and PbTiO3. Therefore, it possesses the largest specific surface area (52.1 m2 g−1) and pore volume (0.218 cm3 g−1). A relatively high photocatalytic efficiency for the degradation of NOx at ppd levels was obtained. Therefore, such a catalyst is a promising electrode candidate for efficient photocatalysis.
SrSnO3 (SSO) has potential applications in other areas, such as single flux quantum circuits,163,164 lithium ion batteries,165 high-temperature humidity sensors,166etc. Thus, Zhang et al.167 synthesized SSO via a solid-state reaction. Then, the photophysical properties of SSO were calculated and analysed. The catalyst was highly active and showed excellent photocatalytic performance in O2 evolution (721 μmol H2 g−1 h−1) and H2 evolution (284 μmol O2 g−1 h−1) under UV light irradiation. In contrast, the photocatalytic activity of different A site BaSnO3 with an ideal cubic perovskite structure was also investigated, and it exhibited poor photocatalytic activity. This phenomenon can be attributed to the smaller ionic radius of Sr which distorted the SnO6 octahedral connection and strong electron-lattice interaction in SSO. This further demonstrated that the distorted tin-oxygen octahedral network was favorable for the effective migration of photogenerated electrons or holes. The research is helpful to explore photocatalytic mechanisms and develop new photocatalyst systems for water splitting.


4.1.3 Bi-based perovskite oxides. 
During the past few decades, Bi-based A-site photocatalysts have been suggested as excellent visible light photocatalytic materials due to their suitable bandgap (<3.0 eV), which are regarded as promising candidates for removing toxins from water and air as well as for the production of fuel.168,169 Compared to other materials with lanthanide A-site cations (such as LaFeO3 and GdFeO3), BiFeO3 exhibits high catalytic efficiency due to the following merits: (1) its small bandgap enables light absorption from a large part of the solar spectrum; (2) multiferroic materials are efficiently beneficial to the separation of cations and anions at room temperature.170,171
Bi4Ti3O12 (BTO) is a narrow bandgap semiconductor due to its hybridized valence band by the Bi 6S2 orbit at the A-site and O2p orbit. The strong interaction between the Bi 6S2 orbit and the O2p orbit reduces the symmetry of Bi4Ti3O12, making it have higher charge fluidity, which was beneficial for the separation of photoinduced carriers.172,173 Chen et al.174 successfully synthesized BTO via a facile co-precipitation method. The photocatalytic activities of the samples were evaluated through the photocatalytic degradation of methyl orange (MO) aqueous solution under sunlight. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of BTO was only 8.9 m2 g−1, the band gap of BTO was 3.07 eV, and the degradation efficiency was only 8% after 3 h of solar illumination. Noticeably, after C modification, the BET surface area of C/BTO was greatly increased to 107.9 m2 g−1, the corresponding band gap was reduced to 2.88 eV, and the degradation rate of MO was nearly 99.5% under the same conditions.


4.1.4 Na-based perovskite oxides. 
Na, because of its large ionic radius, shows a large band gap energy and acts as the A-site in perovskite.175,176 For example, Katsumata et al.177 presented the photocatalytic activity of NaNbO3 (NNO) thin films. The band gap of the NNO film was 3.49 eV, which was nearly equivalent to the photon energy of 335 nm light. Their experimental data showed that MB was decomposed to a degree of ∼10% on the NNO film under UV-A irradiation and ∼15% under UV-B irradiation after 24 h. Their work was the first observation that NNO undergoes photoinduced hydrophilicity under UV irradiation. In order to decrease the band gap energy and further expand the utilization of light energy, the A-site can be appropriately adjusted to promote the absorption of light energy. The impact of A-site non-stoichiometry on the microstructure, electric properties, and phase stability of Na1+xNbO3 (x = −2 to 1 mol%) was reported by Fan's team.178Fig. 9a–f demonstrate that pure NaNbO3 and A-site excess samples exhibit relatively loosely arranged grains and more pores. In contrast, fewer pores are obtained in A-site deficient NNO, presenting a homogeneous and dense micro-structure. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 9g, the obtained size was dependent on Na nonstoichiometry, which became smaller with the decrease in the Na content and larger conversely. These studies demonstrated that the antiferroelectric phase became more stable with A-site deficiency, while the opposite trend occurred with excessive A-site component. Fig. 9h also demonstrates that A-site excess NNO exhibited the lowest phase transition electric field, indicating that the stability of the antiferroelectric phase deteriorated with more excess Na. This work further shows that Na non-stoichiometry at the A-site can influence phase stability in NNO and decrease the band gap. Many tantalates, such as (Li, K, Na) TaO3, have been developed as photocatalysts for water splitting.179,180 NaTaO3 (NTO), as one of the perovskite-type semiconductor materials, has become a research hotspot of alkaline metal photocatalysts. Meanwhile, doping at the A-site features a more homogeneous texture and enhances visible-light photocatalytic activity. There are also other element (Sm, La, Bi, and Cu) doped NTO materials.181 Without introducing impure elements into NTO, Wang's team prepared Ta4+ doped NTO nanoclusters by using a facile and one-pot low-temperature solvothermal method.182 The doping at the A-site results in NTO with a smaller size of 50 nm, which contributed to a high specific area of 77.29 m2 g−1. It clearly discloses that compared to pristine white NTO with an absorption edge of ca. 315 nm, the as-synthesized NTO had an extended absorption edge up to ca. 730 nm, and the time course of H2 evolution under visible-light irradiation (>420 nm) was compared. Most importantly, Ta4+ in bulk NTO greatly narrowed its band gap from 3.94 to 1.7 eV and extended its photoresponse from the UV to the visible light region. All these factors contribute to the catalyst with a relatively stable visible-light photocatalytic activity for water splitting (H2 release rate: 61 μmol g−1 h−1) and much better catalytic activity for the degradation of Safranin O (almost completely degraded after 40 min of visible-light irradiation). Zhou et al.183 also adopted surface modification and elemental doping to further improve the catalytic activity of NTO nanocubes for visible-light-driven applications.
 Fig. 9  (a–f) SEM secondary electron images taken from the polished and thermally etched cross sections of Na1+xNbO3 ceramics with various x; (g) composition dependent relative density and mean grain size calculated by the line intercept method of Na1+xNbO3 ceramics; (h) the maximum polarization (Pm) read from polarization hysteresis loops versus the applied electric field for Na1+xNbO3 ceramics measured at 1 Hz. Adapted from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier B.V. 


4.1.5 K-based perovskite oxides. 
Compared with sodium, potassium has a larger ionic radius. KNbO3 (KNO) has attracted increasing attention, due to its acoustic-optic, electro-optic, nonlinear optic, and piezoelectric properties and high stability under light illumination.184 Huan et al.185 thoroughly discussed the different effects of the K cation and Na cation at the A-site in perovskite oxides (KNO and NNO) on their photocatalytic degradation of Rh B. In this work, KNO exhibited better photocatalytic activity, which was mainly because the band energy gap (Eg) of KNO (3.74 eV) was slightly smaller than that of NNO (3.79 eV). The smaller Eg of KNO nanoparticles utilized the illumination more efficiently and further promoted the photocatalytic activity. Meanwhile, polarization-modulated built-in electric fields in the ferroelectric KNO nanoparticles could efficiently enhance the separation of photo-generated charge carries and improve the photocatalytic activity. Their study proved that the K-based perovskite-type ferroelectric materials have potential applications in photocatalysis and relevant areas.


4.1.6 Other A-site perovskite oxides. 
In addition to the above mentioned perovskite oxides featuring different A-site elements that have been widely studied, other A-site elements also demonstrate the ability to enhance the catalytic properties of perovskite oxides. Therefore, bimetallic and other complex oxide systems such as La-based,186 Ni-based,187 and Co-based188 have been increasingly explored as photocatalysts. As is described above, La-based perovskite oxides also show excellent photocatalytic activity in photocatalysis. For instance, Thirumalairajan et al.189 successfully prepared microspheres by the hydrothermal method, which were composed of LaFeO3 nanoparticles. The BET surface area of the microsphere LaFeO3 nanoparticles was found to be 8.5 m2 g−1, which was higher than the reported value. They exhibited higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of Rh B aqueous solution under visible-light illumination within 3 h. Titanium based perovskite oxides such as ATiO3 (A = Ca, Co and Ni) are a kind of significant photocatalyst for the complete oxidation of hydrocarbons, photocatalytic hydrogen production and photocatalytic degradation of toxic pollutants. Qu et al.191 reported porous CoTiO3 nanorods applied for water oxidation. The sample possessed high crystallinity and porosity. A larger BET surface area (23 m2 g−1) was obtained and the highest oxygen production yield reached up to 64.6 mmol h−1. The reasons for the high O2 production were as follows: the large surface area can provide more active sites; the suitable narrow band gap (2.25 eV) can use more solar energy; the one dimensional structure can lead to good electron transport. Apart from Co-based materials, NiTiO3 with a narrow band gap of about 2.18 eV is smaller than CoTiO3, which contributed to the unique photoresponse in the visible light area for photocatalysis. Meanwhile, compared to other A-site titanates, nickelates are a rich class of materials, ranging from insulating magnets to superconductors. Qu et al. fabricated the NiTiO3 nanorods with 3 μm in length and 400 nm in diameter, which shown an excellent photocatalysis performance to degrade the nitrobenzene in aqueous solution.192 The high performance was attributed to the porous texture and large BET surface area (25 m2 g−1), which offered more active sites and facilitated mass transport.

4.2 Multimetallic A-site perovskite oxides
Heteroatom doping is widely adopted to increase the visible-light absorption of photocatalysts because doping can improve the charge transmission properties of A site perovskite oxides and lead to augmented transfer efficiency of carriers.51 Hu et al.193 reported the substitution of K in the A site to synthesize Na1−xKxTaO3 photocatalysts of x = 0–0.2. Proper substitution of K not only makes the bond angle of Ta–O–Ta become 180°, which can facilitate the separation of photogenerated charges for effective water splitting in the pseudo-cubic phase, but also brings about a smaller band gap energy (3.8 eV). XRD showed that 5% replacement of Na with K gives well-dispersed K in the perovskite A sites and converts the NTO from the monoclinic to the pseudo-cubic system. However, a further increase in K-doping results in A-site vacancy and K2Ta2O6 impurity formation, which distorted the perovskite structure and created defect states, and photocatalytic activity declined. Their study proved that appropriate ionic exchange in the A site was a feasible approach for developing perovskite oxide photocatalysts. As discussed earlier, SrTiO3 and related titanate perovskites have been explored due to their charming properties for photocatalysis and photovoltaic applications. However, the wider optical band gap (∼3.25 eV) makes its unfavourable for the absorption of visible light. In order to solve this intractable problem, groups have long explored ways to reduce the band gap by doping other metal cations.194,195 Although B-site doping can reduce the band gap, it results in the formation of a polyvalence state, and it is usually necessary to introduce other ions at the A site to stabilize the valence state of the B-site. For example, Comes et al.196 demonstrated that by co-doping STO with La at the A-site and Fe at the B-site, the oxidation state of the dopant ions can be controlled.
Choi's team investigated the structural, optical, and electrical properties of strained La doped in the A site of STO (LST) epitaxial thin films.197 The partial substitution of La3+ in Sr2+ sites would result in each La atom donating one electron to the conduction band of STO. Meanwhile, they compared the effect of La concentration and strain on the structural and optical properties. Depending on the dopant of La and oxygen vacancy concentrations, LST is expected to become a promising electrical conductor. Kumar et al.198 reported the effect of La3+ substitution at the A site on the photocatalysis and multiferroic applications of BiFeO3 (Bi1−xLaxFeO3), which was synthesized via a sol–gel methodology. La3+ substitution narrowed the energy gap, and the dielectric constant value increased as the La concentration increased due to oxygen vacancies, which were created through charge reimbursement by La substitution. This analysis suggested that the chemical substitution of rare earth elements on the A site in BiFeO3 will have a remarkable effect on its photocatalytic, electric, magnetic, and optical properties. Specifically, the photocatalytic degradation efficiencies were enlarged from 60.81% to 78.82%, and the saturation polarization and saturation magnetization values were found to be increased from 0.41 to 0.65 μC Cm−2 and 0.66 to 1.14 emu g−1, respectively.
NTO with a perovskite structure is the most active among tantalates. Nevertheless, the NTO photocatalyst was deactivated with the reaction time. It is necessary to suppress the deactivation with the reaction time. Recently, NiO-loaded NTO doped with La at the A site (NiO/NTO: La) which showed a high photocatalytic activity for water splitting into H2 and O2 in a stoichiometric amount under UV irradiation was reported by Kato et al.199 The band gap of NaTaO3: La was 0.09 eV larger than that of undoped NaTaO3. This phenomenon can be explained as the conduction band levels of NaTaO3:La shifted to negative, which might be conductive to the improvement in the photocatalytic activities. Besides, the small shifts to lower angles observed in the diffraction patterns of NaTaO3: La suggested the substitution of La ions for Na ions in the bulk, which occupied A sites in the perovskite structures. The experiment showed that doping La at the A site could obtain fine NaTaO3 particles with high crystallinity. The optimized NiO (0.2 wt%)/NaTaO3: La (2%) photocatalyst exhibited a high activity for water splitting into H2 and O2, which evolved with rates of 19.8 and 9.7 mmol h−1, respectively. As mentioned above, the doping of the A site is also usually used to inhibit the generation of other valences of the B site ion. For example, Ouyang's group demonstrated that a La, Cr-codoped STO photocatalyst could achieve a high apparent quantum efficiency of 25.6% for H2 evolution in CH3OH aqueous solution containing 5 M NaOH at an incident wavelength of 425 ± 12 nm,200 which was obviously higher than those of most of the reported oxide photocatalysts. In this research, La at A site doping in STO was used to suppress the appearance of Cr6+ in the B sites because only Cr3+ chemical valence was beneficial for H2 evolution.201 Jia's group also reported La, Cr co-doped Sr2TiO4/STO heterojunction based photocatalysts for H2 production under visible light irradiation, which were prepared by a simple in situ polymerized complex method.202 The doping at the A site could well preserve the crystalline structure of the original titanate, and the formation of Cr6+ at the B site could be largely suppressed due to charge balancing between the doped cations. Besides, when the Pt was loaded, the composite photocatalyst showed a higher photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production (ca. 59 μmol h−1) than individual STO (La and Cr) (ca. 10 μmol h−1) and Sr2TiO4 (La and Cr) (ca. 21 μmol h−1) in the presence of a methanol sacrificial reagent. Besides, rare-earth ion doping at the A site could significantly promote the visible-light photocatalytic efficiency owing to the fact that their f-orbitals could form complexes with various Lewis bases and possibly enhanced ferroelectricity.203 Thus, Sun's team successfully synthesized Bi5−yEuyFe1−xNixTi3O15 (BEFNT-y, x = 0, 0.05, 0.10, 0.15, 0.20; y = 0, 0.1, 0.3, 0.5) nanosheet-based nanoflowers (Fig. 10a–c) as magnetic recyclable visible-light photocatalysts toward Rh B degradation by a hydrothermal method.204 Eu was chosen to substitute for Bi at the A site to further improve the magnetism and photocatalytic activity of Bi5FeTi3O15. Ni was also employed to substitute for Fe at the B site to improve the magnetism for magnetic recyclability. When Eu was introduced into the A-site, it can tilt Fe–O and Ni–O sublattices due to the different radii of Bi and Eu ions. Besides, oxygen vacancies also exist accompanied by the change in the valence of Fe or Ni in the samples. The authors used various characterization methods to analyze the effect of Eu doping at the A site on the catalyst and catalytic performance. The photocatalytic activities of BEFNTO-y samples were tested by photo-decomposition of Rh B under visible light (Fig. 10d and e). Obviously, BEFNT-0.1 showed the best photocatalytic activity, which was visibly enhanced compared with other samples.
 Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) BEFNTO-0.1; (b) BEFNTO-0.3, and (c) BEFNTO-0.5; (d) RhB removal efficiency with time through photocatalytic degradation by BEFNTO-y; (e) plots of ln (C0/C) as a function of time for BEFNTO-y. Adapted from ref. 204 with permission from Elsevier B.V. 
4.3 Oxynitride of A-site perovskites
Transition metal oxynitrides with perovskite-type structures are regarded as one of the most promising classes of inorganic semiconductor materials that can be used in solar water splitting systems for the production of hydrogen as a renewable and storable energy carrier.205 In particular, oxynitrides are not only more stable than nitrides but are also easily formed from oxides in the presence of reactive gases such as NH3 and N2.206 Besides, a comparison between oxynitrides and oxides highlights the characteristics of a nitrogen N3−/oxygen O2− substitution: an increase in the anionic formal charge, a greater covalent character, a higher cross-linking density in glass, a reducing character due to the N3−/N0 redox couple, and modified acid–base properties.207 Meanwhile, the incorporation of nitrogen within an oxide allows shifting the absorption edge towards the visible wavelength, which makes oxynitrides have a suitable bandgap related to a higher covalency than oxides.208 For example, Wang et al.209 reported the effects of N doping in KNO on its photocatalytic properties. Firstly, highly pure KNO nanocubes were prepared by using 30 M KOH at 200 °C, and then they were doped with nitrogen by heating with urea at 425 °C. Another interesting finding was that there were no significant changes in the morphology, the band gap of KNO decreased from 3.13 to 2.76 eV after N-doping, and the surface area also substantially increased. Such N doping KNO nanocubes worked as a highly efficient and robust photocatalyst for the degradation of organic pollutants and water splitting with a H2 production rate of 6.7 μmol g−1 h−1 and an O2 production rate of 58 μmol g−1 h−1. Seo et al.210 also prepared BaNbO2N by thermal ammonolysis of cubic perovskite-type BaNbO3 for photoelectrochemical water oxidation. The BaNbO2N catalyst exhibited water oxidation activity with a current density of 0.85 mA cm−2 at 1.23 vs. RHE and a faradaic efficiency close to 1 under simulated solar illumination. Meanwhile, tuning the actual surface Ba/Nb ratio could effectively improve the surface and bulk crystallinity and further increase the photochemical water splitting activity. They also demonstrated that crystalline BaNbO2N resulted from the nitridation of single-phase perovskite-type BaNbO3 with no structural transition. It is interesting to note that BaNbO3 has an ideal cubic-perovskite structure identical to that of BaNbO2N, but the smooth surface of BaNbO3 seems to have become porous after nitridation.
The ion radius of A-site can effect the band gap of oxynitrides. Maeda and co-workers211 directly synthesized SrNbO2N particles, which were coated on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass as an n-type semiconductor for water splitting under visible light. The band gap of SrNbO2N (ca. 1.8 eV) is smaller than that of KNbO2N. The designed hybrid electrode delivered steady rates of H2 and O2 evolution (9.8 μmol h−1 for H2 and 4.0 μmol h−1 for O2) under irradiation, which were significantly higher than those recorded under dark conditions. Siritanaratkul et al.212 also reported a series of different A-site perovskite-type niobium oxynitrides (BaNbO2N, SrNbO2N, CaNbO2N, and LaNbON2) used for hydrogen and oxygen evolution from water under visible light irradiation. These catalysts were prepared by heating the corresponding oxide precursors, which were synthesized using the polymerized complex method for 15 h under a flow of ammonia. Owing to the different A-site cation sizes, the band gaps of these catalysts decreased in the order Ca > Sr > Ba > La. This most likely resulted from a change in the distortion of NbOxNy blocks in the perovskite structure. Among the prepared samples, CaNbO2N was found to be more active for oxygen evolution in aqueous AgNO3 (31.2 μmol h−1). The adjustment of the nitridation temperature of CaNbO2N was critically important to obtain higher photocatalytic activity because it affected the balance between producing the active oxynitride phase and suppressing defect formation. Seol et al.213 also reported oxynitride-type complex perovskites, which were synthesized by modifying the A-site composition of the Ta-based simple perovskite ATaO2N to (Ca, Sr, Ba)TaO2N. The crystal structures, thermal decomposition, and optical absorbance spectra of the complex perovskite oxynitrides were also investigated. It is worth mentioning that the lattice volume and Ta–O/N bond lengths vary in accordance with the mean ionic radius of the A-site cations. Besides, the band gap of an oxynitride perovskite depends on the nitrogen content, type of octahedral cation, octahedral-bonding geometry, and inductive effect of the A-site cation. From the viewpoint of the effect of the A-site cation on the band gap, Ba, compared with Sr or Ca, exerted the strongest inductive effect, leading to wider Frontier bands via more covalent Ta–O/N bonds and ultimately a narrower band gap. Their work demonstrated that the properties of transition metal oxynitrides can be tailored in a rational way by the sensible selection of cationic components.
LaTiO2N is considered as one of the most promising photocatalysts for solar energy conversion. However, because of the severe structural distortions (Ti(O, N)6 octahedron tilting) and various types of defects within this compound, it generally has a poor photocatalytic activity under ambient conditions. In order to improve the performance of such a catalyst, very recently, Lin's team modified LaTiO2N (Fig. 11a) by introducing Ba into its A site, obtaining La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8 (Fig. 11b).214 The brightened hue of the sample powder implied reduced absorption of long-wavelength photons in the visible light region. This can be clearly seen in its UV-vis light absorption spectra (Fig. 11c). Both the photocatalytic activity and stability of LaTiO2N were considerably improved after Ba modifications. It is mainly reflected in the following three aspects. The first is an increase in the tolerance factor from 0.9699 to 0.9880 which is closer to 1; the second is that Ba has a much less electron negativity than La, or is more electron donating, and therefore Ba has stronger inductive effects on bonds (Fig. 11d and e) between Ti and O/N than La. The third is that Ba modifications resulted in a slight positive shift of the valence band edge (Fig. 11f).
 Fig. 11  Field emission SEM images of (a) LaTiO2N and (b) La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (c) UV-vis light absorption spectra of LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (d) Mott–Schottky plot for LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (e) XPS valence band scan of samples LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; and (f) diagram of the band gap position of La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8 and LaTiO2N at pH = 7. Adapted from ref. 214 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5 Effect of different A-site cations on B-site's properties
Different A site cations play important roles in A-site perovskite oxides.215 As discussed above, A-site cations can affect redox properties by adjusting B–O interaction.216 Dai et al.217 prepared and characterized a series of perovskites of AFeO3 (A = La, Nd, Eu) oxides. The Fe–O bond strength is considered to be related to the catalytic performance and the chemical structure of AFeO3 oxides. Varying the A cations of AFeO3 oxides, different Fe–O bond strengths were obtained. Compared with the radii of different A-site cations (La = 1.36, Nd = 1.27, and Eu = 1.21), the Fe–O bond was slightly stronger in EuFeO3 than in LaFeO3 and NdFeO3. Therefore, the LaFeO3 sample had the highest selectivity, and it was the best catalyst among the tested AFeO3 oxides. It can be concluded that the different A-site cations can lower the B–O bond strength to improve the catalytic activity.218
Partial substitution at the A site can lead to changes in the A-site perovskite structure, resulting in lattice defects and oxygen vacancies, thus altering the thermal stability and catalytic activity of the catalyst.219,220 For example, Zeng's team first reported that LaMnO3 with Mg substituted A sites.221 Through a series of characterization techniques, Mg substitution at the A site of LaMnO3 could cause the total charge imbalance of the B-site, which significantly improved the amount and reactivity of surface active oxygen species. They also found that Mg substitution at the A site induced the formation of Mn4+–O–Mn3+ and Mn4+–O–Mn2+ in LaMnO3, respectively. Their work provides a reference for the doping of alkali metals into A site perovskite oxides. As mentioned above, what deserves our attention is that the adjustment of A-site stoichiometry can also effectively change the B-site ions' valence and oxygen vacancy concentration according to the electrical neutrality principle, which will change the physical and chemical properties of perovskites, and then improve their OER and ORR catalytic activity.222,223 Doping/substituting A-sites of the perovskite lattice with cations of different sizes or oxidation states can adjust the oxidation state of the B-site cation.78,224 Meanwhile, the A site deficiency would alter the B-site element valence and also increase the number of active sites and the oxygen vacancies on the surface.84,225
Meanwhile, the thermal and chemical stabilities are determined to a large extent by the formation energy of the compound. For a given A-site cation of perovskite oxides, the trends in the formation energies of perovskite oxides with elements from different periods at the B-site depend on the oxidation state of A-site cations.226
6. Conclusions and prospects
Perovskite oxides are one of the most promising materials for catalysts in terms of their structural diversity and compositional flexibility. For perovskite oxides (ABO3), A-site cations play an important role in catalytic performance. Therefore, profound insights into knowledge about A-site perovskite oxides are crucial for the progress of emerging materials in EC and PC. This review discusses recent progress in the applications of A-site perovskite oxides as an emerging functional material in EC and PC. The influences of different factors (introducing defects and doping) on the structure and composition of perovskite oxides are summarized firstly, followed by the discussion of the EC and PC applications of A-site perovskite oxides (bimetallic, ternary metal, multimetallic and oxynitrides) with a unique structure and high stability. And the performances and optimization strategies of different A site elements (A = La, Sr, Ba, Ca, Ag, Bi, Na, K) are also highlighted.
Although many specifically designed A-site perovskite oxides have achieved satisfactory EC and PC performances for energy-conversion reactions, there are still some challenges and opportunities in designing electrocatalysts and photocatalysts in these research areas as follows:
(i) A-site perovskite oxides show diverse and intriguing physical and chemical properties. Meanwhile, the combination of A and B cations also opens up possibilities for making compounds with new properties, which will be useful for functions in future electronics and spintronics. However, the A site spins can align either ferromagnetically or antiferromagnetically within the same structural framework, depending on the nonmagnetic B-site ion. Therefore, the relationships between the structural features and magnetic properties of A site perovskite oxides are worth noting.227
(ii) Compared with their noble-metal counterparts, perovskite oxides usually have low chemical activity. Doping or substitution at A sites has been extensively adopted to tailor, both physically and chemically, the properties of oxide materials, so as to alter their catalytic performance for various redox reactions. Specifically, opposite changes in properties are found in some studies, employing the same dopant,228 and the number of oxygen vacancies monotonically decreased with increasing substitution amount of A-site cations.56 Therefore, further studies should be focused on the effect of dopants, and the amount of substitution on the performance of A-site perovskite oxides. Meanwhile, the concentration of defects in a perovskite also can be controlled by adjusting the doping percentage of the dopants.229
(iii) N doping can narrow the band gap to around 2 eV, so as to effectively extend the visible light absorption range of doped perovskites.230 Oxynitrides of A-site perovskites are still a promising direction worthy of being expanded and further explored, especially to improve the solubility of nitrogen in doped materials and balance the charge between N3− and O2−. Other nonmetals like B, P and S are also promising dopants to tailor the electronic structure of perovskite oxides, thereby changing the adsorption behaviour and tuning the intrinsic activity of each active site. Besides, except for the band gap, the effect of A-site cations on oxynitrides should be further investigated.
(iv) Transition metal ions at the A site of perovskite oxides are developed which have opened new prospects for novel multifunctional materials due to their strong and unusual magnetic interactions and technical applications.121,231,232 However, it is difficult to synthesize such materials at ambient pressure and temperature due to small tolerance factors.233,234 Therefore, it is meaningful to find unusual A-site occupied oxides. A-site cations such as Mg2+, Zn2+, Sc3+, Mn2+, and In3+ are unusually small.235 These materials enable significant technical applications with polarization, multiferroic, piezoelectric, pyroelectric and order nonlinear optical properties.
(v) The A site is not only restricted to the fine tuning of electron concentration and the B–O–B/B′ interactions, but also becomes an integral part of the electronic system.232 The tuning of properties is possible by A–O–A, B–O–B/B′, and A–O–B/B′ interactions.36,236 Therefore, the incorporation of transition-metal ions at all cation sites in perovskite oxides is expected to result in enhanced properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Nos. 22072015 and 51706114).
References
F. Naseem, P. Lu, J. Zeng, Z. Lu, Y. H. Ng, H. Zhao, Y. Du and Z. Yin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7734–7759 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim, P. W. Kang, S. S. Jeon and H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9032–9038 RSC .
J. Wang, Q. Liu, W. Cui, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ji, L. Li, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, S. Mou, T. Wu, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 758–762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, A. Vasileff, X. Zhou, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 7646–7659 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mou, T. Wu, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, L. Ji, H. Huang, T. Wang, Y. Luo, X. Xiong, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903499 CrossRef .
T. Wu, X. Zhu, Z. Xing, S. Mou, C. Li, Y. Qiao, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Shi, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18449–18453 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. Kattel, J. Nash, X. Chang, J. Lee, Y. Yan, J. Chen and B. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 13906–13910 CrossRef .
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yin, B. Weng, J. Ge, Q. Sun, Z. Li and Y. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 442–462 RSC .
B. Susrutha, L. Giribabu and S. P. Singh, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14696–14707 RSC .
K. Kusada, D. Wu, T. Yamamoto, T. Toriyama, S. Matsumura, W. Xie, M. Koyama, S. Kawaguchi, Y. Kubota and H. Kitagawa, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 652–656 RSC .
I. C. de Freitas, L. S. Parreira, E. C. M. Barbosa, B. A. Novaes, T. Mou, T. V. Alves, J. Quiroz, Y. C. Wang, T. J. Slater, A. Thomas, B. Wang, S. J. Haigh and P. H. C. Camargo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12281–12291 RSC .
Y. Song, S. Zhou, Q. Dong, Y. Li, X. Zhang, N. Ta, Z. Liu, J. Zhao, F. Yang, G. Wang and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4617–4621 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luc, C. Collins, S. Wang, H. Xin, K. He, Y. Kang and F. Jiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1885–1893 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Zhang, M. Han, Y. Ye, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, G. Wang, C. Liang and H. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44186–44195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, G. Yu, X. Ai, W. Yan, H. Duan, W. Chen, X. Li, T. Wang, C. Zhang, X. Huang, J. S. Chen and X. Zou, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5236 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yashima, T. Tsujiguchi, Y. Sakuda, Y. Yasui, Y. Zhou, K. Fujii, S. Torii, T. Kamiyama and S. J. Skinner, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 556 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hu, B. Yue, H. Shao, F. Yang, J. Wang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 852, 157002 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bretos, R. Jimenez, D. P. Mezcua, N. Salazar, J. Ricote and M. L. Calzada, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2608–2613 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, G. Zhao, G. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3623–3637 RSC .
M. Wang, B. Han, J. Deng, Y. Jiang, M. Zhou, M. Lucero, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Yang, A. T. N'Diaye, Q. Wang, Z. J. Xu and Z. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5682–5686 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Cheng, Y. Yan, C. Peng, C. Wang and S. Dong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 12717–12721 RSC .
C. Zuo, H. J. Bolink, H. Han, J. Huang, D. Cahen and L. Ding, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500324 CrossRef .
J. De Roo, M. Ibanez, P. Geiregat, G. Nedelcu, W. Walravens, J. Maes, J. C. Martins, I. Van Driessche, M. V. Kovalenko and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2071–2081 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hanzawa, S. Iimura, H. Hiramatsu and H. Hosono, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 5343–5349 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hossain, P. Bandyopadhyay and S. Roy, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 740, 414–427 CrossRef CAS .
N. F. Atta, A. Galal and S. M. Ali, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 725–746 CAS .
Y. Zhang, R. Knibbe, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou, Z. Shao and Z. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700132 CrossRef .
W. Wang, M. Xu, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 136–152 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5371–5408 RSC .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu, C. Su, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6442–6448 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhong, P. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Yang, Z. Zhao and J. Li, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2917–2940 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 580, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Bartel, C. Sutton, B. R. Goldsmith, R. Ouyang, C. B. Musgrave, L. M. Ghiringhelli and M. Scheffler, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav0693 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, K. C. K. Soh and P. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 372, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
M. Arora and M. Kumar, Ceram. Int., 2015, 41, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702774 CrossRef .
X. Huang, G. Zhao, G. Wang and J. T. S. Irvine, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3623–3637 RSC .
T. H. Q. Vu, B. Bondzior, D. Stefanska, N. Miniajluk and P. J. Deren, Materials, 2020, 13, 1614 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zeng, Z. Chen, W. Zhou, H. Gu, Z. Shao and S. Liu, J. Membr. Sci., 2007, 291, 148–156 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Rabuffetti, J. S. Lee and R. L. Brutchey, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1434–1438 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Graca, C. Nico, M. Peres, M. A. Valente and T. Monteiro, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12, 8600–8606 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Wiglusz, T. Grzyb, S. Lis and W. Strek, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 5803–5810 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, C. X. Shan, H. Zhu, F. Y. Ma, D. Z. Shen, X. W. Fan and K. L. Choy, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 045102 CrossRef .
M. Valant, A. K. Axelsson and N. Alford, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5431–5436 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huo, Y. Jin and Y. Zhang, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 331, 15–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Jung, Y. I. Song, K. T. Lim, G. D. Lee, M. S. Lee and S. S. Hong, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15, 652–655 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Yin, S. Wu, X. Yang, W. Xia, Y. Shen, Y. Huang, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1240–1248 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, X. Chen, P. C. Shih and H. Yang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 10910–10917 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yoo, A. Jun, Y. W. Ju, D. Odkhuu, J. Hyodo, H. Y. Jeong, N. Park, J. Shin, T. Ishihara and G. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13064–13067 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nandy and S. K. Pradhan, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 17229–17240 RSC .
R. Lindblad, D. Bi, B. W. Park, J. Oscarsson, M. Gorgoi, H. Siegbahn, M. Odelius, E. M. Johansson and H. Rensmo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 648–653 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Shinde, S. H. Choi, Y. Kim, J. Ryu and J. S. Jang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 2495–2509 RSC .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, X. Xu, J. P. Marcel Veder and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7280–7300 RSC .
Q. Ji, L. Bi, J. Zhang, H. Cao and X. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1408–1428 RSC .
K. K. Ghose, A. Bayon, J. Hinkley and A. J. Page, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 12468–12476 RSC .
C. Dong, Z. Liu, J. Liu, W. Wang, L. Cui, R. Luo, H. Guo, X. L. Zheng, S. Qiao, X. Du and J. Yang, Small, 2017, 13, 1603903 CrossRef .
C. Chen, G. King, R. M. Dickerson, P. A. Papin, S. Gupta, W. R. Kellogg and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 423–432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, Y. Hu, J. Yang, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1497–1499 RSC .
Y. Duan, S. Sun, S. Xi, X. Ren, Y. Zhou, G. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Du and Z. J. Xu, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10534–10541 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, J. Sunarso, Z. G. Chen, L. Ge, J. Motuzas, J. Zou, G. Wang, A. Julbe and Z. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 872–875 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Li, T. Jin, J. Meng, L. Jiao, M. Zhu and J. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 7989–7994 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Miao, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Li and Z. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 5214–5221 RSC .
R. Gao, A. C. P. Jain, S. Pandya, Y. Dong, Y. Yuan, H. Zhou, L. R. Dedon, V. Thoreton, S. Saremi, R. Xu, A. Luo, T. Chen, V. Gopalan, E. Ertekin, J. Kilner, T. Ishihara, N. H. Perry, D. R. Trinkle and L. W. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905178 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Chen, N. Bovet, F. Trier, D. V. Christensen, F. M. Qu, N. H. Andersen, T. Kasama, W. Zhang, R. Giraud, J. Dufouleur, T. S. Jespersen, J. R. Sun, A. Smith, J. Nygard, L. Lu, B. Buchner, B. G. Shen, S. Linderoth and N. Pryds, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1371 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, J. A. Alonso and J. Bian, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 200459 Search PubMed .
V. Celorrio, L. Calvillo, G. Granozzi, A. E. Russell and D. J. Fermin, Top. Catal., 2018, 61, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
Y. B. Cho, A. Yu, C. Lee, M. H. Kim and Y. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 541–549 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Kim, D. F. Abbott, X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, F. Bozza, I. E. Castelli, D. Lebedev, R. Schäublin, C. Copéret, T. Graule, N. Marzari and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3245–3256 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Shih, J. Kim, C. J. Sun and H. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 3992–3998 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Nan, X. Zu, X. Zhang, W. Huang and W. Wang, Chemosphere, 2020, 255, 127010 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, R. Li, C. Yu and Z. Hao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22525–22531 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Xu, H. T. Zhao, J. Liang, Y. Wang, T. S. Li, Y. S. Luo, X. F. Shi, S. Y. Lu, Z. S. Feng, Q. Wu and X. P. Sun, Mater. Today Phys., 2020, 15, 100280 CrossRef .
J. Shim, K. J. Lopez, H. J. Sun, G. Park, J. C. An, S. Eom, S. Shimpalee and J. W. Wedner, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Chen, D. Huang, M. Zhou, D. Ding and H. Luo, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2768–2775 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Li, X. Ma, J. Miao, R. Ran, W. Zhou, S. Wang and Z. Shao, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2020, 219, 115596 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian, Z. Ge, A. Sun, W. Song and H. Li, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 123, 105586 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yan, H. Sun, X. Chen, X. Fu, C. Chen, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 3282–3293 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, H. Yoneyama and H. Tamura, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1977, 79, 319–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhao, Z. Liu and W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6005 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Thanh, N. D. Chuong, J. Balamurugan, H. Van Hien, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, Small, 2017, 13, 1701884 CrossRef .
R. H. Yuan, Y. He, W. He, M. Ni and M. K. H. Leung, Appl. Energy, 2019, 251, 113406 CrossRef .
X. Wu, H. Miao, R. Hu, B. Chen, M. Yin, H. Zhang, L. Xia, C. Zhang and J. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 536, 147806 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Choi, T. L. Kim, J. K. Kim, T. H. Lee, S. A. Lee, C. Kim, K. Hong, C. W. Bark, K. T. Ko and H. W. Jang, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 8040–8045 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1691–1697 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, C. Li, B. Li, X. Zhu, R. Zhang, L. Ji, D. Tang, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun, Q. Li, S. Liu and Y. Luo, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6401–6404 RSC .
Z. Feng, E. J. Crumlin, W. T. Hong, D. Lee, E. Mutoro, M. D. Biegalski, H. Zhou, H. Bluhm, H. M. Christen and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1512–1518 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, K. Kim, J. K. Kim, H. Kwon, J. W. Han and W. Jung, Joule, 2018, 2, 1476–1499 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tang, Y. Nie, J. K. Kawasaki, D. Y. Kuo, G. Petretto, G. Hautier, G. M. Rignanese, K. M. Shen, D. G. Schlom and J. Suntivich, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6831–6836 RSC .
A. Galal, N. F. Atta, S. A. Darwish, A. A. Fatah and S. M. Ali, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3806–3809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Liu, R. Liu, Y. Xie, X. Li, Z. Yan and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27840 CrossRef CAS .
R. Thakur and N. K. Gaur, Ionics, 2014, 20, 65–71 CrossRef CAS .
S. Daengsakul, C. Thomas, C. Mongkolkachit and S. Maensiri, J. Supercond Nov. Magn., 2012, 25, 2507–2518 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sydyknazar, V. Cascos, L. Troncoso, A. L. Larralde, M. T. Fernandez-Diaz and J. A. Alonso, Mater, 2019, 12, 1957 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Jin, J. S. Zhou, J. B. Goodenough, Q. Q. Liu, J. G. Zhao, L. X. Yang, Y. Yu, R. C. Yu, T. Katsura, A. Shatskiy and E. Ito, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 7115–7119 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mori, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1966, 49, 600–605 CrossRef CAS .
K. Szymanek, R. Charmas and W. Piasecki, Chemosphere, 2020, 242, 125162 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Wang, Z. Cui, Y. Li, S. Xin, J. Zhou, Y. Long, C. Jin and J. B. Goodenough, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav6262 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, X. Yin, K. C. Tsao, S. Fang and H. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14646–14649 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fopase, V. Saxena, P. Seal, J. P. Borah and L. M. Pandey, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 116, 111163 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Kim, F. Prado and A. Manthiram, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, B1023−B1028 Search PubMed .
R. Majee, Q. A. Islam, S. Mondal and S. Bhattacharyya, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 10180–10189 RSC .
Y. Zheng, J. Wang, B. Yu, W. Zhang, J. Chen, J. Qiao and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1427–1463 RSC .
Y. Zhou, D. Haynes, J. Baltrus, A. Roy, D. Shekhawat and J. J. Spivey, Appl. Catal., A, 2020, 606, 117802 CrossRef CAS .
O. D. Morales, S. Raaijman, R. Kortlever, P. J. Kooyman, T. Wezendonk, J. Gascon, W. T. Fu and M. T. M. Koper, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12363 CrossRef .
B. Scherrer, A. S. Harvey, S. Tanasescu, F. Teodorescu, A. Botea, K. Conder, A. N. Grundy, J. Martynczuk and L. Gauckler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085113 CrossRef .
V. G. Jadhao, R. M. Singru, G. R. Rao, D. Bahadur and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1975, 71, 1885–1893 RSC .
C. Sun, R. Hui and J. Roller, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1125–1144 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Lenka, T. Mahata, P. K. Paro, A. K. Tyagi and P. K. Sinha, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 537, 100–105 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, M. Shiraiwa, N. Wang, T. Ma, K. Fujii, E. Niwa and M. Yashima, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 126, 814–819 CrossRef CAS .
V. Vibhu, A. Flura, C. Nicollet, S. Fourcade, N. Penin, J. M. Bassat, J. C. Grenier, A. Rougier and M. Pouchard, Solid State Sci., 2018, 81, 26–31 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jin, F. Lu, X. Cao, Z. Yang and R. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12170–12177 RSC .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
Y. Dai, J. Yu, C. Cheng, P. Tan and M. Ni, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125516 CrossRef CAS .
S. Afroze, A. Karim, Q. Cheok, S. Eriksson and A. K. Azad, Front. Energy, 2019, 13, 770–797 CrossRef .
A. K. Azad, S. A. Ivanov, S. G. Eriksson, J. Eriksen, H. Rundlöf, R. Mathieu and P. Svedlindh, Mater. Res. Bull., 2001, 36, 2485–2496 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Ali and H. A. A. Lehaibi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 026501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, Y. Zhong, H. A. Tahini, Z. Shao and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3361–3392 RSC .
S. Pang, J. Xu, Y. Su, G. Yang, M. Zhu, M. Cui, X. Shen and C. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 270, 118868 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kida, D. Takauchi, K. Watanabe, M. Yuasa, K. Shimanoe, Y. Teraoka and N. Yamazoe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, E187−E191 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, Y. Tong, P. Chen, K. Xu, J. Zhao, Y. Lin, W. Chu, Z. Peng, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5989–5994 CrossRef CAS .
C. Si, C. Zhang, J. Sunarso and Z. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19979–19988 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y. Zhang, Y. Yang, J. Chen, B. Hua, Y. Shi, C. Wang and J. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 640–644 CrossRef CAS .
C. F. Chen, G. King, R. M. Dickerson, P. A. Papin, S. Gupta, W. R. Kellogg and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 423–432 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lu, Y. Wang, C. Jin, F. Li, R. Yang and F. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 726–733 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ge, F. W. T. Goh, B. Li, T. S. A. Hor, J. Zhang, P. Xiao, X. Wang, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 9046–9054 RSC .
Y. Zhang, F. Feng, C. Zhang, Q. Zheng, C. Wang, H. Hu, M. Wu and Y. Guo, Energy Fuels, 2020, 34, 10170–10177 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miao, Z. Wang, Q. Wang, S. Su, Y. Xue, F. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Liu and J. Yuan, Energy, 2018, 154, 561–570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gu, S. Samira and E. Nikolla, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2860–2872 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Koo, H. Kwon, M. Ahn, M. Choi, J. Son, J. W. Han and W. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8057–8065 CrossRef CAS .
S. She, J. Yu, W. Tang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, J. Sunarso, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11715–11721 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Stoerzinger, W. T. Hong, X. R. Wang, R. R. Rao, S. B. Subramanyam, C. Li, Ariando, T. Venkatesan, Q. Liu, E. J. Crumlin, K. K. Varanasi and Y. S. Horn, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 9990–9997 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Bugrov, L. D. Abdulaeva, O. I. Silyukov, A. A. Burovikhina, E. N. Latysheva, Y. S. Manucharov and I. A. Zvereva, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 1698–1704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, H. Miao, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Li and Z. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 192–201 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Da, L. Zeng, C. Wang, C. Gong and L. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 300, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
C. Su, W. Wang, Y. Chen, G. Yang, X. Xu, M. O. Tade and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17663–17670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagi, I. Yamada, H. Tsukasaki, A. Seno, M. Murakami, H. Fujii, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, H. Abe, N. Nishiyama and S. Mori, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8249 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, T. Saito, M. Mizumaki, W. Chen, T. Tohyama and Y. Shimakawa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6056–6060 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, W. Guo and Q. Shi, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2020, 31, 21272–21278 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, L. Zhang, D. Zhen, S. Yoo, Y. Ding, D. Chen, Y. Chen, Q. Zhang, B. Doyle, X. Xiong and M. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14586 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, Y. Chen, W. Zhou, Z. Zhu, C. Su, M. Liu and Z. Shao, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6442–6448 CrossRef CAS .
J. I. Jung, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee, M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4582–4586 CrossRef CAS .
D. Guan, J. Zhou, Y. Huang, C. Dong, J. Wang, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3755 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, T. Wen, X. Zhang, B. Chang, W. Kong, Y. Guo, B. Yang and Y. Wang, Chem.–Asian J., 2017, 12, 2727–2733 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iizuka, T. Wato, Y. Miseki, K. Saito and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20863–20868 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Clark, M. S. Dyer, R. G. Palgrave, C. P. Ireland, J. R. Darwent, J. B. Claridge and J. Rosseinsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1016–1032 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tang, H. Chen, F. Cao and G. Pan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2011, 1, 1145–1148 RSC .
S. Halder, T. K. Bhowmik, A. Dutta and T. P. Sinha, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 21021–21032 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hua, S. Jin, S. Ni and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2096–2103 RSC .
S. Iqbal, I. Bibi, S. Ata, S. Kamal, S. M. Ibrahim and M. Iqbal, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2020, 110, 108119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, M. Fu, L. Wang, T. Ma, X. Li, F. Jin and Y. Lu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 1634–1641 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kanhere and Z. Chen, Molecules, 2014, 19, 19995–20022 CrossRef .
H. Dong, J. Sun, G. Chen, C. Li, Y. Hu and C. Lv, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23915–23921 RSC .
J. Singh and S. Uma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 12483–12488 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12441–12447 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ju, H. Fan, B. Zhang, K. Shang, T. Liu, S. Ai and D. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 109, 107–110 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mu, Y. Zhao, A. Li, S. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Liu, R. Chen, J. Zhu, F. Fan, R. Li and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2463–2469 RSC .
G. Zhang, W. Jiang, S. Hua, H. Zhao, L. Zhang and Z. Sun, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16963–16968 RSC .
S. Cai, S. Yu, W. Wan, W. Wen and Y. Zhou, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 27397–27404 RSC .
H. Wakana, A. Kamitani, S. Adachi, K. Nakayama, Y. Nakayama, Y. Tarutani and K. Tanabe, Physica C, 2005, 426–431, 1495–1501 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wakana, S. Adachi, A. Kamitani, K. Nakayama, Y. Ishimaru, Y. Oshikubo, Y. Tarutani and K. Tanabe, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2005, 15, 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Li, P. He, E. Hosono and H. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1294–1305 RSC .
E. H. Mountstevens, S. A. T. Redfern and J. P. Attfield, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 220102(R) CrossRef .
W. F. Zhang, J. Tang and J. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sheng, Y. He, J. Li, C. Yuan, H. Huang, S. Wang, Y. Sun, Z. Wang and F. Dong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 13103–13114 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, X. Cheng, H. Long and Y. Rao, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 31, 2583–2590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Fourmont, D. Benetti, S. G. Cloutier, R. Nechache, Z. M. Wang and F. Rosei, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 084705 CrossRef .
D. Bensaid, N. E. Benkhettou and A. Kourdassi, J. Mod. Phys., 2011, 2, 642–650 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hou, W. Luo, Y. Huang, J. C. Yu and X. Hu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2028–2035 RSC .
Z. Chen, H. Jiang, W. Jin and C. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 180, 698–706 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, W. Mei, C. Liu, C. Hu, Q. Huang, N. Chen, J. Chen, R. Zhang and W. Hou, Mater. Lett., 2016, 172, 184–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nawaz, S. A. Almofty and F. Qureshi, PLoS One, 2018, 13, 0204061 CrossRef .
X. Li, Q. Li and L. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 14282–14289 RSC .
K. I. Katsumata, C. E. J. Cordonier, T. Shichi and A. Fujishima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3856–3857 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, Z. Zhou, R. Liang, M. Zhou and X. Dong, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 39, 4712–4718 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoshioka, V. Petrykin, M. Kakihana, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Catal., 2005, 232, 102–107 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4285–4292 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Torres-Martinez, A. Cruz-Lopez, I. Juarez-Ramirez and M. E. Meza-de la Rosa, J. Hazard. Mater., 2009, 165, 774–779 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. Su, B. Liu, M. Cao and C. Hu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7830–7832 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, T. Wen, B. Chang, Y. Guo, Z. Lin and B. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 461, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
Q. P. Ding, Y. P. Yuan, X. Xiong, R. P. Li and S. G. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18846–18848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huan, H. T. Shen, Y. N. Zhu, M. Li, H. Y. Li, Z. X. Wang, Y. A. Hao and T. Wei, Math. Biosci. Eng., 2019, 16, 4122–4134 Search PubMed .
F. Li, R. Xu, C. Nie, X. Wu, P. Zhang, L. Duan and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 12940–12943 RSC .
C. Xing, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, J. Liu, T. Zhang, P. Tang, J. Arbiol, L. Soler, K. Sivula, N. Guijarro, X. Wang, J. Li, R. Du, Y. Zuo, A. Cabot and J. Liorca, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17053–17059 RSC .
L. Boudjellal, A. Belhadi, R. Brahimi, S. Boumaza and M. Trari, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2020, 24, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thirumalairajan, K. Girija, I. Ganesh, D. Mangalaraj, C. Viswanathan, A. Balamurugan and N. Ponpandian, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 209, 420–428 CrossRef CAS .
S. Catalano, M. Gibert, J. Fowlie, J. Iniguez, J. M. Triscone and J. Kreisel, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2018, 81, 046501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou and H. Fu, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 265–270 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou, Z. Ren, S. Du, X. Meng, G. Tian, K. Pan, G. Wang and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16471–16476 RSC .
C. C. Hu, Y. L. Lee and H. Teng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3824–3830 RSC .
M. J. Moghadam, K. A. Majlan, X. Shen, T. Droubay, M. Bowden, M. Chrysler, D. Su, S. A. Chambers and J. H. Ngai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 2, 1400497 CrossRef .
B. Moss, Q. Wang, K. T. Butler, R. G. Crespo, S. Selim, A. Regoutz, T. Hisatomi, R. Godin, D. J. Payne, A. Kafizas, K. Domen, L. Steier and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Mater., 2021 DOI:10.1038/s41563-020-00868-2 .
R. B. Comes, T. C. Kaspar, S. M. Heald, M. E. Bowden and S. A. Chambers, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2016, 28, 035901 CrossRef .
M. Choi, A. B. Posadas, C. A. Rodriguez, A. O'Hara, H. Seinige, A. J. Kellock, M. M. Frank, M. Tsoi, S. Zollner, V. Narayanan and A. A. Demkov, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 043705 CrossRef .
P. Kumar, P. Chand and V. Singh, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2020, 754, 137715 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, K. Asakura and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 3082–3089 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ouyang, H. Tong, N. Umezawa, J. Cao, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Zhang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Ye, T. Kako and T. Kimura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15824–15830 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jia, S. Shen, D. Wang, X. Wang, J. Shi, F. Zhang, H. Han and C. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7905–7912 RSC .
Z. Zhang and W. Wang, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12072–12074 RSC .
H. Sun, T. Yao, X. Xie, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, Z. Xu, J. Han and X. Chen, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 499–508 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hojamberdiev, M. F. Bekheet, J. N. Hart, J. J. M. Vequizo, A. Yamakata, K. Yubuta, A. Gurlo, M. Hasegawa, K. Domen and K. Teshima, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 22210–22220 RSC .
A. Fuertes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 51, 63–70 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tessier, P. Maillard, F. Chevire, K. Domen and S. Kikkawa, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2009, 117, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Masubuchi, S. Ohtaki, K. Fujii, M. Yashima, M. Higichi and S. Kikkawa, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2020, 40, 6288–6292 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, Y. Zhu, Y. Qiu, C. F. Leung, J. He, G. Liu and T. C. Lau, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 226, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Seo, Y. Moriya, M. Kodera, T. Hisatomi, T. Minegishi, M. Katayama and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6869–6876 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, B. Siritanaratkul, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12334–12337 CrossRef CAS .
B. Siritanaratkul, K. Maeda, T. Hisatomi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Seol, Y. Kim, T. L. Pham and J. S. Lee, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2020, 57, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lin and X. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 9641–9649 CrossRef CAS .
S. Royer, D. Duprea, F. Can, X. Courtois, C. B. Dupeyrat, S. Laassiri and H. Alamdari, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10292–10368 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Wu, Y. Hu, C. Huang, Y. Zhu, M. Tian, Y. Kang, X. Pan, Y. Su, J. Wang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 9420–9430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, R. Li, C. Yu and Z. Hao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22525–22531 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Daniels, S. Ling, S. N. Savvin, M. J. Pitcher, M. S. Dyer, J. B. Claridge, B. Slater, F. Cora, J. Alaria and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15640–15652 RSC .
H. Zhao, L. Sun, M. Fu, L. Mao, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, Y. Xiao and G. Dong, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 11684–11691 RSC .
F. H. Taylor, J. Buckeridge and C. R. A. Catlow, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8147–8157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, Y. Wang, S. Zhang and Q. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 580, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Da, L. Zeng, C. Wang, C. Gong and L. Cui, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 300, 85–92 CrossRef CAS .
M. Retuerto, F. C. Vallejo, L. Pascual, G. Lumbeeck, M. T. F. Diaz, M. Croft, J. Gopalakrishnan, M. A. Pena, J. Hadermann, M. Greenblatt and S. Rojas, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21454–21464 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Rehman, M. Li, R. Knibbe, M. S. Khan, V. K. Peterson, H. E. A. Brand, Z. Li, W. Zhou and Z. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26909–26919 CrossRef CAS .
A. U. Rehman, M. Li, R. Knibbe, M. S. Khan, W. Zhou and Z. Zhu, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5340–5348 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, F. C. Vallejo, M. B. Mogensen and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7526–7533 RSC .
Y. Shimakawa, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 8562–8570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, S. Mou, Q. Peng, Q. Liu, Y. Luo, G. Chen, S. Gao and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1545–1556 RSC .
A. Kumar, A. Kumar and V. Krishnan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 10253–10315 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, G. Liu, L. Wang and J. T. Irvine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5951–5984 RSC .
A. A. Belik and W. Yi, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 163201 CrossRef .
A. Hossain, P. Bandyopadhyay and S. Roy, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 740, 414–427 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Akizuki, I. Yamada, K. Fujita, N. Nishiyama, T. Irifune, T. Yajima, H. Kageyama and K. Tanaka, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 11538–11543 CrossRef CAS .
B. Magyari-Kope, L. Vitos, B. Johansson and J. Kollar, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 2001, 57, 491–496 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, M. Yashima, J. Pena-Martinez and J. A. Kilner, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2638–2641 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09756j‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Xuping Sun	Xuping Sun received his PhD degree from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. During 2006–2009, he carried out postdoctoral research at Konstanz University, University of Toronto, and Purdue University. In 2010, he started his independent research career as a full Professor at CIAC and then moved to Sichuan University in 2015. In 2018, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, where he founded the Research Center of Nanocatalysis & Sensing. He was recognized as a highly cited researcher (2018–2020) in both areas of chemistry and materials science by Clarivate Analytics. He published over 490 papers with total citations over 42000 and an h-index of 108. His research mainly focuses on the rational design of functional nanostructures toward applications in electrochemistry for energy conversion and storage, sensing, and the environment.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Crystal structures of different A-site perovskite oxides. (a) Structure of the rhombohedral cell in perovskite-type BiFeO3. Color codes are Bi (blue), Fe (black) and O (red). Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from Elsevier; (b) schematic illustration of rhombohedral structured LaCoO3 perovskite. Color codes are La (green), Co (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the American Chemical Society; (c) hexagonal BaTiO3. Color codes are Ba (grey), Ti (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 59 with permission from Elsevier; (d) crystal structure of porous CaMnO3. Color codes are Ca (purple), Mn (green), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 60 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) orthorhombic structure. Color codes are [FeO6] Oh (orange), [CoO6] Oh (blue), La (green), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 61 with permission from the American Chemical Society; (f) unit-cell polyhedral structure of BaBi0.1Sc0.2Co1.7O6−x at room temperature. Color codes are Ba (green), Co2, Bi, and Sc (purple), Co1 (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 62 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry; (g) crystal structure with CuO4 tetrahedra and CoO6 octahedra. Color codes are Cu (green), Co (blue), and O (red). Adapted from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM images of the as-prepared different A-site deficient (a) LaCoO3, (b) La0.95CoO3−δ and (c) La0.9CoO3−δ. The scale bar is 100 nm; (d) ORR polarization of LaCoO3, La0.95CoO3–δ and La0.9CoO3−δ at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm in 0.1 mol L−1 KOH solution; (e) Tafel plots of LaCoO3, La0.95CoO3−δ and La0.9CoO3−δ; (f) mass activities at 1.6 V vs. RHE; (g) Tafel plots. Adapted from ref. 77 with permission from Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 3  LaFeO3 with different A-site deficiency, (a) LSV curves for the ORR on a RDE (1600 rpm) comprised of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1), together with LSV curves for a glassy carbon (GC) electrode and GC-supported carbon electrode; (b) Tafel plots of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts; (c) LSV curves for the OER on a RDE (1600 rpm) comprised of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution (scan rate: 5 mV s−1); (c) Tafel plots of LaFeO3, La0.98FeO3−δ, La0.95FeO3−δ, and La0.9FeO3−δ catalysts; (d) schematic illustration of the formation of oxygen vacancies and Fe4+ in A-site-deficient La1−xFeO3−δ perovskites. Adapted from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Electronic spin states of the octahedral site Co ions of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr) and Co3O4; (b) schematic band diagrams of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr). IS, intermediate spin; OER performance of ACoO3 (A = Ca, Sr), RuO2, LaCoO3, and Co3O4; (c) LSV at 1600 rpm in 0.1 M KOH; (d) overpotential required at 10 mA cm−2; (e) Tafel slopes; (f) chronoamperometric curves in an O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at 1.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted from ref. 100 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The general crystal structure of perovskite A-site deficiency; (b) representative SEM micrograph of LSM30; (c) ORR catalytic activities of different catalysts: the CV curves; (d) rotating ring-disk electrode polarization curves at a rate of 1600 rpm. Adapted from ref. 136 with permission from Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Crystal structure diagram of SCT; (b) chronoamperometric responses of SCT and IrO2 electrodes at constant potentials of 1.83 V (for SCT) and 1.74 V (for IrO2) to ensure an initial current density of 10 mA cm−2. Inset: chronopotentiometric responses of SCT and IrO2 electrodes at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2; (c, d) corresponding capacitance-corrected OER activities of these two electrocatalysts in the 2nd and 100th cycles, respectively. Adapted from ref. 138 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Values of the ionic radius and ionic electronegativity for La3+, Pr3+, Sm3+, Gd3+, and Ho3+ cations with 12-fold coordination, which exhibit the lanthanide contraction and gadolinium break phenomena, respectively; (b) inductive effects and electron exchange interactions between A-sites and B-sites in perovskites from molecular orbital theory; correlation with intrinsic HER activity. HER activity trends of the oxide at an overpotential of 10 mA cm−2 as a function of (c) A-site ionic electronegativity, and (d) A-site ionic radius for single and double perovskites studied here. Plots of Tafel slope values as a function of (e) A-site ionic electronegativity (the rate-determining steps estimated from the Tafel slope are shown in pink and purple dashed lines); and (f) A-site ionic radius for the prepared single and double perovskites. Adapted from ref. 146 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  Band structures of NaTaO3, AgTaO3, NaNbO3, and AgNbO3. Adapted from ref. 158 with permission from Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a–f) SEM secondary electron images taken from the polished and thermally etched cross sections of Na1+xNbO3 ceramics with various x; (g) composition dependent relative density and mean grain size calculated by the line intercept method of Na1+xNbO3 ceramics; (h) the maximum polarization (Pm) read from polarization hysteresis loops versus the applied electric field for Na1+xNbO3 ceramics measured at 1 Hz. Adapted from ref. 178 with permission from Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images of (a) BEFNTO-0.1; (b) BEFNTO-0.3, and (c) BEFNTO-0.5; (d) RhB removal efficiency with time through photocatalytic degradation by BEFNTO-y; (e) plots of ln (C0/C) as a function of time for BEFNTO-y. Adapted from ref. 204 with permission from Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  Field emission SEM images of (a) LaTiO2N and (b) La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (c) UV-vis light absorption spectra of LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (d) Mott–Schottky plot for LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; (e) XPS valence band scan of samples LaTiO2N and La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8; and (f) diagram of the band gap position of La0.8Ba0.2TiO2.2N0.8 and LaTiO2N at pH = 7. Adapted from ref. 214 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta09756j
‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
