A solar-electro-thermal evaporation system with high water-production based on a facile integrated evaporator   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07952A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07952A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21771-21779A solar-electro-thermal evaporation system with high water-production based on a facile integrated evaporator†

        
          
            Jiaxiang 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Xu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingjing 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dianpeng 
            Qi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Dongmei 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment, School of Environment, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, China. E-mail: wangweirs@hit.edu.cn
bSchool of Ecology and Environment, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, P. R. China
cMIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150090, P. R. China
Received 
      13th August 2020
    , Accepted 30th September 2020First published on 2nd October 2020AbstractNewer efficient photo-thermal materials and structural engineering have been developed to combine solar energy with seawater to produce water for human consumption or irrigation. However, the water production rate still needs to be increased. Herein, we report a simple approach for developing an integrated photo-electro-thermal evaporation system that provides a high evaporation rate in the day and produces water continually using the electro-thermal effect in the dark. Solar energy is not only absorbed and directly converted to heat in an evaporator, electric power from solar cells is also converted into heat to produce even more vapor. Such a photo-electro-thermal evaporation system reached a record high water-generation rate of 4.73 kg m−2 h−1 under 1 sun illumination. The evaporation system capable of continuous day and night operation provides a water generation of 79.39 kg m−2 under the conditions of a simulated day, near 100% salt rejection, and excellent bactericidal performance.
1. Introduction
Two-thirds of the world's population are predicted to suffer from the consequences of a lack of clean water by 2025.1,2 This means, water scarcity represents a major problem that threatens economic and human well-being. Desalination is becoming an important method to obtain fresh water by effectively utilizing abundant seawater.3–7 A similarly abundant resource, sunlight, can provide the energy needed for seawater desalination.8–10 Nowadays, solar-powered water evaporation, which is typically triggered by interfacial heating, is a promising approach to solve the freshwater scarcity problem. Most of the existing evaporation systems are made of solar absorber materials, an insulating substrate and a water absorption channel.11–14 The solar absorber materials are crucial system components, which are located at the water–air interface, and determine largely the heating and evaporation performance of the system. They typically are noble metals, semiconductors,15–17 carbon-based compounds,18–21 biological materials22,23 and polymers.24,25
Much research was done to develop solar absorbers that have a broad absorption spectrum to increase the light-to-heat conversion efficiency.26–29 A lot of attention has been paid to the development of new materials in order to obtain the highest light absorption. However, there are two reasons that really limit the development of solar-driven evaporation technology: (1) in the daytime with sunshine, the water evaporation rate is limited by the solar radiation (3600 J m−2 h−1) that hits the surface of the solar absorber, even if the efficiency reached 100%.29–36 In practice, increasing the efficiency is far less helpful than the effective acceleration of water production under the same area. Using this process, it is possible that, if an evaporation system can utilize more solar energy than the evaporation interface, the water production can be increased. (2) The global duration of sunshine is short. The Sahara Desert, which has the longest sunshine time in the world, only has 4300 h of sunshine per year. In the middle and low latitudes, the duration of sunshine is 2400–3000 h, and the solar-driven evaporation system cannot work during the long night. Therefore, it is important to solve the problem of continuous water production in the absence of light at night and the daily total yield needs to be increased.
While solar energy is evenly distributed throughout space, evaporation occurs only at a water–air interface.37–39 By transferring the solar energy from the space to the interface, interfacial evaporation could be increased effectively. This means that solar cells can help capture solar energy in space without adding evaporation interfaces and further increase the evaporation rate in the original area. For example, Qu et al. designed a porous graphene sponge and graphene foil to convert solar energy to heat using electrical power (generated by a solar cell) and achieved a high water-production rate of 2.01–2.61 kg m−2 h−1 under a solar illumination of 1 kW m−2.40 In this scenario, the photo-thermal and electro-thermal materials of the photo-electro-thermal evaporation system were physically separated, which prevents effective heat transfer. A combined/integrated absorber with high light-absorption and good electric conductivity could provide both light and electricity to produce clean water more effectively during the day with light illumination. Meanwhile, the system could continue to produce pure water by utilized electricity stored from the day under the condition of no light at night.
Herein, we developed an integrated evaporation system that uses a simple preparation process to increase the evaporation rate using the photo-electro-thermal effect in the day and produce water continually using the electro-thermal effect in the dark. The evaporator design combines the dipping method and carbonization. The carbonization of cotton highly increases the optical absorption of cotton, while dipping in a graphene oxide (GO) suspension enhances its mechanical properties and electrical conductivity by forming a network structure. The solar absorption of the optimized GO-modified carbonized-cotton (GOC) integrated evaporator was 96%. The evaporation rate of this integrated structure reached 1.85 kg m−2 h−1 using only photo-thermal conversion, with a surface temperature of 35.5 °C. By adding an applied voltage (1 V), produced by a solar cell, the evaporation rate of the evaporator reached a record value of 4.73 kg m−2 h−1, with a surface temperature of 42.8 °C. This is 2.6 times the production rate of the conventional photo-thermal evaporation system for the same area. The evaporation rate of 900GO in the dark was only 0.225 kg m−2 h−1, and the evaporation rate of the evaporator with electricity applied was 12 times higher under the same dark conditions. In addition, the evaporator absorbs water through capillary action and heats it, without excessive heat loss, thanks to its porous structure and adiabatic design. Experiments were performed for 24 h under the conditions of a simulated day, and the evaporator with electricity supplied lasted for 10 h under the solar illumination and then 12 h in the dark. The water yield remained stable and the total water yield was 79.39 kg m−2. This relatively simple integrated photo-electro-thermal strategy can produce a high-water production rate and open new doors for future solar desalination technologies.
2. Results and discussion
2.1 Fabrication and characterization

Fig. 1a shows the preparation process of the integrated evaporator. Cotton was chosen as the substrate material due to its large porous structure and excellent water absorption, which facilitates the water-transportation process and increases the evaporation efficiency during the evaporation.41,42 Dipping cotton in the GO-suspension enhances the electrical and mechanical properties because reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has ultra-high electrical conductivity, and a network structure of cotton fibers is formed. A high-temperature carbonization step can reduce partial GO, and alter the carbon-atom arrangement of the cotton, which changes its electrical conductivity. Following the above steps, the GOC was prepared as an integrated evaporator. SEM images of the carbonized cotton and GOC are displayed in Fig. 1b, c and S1.† The insets show magnified images and photographs of the samples on top of the corresponding samples. The surface of the carbonized cotton has an inter-connected fiber structure. The images show fibrous structures with diameters of 5–10 μm, and the carbonized cotton forms both soft and loose structures. After maceration in the GO solution, the GO sheet uniformly covers the fibers such that they are tightly connected, which strengthens them mechanically and improves the electrical conductivity. To investigate the resistance of different GOC evaporators for indicating electrical conductivity, an Autolab (CHI660E, Chenhua Co., Ltd., China) was used to test at a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1, and the results were showed as IU curves in Fig. 1d. All current profiles exhibit a similar trend, where the evaporator behaves like an ideal resistor and the current increased linearly as the voltage increased gradually. The reciprocal of the slope is equal to the resistance of the different evaporators. Samples carbonized at higher temperature exhibited lower resistance, and thus more heat can be generated for a given applied voltage. These results demonstrated that the electric heating capability of 900GO was superior to that of 800GO. Meanwhile, the evaporators, which were dipped in the GO solution, had a lower resistance at the same carbonization temperature because GO has high electrical conductivity between the cotton fibers. The GOC evaporator is an ideal resistor that can generate joule heat when a voltage is applied. The heat Q can be expressed as:Q = U2/Rwhere U is the input voltage across the resistor, and R denotes the resistance. For identical voltages, if the resistance of the evaporator decreases, the generated heat increases. Since the electrolysis voltage of water is 1.23 V, 1 V was selected to be used for the evaporators. This not only ensures that water is not electrolyzed, but also maximizes the heat generation for evaporation.
 Fig. 1  (a) Synthesis of carbonized materials dip coated in GO. (b and c) SEM images of the degreasing cotton carbonated at 700 °C and carbonated degreasing cotton dipped in GO and pretreated at 700 °C. (d) IU curves for different materials. 
The evaporation system designed in this paper can achieve day and night water production. On the one hand, during the day, the generation of electro-thermal part strengthens the amount of water, which enhances the evaporation rate of the system. When solar light hits the GOC, the GOC absorbs it efficiently and converts it into heat. In addition, when a voltage was applied across the above-mentioned GOC evaporator, the GOC resembles a resistor that converts electrical energy into heat (Fig. 2a and c). The daytime energy conversion process in this evaporation system is illustrated in Fig. 2b. The evaporator, a photo-thermal conversion layer, absorbs sunlight and converts it to heat. The generated heat can be used to heat water and generate vapor under solar illumination. The evaporator also acts as an electrothermal conversion layer that can convert electric energy into additional heat to generate more vapor. On the other hand, the traditional evaporators stop running at night due to lack of light but this system can utilize the electric energy stored in the daytime and continue to produce water. During evaporation at night, the electric energy from a solar cell was converted into heat to generated vapor. Hence, photo-electro-thermal evaporation has the potential to increase the evaporation rate and produce more clean water.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram showing energy conversion of the daytime system. (b) Photo-electro-thermal conversion relationship of the evaporation system. (c) Schematic diagram showing energy conversion at night. (d) Electro-thermal conversion of the evaporation system. 
The UV-Vis-NIR absorption spectrum is the main factor to evaluate the capacity of optical absorption of the evaporator – see Fig. 3a. The investigated wavelength range is 250–2500 nm, which is similar to the main emission wavelengths of the sun, suggesting that the evaporators provide solar absorption throughout the solar spectrum. The average absorption of the best evaporators was found to be approximately 96.0%, which is relatively high compared to what has been reported previously. This high value is because the samples have the capacity of broad-spectrum absorption and low reflection from the loose, porous structures. The carbonated cotton absorbs slightly more light than the GOC because the GOC with GO increased the reflection of light. The XRD patterns of the evaporators are shown in Fig. 3b. All samples display a characteristic peak centering around 23°, which corresponds to the (002) reflection of disordered graphite. The diffraction peaks became narrower, more intense, and shifted to larger angles near C002 as the carbonization temperature increased. The results indicate that the degree of graphitization of GOC increased as the carbonization temperature increased. The higher the degree of graphitization of GOC evaporators is, the higher is the electrical conductivity. The water contact angle (WCA) on the sample reflects its hydrophilic and hydrophobic properties, thus determining water transport during evaporation.43,44 Dynamic WCAs on the different samples are shown in Fig. 3c. The pristine soft cotton displayed great hydrophilic properties where the water droplet was absorbed within 20 ms, and there was a hydrophobic angle that appeared in the carbonized cotton. However, the wet samples have hydrophilic properties even better than the pristine cotton, as once the water droplets fell on the surfaces of wet GOC they would be absorbed quickly and the WCA was 0°, indicating that the evaporator has superior hygroscopicity. In addition, the evaporator shows an excellent water-absorption capacity, and the absorption rate is 700% (Fig. S2†). The evaporators showed outstanding solar evaporation efficiencies thanks to the characteristics above.
 Fig. 3  (a) Solar absorption in the different samples. (b) XRD patterns from different GOC evaporators. (c) Water contact angles of pristine cotton (c1), carbonized cotton (c2), and wetted carbonized cotton (c3). 
2.2 Solar evaporation performance
To accurately investigate the solar evaporation rate of the evaporators, a series of laboratory simulations of solar evaporation experiments were designed and carried out – see Fig. 4a. The evaporators were operated under a simulated sun-light source, and the light intensity could artificially be adjusted equal to several suns. The water evaporation rate of the different systems was investigated in real time using an electronic scale. The results are expressed in terms of mass change. The electronic scale was connected to a computer to collect and summarize the data. Due to constant evaporation of water into the ambient atmosphere, the mass of the system decreased gradually over time. Meanwhile, the corresponding surface temperatures of the evaporators were measured with an IR camera to analyze the surface temperature under different conditions. Fig. 4b shows changes in the mass of water on different evaporators while illuminated with 1 sun, and with/without an applied voltage (1 V). The trend lines drawn from the data were all straight lines, indicating that the vapor generated from each evaporator increased steadily. In each case, it is clear that samples carbonized at higher temperature evaporated more water. The amount (per unit time) of water, evaporated from identical evaporators based on the photo-electro-thermal effect, was significantly higher than under the conventional photo-thermal conditions. The evaporation rates were calculated based on the mass change, and the evaporation rates for different times are shown in Fig. S3.† By comparing the illumination conditions, it becomes clear that the evaporation rates from the three different evaporators improved when an electric current was supplied. The evaporation rate from 900GO under 1 sun illumination based on the photo-electro-thermal effect reached 4.73 kg m−2 h−1. Nevertheless, under the same conditions and light intensity, the evaporation rate, from a given evaporator without electric current, was only 1.85 kg m−2 h−1. The evaporation rate increased as the intensity of light increased (Fig. 4c and S4†). The evaporation rate from 900GO reached 8.78, 13.48, and 15.38 kg m−2 h−1 based on the photo-electro-thermal effect, when the solar intensity was 2, 3, or 4 suns, respectively. This shows that the evaporation rates could be greatly increased by focusing sunlight through a lens in practical applications. 900GO was found to provide the best evaporation rate in the above experiments. Hence, the following tests were used to verify the benefits of adding a solar generated current using 900GO. Changes in mass and the evaporation rate, under 1 sun illumination, are shown in Fig. 4d and S5.† Clearly, both the mass change and evaporation rate using 900GO were higher when a current was used additionally than those under only light or electricity alone. In other words, the system designed in this paper by adding electricity to a photo-thermal system can in fact provide a higher evaporation rate. To evaluate the evaporation efficiency rate and quality of desalinated water, a seawater sample from the Bohai Sea was used in the evaporators. The above materials, with their good light absorption capacity as evaporators, could convert light energy into heat energy. A series of evaporation experiments were carried out. The average temperatures of the dry GOC evaporators were recorded with an IR thermal imager – see Fig. S6 and S7.† The surface temperature increased as the light intensity increased. The temperature of the photo-electro-thermal evaporation system, using 900GO, reached 158 °C under 4 suns. This confirms its high potential to heat water to enable a high evaporation rate. The average temperatures of the evaporators were recorded during evaporation – see Fig. 4e. The surface temperature of 900GO rapidly increased and stabilized during illumination. The average temperatures of the surface are plotted as a function of time in Fig. 4e. The temperature of 900GO was 35.5 °C while being wet under 1 sun illumination, which is lower than that of the photo-electro-thermal evaporator (42.8 °C). In addition, the surface temperature increased as the light intensity increased. Furthermore, under the same light intensity, the surface temperatures of evaporators with electricity applied were always higher. The surface temperature of the photo-electro-thermal evaporator reached 63.6 °C when illuminated with 4 suns – an outstanding thermal performance result. According to earlier reports, the top surface of the photo-thermal evaporator can be surrounded by heated vapor during evaporation, which dramatically reduces heat loss for the system.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the laboratory simulation of the solar evaporation experiments. (b) Mass change of water over time from different evaporators under 1 sun illumination. (c) Evaporation rate from different evaporators illuminated under 1 to 4 suns and with applied voltage. (d) Mass change of the 900GO evaporators with 1 sun illumination or with applied voltage over time. (e) Surface temperatures and infrared images of 900GO when illuminated with 1 to 4 suns, with/without electricity applied respectively. 
Under the condition of absence of light at night, the evaporation system designed in this paper can utilize the electric energy stored during the day. The schematic of the laboratory simulation of the evaporation experiments at night is shown in Fig. 5a. The water mass change was traced in real time using an electronic scale. A comparison of the evaporation rate under three different conditions: the 900GO evaporator in the dark, only pure water in the dark, and the 900GO evaporator with electricity supplied in the dark is shown in Fig. 5b. The evaporation rate of 900GO in the dark was only 0.225 kg m−2 h−1; however, the evaporation rate of 900GO with electricity applied was 12 times higher under the same dark conditions, revealing a great improvement of the water evaporation. Interestingly, the natural evaporation rate of 900GO in the dark was higher than that of the pure water (0.0129 kg m−2 h−1) in the dark as well. It is possible that the porous structure increases the natural evaporation rate. Furthermore, experiments were performed for 24 h, and the water yield from the 900GO evaporation system was measured under the conditions of a simulated day, and the evaporator with electricity supplied lasted for 10 h under the solar illumination and then 12 h in the dark. The results are shown in Fig. 5c. The water yield grew stably and the mass change was 45.5 kg m−2 over 12 h under the conditions of providing both light illumination and electricity, and the conditions during this time are simulated during the day. The light is turned off and the illumination is stopped on the evaporation system after 12 h, and power supply to the system is also stopped for one hour at the same time. In order to make the salt crystals on the surface of the evaporator disappear, see Fig. 6 for details. After resupplying the electricity to the evaporation system in the dark, the water production increased steadily and the total water yield was 79.39 kg m−2 during a cycle of one day.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the laboratory simulation of the evaporation experiments at night. (b) Comparison of the evaporation rate under three different conditions: the 900GO evaporator in the dark, only pure water in the dark, and the 900GO evaporator with electricity supplied in the dark. (c) Water yield from the 900GO evaporators under the conditions of a simulated day, and the evaporator lasted for 10 h under the solar illumination and then 12 h in the dark. 
 Fig. 6  (a) Pictures showing salt crystal formation on the evaporator surface during illumination and their disappearance in the dark. (b) Schematic of ion transportation during solar desalination. 
2.3 Comparative analysis of seawater desalination
As usual, as the evaporator ran for a long time, salt crystals appeared and deposited on the evaporator surface, which hinder the transmission of sunlight.45,46 To investigate the consequences of salt crystal formation, evaporation experiments were performed in 3.5% NaCl (seawater salinity) and 7.0% NaCl, respectively. Photographs of the evaporator surfaces during the brine evaporation experiments were collected periodically – see Fig. 6a. The evaporators were illuminated for 480 min, and then the light was turned off and the surface was photographed 60 min later. The same operation was carried out using simulated seawater and yielded twice the seawater concentration. It is clear that only a small amount of salt appeared on the surface and after the light was turned off, and the salt crystals on the surface of the evaporator disappeared and dissolved back into the bulk seawater. This indicates that salt crystals do not form easily on the evaporators, and the evaporators have the ability to self-clean thanks to the excellent water transport capacity and hydrophilic properties. A schematic illustrating the ion transportation during solar desalination is shown in Fig. 6b. During the process of evaporation, water was continuously evaporated from the evaporator, while salt in the seawater remained in the evaporation system. Once the salt solution at the evaporator surface reached a certain high concentration, salt crystals deposited and accumulated on the surface of the evaporator and scattered part of the solar light. As a result, the solar energy received by the evaporator decreased, and the evaporation rate decreased. During the evaporation process, a difference in the concentration of salt solution between the interface and the lower layer of the evaporator appeared gradually. Similarly, a difference in the concentration between the lower layer and seawater appeared.47,48 Therefore, the salt ions transported continually, from the top to seawater, driven by the concentration gradient. The migration rate of salt ions is related to the water absorption and the hydrophilicity of the evaporator. The better the water absorption of the evaporator is, the higher is the migration rate of ions, and the more difficult it is to deposit salt crystals on the surface.49,50 Furthermore, the super-hydrophilic properties of the evaporator are other crucial factors that determine the salt-migration rate.
2.4 Outdoor applications
The outdoor evaporation still of the seawater desalination experiments is shown in Fig. 7a and b. The system consists of a GOC integrated evaporator, solar cell, melamine foam, plastic board and copper foil, which were arranged in a transparent acrylic box, which was filled with seawater. Connect the solar cell and the integrated GOC evaporator through strip copper foils and place it on top of the plastic board to fix it. Water was supplied constantly by the melamine sponge from the bulk of seawater during evaporation. Meanwhile, the same solar still, without applied voltage, was used as a control (Fig. 7c). Under natural solar irradiation, the vapor, which was produced from the evaporator, rose to the inside of the device cover and condensed on the inner wall immediately. Purified water was gathered and collected by gravity into a diversion channel. The amount of collected water was measured at different points in time, as shown in Fig. 7d. The water production of the photo-thermal system was 6.63 L m−2 after 7 h of operation, from 10:00 to 17:00 on June 16th, 2019 at the campus of the Harbin Institute of Technology. This is a typical condition for outdoor applications. The solar intensity and outdoor temperature were recorded, see Fig. S8.† The average solar intensity and temperature of the day were 0.514 kW m−2 and 21.94 °C, respectively. Similarly, the water production of the photo-electro-thermal system was 11.083 L m−2, 1.7 times higher than for the single system, which represents an excellent improvement. However, the improvement is lower than the amount of water produced in the laboratory. This was due to the lower solar intensity and sealed environment, which slowed down the rate of condensation. In addition, the evaporation rate with the evaporator indicates that supplying electricity would significantly increase the water yield of the evaporation system in a practical application. The concentrations of several negative ions and positive ions (Cl−, SO42−, F−, NO3−, Na+, Ca2+, K+ and Mg2+) were tracked, before and after the seawater was desalinated, using ICP-OES and IC. The calculated concentrations and salt rejection are shown in Fig. 7e and S9.† The concentration of all ions decreased by several orders of magnitude, and the rejection of all ions reached 99.8%. Moreover, the concentration of Na+ in distilled water was as low as 0.64 mg L−1, which complies with the drinking water standard specified by the World Health Organization.51 Furthermore, the total bacterial count of raw seawater and distilled water is displayed in Fig. 7f. In order to spread each bacterial colony evenly on the surface of blank agar, the seawater sample was diluted by a factor of 100 before testing. The total number of bacterial colonies in seawater was much higher than in distilled water, which was about 2 × 109 CFU L−1. However, no bacterial colony was observed in the evaporated water, and there are few microorganisms in distilled water. In other words, the evaporation system provides a bactericidal function. The above experimental results indicate that the photo-electro-thermal evaporation system designed in this paper produces higher evaporation rates than a conventional photo-thermal evaporator. The concentration of major seawater ions was very low, and almost no microorganisms were found in the distilled water. The amount of Total Organic Carbon (TOC) was measured before and after the seawater was desalinated, using nondispersive infrared absorption. The results are shown in Fig. S10.† The TOC concentrations of seawater and distilled water are 125.8 and 23.45 mg L−1 respectively, and the TOC rejection was calculated to be 81.4%. The TOC concentration of distilled water is not low enough, because there are some volatile organic compounds in seawater. The solar evaporator in this study cannot remove volatile organic compounds. The solution conductivity of seawater and distilled water was measured using a conductivity meter (INESA Scientific Instrument Co., Ltd, DDSJ-308A), and the results are shown in Fig. S10.† The solution conductivity of seawater and distilled water is 56900 and 6.42 μS cm−1 respectively, while the rejection was 99.99%. The results from the outdoor experiment illustrate the enormous potential of this evaporation system for clean water production.
 Fig. 7  (a and b) Schematic of the evaporation system. (c) Photograph of the solar desalination device for outdoor operation. (d) Desalinated water production over 7 h in the outdoor environment. (e) Measured ion concentration and rejection before and after evaporation during desalination. (f) Images of the total bacterial count on the blank agar of the seawater sample and distilled water. 
3. Experimental section
3.1 Materials and chemicals
The cotton absorbent was purchased from Harbin Tongsheng Co., Ltd. A 10 mg L−1 GO suspension (single layer 0.2–10 μm) was obtained from Ashine Advanced Carbon Material (Changzhou) Limited Corporation. Solar cells (silicon-based solar cells) were provided by Star Solar Co., Ltd. Sodium chloride (NaCl, 99.5%) and ethyl alcohol were obtained from China National Medicines Co., Ltd. Deionized water was used to prepare solutions.
3.2 Fabrication of the evaporator
The evaporator was fabricated by the combined impregnation method and high-temperature carbonization technique. The GO suspension was diluted to 3 g L−1 with deionized water and dispersed using ultrasonication. The commercially available cotton absorbent was cut into 50 × 50 mm2 squares and was washed using absolute alcohol beforehand. The cotton cuts were dipped into the GO suspension such that they were saturated with GO. The desiccated cotton, dipped into GO, was heated to different temperatures (700, 800, and 900 °C) in N2 at a heating ramp of 5 °C min−1 and held at this temperature for 2 h. In this stage, the absorbent cotton was carbonized. The GOC integrated evaporators were named 800GO, 900GO and 1000GO based on their carbonization temperature.
3.3 Characterization
The surface morphologies of the relevant samples were examined with a scanning electron microscope (SEM, Nanolab600i). Optical absorption in the evaporators from 250 to 2500 nm was measured with a UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer equipping with an integrating sphere (PerkinElmer, Lamda950). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were recorded with an X-ray diffractometer (Bruker D8 Advance, Germany) using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.54060 nm) with the Sample-Saver storage container under purified. The positive ion concentration in seawater and purified water was tracked using inductively coupled plasma spectroscopy (ICP-OES, Optima 5300 DV, PerkinElmer Instrument). The negative ion concentration of seawater and purified water was tracked using ion chromatography (IC, IC-3000, Dionex China Ltd.). Solar illumination was calibrated using a power meter (PM100D, Thorlabs Inc) equipped with a thermal sensor (wavelength range 0.19 to 25 μm, S305C, Thorlabs Inc). An IR thermal imager (FLIR T1040) was used to measure the surface temperature of the samples. The wettability of the samples was determined from the water contact angle (WCA), which was measured with a contact angle goniometer (Kino SL200B) and 2 μL water. The graphitization of the samples was examined by Raman spectroscopy.
3.4 Solar evaporation experiment
The photo-electro-thermal evaporation system was composed of a 6 × 6 cm2 silicon solar cell, evaporator, melamine foam, copper foil and plastic board. The evaporator and solar cell were connected by copper foil on the plastic board and placing a plastic board on a container filled with water. Melamine foam was placed through the hole in the center of the plastic board and placed in contact with the evaporator. The excellent water-absorption properties of melamine foam too were used to supply water continually from the bottom container to the evaporator. The photo-electro-thermal evaporation system was illuminated with a solar simulator (NBeT Solar-500) at different illumination intensities for 60 min. The evaporation rate was calculated in terms of weight loss, which was record with an electronic mass balance (accuracy: 0.0001 g) every 1 min. In addition, evaporation experiments were performed at different multiples of 1000 W m−2, which corresponds to the number of suns illuminating the system.
4. Conclusions
In this study, we investigated a novel simple and scalable method to build an integrated photo-electro-thermal evaporation system for efficient water production in the day and capable of continuous water production at night. The evaporator showed good solar absorption due to its large porous loose structures and low optical reflectivity. The addition of GO enhanced its mechanical properties and electrical conductivity by forming a network structure. The evaporation rate under solar illumination was 1.85 kg m−2 h−1 with a surface temperature of 35.5 °C. With the assistance of a solar cell, the evaporation rate of the photo-electro-thermal system increased to 4.73 kg m−2 h−1, and the surface temperature reached 42.8 °C in the same occupied area, which indicates excellent water production. Additionally, the evaporation rates of the photo-electro-thermal system under different solar intensities were higher than both the photo-thermal system and the electro-thermal system. When applied to seawater desalination, the system exhibited a stable performance to produce clean water, with a salt rejection rate of nearly 100%, and excellent bactericidal properties. The condensation system coupled with the evaporator and solar cell structure forms an integrated solar still, which is capable of producing a desalination rate of 11.083 L per m2 per day. The solar photo-electro-thermal evaporation system provides effective clean water production and opens new doors to address the global water shortage.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 52070052, 51873047 and 51761145031), Natural Science Foundation of Heilongjiang Province (Grant No. YQ2020B003) and the Foundation of State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment (Grant No. 2019DX10).
Notes and references
H. K. Jani and K. V. Modi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 93, 302–317 CrossRef .

          P. Milly, K. A. Dunne and A. V. Vecchia, 20th- and 21st-Century Changes in Streamflow Associated With Global Warming, Agu Fall Meeting (AGUFM),  2005, H51I–H02 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, D. Kong, P.-C. Hsu, H. Yuan, H.-W. Lee, Y. Liu, H. Wang, S. Wang, K. Yan and D. Lin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS .
R. Das, M. Eaqub Ali, S. B. Abd Hamida, S. Ramakrishna and Z. Z. Chowdhury, Desalination, 2014, 336, 97–109 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
M. Chandrashekara and A. Yadav, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 67, 1308–1330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 393 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Higgins, A. Shakeel Rahmaan, R. R. Devarapalli, M. V. Shelke and N. Jha, Sol. Energy, 2018, 159, 800–810 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Xu, C. Chen, H. Huang, C. Jia, X. Zhao and E. Hitz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1702149 CrossRef .
C. Chang, P. Tao, J. Xu, B. Fu, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18466–18474 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, H. Zhao, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, X. Yin, N. Li, D. Yin, Y. Li, B. Lei and Y. Du, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1143–1150 RSC .
H. Liu, C. Chen, H. Wen, R. Guo, N. A. Williams, B. Wang, F. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18839–18846 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef .
R. Cui, J. Wei, C. Du, S. Sun, C. Zhou, H. Xue and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 13311–13319 RSC .
X. Jia, I. Ahmad, R. Yang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 2459–2467 RSC .
F. S. Awad, H. D. Kiriarachchi, K. M. AbouZeid, U. m. Özgür and M. S. El-Shall, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 976–985 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, M. Yang, B. Dang, X. Luo, S. Liu, S. Li, Z. Chen and J. Li, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 1152–1158 RSC .
L. Chen, H. Wang, S. Kuravi, K. Kota, Y. H. Park and P. Xu, Desalination, 2020, 483, 114412 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, W. Li, W. Song, L. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 349–357 RSC .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 12, 489 CrossRef .
Y. Zou, X. Chen, P. Yang, G. Liang, Y. Yang, Z. Gu and Y. Li, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb4696 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, G. Zhong, C. Kübel, A. A. Jelle, C. Qian, L. Wang, M. Ebrahimi, L. M. Reyes, A. S. Helmy and G. A. Ozin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6329–6334 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, S. Zhuang, C. He, Y. Tan, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2016, 32, 195–200 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. A. Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 5510 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang and J. Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 30 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Y. He, Y. Hu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9362–9368 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 141, 406–412 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, L. Miao, P. F. Liu, J. Zhou, P. Wang, Y. Gu, X. Wang, H. Cai, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Ma, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 869–876 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, G. Peng, S. Mo, D. Ma, S. W. Sharshir and N. Yang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19066–19072 RSC .
C. Liu, J. Huang, C. E. Hsiung, Y. Tian, J. Wang, Y. Han and A. Fratalocchi, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1600013 CrossRef .
M. Ye, J. Jia, Z. Wu, C. Qian, R. Chen, P. G. O'Brien, W. Sun, Y. Dong and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601811–1601817 CrossRef .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. A. Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang and Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5510–5518 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Kiriarachchi, F. S. Awad, A. A. Hassan, J. A. Bobb, A. Lin and M. S. El-Shall, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18531–18539 RSC .
Z. Zhu, L. Zhong, X. Chen, W. Zheng, J. Zuo, G. Zeng and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 615, 118499 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Z. Zhu and G. Zeng, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 744, 140822 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environmental Science & Technology, 2018, 52, 11822–11830 Search PubMed .
C. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Chen and G. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35142–35151 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, D. Liu, H. Xiang, S. Ren, Z. Zhu, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, C. Liu, F. Wang, Y. Zhao, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 3024–3032 CrossRef CAS .

          W. H. Organization, Guidelines for drinking-water quality, World Health Organization,  1993 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta07952aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Q = U2/R

 	Fig. 1  (a) Synthesis of carbonized materials dip coated in GO. (b and c) SEM images of the degreasing cotton carbonated at 700 °C and carbonated degreasing cotton dipped in GO and pretreated at 700 °C. (d) IU curves for different materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic diagram showing energy conversion of the daytime system. (b) Photo-electro-thermal conversion relationship of the evaporation system. (c) Schematic diagram showing energy conversion at night. (d) Electro-thermal conversion of the evaporation system.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Solar absorption in the different samples. (b) XRD patterns from different GOC evaporators. (c) Water contact angles of pristine cotton (c1), carbonized cotton (c2), and wetted carbonized cotton (c3).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the laboratory simulation of the solar evaporation experiments. (b) Mass change of water over time from different evaporators under 1 sun illumination. (c) Evaporation rate from different evaporators illuminated under 1 to 4 suns and with applied voltage. (d) Mass change of the 900GO evaporators with 1 sun illumination or with applied voltage over time. (e) Surface temperatures and infrared images of 900GO when illuminated with 1 to 4 suns, with/without electricity applied respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the laboratory simulation of the evaporation experiments at night. (b) Comparison of the evaporation rate under three different conditions: the 900GO evaporator in the dark, only pure water in the dark, and the 900GO evaporator with electricity supplied in the dark. (c) Water yield from the 900GO evaporators under the conditions of a simulated day, and the evaporator lasted for 10 h under the solar illumination and then 12 h in the dark.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Pictures showing salt crystal formation on the evaporator surface during illumination and their disappearance in the dark. (b) Schematic of ion transportation during solar desalination.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a and b) Schematic of the evaporation system. (c) Photograph of the solar desalination device for outdoor operation. (d) Desalinated water production over 7 h in the outdoor environment. (e) Measured ion concentration and rejection before and after evaporation during desalination. (f) Images of the total bacterial count on the blank agar of the seawater sample and distilled water.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta07952a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
