Black phosphorus-based nanohybrids for energy storage, catalysis, sensors, electronic/photonic devices, and tribological applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC02355E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC02355E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14053-14079Black phosphorus-based nanohybrids for energy storage, catalysis, sensors, electronic/photonic devices, and tribological applications

        
          
            Shuangqing 
            Fan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hao-Qiang 
            Cao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xuhai 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minghui 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tong 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ting 
            Xu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jie 
            Su
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Electronics and Information, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, China. E-mail: jsu@qdu.edu.cn
bChinese Automotive Technology & Research Centre Co. Ltd, Tianjin 301822, China
cWuxi Little Swan Co., Ltd, Wuxi 214000, China
Received 
      10th June 2022
    , Accepted 1st September 2022First published on 10th September 2022AbstractBlack phosphorus (BP) has many unique properties including layer-dependent bandgap, high carrier mobility, large on–off current ratios, and distinctive anisotropy, making it suitable for nanoelectronic and optoelectronic devices. To overcome its intrinsic disadvantages of instability and obtain performance beyond the limitations of a single material, nanohybrids structures are developed to enhance the performance of the device. Due to their unique structure and excellent properties, significant progress has been made in recent years in the development of BP-based nanohybrids. The purpose of the current review is to fully understand the advantages and disadvantages of BP-related nanohybrids and to find ways to improve the properties of nanohybrids through new designs. In this review, we summarize several important BP-based nanohybrids, the majority of the reported synthetic routes, properties and performance of nanohybrids, as well as the recent advance in the field of BP-based nanohybrids materials for Li/Na/K-ion storage, catalysis, sensor, electronic/photonic devices, and tribological applications. Finally, we highlight the challenges and opportunities relating to BP-based nanohybrids for future research.
Shuangqing Fan

Xuhai Liu

Tong Liu

Ting Xu

Jie Su

1. Introduction
Following the first successful exfoliation of graphene from graphite in the 20th century, 2D layered van der Waals (vdW) nanomaterials have aroused wide attention and led to a rapid development of 2D layered vdW-based devices owing to their fantastic structural and physical properties. Nevertheless, despite extensive research, logic circuit switches using graphene have still not been realized owing to the intrinsic lack of a band gap, something that has greatly limited its applications in the field of semiconductor devices. Transition metal disulfides (TMDs) are a series of other extensively studied 2D vdW materials, especially the most famous one-MoS2, which possesses a similar structure to graphene and exhibits direct band gaps when its thickness is reduced to a mono-layer. However, due to its relatively low carrier mobility there is difficulty in meeting the preparation requirements of next-generation optoelectronic devices.
As a novel 2D material member, BP has recently attracted great attention due to its suitable bandgap, high charge carrier mobility and high-current ON/OFF ratios.1 Compared with other 2D materials, BP can be identified by the pleated structure along the armchair direction and the double-layer structure along the zigzag direction.2,3 This structural anisotropy endows BP with some special properties, including conducting nature, optical, magnetic, thermoelectric, and electrochemical or mechanical properties (negative Poisson effect). Different from the zero-bandgap graphene and wide-bandgap transition metal dichalcogenides (TMCDs), BP exhibits a wide-range tunable direct bandgap, a tunable current ON/OFF ratio of 103 to 106 and an excellent carrier mobility of as high as ca. 104 cm2 V−1 s−1.4 Due to the interesting thickness-dependent bandgap that can be expanded from 0.3 eV to 2.0 eV, the BP nanosheets prepared using mechanical and electrochemistry exfoliation methods hold a great potential in electronic and optoelectronic devices.5,6 With the exception of 2D layered BP, the one-dimensional (1D) BP nanoribbons and zero-dimensional (0D) BP quantum dots (BPQDs) with high surface-to-volume ratios and more active edge sites have also drawn extensive attention, whose electronic characteristics are extremely sensitive to the edge types.7–14
However, pristine BP nanomaterials have some inherent defects, which can constitute substantial barriers to their practical application.15,16 For example, the degradation of the BP surface is a serious challenge that needs to be addressed to effectively improve the long-term stability of BP devices. Therefore, efforts have been devoted to elucidating the degradation mechanism of BP through experimental and theoretical studies. The commonly used degradation mechanism is the synergistic effect of light, water and oxygen. A three-step degradation process of BP has been proposed, including the formation of superoxide, formation of phosphate, and destruction of the top layer.17 In particular, BP is very sensitive to water and air,18–20 which will cause a rapid degradation owing to the uncovered lone pair electrons on the surface of BP. Also, the roughness caused by the preparation process will further promote the surface oxidation, so that the fast degradation of the semiconducting properties and photocatalytic performance further confine its practical application.1,21 It is critical to devise feasible BP passivation methods to eliminate or reduce the deterioration of BP. In recent years, several methodologies have been studied to block BP oxidation, of which the construction of nanohybrids between BP and other materials was put forward as a valid approach.22
The BP-based nanohybrids with inorganic nanostructures, conducting polymer and/or organic materials have been used for the fabrication of metal-ion batteries, supercapacitors, photocatalysis/electrocatalysis, electrochemical sensors, electronic and optoelectronic devices. Various study groups have reported the incorporation of BP into nanohybrids and the resultant enhancements of thermal stability, electrochemical activity and gas barrier properties.23–28 Apart from that, the major advantage of these nanohybrids is that the positive results can be obtained even with low-dose BP. The stacking of various nanomaterials is a novel nanomanufacturing strategy where the overall properties of stacked nanohybrids can overcome the potential drawbacks associated with any component in the nanohybrids. The stacking of various nanomaterials can also enable novel electronic, phononic, or optical properties that are differentiated from the individual nanomaterials themselves (Table 1).29 This review is to highlight the importance of BP and its nanohybrids with different types of organic/polymer, inorganic non-metallic, metal, metal oxide, as well as their applications (Fig. 1).
Table 1 Summary of precursors, preparation method, applications and stability of different types of BP-based nanohybrids




Nanohybrids type
Type of BP
Doping material
Preparing methods
Applications
Stability
Ref.




bPEI, branched polyethylenimine; MVs, matrix vesicles; PLGA, poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid); NPs, nanoparticles; PILs, polymer ionic liquids; CN, carbon nitride; CNT, carbon nanotubes; NG, N-doped graphene; TMC, TiO2 mesocrystals; LWIR, long-wavelength infrared; NA, not available.




Co/BP
Nanosheet
Co NPs
Solvothermal reduction
OER
55 h

30



Ag–BP
Flake
Ag nanoclusters
Thermal evaporator
NIR optoelectronic devices
3 d

31



BP–Au
Nanosheet
AuNPs
Physical adsorption
Photothermal sensing probes
NA

32



BP/Cu
Nanosheet
Cu NPs
Micromechanical manipulator
NA
NA

33



BP-bPEI-PEG
Nonosheet
PEG-COOH bPEI
Solution process
Photothermal therapy
16 d

34



Apt-bioinspired MVS
BPQD
PLGA NPs
NA
Cell biomineralization
NA

35



PLGA-SS-D@BPQDs
BPQD
PLGA
Emulsification evaporation
Radio sensitization
15 d

12



BP/P([vpim]TFSI)
Nanosheet
PILs
Ultrasonication
Flexible optoelectronics
100 d

36



BP/CN
Powder
Carbon nitride
Sonication
Photocatalytic
NA

37



BP–CNT
Nanocrystal
MWCNTs
Ball milling
Li/Na-ion batteries
400 cycles

38



BP–C60
Bulk
C60
Solid-state mechano-chemical
Photodynamic therapy
24 h

39



BPQD-C3N4
BPQD
g-C3N4
Sonication
HER
25 h

40



EBP@NG
Few-layered
NG
Sonication
HER/OER
2 weeks

41



BP/RGO
RP
rGO
Flash-heat-treatment method
Sodium-ion battery anodes
NA

42



BPQDS/CsPbI2Br
BPQD
CsPbI2Br
Solution-based method
Photovoltaic application
NA

43



BP NS/TMC
Bulk
TMC
Solvothermal route
Photocatalytic
180 min

44



CsPbBr3 QD-FLBP
Nanosheet
CsPbBr3 & QDs
Sonication
Photoluminescence quenching
NA

45



BQ-MIL@cat-MIL
BPQD
MIL-101-NH2
Stepwise in situ growth
Photothermal therapy
NA

46



BPQD/TNS
BPQD
Ti3C2
Sonication and freeze-drying
Li/Na-ion storage
2400 cycles

13



Co3O4@BP-PEI
Nanosheet
Co(NO3)2
Hydrothermal method
NOx gas sensor
11 d

47



FMSN@BP-DOX-FA
BPQD
NH2-modified silica
Sonication
Photothermal therapy
3 cycles

48



SiO2/BP-MT
Nanosheet
MTEOS & APTES
NA
Solar desalination
15 d

49



Silicon/BP
Thin film
Silicon core
Imprint-transfer process
Mid-IR photodetectors
65 °C

50



Black/red phosphorus nanohybrids
Red phosphorus
Red phosphorus
Sonochemical method
Supercapacitors
2000 cycles

51



b-AsP materials
Red phosphorus
Gray arsenic
Vapor transport
LWIR regime
NA

52



Ag/BP
Nanosheet
Ag-NPs
Sonication
Tribological applications
NA

53





 Fig. 1  Summary of BP-based nanohybrids and their applications. 
2. BP-based nanohybrids
2.1. BP-organic/polymer nanohybrids
BP nanomaterials are very sensitive to ambient environment and easily reactive to oxygen and water within hours as a result of the lone pairs in each P atom. The environmental stability of the BP nanomaterials could be enhanced by combining BP with organic/polymeric functional materials. Similar to graphene, carbon nanotubes, and C60, BP shows very low solubility in common organic solvents, which makes it very difficult to fabricate BP-based thin film devices via a solution-processable method. Besides, bare BP nanomaterials cannot be administered intravenously, thus limiting its biotechnological applications. To address these problems, many strategies, including non-covalent functionalization, covalent chemical modification, have been proposed.7
Solution mixing process is the most used method to prepare the nonchemically bonded BP-organic/polymer nanohybrids, due to its easy-to-perform nature and applicability in various organic or polymer nanohybrids. For example, conjugating BPQDs with several layers of multifunctional polymers organic solutions to form core–shell PLGA-SS-D@BPQDs nanosystem would significantly improve the hydrophilicity, stability, and cellular uptake of the nanosystem and provide sites for further chemical modification.54 The size of the BPQDs characterized by TEM is about 3 nm and it increases to 140 nm after the introduction of poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA), polyethyleneimine (PEI), cystamine, oxalic acid, Arg-Gly-Asp-Gys (RGD), and 2,3-dimethylmaleic anhydride (DMMA) successively.
However, a lack of reactive groups, such as amino group (–NH2) and hydroxyl group (–OH) on the surface of BP, greatly limits the fabrication of BP-based polymer nanohybrids through chemical bonding.55 For the first time, Ryder et al. reported the organic chemical functionalization of mechanically exfoliated BP with 4-nitrobenzene-diazonium (4-NBD) and 4-methoxybenzene-diazonium (4-MBD) tetrafluoroborate salts.56 However, the resultant organic molecules cannot be used directly to fabricate electronic devices through spin-coating technique because of its low solubility in organic solvents. In light of this concern, Cao et al. used 4-bromobenzene-diazonium (4-BBD)-functionalized BP (4-BBD-BP) as a 2D template to covalently combine them with poly[(1,4-diethynylbenzene)-alt-9,9-bis(4-diphenylaminophenyl)fluorene]-(PDDF) through two-step reactions. After the study, they developed one-step synthetic strategy by firstly synthesizing highly soluble diazotated polymer, PFCz-N2+BF4−, through the use of poly[(9,9-dioctyl-9H-fluorene)-alt-(4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)aniline)] (PFCz-NH2) and then conjugated the polymer directly with BOQDs. Both of the two BP-polymer nanohybrids exhibited excellent resistive random-access memory (RRAM) performance.
Of cause, to further broaden the reactively activity of BP, a facile, green, and economical method is needed to obtain BP–OH or BP–NH2 nanomaterials. Also, the ball milling method was wildly used for preparing and peeling nanomaterials with the assistance of a suitable substance. Thus, by using ball milling method, one can easily exfoliate and functionalize BP within a relatively short period of time. Zhu et al. prepared –OH functionalized BP using the LiOH-assisted ball-milling method. Not coincidentally, another work displayed the urea-assisted ball-milling strategy to obtain NH2-functionalized BP nanosheets. The –OH57 and –NH258 groups are expected to get attached preferentially to the surface and edge of BP nanoparticles. Many polymers can react with BP–OH or BP–NH2 nanomaterials through either esterification or aldol condensation. For example, 1D nanofibrillar cellulose containing abundant hydroxyl groups is beneficial to construct the interfacial interactions with BP–OH via hydrogen bonding network.59
2.2. BP–carbon nanohybrids
Oxygen and water are easy to react with BP thorough the exposed lone pairs. Hence, forming chemical bonds, such as P–C and P–O–C bonds, or electrostatic absorb positively charged nanomaterials, to occupy the lone pair electrons, is a promising method to address the susceptible degradation of the BP. Carbon materials are often applied as an excellent candidate for combination with other nanomaterials due to their fast reaction kinetics, high stability, high electronic conductivity, and high mechanical strength. Therefore, integrating carbon materials with BP is a commonly used approach to improving the overall performance of the ensemble. Currently, there are many kinds of carbon-based materials suitable as active building blocks, such as graphene, graphdiyne, heteroatom/defect doped carbons, carbon nanotubes, and fullerene.
As shown in Fig. 2, the grafting of nanomaterials is a novel nanomanufacturing strategy where the overall properties of interconnected 2D nanohybrids can compensate for the restrictions or bottlenecks associated with either of the nanomaterials in the nanohybrids. Clearly, efficiently integrating those carbon materials into the structure of BP nanomaterial could result in an unprecedented improvement in the nanohybrids and also enable novel electronic or photonic properties that are differentiated from the individual BP and carbon materials themselves. Experimental and theoretical calculations show that the carbon materials intertwined, interspersed or integrated with BP can not only enhance the stability of BP or the limit on structural breaking during work through the assembly of different phosphorene–carbon nanohybrids, but also enhance electrical conductivity and electrochemical performances. Besides, the restriction of the semi-metallic nature of carbon materials limits their scope of practical application. For example, the photocatalytic performance of graphene and graphitic carbon nitride (CN) is restricted to the narrow range of visible-light absorption and limited efficiency of photoinduced electron–hole pairs separation. BP has tunable and direct bandgap, thus leading to broad and large solar light absorption from near UV to visible light-NIR region (Fig. 2b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of the CN-4N(BQ) nanohybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of CN, BP, and BP–CN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The charge density of NG and EBP. (d) Schematic illustration of the face-to-face direct contact between BP and NG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In the meantime, due to the low Fermi level of BP, the electronic interaction can effectively excite electron transfer from carbon materials to BP. Thus, the BP will potentially broaden the application of carbon-based materials in photo-related areas, such as photocatalytic, photothermal therapy (PTT),62–64 photodynamic therapy, and photoacoustic imaging. More importantly, embedding nanocarbons like 1D-nanotubes or 2D-graphene may give rise to hierarchical mesoporous structures,65 thus providing more electro-active surfaces and interfaces for various applications such as alkali or alkaline earth batteries, supercapacitors and photocatalysis.66–68 Carbon nanostructures are often used for hierarchical structures, in which BP skins are used as conductive networks for phosphorus to improve its electrochemical performances and prevent the deconstruction of phosphorus structure. In addition, self-assembling or preparing carbon-based materials into the BP system would be beneficial to increase the hydrophilicity of the surface chemistry and achieve a better interaction among those components in practice.
To date, the BP used in most BP-based research works is mechanically exfoliated from bulk crystals, which is a complex, time-consuming, and poorly scalable production process. However, the serious intrinsic challenges have so far offset the nominal advantages of BP. To this end, there are a number of methods available for the synthesis of BP–carbon nanohybrids and the ultrasonic-assisted liquid-exfoliation method is commonly used. Few-layer or quantum dot can be obtained and the chemical bonding with carbon-based materials can be completed in appropriate solvents, for instance, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), dimethylformamide (DMF) and isopropanol. Yuan et al. prepared the aqueous dispersion of few-layered BP by peeling from bulk material in an environmental-safe ethanol/water mixture solvent, which is followed by the electrostatic attract positively charged N-doped graphene (NG) for assembly into a new 2D–2D nanohybrids (EBP@NG) with unique electronic configuration and well-designed interface, as the proficient and bifunctional catalysts for both HER and OER processes (Fig. 2c).41 The sonochemical-assisted process69 could exfoliate BP with a large interface area, thus leading to the face-to-face contact with NG and promoting charge separation/transfer (Fig. 2d). Inductively coupled plasma-atomic spectroscopy results show that the presence of NG could effectively prevent BP from chemical and structural degradation in the assembled nanohybrids systems. Nevertheless, the thickness of BP obtained by long-time sonication is difficult to regulate, and extensive defects are induced, which is unable to meet the requirement on BP–carbon nanohybrids scalability. Fortunately, electrochemical exfoliation can be relied on to mass produce the BP and graphene with larger lateral size and lower defect.70
Besides, combining the electrochemically exfoliated BP and graphene through the solvothermal method can also successfully obtain the phosphorene–graphene nanohybrids material with a sandwiched structure. The sandwiched structure induces an excellent contact between layered BP and graphene, thus endowing the BP with high surface electronic conductivity that is comparable to graphene and reducing the resistance of active materials. The van der Waals stacked BP nanohybrids are not favorable to the formation of strong chemical bonds during the solution process without high energy supplied. High-energy mechanical milling (HEMM) is a simple and highly scalable method of producing BP–carbon nanohybrids directly from precursor red phosphorus71 and functionalized CNTs.38 Both the raw materials with rich surface functional groups can be attracted to bond with each other, which results in the formation of stable chemical bonds (P–O–C, P–C) and dehydration cross links with CNTs. Apart from such approaches, flash-heat-treatment method,42 calcination method,72 electrophoretic deposition (EPD),73 mineralizer assisted vapor phase method, and microfluidic-spinning-technique (MST)74 have also been applied to synthesize BP–carbon nanohybrids.
2.3. BP–metal nanohybrids
As mentioned above, the monodispersed BP nanostructure is severely limited by instability, due to the presence of exposed lone-pairs electrons, which is the major deficiency that limits the long-term service of BP. For this reason, many studies have focused on occupying the exposed lone pair electrons by either using other substances or passivating the active lone pars by covering BP with various polymer or organic molecules. However, many efforts failed in taking full advantage of the lone pairs for the innovation of BP electronic structure. Taking into account the electronic structure engineering and mechanism explorations of BP-based materials for electrical and electrochemical usage, it is viable to assemble BP with transition metals possessing intrinsic charge transfer capacity for further improving the overall performance. The deposition of transition metal nanoparticles (e.g. Au, Pt, Ag, Cu, Co, Pd) on the BP surface or edges is an ideal strategy to optimize their electronic structure. In most cases, because of a lower Fermi level of transition metal than that of BP, electrons will be transferred from BP to transition metallic particles through the contact interface to realize Ef equilibrium.75 The preferential transfer of the active lone pairs from the defect of BP can not only improve the stability of BP but also increase the level of hole mobility, which in turn enhances the catalytic and electrical properties of BP–metal nanomaterials. For instance, constructing Co nanoparticles into BP nanosheets via solvothermal reduction can effectively increase the electrical conductivity and catalytic performance of OER.30
The metallic particles are commonly formed on the BP with or without reducing agent. The degradation of BP results from the oxidation of oxygen, suggesting that BP has stronger reducibility. Due to gold compounds (HAuCl4)32,76–79 possessing ultrahigh redox potential, the gold ions can be chemically reduced in situ to Au nanoparticles directly by BP without the need for other reducing agents. As for other metals such as Pt, Pd, Co and so on with lower redox potential than Au, a reducing agent is required to help reduce the cations of metals.80 For example, during the preparation of Pd/ATN-BP for the EOR catalysis, potassium borohydride (KBH4) was added as the reductant.81 Experimental investigations and DFT calculations of the metal/BP have been described as stabilized by covalent bonds at the metal/BP interface.82 BP can act as a polydentate phosphine ligand toward transition metal, which significantly stabilizes the structure toward self-agglomeration and prevents the metal from being peeled off. Also, metal nanoparticles can be intercalated into layered BP nanosheets to yield 0D–2D heterostructure.
Interestingly, the structure of BP leads to the opportunity for metal atoms to grow in a specific direction. However, in many cases, it is almost impossible to control the two features of twist angle and variable interlayer distance between layered materials and substrates. Nerl et al. proposed a novel way to control seed Cu atoms in BP surface using a standard e-beam lithography technique, which can be readily scaled in the semiconductor industry.33,83 Through TEM imaging of the structures grown in multi-layered BP, all Cu atoms occurred along the [010] direction without any other growth direction observed, which strongly illustrates the growth of Cu in the template of the BP lattice. The addition of the unique chiral dimensionality and metallic nature of the Cu layers into BP to form novel nanohybrids material may endow BP with a range of potential applications in nanosensors, nanocatalysis and plasmonics.84 The Cu heterostructures with high aspect ratio can further increase the BP structural anisotropy already existing in the crystal. The anisotropic atomic structure of BP will further imply anisotropy in its highly-directional thermal, optical and electrical properties in BP, which vary in the zigzag and armchair direction, respectively. And, the addition of embedded anisotropy transition metal film is expected to further optimize these properties and in-depth studies are needed.85
2.4. BP–metal compound nanohybrids
Various metal compound combining (MX) metal oxides such as Co3O4, MnO2, TiO2, ZnO, Fe3O4 metal chalcogenides such as MoS2, WS2, PbS, as well as metal nitride, metal phosphide materials, perovskite, metal–organic frameworks (MOF), and Mxene, can be easily combined with BP nanosheets or QDs, highlighting the excellent affinity between the BP surface and metal ions.14,47,86–96 This affinity is dependent on the Lewis acid–base forces, the BP with lone pairs on surface can acts as a Lewis acid, and the metal ion with positive charges serves as acid. Beyond this point, the vacant d-orbital of the transition metal (Mo, Pb, Ti, etc.) can be coupled with the lone-pair electrons of phosphorus to form a M–P coordination bond,97 which may cause the rearrangement of the electrons on the surface of BP and enhance their chemical and structural stability. Shi et al. designed Co3O4@BP, and discovered that electrons were transferred from BP to Co3O4 steadily and efficiently. Correspondingly, the combination with ZnS nanosheets can also successfully create Zn–P bond, which can not only improve the stability and dispersibility of BP,3 but also increase surface reactive sites and hydrophily, which is important for photocatalytic or electrochemical kinetics.
Recently, many intriguing physicochemical properties have been discovered in many coupling nanohybrids systems. Otherwise, a number of studies on designing heterostructures usually include transition metal compounds for the photogenerated charge separation. In general, the BP-based nanohybrids can be mainly combined into the following categories: type-I with a straddling gap and type-II with a staggered gap. As for Type-II band alignment, the semiconductor has more negative valence band (VB) and conduction band (CB) edges than others (Fig. 3a). The photogenerated electrons can easily migrate from the semiconductor with higher CB to a lower one, whereas the holes are conversely transferred from the lower VB to the higher one. BP can be incorporated with various metal compounds such as BiVO4,98 TiO2, MoS299 and CsPbI2Br (Fig. 3b)43 to form type-II heterojunctions to effectively facilitate the charge separation for advancing the photocatalytic reactivity and suppressing the BP from photocatalytic degradation.100 These findings open up potential avenues for developing more type-II heterojunctions nanohybrids for solar hydrogen production.
 Fig. 3  (a) Type-II band alignment at the interface of BPQDS/CsPbI2Br was implied. (b) Schematic diagram of the growth of CsPbI2Br onto the surface BPQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Synthesis of CsPbBr3 QDs@FLBP. (d) Band alignments of CsPbBr3 and BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Apart from type-II heterojunction, there have also been some studies focusing on engineering binary type-I heterojunction BP-nanohybrids.101,102 An ordered self-assembly (001) crystal facet of CsPbBr3 QDs on the surface of BP nanosheets could generate type-I band offset (Fig. 3c and d).45,103 Thus, photoexcited electrons migrate from CsPbBr3 QDs to few layered BP and eventually stabilize in BP due to its high carrier mobility and large special surface area, which is responsible for the quenching of the photoluminescence. In addition, the CB potential level of organic–inorganic perovskites like MAPbI399 is higher than that of BP so that light-induced e− could be transferred from MAPbI3 to BP, thus facilitating the reduction of H+ to generate H2. While the VB of MAPbI3 is lower than that of BP so that light-induced h+ could also be transferred from MAPbI3 to BP nanosheets. This type-I BP–MX semiconductors not only show advanced HER performance99 but also demonstrate high photo responsivity.101 More intriguingly, Liu et al. demonstrated computationally and experimentally that some inorganic perovskite–BP systems present both type-I and type-II band alignments when BP is in contact with different interfaces of perovskite.102 Electronic structure tuning in BP–MX nanohybrids could be optimized further by meeting the complementary advantages of type-I and type-II heterojunctions.99 Type-I heterointerface is beneficial to introduce efficient photocarriers into the junction area and the type-II heterointerface enables effective photocarriers separation. This nanohybrids device shows both fast response and high responsivity. Taking these concepts of electronic structure tuning, reaction kinetics, and complex active-sites into consideration, choosing the MX and BP as a model system is conducive to eliminating shortcomings and balancing advantages for practical applications.
2.5. BP–inorganic non-metallic materials nanohybrids
Furthermore, BP has also shown a considerable potential in enhancing performance and expanding the research field after combination with other series of inorganic non-metallic materials. More recently, BP–As nanohybrids have emerged as the layered anisotropic infrared semiconductors with tunable band gaps in the long-wavelength infrared regime (8.27 μm) (Fig. 4a and b).27,52,104,105 The specific detectivity of 2.4 × 1010 cm Hz1/2 W−1 for BP–As is one order of magnitude lager than those commercial mid-wave infrared devices operating at ambient temperatures. Additionally, the integrating selenium BP crystals with controllable doping contents can remarkably increase the photoresponse from 0.765 to 15.33 A W−1 along with a particularly significant improvement of EQE between different Se dope contents.
 Fig. 4  (a) Structure of b-AsP. (b) AFM image of b-As0.83P0.17. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, (c) schematic diagram of the waveguide photodetector structure of the nanohybrids silicon/BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the silica modified BP. (e) Water contact angle of SiO2/BP-M and SiO2/BP-MT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As a precursor for the synthesis of BP, red phosphorus (RP) is one of the best candidates for integration into the crystalline structure of BP with good compatibility.106 Owing to the low bandgap, earth abundance and high theoretical specific capacity, RP has been widely used as light-harvesters in photovoltaics and energy storage devices.107–109 Unfortunately, the optoelectronic properties and electrochemical behaviors of RP are hard to satisfy because of its inferior electronic conductivity. Thus, it is necessary to enhance its electric conductivity by synthesizing BP into the matrix of RP, which can lead to intimate and good interface contact and the formation of a heterostructure.
Over the past decade, Si-based devices have been very promising owing to their distinctive advantages, for instance, ultrahigh integration density and complementary metal–oxide–semiconductor (CMOS) compatibility. Therefore, nanohybrids silicon/BP electronic and optoelectronic devices have become very attractive in the past few years. Yin et al. proposed nanohybrids Si/BP waveguide photodetectors by coupling BP thin film on the top of silicon-on-insulator ridge through imprint-transfer process, which leads to the light absorption enhancement for the fundamental TE mode (Fig. 4c).50 As an oxide of silicon, silica shells have been used extensively for covering organic/inorganic nanostructures (Fig. 4d). The optical properties of the core materials could be retained owing to the optical transparency of silica. It has been reported that methyltriethoxysilane (MTEOS) can create a hydrophobic layer, which will insulate the inner surfaces from water molecules. In this way, the surface covering a hydrophobic silica layer is supposed to inhibit the degradation of BP in ambient condition. For the good dispersity in aqueous solutions for versatile applications, additional hydrophilicity silica shell could be coated on the hydrophobic silica–BP nanostructures through the controlled hydrolysis and condensation of tetraethoxysilane (Fig. 4e).49 Furthermore, it would be valuable to further modify silica shell with reactive functional groups, such as –NH2, so that they can conjugate with carboxyl activated organic matters. This multifunctional hierarchical porous structure can deliver sufficient loading capacity for various drugs or agents.48
3. Applications
3.1. BP nanohybrids for Li/Na/K-ion storage
With the enhancement of environmental awareness and the exhaustion of resources, energy storage is imminent for the integration of renewable energy (sun, wind and so on) into the effective grid and the traditional applications in portable devices and electric vehicles or nanohybrids electric vehicles. Electrochemical energy storage devices (EESDs) have entered a stage of rapid growth, especially over the past decades. With a progress made in energy storage, it is obvious that better-performing, smaller/lighter, flexible/wearable, and multifunctional energy devices will be required in the future. 2D BP is considered as a promising electrochemically active material for energy storage ranging from metal ions (Li+, Na+, K+) to supercapacitors,110–112 owing to its high theoretical capacities, ion mobility, and higher electrical conductivity (∼300 S m−1).

3.1.1. Metal-ion batteries. 
BP has been investigated as an anode material for metal-ion batteries owing to its higher theoretical capacities of 2596 mA h g−1 for Li+ storage (LIBs) and 2600 mA h g−1 for Na+ batteries (NIBs), etc.113,114 It is few times higher than the commonly used graphite, and a large inter-layer spacing (0.53 nm) allows the easier intercalation and de-intercalation of different-sized ions compared to graphene. BP also possesses acceptable density (2.69 g cm−3), which is essential for light batteries, sufficient charge/discharge potential scales, and the quick kinetics of electrode process. However, BP always suffers from the rapid capacity decay caused by large volume changes of BP upon cycling (≈300% in LIBs and ≈500% in NIBs). BP-based nanohybrids have been applied for supercapacitors with exciting results due to their large surface area and the stacking layers for efficient intercalation of ions, see Table 2 which shows the comparison of the performance of BP-based nanohybrids anodes in batteries. The formation of MXP (Li3P, Na3P, etc.Fig. 5a)115 will destroy the lattice structure during the discharge process through reversible reaction, which implies that the MXP was not converted into BP under next charging cycles. The primarily negative impacts are shown as follows: (1) the cracking structure causes the poor contact among the active substances that influence the stability of the mechanical structure of electrode active materials. (2) With the destruction of the mechanical structure, the active materials are easily detached from the current collector after a long cycling, reducing the cycle life of the cell. (3) Recurrent structure breakage might reduce the decrease of the active sites, thus reducing the capacity of the cathode materials. (4) The voids and indirect contact among the active materials increase the overall resistance of the active materials and reduce the conductivity, which disrupts the performance of the batteries.
Table 2 Summary of BP-based nanohybrids anodes in batteries




Nanohybrids type
Synthetic method
Battery type
Capacity retention
Ref.




BP–CNT
Ultrasonic
Li-ion batteries
0.5 A g−1, 757.3 mA h g−1, 650 cycles

70



BP/RGO
Flash-heat-treatment method
Na-ion battery anodes
1 A g−1, 250 mA h g−1, 500 cycles

42



BPQD/TNS
Sonication
Li/Na-ion storage
1 A g−1, 520 mA h g−1, 2400 cycles

13



BP/RP
Sonochemical method
Li-ion batteries
1 A g−1, 491 mA h g−1, 100 cycles

108



BP/NiCo MOF
Liquid exfoliation
Li-ion batteries
5 A g−1, 398 mA h g−1, 1000 cycles

116





 Fig. 5  (a) Ex situ measured XRD patterns of BP–graphite electrodes charged and discharged to different potentials in LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HR-TEM of BP QDs/N-graphene. (c) Cycle curves of van der Waals heterostructures and BP QDs/N-graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) O 1s of the BPQD/TNS composite and TNSs. (e) Long cycling stability of the BPQD/TNS nanohybrids electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
To address the above-mentioned issues, numerous strategies have been implemented by reducing the BP particle size and fabricating nanohybrids recombination. BPQDs,10 whose sizes are limited within 10 nm, are very attractive, as they can shorten the transmission path of mental ions along all directions and alleviate the volume expansion during charging and discharging. It is found, therefore, that the single BPQDs component anode exhibits a lower reversible capacity of 228 mA h g−1, due to their poor conductivity and aggregation during cycling. Usually, the conductively dope BPQDs with high conductive matrices, such as carbonaceous matrix and Mxene, may compensate for the weakness or deficiency of BPQDs.117 More recently, nitrogen-doped graphene, as one of the most widely studied graphene derivatives with the so-called “activation regions” to endow various anode materials, has been considered as a fascinating carrier to load the BPQDs.118 Notably, the BPQDs were spontaneously attracted to the N-graphene nanosheets with large surface area through strong van der Waals interactions, which not only effectively prevents their aggregation but also maintains the flexibility and elasticity of N-graphene (Fig. 5b). The synergistic superiority of the N-graphene–BP nanohybrids delivers a high reversible capacity of 1271 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 for lithium storage (Fig. 5c). However, the non-covalent bonding between BPQDs and N-graphene is unfavorable to the transformation of LiXP phase into the neutrally charged BPQDs (Fig. 5f and g). Then, Meng et al. successfully integrated BPQDs into Ti3C2 matrix to construct a novel battery-capacitive dual-model energy storage, in which Ti3C2 acts as an ideal host due to its high conductivity, ease-to-modify surface, and flexibility (inset of Fig. 5e).119 X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), XPS and X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) were performed to confirm the formation of the P–O–Ti bonds at the interfaces between BPQDs and Ti3C2 (Fig. 5d).
The presence of the strong covalent interaction not only causes atomic charge polarization in the interface of the nanohybrids, thus leading to efficient charge adsorption and enhanced interfacial electron transfer, but also further enables high interfacial structural stability. Therefore, the positively charged P ions (P+0.37) can be sufficiently reduced to neutrally charged BPQDs via electron transfer in the local P–O–Ti bonding configuration. It is noted that BPQDs/Ti3C2 nanohybrids exhibit ultra-long cycling stability (with a capacity retention rate of over 100% after 2400 cycles for LIB and a capacity retention rate of nearly 100% after 1000 cycles for SIB) due to the reversible alloying reaction (Fig. 5e). Moreover, BP could be coordinated with Ti-based materials trough P–Ti bonds, such as TiO2.120 Unfortunately, the low intrinsic electronic and ionic conductivity of TiO2 hinders its practical applications. Therefore, high conductivity bulk BP instead of BPQDs has been used as active building block for integration with TiO2 to form TiO2–BP–S nanohybrids. The formed P–Ti and P–S bonds solved the drawbacks of BP-based anodes for SIBs systems by suppressing the degradation and volumetric expansion of electrode materials.121 It has been convinced that the chemical bonds would be beneficial to enhance the electrochemical performance of P-based nanohybrids in both LIB and SIB systems. Thus, the formation of strong chemical bonds (P–Ti, P–O, P–C, etc.) between BP116 and various other active building blocks, such as MOFs, Mxenes,13 TiO2,121–124 and carbon,38,70,71,110,125,126 is an extremely effective and popular way to create the electrical connection between them, inhibit the volume expansion during charging and discharging, and thus improve the performance of the battery.
The BP-based nanohybrids can be a quaternary or even higher multinary phase. To form tight chemical bond and dehydration cross links at the heterophase interface, a more dramatic method of synthesis is therefore needed, including the commonly used high-energy ball milling127 and hydrothermal and solvothermal methods. The procedure is usually performed in an inert atmosphere to prevent nanohybrids contamination and/or oxidation. Although ball milling is a green, low-cost and large-scalable method of preparing BP-based nanohybrids, mechanical grinding may disrupt the periodic structure of the BP lattice and turn to being amorphous, thereby influencing the intercalation of metal ions.122 It is found that Li/Na ions preferably intercalate along the [100] (zigzag) direction owing to the wide channel space being much larger than the diameter of the Li+ (0.1520 nm) and Na+ (0.204 nm). DFT calculation demonstrated that the diffusion barrier along zigzag direction is 97 meV for Li+ and 93 meV for Na+, both of which are much smaller than that along armchair direction (156 meV for Li+ and 268 meV for Na+).128 Although Li ions may barely overcome this relatively low barrier and propagate at a lower speed, Na ions cannot diffuse along the armchair direction with insurmountable barrier. Hence, the collapse and disordering of lattice in the BP structure may block the metal ion from passing across the channels of easy diffusion and limit the lithiation and sodiation step. Compared to the violent ball milling method, hydrothermal and solvothermal methods are a mild one and are widely applied to prepare BP-based nanohybrids. The orthorhombic structure of the BP is always intact after solvothermal treatment.70 Furthermore, modifying graphite with BP nanoflakes could yield a KP alloy, thus leading to an increased specific capacity and cyclability of the potassium-ion batteries.112


3.1.2. Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors, comprised of electrochemical double layer capacitors and pseudocapacitors, are capable of delivering much higher power density and charging and discharging rates than batteries. Recently, liquid-exfoliated BP has been used as electrode materials to achieve a high specific capacitance of 45.8 F g−1 in the flexible all-solid-state supercapacitors.129 However, despite a high theoretical specific capacity, the electrochemical performance of sole BP is barely satisfactory owing to its poor stability and easy degradation to phosphorous acid, thus leading to a low charging rate capability retained.129,130 Embedding hetero-structured materials may overcome the drawbacks and form the high surface area structures with excellent stability.74 It is expected to in situ synthesize BP into the RP matrix and form a heterostructure with excellent interfacial contact. The capacitance of BP–RP nanohybrids electrode can reach up to 60.1 F g−1.108 After a further combination of this nanohybrids with sulfonated porous carbon through the carbonization process to form R–BP/SPC nanohybrids ((Fig. 6a), the specific capacitance reaches as high as 364.5 F g−1 (Fig. 6b and c).69
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the BP/RP hybrid. (b) Specific capacitance dependence of RP and BP/RP. (c) Capacity retention of RP and BP/RP after 2000 cycles at 1 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides, Nakhanivej et al. reported a thermal annealing strategy at 800 °C to couple the ozone-oxidized BP with rGO via thermal decarboxylation and dehydrolysis reactions. The molecular-level redox-active PO sites at the amorphorized heterointerface could achieve highly reversible surface redox charge storage capability, revealing that the high pseudocapacitance of 478 F g−1 and stability exceed those of the existing BPs.17 Furthermore, combining rGO with BPQDs can be achieved in wearable electronics due to their outstanding flexibility and no obvious performance degradation after repeated bending cycles.131

3.2. BP nanohybrids for catalysis
Nanohybridization endows the BP nanomaterials with high catalytic activity, stability and selectivity due to the interplay between the BP and the nanohybrids material. Consequently, the BP-based nanohybrids demonstrate a promising category of nanocatalysts that are applicable in a wide range of reactions including photocatalysis and electrocatalysis.

3.2.1. Photocatalysis. 
Photocatalysis could be employed to convert and store solar energy in chemical bonds and to decompose chemical and bacterial pollutants in environmental decontamination.132 The photocatalytic ability of photocatalysis is reliant on the generation of electrons–hole pairs after the absorption of sunlight.133 Therefore, it is desirable to develop the photocatalytic systems with a full spectrum. The easily regulated bandgap of BP makes it an ideal absorber of broad solar light regions from near-UV to near-IR. In addition, the catalytic activity of BP nanosheets is several times stronger than bulk BP, due to a series of spectroscopic and morphological characterizations.57 However, the photocatalytic activity of the bare BP was found to be low because of the critical drawbacks of ultra-fast charge recombination and short charge lifetime. Nanohybridizing BP with other semiconductor photocatalysts is a promising strategy to prolong the charge lifetime of BP, since the nanohybrids may display the complementary attributes of the constituents and trap the photogenerated electrons, thereby improving the photocatalytic performance. As synthesis technologies of BP improve, many papers have appeared on the photocatalytic application of BP-based nanohybrids including electron reductive reaction (ERR) (proton reduction for H2 evolution and CO2 reduction for hydrocarbon fuels) and the degradation of environmental pollutants.
3.2.1.1. H2 evolution and CO2 reduction. 
The direct conversion of water and carbon dioxide into a clean and useful energy is considered as an appropriate and sustainable way to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels and address environmental pollution.134 Typically, the whole photocatalytic proton or CO2 reduction involves three main process: (1) photon absorption by the photocatalyst to form electron–hole carriers, (2) electron–hole pair is separated and migrates to the surface of the photocatalyst, and (3) surface reaction for H2 generation135 and CO2 reduction.136 Loading a suitable cocatalyst on BP can improve light absorption and charge-separation efficiency.135,137 Here, we summarize the recent progress for BP-based nanohybrids acting as photocatalytic used in H2 evolution and CO2 reduction (Table 3).
Table 3 Performance summary of BP-based nanohybrids for photocatalytic H2 evolution and CO2 reduction




Nanohybrids type
Lasers
H2 or CO evolution
Ref.




BP/OPCN
460 nm
3463 mmol h−1 g−1 (CO)

138



BPQD-C3N4
Simulated sunlight
190 μmol h−1 (H2)

40



BP@g-C3N4
Xe lamp
6.54 μmol h−1 g−1 (CO)

139



MCN/BP/MS
Xe lamp
2146.8 μmol h−1 g−1 (H2)

140



BPQDs/g-C3N4
325 nm
271 μmol h−1 g−1 (H2)

141





Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has been studied as a promising metal-free photocatalyst due to its 2D π-conjugated structure with large specific surface area and narrow band gap (2.7 eV) with negative CB potential (−1.12 eV), which makes g-C3N4 show sufficient redox potential for water dissociation and CO2 reduction.140 By taking advantage of the 2D/3D g-C3N4 nanosheets and BPQDs or 2D BP nanosheets, the formation of nanohybrids with 2D–2D, 2D–0D or 3D/0D142 semiconductor heterostructure with excellent contact effect and affinity is favorable to enhancing the interfacial charge redistribution across the heterointerfaces. Majima's group reported the binary nanohybrids of 2D BP and g-C3N4 as a metal-free photocatalyst for H2 evolution.37 The band gap of the present BP nanosheets is 0.45–0.76 eV, while the VB edge of g-C3N4 is 1.68 eV vs. NHE. Thus, considering the band structure, 2D BP/g-C3N4 is a type I heterojunction, in which the excited electrons and holes are transferred from the CB and VB of g-C3N4 to those of 2D BP upon >420 nm light illumination. Also, the 2D BP can act as a carrier acceptor to prevent the recombination of charge carrier. In addition, the research included the characterization by XPS, FT-IR, and solid-state NMR, confirming the formation of P–N coordinate bonds in the BP/CN nanohybrids. H+ can easily be adhered onto P and P–N coordinate bonding, where the excited electrons in the CB band of BP are expedited to be trapped, causing enhanced photocatalytic performance and H2 evolution. Subsequently, Zhang et al. developed an improved time-effective ice-assisted method to prepare 2D BP with a large lateral size. Thus, the H2 generation rate of BP/g-C3N4 increased to 384.17 μmol h−1 g−1, which is much larger than that of pure BP and g-C3N4. In addition, the combination of BP/g-C3N4 with other alloys, such as AgPd, Ni2P, to form ternary nanohybrids, would lead to a high synergistic photoactivity.143,144
When the BP lateral size decreases from bulk to less than 20 nm to form BPQDs, the CB of BPQDs would upshift from −0.33 eV to −0.72 eV, leading to a typical type II heterojunction. In this case, the photoexcited electrons on the surface of BPQDs would be transferred to the CB of g-C3N4 through the interfacial P–C bonds, due to the more negative CB of g-C3N4. The electron–hole recombination can be effectively inhibited because of the fast charge transfer from the P–C bonds. Then, the accumulated electrons migrate from the interior surface of g-C3N4 to the exterior for the reaction with H+ or CO2 to form H240,141,142 or CO.139 The content of BPQDs is a critical factor in photoactivity and photostability. These BPQDs can be well distributed on the surface of 2D g-C3N4 nanosheets at a lower content of 1–5 wt%, but they easily self-aggregate at higher contents.141 The photo absorption for the BPQDs/g-C3N4 nanohybrids shows a significant increase as a function of BPQDs content. Therefore, the respective H2 production rate increases with the BPQDs, and reaches the maximum of 271 μmol h−1 g−1 given the 5 wt% BPQDs/g-C3N4. However, considering the production cost, a reasonably low concentration of BP is essential for practical applications. If the 2D g-C3N4 is replaced by the 3D network g-C3N4 material, it is reported that the optimized content of BPQDs can be reduced to only 1.2 wt%, and the obtained 3D/0D nanohybrid exhibits the best photocatalytic hydrogen production rate (13.83 mmol h−1 g−1).60 While for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO, the highest activity of BP@g-C3N4 nanohybrids can be obtained in case of very low BP loading (∼1 wt%).139
It was also found out that introduction of oxygen functional groups (–COOH and C–O–C) into g-C3N4 could further increase the number of active sites.138 We predict that rationally designing nanohybrids by assembling oxygen-enriched g-C3N4 and BP could also enhance the photocatalytic activity for both H2 production and CO2 reduction. Despite g-C3N4, there are also many other nanomaterials with excellent optoelectrical properties that can be combined with BP to act as high-efficiency photocatalysts, such as perovskite,145 inorganic metal-based cocatalysts,44,97,146–149 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs).147,150
3.2.1.2. Degradation of environmental pollutants. 
With the rapid growth of global industries, the direct release of environmental pollutants into water or the atmosphere poses a significant risk to human health.151 Of the strategies developed for degradation of a variety of environmental pollutants, photocatalytic method is considered as the most effective and eco-friendly one. BP is an environmental-friendly photocatalyst for the degradation of pollutants because the final product of the catalyst is phosphoric acid.152,153 Recently, many BP-based nanohybrids have been constructed to decompose a wide range of organic or inorganic compounds including rhodamine B,91,154 methylene blue,95 acrylic acid,78 methylene orange,155 bacterial,61 NO,156etc. These BP-based nanohybrids always possess numerous active sites, metallic conductivity, and more negative potential for the O2 reduction to active ˙O2− and ˙OH species under illumination. The resultant strong oxidizing radicals including h+, ˙O2− and ˙OH can diffuse to the surface of the nanohybrids and directly oxidize pollutants owing to their high oxidation potential.


3.2.2. Electrocatalysis. 
Electrocatalysts play an indispensable role in sustainable, renewable, and eco-friendly energy conversion devices, enabling the processes of electrochemical water splitting and nitrogen fixation. The electrolysis of water (H2O (l) → H2 (g) + 1/2O2 (g) involves two half-cell reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER, 2H+ (aq) + 2e− → H2 (g)) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER, 2H2O (l) → 4e− + 4H+ (aq) + O2 (g)). The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is the reverse process of OER and the cathode reaction in full cells or metal–air batteries. Electrochemical nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR) is an attractive approach to industrial nitrogen fixation in natural environments. In this part, the application of BP-based nanohybrids in HER, OER, ORR, and NRR with a stress on the synergy between the components will be discussed.
3.2.2.1. HER. 
The hydrophilic nature of BP makes it easy to adsorb water and has attracted growing interest in HER.58,157 Although the bare BP presented certain activity for electrochemical HER, the activity is less than satisfactory. Nanohybridization is an efficient method to enhance the electrochemical activity and stability. TMDCs, such as MoS2, MoSe2, etc.,158,159 have emerged as a promising new class of nanomaterials for catalysis towards HER. By depositing the catalytical active TMDCs flakes onto BP nanosheets, the overpotential of HER can be effectively reduced. The BP with long pair electrons is preferred to bind with the S vacancy of MoS2, resulting in stable structure (Fig. 7a).160 He et al. constructed a MoS2–BP nanosheets by depositing MoS2 flakes on BP nanosheets, which is effective in altering their electronic properties for improved HER activity.161,162 According to the Mott–Schottky plots, the Fermi level of BP is −0.29 V, which is higher than that of MoS2 (Fig. 7b). Thus, the electrons were transferred from the BP to the MoS2 at the heterostructure interface, inducing the accumulation of abundant electrons on MoS2 nanosheets. The intrinsic exchange current density of MoS2 was increased to 0.66 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7c), so that the coupling of electrons with protons was facilitated and a lower overpotential (80 mV) of HER was reached. By conducting long-term CV tests, the excellent stability of MoS2–BP nanosheets was confirmed (Fig. 7d). The concentration of hydrogen ion can have a significant impact on catalytic capacity for H2 production. The MoS2/BP exhibited different overpotentials and Tafel slopes in acid, alkali and neutral solutions.160 Especially, in the 0.5 M sulfuric acid solution, the on-set potential and overpotential of MoS2/BP could be reduced to 67 mV and 126 mV, respectively, with the Tafel slope down to 68 mV dec−1.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the preparation of MoS2/EEBP heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Mott–Schottky curves of MoS2 and BP. (c) Comparison of calculated exchange current densities of BP, MoS2/C, MoS2–BP, and Pt/C. (d) Plot of the current density of MoS2–BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Compared to MoS2, MoSe2 showed more metallic properties, thus leading to a lower Gibbs free energy for H adsorption. Combining BP with MoSe2 would increase the number of catalytic sites as well as the conductivity of MoSe2 and prevent its agglomeration.163 The MoSe2–BP heterostructure delivered much better electrochemical property than individual MoSe2 and BP. However, the overpotential of MoSe2–BP-based nanohybrids is not as good as that of MoS2–BP, which might result from the easy decomposition of MoSe2 under electrochemical conditions.164 It is observed that the major contacts of the above-mentioned TMDCs-BP-based nanohybrids are mediating van der Waals contacts. The weak interaction between 2D materials is not beneficial to charge transport. Thereafter, Vishnoi et al. presented a new method for the covalently cross-linked nanohybrids of BP with MoS2 and MoSe2 by means of amide linkage.164 The Tafel slopes and charge transfer resistance could be significantly reduced in the case of BP–MoS2/MoSe2, due to the rapid transfer of electrons to the catalytically active site. The BP–MoS2 with covalently cross-link nanosheets presented the comparable electrochemical HER activity to Pt.
3.2.2.2. OER. 
Owing to its distinguished structural and electronic features, BP has attracted great attention in electrocatalytic OER.165–167 It has also been demonstrated recently that the performance of OER was dependent on the thickness of the pristine BP, and that decreasing the thickness from bulk to fewer layered BP led to the generation of additional active sites and the increase of specific surface area.168 Ultrathin few-layer BP is anticipated to construct high-performance OER devices. Whereas, the ultrathin BP nanosheets undergo quick degradation in electrolyte, which makes it unfit for application in long-term electrocatalysis. In light of this, some recent strategies have been developed to design BP-based nanohybrids through physical coating or chemical reaction. For example, Shi et al. demonstrated the fabrication of Co/BP NSs nanohybrids electrocatalyst by following the one-pot solvothermal reduction process.30 The Fermi level of BP is higher than that of metallic cobalt, which results in the migration of electrons from BP to Co. As a result, the stability of the BP is significantly improved (Fig. 8a). The electrons accumulate on the Co, which would reduce the charge-transfer resistance and change the rate-limiting steps in the OER process. Thus, the Co/BP nanohybrids showed a low overpotential of 310 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a reduced Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1 (Fig. 8b and c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Band diagram of Co/BP nanohybrids. (b) Onset overpotential. (c) Tafel plots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the BP/Co2P nanohybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The combination of BP with other cobalt compounds for OER electrocatalysis had also been extensively studied to manipulate the properties of BP.169 They tend to bond more tightly to BP surface through the Lewis acid–base interactions. Wang et al. reported the in-plane BP/Co2P heterostructures by adopting an in situ reduction strategy (Fig. 8d).170 The formed Co2P would prefer to occupy the defects on the edges and increase the number of electrocatalytic sites for OER.171 According to the further characterizations and electrochemical tests, the Co/P and Co3+/Co2+ ratios play a key role in surface topography and electrocatalytic performance. The electron-withdrawing nature of BP/CoP was strengthened with the increase of Co3+/Co2+ ratio, which would speed up OER (4OH− → O2 + 2H2O + e−). However, the higher content of Co could lead to the aggregation of CoP nanoparticles, resulting in the decrease of Co3+ proportion.172 The catalyst with a Co/P atomic ratio of around 1:3 presented a small overpotential of 315 mV at 10 mA cm−2. Shi et al. synthesized a well-designed Co3O4@BP nanohybrids, where Co3+ could be reduced to Co2+ because of the electron transfer from BP to Co3O4.86 The resulted Co2+ ions were shown to serve as the essential active sites for water oxidation, which could help improve the electrocatalytic performance. Compared to Co3O4, amorphous CoFeO can be combined with BP more easily and boost the overall catalytic performance of nanohybrids more efficiently.173 The oxygen vacancies on CoFeO@BP play a key role in activating the lattice oxygen, which in turn causes the direct O–O coupling via the lattice oxygen oxidation mechanism leading to enhanced OER activity.
3.2.2.3. ORR. 
Generally speaking, the ORR process involves 4-electron reduction of O2 to water. A very modest adsorption of oxide intermediate is of particular importance for high ORR performance.14 An excessively weak adsorption usually results in the compromised ORR activity because the reactants are not effectively fixed at the active catalytic site, whereas a strong adsorption is not conductive to the desorption of reduction products. The lone pair of electrons on the P prefers to bind with oxide intermediate, which will inhibit the further reactions. DFT calculation has indicated that the introduction of doping atoms into the lattice of BP, such as C, N, O, could reduce the adsorption of reaction intermediate O*.174 The overpotential of C-doped BP is smaller than pristine BP. However, the N-doped BP possesses poorer ORR catalytic performances owing to a higher electron affinity compared to C atom. However, the steps of O* → OOH* and O* → OH* for C-doped BP are still the rate-determining step, which suggests the need to further reduce the adsorption energy of O*. The oxidation of BP could effectively weaken the adsorption energy of O*, and optimal ORR catalytic activity can take place at a local oxidation degree of 3.4.
BP could also be applied as an effective substrate to tune the electronic properties of various transition metals (TM, e.g., Pt, Ag, Au), which were widely used as ORR catalysts. There are two lone pairs of electrons on P, and they can be involved in the charge transfer from the BP to the metal because of the higher Fermi level.175 But for the Pt atom, the binding energy of oxygen species was too strong to allow the desorption of oxygen species. Therefore, the ORR activity of Pt–BP nanohybrids was significantly suppressed, as the charge transfer enhanced the interaction with oxygen species. By contrast, bare Ag and Au atoms delivered insufficient adsorption of the oxygen, and increasing electron density would enhance the ORR activity. Compared with the carbon-supported counterparts, the mass activity increased by 99% for Ag–BP and by 164% for Au–BP, but decreased by 50% for Pt–BP.
Notably, introducing TM into C-doped BP can address the low activity of C-BP in ORR. Chen et al. explored the ORR activity of pyridine-like and pyrrole-like TM–N4 inserted black phosphorus carbide (b-PC).169 When the P or C atoms were taken as the active sites, the ORR process exhibited a much higher overpotential than that of TM site. Therefore, the TM site played a major role in excellent ORR catalytic properties. By taking the number of d electrons, valence electrons, and d band centers into consideration, the ORR catalysts of Co–N4–bPC, Rh–N4–bPC, and Ir–N4–bPC are comparable to or even better than that of Pt(111) due to a lower overpotential. Beyond those, the Mn–N4–bPC and Fe–N4–pBC also show acceptable output potential (0.6 for Mn–N4–bPC and 0.55 V for Fe–N4–pBC) and ORR performance.
3.2.2.4. NRR. 
Electrocatalytic NRR is a promising way to produce ammonia, which is a value-added and essential raw used in modern synthetic chemicals and agricultural fertilizer production. However, the vigorous competing HER process severely limits the electrocatalysis of N2 to NH3.176 The BP is attractive as a catalyst for NRR177 because phosphorus and nitrogen are of the same family in the periodic table and have a similar valence electron structure (3s23p3 and 2s22p3, respectively). By following a similarity principle of “like dissolves like”, the adsorption of N2 process was easy to proceed on the surface of BP (Fig. 9a).178 As a proof of concept, the faradaic efficiency of BP in 0.01 M HCl is as high as 5.07%. However, DFT calculations have shown that the active centers for N2 adsorption are only located on the zigzag and diff-zigzag edges of bare BP and the basal plane is catalytically inert. A further modification to BP is required to increase the number of electrochemically active surface sites. In fact, the Lewis-acid would be adsorbed onto the lone-pairs of N2 and weaken the NN bond. Additionally, the puckered honeycomb atomic structure of BP offers advantages for Lewis-acid binding. B is a typical metal-free Lewis acid and has a similar sp3 orbital nanohybridization to BP. Recently, Shi et al. investigated boron decorated BP as a metal-free Lewis acid catalyst to fix N2 (Fig. 9b).179 The electrons distribution on the B is negligible, which prevents the binding of H+ and inhibits the HER side reaction. The lone-pairs of the N2 would be caught by the empty orbital of the B, and the inert NN can be stretched and activated via the pull–pull effect (Fig. 9c). Among all the hydrogenation reaction steps, the highest energy barrier is only 0.81 eV, resulting in a very small onset-potential of 0.19 V (Fig. 9d).
 Fig. 9  (a) NRR mechanisms of BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Catalytic mechanism of B and P atoms. (c) The electron localization function of B/2B-funtionalized BP. (d) The free energy diagram of the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia on the para-doped BP through a continuous route at zero potential (blue line) and starting potential (red line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Ammonia yield rate and FE for BP QDs/MnO2 nanohybrids at different potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2020, (f) faradaic efficiency for ammonia of BP@SnO2−x nanotubes at the corresponding potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, downsizing the BP to quantum dots could also increase the number of active sites. However, an ideal matrix was needed for preventing their agglomeration and increasing their conductivity. The creation of wrinkled MnO2 as a substrate could lead to the aggregation of BPQDs.89 Meanwhile, the BPQDs can avoid the restacking of MnO2. However, the weak van der Waals interactions between BPQDs and MnO2 nanosheets hamper synergy development, thus resulting in a modest NH3 yield of 25.3 μg h−1 mgcat.−1, and a faradaic efficiency of 6.7% (Fig. 9e). Relatively, covalent binding would provide a stronger synergy for an electrochemical NRR process. Liu et al. synthesized black tin oxide (SnO2−x) nanotubes as a BPQDs carrier.181 Under this circumstance, BPQDs stably bond to SnO2−x nanotubes via the Sn–P coordination allowing their uniform dispersion. The introduction of oxygen vacancies into SnO2−x could increase the electrical conductivity by 5 orders of magnitude. Additionally, the created oxygen defects would lead to unbalanced charge distribution and the built-in driving force that accelerates the charge transport between BPQDs and SnO2−x. Due to their synergistic effects, the BPQDs@SnO2−x nanohybrids exhibited a very high ammonia yield of 48.87 μg h−1 mgcat−1 and faradaic efficiency of 14.6% (Fig. 9f).

3.3. BP-based nanohybrids for sensors

3.3.1. Gas sensors. 
BP is expected to exhibit gas-sensing applications because it is sensitive to various surface chemical stimuli and presents a very high surface-to-volume ratio. Also, its gas-sensing performance is superior to other 2D material-based nanohybrids such as graphene or TMDCs.182,183 Recent DFT calculations reveal that BP has a strong adsorption ability with gas molecular, especially paramagnetic molecules, e.g., NO2 or NO, which brings about not only high sensitivity at the ppb level, but also fast response.184,185 However, pristine BP can hardly achieve full recovery or reproduction.186 Similarly, to apply a better control on the performance of the BP-based gas sensor, it is necessary to encapsulate the surface with metals, oxides or organic molecules.187 Cho et al. explored the effects of incorporating Au and Pt into the BP surface. It was found out that Pt/BP nanohybrids made excellent response to H2 gas with high selectivity, which results from the excellent catalytic performance of Pt.188 After the doping with Au, the function of BP was altered by the electrons obtained from Au, resulting in the n-type doping of BP. Besides, the response behavior of BP to NO2 varied between negative resistance to positive resistance variation.
Humidity is considered as a major threat to gas sensors due to the occurrence of competitive adsorption between NO2 and H2O. More importantly, water vapor can catalyze the physical and chemical degradation of BP or exert influence on other electronic properties of BP. Pioneering studies have shown that hydrophobic metal oxides (e.g. Co3O4, In2O3, ZnO)47,94,189,190 and organic molecule (e.g. benzyl viologen)191 display a stronger resistance to humidity. Incorporation of BP with suitable metal oxides has also enabled the preparation of nanohybrids for ultra-sensitive gas sensor even in high humidity (Table 4). For example, the combination of 1D ZnO nanowires with 2D BP could promote the passivation of BP together with humidity-resistant properties.191 After ZnO incorporation, the water contact angle increased from 61.61° to 73.38°, suggesting the higher hydrophobicity of BP–ZnO film than bare BP.192 The limit of detection is found reaching 1 ppb in contrast to bare BP. The BP–ZnO sensor not only works well at normal temperature, but also is applicable at high temperature (160 °C). Furthermore, by injecting 1 ppm of oxidizing gases (SO2) and reducing gases (such as H2, CO, NH3) into 100 ppb of NO2 gas, it could be observed that the ZnO modified BP sensor showed a higher response to NO2.192 Likewise, BP–In2O3 nanohybrids also exhibited high response to NO2 even at a relative humidity of 30%.189
Table 4 The gas sensing performance of BP-based nanohybrids sensors




Nanohybrids type
Humidity (%)
Gas
Concentration (ppm)
Response (%)
Ref.




BP/BP–TiO2-1
60
NH3
5
5.5

96



Co3O4@BP-PEI
24
NOx
100
8.38

47



BP–ZnO
60
NO2
0.05
74

94



BP–In2O3
30
NO2
10
12.2

189



Au/BP
35
NO2
100
1

188





When BP binds to pH-sensitive molecules, the nanohybrids would be best suited to identifying acid and alkali gas. Wang et al. developed the self-assembled BP-dye composite films for detecting NH3 and HCl gas.84


3.3.2. Ion sensors. 
Liu et al. constructed a BP-fiber optic configuration by developing an in situ layer-by-layer strategy. The BP embedded tilted-fiber grating (BP-TFG) structure possesses the promising optical tunable features of overlay thickness-dependent spin polarization and polarization coupling and shows ultrahigh sensitivity to Pb2+, with a lower limit of detection of 0.25 ppb.194,195 By combining BP and tetraphenylporphyrin tetrasulfonic acid (TPPS), Gu et al. (Fig. 10a) discovered that Hg2+ can promote the complexation reaction between Mn2+ and TPPS and reduce the absorption intensity of TPPS, which allows the detection of Hg2+ in a linear range from 1 to 60 nM (Fig. 10b and c).193 Field-effect transistor (FET)-based sensors are promising for real-time detection.196 When FET platform is used with the nanohybrids structure of BP/Au NPs/dithiothreitol (DTT), the limit of detection of As can reach up to 1 nm with an excellent selectivity against other metal ions such as Hg2+, Ca2+, Cd2+, etc.197,198
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of BPQDs fluorescent probe. (b) Changes of fluorescence intensity at 523/649 nm. (c) Curves of the fluorescence ratio as a function of the Hg2+ concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 


3.3.3. Biosensors. 
The BP-based nanohybrids with significant surface activity and good biocompatibility can be utilized as specific signal reporters for obtaining the high detection sensitivity of biological markers. Recently, Jiang et al. exploited the zinc-ion-coordinated BPQDs for visual bio-detection and versatile bio-imaging (Fig. 11a).199 After the coordination of Zn with the lone pair electrons of BP, the P atoms lose their ability to react with O2, which improves BP stability and fluorescence intensity (Fig. 11b). Combining the metal phosphides with mercaptan ligands improves the sensitivity and selective responses of glutathione, which is conducive to the in vitro imaging of aquatic animals and natural plants (Fig. 11c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CoOOH and the complex of Zn@BPQDs/CoOOH nanohybrids used as probe for detection of GSH. (b) PBS dispersion of the Zn@BPQDs/CoOOH with the addition of GSH. (c) The visual FL bio-imaging colors of glass fishes incubated with Zn@BPQDs for different days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Zn@BPQDs neither destroy the morphology of natural plants nor alter the activity of living aquatic animals because of the safety and compatibility for in vivo imaging. In addition to fluorescence detection, surface plasmon resonance (SPR) was similarly constructed in the field of biosensors. Su et al. constructed a guided-wave SPR biochemical sensor with the nanohybrids structure of BP–graphene coated with a silicon film. Although the coupling with silica could enhance the sensitivity of the nanohybrids, the detection range would be reduced. There seems to be a balance between sensitivity and detection range. By modulating the amount of BP layers and the thickness of Si films, the sensitivity reached a maximum of 148.2° per RIU while the RI of the sensing target was 1.33 RIU.200 When the graphene was replaced with bilayer WSe2, the sensitivity can be improved to 279° per RIU.201

3.4. BP-based nanohybrids for electronic and optoelectronic devices
During the past several years, a major progress has been made in using these excellent characteristics of BP for various devices, including high-performance FETs, memory, and optoelectronic devices.202

3.4.1. FETs. 
The researches of BP in FETs have been focused on the development of BP nanohybrids devices in recent years, because the modulation of BP is an effective and controllable strategy to manipulate the performance of BP FET. For example, the introduction of K or Cu atoms into the surface of BP led to a n-type doping effect through electron injection.203,204In situ UPS and XPS analyses prove the surface charge transfer occurring at the metal/BP interface.205 The electron mobility of BP is greatly enhanced by approximately one order of magnitude, which allows the construction of in situ construction of high-performance complementary inverter with a unity diode ideality factor and high gain. However, the stability of K atom is even lower than BP when exposed to the atmospheric environment. Other metals such as Ag, Sc and Al can also be used for deposition on the surface of BP and to enhance the stability of BP FET.31,206–208
In addition to these metal atoms, some metal oxides have also been explored for tuning electric characteristics of BP FETs. Xiang et al. reported the controlled surface functionalization of BP by Cs2CO3 and MoO3. Cs2CO3, given its low work function, exerts a great n-type modulating effect on BP, while MoO3 as an efficient hole-donating material causes a p-type modulating effect on BP devices. The doping effect and contact resistance were remarkably controlled by adjusting the thickness of metal oxides. A much lower contact resistance to BP transistors can also be achieved through charge-transfer doping and contact engineering.209 Metal–oxide nanomaterials are widely used to fabricate metal–oxide FET. Assembling various metal–oxide nanomaterials with BP to construct such vertical van der Waals heterostructures as BP-IGZO and BP–ZnO will become popular for the development of novel electronic devices intended for industrial applications in the future.93,210,211 Jeon et al. constructed novel 1D–2D BP–ZnO nanohybrids junction for p–n diode by taking advantage of the mechanical flexibility of BP and found out that the JFET showed a high ON/OFF ratio (∼104) and kilohertz dynamic rectification.


3.4.2. Artificial synapses. 
Semiconductor memories are the crucial components for modern information storage. Recently, the non-volatile memories based on 2D materials, for instance, organic ferroelectric memory diodes, floating gate memory, and resistive switching memory, promote the rapid development of the digital world.162,212–218 The main drawbacks of BP are its poor stability in air and poor solubility in most organic solvents. A classical solution to the problem is to introduce BP into the polymer main chain or polymer matrix to form new functional materials, which presents both challenges and opportunities for the innovation of memory. Cao et al. used the covalently functionalized BP with poly[(1,4-diethynylbenzene)-alt-9,9-bis(4-diphenylaminophenyl)fluorene] (PDDF) as a 2D template to produce the PDDF-g-BP nanohybrids with high solubility in organic solvents (Fig. 12a).219 The fabricated Au/PDDF-g-BP/ITO memristors showed a typical nonvolatile rewritable memory performance and a lower operational voltage, while the PDDF produced no memory effect (Fig. 12b). Furthermore, the PDDF-g-BP nanohybrids also demonstrated good device stability after 200 switching tests and 3 months of exposure to air, whereas the PDDF/BP blends-based memory displayed switching instability. PDDF-g-BP-based device demonstrated the ON/OFF current ratio of 104 and the corresponding voltages of +1.95 V and −2.34 V (Fig. 12c). Compared to 2D BP, 0D BPQDs demonstrate more promising physical and chemical properties owing to the quantum confinement. For this reason, they selected BPQDs and poly[(9,9-dioctyl-9H-fluorene)-alt-(4-(9H-carbazol-9-yl)aniline)] (PFCz-NH2) as the precursor to successfully synthesize the PFCz-g-BPQDs nanohybrids via a covalent bond (Fig. 12d and e).220 The memory device exhibited good nonvolatile rewritable memory behavior, an enhanced ON/OFF current ratio of 107 and the lowered switch-ON/OFF voltages of −0.89 V and +1.95 V (Fig. 12f). Other polymers such as PVP, PMMA, PFF-100, and polyacrylonitrile could also be used to build BP nanohybrids-based memory by modifying 2D BP nanosheets or 0D BPQDs,212,214,221,222 which suggests that BP can be easily modified with different materials to improve stability and memory performance.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of PDDF-g-BP. (b) Construction of the Au/active material/ITO memory device. (c) I–V curves of Au/PDDF-g-BP/ITO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of PFCz-g-BPQDs structure. (e) Construction of the Al/active material/ITO memory device. (f) I–V curves of the Al/PFCz-g-BPQDs/ITO device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
BP-based hybrids also have great application potential in other neuromorphological devices, such as three-terminal transistors. Ahmed et al. reported an artificial optical synapse based on BP/POx synaptic transistor to emulate excitatory and inhibitory neural functions such as psychological learning and forgetting. To further improve the stability and electron storage capacity of BP, combining BP with graphene to form BP–graphene nanohybrid memeristors is an effective strategy. Hence, Yuan et al. successfully manufactured Ag/GO/BP·GOQD/GO/ITO artificial synaptic device with low power consumption, high sensitivity, and high stability in the air atmosphere. Table 5 shows a comparison of artificial synaptic devices of BP-based nanohybrids, suggesting that BP-based nanohybrids are promising candidates for synaptic devices.
Table 5 The artificial synaptic performance comparisons of BP-based nanohybrids




Nanohybrids type
Cycles
ON/OFF ratio
Switch-on voltage/V
Stability/s
Ref.




BPQD/PMMA
500
3.0 × 107
3
104

212



PDDF-g-BP
200
104
1.95
104

219



PFCz-g-BPQDs
600
>107
1.95
104

220



BP/POx
2 × 103
103
0.05



187



BP/Al2O3
100
105
20



215







3.4.3. Optoelectronic devices. 
Optoelectronics devices, such as photodetectors and light-emitting diodes (LEDs), have been commonly applied in every aspect of modern life, including imaging, display and optical communications.223,224 2D BP is also a promising candidate for optoelectronics. However, the poor light stability of BP restricts its applications under the context of photoirradiation. To deal with this problem, several studies have been conducted recently. Hu et al. developed an economical and practical fabrication method for the synthesis of highly stable polymer ionic liquid (PIL) passivated few-layer BP (Fig. 13a).36 The crucial strength of this strategy is to exfoliate bulk BP using PILs solution instead of pure ILs. The PIL modified few-layer BP retains its morphology and structure in air for 100 d. Due to the good conductivity of the PIL coating layer, the BP-PIL nanohybrids were well used in the construction of flexible photodetectors, which shows excellent stability (Fig. 13b). Although the BP/P([VPIm]TFSI)-based flexible photodetector shows a high response of 0.46 μA W−1 at a bias voltage of 3 V, the dark current of the PIL-modified BP based photodetector would increase and result in the lower on/off ratio of 17 (Fig. 13c). To solve this issue, the nanohybrids BP phototransistors modified with other photosensitive materials, such as silicon, perovskite materials and carbon nanomaterials, have been investigated recently. For instance, Zou et al. reported the Schottky barrier-controlled nanohybrids BP/MAPbI3−xClx perovskite phototransistors that exhibited a high responsivity of up to 106–108 A W−1 and an excellent specific detectivity of up to 9 × 1013 Jones.225 Moreover, the ON/OFF ration exceeded 104. Chen et al. demonstrated the BP/CsPbBr3 perovskite nanohybrids with a low dark current of 2.9 nA and an ON/OFF ratio of 103.103 Tan et al. reported the BP carbide infrared phototransistor that exhibited a responsivity of 2163 A W−1 and an operating dark current of 50 μA.226 Yin et al. developed a high-performance waveguide photodetector at 2 μm by coupling BP with silicon, thus resulting in a high responsivity of 306.7 mA W−1.50
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the BP assisted by diluted PIL solution. (b) The flexibility of BP/P([VPIm]TFSI) nanohybrids based photodetectors. (c) Cycling stability of the photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 

3.5. BP-based nanohybrids for tribological applications
Due to the weak interlayer interactions in conjunction with strong in-plane bonds, BP is suitable as a liquid lubricant additive for tribological applications. However, the inherent instability of BP hampers the research and application of it in tribology. To resolve this issue, such protection methods as the modification with passivation layers, organic compounds, and nanoparticles have been proposed.227 Taking full advantage of the synergistic effects of multiple nanomaterials plays a critical role in developing efficient lubricating materials.228 Making full use of the synergistic effect of multiple nanomaterials is of great importance to the development of efficient lubricating materials. Due to the synergistic effect of multiple nanohybrids, composites often outperform individual nanomaterials.229
For example, recent progress has shown that BP nanosheets can also act as catalysts to decompose lubricant molecules to form the carbon-based tribofilms as shown in Fig. 14a. Studies have shown that the carbon-based films formed in situ at the friction interface have excellent wear resistance under high pressure. Tang et al. developed a tribosystem in which base oil oleic acid (OA) molecules provided not only a fluid layer but also a solid tribofilm at the friction interface to achieve superlubricity at high pressure in the presence of BP.230
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the decomposition mechanism of OA on the surface of BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image showing the interfacial microstructure of the wear scar surface on the Si3N4 ball after friction test (c) Evolution of EELS P–L core edge spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (d) Coefficients of friction and wear rates varying with concentration.53 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Wang et al. observed that the BP nanosheets modified by NaOH can achieve high superlubricity when used as water-based lubricant additives. SEM images show the presence of a sublayer after the friction test (Fig. 14b). As shown in Fig. 14c, the PO and P–OH bonds formed during the oxidation process can adsorb and retain water molecules on the BP surface, helping to achieve and maintain superlubricity at ultra-high contact pressures.231,232 Subsequently, Wu et al. observed a 50% reduction in friction in the BP degraded region by AFM, due to the formation of phosphorus oxides.233 The experimentally evaluated BP/SiO2 interfacial shear stress (ISS) reaches as low as 0.029 ± 0.004 MPa, which is comparable to the ISS value for the disproportionately rigid crystal contacts.
Recent studies suggest that Ag-NPs possess excellent lubricating properties. Ag-NPs can synergistically reduce friction and anti-wear properties when combined with other 2D materials such as graphene and MoS2.234 The BP doped with silver nanoparticles (Ag/BP) as recently synthesized by Tang et al. and the tribological properties of the as-prepared Ag/BP nanocomposites used as lubricant additives in PAO oil were investigated.53 As shown in Fig. 14d, the oil with the addition of 0.075 wt% Ag/BP nanoadditive showed a 73.4% reduction in coefficient of friction (COF) and a 92.0% reduction in wear rate compared to the PAO6-based oil.235 TiO2 can also significantly improve the lubricating properties of BP due to its self-healing properties and ‘ball-bearing’ characteristics under certain conditions of contact stress.
In addition, some studies confirmed the effect of particle size on tribological properties. The results have shown that nano-sized particles are superior to micron-sized particles in terms of wear resistance. Thus, Ren et al. fabricated BPQDs and dispersed them in ethyl alcohol and ethylene glycol to study macroscale superlubricity.236 The lubricating wear rate of the BPQD-EG aqueous suspension at the Si3N4/sapphire friction interface was measured to be 5.96% of that of the EG aqueous lubricant. Also, the macroscopic superlubrication state was reached at a high contact pressure of 336 MPa.237 It is believed that the rolling effect of BPQDs, the low shear stress between the interlayers of BPQDs, and the oxidation products of BPQDs all lead to the excellent anti-wear and lubricating effects.
4. Conclusions, challenges, and prospective
Fabricating BP-based nanohybrids has provided enormous opportunities for exploring the nanomaterials with strong activity, high operational stability and high reproducibility for widespread applications. In this review article, we comprehensively summarized the latest progress in the research of BP-based nanohybrids, including preparation methods, properties and applications in energy storage, catalysis, sensors, electronic/photonic devices and tribology. Among various nanomaterials, BP–organic/polymer nanohybrid, BP–carbon nanohybrid, BP–metal nanohybrid, BP–metal compound nano hybrid and BP–inorganic non-metallic material nanohybrid are the five main methods for preparing BP-based nanohybrid. In the field of nanohybrid materials, the ideal outcome is a material that not only overcomes the shortcomings of its individual components, but also benefits from the synergistic effects that arise when the components are combined together. It is worth noting that the development of BP–organic/polymer nanohybrids shows a trend of increasing year by year, among which the solution casting method is the most used, accounting for more than half of the literature reports.238 Advantages of using organic molecules may include light weight, low cost, large-scale manufacturing, environmental friendliness, and biocompatibility. The different preparation methods of BP-based nanohybrids were discussed in detail. Although the “top-down method” is simple and low cost, the size of BP-based nanohybrids prepared is not uniform and the yield is low. The “bottom-up method” has great potential in preparing controllable large-scale and high-quality BP-based nanohybrids, but it requires high equipment conditions.239 All these methods turn out to be successful and universally applicable to the synthesis of BP-based nanohybrids. Compared with bare BP, these nanohybrids have many strengths, such as increased stability, recyclability, activity, and the maximized electronic interaction between the BP and the modification materials. Therefore, some important concerns about practical applications, especially high production cost, could be largely addressed. To sum up, developing BP-nanohybrids may be an important direction of future research.
However, we assume that there is still a long way to go to fully control the synthesis and explore the potential properties and applications of BP-based nanohybrids materials. Below are some of the recent challenges and future trends in this field.
(1) Most researchers are committed to developing high-performance BP-based nanohybrid materials through the technological innovation and optimization of synthesis conditions, but less consideration is given to reaction kinetics and reaction mechanism, which provides a new way to achieve excellent properties in recent years. As a consequence, the systematic study of reaction kinetics and mechanism is imminent.
(2) The relationship between chemical structure and electrical characteristic is still not fully understood. Efforts are needed in the near future to unravel the related mechanisms of the electronic structure of BP nanohybrids to improve their existing properties and extend their properties to new areas. Combining theoretical models and actual experiments will help develop the structures of BP nano-nanohybrids with novel and superior properties.
(3) In the recent study, most efforts have been made on exploring the methodology for BP-based nanohybrids. The recent synthetic methodology of BP nanohybrids relies mostly on using toxic sources or presenting safety issues failure to meet the needs of low cost in large-scale industrial production. Exploring new methods for the low-cost, time-saving, simple and efficient improvement of performance is the focus of future research.
(4) As mentioned above, BP-based nanohybrids have obvious advantages over bare BP. Given the great potential of BP nanohybrids, they are likely to be used in a wider range of practical applications beyond the currently researched ones. Expanding the range of application for these BP-based nanohybrids may help to fully explore the value of this unique family of nanohybrids. For example, BP-based nanohybrids can be applied to flexible electronic skins due to its outstanding electrical properties.
The comprehensive summary of the preparation, performance and applications of BP-based nanohybrids in this review shows that the investigations into this new type of nanohybrids are still limited, so that more continuous research is required to fully realize its potential.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declared that they have no conflicts of interest to this work. We declare that we do not have any commercial or associative interest that represents a conflict of interest in connection with the work submitted.
References
H. Kim, S. Z. Uddin, D. H. Lien, M. Yeh, N. S. Azar, S. Balendhran, T. Kim, N. Gupta, Y. Rho, C. P. Grigoropoulos, K. B. Crozier and A. Javey, Nature, 2021, 596, 232–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thurakkal, D. Feldstein, R. Perea-Causín, E. Malic and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 33, 2005254 CrossRef PubMed .
P. K. Srivastava, Y. Hassan, D. J. P. de Sousa, Y. Gebredingle, M. Joe, F. Ali, Y. Zheng, W. J. Yoo, S. Ghosh, J. T. Teherani, B. Singh, T. Low and C. Lee, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 539 CrossRef .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. Yang, G. J. Ye, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhu, W. Lou, X. Zhou, L. Li, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Chang, Y. Wang, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 593–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, Z. Zhang, N. Z. Wang, G. J. Ye, W. Lou, X. Zhou, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Chang, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6611–6616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gui, H. Jin, Z. Wang and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6795–6823 RSC .
X. Feng, X. Huang, L. Chen, W. C. Tan, L. Wang and K. W. Ang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. C. Watts, L. Picco, F. S. Russell-Pavier, P. L. Cullen, T. S. Miller, S. P. Bartuś, O. D. Payton, N. T. Skipper, V. Tileli and C. A. Howard, Nature, 2019, 568, 216–220 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Xu, S. Lin, N. Onofrio, L. Zhou, F. Shi, W. Lu, K. Kang, Q. Zhang and S. P. Lau, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, K. Hu, D. Yan, R. Chen, Y. Zou, H. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–22 Search PubMed .
L. Chan, P. Gao, W. Zhou, C. Mei, Y. Huang, X. F. Yu, P. K. Chu and T. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12401–12415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Meng, J. Huang, Y. Feng, L. Zu, C. Peng, L. Zheng, L. Zheng, Z. Chen, G. Liu, B. Chen, Y. Mi and J. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–10 Search PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Xie, G. Cao, Y. Lu, D. Zheng, Y. Jin, K. Wang and X. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 684–692 CrossRef .
W. Gao, Y. Zhou, X. Wu, Q. Shen, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2005197 CrossRef .
M. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Zi, Z. G. Wu, H. Hu, Z. Xie, Y. Zhang, L. Hu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 12433–12473 RSC .
P. Nakhanivej, X. Yu, S. K. Park, S. Kim, J. Y. Hong, H. J. Kim, W. Lee, J. Y. Hwang, J. E. Yang, C. Wolverton, J. Kong, M. Chhowalla and H. S. Park, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 156–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cui, H. Pu, S. A. Wells, Z. Wen, S. Mao, J. Chang, M. C. Hersam and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8632 CrossRef CAS .
J. Peng, Y. Lai, Y. Chen, J. Xu, L. Sun and J. Weng, Small, 2017, 13, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Abate, D. Akinwande, S. Gamage, H. Wang, M. Snure, N. Poudel and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hu, Q. Ji, M. Huang, L. Chang, C. Zhang, G. Wu, B. Zi, N. Bao, W. Chen and Y. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20511–20517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, L. Yin, R. Hu, H. Liu, Y. Wen, C. Liu and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. A. Doganov, E. C. T. O’Farrell, S. P. Koenig, Y. Yeo, A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. C. Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pei, X. Gai, J. Yang, X. Wang, Z. Yu, D. Y. Choi, B. Luther-Davies and Y. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chhetry, S. Sharma, S. C. Barman, H. Yoon, S. Ko, C. Park, S. Yoon, H. Kim and J. Y. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–14 Search PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Shi, K. Khan, R. Cao, W. Liang, A. K. Tareen, Y. Zhang, W. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Luo and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5421–5441 RSC .
X. Xuan, Z. Zhang and W. Guo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7898–7904 RSC .
V. Artel, Q. Guo, H. Cohen, R. Gasper, A. Ramasubramaniam, F. Xia and D. Naveh, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2017, 1, 6 CrossRef .
X. Liu, S. Zhang, S. Guo, B. Cai, S. A. Yang, F. Shan, M. Pumera and H. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 263–285 RSC .
F. Shi, Z. Geng, K. Huang, Q. Liang, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, J. Cao and S. Feng, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5(5), 1800575 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, Q. Li, B. Lei, J. Wu, Q. Zhou, C. Gu, X. Wen, J. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Li, Y. Zheng, J. Lu, J. He, L. Wang, Q. Xiong, J. Wang and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Wen, W. Sheng, J. Wang, S. Wang and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2019, 133, 223–229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Nerl, A. Pokle, L. Jones, K. Müller-Caspary, K. H. W. van den Bos, C. Downing, E. K. McCarthy, N. Gauquelin, Q. M. Ramasse, I. Lobato, D. Daly, J. C. Idrobo, S. Van Aert, G. Van Tendeloo, S. Sanvito, J. N. Coleman, C. S. Cucinotta and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–9 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, H. Chen, Z. Guo, W. Zhang, H. Yu, Z. Zhuang, H. Zhong and Z. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 394, 124314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Hu, L. Zhang, C. Zhu, J. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhang and Q. Yuan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef .
C. X. Hu, Q. Xiao, Y. Y. Ren, M. Zhao, G. H. Dun, H. R. Wu, X. Y. Li, Q. Q. Yang, B. Sun, Y. Peng, F. Yan, Q. Wang and H. L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haghighat-Shishavan, M. Nazarian-Samani, M. Nazarian-Samani, H. K. Roh, K. Y. Chung, B. W. Cho, S. F. Kashani-Bozorg and K. B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10121–10134 RSC .
Y. Liu, D. Zhu, X. Zhu, G. Cai, J. Wu, M. Chen, P. Du, Y. Chen, W. Liu and S. Yang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 11435–11442 RSC .
L. Kong, Y. Ji, Z. Dang, J. Yan, P. Li, Y. Li and S. F. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800668 CrossRef .
Z. Yuan, J. Li, M. Yang, Z. Fang, J. Jian, D. Yu, X. Chen and L. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4972–4979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Liu, A. Zhang, J. Cai, X. Cao, Z. Li, P. D. Asimow and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8323–8329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, P. P. Cheng, Y. W. Zhang, W. Y. Tan, D. Yu, G. Yi and Y. Min, Black phosphorus quantum dots as an effective perovskite interfacial modification layer for efficient low-temperature processed all-inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy, 2020, 206, 793–798 CrossRef CAS .
O. Elbanna, M. Zhu, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3618–3626 CrossRef CAS .
S. Muduli, P. Pandey, G. Devatha, R. Babar, T. M. Kabir, D. C. Kothari, P. P. Pillai and S. Ogale, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 7808–7812 CrossRef .
J. Liu, T. Liu, P. Du, L. Zhang and J. Lei, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 7890–7894 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Wang, M. Ikram, H. Lv, J. Chang, Z. Li, L. Ma, A. U. Rehman, G. Lu, J. Chen and K. Shi, ACS Sens., 2018, 3, 1576–1583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, L. Shi, X. Yu, W. Liu, J. Sheng, J. Wan, Y. Li, Y. Wan, Z. Luo and X. Yang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12578–12588 RSC .
M. Li, Q. Zhao, S. Zhang, D. Li, H. Li, X. Zhang and B. Xing, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2020, 7, 414–423 RSC .
Y. Yin, R. Cao, J. Guo, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Feng, H. Wang, W. Du, A. Qadir, H. Zhang, Y. Ma, S. Gao, Y. Xu, Y. Shi, L. Tong and D. Dai, Laser Photonics Rev., 2019, 13, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, G. Xu, X. Ren, Z. Li, X. Qi, K. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6581–6588 RSC .
B. Liu, M. Köpf, A. N. Abbas, X. Wang, Q. Guo, Y. Jia, F. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, H. Wang, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, M. Ge, X. Fang, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tang, F. Su, X. Xu and P. K. Chu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123631 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kong, X. Ji, J. Wang, X. Sun, G. Chen, T. Fan, W. Liang, H. Zhang, A. Xie, O. C. Farokhzad and W. Tao, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3943–3955 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xue, L. Sutrisno, M. Li, W. Zhu, Y. Fei, C. Liu, X. Wang, K. Cai, Y. Hu and Z. Luo, Biomaterials, 2021, 269, 120623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, T. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, J. Guan, X. Chen, H. Ji, P. Du and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Shao, H. Sun, L. Miao, X. Chen, M. Han, J. Sun, S. Liu, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2494–2499 RSC .
S. Qiu, X. Ren, X. Zhou, T. Zhang, L. Song and Y. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 36639–36651 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, G. Zeng, P. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Ali, S. Huang and H. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 503–512 RSC .
D. He, Z. Zhang, Y. Xing, Y. Zhou, H. Yang, H. Liu, J. Qu, X. Yuan and J. Guan, and Y. nan Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 384, 123258 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lianga, D. Wanga, X. Ren, C. Ge, H. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Liu, M. Qiu, Z. Du, X. Qi, Y. Xu, L. Liu, S. Bao and H. Zhang, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9, 3023–3034 CrossRef .
W. Liu, A. Dong, B. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 1–35 Search PubMed .
H. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Wei, J. Huang, X. You, J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, Z. Tang, Z. Guo and J. Wu, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 655–665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Li, Y. Lu, L. Cheng and J. Liu, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 472–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, G. Qu, P. K. Chu and X. Yu, View, 2021, 2, 20200043 CrossRef .
S. Ding, Z. Liu, C. Huang, N. Zeng, W. Jiang and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 10564–10573 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. Li, D. Qiao, N. Hu, Y. Gu, Q. Deng and S. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 43855–43867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gopalakrishnan and S. Badhulika, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7096–7099 RSC .
H. Shuai, P. Ge, W. Hong, S. Li, J. Hu, H. Hou, G. Zou and X. Ji, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Xu, J. Cao, D. Chen and W. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–12 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, Y. Ji, Z. Mo, N. Li, Q. Xu, Y. Li, H. Xu, D. Chen and J. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4408–4414 RSC .
M. Li, N. Muralidharan, K. Moyer and C. L. Pint, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10443–10449 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, Y. Hu, G. Wu, H. Cheng, Q. Yu, K. Zhang, W. Chen and S. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
J. He, X. Liu, L. Song, H. Li, H. Zu, J. Li, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Qin and F. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12, 1339–1345 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. An, Y. H. Kang, C. Lee and S. Y. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–7 Search PubMed .
İ. Aksoy, H. Küçükkeçeci, F. Sevgi, Ö. Metin and I. Hatay Patir, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 26822–26831 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Veselý, P. Marvan, J. Trejbal, V. Mazánek, J. Luxa, J. Šturala and Z. Sofer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22702–22709 CrossRef .
Q. Wu, M. Liang, S. Zhang, X. Liu and F. Wang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10428–10435 RSC .
Y. H. Pai and C. H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 763–775 RSC .
T. Wu, J. Fan, Q. Li, P. Shi, Q. Xu and Y. Min, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–11 Search PubMed .
W. Lei, T. Zhang, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, G. Liu and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8009–8020 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Lee, L. Qiu, J. C. Yoon, Y. Kim, D. Li, I. Oh, G. H. Lee, J. W. Yoo, H. J. Shin, F. Ding and Z. Lee, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6336–6342 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, X. Yan, B. Ge, J. Zhou, M. Wang, L. Zhang and T. Jiao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4521–4536 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Y. Zhu, X. Ban, S. Wang and H. Zhu, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 121, 105309 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shi, K. Huang, Y. Wang, W. Zhang, L. Li, X. Wang and S. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17459–17466 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Du, T. Liu, B. J. Córdova Wong, W. Wang, H. Ju and J. Lei, Biomaterials, 2019, 192, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. Xie, C. Huang, J. He, P. Yang, J. Tao, B. Lin and P. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 321, 128518 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, J. Gao, J. G. Zhao, D. J. Yan and X. D. Zhu, Small, 2020, 16, 1–7 CAS .
Q. Zhang, W. Wang, M. Zhang, F. Wu, T. Zheng, B. Sheng, Y. Liu, J. Shen, N. Zhou and Y. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123525 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, J. Wang, Z. Liu, G. Zeng, L. Tang, Q. Liang, Q. He, T. Wu, Y. Liu and X. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 5171–5185 RSC .
H. Shi, S. Ge, Y. Wang, C. Gao and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 41062–41068 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Jeon, Y. T. Lee, J. Y. Lim, J. S. Kim, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, H. Ren, Y. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Guo and X. Li, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 11007–11017 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, P. Wang, R. Wang, Y. Liu, R. Jing, Z. Li, Z. Meng, Y. Liu and Q. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 497, 143682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, R. Zhang, J. Li, X. Li and Z. Zang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 349, 130770 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Hu, F. Qi, L. Ding, J. Wang, X. Zhang, Q. Liu, L. Liu, H. Sun and P. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8157–8167 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, T. Shi, P. Liu, X. Ma, L. Shui, C. Shang, Z. Chen, X. Wang, K. Kempa and G. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19167–19175 RSC .
L. Wang, X. Zou, J. Lin, J. Jiang, Y. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. F. Liu, J. C. Ho and L. Liao, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4804–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Chen, B. Gao, B. Lin and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–17 Search PubMed .
D. H. Kwak, P. Ramasamy, Y. S. Lee, M. H. Jeong and J. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29041–29046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Long, M. Q. Cai and J. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 043901 CrossRef .
K. Chen, Y. Wang, J. Liu, J. Kang, Y. Ge, W. Huang, Z. Lin, Z. Guo, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16852–16859 RSC .
M. Amani, E. Regan, J. Bullock, G. H. Ahn and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11724–11731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Pradhan, C. Garcia, M. C. Lucking, S. Pakhira, J. Martinez, D. Rosenmann, R. Divan, A. V. Sumant, H. Terrones, J. L. Mendoza-Cortes, S. A. McGill, N. D. Zhigadlo and L. Balicas, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18449–18463 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Wu, Y. Yan, L. Li, P. Lu, J. Guan, N. Lu and X. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 850, 156580 Search PubMed .
H. Yuan, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Duan, B. He and Q. Tang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410–411, 53–58 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Xu, X. Ren, Z. Li, X. Qi, K. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Huang and J. Zhong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6581–6588 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q. Jiang, P. Lang, N. Yuan and J. Tang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 850, 156580 CrossRef .
H. Jin, H. Wang, Z. Qi, D. Bin, T. Zhang, Y. Wan, J. Chen, C. Chuang, Y. Lu, T. Chan, H. Ju, A. Cao, W. Yan, X. Wu, H. Ji and L. Wan, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 2338–2342 CrossRef .
Y. Li, S. Jiang, Y. Qian, Y. Han, J. Zhou, T. Li, L. Xi, N. Lin and Y. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6751–6754 RSC .
I. Sultana, M. M. Rahman, T. Ramireddy, Y. Chen and A. M. Glushenkov, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23506–23512 RSC .
S. Zhang, L. Sun, Q. Fan, F. Zhang, Z. Wang, J. Zou, S. Zhao and J. Mao, Nano Research Energy, 2022, 1, e9120001 CrossRef .
M. Li, W. Li, Y. Hu, A. A. Yakovenko, Y. Ren, J. Luo, W. M. Holden, M. Shakouri, Q. Xiao, X. Gao, F. Zhao, J. Liang, R. Feng, R. Li, G. T. Seidler, F. Brandys, R. Divigalpitiya, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. M. Park and H. J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, Y. Zheng, S. Z. Huang, P. P. Sun, N. Srikanth, L. B. Kong, Q. Yan and K. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 783–790 RSC .
J. Yang, Z. Pan, J. Zhong, S. Li, J. Wang and P. Y. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 36, 257–264 CrossRef .
L. Pan, X. D. Zhu, K. N. Sun, Y. T. Liu, X. M. Xie and X. Y. Ye, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 347–354 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Pan, L. Kang, T. Li, M. Waqar, J. Yang, Q. Gu, X. Liu, Z. Kou, Z. Wang, L. Zheng and J. Wang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12975–12987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ni, S. Fu, C. Wu, J. Maier, Y. Yu and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2259–2265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Song, H. Chen, Z. Li, Q. Xu, H. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–10 Search PubMed .
F. Zhou, L. Ouyang, J. Liu, X. S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227549 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mei, Y. Zhang, T. Liao, X. Peng, G. A. Ayoko and Z. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 424–431 CrossRef .
Y. Luo, H. Wu, L. Liu, Q. Li, K. Jiang, S. Fan, J. Li and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36058–36066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, L. Zhang, C. Fu, J. Huang, H. Huang, Z. Li, J. Zhang and C. Niu, Carbon, 2018, 139, 1057–1062 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Xu, Z. Chen, G. M. Zhong, Y. Liu, Y. Yang, T. Ma, Y. Ren, X. Zuo, X. H. Wu, X. Zhang and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3955–3965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiao, Y. Liu, B. Li, W. Zhang, C. He, C. Zhang, Z. Yu, T. Gao and J. Song, Carbon, 2019, 148, 518–524 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, J. Cui, V. P. Dravid and K. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Yang, C. Hao, F. Wen, B. Wang, C. Mu, J. Xiang, L. Li, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44478–44484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, P. He, J. R. Brent, H. Yilmaz, D. J. Lewis, I. A. Kinloch and B. Derby, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10330–10338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Fu, Z. Di Chen, Y. L. Zhang, D. D. Han, J. N. Ma, W. Wang, Z. R. Zhang, H. Xia and H. B. Sun, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9133–9140 RSC .
P. Ran, W. Chen, H. Zheng, J. Zhou, B. Qiu, W. Cao and X. Li, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 13506–13518 RSC .
S. Luo, R. Liu, X. Zhang, R. Chen, M. Yan, K. Huang, J. Sun, R. Wang and J. Wang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 424, 127281 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 67, 745–779 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, H. Miao, M. Khurram, Z. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Q. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 421, 127841 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Tang, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5175–5183 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, C. Huang, C. X. Liu, R. Shi and Y. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2020, 26, 4449–4460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, C. Chen, T. Hu, J. Li, H. Lu, Y. Zheng, X. Yang, C. Guo and C. M. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 19484–19492 RSC .
C. Han, J. Li, Z. Ma, H. Xie, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Ye and T. Zhang, Sci. China Mater., 2018, 61, 1159–1166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meng, W. Tian, H. Yang, X. Wang, X. Wang and Z. Li, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 413, 0–2 CAS .
W. Lei, Y. Mi, R. Feng, P. Liu, S. Hu, J. Yu, X. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, J. O. Wang, L. Zheng, K. Tang, S. Zhu, G. Liu and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 552–561 CrossRef CAS .
T. Song, G. Zeng, P. Zhang, T. Wang, A. Ali, S. Huang and H. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 503–512 RSC .
S. Eken Korkut, H. Küçükkeçeci and Ö. Metin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 8130–8139 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boppella, W. Yang, J. Tan, H. C. Kwon, J. Park and J. Moon, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 422–430 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, X. Li, J. Wu, X. Lv, Y. Z. Zheng, Z. Zhao, X. Ding, X. Tao and J. F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Yuan, Z. K. Shen, S. Song, J. Guan, L. Bao, L. Pei, Y. Su, S. Wu, W. Bai, Z. T. Yu, Z. Ji and Z. Zou, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7801–7807 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, P. Fan, L. Xiao, J. Weng, Q. Xu and J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 53, 185–191 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, C. Zhai, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 645–651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Hu, X. Yang, T. Yang, J. Qu, C. Guo and C. M. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20162–20173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, T. Liu, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, S. Tang, Y. Yuan, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, H. Wang, K. V. Fedorovich and N. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Shaw, S. Kuriakose, S. Cheeseman, E. L. H. Mayes, A. Murali, Z. Y. Oo, T. Ahmed, N. Tran, K. Boyce, J. Chapman, C. F. McConville, R. J. Crawford, P. D. Taylor, A. J. Christofferson, V. K. Truong, M. J. S. Spencer, A. Elbourne and S. Walia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 17340–17352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–43 Search PubMed .
T. Sakthivel, X. Huang, Y. Wu and S. Rtimi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122297 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Z. Yu, H. Ou, A. M. Asiri, Y. Chen and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. Feng, W. Lei, X. Sui, X. Liu, X. Qi, K. Tang, G. Liu and M. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 444–453 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, D. Chen, Z. Mo, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He, H. Xu and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2073–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shi, K. Huang and S. Feng, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1913–1921 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fan, W. Shen, C. An, Z. Sun, S. Wu, L. Xu, D. Sun, X. Hu, D. Zhang and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26533–26538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, M. Cao, J. Liu, J. Liu and J. Su, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 4365–4371 RSC .
T. Liang, Y. Liu, Y. Cheng, F. Ma and Z. Dai, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2840–2848 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, J. Hua, A. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Peng, W. Chen and J. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4311–4316 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Zou, M. C. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Lv, X. Duan, S. Zhang, X. Liu, W. W. Wu, W. Hu, Z. Fan and L. Liao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–9 Search PubMed .
W. Li, D. Liu, N. Yang, J. Wang, M. Huang, L. Liu, X. Peng, G. Wang, X. F. Yu and P. K. Chu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 467–468, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
P. Vishnoi, K. Pramoda, U. Gupta, M. Chhetri, R. G. Balakrishna and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 27780–27787 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Zhu, Y. Xie and Y. T. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21255–21260 RSC .
X. Wang, Q. Li, P. Shi, J. Fan, Y. Min and Q. Xu, Small, 2019, 15, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Xu, N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 14053–14057 CrossRef .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–8 CAS .
D. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Lu, X. Zhang, J. Tang and C. V. Singh, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 18721–18732 RSC .
J. Wang, D. Liu, H. Huang, N. Yang, B. Yu, M. Wen, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2600–2604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xue, H. Zhang, S. Fricke, M. Lüther, Z. Yang, A. Meng, W. Bremser and Z. Li, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1723–1729 RSC .
T. Liang, Y. Liu, P. Zhang, C. Liu, F. Ma, Q. Yan and Z. Dai, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 124976 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, L. Xiao, L. Zhou, Q. Xu, J. Weng, J. Xu and B. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21106–21113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Xue, S. Shen, X. Jiang, P. Sengdala, K. Chen and Y. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, B. Lu, N. Wang, J. E. Lu, C. Li, Y. Ping and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24707–24714 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ou, X. Zhou, F. Meng, C. Chen, Y. Chen and J. Song, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13600–13611 RSC .
D. Liu, J. Wang, S. Bian, Q. Liu, Y. Gao, X. Wang, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Ding, G. Chen, X. Yang and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 2638–2642 CrossRef .
L. Shi, Q. Li, C. Ling, Y. Zhang, Y. Ouyang, X. Bai and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4865–4871 RSC .
J. Park, H. Elmlund, P. Ercius, J. M. Yuk, D. T. Limmer, Q. Chen, K. Kim, S. H. Han, D. A. Weitz, A. Zettl and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2015, 349, 290–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, D. Li, J. Yu and B. Ding, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 16591–16596 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, L. Miao, S. T. Han, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Peng, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 997–1019 RSC .
C. Tan, Z. Lai and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–25 Search PubMed .
L. Kou, T. Frauenheim and C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2675–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Yang, D. Yuan, J. Tian and D. Ma, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 074501 CrossRef .
G. Lee, S. Kim, S. Jung, S. Jang and J. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 250, 569–573 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ahmed, M. Tahir, M. X. Low, Y. Ren, S. A. Tawfik, E. L. H. Mayes, S. Kuriakose, S. Nawaz, M. J. S. Spencer, H. Chen, M. Bhaskaran, S. Sriram and S. Walia, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 1–13 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Cho, H. J. Koh, H. W. Yoo and H. T. Jung, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 7197–7205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Huang, Q. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Ye, X. Li, Y. Geng, Z. Liang, Y. Du and X. Tian, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 308, 127650 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fan, H. Q. Cao, J. Song, M. Cao and J. Su, Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 1155–1158 RSC .
H. Ren, Y. Zhou, Y. Wang, X. Zhu, C. Gao and Y. Guo, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 321, 128520 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Y. Cen, J. Huang, X. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Geng, B. I. Yakobson, Y. Du and X. Tian, Nanoscale Horiz., 2018, 3, 525–531 RSC .
W. Gu, X. Pei, Y. Cheng, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Yan, C. Ding and Y. Xian, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 576–582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Z. Sun, L. Zhang, J. Lv, X. F. Yu, L. Zhang and X. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 1093–1098 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, H. Shi, L. Zhang, S. Ge, X. Meiling, X. Wang and J. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 403, 123601 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, R. Ren, H. Pu, J. Chang, S. Mao and J. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 89, 505–510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, H. Pu, J. Chang, X. Sui, S. Mao and J. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 257, 214–219 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, X. Zhang, J. Ouyang, D. Chu, F. Han, L. Shi, R. Liu, Z. Guo, G. X. Gu, W. Tao, L. Jin and J. Li, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 4053–4064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, H. Jin and R. Gui, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 165, 112390 CrossRef CAS .
M. Su, X. Chen, L. Tang, B. Yang, H. Zou, J. Liu, Y. Li, S. Chen and D. Fan, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9, 4265–4272 CAS .
L. Wu, J. Guo, Q. Wang, S. Lu, X. Dai, Y. Xiang and D. Fan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 249, 542–548 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fan, X. Tang, D. Zhang, X. Hu, J. Liu, L. Yang and J. Su, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15359–15366 RSC .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, L. Seixas, A. Carvalho, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, N. Yakovlev, A. H. Castro Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2145–2151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Han, Z. Hu, L. C. Gomes, Y. Bao, A. Carvalho, S. J. R. Tan, B. Lei, D. Xiang, J. Wu, D. Qi, L. Wang, F. Huo, W. Huang, K. P. Loh and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4122–4129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, W. Shen, J. Liu, H. Hei, R. Hu, C. Hu, D. Zhang, X. Hu, D. Sun, J. H. Chen, W. Ji and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 39890–39897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. Tang, W. Zhu, X. Zhou, Q. Zhou and C. Cheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 9654–9662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Prakash, Y. Cai, G. Zhang, Y. W. Zhang and K. W. Ang, Small, 2017, 13, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Yang, B. Wan, Q. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. Hu, W. Lv, Q. Chen, Z. Zeng, F. Wen, J. Xiang, S. Yuan, J. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Wang, J. Zhang, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Y. Tian and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9408–9415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fan, T. Xu, E. Wu, M. Cao, T. Liu and J. Su, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 16655–16663 RSC .
G. Dastgeer, M. F. Khan, J. Cha, A. M. Afzal, K. H. Min, B. M. Ko, H. Liu, S. Hong and J. Eom, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10959–10966 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bi, X. Zou, Y. Lv, G. Li, X. Liu, Y. Liu, T. Yu, Z. Yang and L. Liao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. T. Han, L. Hu, X. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. J. Zeng, S. Ruan, C. Pan and Z. Peng, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Li, M. Chen, Q. Zong and Z. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6353–6359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gu, B. Zhang, B. Liu, Q. Che, Z. Zhao and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1231–1238 RSC .
H. Tian, B. Deng, M. L. Chin, X. Yan, H. Jiang, S. J. Han, V. Sun, Q. Xia, M. Dubey, F. Xia and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10428–10435 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, F. Wang, J. Su, Y. Zhou and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 1–22 Search PubMed .
T. Xu, S. Guo, W. Qi, S. Li, M. Xu and W. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21952–21960 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, S. Fan, M. Cao, T. Liu and J. Su, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2022, 120, 073301 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, X. Tian, J. Gu, B. Liu, B. Zhang, S. Song, F. Fan and Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4543–4548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, B. Zhang, X. Tian, M. Gu and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3527–3533 RSC .
P. Kumari, J. Ko, V. R. Rao, S. Mhaisalkar and W. L. Leong, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2020, 41, 852–855 CAS .
X. Zhang, H. Xie, Z. Liu, C. Tan, Z. Luo, H. Li, J. Lin, L. Sun, W. Chen, Z. Xu, L. Xie, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3653–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, F. Gan, N. Dong, B. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 10789–10794 RSC .
X. Chen, K. Shehzad, L. Gao, M. Long, H. Guo, S. Qin, X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Shi, W. Hu, Y. Xu and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–24 Search PubMed .
X. Zou, Y. Li, G. Tang, P. You and F. Yan, Small, 2019, 15, 1–9 Search PubMed .
W. C. Tan, L. Huang, R. J. Ng, L. Wang, D. M. N. Hasan, T. J. Duffin, K. S. Kumar, C. A. Nijhuis, C. Lee and K. W. Ang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Zhuang, W. Liang, T. Yan, T. Li, L. Zhang and S. Li, Friction, 2018, 6, 116–142 CrossRef .
L. Meng and L. Li, Nano Research Energy, 2022, 1, e9120020 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Li, Q. Wang and J. Luo, Friction, 2021, 9, 952–962 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tang, Z. Wu, F. Su, H. Wang, X. Xu, Q. Li, G. Ma and P. K. Chu, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 5308–5315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, X. Yang, G. Xie, F. He, R. Wang, C. Zhang, D. Guo and J. Luo, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2021, 5, 1–12 CrossRef .
S. Wu, F. He, G. Xie, Z. Bian, J. Luo and S. Wen, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5618–5627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, F. He, G. Xie, Z. Bian, Y. Ren, X. Liu, H. Yang, D. Guo, L. Zhang, S. Wen and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7717–7726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, L. Zhang, G. Xie, W. Xu, D. Guo, J. Luo and B. Prakash, Friction, 2020, 8, 813–846 CrossRef .
Z. Luo, J. Yu, Y. Xu, H. Xi, G. Cheng, L. Yao, R. Song and K. D. Dearn, Friction, 2021, 9, 723–733 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, X. Yang, G. Xie and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 4799–4809 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Li, J. Li, S. Yi, X. Ge, X. Zhang and J. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31947–31956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Safaei and G. Wang, Nano Research Energy, 2022, 1, e9120008 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, C. Zhi and L. Qu, Nano Research Energy, 2022, 1, e9120005 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Shuangqing Fan
	

Xuhai Liu
	

Tong Liu
	

Ting Xu
	

Jie Su
	


Co/BP	Nanosheet	Co NPs	Solvothermal reduction	OER	55 h	
30

Ag–BP	Flake	Ag nanoclusters	Thermal evaporator	NIR optoelectronic devices	3 d	
31

BP–Au	Nanosheet	AuNPs	Physical adsorption	Photothermal sensing probes	NA	
32

BP/Cu	Nanosheet	Cu NPs	Micromechanical manipulator	NA	NA	
33

BP-bPEI-PEG	Nonosheet	PEG-COOH bPEI	Solution process	Photothermal therapy	16 d	
34

Apt-bioinspired MVS	BPQD	PLGA NPs	NA	Cell biomineralization	NA	
35

PLGA-SS-D@BPQDs	BPQD	PLGA	Emulsification evaporation	Radio sensitization	15 d	
12

BP/P([vpim]TFSI)	Nanosheet	PILs	Ultrasonication	Flexible optoelectronics	100 d	
36

BP/CN	Powder	Carbon nitride	Sonication	Photocatalytic	NA	
37

BP–CNT	Nanocrystal	MWCNTs	Ball milling	Li/Na-ion batteries	400 cycles	
38

BP–C60	Bulk	C60	Solid-state mechano-chemical	Photodynamic therapy	24 h	
39

BPQD-C3N4	BPQD	g-C3N4	Sonication	HER	25 h	
40

EBP@NG	Few-layered	NG	Sonication	HER/OER	2 weeks	
41

BP/RGO	RP	rGO	Flash-heat-treatment method	Sodium-ion battery anodes	NA	
42

BPQDS/CsPbI2Br	BPQD	CsPbI2Br	Solution-based method	Photovoltaic application	NA	
43

BP NS/TMC	Bulk	TMC	Solvothermal route	Photocatalytic	180 min	
44

CsPbBr3 QD-FLBP	Nanosheet	CsPbBr3 & QDs	Sonication	Photoluminescence quenching	NA	
45

BQ-MIL@cat-MIL	BPQD	MIL-101-NH2	Stepwise in situ growth	Photothermal therapy	NA	
46

BPQD/TNS	BPQD	Ti3C2	Sonication and freeze-drying	Li/Na-ion storage	2400 cycles	
13

Co3O4@BP-PEI	Nanosheet	Co(NO3)2	Hydrothermal method	NOx gas sensor	11 d	
47

FMSN@BP-DOX-FA	BPQD	NH2-modified silica	Sonication	Photothermal therapy	3 cycles	
48

SiO2/BP-MT	Nanosheet	MTEOS & APTES	NA	Solar desalination	15 d	
49

Silicon/BP	Thin film	Silicon core	Imprint-transfer process	Mid-IR photodetectors	65 °C	
50

Black/red phosphorus nanohybrids	Red phosphorus	Red phosphorus	Sonochemical method	Supercapacitors	2000 cycles	
51

b-AsP materials	Red phosphorus	Gray arsenic	Vapor transport	LWIR regime	NA	
52

Ag/BP	Nanosheet	Ag-NPs	Sonication	Tribological applications	NA	
53


 	Fig. 1  Summary of BP-based nanohybrids and their applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the synthesis of the CN-4N(BQ) nanohybrids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) UV-visible absorption spectra of CN, BP, and BP–CN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) The charge density of NG and EBP. (d) Schematic illustration of the face-to-face direct contact between BP and NG. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Type-II band alignment at the interface of BPQDS/CsPbI2Br was implied. (b) Schematic diagram of the growth of CsPbI2Br onto the surface BPQDs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Synthesis of CsPbBr3 QDs@FLBP. (d) Band alignments of CsPbBr3 and BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Structure of b-AsP. (b) AFM image of b-As0.83P0.17. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim, (c) schematic diagram of the waveguide photodetector structure of the nanohybrids silicon/BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of the silica modified BP. (e) Water contact angle of SiO2/BP-M and SiO2/BP-MT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

BP–CNT	Ultrasonic	Li-ion batteries	0.5 A g−1, 757.3 mA h g−1, 650 cycles	
70

BP/RGO	Flash-heat-treatment method	Na-ion battery anodes	1 A g−1, 250 mA h g−1, 500 cycles	
42

BPQD/TNS	Sonication	Li/Na-ion storage	1 A g−1, 520 mA h g−1, 2400 cycles	
13

BP/RP	Sonochemical method	Li-ion batteries	1 A g−1, 491 mA h g−1, 100 cycles	
108

BP/NiCo MOF	Liquid exfoliation	Li-ion batteries	5 A g−1, 398 mA h g−1, 1000 cycles	
116


 	Fig. 5  (a) Ex situ measured XRD patterns of BP–graphite electrodes charged and discharged to different potentials in LIBs, SIBs, and PIBs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) HR-TEM of BP QDs/N-graphene. (c) Cycle curves of van der Waals heterostructures and BP QDs/N-graphene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) O 1s of the BPQD/TNS composite and TNSs. (e) Long cycling stability of the BPQD/TNS nanohybrids electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 13 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the BP/RP hybrid. (b) Specific capacitance dependence of RP and BP/RP. (c) Capacity retention of RP and BP/RP after 2000 cycles at 1 A g−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

BP/OPCN	460 nm	3463 mmol h−1 g−1 (CO)	
138

BPQD-C3N4	Simulated sunlight	190 μmol h−1 (H2)	
40

BP@g-C3N4	Xe lamp	6.54 μmol h−1 g−1 (CO)	
139

MCN/BP/MS	Xe lamp	2146.8 μmol h−1 g−1 (H2)	
140

BPQDs/g-C3N4	325 nm	271 μmol h−1 g−1 (H2)	
141


 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme of the preparation of MoS2/EEBP heterostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Mott–Schottky curves of MoS2 and BP. (c) Comparison of calculated exchange current densities of BP, MoS2/C, MoS2–BP, and Pt/C. (d) Plot of the current density of MoS2–BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Band diagram of Co/BP nanohybrids. (b) Onset overpotential. (c) Tafel plots. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the BP/Co2P nanohybrid. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) NRR mechanisms of BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (b) Catalytic mechanism of B and P atoms. (c) The electron localization function of B/2B-funtionalized BP. (d) The free energy diagram of the reduction of nitrogen to ammonia on the para-doped BP through a continuous route at zero potential (blue line) and starting potential (red line). Reprinted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Ammonia yield rate and FE for BP QDs/MnO2 nanohybrids at different potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2020, (f) faradaic efficiency for ammonia of BP@SnO2−x nanotubes at the corresponding potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

BP/BP–TiO2-1	60	NH3	5	5.5	
96

Co3O4@BP-PEI	24	NOx	100	8.38	
47

BP–ZnO	60	NO2	0.05	74	
94

BP–In2O3	30	NO2	10	12.2	
189

Au/BP	35	NO2	100	1	
188


 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of BPQDs fluorescent probe. (b) Changes of fluorescence intensity at 523/649 nm. (c) Curves of the fluorescence ratio as a function of the Hg2+ concentration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis of CoOOH and the complex of Zn@BPQDs/CoOOH nanohybrids used as probe for detection of GSH. (b) PBS dispersion of the Zn@BPQDs/CoOOH with the addition of GSH. (c) The visual FL bio-imaging colors of glass fishes incubated with Zn@BPQDs for different days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of PDDF-g-BP. (b) Construction of the Au/active material/ITO memory device. (c) I–V curves of Au/PDDF-g-BP/ITO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) Schematic illustration of PFCz-g-BPQDs structure. (e) Construction of the Al/active material/ITO memory device. (f) I–V curves of the Al/PFCz-g-BPQDs/ITO device. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

BPQD/PMMA	500	3.0 × 107	3	104	
212

PDDF-g-BP	200	104	1.95	104	
219

PFCz-g-BPQDs	600	>107	1.95	104	
220

BP/POx	2 × 103	103	0.05	
	
187

BP/Al2O3	100	105	20	
	
215


 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of the BP assisted by diluted PIL solution. (b) The flexibility of BP/P([VPIm]TFSI) nanohybrids based photodetectors. (c) Cycling stability of the photodetector. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the decomposition mechanism of OA on the surface of BP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 230. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. (b) TEM image showing the interfacial microstructure of the wear scar surface on the Si3N4 ball after friction test (c) Evolution of EELS P–L core edge spectra. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2021, Springer Nature. (d) Coefficients of friction and wear rates varying with concentration.53 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
