Investigation of the mechanisms of plasmon-mediated photocatalysis: synergistic contribution of near-field and charge transfer effects   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC00491G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00491G
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 7511-7524Investigation of the mechanisms of plasmon-mediated photocatalysis: synergistic contribution of near-field and charge transfer effects†

        
          
            Zelio 
            Fusco
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kylie 
            Catchpole
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Fiona J. 
            Beck
          
        
      *
      School of Engineering, College of Engineering and Computer Science, Australian National University, Acton, ACT 2601, Australia. E-mail: fiona.beck@anu.edu.au
Received 
      4th February 2022
    , Accepted 18th April 2022First published on 21st April 2022AbstractPlasmonic photocatalysis is an attractive way to drive and enhance chemical reactions. The relative importance of thermal and non-thermal effects in driving the reaction is still under debate in the literature, and the lack of a complete theoretical framework, discrepancies in nomenclature and contrasting experimental results continue to hinder the understanding of the underlying reaction mechanism. Particularly for small (<50 nm) nanoparticles (NPs), this has been exacerbated by limited in situ investigation of the relationships between morphology and performance. Here, we study the N-demethylation reaction of methylene blue (MB) adsorbed on disordered Au nanoparticle arrays with average size <50 nm as a model plasmonic photocatalytic system, by means of surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). The highest reaction yield is found under laser excitation at 633 nm, which overlaps both the plasmon and molecular resonance, however traces of products are found also off-resonance under illumination at 785 nm. Critically, we find that the reaction rate decreases as particle radius increases, showing a reduction of ca. 80% when the NP radius is increased from 5 nm to 32 nm. By employing multiscale modelling, we systematically report a mechanistic analysis of photothermal effects, near-field enhancements and hot-electron transfer in this system and address their relationship with NP size and reaction yield. This work demonstrates that both near-fields and hot-electrons synergistically cooperate in enhancing the N-demethylation reaction of MB and indicates that photothermal effects do not play a dominant role in this reaction. The results of this investigation contribute to the mechanistic understanding of plasmon-mediated reactions and provide insights for improved design of metal–molecule interfaces for efficient and selective photocatalysis.
Introduction
Plasmonic photocatalysis is a rapid evolving interdisciplinary field that has the potential to enable the direct conversion of solar to chemical energy. The use of plasmonic metal nanostructures can open alternative reaction pathways that are not accessible through conventional semiconductor thermo-catalysts and offers the possibility of selectively driving chemical reactions.1–4 Although plasmons have found widespread use in heterogeneous catalysis, there is not yet consensus on the dominant underlying mechanism that facilitates chemical reactions.5–8
Significant effort has been devoted to the discussion of the underlying energy transfer mechanisms of plasmon-mediated catalysis.9–11 Once generated, the localized surface plasmons resonances (LSPR) can transfer their energy to the surrounding environment, either a molecular species or a semiconductor, via enhanced optical near-fields, transfer of hot-carriers and photothermal heating,2,12 as illustrated in the schematic of Fig. 1a. The main topic of debate in the literature is the elusive distinction between thermal and non-thermal effects in plasmonic photocatalysis, as they both lead to increased reaction rates.5–7,13–15 In this context, thermal contributions include external heating and photothermal effects due to the plasmon relaxation, while non-thermal contributions are defined as any other effect not achievable under thermal conditions.12 Distinguishing between those mechanisms has been proven more difficult than expected, especially because of the experimental challenges of accurately measuring nanoscale surface temperatures.13,14
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the possible plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic processes, including optical near-field enhancement, photothermal heating and direct (solid arrow) and indirect (dashed arrows) hot-carrier transfer to the empty molecular orbital of the adsorbate. (b)–(d) Top-view SEM images of the disordered Au NP arrays with average radii of 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm, respectively. The insets show the results of the FFT analysis. (e) Interparticle distance for the different samples computed from the SEM images in (a). (f) UV-Vis absorption spectra for the disordered Au nanoparticles arrays with increasing particle radius and the Au film. The labelled dashed vertical lines correspond to the excitation laser wavelengths used in the SERS measurements. (g) Normalized UV-Vis spectral absorption and emission of a 5 ppm MB solution in ethanol. (h) Stacked temporal evolution of SERS spectra of MB (chemical structure shown in the inset) on adsorbed on the 5 nm Au nanoparticle arrays under the illumination at 633 nm. The vertical dotted lines at 479 cm−1 and 804 cm−1 correspond to the vibrational fingerprints of thionine, a product of the light induced transformation of MB. 
Understanding the relative roles of the different underlying mechanisms could have a profound impact in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis, particularly with respect to achieving selective chemical reactions. If the reactions are primarily driven by non-thermal effects, plasmon dissipation could open different reaction pathways not accessible by traditional thermally driven catalysis, by decreasing the activation barrier required for the reaction to happen.8,16 On the other hand, if the thermal effects are the dominant mechanism, there would be little advantage in using often precise arrangements of plasmonic elements when a simple heating of the reaction reactor would lead to the same results.
In general, plasmon catalysis experiments employ either “macroscopic” techniques or “microscopic” techniques. Macroscopic techniques provide time integrated, averaged results on the catalyst ensemble by, for example, using a reactor chamber coupled with product analysis systems like gas chromatographer or mass spectroscopy. Microscopic techniques probe in situ and/or real-time reaction characteristics, using microscopic and spectroscopic techniques, and allow a deeper phenomenological understanding of the underlying mechanisms.
The intrinsic interplay between the mechanisms and their complexity has hindered a complete understand of plasmon-mediated photocatalysis, providing contrasting results and/or different interpretation of the data.14,17 One important work aimed at quantifying the contribution of hot carrier and thermal effects used Cu–Ru photocatalysts to enhance the ammonia (NH3) decomposition reaction.8 A comparison between the reaction rate under light illumination and in the dark but with external heating, showed a drastic reduction reaction yield in the latter case. By using an Arrhenius law, the authors showed that the light-dependent activation energy is reduced under illumination, with respect to the dark conditions, concluding that thermal effects are not predominant in this system and the reaction is catalysed by plasmon-induced hot carriers. However, this methodology has been criticized, and it has been shown that the same results can be obtained by using a simple thermal model, by fitting an Arrhenius equation with an intensity-independent activation energy.14 This discrepancy shows that the use of a single temperature Arrhenius equation does not provide conclusive information for a chemical reaction driven either by photochemical or photothermal effects.18 Similar arguments14,19 were found in other seminal works in the field that have tried to distinguish between thermal and nonthermal effects for different reactions by means of standard macroscopic methodologies and surface-enhanced spectroscopy.20–22 In addressing the contribution of nonthermal and thermal effects, Everitt and Liu developed an experimental approach aimed at achieving identical thermal profiles under direct and indirect illumination. They used two thermocouples embedded in the catalyst reactor to accurately measure its temperature and placed an inert broadband absorber (Ti2O3) to convert all the light into heat (indirect illumination).23 This permitted realization of identical temperature gradients as for the case of the reactor without Ti2O3 (direct illumination). The differences between the two reaction rates measured in the two cases were then ascribed to nonthermal effects. Interestingly, these experiments suggested that NH3 decomposition on ruthenium was mainly driven by thermal effects, while nonthermal effects were responsible for enhanced CO2 methanation on Rh/TiO2 catalysts and provided CH4 product selectivity.12,24 It is thus clear that plasmon-enhanced catalysis is often not dominated by a single mechanism and, depending on the design of the plasmonic device and the targeted chemical reaction, these mechanisms may synergistically contribute in mediating the catalytic process.25 Discrepancies in attributing the enhancement of plasmonic photocatalysis to a particular driving mechanism are also found in surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) studies in the literature. For instance, the plasmon reduction of pNTP, has been claimed to be driven both from nonthermal10 and thermal effects.26 Similarly, the N-demethylation reaction of methylene blue (MB) on plasmonic aggregates has been ascribed by a direct charge transfer of hot electrons27 or by enhanced plasmon fields which pump energy into molecular adsorbates.28,29
It is well established that the NP size is a key parameter in any plasmonic application; despite this, many studies overlook the relationship between NP size and reaction rate in SERS experiments. Most works employ relatively large NPs (>50 nm) as catalysts,10,27,29 which are known to dissipate more of the plasmonic energy by scattering light to the far field. A recent study addressed the size-dependence of absorption, scattering and near-field effects by studying the catalytic activity of Ag NPs having 12 to 50 nm in diameter toward the oxidation of DMAB to PATP.30 They found that the reaction yield showed a volcano plot that peaked for a diameter of ∼30 nm, which was dependent on the balance between near-field, absorption and scattering properties. As the diameter increased above 30 nm, despite the increased electric field enhancements, the yield dropped because of the higher contribution of scattering; the distinction between thermal and nonthermal effects was not investigated. Furthermore, in analysing the near-fields, most studies focus on the behaviour of isolated nanoparticle embedded in homogeneous media.20,30 While this situation offers a good starting point, it does not consider the collective effects that can significantly modify the photothermal and near-field response in realistic NP ensembles.
In this work, we have experimentally and theoretically investigated the role of thermal effects, near-field enhancements and hot carrier transfer in a model plasmonic photocatalytic system, consisting of random absorption dominated Au NPs arrays with radii between 5 and 32 nm to study the N-demethylation reaction in methylene blue (MB) by means of surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS). We demonstrate that MB conversion is maximized under optimal overlap of the excitation wavelength (633 nm), plasmon and molecular resonance (HOMO–LUMO gap). In addition, we find that the reaction yield decreases with the increase of the particle size, showing ca. 80% drop as the NP radius goes from 5 nm to 32 nm. Supported by the extensive theoretical investigations, we demonstrate that thermal effects do not play a dominant role in this system and we propose that optical near-field and hot electron transfer both contribute to the transformation of MB. Our work provides detailed understanding of the N-demethylation reaction on plasmonic disordered NP arrays and extends the mechanistic understanding of plasmon enhanced photocatalysis. Furthermore, our results highlight the importance of the NPs size in helping to identifying the underlying physical mechanism and improve the efficiency, providing insights for the ongoing development of plasmon enhanced photocatalysis.
Review of the underlying mechanisms driving plasmonic photocatalysis
For clarity, and to avoid confusion arising from the different terminology used in the field, we begin by briefly outlining the basic theory of the physical effects driving plasmon-mediated chemical reactions.
The mechanisms of plasmonic catalysis are a consequence of the plasmon excitation:31 upon interaction between electromagnetic waves of suitable frequency and free electrons in metallic nanostructure, light is concentrated in subwavelength volumes in close proximity to the nanoparticle surface, resulting in higher photon density in the form of strong electric fields, often called ‘hot-spots’. The radiative decay of the plasmon results in large optical near-field enhancements, that can transfer energy to molecular adsorbates and activate chemical transformations via excitation between highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO)1,2,31,32 (Optical Near-field in Fig. 1(a)). As the plasmon dephases, it can lose its energy non-radiatively, in a process often referred to as Landau damping. The latter happens in timescales of 1 to ∼100 fs and results in the generation of a non-thermal distribution of electron–hole pairs with energies higher than the Fermi level, commonly referred to as ‘hot electrons’ and ‘hot holes’. Despite their short lifetime, these hot-carriers can be injected over a Schottky barrier formed at a metal–semiconductor interface33 or into acceptor electronic states of adjacent molecular adsorbates, starting or enhancing chemical reactions34 (Hot Carrier transfer in Fig. 1(a)). Two charge transfer mechanisms have been suggested: indirect and direct charge transfer.2,27,31 The former involves the generation of energetic hot electrons within the metal nanoparticles that are subsequentially injected to empty states of surface-adsorbed molecules, provided that they have suitable energy (dotted arrow in Fig. 1(a)); while in the latter mechanism, the electrons are directly excited from the metal into unoccupied molecular orbitals of interacting acceptor adsorbates (solid arrow in Fig. 1(a)). All the aforementioned mechanisms are considered nonthermal effects. Given the highly multidisciplinary nature of the plasmon-catalysis field, there is confusion in the semantics and terminology, especially with respect to the electron transfer: chemical interface damping (CID), coherent charge transfer, plasmon-induced interfacial charge-transfer (equivalent of CID when the acceptor is a semiconductor), plasmon resonant energy transfer, or hybridization are often used to refer to the same mechanism.6,35
The last step of the plasmon relaxation involves electron–electron and electron–phonon scattering (timescales of ∼100 fs to ∼1 ps) and leads to a thermal distribution of the electrons which ultimately results in the heating of the nanoparticle16,31,34,36 (Photothermal heating in Fig. 1(a)). In ensembles of plasmonic nanoparticles, heating can result in collective photothermal effects, and the temperature increase can be uniformly distributed throughout the system even though the sources of heat are nanometric.3,37 It has been demonstrated that the photothermal heating can drive or enhance chemical reactions that occur at the nanoparticle surface24 however, the extent of their importance is still an object of debate.5,14
The different energy transfer mechanisms are all a consequence of the plasmonic excitation and decay, which in turn depends on the nanostructure geometry, composition and environment, making the relative contribution of thermal and non-thermal effects hard to distinguish. For instance, both hot electron generation and temperature increase scale with the absorption cross section, which depends on the local fields.7 Similarly, the strong and confined fields facilitate the breaking of linear momentum-matching condition which improves the hot carrier generation efficiency38–40 by introducing an additional plasmon decay mechanism via intraband transitions.41 The presence of high curvatures, sharp features and gaps strongly enhances the near-fields and the plasmon decay by hot carriers,42 as recently demonstrated for a hot-spot-rich substrate made of Ag NPs and MoS2.43,44 In the remainder of this work, we attempt to disentangle the effects of the different mechanisms by varying the plasmonic nanostructure geometry and excitation wavelength, and carefully analysing the effect on the reaction rate.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1b–d show top-view scanning electron micrographs (SEM) of different Au nanoparticle arrays prepared by thermal evaporation,45 with average sizes of 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm, respectively. Increasing the initial Au film thickness results in larger nanoparticles with a decrease in density, as expected from surface coalescence. Preparation methods, nanoparticle size distributions and additional results for larger particle sizes are provided in the ESI†).
An analysis in the inverse space is obtained using the built-in 2D fast-Fourier transform (FFT) data visualisation module from Gwyddion, and is shown in the insets of Fig. 1b–d. The substrates with average particle radius of 5 nm and 8 nm show FFT spectra consisting of diffusive symmetric rings – a feature typical of correlated disordered morphologies.46 By contrast the 32 nm sample shows an amorphous disk typical of completely random arrangements. This analysis indicates that the 5 nm and 8 nm NP arrays, despite being at first sight random, are statistically homogeneous across the surface with short-range periodicity.47,48 For the Au NPs arrays of 5 nm and 8 nm, the morphology is predominantly circular, while the 32 nm array presents more irregular shapes. This irregularity is even more pronounced when we increase the initial film thickness to produce arrays with larger NP size (see Fig. S1, ESI†). The average interparticle distance between each nanoparticle was computed from the SEM images (Fig. 1e) and reveals an almost identical profile for the statistically correlated samples with a maximum separation never exceeding 30 nm, while the interparticle distances for the 32 nm sample span a range from ∼30 nm up to ∼150 nm.
As expected for plasmonic systems, a strong absorption band dominates the absorption spectra in the visible region, due to the collective oscillation of the Au conduction electrons (Fig. 1f). The latter redshifts with the increase of the particle size, going from 540 nm to 590 nm with the increase of the average particle radius from 5 nm to 65 nm. The absorption profiles are quite low and never exceed 35% at resonance as no optimization of the substrates was performed.
The absorption and emission spectra of MB in solution are plotted in Fig. 1g. The absorption spectrum shows a broad band in the range ∼530–710 nm with a maximum peak at 660 nm and a shoulder at 614 nm, attributed to the resonance of π electrons in the sulphur atoms and π–π* transitions of the benzene ring in monomeric MB.49 The photoluminescence spectrum shows a mirrored profile with respect to the absorption profile, with partial overlap and a redshift of the maximum intensity of 26 nm, in agreement with a recent study on the optical properties of MB.50 Here we note that the MB shows low absorption at the excitation wavelengths of 533, while at 632 nm there is substantial absorption in MB and good overlap with the LSPR resonance of the disordered Au surfaces. However, there is no overlap between the molecular absorption and the laser wavelength at 785 nm. The Au NP arrays were functionalised by immersion overnight in a 5 ppm aqueous MB solution. Fig. S6 (ESI†) shows an extra shoulder in the absorption profile of a 5 nm Au NP array at ∼660 nm which can be attributed to absorption in the MB, and a 5 nm redshift and a broadening of the LSPR peak, due to the increase in the refractive index of the NP environment.
To monitor the dynamics of the plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic reaction, we perform in situ, real-time Raman measurements on our Au–MB systems. Fig. 1h shows the temporal evolution of the vibrational fingerprints of MB adsorbed on the disordered Au nanoparticle array with average radius of 5 nm upon irradiation with an excitation wavelength λext = 633 nm and 0.66 mW of power. Several peaks attributed to MB are identified and tabulated in Table S1 and Fig. S2 (ESI†), confirming that the molecules were absorbed on the substrates. The temporal evolution shows the emergence of new vibrational peaks at 480 cm−1 and 804 cm−1, which increase with time. These peaks are due to the skeletal deformation mode (480 cm−1) and NH2 rocking vibration (804 cm−1) of thionine and are a signature of the partial N-demethylation reaction that converts MB into thionine.51
To investigate the effect of the nanoparticle size on the photochemical reaction, we have performed a set of SERS measurements on the MB coated disordered Au NP arrays with average particle radii ranging from ∼5 nm to ∼65 nm, as well as on a rough continuous Au film. Under the same illumination conditions (λext = 633 nm, power 0.66 mW), all the analysed MB–Au nanoparticles arrays show the vibrational fingerprints of MB and its product, as depicted in Fig. 2a–c for particles with radius 5 nm to 32 nm (and Fig. S3 (ESI†) for the larger particles and film). Here we note that the SERS intensity for the different Au NPs arrays is of the same order of magnitude and decreases with the increase of the Au NPs size. To investigate this trend, we computed the SERS enhancement factors52 for the different Au NPs arrays. The obtained values have the same order of magnitude and range from 1.5–6 × 107 (S8, ESI†). This procedure does not consider possible chemical enhancement effects, which are system dependent and have been shown to contribute by a factor of 10–100 to the overall SERS enhancement.53,54 The experimentally observed trend in the SERS intensity may thus be due to fluctuations in the near-field enhancements of smaller Au NPs arrays due to the higher nanoparticle density and/or fluctuation in the number of MB molecules involved in the SERS process (i.e. formation of an imperfect monolayer on the Au NPs surface) and/or different chemical enhancements.
 Fig. 2  (a)–(c) Temporal evolution of the SERS spectra of MB on different Au nanoparticle arrays with average NPs size of 5, 8, and 32 nm, respectively. (d) and (e) Exemplary spectral deconvolution at the initial (t = 0 s) and final (t = 284 s) timesteps for the 5 nm Au nanoparticle arrays, respectively. The red and black lines are the cumulative fit distributions and the data, respectively, while the green lines represent the best fit of each peak. Highlighted in green are the deconvoluted peaks attributed to the product of the N-demethylation reaction. All the fits were performed using Lorentzian curves. (f) Summary of the yield of the MB transformation evaluated by integrating the peak at 480 cm−1 (shaded green peak in (d) and (e)) taken at the final timestep of 284 s for the different Au nanoparticles arrays and the rough Au film. 
To analyse the yield of the MB transformation for the different Au NPs arrays, we normalize each SERS spectra in the temporal evolution to their maximum value, and deconvolute the signal between 350–575 cm−1, as illustrated in Fig. 2d and e for the 5 nm Au nanoparticle array at the initial (t = 0 s) and final (t = 284 s) timesteps, respectively. We then integrate under the peak at 480 cm−1 associated with the production of thionine, indicated by the shaded green curves. As the intensity for a vibrational mode is related to the population of vibrationally excited molecules,55 this provides a way to quantify and compare the efficiency of the photocatalytic MB reaction on the different Au surfaces. Different laser powers in the range of 0.066–6.6 mW with the excitation at 633 nm were also investigated using the optimal 5 nm Au NP array. Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the time evolution of the normalized SERS spectra in the range 420–510 cm−1, demonstrating an higher reaction yield with higher laser power.
The key result of this analysis is summarised by plotting the MB yield at the final timestep against the particle size (Fig. 2f). The results clearly demonstrate that the yield is strongly dependent on nanoparticle size and that the N-demethylation reaction which converts MB into thionine is more efficient for smaller particle size distributions. In particular, the 5 nm Au nanoparticle array shows more than a fourfold increase in reaction product with respect to the 65 nm Au nanoparticle array and is about 8 times that of the Au film. The Au nanoparticle arrays which have smaller nanoparticles show a higher product yield and thus better catalytic efficiency in driving the N-demethylation reaction.
To obtain further insights into the mechanism of plasmonically driven N-demethylation, we investigate the wavelength dependence of the system. Fig. 3a–c shows SERS measurements of the MB coated Au nanoparticle arrays with optimal average radius of 5 nm, using different excitation wavelengths (λext) and similar laser power. The SERS signal strength varies significantly with the excitation wavelength, being strongest when the Au–MB complex is excited by the 633 nm laser. The signal is almost negligible with λext = 533 nm, showing little more than the vibrational band at 1621 cm−1, and the absence of the peaks at 400–500 cm−1 does not allow the measurement of the N-demethylation reaction. We attribute this to a spectral mismatch between near- and far field, i.e. the electric field enhancement required to observe a SERS signal is not occurring at this wavelength as the near-field does not have the same wavelength dependence as the absorption spectrum, as will be further discussed in the next section. Conversely, when the system is excited by lower energy photons (λext = 785 nm), all the vibrational fingerprints of MB are present, and the peaks associated with thionine production appear over time.
 Fig. 3  (a)–(c) SERS spectra of MB on the 5 nm Au nanoparticles array with different excitation lasers, respectively 533 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm. (d) Normalized optical absorbance for Au, Au + MB and MB (black, red and blue lines, respectively) overlapped with the N-demethylation reaction conversion efficiency (grey stars) evaluated at the different excitation wavelengths (vertical dashed lines). 
A quantitative analysis of the conversion yield is obtained by a deconvolution of the SERS signal followed by the integration of the vibrational fingerprint of thionine at 480 cm−1, as described above. The results of this analysis for the different laser wavelengths are plotted in Fig. 3d (grey stars), along with the absorption spectra of the 5 nm array, with and without MB functionalization. The reaction yield is maximum when the Au–MB complex is illuminated by the 633 nm laser, matching the molecular resonance (HOMO–LUMO gap of MB = 1.86 eV = 665 nm) and having a significant overlap with the nanoparticle's resonance. In contrast, the reaction yield is ∼11 times smaller when illuminated by the 785 nm laser at a similar power.
In the following, we use these experimental findings to systematically analyse the possible mechanisms that contribute to initiating and driving this chemical reaction.
Photothermal effects
To distinguish between thermal and nonthermal effects, we start by investigating the photothermal heating which our disordered Au NP aggregates are subjected to during the SERS measurements. Under monochromatic CW illumination, the increase in temperature of the whole system is determined by the sum of the heat (Qk) generated by all the NPs in the system, and the temperature increase at a point in the system (ΔT(r)), can be expressed as:56 (1)where the heat powers Qk are generated by energy dissipation via the Joule effect and are proportional to the absorption cross-section of the nanoparticles (σabs) and the light intensity, I.
Depending on the morphological parameters and the illumination conditions, the temperature increase can be either confined or delocalized,17,37 and the regime can be estimated by the ratio between the self- and external temperature contributions. Given the high NP density of up to ∼2300 μm−2 for the 5 nm Au NP array, and the CW illumination, we fall in the delocalized regime in which the temperature increase is uniform throughout the nanoparticle distribution despite the nanometer dimension of the heat sources.56
Considering the high number of nanoparticles illuminated by the laser and the homogeneity of our samples, we follow the approach of Pezzi et al.57 and define an equivalent continuous heat source density, which allows us to treat the system in the framework of the ‘continuum’ approximation, and convert the sum of eqn (2) into the integral: (2)where w is the radius of a circular Gaussian laser beam of intensity I, VNP is the volume of the NPs with density nNP, χNP is the electric susceptibility, kH is the thermal conductivity of the host medium and εH and εNP are the dielectric constant of the surrounding medium and NPs, respectively.
The temperature variation at the centre of the laser spot, ΔT(r = 0), can be then calculated for different densities of disordered Au nanoparticles arrays as function of the laser intensity. This method has been shown to provide good agreement with experimental results57–59 when performed on disordered NPs arrays with morphological parameters similar to our samples.

Fig. 4a shows the calculated photothermal temperature increase for a 5 nm Au NPs array embedded in a homogeneous medium with a thermal conductivity given by the average between kair = 0.0262 W m−1 K−1 and kglass = 1.38 W m−1 K−1, as a function of the illumination wavelength and a laser power of 6.6 mW, corresponding to the highest delivered power in the SERS measurements. The blue line corresponds to the increase in temperature computed using the absorption cross-section σabs = σMieabs() from a monodisperse array of NPs with a radius of R = 5 nm, while the red line uses an average absorption cross-section which takes into account the distribution of radii observed experimentally in our sample. In the latter case σabs is computed for a range of particle radii, Rk, equal to the NP radii observed in the SEM image in Fig. 1b, and plotted in Fig. S1 (ESI†), and then averaged to get: .
 Fig. 4  (a) Calculated temperature increase for a distribution of identical 5 nm Au NP (red line) and the same computed from the σabs of all the NPs (blue line) as a function of the wavelength. (b) Expected temperature increase as a function of the laser power for a 5 nm NP array at different illumination wavelengths. (c)–(e) Dependency of the temperature increase on the NPs radius and density for the 533 nm, 633 nm, and 785 nm, respectively. The red stars depict the experimental data. 
Both profiles have very similar wavelength dependence, which follows the absorption profile, and show a maximum ΔT of 6 °C at a wavelength of 517 nm for the monodisperse, and 523 nm for the polydisperse case. Similar dependencies have been obtained by other groups who analysed the photothermal effects in three-dimensional17 and planar arrangements of plasmonic larger nanoparticles.60
Next, we investigate the effect of laser power on the temperature increase of monodisperse 5 nm arrays, for the three excitation wavelengths used in the SERS measurements (Fig. 4(b)). The temperature increase is linear with the laser power and is highest when the illumination wavelength is closest to the plasmonic resonance. These results show that for monodisperse 5 nm arrays, the maximum temperature increase expected due to photothermal effects is ∼7 °C when excited by a 533 nm laser at similar powers to those used in the experiment. Similar trends are found for all the investigated Au NP arrays (see Fig. S5, ESI†) due to the linearity of the temperature increase with the illumination power shown in eqn (2).
Finally, we estimate the maximum temperature increases that could occur in the random experimental arrays. Fig. 4c–e show the temperature increase computed as a function of the NP density and size, for a laser power of 6.6 mW at different excitation wavelengths. The red stars in the plots represent our experimental data. It is found that for each illumination wavelengths, the larger the NPs and the greater their density, the higher the temperature increase. In particular, in figure (c) for an excitation wavelength of 533 nm, ΔT increases from ∼6 °C for the 5 nm array to ∼160 °C for the larger NP array with average radius of 64 nm. When illuminating with a 633 nm or 785 nm laser (figures (d) and (e) respectively), the temperature increases are significantly smaller, and ΔT never exceeds 8 °C for any of the array parameters studied.
The analysis presented above suggests that the reaction yield would be highest for larger NP arrays and would be maximized under illumination with a 533 nm laser if photothermal effects are the dominant mechanism for driving the reaction. However, this observation is not consistent with our experimental results which show that the reaction yield is maximized under illumination at 633 nm for the NPs arrays having average radius of 5 nm, suggesting that thermal effects are negligible in our conditions. This further suggests that other local effects, such as near-field enhancement and hot-electron transfer could play a more significant role in this catalytic process, and their importance will be investigated in the following sections.
To demonstrate that this increase in temperature is not sufficient to drive the N-demethylation reaction, we have heated pure MB powder up to 61 °C and simultaneously acquired Raman (Fig. S6, ESI†). Within these investigated temperatures, no product fingerprints are observed, demonstrating that a temperature increase up to 61 °C is not sufficient to drive the reaction, and in agreement with experimental results in similar systems.61
Near-field effects
In the following, we analyse the role of near-fields to investigate their effect on the photochemical N-demethylation reaction of MB. These are dictated by the morphological parameters of the NP arrays, including NP size and interparticle distances. In investigating the role of the near-fields on photochemical reactions, several studies analyse the behaviour of isolated NPs embedded in homogeneous media20,30 but do not consider possible coupling effects, often because of the complexity of simulating random distributions of NPs. Here, by using full field 3D optical simulations with COMSOL, we include this dependency by modelling periodic arrays of NPs, varying the interparticle distance (via the periodicity) and the particle size, using parameters corresponding to our experimental values. This provides a more accurate estimation of the near-field distributions over the samples. We note that the periodicities studied here are much smaller than the wavelength, and as such, diffraction and plasmonic lattice resonances are not present.
The Au arrays are modelled as periodic arrays of metal hemispheres on glass (nglass = 1.5). The average near-field enhancement  is defined as a volumetric integration of (E/E0)2 over a hemispherical shell volume V extending 2 nm above the metal surface, chosen to coincide with the volume of the adsorbed MB molecules on the surface of Au NPs, under the assumption that they are randomly and uniformly distributed. This is evaluated as:  
The absorption in the simulated NP arrays has also been calculated and agrees well with the experimentally measured absorption (see S4, ESI†).

Fig. 5(a–c) show the results of this computation for hemispherical NP of radii 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm Au, over a range of interparticle distances. The average field enhancement, , is strongest at short interparticle distances and decreases to an almost constant value for larger separations, due to coupling between dipolar plasmon modes of individual nanoparticles, which confines light in subwavelength regions often referred to as ‘hot-spots’,62 resulting in enhanced electromagnetic field.
 Fig. 5  (a)–(c) Colormaps of the calculated averaged field enhancement (E/E0)2 for a 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm Au hemispheres (schematics in inset), respectively, on glass as a function of the wavelength and interparticle separation. (d) Summary of the averaged EF as a function of the Au NPs radius for the two wavelengths of interest, taken at gaps = 8 nm for the 5 nm and 8 nm Au NPs, and gap = 28 nm, for the 32 nm case. 
In addition, within the range of analysed NPs,  increases with the particle size.20,30,63 This can be explained by the relative contributions of damping, scattering and retardation effects.63 For small sizes, surface damping is the main cause for weak fields; as the NP size increases so the near-field does, up until radiative scattering and retardation effects play a significant role. It has been found that the near-field follows a volcano-type plot with a maximum for NP sizes of ∼50 nm.63
It is also notable that the wavelength dependence of the  is not always the same as the absorption spectra of the NP arrays, (see Fig. S7(d–f) in the ESI†). This discrepancy has been attributed to radiative damping in the nanostructure, and explained by using a damped harmonic oscillator model for the conduction electrons.64 This results in a redshift of the maximum near-field enhancement compared to the LSPR extinction peak, and when applied to SERS measurements, has led to the measurement of stronger Raman signals at excitation wavelengths far from the LSPR absorption band and/or molecular electronic transition.65–67 We attribute the inability to observe a good SERS signal for MB coated Au arrays under the excitation at 533 nm to this mismatch between near- and far-field and the low spectral overlap with the MB molecular resonance.

Fig. 5(d) summarises the key results for the NP arrays under investigation, by plotting averaged EF for the three particle radii of interest, at the SERS laser excitation wavelengths where reaction yield was measured (635 nm and 785 nm). We choose interparticle distances of 8 nm for the 5 nm and 8 nm Au hemisphere arrays, and of 28 nm, for the 32 nm case, corresponding to the averaged minimum distances seen experimentally (Fig. 1e). For both wavelengths investigated, EF increases with particle size, and is strongest for a wavelength of 633 nm, showing ca. a threefold increase when the particle radius increases from 5 nm to 8 nm. The result of this analysis indicates that within the ranges of our experimental NP array parameters the averaged EF at 633 nm is higher than at 785 nm. It is likely that in our disordered Au NPs arrays there a combination of different EF in regions dominated by gaps as well as isolated nanoparticles. To better match the experimental NP arrays, we have also performed a set of simulations using the real spatial distribution of the Au NPs arrays from a binarization of the SEM images (see Fig. S8, ESI†). The results show a trend similar to the hemisphere case, clearly showing stronger electric field concentrations for larger NPs arrays. In particular, for all the analysed cases, the field enhancement at 633 nm is higher than at 533 nm and 785 nm, with the exception of the 32 nm Au NPs array, which shows a strong field also at the wavelength of 785 nm, attributed to the higher plasmon modes and small gaps between NPs.
Since we see a higher conversion yield at 633 nm for all NP arrays (Fig. 3(d)), this finding suggests that the near-field plays an important role in driving the reaction, by pumping energy into the molecule. This interpretation is strengthened by the fact that the excitation wavelength with the highest  and the highest reaction yields, also overlaps with the HOMO–LUMO transition of methylene blue (1.86 eV = 665 nm). As mentioned above, the radiative plasmon decay results in large field enhancements at the nanoparticle surface that can be used for plasmon-enhanced intramolecular excitations. When the spectral overlap condition is met, the adsorbed molecules experience an enhanced rate of electronic transition from their HOMO to the LUMO due to the high mode density of the plasmon field.28 This conclusion is in line with the works of Tesema et al.28,29,51 who proposed a plasmon-pumped electronic excitation as a primary mechanism driving the N-demethylation reaction: they demonstrated that for the reaction to occur, there needs to be spectral overlap between the excitation wavelength, the HOMO–LUMO gap of the molecule and the plasmon resonance. Here, we confirm that the overlap between excitation wavelength, LSPR and molecular resonance, which enables a resonant Raman scattering condition, considerably improves the Raman signal and leads to optimal reaction yields (see Fig. 2 and 3). Additionally, they showed that in oxygen-free atmospheres, this reaction does not occur, identifying oxygens radicals as an essential element in cleaving the methyl group from MB. In their proposed mechanism, the plasmon near-fields transfer their energy from the HOMO to the LUMO of MB – corresponding to a singlet ground state to singlet excited state (S0 → S1) – which then populates an excited triplet (T1) state, by a process called intersystem crossing. This is followed by charge transfer from the T1 of MB to environmental oxygen in its ground state (3O2) which generates the reactive single oxygen specie (1O2) responsible for the cleavage of the C–N bond.68 This mechanism, implies that greater local fields will pump more energy to the MB adsorbates, hence enhancing the generation of oxygen anions and leading to higher reaction yields. However, our analysis of the near fields presented in Fig. 5 shows that, the calculated  values increase with the Au NPs size, in contradiction to our experimental results. This suggests that other additional mechanisms contribute to the plasmon-pumped electronic excitation.
In the following section, we discuss the role of hot electrons, and provide evidence that they are also involved in this photochemical reaction.
Hot electron effects
The three NP arrays with average radii or 5 nm, 8 nm, and 32 nm all fulfil the condition for optimal reaction yields identified above under excitation with the 633 nm laser: namely an overlap of the LSPR resonance with the excitation wavelength and the HOMO–LUMO gap of MB. However, our results clearly show that the yield is higher for smaller average NP radii, despite having lower average near-fields.
A similar size dependency has been recently demonstrated in plasmonic hot electron photocatalysis with metal/semiconductor systems by Liu et al.69 Using time-resolved pump–probe spectroscopy, they investigated the hot-electron transfer from Au to CdS and demonstrated an exponential increase in the quantum efficiency with decreasing particle size. Similarly, the size-dependency of the hot carrier generation and transfer has been investigated theoretically35,70,71 and experimentally with other photocatalytic systems and plasmon-enhanced solar cells.72
Hot-electron generation occurs after the decay of the plasmon, due to electron-surface scattering; the latter breaks the conservation of the linear electron momentum at the NP surface and enables quantum transitions that transfer the plasmon energy into energetic carriers. Mathematically, the rate of surface decay of a plasmon, γsurf, for a spherical NP of radius R can be expressed as:39γsurf = AvF/Rwhere A is a constant prefactor, and vF is the Fermi velocity of the metal. This demonstrates that by decreasing the particle size, surface dampening effects become predominant, leading to an enhanced hot electron population and efficiency.69,70
To study hot-carrier generation and transfer in the Au–MB complex, we have used an ab initio framework based on real-time time-domain density functional theory (RT-TDDFT).73 Following the approach used by Rossi et al.,35 we investigate the presence and energy distribution of hot carriers in a model system comprising of a metallic Au55 nanoparticle (1.4 nm diameter) and a methylene blue molecule (inset of Fig. 6a). As these DFT simulations are computationally very intensive, we have restricted our analysis to pulsed illumination and Au NP with a smaller size than the experimental ones. Nevertheless, this provides insight on the plasmon dynamic and gauges whether hot carriers with sufficient energy are present in this complex. We use a δ-pulse perturbation to determine the photo-absorption spectrum and the plasmon resonances. We then excite the system with a laser pulse (Gaussian envelope) peaked at the LSPR to probe the time-evolution of the induced charges oscillations, i.e. dipole moment, (Fig. 6a). Following this approach, the dynamics of plasmon formation and its decay into non-thermal carrier are resolved within the 30 fs of time propagation.
 Fig. 6  (a) Applied Gaussian laser pulse and time-dependent dipole moment response of the Au55–MB system. (b) Density of the states (DOS) of the system showing the relative contribution for the metal and the molecule. (c) Kohn–Sham electron–hole transition probability presented as transition–contribution map taken at 10 fs. Inset: Spatial density profile of the induced hot electrons in the system evaluated at 10 fs. (d) Hot-electrons (dashed red lines) and hot-holes (solid blue lines) distribution at different time-steps after the laser excitation. 

Fig. 6a shows that immediately after the pulse is switched on, the charges of the system feel the effect of the external electric field and start to collectively oscillate, reaching a maximum after 5.5 fs and decreasing in amplitude at around 10 fs as the pulse switches off. As time proceeds, the dipole moment starts to decay via a dephasing process (Landau damping) and generates energetic electrons and holes.35 The density of states (DOS) for the ground system is calculated and is shown in Fig. 6b. The different contributions from the energy bands of Au55 (s, d, p) and MB are shaded in different colours. The main contribution to this DOS comes from the d-band of Au55, shown in red, starting at −1.8 eV from the Fermi level (−5.61 eV).
We use the concept of transition contribution maps (TCM) introduced by Rossi et al. to analyse the hot carrier generation in the Au–MB complex.35Fig. 6c shows the TCM after 10 fs from the excitation pulse and shows the contribution of the different transitions after the plasmon dephases (∼10 fs). The TCM also provides a convenient way to look at the hot-carrier energy distribution (see methods in ESI†). The hot-hole and hot-electron probability distributions can be obtained from the TCM by vertically and horizontally summing all the transitions, respectively, and are indicated by the blue and red arrows in Fig. 6c and d. Fig. 6d shows the total hot-electron (dashed red lines) and hot-hole (solid blue lines) distributions at different time-steps after the laser excitation. This analysis reveals that a significant concentration of hot electrons and holes with energies up to ∼|2.5| eV (higher than the HOMO–LUMO gap of ∼1.86 eV for the free methylene blue molecule) are generated during the plasmon decay.
This TD-DFT analysis provides a quantum treatment of the plasmon generation and relaxation, and it demonstrates that energetic hot electrons and holes are present in the Au–MB complex. This suggests that these hot electrons can be transferred to unoccupied molecular orbitals of MB and synergistically assist the near-field effect in improving the reaction yield, with higher efficiencies for small nanoparticles.
To examine the nature of their transfer, we show a spatial profile of the excited carriers in the inset of Fig. 6c. The image represents the induced hot electron density distribution taken at 10 fs, immediately after the laser pulse is switched off; it can be seen than the hot electron density is shared across the system, as induced electrons are found both in the Au55 NP and the MB molecule. This is in line with the theoretical work of Long et al.,74 which showed an instantaneous generation of charge separated states in a Au–TiO2 system upon photoexcitation at the plasmon energy. According to this scenario the induced electron density is delocalized and extends to the MB molecule, which is likely due to the hybridized states formed during the MB adsorption process.
Here, we tentatively suggest that the hot electrons can be directly transferred (for sake of clarity we use direct transfer and chemical damping interface as synonyms) into these hybridized states. In the presence of strongly interacting adsorbates, it is known that energetic charge carriers can be directly injected into the unoccupied hybridized orbitals via CID.54,75,76 Indication of the presence of new hybrid states comes from the analysis of the optical properties of the Au substrates before and after the MB functionalization, as shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†). The normalized absorption profile of the Au surface shows a broadening of ∼60 meV in the LSPR resonance and a shift toward longer wavelengths of about 5 nm. This suggests that the interaction between methylene blue and the Au NP arrays results in hybridization of electronic states, which introduce a new pathway for the LSPR dephasing and can be excited by hot carriers. It has been proven that the CID scales with the surface-to-volume ratio, and hence it becomes a more significant for NPs of small sizes.77 This is in line with our experimental SERS measurements, and thus points out that in this system, charge transfer plays a role in enhancing the reaction rate.
Our results suggest the following reaction pathway, incorporating the finding of the works of Tesema51 and Mondal.78 Upon light irradiation and excitation/decay of the plasmon, the near-fields and the photogenerated hot carriers participate in the photochemical reaction that leads to the N-demethylation of methylene blue. The plasmon near-field and hot electrons can transfer their energy from the HOMO to the LUMO of MB. As previously mentioned, this results in an excited singlet state (S1) which then decays into a metastable triplet state (T1) via intersystem crossing. This ultimately can transfer its energy to environmental oxygen (O2) producing reactive singlet oxygens (1O2). Alternatively, the electrons can directly react with O2 molecules to produce radical superoxide species (˙O2−).79 Simultaneously, hot holes produced by the plasmon decay can either directly oxidize MB or can oxidise water molecules to form reactive ˙OH and HO2˙ species.79 In Fig. S10 (ESI†) we depict this mechanism along with the equation for a possible reaction pathway for the N-demethylation reaction of MB.
The experimental and theoretical results of this work can be exploited to improve our understanding of heterogeneous plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis and are not limited to this model system. The key learnings can be applied to efficiently driving chemical reaction at the nanoscale with different plasmonic elements and molecular species, with the caveat that the optical properties of the metal and adsorbates need to be carefully investigated and optimised through modification of the geometry and the surface chemistry.
Conclusions
This work aims to progress the understanding of the underlying mechanisms of plasmon-mediated photoreactions. We start by reviewing the sequence of events that occur following the excitation of a plasmon in a NP-molecule complex, clarifying discrepancies in nomenclature where possible. Using in situ SERS we monitor the reaction yield of the N-demethylation reaction of methylene blue (MB) on a variety of small, disordered Au nanoparticle (NP) arrays. Our findings confirm that overlap between the excitation wavelength, the plasmonic resonance of the NP arrays and the HOMO–LUMO excitation leads to optimal reaction yields. Critically, we find that for NP arrays that meet the condition above for optimal yield, the reaction rate increases as particle size decreases.
Next, by theoretically analysing the photothermal heating and near-fields of NP arrays with a range of NP sizes and inter-particle spacing, we are able to make progress towards identifying the key phenomena driving the plasmon-mediated reaction.
Firstly, we demonstrate that the increase in temperature due to the photothermal effect increases with the NP size and, at the wavelength of 633 nm where we observe the maximum yield, it never exceeds 8 °C. Our key finding here is that the temperature increase is delocalized throughout the system and the calculated temperatures are not consistent with the wavelength and size dependence of the reaction yield. Critically, the temperature increases calculated for the smallest particle arrays, exhibiting the largest yield experimentally, are likely not sufficient to drive the N-demethylation reaction. This result suggests that the reaction is driven by photochemical as opposed to photothermal mechanisms.
Secondly, we perform a simulation study of the average volume-integrated near-fields (EF) generated by the plasmonic resonance in our NP-arrays. The results show that the excitation wavelength with the highest calculated EF overlaps with the HOMO–LUMO energy gap in MB, and results in the highest reaction yields observed experimentally at wavelength of 633 nm. This confirms that the rate of intramolecular electronic transitions is improved when the energy of the plasmon resonance matches the HOMO–LUMO energy gap and demonstrates the contribution of near-fields in this plasmon-enhanced chemical reaction. However, EF is shown to increase with increasing NP size, which is not consistent with the observed experimental increase in reaction yield with decreasing NP size, suggesting that other mechanisms are present in this investigated system.
Finally, we investigate the role of hot-electrons by means of DFT on a model system. We demonstrate the presence of hot-electrons with energy sufficient to excite the HOMO–LUMO gap of the free MB and we highlight the NP size dependence of hot-electron generation efficiency, which has been experimentally and theoretically demonstrated to be consistent with our experimental findings.
In conclusion, by a systematic mechanistic investigation, this work demonstrates that both near-field and hot-electron transfer play a role in driving the N-demethylation reaction of MB, and through the size dependency of the reaction yield, it provides insights for improving the efficiency of plasmon-mediated catalysis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
M. J. Kale, T. Avanesian and P. Christopher, Direct Photocatalysis by Plasmonic Nanostructures, ACS Catal., 2014, 4(1), 116–128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Linic, U. Aslam, C. Boerigter and M. Morabito, Photochemical transformations on plasmonic metal nanoparticles, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(6), 567–576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cortés, L. V. Besteiro, A. Alabastri, A. Baldi, G. Tagliabue, A. Demetriadou and P. Narang, Challenges in Plasmonic Catalysis, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(12), 16202–16219 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, H. Huang, L. Shao and J. Wang, How to Utilize Excited Plasmon Energy Efficiently, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(7), 10759–10768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dubi and Y. Sivan, “Hot” electrons in metallic nanostructures-non-thermal carriers or heating?, Light: Sci. Appl., 2019, 8, 89 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Baumberg, Hot electron science in plasmonics and catalysis: what we argue about, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 214, 501–511 RSC .
G. Baffou, I. Bordacchini, A. Baldi and R. Quidant, Simple experimental procedures to distinguish photothermal from hot-carrier processes in plasmonics, Light: Sci. Appl., 2020, 9, 108 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhou, D. F. Swearer, C. Zhang, H. Robatjazi, H. Zhao, L. Henderson, L. Dong, P. Christopher, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Quantifying hot carrier and thermal contributions in plasmonic photocatalysis, Science, 2018, 362(6410), 69–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, M. Yang, T. W. Ueltschi, M. A. Mosquera, Z. Chen, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, SERS Study of the Mechanism of Plasmon-Driven Hot Electron Transfer between Gold Nanoparticles and PCBM, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(49), 29908–29915 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Keller and R. R. Frontiera, Ultrafast Nanoscale Raman Thermometry Proves Heating Is Not a Primary Mechanism for Plasmon-Driven Photocatalysis, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(6), 5848–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Aizpurua, F. Baletto, J. Baumberg, P. Christopher, B. d. Nijs, P. Deshpande, Y. Diaz Fernandez, L. Fabris, S. Freakley, S. Gawinkowski, A. Govorov, N. Halas, R. Hernandez, B. Jankiewicz, J. Khurgin, M. Kuisma, P. V. Kumar, J. Lischner, J. Liu, A. Marini, R. J. Maurer, N. S. Mueller, M. Parente, J. Y. Park, S. Reich, Y. Sivan, G. Tagliabue, L. Torrente-Murciano, M. Thangamuthu, X. Xiao and A. Zayats, Theory of hot electrons: general discussion, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 214(0), 245–281 RSC .
X. Li, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Confirming nonthermal plasmonic effects enhance CO2 methanation on Rh/TiO2 catalysts, Nano Res., 2019, 12(8), 1906–1911 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Jain, Taking the Heat Off of Plasmonic Chemistry, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(40), 24347–24351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dubi, I. W. Un and Y. Sivan, Thermal effects – an alternative mechanism for plasmon-assisted photocatalysis, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11(19), 5017–5027 RSC .
Y. Sivan, I. W. Un and Y. Dubi, Assistance of metal nanoparticles in photocatalysis - nothing more than a classical heat source, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 214, 215–233 RSC .
L. Mascaretti and A. Naldoni, Hot electron and thermal effects in plasmonic photocatalysis, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128(4), 041101 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Un and Y. Sivan, Parametric study of temperature distribution in plasmon-assisted photocatalysis, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(34), 17821–17832 RSC .
P. K. Jain, Comment on “Thermal effects – an alternative mechanism for plasmon-assisted photocatalysis” by Y. Dubi, I. W. Un and Y. Sivan, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 5017, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11(33), 9022–9023 RSC .
I.-W. Un and Y. Sivan, The Role of Heat Generation and Fluid Flow in Plasmon-Enhanced ReductioŽ Oxidation Reactions, ACS Photonics, 2021, 8, 1183–1190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, F. Libisch, N. Large, O. Neumann, L. V. Brown, J. Cheng, J. B. Lassiter, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Hot electrons do the impossible: plasmon-induced dissociation of H2 on Au, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(1), 240–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Christopher, H. Xin, A. Marimuthu and S. Linic, Singular characteristics and unique chemical bond activation mechanisms of photocatalytic reactions on plasmonic nanostructures, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11(12), 1044–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, B. de Nijs, S. Cormier, K. Sokolowski, D.-B. Grys, C. A. Readman, S. J. Barrow, O. A. Scherman and J. J. Baumberg, Plasmon-induced optical control over dithionite-mediated chemical redox reactions, Faraday Discuss., 2019, 214(0), 455–463 RSC .
X. Zhang, X. Li, M. E. Reish, D. Zhang, N. Q. Su, Y. Gutiérrez, F. Moreno, W. Yang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Plasmon-Enhanced Catalysis: Distinguishing Thermal and Nonthermal Effects, Nano Lett., 2018, 18(3), 1714–1723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Zhang, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Light-Induced Thermal Gradients in Ruthenium Catalysts Significantly Enhance Ammonia Production, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(3), 1706–1711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. O. Everitt and J. Liu, Synergy between thermal and nonthermal effects in plasmonic photocatalysis, Nano Res., 2020, 13(5), 1268–1280 CrossRef .
A. A. Golubev, B. N. Khlebtsov, R. D. Rodriguez, Y. Chen and D. R. T. Zahn, Plasmonic Heating Plays a Dominant Role in the Plasmon-Induced Photocatalytic Reduction of 4-Nitrobenzenethiol, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(10), 5657–5663 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boerigter, R. Campana, M. Morabito and S. Linic, Evidence and implications of direct charge excitation as the dominant mechanism in plasmon-mediated photocatalysis, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. E. Tesema, B. Kafle and T. G. Habteyes, Plasmon-Driven Reaction Mechanisms: Hot Electron Transfer versus Plasmon-Pumped Adsorbate Excitation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(14), 8469–8483 CrossRef CAS .
T. E. Tesema, B. Kafle, M. G. Tadesse and T. G. Habteyes, Plasmon-Enhanced Resonant Excitation and Demethylation of Methylene Blue, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121(13), 7421–7428 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Geonmonond, A. G. M. da Silva, T. S. Rodrigues, I. C. de Freitas, R. A. Ando, T. V. Alves and P. H. C. Camargo, Addressing the Effects of Size-dependent Absorption, Scattering, and Near-field Enhancements in Plasmonic Catalysis, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10(16), 3447–3452 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Zhang, H. Zheng and H. Xu, Plasmon-Driven Catalysis on Molecules and Nanomaterials, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52(9), 2506–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kazuma and Y. Kim, Mechanistic Studies of Plasmon Chemistry on Metal Catalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(15), 4800–4808 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, Y. Yin, J. Peng, Y. Wu, G. G. Andersson and F. J. Beck, The Importance
of Schottky Barrier Height in Plasmonically Enhanced Hot-Electron Devices, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2001121 Search PubMed .
J. Gargiulo, R. Berte, Y. Li, S. A. Maier and E. Cortes, From Optical to Chemical Hot Spots in Plasmonics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52(9), 2525–2535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Rossi, P. Erhart and M. Kuisma, Hot-Carrier Generation in Plasmonic Nanoparticles: The Importance of Atomic Structure, ACS Nano, 2020, 14(8), 9963–9971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kim, M. Lin, J. Son, H. Xu and J.-M. Nam, Hot-Electron-Mediated Photochemical Reactions: Principles, Recent Advances, and Challenges, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5(15), 1700004 CrossRef .
G. Baffou, P. Berto, E. Bermúdez Ureña, R. Quidant, S. Monneret, J. Polleux and H. Rigneault, Photoinduced Heating of Nanoparticle Arrays, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(8), 6478–6488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Huang, X. Wang, Q. Q. Zhao, J. F. Zhu, C. W. Li, Y. H. He, S. Hu, M. M. Sartin, S. Yan and B. Ren, Probing nanoscale spatial distribution of plasmonically excited hot carriers, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 4211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chang, L. V. Besteiro, J. Sun, E. Y. Santiago, S. K. Gray, Z. Wang and A. O. Govorov, Electronic Structure of the Plasmons in Metal Nanocrystals: Fundamental Limitations for the Energy Efficiency of Hot Electron Generation, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(10), 2552–2568 CrossRef CAS .
H. Harutyunyan, A. B. Martinson, D. Rosenmann, L. K. Khorashad, L. V. Besteiro, A. O. Govorov and G. P. Wiederrecht, Anomalous ultrafast dynamics of hot plasmonic electrons in nanostructures with hot spots, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10(9), 770–774 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Brown, R. Sundararaman, P. Narang, W. A. Goddard and H. A. Atwater, Nonradiative Plasmon Decay and Hot Carrier Dynamics: Effects of Phonons, Surfaces, and Geometry, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(1), 957–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sousa-Castillo, M. Comesaña-Hermo, B. Rodríguez-González, M. Pérez-Lorenzo, Z. Wang, X.-T. Kong, A. O. Govorov and M. A. Correa-Duarte, Boosting Hot Electron-Driven Photocatalysis through Anisotropic Plasmonic Nanoparticles with Hot Spots in Au–TiO2 Nanoarchitectures, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120(21), 11690–11699 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, C. Ji, J. Yu, Z. Li, Z. Li, C. Li, S. Xu, W. Li, B. Man and X. Zhao, MoS2-based multiple surface plasmonic coupling for enhanced surface-enhanced Raman scattering and photoelectrocatalytic performance utilizing the size effect, Opt. Express, 2021, 29(23), 38768–38780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Qiu, W. Lu, M. Shao, C. Ji, G. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Yu and Z. Li, Highly ordered arrays of hat-shaped hierarchical nanostructures with different curvatures for sensitive SERS and plasmon-driven catalysis, Nanophotonics, 2022, 11(1), 33–44 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gaspar, A. C. Pimentel, T. Mateus, J. P. Leitao, J. Soares, B. P. Falcao, A. Araujo, A. Vicente, S. A. Filonovich, H. Aguas, R. Martins and I. Ferreira, Influence of the layer thickness in plasmonic gold nanoparticles produced by thermal evaporation, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Torquato, Hyperuniform states of matter, Phys. Rep., 2018, 745, 1–95 CrossRef CAS .
C. De Rosa, F. Auriemma, C. Diletto, R. Di Girolamo, A. Malafronte, P. Morvillo, G. Zito, G. Rusciano, G. Pesce and A. Sasso, Toward hyperuniform disordered plasmonic nanostructures for reproducible surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17(12), 8061–8069 RSC .
Z. Fusco, R. Bo, Y. Wang, N. Motta, H. Chen and A. Tricoli, Self-assembly of Au nano-islands with tuneable organized disorder for highly sensitive SERS, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7(21), 6308–6316 RSC .
O. V. Ovchinnikov, A. V. Evtukhova, T. S. Kondratenko, M. S. Smirnov, V. Y. Khokhlov and O. V. Erina, Manifestation of intermolecular interactions in FTIR spectra of methylene blue molecules, Vib. Spectrosc., 2016, 86, 181–189 CrossRef CAS .
F. Pahang, P. Parvin, H. Ghafoori-Fard, A. Bavali and A. Moafi, Fluorescence properties of methylene blue molecules coupled with metal oxide nanoparticles, OSA Continuum, 2020, 3(3), 688–697 CrossRef .
T. E. Tesema, C. Annesley and T. G. Habteyes, Plasmon-Enhanced Autocatalytic N-Demethylation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(34), 19831–19841 CrossRef CAS .
P. L. Stiles, J. A. Dieringer, N. C. Shah and R. P. Van Duyne, Surface-enhanced Raman spectroscopy, Annu. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2008, 1, 601–626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kneipp, H. Kneipp, I. Itzkan, R. R. Dasari and M. S. Feld, Ultrasensitive Chemical Analysis by Raman Spectroscopy, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99(10), 2957–2976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Seo, G. W. Kim, P. V. Tsalu, S. W. Moon and J. W. Ha, Role of chemical interface damping for tuning chemical enhancement in resonance surface-enhanced Raman scattering of plasmonic gold nanorods, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5(2), 345–349 RSC .
R. C. Maher, C. M. Galloway, E. C. Le Ru, L. F. Cohen and P. G. Etchegoin, Vibrational pumping in surface enhanced Raman scattering (SERS), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37(5), 965–979 RSC .

          G. Baffou, Thermoplasmonics: Heating Metal Nanoparticles Using Light, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  2017 Search PubMed .
L. Pezzi, G. Palermo, A. Veltri, U. Cataldi, T. Bürgi, T. Ritacco, M. Giocondo, C. Umeton and A. De Luca, Photo-thermal study of a layer of randomly distributed gold nanoparticles: from nano-localization to macro-scale effects, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50(43), 435302 CrossRef .
G. Palermo, R. Grillo, L. Pezzi, T. Bürgi, N. Tabiryan, L. De Sio and C. Umeton, Photo-Aligned Nematic Liquid Crystals Enable the Modulation of Thermoplasmonic Heating, Appl. Sci., 2021, 11(14), 6272 CrossRef CAS .
G. Palermo, A. Guglielmelli, L. Pezzi, U. Cataldi, L. De Sio, R. Caputo, A. De Luca, T. Bürgi, N. Tabiryan and C. Umeton, A command layer for anisotropic plasmonic photo-thermal effects in liquid crystal, Liq. Cryst., 2018, 45(13-15), 2214–2220 CrossRef CAS .
A. O. Govorov and H. H. Richardson, Generating heat with metal nanoparticles, Nano Today, 2007, 2(1), 30–38 CrossRef .
J. L. Brooks, D. V. Chulhai, Z. Yu, J. D. Goodpaster and R. R. Frontiera, Plasmon-Driven C–N Bond Cleavage Across a Series of Viologen Derivatives, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123(48), 29306–29313 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhan, X.-J. Chen, J. Yi, J.-F. Li, D.-Y. Wu and Z.-Q. Tian, From plasmon-enhanced molecular spectroscopy to plasmon-mediated chemical reactions, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2018, 2(9), 216–230 CrossRef .
C. Deeb, X. Zhou, J. Plain, G. P. Wiederrecht, R. Bachelot, M. Russell and P. K. Jain, Size Dependence of the Plasmonic Near-Field Measured via Single-Nanoparticle Photoimaging, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117(20), 10669–10676 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zuloaga and P. Nordlander, On the Energy Shift between Near-Field and Far-Field Peak Intensities in Localized Plasmon Systems, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(3), 1280–1283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Merlen, V. Gadenne, J. Romann, V. Chevallier, L. Patrone and J. C. Valmalette, Surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy of organic molecules deposited on gold sputtered substrates, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(21), 215705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, J. A. Dieringer, X. Zhang, G. C. Schatz and R. P. Van Duyne, Wavelength-Scanned Surface-Enhanced Resonance Raman Excitation Spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(49), 19302–19310 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dutta Roy, M. Ghosh and J. Chowdhury, Near-Field Response on the Far-Field Wavelength-Scanned Surface-Enhanced Raman Spectroscopic Study of Methylene Blue Adsorbed on Gold Nanocolloidal Particles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(20), 10981–10991 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takizawa, T. Watanabe and K. Honda, Photocatalysis through excitation of adsorbates. 2. A comparative study of Rhodamine B and methylene blue on cadmium sulfide, J. Phys. Chem., 1978, 82(12), 1391–1396 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Q. Chen, D. A. Cullen, Z. Xie and T. Lian, Efficient Hot Electron Transfer from Small Au Nanoparticles, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(6), 4322–4329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dal Forno, L. Ranno and J. Lischner, Material, Size, and Environment Dependence of Plasmon-Induced Hot Carriers in Metallic Nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(15), 8517–8527 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Besteiro, P. Yu, Z. Wang, A. W. Holleitner, G. V. Hartland, G. P. Wiederrecht and A. O. Govorov, The fast and the furious: Ultrafast hot electrons in plasmonic metastructures. Size and structure matter, Nano Today, 2019, 27, 120–145 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reineck, D. Brick, P. Mulvaney and U. Bach, Plasmonic Hot Electron Solar Cells: The Effect of Nanoparticle Size on Quantum Efficiency, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(20), 4137–4141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-C. Li and P.-q. Tong, Time-dependent density-functional theory for multicomponent systems, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1986, 34(1), 529–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Instantaneous Generation of Charge-Separated State on TiO2 Surface Sensitized with Plasmonic Nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(11), 4343–4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, S. He, W. Guo, Y. Hu, J. Huang, J. R. Mulcahy and W. D. Wei, Surface-Plasmon-Driven Hot Electron Photochemistry, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118(6), 2927–2954 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, P. V. Tsalu, G. W. Kim, M. J. Seo, J. W. Hong and J. W. Ha, Tuning Chemical Interface Damping: Interfacial Electronic Effects of Adsorbate Molecules and Sharp Tips of Single Gold Bipyramids, Nano Lett., 2019, 19(4), 2568–2574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Foerster, A. Joplin, K. Kaefer, S. Celiksoy, S. Link and C. Sönnichsen, Chemical Interface Damping Depends on Electrons Reaching the Surface, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(3), 2886–2893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mondal, M. E. De Anda Reyes and U. Pal, Plasmon induced enhanced photocatalytic activity of gold loaded hydroxyapatite nanoparticles for methylene blue degradation under visible light, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(14), 8633–8645 RSC .
I. Khan, K. Saeed, I. Zekker, B. Zhang, A. H. Hendi, A. Ahmad, S. Ahmad, N. Zada, H. Ahmad, L. A. Shah, T. Shah and I. Khan, Review on Methylene Blue: Its Properties, Uses, Toxicity and Photodegradation, Water, 2022, 14(2), 242 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00491gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of the possible plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic processes, including optical near-field enhancement, photothermal heating and direct (solid arrow) and indirect (dashed arrows) hot-carrier transfer to the empty molecular orbital of the adsorbate. (b)–(d) Top-view SEM images of the disordered Au NP arrays with average radii of 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm, respectively. The insets show the results of the FFT analysis. (e) Interparticle distance for the different samples computed from the SEM images in (a). (f) UV-Vis absorption spectra for the disordered Au nanoparticles arrays with increasing particle radius and the Au film. The labelled dashed vertical lines correspond to the excitation laser wavelengths used in the SERS measurements. (g) Normalized UV-Vis spectral absorption and emission of a 5 ppm MB solution in ethanol. (h) Stacked temporal evolution of SERS spectra of MB (chemical structure shown in the inset) on adsorbed on the 5 nm Au nanoparticle arrays under the illumination at 633 nm. The vertical dotted lines at 479 cm−1 and 804 cm−1 correspond to the vibrational fingerprints of thionine, a product of the light induced transformation of MB.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a)–(c) Temporal evolution of the SERS spectra of MB on different Au nanoparticle arrays with average NPs size of 5, 8, and 32 nm, respectively. (d) and (e) Exemplary spectral deconvolution at the initial (t = 0 s) and final (t = 284 s) timesteps for the 5 nm Au nanoparticle arrays, respectively. The red and black lines are the cumulative fit distributions and the data, respectively, while the green lines represent the best fit of each peak. Highlighted in green are the deconvoluted peaks attributed to the product of the N-demethylation reaction. All the fits were performed using Lorentzian curves. (f) Summary of the yield of the MB transformation evaluated by integrating the peak at 480 cm−1 (shaded green peak in (d) and (e)) taken at the final timestep of 284 s for the different Au nanoparticles arrays and the rough Au film.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a)–(c) SERS spectra of MB on the 5 nm Au nanoparticles array with different excitation lasers, respectively 533 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm. (d) Normalized optical absorbance for Au, Au + MB and MB (black, red and blue lines, respectively) overlapped with the N-demethylation reaction conversion efficiency (grey stars) evaluated at the different excitation wavelengths (vertical dashed lines).	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Calculated temperature increase for a distribution of identical 5 nm Au NP (red line) and the same computed from the σabs of all the NPs (blue line) as a function of the wavelength. (b) Expected temperature increase as a function of the laser power for a 5 nm NP array at different illumination wavelengths. (c)–(e) Dependency of the temperature increase on the NPs radius and density for the 533 nm, 633 nm, and 785 nm, respectively. The red stars depict the experimental data.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a)–(c) Colormaps of the calculated averaged field enhancement (E/E0)2 for a 5 nm, 8 nm and 32 nm Au hemispheres (schematics in inset), respectively, on glass as a function of the wavelength and interparticle separation. (d) Summary of the averaged EF as a function of the Au NPs radius for the two wavelengths of interest, taken at gaps = 8 nm for the 5 nm and 8 nm Au NPs, and gap = 28 nm, for the 32 nm case.	 
γsurf = AvF/R

 	Fig. 6  (a) Applied Gaussian laser pulse and time-dependent dipole moment response of the Au55–MB system. (b) Density of the states (DOS) of the system showing the relative contribution for the metal and the molecule. (c) Kohn–Sham electron–hole transition probability presented as transition–contribution map taken at 10 fs. Inset: Spatial density profile of the induced hot electrons in the system evaluated at 10 fs. (d) Hot-electrons (dashed red lines) and hot-holes (solid blue lines) distribution at different time-steps after the laser excitation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2tc00491g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
