Nano/microstructured materials for solar-driven interfacial evaporators towards water purification  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA02202D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA02202D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 13746-13769Nano/microstructured materials for solar-driven interfacial evaporators towards water purification

        
          
            Fantao 
            Meng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Benzhi 
            Ju
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shufen 
            Zhang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bingtao 
            Tang
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, PR China. E-mail: tangbt@dlut.edu.cn
Received 
      16th March 2021
    , Accepted 12th May 2021First published on 14th May 2021AbstractThe scarcity of clean water is one of the most pervasive issues in human society. On-site extraction of clean water from seawater and wastewater is regarded as the most applicable scheme for meeting the growing demand. However, most conventional water purification technologies are generally considered energy or cost intensive. In recent years, the rapid development of solar-driven interfacial evaporation has injected new vitality into the field of clean water production. For interfacial evaporators, nano/microstructured materials are the core components to achieve nearly 100% energy efficiency through maximizing light harvesting, synergistically assisting water supply, and suppressing heat dissipation. In this review, the design and optimization guidelines of evaporators with ultrahigh performance are first explored from the perspective of nano/microstructured materials, including photothermal materials, functional water-replenishment substrates, and structural engineering strategies. Benefiting from the excellent characteristics of the introduced nano/microstructured materials, the applications of long-term salt rejection in seawater desalination and the separation of different contaminants in wastewater remediation were further presented. Finally, prospects and recommendations for the future development are proposed.
1 Introduction
The scarcity of clean water has become a formidable issue for the sustainable development of human society, and nearly two thirds of the global population is predicted to live in water-stressed countries by 2025.1,2 Of the water reservoir on Earth, 97% is seawater with high salinity.3 Moreover, a large part of clean water is unavailable for use because of being distributed deep underground and in glaciers at the poles. With the dramatic population growth and tremendous industrial development resulting in severe environmental pollution, the limited available water sources (only 0.5%) for human survival are further challenged.4 To deal with this crisis, water purification technologies for the on-site extraction of clean water from seawater and wastewater are urgently desired.5–7 Various technologies for water purification, such as reverse osmosis,8–15 thermal distillation,16,17 membrane filtration,18–21 and electrodialysis,22–24 have been investigated. Among them, reverse osmosis, as the most energy-saving technology at present, requires advanced infrastructure and frequent maintenance.10–12 The pretreatment of water sources, high-pressure supply, and membrane service life also lead to a high economic barrier.13–15 Hence, a new generation of water purification technologies is imperative to combine cost effectiveness, low energy consumption, and minimum negative impact on the environment.
Inspired by the circulation of water in nature, solar-driven evaporation based on photothermal conversion seems to be a feasible scheme to recover clean water directly from seawater and wastewater.25,26 In addition, abundant, green, and renewable solar energy is being viewed as an attractive alternative to traditional fossil-based energy resources. In consideration of the inefficient natural evaporation caused by the poor light-harvesting performance of water, a myriad of photothermal materials have been explored to accelerate evaporation.27 Interfacial evaporation systems began to rise in the early 2010s and confine vaporization processes of water at the water–air interface by constructing floating-type evaporators with photothermal materials. In recent years, solar-driven interfacial evaporation has been developed for seawater desalination and wastewater remediation.28,29 Compared with bulk heating evaporation, localized heating at the water–air interface contributes to achieving efficient water evaporation through improving sunlight capture, enhancing photothermal conversion efficiency, and reducing heat dissipation to a nonevaporative part below the interface. Therefore, the important design considerations of floating-type evaporators are photothermal materials, water transport, and heat management. Related research has been dedicated to achieving a high evaporation efficiency (approaching the theoretical limit under one sun),30 opening up new opportunities for the current global challenges of water scarcity.
So far, many relevant comprehensive reviews have emerged. For instance, Zhu et al. provided a basic understanding of solar-driven interfacial evaporation thermodynamically and kinetically, to define the figures of merit and build measurement protocols.31 Xu et al. summarized the photothermal effect and applications of different categories of light absorbing materials.32 Ho et al. outlined the recent advancements of hybrid interfacial evaporation systems that can fully utilize the solar energy beyond water production, demonstrating the great potential to interlink the water, energy and environmental nexus.33 Recently, the number of corresponding studies concerning nano/microstructured materials has increased, and many impressive advanced functions have been achieved. Nano/microstructured materials are the key components of the solar-driven interfacial evaporation system, which can synergistically combine light absorption, water transport adjustment, and thermal management to achieve high energy conversion efficiency. Therefore, a comprehensive understanding of nano/microstructured materials is of great significance for the development of high performance evaporators. The goal of this review is to systematically explore the representative progress of nano/microstructured materials in solar-driven interfacial evaporation and their practical utilization towards water purification (Fig. 1). We detail the categories of nano/microstructured photothermal materials according to photothermal conversion mechanisms and maximum light harvesting. Advanced nano/microstructures of various water-replenishment substrates are further discussed for equilibrium-assisted evaporation. To enhance solar evaporation, recent progress in structural engineering strategies, including heat localization modes and stereoscopic design, is described. For practical applications, interfacial evaporators based on nano/microstructured materials bring about excellent characteristics in seawater desalination and wastewater remediation, and this review particularly summarizes the long-term salt rejection and the separation of different contaminants. Finally, we discuss the challenges and prospects of the solar-driven interfacial evaporation system in water purification, providing insights for the future development.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system for water purification: system design and optimization, seawater desalination and wastewater remediation. 
2 System design and optimization
In the solar-driven interfacial evaporation system, photothermal materials are located at the water–air interface. The formed thermal localization is used to heat and evaporate the water at the interface selectively through an efficient light-to-heat conversion, and the generated vapor is then condensed into clean water. The floating-type evaporator continuously transmits water to the heating area through the capillary conduit, simultaneously ensuring the evaporation rate. The synergy not only effectively drives the steam generation to improve the energy efficiency greatly, but also reduces the heat radiation to compensate for the defects of the bulk evaporation system. The design of the interfacial evaporation system is mainly classified into three parts: photothermal materials, water-replenishment substrates, and structural engineering.
2.1 Photothermal materials
As the core component of the evaporation system, nano/microstructured photothermal materials are responsible for converting solar energy into heat and driving the vaporization of interface water. The ideal photothermal materials require broadband optical absorption in the full solar spectrum range (250–2500 nm) and high conversion efficiency. On the basis of their different compositions, the materials are divided into four categories: carbon-based materials, plasmonic metal materials, semiconductors, and polymers.

2.1.1 Carbon-based materials. 
Carbon-based materials possess excellent chemical stability, high sunlight absorption, and superior processability.34,35 The electrons in a molecular orbital can capture the energy of nearly the entire solar spectrum due to the conjugation effect, thus jumping to the excited state. When the electrons return to the ground state, heat is released in the form of ultrafast thermal vibration (Fig. 2a). Combining the merits of low cost and rich variety, carbon-based materials, such as carbon black (CB), carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphite, graphene oxide (GO)/reduced GO (rGO), and carbonized materials, are the most widely studied photothermal materials.36–40 Assembly into a multistage microstructure can enhance light capture and minimize the dependence of the incident angle. For example, Liu and coworkers designed a hierarchical foam, which consists of vertical graphene nanoplates anchored on the surface of the foam skeleton.41 The omnidirectional absorption structure provided a large heat exchange area due to the multiple internal reflections of sunlight, and the photothermal conversion efficiency reached nearly 93.4%. Especially, 3D graphene-based macrostructures have received immense interest in water purification.42 The interconnected pore structures provide sufficient transportation channels for pollutant diffusion. Multiple pollutants (e.g., heavy-metal ions, radionuclides, dyes, oils, and organic solvents) can be removed simultaneously due to electrostatic interaction, π–π stacking, and functional groups. Furthermore, enhancing their decontamination capacity through integrating metal oxide nanoparticles, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), and covalent organic frameworks would be practical.
 Fig. 2  Schematic of photothermal conversion. (a) Thermal vibration of molecules in conjugated systems. (b) Local heat generation by surface plasmon decaying. (c) Electron–hole generation and non-radiative relaxation. 


2.1.2 Plasmonic metal materials. 
Under light irradiation, the electrons of plasmonic nanostructures exhibit collective coherent oscillation at the metal/dielectric interface. Then, these photoexcited hot carriers can either propagate along the interface (surface plasmon resonance) or be localized near the curved surfaces of metal nanostructures (localized surface plasmon resonance).43 These strongly damped oscillators redistribute the oscillation energy of free electrons through different interaction channels (electron-to-photon, electron-to-electron, and electron-to-phonon), most of which are dissipated in the form of heat (Fig. 2b). Unlike carbon materials, metal nanoparticles (including Au, Ag, Pa, and Pt) exhibit a narrow absorption band of light.44–46 To harvest the input solar energy effectively, tailoring the composition, size, surrounding environment, and assembly morphology of metal nanostructures has been widely investigated.44,47 Significant advances have recently been achieved through the hybridization of core/shell structures and combining 3D porous matrices for broadband and efficient absorption. Zhu's group demonstrated an asymmetric plasmonic structure by self-assembly of Ag NPs into a nanoporous alumina template.48 The utilization of the dark side enabled efficient solar water purification (average absorbance of >93.5%). Water sources polluted by organic chemicals could also be rapidly discriminated by employing the shiny side on the basis of sensitive detection of surface-enhanced Raman scattering. In consideration of cost, stability and practicability, the further application of noble metals is challenging. Therefore, non-noble metal materials (such as Al, Cu, and Te) for efficient and durable solar evaporation should be developed.49–52


2.1.3 Semiconductors. 
Narrow-bandgap semiconductors with low cost and thermal stability, such as Ti2O3, CuS and NiO, are generally explored for photothermal agents.53–55 Triggered by light, the electrons jump to the conduction band and thus generate electron–hole pairs. Afterward, the photoexcited electrons and holes relax to the band edges before recombining, while excess energy is nonradiatively released in the form of heat (Fig. 2c). For semiconductors, the bandgap energy between conduction and valence bands is the key to photothermal conversion.56 Tailoring the bandgap through doping or disordering has been developed as a promising method to enhance absorption and improve the carrier relaxation rate.57 Nanostructured semiconductors are also potential alternatives for water purification due to their unique photocatalytic properties. He and coworkers demonstrated the degradation of organic pollutants by using 3D hierarchical CuS nanoflowers in a photothermal-assisted system.58 The photothermal conversion of CuS nanoflowers played an important role in exhibiting a high catalytic activity; consequently, the photodegradation rate of MB was enhanced by ∼212.7%. In addition, MXene and MoS2-based materials are newly emerging platforms for high-performance evaporation.59–61


2.1.4 Polymers. 
Conducting polymers, such as polypyrrole (PPy) and polyaniline, are easy-to-produce and scalable photothermal materials with biocompatibility.62–64 These organic polymers not only have large conjugated systems and high light absorption capacity in the near-infrared region, but also can act on various substrates for surface modification. Xu et al. fabricated multilayer PPy nanosheets with wrinkled features on paper substrates, and the solar–thermal conversion efficiency could reach 95.33%.65 Meanwhile, the hierarchically multilayer structure was mechanically flexible and exhibited stable performance for seawater and sewage treatment. Moreover, polydopamine (PDA) coatings possess broadband monotonic absorption and binding capability with metal ions.66,67 Another most attractive feature for water purification is the synergistic effect with photocatalysts through π–π* electron transition. Nevertheless, the low bulk thermal conductivities of polymers should be considered for the optical and thermal design.

2.2 Water-replenishment substrates
Water supply is another primary consideration for high-performance evaporation. Through self-existent water pathways or integrated devices with external channels, water is continuously transported from bulk water to the top heating zone. For this purpose, the pore structure and wetting properties are essential for designing nano/microstructured water-replenishment substrates. In addition, ideal substrates can suppress heat loss simultaneously because of excellent thermal insulation.

2.2.1 Foam. 
The commercially available foams, such as polyurethane (PU) foam, melamine foam (MF), and polystyrene (PS) foam, are highly ideal skeleton materials for solar steam generation due to their low density, thermal insulation, and low cost.68–72 Liu et al. first hot-pressed MF, and then PPy was coated on the upper side to construct a bilayer polymer foam.73 The bottom MF layer could efficiently transport water and confine the thermal energy on the PPy layer. The superelastic and robust skeleton of the prepressed MF kept the structural stability and evaporation performance in durability tests (over 30 days, with 60 min each day), simultaneously exhibiting the excellent antifouling properties and good reusability. To optimize the water-transport regulation, Wang and coworkers modified MF by filling hydrophobic SiO2 NPs (Fig. 3a).74 The design of blocking excessive useless water was conducive to reducing the sensible heat loss, enabling a fast evaporation response, and enhancing the edge zone effect.
 Fig. 3  Advanced nano/microstructures of diverse water-replenishment substrates. (a) Schematic illustration of modified MF with a water-transport controllable design.74 (b) Bilayer polyacrylamide-based aerogel with rapid water-transport capacity enabled by the radially aligned channels, micron pores, wrinkled internal surface, and molecular meshes.81 (c) Tunable water state and vaporization enthalpy in the hydrogel network by changing PVA/chitosan weight ratios.85 (d) Schematic illustration of the transformation of wood-based substrates into solar evaporators.94 


2.2.2 Aerogels. 
Aerogels, a class of solids with controllable pores, light weight, and decreased thermal conductivity, have been intensely pursued for solar evaporators.75 Floating on water without any support, aerogels can not only provide numerous channels for water transportation and vapor escaping, but can also realize heat localization near the sample, highly reducing the heat losses of conduction and convection. Graphene, CNTs, and cellulose-based aerogels have been exploited as supporting substrates.76–80 Tailoring nano/microstructures by using synthesis strategies (including freeze drying, 3D printing, and chemical vapor deposition) and parameters could enable unexpectedly excellent evaporation performance. Liu and coworkers designed an attractive polyacrylamide aerogel by a radial freezing and in situ cryopolymerization technique (Fig. 3b).81 The radially aligned channels, micron pores, wrinkled internal surface, and molecular meshes contributed to powerful antigravity water transport, achieving the longest transport distance of >28 cm at 190 min and 1.08 cm in the first second. A multiwalled CNT layer was used as the top solar absorber, and the water evaporation rate was 2.0 kg m−2 h−1 with energy efficiency up to 85.7% under one sun.


2.2.3 Hydrogels. 
Cross-linked polymer networks containing hydrophilic groups can capture water by noncovalent interaction to form hydrogels.82–84 In accordance with different intermolecular hydrogen bonding (water/polymer, weakened water/water, and normal water/water bonding), three existence states of water occur in hydrogels, corresponding to bound, intermediate, and free water.85–89 The energy demand for vaporization is determined by the water state and phase-transition behavior. Intermediate water contributes to activating water molecules and reducing evaporation enthalpy, thus accelerating water evaporation. The relative amount of intermediate water could be tailored by designing polymer networks, while microchannels ensure adequate water transport from bulk water to heat-localized surface through capillary pumping. Yu's group demonstrated the tunability of the water state by changing the PVA/chitosan weight ratios (Fig. 3c).85 As a result, the proportion of intermediate and free water increased with the chitosan content (h-LAH1 to h-LAH5) because of the highly hydratable –NH2 groups. The total energy demand for water evaporation gradually decreased. h-LAH4 showed a high vapor generation rate of 3.6 kg m−2 h−1 with an energy efficiency of 92% under one sun.


2.2.4 Bioinspired structures. 
Inspired by the transpiration process in nature, wood-based substrates provide an attractive route ascribed to the hierarchical structure, economy, and greenness.90–92 Wood cell walls are composed of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin. Delignified wood exhibits strong hydrophilicity while reducing thermal conductivity through additional voids and defects.93 Integrating surface absorbers or simple carbonization can readily transform wood into efficient solar evaporators. Li et al. developed a simple, mild, and versatile method for treating wood by using tannic acid and ferric sulfate (Fig. 3d).94 The wood–TA–Fe3+ possessed high light absorption (approximately 98%) and superwettability because of abundant coordination compounds, rough surface, and pore canals. The outstanding stability and anticrude oil-fouling performance (the underwater crude oil contact angle of the poplar–TA–Fe3+ is 158° and the roll off angle is below 10°) showed great application potential in oil–water separation. Other natural materials,95–99 such as lotus seedpods, mushrooms, daikon, and bamboo, have been reported as carbon precursors. The obtained graphitic carbon through high-temperature pyrolysis effectively enhances the optical absorption, but the damage of the body structure is often inevitable.


2.2.5 Others. 
Other substrate materials, including inorganic materials (e.g., nanoporous aluminum oxide, microporous silica, and hydroxyapatite nanowires (HNs)),49,100,101 porous membrane (e.g., poly (vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF), polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), and cellulose),102–108 fabric109 and paper,110,111 have also been explored as promising candidates.

2.3 Structural engineering
The evaporation process involves complex heat transfer and exchange. The heating layer inevitably causes thermal energy loss to the surrounding environment from radiation, convection, and conduction. Through structural engineering, nano/microstructured photothermal materials and water-replenishment substrates are integrated to achieve good thermal management.

2.3.1 Heat localization. 
To diminish parasitic energy loss, common heat localization techniques include direct, indirect and confined contact modes.112–118 In the direct contact mode (Fig. 4a), a single layer of photothermal materials floats directly on water because of its light weight. The intrinsic microscale pores provide pathways for efficient water supply from bulk water to the hot water–air interface. Meanwhile, the low thermal conductivity contributes to cutting off the heat transfer to the bulk water, thus heating up only the upper portion of water. The indirect contact mode is developed to reduce the heat conduction and convection of solar absorbers further compared with direct contact. Integrating insulators and solar absorbers in the bilayer system can prevent direct contact with the bulk water (Fig. 4b). The bottom insulating layer serves as a transport channel for capillary pumping and a mechanically stable support. However, heat exchange between the solar absorbers and bulk water is still inevitable in the indirect contact mode because insulators and water pathways are constructed together. At this point, the confined contact mode enables the solar absorbers to separate from the insulators and bulk water by using additional 1D/2D paths (Fig. 4c). The hydrophilic low-dimensional pathways ensure the water delivery for evaporation while achieving an optimal balance between heat management and water transportation.
 Fig. 4  Various heat localization modes for thermal management. (a) Direct contact mode. (b) Indirect contact mode. (c) Confined contact mode. 


2.3.2 Stereoscopic design. 
Planar solar evaporators have been reported to possess an energy efficiency limit due to two major energy losses via diffuse reflectance and thermal radiation.116 Recent research emphases are improving light absorption and enlarging the evaporation area through rationally designing 3D devices (Fig. 5), successfully lowering the steady-state temperature of the evaporator surface and reducing radiation and convection heat dissipation to the surroundings.120–124 From the perspective of energy efficiency, harvesting additional energy from the surroundings is another key for optimizing thermal management.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of designing 3D devices to further enhance solar evaporation.123 
Wang and coworkers fabricated a cylindrical cup-shaped structure by combining a quartz glass fibrous membrane and CuFeMnO4 (Fig. 6a), the apparent energy efficiency of which was 140% (corresponding to a 2.04 kg m−2 h−1 generation rate) under one sun illumination.119 The increase in the wall height led to energy recovery from diffuse reflection, thermal radiation, and heated steam, while the outer wall could achieve additional excess evaporation by absorbing the energy of ambient air. Jiang et al. developed a 3D photothermal cone through clipping PPy-coated PVDF membranes (Fig. 6b).125 The optimized cone exhibited an excellent light-harvesting capability due to the multiple light reflections of the rational curved inner surface, and provided a large evaporation area. Thermal management was conducted to suppress heat loss by controlling the contact area with the bulk water. Therefore, the solar conversion efficiency was increased to over 93% under one sun illumination. Song's group achieved high energy efficiency (higher than 96%) under one sun illumination by using a biomimetic 3D structure with asymmetric grooves and gradient microcavity arrays, benefiting from the input energy reutilization through thermocapillary force originating from the temperature gradient that simultaneously allowed the collection of excess energy from the surroundings (Fig. 6c).126 In addition, a 3D origami device with a periodic concavity structure was designed to recover radiative and convective heat losses (Fig. 6d).127 A temperature gradient existed in the alternating mountain/valley pleats, resulting in the heat energy flow. The surrounding parallelogram faces were able to harvest multiple light reflections efficiently. Xu et al. proposed a novel strategy to completely reverse conductive heat loss by introducing a cold evaporation surface between the solar evaporation surface and the bulk water.128 When its surface area increased to a certain value, the evaporator extracted energy from the bulk water to enhance solar evaporation. They also designed a solid photothermal reservoir consisting of a water absorbing core encapsulated by a rGO-based aerogel sheet.129 During one day solar evaporation, no external water supply is required, thus minimizing the heat conduction loss.
 Fig. 6  Stereoscopic design strategies for thermal management. (a) Schematic illustration of the energy recovery from diffuse reflection and thermal radiation by using a cup-shaped structure.119 (b) The simplified reflection process in the 3D photothermal cone and the limited contact with bulk water.125 (c) Temperature gradient along the biomimetic 3D structure surface, resulting in energy reutilization through the Marangoni effect.126 (d) Spatial temperature distribution on the creased surface of the compressed 3D origami device, in which the temperature gradient promotes the heat energy flow.127 (e) Schematic drawing of the 3D interconnected porous evaporator, which ensures effective vapor diffusion with a natural convective flow.124 (f) Schematic illustration of the energy flux for 2D and 3D photothermal evaporators.133 
Zhu's group constructed a cylindrical vapor generator to minimize the energy loss caused by the temperature of photothermal devices being higher than that of the environment.130 The temperature of the side surfaces was lower than that of the environment; thus, environmental energy was exploited from air convection energy transfer. This strategy reduced the energy loss of the upper surface and increased the side energy input. In this case, the net energy gain from the environment was conducive to a high evaporation rate, exceeding the theoretical limit (1.47 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun). In traditional porous evaporators, a large amount of vapor stagnates within the pores because of insufficient diffusion. To solve this problem, they also demonstrated that a 3D interconnected porous carbon foam could make the vapor fully diffuse with a convective flow (Fig. 6e).124 Compared with the 2D evaporator, the lower and inner surfaces of the 3D spiral evaporator could also be activated by the convection flow to promote evaporation, leading to a much higher evaporation rate of 4.35 kg m−2 h−1.131 Gan et al. prepared triangle structures with large surface areas by using carbon-coated paper and foam.132 The cold vapor generation system exceeded the upper limit of the evaporation rate through the additional energy in the environment (up to 2.20 kg m−2 h−1). The latent heat released by vapor condensation normally exists above the warm evaporation surface. The vertical fins in the 3D evaporator could effectively recover the latent heat, which accounted for more than 80% of the total recovered energy (Fig. 6f).133 By controlling the number of fins, the temperature of the top evaporation surface was decreased to lower than the ambient temperature, thus fully suppressing the radiation, convection, and conduction heat losses and achieving full cold evaporation under one sun.134 As a result, a massive amount of energy harvested from the environment (equivalent to 170% of the received solar energy) contributed to a high evaporation rate of 4.10 kg m−2 h−1 under the condition of 6 fins. In addition, a 3D hollow and compressible evaporator delivered an extremely high evaporation rate of 7.6 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun illumination because of the full cold evaporation surfaces.135

3 Desalination
Seawater desalination has been widely considered an ideal solution for the scarcity of clean water. Given the no/low energy consumption and ultralow ion concentration of freshwater production, solar-driven water evaporation is emerging as a promising desalination technology.136 In recent years, interfacial solar evaporation has realized a high evaporation rate and efficiency with the development of photothermal materials and heat localization models. Nonetheless, during the fast water evaporation at the heating interface (typically porous solar absorbers), salt accumulation is a common occurrence, which will affect the light absorption, decrease the vapor pressure, and block water supply and vapor escape channels.137 Furthermore, the precipitated salt will accumulate rapidly with the increase in salt concentration, resulting in deteriorated evaporation performances and eventual system collapse. Through the rational design of nano/microstructures, solar evaporators enable high efficiency desalination with long-term salt rejection from five aspects.
3.1 Facilitated salt exchange
Salt crystallization occurs when the solution reaches saturation. Therefore, fast salt exchange caused by dilute solution replenishment can decrease the local solute concentration at the vaporization interface, thus avoiding salt deposition.
A vertically oriented channel is conducive to rapid water transfer; consequently, a self-desalting evaporation system based on radial polyacrylonitrile foam prevented salt accumulation during 12 h desalination (3.5 wt% NaCl) under one sun illumination.138 Hu's group demonstrated a spontaneous and fast salt exchange strategy by properly distributing natural wood (micron-sized) and drilled (millimeter-sized) channels.139 The formed in-plane concentration gradients resulted in real-time salt redistribution through the small pits (1–2 μm) of the channel arrays due to the difference in water flux (Fig. 7a). The large channels with high hydraulic conductivities further diluted the salt back to the bulk solution via diffusion and convection. As a result, the self-regenerating evaporator enabled a long-term stability during a 100 h continuous test in concentrated brine (20 wt%) with one sun irradiance. They also introduced natural balsa wood with large vessel channels (180–390 μm) and narrow tracheid channels (18–39 μm) as a substrate for salt rejection.140
 Fig. 7  Facilitated salt exchange for salt-rejection. (a) Strategy of interfacial salt dilution by reasonably distributing channels of different sizes, the self-regenerating evaporator surface after 6 h continuous testing in 20 wt% NaCl solution and the comparison with a conventional evaporator.139 (b) Schematic of the self-driven salt-resistant mechanism of MF.143 (c) Structure illustration of a solar evaporator composed of foam and fabric, and the flow of salt exchange.146 
Based on the high water flux of large pores, hollow spacer fabric (with aligned 2 mm channel arrays)141 and GO-based aerogel (with hundreds of micrometers pores)142 avoided salt accumulation through a fast salt exchange between surface-vaporized and bulk solutions. In addition, MF has been explored for self-driven salt resistance, benefiting from the 3D porous structure and powerful water absorption (Fig. 7b).143–145
Chen and coworkers designed a multilayer salt-rejection structure by alternately assembling insulation PS foam and hydrophilic fabric at the bottom (Fig. 7c).146 In the process of water supply, the excess salt was discharged down the fabric wick through advection and diffusion. However, the large ratio of the salt-excretion area led to substantial water contact, which affected the thermal insulation and evaporation efficiency. Hence, the structure should be optimized carefully.
3.2 Wettability tuning
Wettability plays a critical role in the performance of solar steam generators. Hydrophilic substrates are generally beneficial to water storage and supply, but hydrophobic structures with natural non-wetting features, such as hydrophobic membranes and photothermal materials, can repel liquid water and resist salt deposition. Therefore, wettability tuning is an applicable method to solve the balance between long-term stability and evaporation efficiency.
With an upper hydrophobic CB/PMMA layer and a lower hydrophilic PAN layer, a flexible Janus membrane fabricated by electrospinning was able to float on water (Fig. 8a).147 The CB/PMMA layer was used to generate steam and cut off water transportation. Accordingly, salt ions were trapped in the PAN layer immersed in water, diffusing with continuous water pumping. The evaporation rate was stable over 16 days under one sun (1.3 kg m−2 h−1, with 45 min each day), and no salt was observed either inside or on the top surface. Nevertheless, the thickness restriction and direct contact mode resulted in insufficient thermal insulation, which reduced solar conversion efficiency. Utilizing indirect contact mode, Wang et al. prepared a Janus evaporator by spraying hydrophobic HDMS-treated SiO2 on a CNF/CNT aerogel (Fig. 8b).148 The salt was confined under the hydrophobic/hydrophilic interface due to the unique structural design, and the low-tortuosity channels contributed to fast salt excretion through concentration gradient-driven diffusion. Combined with high thermal resistance, continuous steam generation (100 h) with over 80% efficiency was realized in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution under one sun. To improve the efficiency further, a hydrophilic/hydrophobic bilayer structure was assembled on a PU insulation foam containing a 1D water pipe (Fig. 8c).149 Although the salt concentration underneath the Cu2SnSe3 (or Cu2ZnSnSe4) layer increased due to its water impermeability, the capillary pumping rate of the hydrophilic cellulose filter membrane and nonwoven fabrics was faster than the evaporation rate. Consequently, the energy conversion efficiency was up to 86.6% under one sun and nearly constant within 12 h. Que and coworkers also fabricated a modified-MXene membrane as a hydrophobic solar absorber for long-term steady operation in saline water.150
 Fig. 8  Wettability tuning to balance self-desalination and evaporation efficiency. (a) Structure diagram of the Janus membrane (CB/PMMA–PAN), and salt ions are trapped under the water.147 (b) Schematic of the Janus evaporator with a low tortuosity pore structure and its salt excretion mechanism.148 (c) Structure illustration of the hydrophilic/hydrophobic bilayer evaporation device with 1D confined contact mode.149 (d) Schematic of the solar evaporator with 2D confined contact mode based on Janus HN/NiO paper, its cross-sectional morphology and salt-rejecting behaviour.152 (e) Demonstration of the self-desalting process of the superhydrophilic porous carbon foam.153 
Floating under water, a PVDF heterostructured membrane with a top hydrophilic layer and an underlying hydrophobic layer exhibited relatively low evaporation efficiency.151 Zhu et al. designed an extensible strategy by using sodium oleate-modified ultralong HNs as the bottom hydrophobic substrate, which could load photothermal materials (Fig. 8d).152 The salinity beneath the substrate remained unsaturated because the blocked saline water was diluted through salt exchange with 2D channels of an air-laid paper. Hence, the Janus HN/NiO paper possessed a stable evaporation rate during 8 h desalination (with nearly 83.5% efficiency) under one sun illumination.
Wang et al. used a monolithic superhydrophilic porous carbon foam to achieve self-desalting during 8 h desalination (3.5 wt% NaCl) under one sun irradiation (Fig. 8e).153 In addition, Sun's group developed a robust WC film with sandwich wettability.154 The discrete hydrophilic and hydrophobic domains were able to accelerate evaporation by reducing light reflection and heat dissipation. However, washing the deposited NaCl crystals was inevitable for reutilization. A 1 h × 100 cycle distillation test in 3.5 wt% NaCl solution showed its good stability with a 2% decrease in the evaporation rate.
3.3 Membrane barrier
On the basis of “artificial leaves”, Li et al. introduced forward osmosis desalination by using PNIPAm-modified graphene (PG) as a semipermeable membrane.155 In the process of sucking water with high osmotic pressure, the drawing agent (cross-linked hydrogels) obtained clean water from brine feed due to the exceptional ionic rejection (> 99%) of the PG membrane. Afterward, the water was continuously collected through solar-driven transpiration and guttation. Coated with PEDOT-PSS, the integrated thin structure with specially designed pores induced a poor adhesion of salt particles.156 Even after long-term desalination (more than 20 h) in saturated brine, no clogging was observed on the surface. Peng and coworkers fabricated a modified MOF membrane as a water supply component, which prevented salt deposition by blocking the diffusion of salt ions.157
3.4 Controlled salt accumulation
Salt ions are permitted to accumulate at fixed locations along the concentration gradient through regulating the transport and distribution of salt solution. The purpose of this design strategy is to achieve the rational isolation of salt deposition from the solar absorber surface, guaranteeing continuous and efficient solar desalination.
Zhang et al. demonstrated a strategy of edge-preferential crystallization, which successfully achieved an efficient and long-term operation (over 600 h without stopping) in saline water (35 g L−1 NaCl) by spatially isolating salt crystallization with the active surface of an evaporation disc (Fig. 9a).158 The saline water was carried first up to the center of the solar steam generator through a vertical water channel, and then to the edge of a superhydrophilic filter paper. During this process, the radial concentration gradient of NaCl was formed along with the water evaporation of a CNT light-absorbing layer. When the concentration exceeded the solubility limit in water, NaCl would crystallize at the edge because the radius of the evaporation disc was less than or equal to that of the salt ring. The saline water-prewetted disc tended to form loosely connected “salt particles”, unlike the salt ring under nonprewetted and DI water-wetted conditions, due to the formation of small seed crystals in the prewetting process. Consequently, over 90% of in situ salt harvesting was achieved by the “crystallization–falling” cycle under weak adhesion and gravity. At this point, the 3D cup structure was inclined to salt precipitation on the outer cup wall, thus protecting the light-absorbing surface for long-term operation.159
 Fig. 9  Controlled salt accumulation for achieving salt harvest and high evaporation performance. (a) Design sketch of the desalination process with edge-preferential crystallization, NaCl concentration gradient formed with water transportation and evaporation, and the salt concentration profiles (predicted by computational fluid dynamics simulation) and photograph for the one-inlet configuration.158 (b) The localized crystallization process on the biomimetic 3D evaporator, optical image showing the salt easy-removing properties through leaning the evaporator, bottom view and side cross-sectional Micro-CT images of the removed NaCl crystal, Micro-CT image of the apex position, and scheme of the continuous water film along the sidewall.126 (c) Photographs of the top, bottom, and cross-sectional views for the water lily–inspired hierarchical structure, and complete separation of water and salt after stable and efficient solar evaporation.160 (d) Schematic illustration of seawater evaporation in the hanging photothermal fabric.161 
The apex of a biomimetic 3D structure was prone to salt crystallization during a continuous desalination process due to the thickness gradient and position-related evaporation of a surface water film (Fig. 9b).126 Moreover, the Marangoni effect inside the inhomogeneous 3D water film could drive the salt to the apex along the sidewall. The crystallized salt (in contact with a liquid layer) was easy to remove through tilting the evaporator. Even under high salinity (25 wt% NaCl), the system exhibited a stable evaporation rate of 2.63 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun illumination.
Inspired by water lilies, Xu's group designed a hierarchical structure to heat only the thin water layer between the hydrophobic absorber and the insulation stand (Fig. 9c).160 Brine was supplied and exchanged through the holes of the bottom stand. As the vapor continuously escaped from the top porous absorber, the salt and water were gradually separated. Therefore, the evaporation rate was stable (1.39 kg m−2 h−1) during 8 h solar desalination in 10 wt% brine under one sun illumination. Liu and coworkers developed an arc-shaped hanging model of photothermal fabric, and the gathered high-salinity brine dripped from the lowest center as evaporation proceeded (Fig. 9d).161 Solid-salt accumulation was avoided during 12 h evaporation (21 wt% NaCl solution) under light irradiation of 1 kW m−2 by controlling the drop speed (20 g h−1), while the evaporation rate remained nearly 1.9 kg m−2 h−1.
3.5 Intermittent operation and post-treatments
Simulating the working conditions in real life (the alternation of day and night) is a feasible salt-removal scenario, and evaporation only occurs during daylight hours (12 h). In a recent study conducted by Bo and coworkers, nonvolatile salts gradually deposited on the top surface of an evaporator during 12 h solar evaporation (Fig. 10a).162 Afterward, the salt residues spontaneously diffused to the bulk water driven by the salt gradient in a dark environment for 12 h. Therefore, no obvious degradation in performance was observed after consecutive desalination over 240 h (10 cycles) in real seawater. As shown in Fig. 10b, the 3D structure located in the sand/water mixture could completely reject the salt overnight due to the strong wicking capability of cotton fabric.163
 Fig. 10  Intermittent operation and post-treatments to solve salt-fouling. (a) Optical images of the salt deposition and diffusion process.162 (b) Schematic illustration of the 3D evaporator embedded into the sand/water matrix for extracting the water from the ground, and pictures of the wicking effect showing that the salt could fully sink into the sand overnight.163 (c) Structure diagram of rGO–silk–fabric, and evaluation of the K/S value and solar steam efficiency with washing cycles.164 
Recent post-treatments to solve salt-fouling issues include simple water soaking and sonication. For the photothermal fabric with mechanical stability, salt deposits can be removed by physical cleaning during seawater evaporation. As shown in Fig. 10c, rGO–silk–fabric exhibited high washability after 30 cycles without remarkable structural damage.164 In addition, a composite cloth fabricated by encapsulating CB nanoparticles into nylon 6 nanofibers enabled an anticorrosion capability in chemically harsh environments.165 Even after 100 handwashing cycles, the structural integrity remained nearly unchanged without photothermal component loss. Although additional operations suggest potential for the regeneration of the solar evaporator, they inevitably limit efficiency and increase production cost.
4 Remediation
The clean water crisis has been exacerbated due to the increased emission of domestic sewage, industrial wastewater, and agricultural runoff. Moreover, a growing number of contaminants, from traditional heavy metals and dyes to emerging micropollutants, such as endocrine disrupting compounds and pharmaceuticals, are discharged into seawater and ground water. Water remediation through purification is one of the most practical technologies to tackle the clean water scarcity worldwide. Based on the excellent characteristics of the introduced nano/microstructured materials, interfacial solar evaporation is an ideal green all-in-one system to separate clean water from contaminants through integration with related functions, such as adsorption and catalysis. This section provides a systematical summary of nano/microstructured materials used in interfacial evaporation systems to treat different types of pollutants.
4.1 Heavy metals
Heavy-metal ions with significant biological toxicity, such as cadmium, lead, chromium, and mercury ions, are difficult to biodegrade. In contrast, the easy enrichment under the amplification of the food chain raises serious health and environmental concerns worldwide.166,167 Even at very low concentrations, the accumulation of heavy metals is harmful to the human body by strong interaction or chronic poisoning.
To purify contaminated water and recycle valuable heavy metals, Zhu's group demonstrated an umbrella-shaped transpiration device.168 Clean water was condensed from vapor under solar illumination, while heavy-metal salts precipitated on the evaporator surface. The synergetic photocatalytic–photothermal system also shows great potential in the practical recycling of metal ions with a high value. Li et al. designed a ZIF-67/GO membrane for the removal and reutilization of Ag+ through adsorption, photo-reduction and evaporation concentration.169 Unlike common heavy metal ions removed using a simple distillation process, mercury contaminates, such as mercury chloride, are easy to volatilize along with the solar steam. At this point, PU foams loaded with MoS2/C microbeads for collaborative mercury removal during efficient evaporation were reported (Fig. 11a).170 According to the results, the concentration of mercury ions in the condensed freshwater (directly steamed) was almost comparable to the original. Nonetheless, the high mercury affinity of MoS2 provided high removal efficiency (from 200 ppb to 1 ppb). According to hard–soft acid and base theory, heavy metal ions (soft acids) have a smaller effective ionic radius than plenty of metal ions in aqueous solution. Therefore, heavy metal ions show a strong binding tendency to sulfur derivatives (soft bases). Utilizing low-cost and high-efficiency sulfur-containing materials to remove heavy metal ions has notable environmental and societal significance. Tang's group facilely prepared a novel mercury-removal platform, polysulfide nanoparticles (PSNs), from low-cost sodium disulfide and 1,2,3-trichloropropane.171 The strong binding affinity and the presence of numerous highly accessible sulfur species of PSNs was conducive to comprehensive purification of heavy metal ions from wastewater by using a PSN-rGO aerogel.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the structure and functions of MoS2/C microbeads, digital photographs of PU sponges before and after assembling MoS2/C microbeads, and comparison of effectiveness of mercury removal.170 (b) Demonstration of solar water purification by using a hydrogel evaporator based on simultaneous one-step adsorption and solar distillation, and the overall heavy metal removal performance before and after solar distillation.172 (c) Design illustration of a solar absorber gel for clean water production.173 
Yu's group recently fabricated a hybrid hydrogel evaporator based on Konjac glucomannan for effectively removing heavy metal ions (Fig. 11b).172 The low-priced biomass with excess –OH groups enabled the ability to form hydrogen and chelating bonds; especially the metal ions with 4s/3d (or 5s/4d, 6s/5d) empty orbitals are prone to accept the free electron pair of oxygen. Consequently, the adsorption capacity greatly reduced the concentrations of various heavy metal ions in distilled water, and the concentration of mercury ions decreased by seven orders of magnitude. Inspired by the adsorption and release cycle of pufferfish, a high passive solar water-purification rate was achieved by using an elastic thermoresponsive gel (Fig. 11c).173 The introduction of PDA and sodium alginate into the porous gel network could strongly scavenge metals, such as Pb2+. The effective enrichment and extraction of uranium resources in seawater is expected to replace the consumption of traditional uranium ores for meeting the needs of sustainable development.174 Considering the complicated ocean environments, black phosphorus (BP) nanosheets were composited into polyacrylamidoxime (PAO) to fabricate BP-PAO fiber for uranium extraction.175 Attributed to the photothermal, photoelectric, and photocatalytic effects of BP nanosheets, the BP-PAO fiber exhibited a high uranium adsorption capacity of 11.76 mg g−1 in bacteria-containing natural seawater, which was 1.50 times higher than that of the PAO fiber.
4.2 Dyes
Human beings are facing the most serious environmental crisis in history, and most of the environmental pollution is directly related to industry and industrial products. Water pollution caused by dyes, as common pollutants, is a major scenario because of the wide application in the printing and textile industries.176 The high toxicity and long-term chemical stability pose additional challenges to dyeing wastewater treatment.
Photocatalysis for dye degradation is a promising route because the generation of highly active species (such as hydroxyl radicals, superoxide, and singlet oxygen) contributes to completely decomposing dye contaminants during the process of converting solar energy into chemical energy.177,178 Tao and coworkers designed a tri-layered bifunctional membrane (TiO2–Au–AAO) for extracting clean water by combining solar steam generation with photocatalytic reactions (Fig. 12a).179 The middle Au NP layer could enhance the photocatalytic performance of the top TiO2 NP layer through plasmonic effects. After 2 h light illumination, the concentration of RhB in the partial purified water left in the beaker was reduced to nearly 40%, while the pure liquid water was condensed from clean vapor. Bifunctional TiO2-PDA/PPy/cotton was demonstrated to exhibit a high evaporation rate (1.55 kg m−2 h−1) and a localized photodegradation of MO (∼96% after 3 h) under one sun (Fig. 12b).180 Au@TiO2 core–shell NPs, rGO sheets of deposited TiO2 NPs, CuO@PDA/Prussian blue NPs, and ZnO based trifunctional membranes have also been reported to improve the photocatalytic degradation under the assistance of the interfacial photothermal effect.181–184
 Fig. 12  (a) Design illustration of the TiO2–Au–AAO membrane with photocatalytic degradation and solar vapor generation functions.179 (b) Pictures showing the photodegradation of the MO solution with TiO2–PDA/PPy/cotton.180 (c) Schematic illustration of the spectrally selective utilization strategy with a defective semiconductor nanosheets aerogel.185 (d) Schematic of the coupled photo-piezo-catalytic effect.186 
Conventional solitary photochemical and photothermal conversion systems are usually limited by insufficient light harvesting or trade-offs in the quality of the solar photon. Photothermal conversion is beneficial to the capture of visible-NIR light, but the nonselective full photothermal conversion inevitably reduces the energy quality of high-frequency solar photons, especially in the UV region. Therefore, a spectrally selective utilization strategy was developed for cooperative photochemical and photothermal conversion in the respective optimal working spectra with a defective semiconductor nanosheet aerogel, which was composed of oxygen vacancy defect-rich HNb3O8 nanosheets and a polyacrylamide framework (Fig. 12c).185 The composite aerogel capitalized UV photons for redox reactivity, while transforming visible-NIR light into heat. Combined with low thermal conductivity, rapid mass diffusion, and organic molecules enrichment, the synergistic all-in-one photochemical and photothermal conversion achieved efficient vapor generation (1.4 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun) and photocatalytic degradation activity. Moreover, the low cost and solution based mass-producible made the aerogel process important practical application value. To further restrict photoinduced charge recombination, Li et al. used a piezoceramic-polymer porous foam to package barium strontium titanate particulates, and enhanced the dye degradation by combining solar irradiation and low-frequency mechanical squeezing.186 This photo-piezo-catalytic coupling effect increases the generation of electron–hole pairs and improves the separation of electron–hole pairs by the induced piezoelectric electric field (Fig. 12d). It realized a 97.8% RhB degradation and an enhanced performance of 275% compared with individual photocatalysis or mechanical squeezing alone, providing a new insight into wastewater degradation via utilizing both solar energy and environmental mechanical sources.
Cheng et al. constructed a 3D hierarchical solar evaporator for industrial dyeing wastewater treatment.187 Despite the sensitization effect and contamination of practical wastewater, the minimum evaporation rate was still 1.45 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun even after 7 days, and the condensed water reached the national environmental quality standard. Removing mixed organic dyes with only one type of photocatalyst is difficult in industrial applications due to different band gaps. Miao et al. demonstrated a stereoscopic PVA foam stained using nanoink.188 The trilayer embossed configuration realized a high evaporation rate of 2.15 kg m−2 h−1 (7.2 times that of pure water) under one sun illumination through enlarging the sidewall area. It also exhibited great performance to treat mixed organic dyes (MB, MO, and RhB).
4.3 Volatile organic compounds
Aside from salts, most heavy metals and organic pollutants can be removed directly during the solar-driven process of phase change and mass transfer. However, volatile organic compounds (VOCs) in the source water are a potential concern in consideration of the complexity of emission sources and the diversity of substances.189,190 Solar distillation may accelerate the volatilization of VOCs (such as toluene and phenol) and enrich them in distillate water.
Wang's group fabricated a CuFeMnO4 photothermal coating, simultaneously acting as a heterogeneous photo-Fenton catalyst, by introducing the photo-Fenton reaction to remove potential VOC pollutants.191 The experimental results demonstrated that VOCs (such as phenol) were easily enriched in distilled water (much higher than the original solution) during solar-driven water evaporation. The removal efficiency for phenol solution (20 mg L−1) was higher than 98.2% compared with the condensed water evaporated without material treatment. Furthermore, the multifunctional ceramic plate was stable after repeated cycles and could be regenerated by simply flushing. However, continual addition of expensive oxidants to remove VOCs also faces the challenge of rapid decomposition. A mesoporous oxygen-vacancy-rich TiO2−x nanofibrous membrane was reported to in situ degrade VOCs without extra reactive agents by providing abundant reactive sites and longer VOC transportation routes (Fig. 13a).192 P25-loaded porous clustered carbon arrays prepared from the biomass waste of the Flammulina root segment also exhibited effective removing performance for VOCs (such as phenol, quinol, and aniline).193 Ye and coworkers demonstrated a MoS2-based solar evaporator for organic contaminant removal.194 Compared with the initial concentrations of model pollutants ([nitrobenzene]0 = 400 μg L−1, [carbamazepine]0 = 472.5 μg L−1, and [naproxen]0 = 460.5 μg L−1), the concentrations in the condensed freshwater (evaporated without material treatment) were 276.7, 153.5 and 148.2 μg L−1. Nevertheless, the concentrations of the corresponding target pollutants in the condensed freshwater (evaporated with a MoS2 photothermal layer) were greatly reduced to 74.3, 51.5, and 19.1 μg L−1. The results of intermittent experiments showed that the adsorption of MoS2 nanoflowers played a major role in the process of removing organic pollutants, whereas photocatalytic oxidation played a relatively minor role. In the real seawater desalination experiment, the evaporator also enabled the removal of tryptophan and humic acid-like organic pollutants. The production of highly reactive oxygen species is greatly affected once electrons and holes induced by photocatalysts recombine and fluoresce. Therefore, effective light absorption and carrier separation are two key requirements. In a recent study carried out by Dong et al., a visible-light responsive perylenetetracarboxylic diimide (PDI)/rGO composite film was developed to degrade antibiotics (Fig. 13b).195 The π–π interactions between supramolecular PDI nanofibers and rGO regulated the energy band structure and redox potential, and the above-bandgap electrons and holes of the upper PDI nanofibers relaxed to the band edge and converted the excess energy into heat. As a result, it showed excellent photothermal catalytic performance, even in different actual water samples, including tap water, Weihe River water, and Yellow River water, offering a feasible scheme for low-cost indoor water treatment and water recycling.
 Fig. 13  (a) Characterization of the flexible m-TiO2−x nanofibrous membrane.192 (b) Schematic illustration of the PDI/rGO composite film with photothermal catalytic performance for antibiotics.195 (c) The chemical affinities of water and phenol with PPy, and effects of molecule size on solution and molecule–membrane interaction on diffusion during the selective permeable process. (d) Demonstration of the selective permeable evaporation process by the PPy-based membrane.196 
As a typical polar conducting polymer, PPy possesses a protonated molecular structure and good affinity for polar water molecules (Fig. 13c).196 Wang et al. verified the selective solution-diffusion behavior of a micropyramid-structured PPy membrane toward water and VOCs (Fig. 13d). The interaction between PPy and water molecules was stronger than that of phenol molecules, and the smaller size of water molecules facilitated their diffusion in the PPy membrane. The membrane could not only effectively suppress the evaporation of simulated volatile pollutants in the prototype, but also intercept the complex VOCs in natural water. Compared with catalytic oxidation methods, this solution-diffusion strategy required no expensive oxidants without the production of organic by-products.
4.4 Oil-based contaminants
In recent years, oil–water hybrids are usually found in water sources due to oil spill and sewage discharge.197 The oil fouling of photothermal materials is a serious and unavoidable problem, which may lead to the degradation of the purification performance.
Li et al. prepared an oil-repellent photothermal material based on low-cost basalt fibers with a stable evaporation efficiency of 81% in oily water.198 Underwater oleophobic surfaces may become oleophilic when exposed to air, so it is easily polluted. To achieve an in-water and simultaneously in-air oil rejection, functional fluorinated molecules were dispersed on vertically oriented graphene nanosheets.199 The durable anti-oil-fouling ability ensured an energy efficiency of 85% in pure or oil-contaminated water, resulting in the continuous production of clean water over several days. As emerging porous crystalline materials, MOFs with hierarchical structures could produce superwetting phenomena. In a recent study performed by Zhang's group, a film of Cu-CAT-1 MOF crystals was designed for oil resistance (Fig. 14a).200 The superhydrophilic surface (water contact angle ≈ 26.5°) exhibited underwater superoleophobic properties (underwater oil contact angle of 150.7°), and only water was transported underneath layered oil and emulsified oil contaminations.
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of a MOF-based hierarchical structure, and time-dependent underwater oil contact angle measurements.200 (b) Schematic illustration of the solar evaporator based on wood, PVA, and hydroxylated multiwalled CNTs for oily wastewater treatment.202 (c) Demonstration of oil-water separation and solar evaporation processes, optical images of polluted seawater (P-WA) and filtered water (F-WA), and comparison of evaporation performance before and after separation.204 
Oily wastewater poses a serious threat to drinking water safety, ecological environment, and human health.201 Inspired by plant transpiration, Heng et al. developed a porous wood-based evaporator to address the challenges of treating nano/submicrometer-emulsion oily water, oily seawater, and acid–base–corrosion oily wastewater (Fig. 14b).202 It demonstrated a high purification efficiency of 99.7% for stabilized nano/submicrometer-emulsion oily water. Moreover, the excellent long-term stability and recyclability provided the feasibility of one-step production of clean water from various oily wastewater. In addition, a compressible wood-sponge was decorated in situ with rGO for photothermal thermogenesis to effectively collect and recover highly viscous crude-oil.203 Chen and coworkers introduced a prehandling separation strategy to produce filtered water by the physisorption of modified black sand (Fig. 14c).204 The water/oil hybrids were efficiently separated; thus, the purification performance of subsequent solar-driven evaporation showed a positive improvement. Reactivated via solar irradiation and washed with ethanol, the sand could recover the separation capacity after several cycles.
4.5 Biological contaminants
According to the World Health Organization, 80% of diseases are spread through drinking unhealthy water related to bacteria.205,206 In practical applications, biological pollutants exist universally in natural water. Solar evaporators may be suitable for their growth, and biofouling would threaten the long-term stability and even cause structural damage.
As one of the most effective sterilization methods, steam sterilization usually relies on electricity and specific equipment, which is not available or affordable in economically underdeveloped regions. However, photothermal sterilization by high-temperature vapor generated during solar evaporation is an economical and green way to remove bacteria and viruses from drinking water without by-products, especially applicable for decentralized families. The energy conversion efficiency of traditional solar autoclave systems is low, and its storage design of high pressure steam is complex. In contrast, an interfacial evaporation system based on a rGO/PTFE composite membrane helped to generate steam with a temperature higher than 120 °C for killing most bacterial spores without complex design (Fig. 15a).207 Moreover, its recyclability, thermal stability, and easy fabrication provided a potential low-cost alternative for sterilization applications in areas with frequent power shortages but sufficient solar radiation. Zhu et al. revealed that an interfacial evaporation system enabled fast-responsive (as short as 8.4 min for a full sterilization cycle) and energy-efficient (100 J mL−1 for steam reaching 121 °C) sterilization.208 The low-cost sterilization setup could operate with a minimum carbon footprint with effective sterilization (≈99.999999% inactivation of pathogens). To produce superheated steam under ambient pressure and low-flux solar radiation, a commercial double-walled solar vacuum tube was integrated (Fig. 15b).209 The portable steam generator enabled stable steam generation above 121 °C under ambient fluctuating solar illumination with an averaged intensity of 0.6 sun for effective sterilization of both spores and bacteria (Fig. 15c). Photothermal technology has also been developed to activate low-temperature biological wastewater treatment.210
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the sterilization setup by the rGO/PTFE composite film.207 (b) Schematic working principle and structural design of the superheated solar steam generator. (c) Solar steam sterilization of the portable interfacial evaporator under ambient solar illumination.209 (d) Comparison of antibacterial properties between a ZnO-free scaffold and ZnO-containing chitosan aerogel (GCZ scaffold), and SEM images of the scaffolds after being cultivated in bacterial suspensions for 72 h.211 
Lu et al. fabricated a unidirectional chitosan/ZnO aerogel as a water transport scaffold, which prevented biofouling in the earlier stages of primary bacterial adhesion and biofilm growth (Fig. 15d).211 The ZnO nanoparticles could produce reactive oxygen species to inhibit the bacterial proliferation. After the bacterial experiments (with Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus) for 3 days, the solar steam device still maintained high evaporation efficiencies (89.4% and 89.7%, respectively) against the bacterial accumulation. By contrast, the efficiencies of the scaffolds without ZnO were almost half that of the original. Positive copper ions also possess excellent antibacterial properties, which can be absorbed into the negative cell membrane, causing the leakage of intracellular substances and eventually resulting in cell death. Hence, Wang and coworkers demonstrated a 3D hierarchical foam assembled using CuxS composite nanorods.212 In typical bacteriostatic tests, the inhibition zones of E. coli and S. aureus were clearly visible due to the existence of positive copper ions. In addition, an Ag3PO4-rGO nanocomposite-coated textile could kill bacteria through denaturation or oxidation of the biomolecules in the bacteria due to the release of Ag+ and generation of reactive oxygen species.213 Polyethylene imine-based and MXene-based photothermal materials have also been reported to have excellent antibacterial properties.214,215
To solve biofoulants, such as algae, Jiang's group fabricated a multifunctional perovskite (La0.7Sr0.3CoO3) slice with good photothermal performance, thermostability (over 1000 °C in air), and high activity in catalytic combustion.216 The porous slice could catalyze the thermal decomposition of algae at a relatively low temperature (468 °C, nearly 50 °C lower than that without catalyst) for energy-saving regeneration. The evaporation rate was still 1.63 kg m−2 h−1 after four regeneration cycles.
5 Conclusions and prospects
Solar-driven interfacial evaporation is a promising water purification technology to deal with the clean water crisis, and great strides have been made in the past decade. This review summarizes the recent progress in solar evaporators from the perspective of nano/microstructured material architecture designs, including the mechanism and optimization of photothermal materials, functional water-replenishment substrates, and efficient structural engineering. Based on the excellent characteristics of the introduced nano/microstructured materials, the applications of long-term salt-rejection in seawater desalination and the removal of various pollutants in wastewater remediation are discussed in detail. Nano/microstructured materials can not only synergistically combine light absorption, water transport adjustment and thermal management, but also introduce unique water purification functions. Despite these advantages and developments, the challenges of this technology need further attention and research.
Solar-driven interfacial evaporation characterized by zero liquid discharge is the development direction of high-concentration brine treatment. As an alternative candidate to wastewater treatment, it has the minimum sewage discharge and/or valuable chemical recyclables. A solar-driven interfacial evaporation system generally consists of a closed chamber with a transparent cover. The generated vapor condenses and coalesces into droplets or liquid films, and then the water is collected through directional movement under the action of external forces, such as gravity. In this process, the formed droplets inevitably block incident light, resulting in optical loss and a falling evaporation rate. The hydrophilic surface contributes to the formation of a continuous thin film, which is more transparent than droplet arrays. However, the heat transfer resistance of film condensation is high, and condensation is usually difficult to collect due to stick and fall back effects. At this point, the hydrophobic surface can enable fast condensation and transportation. Therefore, material selection and design need to be balanced with light transmission. Directional harvesting of water was promoted by the spatial control of microstructure wettability (Fig. 16a).217 The formation of vapor mist causes increased humidity and deteriorated evaporation performance because the sealed space inhibits the free diffusion of hot vapor. To solve the blocking and collection issues, Bo and coworkers extracted hot vapor by using an exhaust fan (Fig. 16b).162 The water collection ratio dramatically increased to 83.5% when the fan was turned on compared with that when the fan was turned off (41.2%). For actual operation, clean water collection should be carefully considered.
 Fig. 16  Hybrid evaporation systems for practical applications. (a) Hybrid superhydrophobic substrate with a superhydrophilic track, and in situ observation of fog collection of a hybrid and anisotropy surface by optical microscopy.217 (b) Schematics of the vapor transport path with the fan off and on, and the corresponding optical image of the dome.162 (c) Schematic of the solar passive distiller during day time.218 (d) Demonstration of the synergistic interfacial evaporation and thermoelectricity generation process.221 (e) Schematic illustration of water evaporation and capillarity-driven electricity generation based on hybrid wettability.111 (f) Schematic of a PV cell with water-proof thermal interconnecting layers.228 (g) Outdoor demonstration for solar water–electricity–hydrogen co-production.229 (h) Schematic illustration of an interfacial solar-driven atmospheric water generator.234 
In the past few years, considerable attention has been paid to waste energy recovery in solar evaporation processes. The generated steam contains considerable latent heat, which is normally dissipated into the surroundings after condensation. Reusing the latent heat of vaporization could efficiently enhance the water productivity. For example, Asinari's group designed a passive multistage desalination device that achieved a high water yield in a 10-stage configuration (Fig. 16c).218 Furthermore, an evaporation device can not only work for clean water production, but can also function for the self-generation of electricity via rational combination with appropriate electricity technologies. Recent studies have revealed collaborative electricity generation mechanisms, including triboelectric, thermoelectric, piezoelectric, and salinity gradient effects.219,220 A solar hybrid system of simultaneously generating electricity and water can improve the overall efficiency of energy conversion, showing a significant prospect. Multipurpose functions (power generation, heat insulation, heat scavenging and steam condensation) can be realized through rational design to provide renewable and distributed clean water-electricity solutions, especially for rural areas and developing countries.33 To harvest the low-grade waste heat between the water–air interface and bulk water, Ho et al. developed a highly compressible and readily reconfigurable solar absorber sponge for cost-effective water-electricity co-generation (Fig. 16d).221 A commercial Bi2Te3-based thermoelectric module served as a thermal insulator to promote solar evaporation and sustained waste energy-to-electricity generation via the Seebeck effect, ensuring a durable electricity supply on-demand/on-site for off-grid regions. The redundant energy can also be recovered by other tandem devices, such as thermal storage, photovoltaic, and mechanical devices. A ferroelectric PVDF film was used to harvest the thermomechanical responses of steam through its heating-cooling and slight oscillation.222 Due to the large difference of charge density between water and PTFE, triboelectric signals were generated with the gravitational flow of condensate droplets.223 An all-cellulose-based 3D monolithic evaporator was also properly integrated with a flexible triboelectric nanogenerator, achieving a new function of self-powered water wave detection.224 By monitoring the capacitance of the electric double layer formed at the evaporator/seawater nanointerface, salt concentration change and clogging of water transport pathways could be detected.225 The internal enthalpy of high-temperature vapor could be recovered by thermal storage to produce steady electrical output.226 Further diversely utilizing heat dissipation and water flow-induced enthalpy fluctuation contributes to improving energy efficiency. A CNT-based paper asymmetrically decorated with a hydrophobic PDMS layer on a specific location could achieve a centimeter-sized channel to drive the directional water flow for efficient electricity generation under dark and light conditions (Fig. 16e).111 Through integrating multi-stage photovoltaic-membrane distillation devices and water-proof thermal interconnecting layers (Fig. 16f),227,228 the waste heat of PV cells was used to promote water evaporation, and the heat dissipation by evaporative cooling ensured the high efficiency of PV cells. This PV-integrated water-electricity co-generation helped to expand the electricity output by PV cooling, while maintaining a high water evaporation rate. Thermoelectric and photovoltaic devices usually possess high power density and reliability with the merit of well-matched energy profiles. The distance of the tandem system is the limit of its practical application, and the stability of water-electricity co-generation systems also needs to be improved. Due to the low output density for light-to-vapor-induced electricity, series and parallel connections of multiple devices can scale up both current and voltage, which can be used for tiny electronic appliances or power storage.
Synergistic production of non-fossil fuels and water is another important endeavor for practical applications and has aroused people's interest in fundamental and applied research. By controlling heterogeneous water distribution and evaporation, a 3D pillar hydrogel-based evaporator was developed to achieve the synergistic generation of clean water and diverse energy (electricity and green fuel) (Fig. 16g).229 Bi2Te3-based thermoelectric generators were sandwiched by the tailored hydrogels to harvest evaporative cooling and waste solar-thermal energy. The converted electrical output (4.8 W m−2) was demonstrated to drive water splitting (0.3 mmol h−1) under outdoor sunny/cloudy conditions, which held great potential in vapor generation as well as the energy crisis and pollution remediation for global sustainability. Ho et al. also introduced a water-energy coupled technology based on a photothermal catalytic gel composed of TiO2/Ag nanofibers and chitosan.230 The H2O–H2 co-generation system provided thermal confinement at the macroscopic level and localized plasmonic heating at the catalyst active sites, thus maximizing the energy value per area. Moreover, the inside microchannels enhanced the transmission of water, vapor, and hydrogen, and prevented the accumulation of salt crystals. As a result, it realized a hydrogen production of ≈4600 μmol m−2 and desalination production of ≈5000 g m−2 within one day under natural sunlight, providing an environmentally and sustainable pathway for off-grid or small-scale desalination and energy generation. Recently, several other milestones (ethanol, methane, and hydrocarbon fuels) have been reached, showing new concepts and prospects. For example, the conversion of cellulose into ethanol was achieved through completely off-grid solar-driven steps, including solar steam processing to hydrolyze feedstock and solar steam-distillation of the fermentation product.231 It offered a green and sustainable approach for small-scale and decentralized fine chemical manufacturing.
The overwhelming evaporation rate achieved by the environmental energy enhancement and hierarchical approach of water management has broken through the traditional limit of photothermal efficiency. Under one sun illumination coupled with a natural convective flow, an evaporation rate as high as 10.9 kg m−2 h−1 could be achieved by a 3D interconnected porous evaporator,124 symbolizing a high-throughput, around-the-clock, and eco-friendly evaporative water treatment. Despite the current focus mainly on maximizing evaporation efficiency, low cost and scalability are the prime requirements for interfacial evaporators from laboratory tests to actual implementation. It was reported that a small-scale floating desalination evaporator, made from commercially available materials, was coupled with a polymer film condensation cover to operate continuously under natural light with a water production rate of 2.5 L per m2 per day which is enough to meet individual drinking needs.146 The total material cost of the still was $3 m−2 (10× lower than those of conventional solar stills), making it a fast-to-deploy and simple-to-use desalination technology for disaster-stricken communities and low infrastructure areas. By employing renewable biomass, a hybrid hydrogel evaporator exhibited both a high evaporation rate and excellent cost-effectiveness of 215 g per h per $, offering new affordable possibilities for communities that suffer from economic water scarcity.172 A pre-pressed MF evaporator was also fabricated for remarkable robustness and stability under a series of severe conditions with a cost of about $8.25 m−2, which is especially attractive for remote water-stressed regions.73 Only working within the light penetration depth, the light-to-heat effect of photothermal materials can be involved. Therefore, any extra subsurface coating is an excessive waste of resources, which is not conducive to large-scale applications. To decrease the cost of evaporator fabrication, Xu et al. selectively coated various nano/microstructured photothermal materials on 3D porous substrate surfaces through the fast gelation process of Ca2+ induced crosslinking of sodium alginate.232 The general interfacial gelation method contributed to saving more than 75% of photothermal materials while still exhibiting a higher evaporation rate, paving the way for greater real-world utilization. Facilely transforming various wood with any shapes into photothermal evaporators could be realized in aqueous solution (tannic acid and Fe3+) without high temperature or expensive materials.94 Moreover, the resultant wood was endowed with excellent acid–base resistance properties, anti-rinsing performance (3000 rpm for 100 h), and anti-(cyclic frost–thaw) properties (100 times) for practical applications. In a recent study by Yu et al., a PVA hydrogel-based ultrathin membrane was conductive to direct energy harvesting from the gas flow and relocated evaporation front for eliminating the temperature polarization induced energy consumption.233 The potential cost of clean water production could be as low as $0.3–1.0 m−3, simultaneously achieving a water yield of 2.4 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun.
As mentioned before in the application of seawater and wastewater purification, comprehensive environmental adaptability in water sources consisting of many complex components should also be emphasized. In a long-term outdoor operation, the system must be stable against degradation and disruption, thus reducing the cost associated with maintenance and replacement. The performance of evaporators is often complicated due to various environmental factors, especially the possibility of steam generation in any weather, which requires systematic research and evaluation. Atmospheric water is another abundant source, and advanced adsorption materials, such as MOFs, anhydrous salts, and hydrogels, can harvest clean water from air by photothermal assistance (Fig. 16h).178,234 Further innovation and development in nano/microstructured material selection and design through the effective utilization of abundant solar energy resources will promote interfacial evaporation to a new level in solving clean water shortage.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21878043, 21576039, 21421005 and U1608223), Program for Innovative Research Team in University (IRT_13R06), Talent Fund of Shandong Collaborative Innovation Center of Eco-Chemical Engineering (XTCXYX04), Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (DUT18ZD218), Program for the Innovative Talents of Higher Learning Institutions of Liaoning (LCR2018066), Dalian High-level Talents Innovation Support Program (2019RD06), and Liaoning Revitalization Talent Program (1801006).
References
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mariñas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Khawaji, I. K. Kutubkhanah and J. Wie, Desalination, 2008, 221, 47–69 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandakumar, Y. Zhang, S. K. Ravi, N. Guo, C. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806730 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. J. Alvarez, C. K. Chan, E. Menachem, N. J. Halas and V. Dino, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 634–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, D. Kong, P. C. Hsu, H. Yuan, H. W. Lee, Y. Liu, H. Wang, S. Wang, K. Yan and D. Lin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1098–1104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Menon, I. Haechler, S. Kaur, S. Lubner and R. S. Prasher, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 144–151 CrossRef .
L. Wang, M. S. H. Boutilier, P. R. Kidambi, D. Jang, N. G. Hadjiconstantinou and R. Karnik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 509–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Cohen-Tanugi and J. C. Grossman, Desalination, 2015, 366, 59–70 CrossRef CAS .
C. Klaysom, T. Y. Cath, T. Depuydt and I. F. J. Vankelecom, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6959–6989 RSC .
S. Veerapaneni, B. W. Long, S. Freeman and R. Bond, J. - Am. Water Works Assoc., 2007, 99, 95–106 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Werber, C. O. Osuji and M. Elimelech, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16018 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen and J. Gao, Global Challenges, 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Shalaby, Renew Sustain. Energ. Rev., 2017, 73, 789–797 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jassby, T. Y. Cath and H. Buisson, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 670–672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Al-Karaghouli and L. L. Kazmerski, Renew Sustain. Energ. Rev., 2013, 24, 343–356 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miller, H. Shemer and R. Semiat, Desalination, 2015, 366, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Surwade, S. N. Smirnov, I. V. Vlassiouk, R. R. Unocic, G. M. Veith, S. Dai and S. M. Mahurin, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 459–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Tunuguntl, R. Y. Henley, Y.-C. Yao, T. A. Pham, M. Wanunu and A. Noy, Science, 2017, 357, 792–796 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
L. Ding, L. Li, Y. Liu, Y. Wu, Z. Lu, J. Deng, Y. Wei, J. Caro and H. Wang, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 296–302 CrossRef .
K.-G. Zhou, K. S. Vasu, C. T. Cherian, M. Neek-Amal, J. C. Zhang, H. Ghorbanfekr-Kalashami, K. Huang, O. P. Marshall, V. G. Kravets and J. Abraham, Nature, 2018, 559, 236–240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Mei and C. Y. Tang, Desalination, 2018, 425, 156–174 CrossRef CAS .
N. Voutchkov, Desalination, 2017, 431, 2–14 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
W. Shang and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16133 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, Q. Jiang, X. Wu, D. Ghim, H. G. Derami, P. I. Chou, Y. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 24092–24123 RSC .
L. Zhou, X. Li, G. W. Ni, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 562–578 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens, D. Chu and H. Xu, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 277–296 CrossRef .
T. Ding, Y. Zhou, W. L. Ong and G. W. Ho, Mater. Today, 2021, 42, 178–191 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, H. Xu, X. Shan, Y. Di, A. Zhao, Y. Hu and Z. Gan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 19203–19227 RSC .
Y. Zhang, M. M. Umair, S. Zhang and B. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22218–22228 RSC .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Chen, D. Guo, M. Cao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13645–13652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang and J. Y. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, S. K. Megarajan and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 963–971 RSC .
Y. Chen, Y. Shi, H. Kou, D. Liu, Y. Huang, Z. Chen and B. Zhang, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 2911–2915 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, X. Mi, Y. Li and S. Zhan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7188–7216 RSC .
J. Liang, H. Liu, J. Yu, L. Zhou and J. Zhu, Nanophotonics, 2019, 8, 771–786 Search PubMed .
Z. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Sun and C. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901312 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Feng, Z. Li, P. Xu, X. Wang, W. Yin, M. Wang, X. Ge and Y. Yin, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 400–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Zielinski, J. Choi, T. La Grange, M. A. Modestino, S. M. H. Hashemi, Y. Pu, S. Birkhold, J. A. Hubbell and D. Psaltis, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2159–2167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, L. Zhou, J. Yu, Y. Wang, S. Nie, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2018, 51, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, J. Yan, Y. Huang, C. Wang and G. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Z. Chen, L. Fang, M. Meng, Z. Liu, Y. Di, W. Cai, S. Huang and Z. Gan, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 015402 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Singh, M. ElKabbash, Z. Li, X. Li, B. Regmi, M. Madsen, S. A. Jalil, Z. Zhan, J. Zhang and C. Guo, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 938–946 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu, X. Chen and T. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, M. E. Robson, J. L. Phelps, J. Tan, B. Shao, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 708–715 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Li, J. Ke, S. Wang, L. Wang and H. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 705–714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. G. Gurzadyan, R. Lu, S. Zhang, X. Jin and B. Tang, AIChE J., 2020, 66, e16975 CAS .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 323–343 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. He, Y. Hu, G. Jin, B. Jiang and Y. Huang, Sol. Energy, 2018, 170, 586–593 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Zha, J. Pu, L. Bai, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10446–10455 RSC .
X. Zhao, L. Peng, C. Tang, J. Pu, X. Zha, K. Ke, R. Bao, M. Yang and W. Yang, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 855–865 RSC .
D. Ghim, Q. Jiang, S. Cao, S. Singamaneni and Y. Jun, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 949–957 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, P. Mu, J. Han, J. He, Z. Zhu, H. Sun, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18092–18099 RSC .
P. Mu, W. Bai, Y. Fan, Z. Zhang, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9673–9679 RSC .
X. Yin, Y. Zhang, Q. Guo, X. Cai, J. Xiao, Z. Ding and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10998–11007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Wu, B. Xu and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807716 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Yin, B. Yu, X. Wang, Q. Guo and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32559–32568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Li, W. Wang, J. Huang, D. Xia, J. Liao, M. Wu and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, J. Chen, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, G. Chen, D. Yu, M. Q. Zhang, W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4642–4648 RSC .
K. Yin, S. Yang, J. Wu, Y. Li, D. Chu, J. He and J. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8361–8367 RSC .
G. Wang, Y. Fu, A. Guo, T. Mei, J. Wang, J. Li and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5629–5635 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16212–16219 RSC .
C. Li, D. Jiang, B. Huo, M. Ding, C. Huang, D. Jia, H. Li, C. Liu and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 841–849 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zang, C. Yang, Y. Liu, F. Jing, H. Jing, J. Hu, C. Wang and Y. Zhou, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104834 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907234 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Storer, J. L. Phelps, X. Wu, G. Owens, N. I. Khan and H. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 15279–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, Z. Li, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, H. G. Derami, D. Ghim, S. Cao, Y. Jun and S. Singamaneni, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18397–18402 RSC .
W. Xu, Y. Xing, J. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Cui, D. Li, D. Guo, C. Li, A. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7930–7938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, X. Mu, P. Wang, X. Wang, J. Liu, J. Shi, A. Wei, Y. Tian, G. Zhu, H. Xu, J. Zhou and L. Miao, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104857 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tan, J. Wang, W. Song, J. Fang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1244–1251 RSC .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. T. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. T. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Y. Guo, X. Zhao, F. Zhao, Z. Jiao, X. Zhou and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2087–2095 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai and C. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704107 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. Chen, E. Hitz, D. Siddhartha, R. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707134 CrossRef .
Q.-F. Guan, Z.-M. Han, Z.-C. Ling, H.-B. Yang and S.-H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5699–5704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Dang, X. Luo, W. Li, J. Li, H. Yu, S. Liu and S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26032–26037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. He, M. Han, J. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Wu, Y. Zhou, L. Jiang, S. Peng and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104650 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, J. Liu, J. Gu, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, H. Su and D. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 6217–6221 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, J. Yu, C. Ma, C. Zhang, D. Wu and H. Zhu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 83–90 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Wang, T. Lei, H. Ma, J. Su, S. Ling and W. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800144 CrossRef .
C. Liu, K. Hong, X. Sun, A. Natan, P. Luan, Y. Yang and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12323–12333 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiong, Y. Zhu, D. Qin, F. Chen and R. Yang, Small, 2018, 14, 1803387 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Min, Y. Liu, C. Song, D. Zhao, X. Wang, Y. Qiao, R. Feng, W. Hao, P. Tao and W. Shang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21246–21253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Tao, Y. Zhang, K. Yin, S. Cao, X. Chang, Y. Lei, D. Wang, R. Fan, L. Dong and Y. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35154–35163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hou, Z. Cui, X. Zhu, X. Liu, G. Wang, J. Wang, T. Mei, J. Li and X. Wang, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2019, 222, 159–164 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Gu, L. Zhang and T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15498–15506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, J. Pei, H. Jiang and X. Hu, Desalination, 2018, 442, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao, P. Rathi, X. Wu, D. Ghim, Y.-S. Jun and S. Singamaneni, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000922 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yuan, C. Dong, J. Gu, Q. Liu, J. Xu, C. Zhou, G. Song, W. Chen, L. Yao and D. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, H. Kou, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, D. K. Macharia, M. Zhu, B. Wu, X. Liu and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35005–35014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, H. Su, L. Sun, S. Tanemura, W. Cao, F. Jiang and L. Zhao, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 166–173 CrossRef .
P. Xiao, J. He, F. Ni, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Gu, J. Xia, S.-W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104385 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U.S.A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Meng, X. Zhao, C. Tang, P. Yu, R. Bao, Z. Liu, M. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 2701–2711 RSC .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Deng, P.-F. Liu, J. Zhou, L. Miao, Y. Peng, H. Su, P. Wang, X. Wang, W. Cao, F. Jiang, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Solar RRL, 2018, 2, 1800073 CrossRef .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, J. Han, T. Fujita, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4302–4307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tian, J. Liu, R. Ruan, X. Tian, X. Lai, L. Xing, Y. Su, W. Huang, Y. Cao and J. Tu, Small, 2020, 16, 2000573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhong, Z. Zhu, J. Lin, C. F. Cheung, V. L. Lu, F. Yan, C.-Y. Chan and G. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6213–6221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K. C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Li, K. Bertelsmann and D. E. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900720 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, C. Yang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15303–15309 RSC .
C. Tu, W. Cai, X. Chen, X. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1902070 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Liu, P. Wang, L. Miao, J. Liu, A. Wei, X. Mu, J. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Xu, X. Li, J. Liang, W. Zhao, R. Lin, B. Zhu, G. Liu, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 928–937 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, M. Huang, S. K. Megarajan, S. F. Shaukat and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9874–9881 RSC .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, T. Gao, C. Han, J. Xu, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1625–1633 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou and S. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, T. Gao, Y. Lu, X. Yang, G. Y. Chen, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105477 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, M. H. Singer, C. Li, A. Cheney, D. Ji, L. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Bei, Z. Yu, S. Jiang and Q. Gan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800222 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Q. Li and H. Xu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, X. Wu, Y. Wang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Solar RRL, 2021, 5, 2100053 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Huang, K. Liu, X. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900310 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, H. Yang, X. Xiao, H. Wang, L. Yan, Z. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14620–14628 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie and E. Hitz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
F. Wang, D. Wei, Y. Li, T. Chen, P. Mu, H. Sun, Z. Zhu, W. Liang and A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18311–18317 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Li, G. Liu, J. Li, X. Hu, N. Xu, W. Zhao, B. Zhu and J. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12054–12058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, X. Liang, X. Zhou, H. Fu, Q. Wu, J. Zhang and W. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2581–2588 RSC .
P. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, Y. Gu, S. Chen, H. Cai, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Appl. Energy, 2019, 241, 652–659 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xing, D. Huang, S. Chen, Q. Huang, C. Zhou, Z. Peng, J. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, H. Chen, J. Zhao, J. Li, L. Liu, F. Cheng, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
R. Hu, J. Zhang, Y. Kuang, K. Wang, X. Cai, Z. Fang, W. Huang, G. Chen and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15333–15340 RSC .
Y. Yang, H. Zhao, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, X. Yin, N. Li, D. Yin, Y. Li, B. Lei and Y. Du, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1143–1150 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
T. Li, Q. Fang, H. Lin and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17505–17515 RSC .
D.-D. Qin, Y.-J. Zhu, R.-L. Yang and Z.-C. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 6717–6728 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Li, K. Xu, T. Lei and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9528–9535 RSC .
N. Han, K. Liu, X. Zhang, M. Wang, P. Du, Z. Huang, D. Zhou, Q. Zhang, T. Gao, Y. Jia, L. Luo, J. Wang and X. Sun, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 391–399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Kashyap, A. Albayati, S. M. Sajadi, P. Irajizad, S. H. Wang and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15227–15234 RSC .
X. Ma, W. Fang, Y. Guo, Z. Li, D. Chen, W. Ying, Z. Xu, C. Gao and X. Peng, Small, 2019, 15, 1900354 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang and L. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Xu, J. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, B. Wu, B. Zhu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu and X. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905485 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, G. Xiong, H. Yang, B. Gong, Y. Tian, C. Xu, Y. Wang, T. S. Fisher, J. Yan, K. Cen, T. Luo, X. Tu, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901286 CrossRef .
P. Xiao, J. Gu, C. Zhang, F. Ni, Y. Liang, J. He, L. Zhang, J. Ouyang, S. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104002 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Xiao, G. Wang, X. Ming, X. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, W. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17212–17219 RSC .
Y. Jin, J. Chang, Y. Shi, L. Shi, S. Hong and P. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7942–7949 RSC .
Z. Hanif, S. Lee, G. Hussain Qasim, I. Ardiningsih, J.-A. Kim, J. Seon, S. Han, S. Hong and M.-H. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12425–12433 RSC .
M. Mcnutt, Science, 2013, 341, 1430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pei, J. Zhang, H. Tong, M. Ding, F. Shi, R. Wang, Y. Huo and H. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119575 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, M. C. Tekell, Y. Huang, K. Bertelsmann, M. Lau and D. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802108 CrossRef .
F. Meng, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, B. Ju and B. Tang, Green Energy Environ., 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.gee.2021.04.004 .
Y. Guo, H. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Ozden, N. Bizmark, C. B. Arnold, S. S. Datta and R. D. Priestley, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, T. Liu, X. Zhang, R. Zhang, S. Tang, Y. Yuan, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, H. Wang, K. V. Fedorovich and N. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100106 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, B. Niu, Q. Yu, X. Guo, Z. Guo, J. Wen, T. Liu, H. Zhang and N. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1220–1227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, A. S. Gong, M. Zhu, G. Chen, S. D. Lacey, F. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, J. Song, B. Liu, K. Fu, S. Das and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4275–4282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Z. Qiu, H.-C. Yang, L.-S. Wan and Z.-K. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14438–14444 RSC .
C. Zhang, H. Liang, Z. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Lou, M. Ni, C. Song, J. Wu, N. P. Dasgupta, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 772–779 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hao, Y. Yang, B. Xu and Z. Cai, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10789–10797 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. He, L. Wang, Y. Huang and B. Jiang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 132, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, M. Liu, Y. Hou, D. Wang, L. Zhang, D. Wang and S. Fu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 423, 129099 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. He and X. Liu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 173, 158–166 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Yang, C. F. Tan, W. Lu, K. Zeng and G. W. Ho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004460 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, W. Qian, D. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Li, C. R. Bowen and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105305 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, S. Cheng, C. Li, L. Li and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32038–32045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Deng, L. Miao, P. Liu, J. Zhou, P. Wang, Y. Gu, X. Wang, H. Cai, L. Sun and S. Tanemura, Nano Energy, 2019, 55, 368–376 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bu, B. Wang, J. Huang, S. Deng and G. Yu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 262, 189–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, W. Shi, W. Liu, H. Li, W. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Ke, W. Sun and J. Ni, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 615, 906–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, Y. Shi, S. Zhuo, C. Zhang, Y. Aldrees, S. Aleid and P. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
C. Song, D. Qi, Y. Han, Y. Xu, H. Xu, S. You, W. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Wei and J. Ma, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 9025–9033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, S. Xiao, B. Wang, Q. Li, G. Li, D. Zhang and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51537–51545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, X. Wang, Q. Gan, T. Zhang, K. Zhu and M. Ye, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11177–11185 RSC .
S. Dong, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, X. Liu, W. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. Sun, J. Feng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 291, 120127 CrossRef CAS .
D. Qi, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Y. Luo, H. Xu, X. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Yang, W. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4527–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, M. Xia, J. Du, X. Luo, L. Zhang and A. Li, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 493–500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, B. Gong, H. Yang, Y. Tian, C. Xu, X. Guo, G. Xiong, T. Luo, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo, K. K. Ostrikov and T. S. Fisher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38512–38521 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, P. Yin, M. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Huang, Q. He, Y. Yu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu and B. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808249 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Q. Cheng, Y. Jiao, Z. Sun, X. Yang, Z. Cheng, Q. Bai, Y. Zhang, K. Wang and L. Shao, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3500–3508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, P. Guo, L. Heng and L. Jiang, Matter, 2021, 4, 1274–1286 CrossRef .
W. Chao, S. Wang, Y. Li, G. Cao, Y. Zhao, X. Sun, C. Wang and S.-H. Ho, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 400, 125865 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, N. Qiu, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Gu, J. Xia, Z. Zeng, L. Wang and Q. Xue, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104311 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, T. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, C. Yang, C. Li, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 415–422 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, G. Xiong, H. Yang, Y. Tian, B. Gong, H. Wan, Y. Wang, T. S. Fisher, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Matter, 2019, 1, 1017–1032 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, D. Zhao, F. Yu, C. Yang, J. Lou, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19384–19389 RSC .
J. Li, M. Du, G. Lv, L. Zhou, X. Li, L. Bertoluzzi, C. Liu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805159 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chang, P. Tao, J. Xu, B. Fu, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18466–18474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Wang, S. You, D. Qi, Z. Liu, D. Liu, M. Ma, F. Cui, N. Ren and X. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909432 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Xue, C. Ma, T. He, H. Qian, B. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16696–16703 RSC .
W. Huang, P. Su, Y. Cao, C. Li, D. Chen, X. Tian, Y. Su, B. Qiao, J. Tu and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2020, 69, 104465 CrossRef CAS .
L. Noureen, Z. Xie, Y. Gao, M. Li, M. Hussain, K. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6343–6350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Cui, M. Zhao, Y. Xu, L. Chen, Z. Cao, S. Yang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 704–710 RSC .
X.-J. Zha, X. Zhao, J.-H. Pu, L.-S. Tang, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, L. Bai, Z.-Y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36589–36597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, W. Liang, X. Song, Y. Zhang, M. Huang and H. Jiang, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104538 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, L. Zhang, Y. Wang and P. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600801 CrossRef .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
V.-D. Dao, N. H. Vu, H.-L. Thi Dang and S. Yun, Nano Energy, 2021, 85, 105979 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. G. Gurzadyan, M. M. Umair, W. Wang, R. Lu, S. Zhang and B. Tang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 344, 402–409 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, T. Ding, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900250 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
M. Gao, C. K. Peh, H. T. Phan, L. Zhu and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800711 CrossRef .
N. Li, L. Qiao, J. He, S. Wang, L. Yu, P. Murto, X. Li and X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2008681 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, L. Wang, J. Shi, X. Hou, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, N. Bai, J. Yang, J. Zhang, B. Yu and C. F. Guo, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 5752–5761 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Xu, P. Zhu, Y. Sheng, L. Zhou, X. Li, H. Tan, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 347–358 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, T. Ding, M. Gao, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, J. He and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105102 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. K. Peh, L. Zhu, G. Yilmaz and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000925 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. D. Neumann, S. Tian, C. Thibodeaux, S. Shubhankar, J. Müller, E. Silva, A. Alabastri, S. W. Bishnoi, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, ACS Energy Lett, 2017, 2, 8–13 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shao, X. Wu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Z.-Q. Liu, G. Owens and H. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 24703–24709 RSC .
H. Lu, W. Shi, F. Zhao, W. Zhang, P. Zhang, C. Zhao and G. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101036 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qi, T. Wei, W. Zhao, B. Zhu, G. Liu, P. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a solar-driven interfacial evaporation system for water purification: system design and optimization, seawater desalination and wastewater remediation.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of photothermal conversion. (a) Thermal vibration of molecules in conjugated systems. (b) Local heat generation by surface plasmon decaying. (c) Electron–hole generation and non-radiative relaxation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Advanced nano/microstructures of diverse water-replenishment substrates. (a) Schematic illustration of modified MF with a water-transport controllable design.74 (b) Bilayer polyacrylamide-based aerogel with rapid water-transport capacity enabled by the radially aligned channels, micron pores, wrinkled internal surface, and molecular meshes.81 (c) Tunable water state and vaporization enthalpy in the hydrogel network by changing PVA/chitosan weight ratios.85 (d) Schematic illustration of the transformation of wood-based substrates into solar evaporators.94	 

 	Fig. 4  Various heat localization modes for thermal management. (a) Direct contact mode. (b) Indirect contact mode. (c) Confined contact mode.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of designing 3D devices to further enhance solar evaporation.123	 

 	Fig. 6  Stereoscopic design strategies for thermal management. (a) Schematic illustration of the energy recovery from diffuse reflection and thermal radiation by using a cup-shaped structure.119 (b) The simplified reflection process in the 3D photothermal cone and the limited contact with bulk water.125 (c) Temperature gradient along the biomimetic 3D structure surface, resulting in energy reutilization through the Marangoni effect.126 (d) Spatial temperature distribution on the creased surface of the compressed 3D origami device, in which the temperature gradient promotes the heat energy flow.127 (e) Schematic drawing of the 3D interconnected porous evaporator, which ensures effective vapor diffusion with a natural convective flow.124 (f) Schematic illustration of the energy flux for 2D and 3D photothermal evaporators.133	 

 	Fig. 7  Facilitated salt exchange for salt-rejection. (a) Strategy of interfacial salt dilution by reasonably distributing channels of different sizes, the self-regenerating evaporator surface after 6 h continuous testing in 20 wt% NaCl solution and the comparison with a conventional evaporator.139 (b) Schematic of the self-driven salt-resistant mechanism of MF.143 (c) Structure illustration of a solar evaporator composed of foam and fabric, and the flow of salt exchange.146	 

 	Fig. 8  Wettability tuning to balance self-desalination and evaporation efficiency. (a) Structure diagram of the Janus membrane (CB/PMMA–PAN), and salt ions are trapped under the water.147 (b) Schematic of the Janus evaporator with a low tortuosity pore structure and its salt excretion mechanism.148 (c) Structure illustration of the hydrophilic/hydrophobic bilayer evaporation device with 1D confined contact mode.149 (d) Schematic of the solar evaporator with 2D confined contact mode based on Janus HN/NiO paper, its cross-sectional morphology and salt-rejecting behaviour.152 (e) Demonstration of the self-desalting process of the superhydrophilic porous carbon foam.153	 

 	Fig. 9  Controlled salt accumulation for achieving salt harvest and high evaporation performance. (a) Design sketch of the desalination process with edge-preferential crystallization, NaCl concentration gradient formed with water transportation and evaporation, and the salt concentration profiles (predicted by computational fluid dynamics simulation) and photograph for the one-inlet configuration.158 (b) The localized crystallization process on the biomimetic 3D evaporator, optical image showing the salt easy-removing properties through leaning the evaporator, bottom view and side cross-sectional Micro-CT images of the removed NaCl crystal, Micro-CT image of the apex position, and scheme of the continuous water film along the sidewall.126 (c) Photographs of the top, bottom, and cross-sectional views for the water lily–inspired hierarchical structure, and complete separation of water and salt after stable and efficient solar evaporation.160 (d) Schematic illustration of seawater evaporation in the hanging photothermal fabric.161	 

 	Fig. 10  Intermittent operation and post-treatments to solve salt-fouling. (a) Optical images of the salt deposition and diffusion process.162 (b) Schematic illustration of the 3D evaporator embedded into the sand/water matrix for extracting the water from the ground, and pictures of the wicking effect showing that the salt could fully sink into the sand overnight.163 (c) Structure diagram of rGO–silk–fabric, and evaluation of the K/S value and solar steam efficiency with washing cycles.164	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the structure and functions of MoS2/C microbeads, digital photographs of PU sponges before and after assembling MoS2/C microbeads, and comparison of effectiveness of mercury removal.170 (b) Demonstration of solar water purification by using a hydrogel evaporator based on simultaneous one-step adsorption and solar distillation, and the overall heavy metal removal performance before and after solar distillation.172 (c) Design illustration of a solar absorber gel for clean water production.173	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Design illustration of the TiO2–Au–AAO membrane with photocatalytic degradation and solar vapor generation functions.179 (b) Pictures showing the photodegradation of the MO solution with TiO2–PDA/PPy/cotton.180 (c) Schematic illustration of the spectrally selective utilization strategy with a defective semiconductor nanosheets aerogel.185 (d) Schematic of the coupled photo-piezo-catalytic effect.186	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Characterization of the flexible m-TiO2−x nanofibrous membrane.192 (b) Schematic illustration of the PDI/rGO composite film with photothermal catalytic performance for antibiotics.195 (c) The chemical affinities of water and phenol with PPy, and effects of molecule size on solution and molecule–membrane interaction on diffusion during the selective permeable process. (d) Demonstration of the selective permeable evaporation process by the PPy-based membrane.196	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of a MOF-based hierarchical structure, and time-dependent underwater oil contact angle measurements.200 (b) Schematic illustration of the solar evaporator based on wood, PVA, and hydroxylated multiwalled CNTs for oily wastewater treatment.202 (c) Demonstration of oil-water separation and solar evaporation processes, optical images of polluted seawater (P-WA) and filtered water (F-WA), and comparison of evaporation performance before and after separation.204	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the sterilization setup by the rGO/PTFE composite film.207 (b) Schematic working principle and structural design of the superheated solar steam generator. (c) Solar steam sterilization of the portable interfacial evaporator under ambient solar illumination.209 (d) Comparison of antibacterial properties between a ZnO-free scaffold and ZnO-containing chitosan aerogel (GCZ scaffold), and SEM images of the scaffolds after being cultivated in bacterial suspensions for 72 h.211	 

 	Fig. 16  Hybrid evaporation systems for practical applications. (a) Hybrid superhydrophobic substrate with a superhydrophilic track, and in situ observation of fog collection of a hybrid and anisotropy surface by optical microscopy.217 (b) Schematics of the vapor transport path with the fan off and on, and the corresponding optical image of the dome.162 (c) Schematic of the solar passive distiller during day time.218 (d) Demonstration of the synergistic interfacial evaporation and thermoelectricity generation process.221 (e) Schematic illustration of water evaporation and capillarity-driven electricity generation based on hybrid wettability.111 (f) Schematic of a PV cell with water-proof thermal interconnecting layers.228 (g) Outdoor demonstration for solar water–electricity–hydrogen co-production.229 (h) Schematic illustration of an interfacial solar-driven atmospheric water generator.234	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
