Precursor purity effects on solution-based growth of MAPbBr 3 single crystals towards efficient radiation sensing   - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CE01498A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CE01498A
(Paper)
CrystEngComm, 2018, 20, 7818-7825Precursor purity effects on solution-based growth of MAPbBr3 single crystals towards efficient radiation sensing†

        
          
            Jeremy T. 
            Tisdale‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Travis 
            Smith‡
b, 
      
        
          
            John Robert 
            Salasin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mahshid 
            Ahmadi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nathan 
            Johnson
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Anton V. 
            Ievlev
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Michael 
            Koehler
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Claudia J. 
            Rawn
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Eric 
            Lukosi
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Hu
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Tennessee 37996-4545, USA. E-mail: bhu@utk.edu
bDepartment of Nuclear Engineering, University of Tennessee-Knoxville, Tennessee 37996-4545, USA. E-mail: elukosi@utk.edu
cCenter for Nanophase Materials Sciences, Oak Ridge National Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee 37831-6056, USA
Received 
      4th September 2018
    , Accepted 26th October 2018First published on 30th October 2018AbstractOrganometallic halide perovskite (OMHPs) single crystals have recently gained attention for high-energy radiation detection due to their low trap state densities, high bulk resistivities, excellent stopping power and cost-effective solution growth. An integral focus for radiation sensing materials is the reduction of trap states to enhance charge transport properties. In this perspective, we investigate the use of high and low purity precursors for growth to understand impurity inclusion, as well as effects on structural properties due to impurities. Using both high purity and low purity precursors, we report minimal effects on impurity inclusion observed via Raman, ToF-SIMS and X-ray diffraction. Through SEM analysis, we observe that the particle size in the grown single crystal increased on average by a factor of two to five, when using high purity precursors. The microstructural changes affect the recombination mechanisms, promoting longer charge carrier lifetimes (τavg), where time-resolved photoluminescence shows a large increase from τavg = 1.26 × 10−6 s (low purity) to τavg = 1.18 × 10−4 s (high purity). We further investigate the purity effects with alpha radiation detection, demonstrating charge collection efficiency and observing an increase in charge collection by 32 ± 30% using the higher purity precursors. The microstructural differences in growth are herein proposed to be caused by nucleation from the impurities present in the solution, thereby adversely affecting the electronic properties of the MAPbBr3 single crystals. In this perspective, we provide a deeper understanding of the effects of precursor purity on solution-based single crystal growth of OMHPs towards development of efficient radiation sensors and optoelectronic devices.
Introduction
In recent years, methylammonium lead halide perovskites (MAPbX3: MA = CH3NH3+, X = I−, Br− or Cl−) have gained attention for a variety of applications including, but not limited to, photovoltaics,1–6 photodetectors,7 lasing,8 light-emitting diodes9 and more recently for high energy radiation sensors.10–12 These materials have gained interest due to their tunable optical band gaps, desirable electronic properties, low cost and wide range of deposition techniques.13–15 Specifically, single crystalline MAPbBr3 has garnered attention due to its low trap state density and long carrier diffusion length.13–15 Single crystalline MAPbBr3 is grown using simple, low-cost, low-temperature, solution-based crystal growth techniques, with the growth process only taking hours to days to complete. For optoelectronic application and high energy radiation detection, an essential parameter for suitable materials relies on low trap and defect density. In this perspective, we investigate the effects of precursor purity on charge transport properties and structural changes in single crystals of MAPbBr3. To study the impact that growth conditions have on the quality of MAPbBr3 single crystals (desired low trap density and high charge carrier properties), it is important to understand similar studies on MAPbX3 thin films processes, single crystal growth techniques for MAPbX3, and mechanisms behind the crystal growth techniques.
Studies on MAPbI3 thin films have shown that the purity of the PbI2 precursor used in the preparation of solutions for spin-coating and spray-coating has a large impact on the thin film properties and device performances. Chang, et al. observed that impurities can lower the electron lifetime and increase the amount of non-radiative recombination in MAPbI3 thin films.16 They were able to reduce the amount of impurities in the active layer by using higher purity PbI2 in the spin-coating solution and overall increased the power conversion efficiency (PCE) of MAPbI3 solar cells by 3–4%. Similarly, Yao, et al. established that the purity of PbI2 in spray-coating solutions had a large impact on the crystallinity, grain size and grain boundaries in MAPbI3 thin films for solar cells.17 It was found that using the higher purity PbI2 precursor greatly increases the PCE of MAPbI3 solar cells and eliminates hysteresis effects. Single crystalline MAPbBr3 has commonly been grown using lower purity precursor materials, such as 98% PbBr2.11–15 These reports have shown excellent single crystalline quality and novel use in high-energy radiation detection; however, no reports have shown how the purity of precursor materials can affect the pertinent electronic properties of single crystals for high-energy radiation detection.
Several solution-based techniques have been studied for single crystal growth of organic–inorganic halide perovskite single crystals. A slow cooling method has been heavily studied for MAPbI3 single crystal growth, where a seed crystal is placed in solution, and the solution is cooled slowly over the course of days to grow on the seeded crystal. However, this growth technique is only suitable for materials that have high solubility at high temperatures,14,18,19 and the solubility of MAPbBr3 is low at high temperatures. Therefore, growth of MAPbBr3 single crystals commonly use anti-solvent vapor-assisted crystallization (ASC) and inverse temperature crystallization (ITC) techniques. The ASC method is efficient for synthesizing high quality crystals, but it is difficult to obtain large crystal sizes, limiting the potential use in optoelectronic applications.13 ITC has shown to be the best technique for growth of large, high quality MAPbBr3 single crystals. The MABr and PbBr2 precursors have high solubility in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) at room temperature with a decrease in solubility as the temperature increases.15,20,21 Understanding the mechanisms behind single crystal growth and its impact on electronic performance is a critical step in enhancing the device performance. In solution-based growth, free parameters like precursor purity can have an impact on crystal quality (e.g., intrinsic defect minimization), causing significant effects on the electronic properties of the crystals. Impurities in the solvent and solute may incorporate themselves in the crystal structure via interstitial and substitutional defects. Understanding the mechanisms of solution-based growth should help to identify how to properly control the growth conditions to minimize intrinsic and/or extrinsic defects to achieve higher-quality MAPbBr3 single crystals.
In this report, we investigate the impact of precursor purity on the structural and electronic properties of single crystalline MAPbBr3 using the ITC method for sensing and opto-electronic applications. We specifically studied if impurities were incorporated into the crystal structure during growth and whether increasing the purity of the precursors had a positive impact on single crystal quality. We also examined how the electronic properties of single crystalline MAPbBr3 are modified with different precursor purities through charged particle detection.
Experimental
Growth of MAPbBr3
Methylammonium lead bromide (MAPbBr3) single crystals were grown using the ITC method.17 To prepare the growth solution, methylammonium bromide and lead(II) bromide (PbBr2) were mixed with 1:1.25 (PbBr2:MABr) in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF). For lower purity stock materials, PbBr2 (98%-Alfa Aesar) and MABr (98%-Sigma-Aldrich) were used for solution preparation. For high purity stock materials, PbBr2 (99.999%, trace metals basis-Sigma-Aldrich) and MABr (99.5%-Osilla) were used for solution preparation. All materials used in the growth process were used as received. The solution was stirred for one hour at room temperature for dissolution and homogenization. The solution was then filtered using a 0.2 μm PTFE filter. After filtration, the solution was divided among vials in 2 mL quantities. The vials were placed in an oil bath at 75 °C. After growth, the samples were washed using dichloromethane (DCM).
Alpha radiation detection device fabrication
For alpha radiation detection, the MAPbBr3 single crystals were mechanically polished using SiC films down to a 0.1 μm abrasive particle size. After polishing a 20 nm layer of C60 followed by an 8 nm layer of bathocuproine (BCP) was deposited on one side of the crystal. Then, 60 nm thick Cr electrodes were deposited on both faces. Cr has been used in previous studies using MAPbBr3 for radiation detection12 and has also been shown to exhibit Ohmic behavior.22 All electrode layers were deposited via thermal evaporation.
Measurement techniques
X-ray powder diffraction (XRD) was performed on a Malvern PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer setup in Bragg–Brentano geometry utilizing a PIXcel3D area detector with 255 active channels with ∼3° 2Θ of coverage. The samples were first characterized as-grown and then ground into a polycrystalline powder with an agate mortar and pestle and reanalyzed. The phase was identified using the ICDD PDF 4+ database and subsequent analysis using the Rietveld method was performed to obtain refined structural information using Malvern PANalytical's HighScore software. Time-resolved photoluminescence was performed using a 370 nm nanoLED photoexcitation source. The emission was measured at 575 nm with a time range of 5 μs. Raman spectroscopy was performed at liquid nitrogen temperature using a 473 nm pulse laser. The grating was set to 600 with the filter set to 0.01%. ToF-SIMS measurements were performed using a TOF.SIMS 5 NSC instrument (ION-TOF, Germany) using a Bi3+ primary ion beam with an energy of 30 keV, 30 nA current and 5 mm spot size. A sputter Cs+ ion beam (1 keV energy, 60 nA current and 20 mm spot size) was used to clean the sample surface before chemical imaging to minimize surface contamination manifesting itself in the collected ToF-SIMS spectra. Imaging was performed in the positive ion detection mode. Alpha radiation spectra were collected by exposing the cathode of MAPbBr3 detectors to a 210Po radiation source and utilizing a pulse processing chain comprised of a CAEN A1422-F2–90 preamplifier, an ORTEC 572A amplifier (shaping time of 10 μs), and an ORTEC ASPEC-927 multichannel analyzer. Alpha particle signal traces were collected by connecting a Cremat CR-110 preamplifier output to a 1.5 GHz Agilent Oscilloscope 54845A with a 1 MΩ input impedance. A custom LabVIEW program was used to capture 100 signal traces to analyze the rise time of each sample in response to alpha particles. The signal traces were averaged to minimize the effect of noise on the pulse shape. All measurements were completed under dark conditions to avoid any interactions with light.
Results & discussion
The samples compared were grown with two different precursor purities. Low purity refers to the single crystal grown with 98% PbBr2 and 98% MABr, while high purity refers to the single crystal grown with 99.999% PbBr2 and 99.5% MABr. XRD data at 300 K are shown for single crystalline (preferred orientation) and ground, polycrystalline powder MAPbBr3 in Fig. 1a and b, respectively. These patterns agree with previous studies for MAPbBr3 single crystals and the data confirm that the samples are single phase (ICDD# 01-084-9476).23,24
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD data collected for single crystals and (b) powder XRD for low and high purity grown single crystalline MAPbBr3. 
XRD data for the as-grown, single crystal samples, synthesized from both the high and lower purity precursor materials, show preferred orientation in the 00l crystal orientation. The FWHM deviates by only 0.001° 2θ between samples; however, the observed counts for the high purity precursor materials are orders of magnitude larger than those for the low purity samples correlated with a higher number of diffracted X-rays, suggesting a higher degree of crystallinity. This could also be the cause of the difference in tail characteristics due to microstructural Lorentzian broadening observed in Fig. 1a for the low purity crystal.25,26 Powder XRD data was collected after grinding the single crystals into polycrystalline samples, showing that all the characteristic peaks of the cubic Pmm space group are observed. When the samples are ground, no difference in the peak shape is observed, as crystallite size and preferred orientation differences are removed. The refined lattice parameter of the high-purity phase is 5.9300(2) Å and for the low-purity phase is 5.9300(2) Å, indicating no chemical strain that would be caused by ionic radii differences from impurities leading to a change in lattice parameters. The crystalline quality is directly compared between low and high purity-based samples via triple axis rocking curves, as shown in Fig. S1.† Rocking curves are generated by rotating the sample to change the sample orientation while keeping the angle of the incident beam constant. The width of the rocking curve directly measures the crystalline quality of the single crystals, where curve broadness indicates crystalline disorder and high mosaicity in the sample. By comparing the rocking curves in Fig. S1,† we show that the high purity sample has highly textured crystalline quality, while the low purity sample shows higher disorder by a broader FWHM of the main rocking curve peak, as well as plane tilting in the sample observed by the presence of a second small peak.27
Raman spectroscopy was implemented to compare the vibrational MA+ cation motions for low and high purity samples to study any differences in the organic framework of the crystal structure. The Raman spectra for low and high purity MAPbBr3 single crystals are shown in Fig. 2a. These figures were used to compare the Raman spectra to literature values. Each spectrum shows a great signal to noise ratio, with sharp, high intensity peaks. We observe clear peak positions at 915, 975, 1251, 1425, 1480, and 1590 cm−1, all related to different MA+ cation motions as indicated in the work reported by Wang et al.24 For example, the 915 cm−1 peak is due to CH3NH3+ rocking and the 975 cm−1 peak is due to C–N stretching. The values of these peaks are in close agreement with reported Raman spectroscopy results for single crystalline MAPbBr3.28–30
 Fig. 2  Raman spectroscopy for 98%-based and high purity single crystalline MAPbBr3 from (a) 750–2000 cm−1 and (b) normalized spectra from 1400–1700 cm−1. (blue shading in 2a shows the area of interest for 2b). 
To make a direct comparison between the low and high purity single crystal MAPbBr3 samples, we normalized the Raman spectra and decreased the plotted shift range to the blue shaded region from Fig. 2a, shown in Fig. 2b. Fig. S1 and Table S1† provide a quantitative analysis on the peak fitting for Raman spectroscopy to further examine changes between high and low purity crystals. The largest deviations occur in the peak area, possibly indicating more disorder in the low purity samples. However, the peak positions are nearly identical, showing that the MA+ cation motions were identical in each sample. Slight shifts in peak positions and widths, correlated with vibrational lifetimes, from reported values may arise from changes in sample crystallinity and defect composition. Therefore, due to the lack of any significant deviations when using lower purity precursor materials, it is proposed that no large impurities are incorporated into the crystal structure that would alter the local environment of the organic framework. In Fig. 2a, there is a slight difference observed, where the high purity sample has a slightly higher intensity for each peak. From XRD and Raman spectroscopy, we show that using low purity precursor materials instead of higher purity precursor materials does not introduce any local or long range structural deviations correlated with the incorporation of impurities in single crystalline MAPbBr3; however, using high purity precursors shows to have small effects on the long-range order of crystallites in the sample.
The SEM (scanning electron microscopy) images are shown in Fig. 3 to further investigate the microstructural differences between low and high purity MAPbBr3 single crystals. The growth of MAPbBr3 single crystals was directly studied by Chen, F., et al., where they experimentally show how crystallites align together in a highly-textured orientation to form the final cubic single crystal.31 Further evidence is shown for this growth mechanism on the surface of the crystals, where square-like formations are observed as individual crystallites via SEM. Because solution-based growth of MAPbBr3 forms single crystals through highly textured alignment of crystallites, it is important to understand the impurity effects during growth, as impurities are able to act as nucleation sites, causing disorder in the alignment of crystallites.32 In Fig. 3a and b, the surface of the low purity sample is pictured. Here, it is important to note that the majority of the surface texture consists of crystallite boundaries on average of about 20–50 μm. Also, when the region of interest in Fig. 3a is zoomed in, (as shown in Fig. 3b) there are regions in the structure of even smaller crystallite boundaries ranging from approximately 200 nm to 2 μm. Therefore, it is observed that a high amount of nucleation occurs with a lower amount of continual crystal growth in the crystallites, correlated with the presence of defect centers introduced by impurities from the lower purity precursors. The SEM images of the high purity samples, shown in Fig. 3c and d, show much larger crystallite sizes with an average of about 100 μm. When zoomed in, (as shown in Fig. 3d) there are no regions of smaller, disordered crystallites, as seen in the low purity samples, and the average crystallite sizes are bigger than those of the low purity samples. This mixture of reduction in the size of the larger micron-sized crystallites and the presence of nano-sized crystallites give rise to the peak changes observed between high purity and low purity samples in XRD characterization. The decrease in crystallite size decreases the intensity of the diffracted X-rays and the presence of nano-sized crystallites leads to the Lorentzian broadening observed in the tails of the diffraction peaks. The disordered crystallites also give rise to more crystallite boundaries, which can act as trapping sites, adversely affecting the electronic properties of the single crystal.
 Fig. 3  SEM images of (a and b) low purity MAPbBr3 single crystals as-grown and (c and d) high purity MAPbBr3 single crystals as-grown. 
EDS (Fig. S2†) and ToF-SIMS (Fig. S3†) were used to ensure that the chemical composition remained homogenous throughout the surface of each sample despite the disorder and crystallite size of each region. EDS shows that the Pb to Br ratio was constant at a 1:3 ratio for both low and high purity samples regardless of the region of interest. ToF-SIMS also identifies a large peak of the methylammonium cation for both low and high purity crystals. This indicates that homogeneity of MAPbBr3 is retained from small disordered crystallites to larger crystallite regions. Here, it is proposed that the changes in disorder of crystallites are caused by crystal growth in the presence of impurities. Although it is shown that impurities are not readily incorporated into the crystal structure, SEM shows that microstructural crystallite size and disorder change when using low and high purity precursors. Using low purity precursors introduces more impurities in the solution, which can act as nucleation sites.32,33 Therefore, in low purity samples, it is observed that a higher rate of nucleation occurs with a lower amount of contiguous crystal growth, while high purity samples have less nucleation and more crystal growth. Following these evaluations, we investigated the effect of precursor purity on the optical dynamics and electronic properties of single crystalline MAPbBr3.
Using time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL), we investigated the optical dynamics in MAPbBr3 single crystals grown with high and low purity precursors to study the carrier diffusion and recombination processes, shown in Fig. 4.34 A 370 nm nanoLED source was used for photoexcitation to probe the near-surface region of the samples.35 For reproducibility of these measurements, three high purity and three low purity samples were measured and the average photogenerated carrier lifetime was calculated among the devices. For low purity, we calculated the average charge carrier lifetime as τavg = (1.26 ± 0.36) × 10−6 s, and for high purity, τavg = (1.18 ± 0.12) × 10−4 s. By comparing the average carrier lifetime, we gain valuable understanding on the carrier recombination process in the near-surface region, which directly affects the carrier diffusion length. The high purity samples showed an increase of τavg by two orders of magnitude, indicating less nonradiative recombination and charge carrier trapping in the high purity samples.35 We attribute this increase in carrier lifetime to the increase in the crystallite size and texture observed in the high purity single crystals. In the low purity samples, the smaller, disordered crystallite regions may act as recombination centers, introducing traps that reduce the carrier lifetime and diffusion length in the single crystal. Meanwhile, we propose that the larger, more textured crystallites in the high purity samples reduce the probability of nonradiative recombination and charge carrier trapping. Increasing the charge carrier lifetime is crucial for sensing and optoelectronic devices, where low trap-state density and long diffusion lengths are among the essential properties for efficient device performance.13,14 In this perspective, we focus on the differences in crystallite boundaries during the growth process. However, deep and shallow trapping can also negatively impact the electronic properties. Therefore, in future work, further investigation into purity effects on the levels of defects generated due to impurities in precursors could provide a deeper understanding on defect generation and energies.
 Fig. 4  Normalized TRPL for MAPbBr3 single crystals grown with low purity and high purity precursors. 
Lastly, the performance in application of single crystalline MAPbBr3, grown with different precursor purities, is evaluated by comparing 210Po alpha particle detection. For these measurements, the device structure was Cr(60 nm)/MAPbBr3/C60(20 nm)/BCP(8 nm)/Cr(60 nm). This device structure is shown schematically in Fig. S4a† and has been used in previous studies for radiation detection.12 All detectors were biased at −50 V on the Cr anode. The 5.3 MeV alpha spectra are shown for low purity and high purity-based MAPbBr3 detectors in Fig. 5a and b, respectively, and an analysis of the collected results is provided in Table S2.†
 Fig. 5  
210Po alpha particle spectra collected at a −50 V bias for (a) the low purity MAPbBr3 detector and (b) high purity MAPbBr3 detector. 
The most apparent difference between the low purity and high purity detectors is the larger signal amplitude (H0) from the higher purity samples. The average H0 for the low purity and high purity detectors was calculated to be 92 ± 16 channels and 166 ± 45 channels, respectively. This corresponds to an average increase in signal amplitude by 80.44 ± 12.6%. The average energy resolution for the low purity and high purity detectors was calculated to be 18.13 ± 1.79% and 18.16 ± 7.25%, respectively. Although the average resolution is very similar, the larger standard deviation in the low purity samples can be attributed to the regions of nano-sized, disordered crystallites causing more microstructural differences between the low purity samples, whereas the crystallization of high purity samples is more consistent.
While an increase in signal amplitude, as measured by the multichannel analyzer, is typically attributed to a higher charge collection efficiency (CCE), the larger signal intensity could also result from an increase in sample mobility. The rise time of a MAPbBr3 detector using low purity precursors has shown to exhibit a slow charge collection time, leading to a significant level of ballistic deficit.36 As the bias was increased across the sample, the increase in charge collection observed was a combination of reduced charge carrier trapping and enhanced signal integrity through the amplifier. In this study, ballistic deficit could also play a significant role.
The preamplifier traces were evaluated using an oscilloscope to determine the charge collection time of each detector37–39 and remove the ballistic deficit from the preamplifier using a cascade of partial deconvolutions.40 The average of the 100 preamplifier traces collected for each low purity and high purity detector was aligned using a constant fraction discrimination algorithm in Matlab™ and the results are shown in Fig. S4.† In eqn (1), the integrated charge Vc, deconvolved from the single pole of the preamplifier, was determined at each time stamp i, where s is the sampling frequency of the oscilloscope, τp is the fall time of the preamplifier, and Vp is the uncorrected signal. (1)
After deconvolving each of the pulses, it is shown that the high purity detectors collected an average of 32 ± 30% more charge at the time stamp corresponding to the maximum amplitude observed from the averaged preamplifier traces. We used this time stamp rather than the maximum charge observed to remove the effect of the much slower detrapped charge that manifests itself in the decaying tail of the preamplifier trace.
In addition, each of the low purity detectors has a signal rise suggesting that there are multiple charge transport components involved during the primary signal rise. After a fast-initial rise, the slope of the rise decreases between 20 and 25 microseconds. We attribute this slow component of the rise time to charge trapping and detrapping. The high purity detectors do not show this same trapping behavior. In Table S2,† the drift mobility is calculated to compare three high purity and three low purity detectors. Assuming a flat electric field profile, ||drift = may be used to calculate the mobility, where ||drift is the observed 10% to 90% rise time from the averaged preamplifier traces. The average hole drift mobility for the high purity detectors was found to be 17.5 ± 1.9 cm2 V−1 s−1, and the hole drift mobility for the low purity detectors was 16.7 ± 1.9 cm2 V−1 s−1. While the difference in the hole mobility between the low purity and high purity samples helps explain the effect of potential error in evaluating the results if ballistic deficit is not taken into account, the larger average signal amplitude from the high purity samples clearly indicates that there is a reduction in charge trapping during the primary drift, enhancing the charge collection. Although the energy resolution of the device did not increase using the high purity precursors, the increase in CCE is a critical characteristic in efficient radiation sensing devices. By maximizing the CCE, the signal-to-noise ratio increases and enables sensing of lower energy X-rays and gamma rays that interact throughout the bulk of the MAPbBr3 single crystals.
Conclusions
In summary, the effects of precursor purity on single crystalline MAPbBr3 solution-based growth were deeply investigated. Although it is shown that impurities are not incorporated into the final crystal structure, impurities do alter the microstructure by acting as nucleation sites, which are shown to inhibit larger grain growth and alignment by increasing the amount and reducing the size of crystallites in the single crystal. We found that using high purity precursors increased the size of crystallites, yielding a higher photogenerated charge carrier lifetime by two orders of magnitude. The increase in carrier lifetime indicates a lower probability of nonradiative recombination and charge carrier trapping, thereby increasing the diffusion length of charge carriers due to less trap states at crystallite boundaries in the near-surface region. Further, through alpha particle sensing, the impact of precursor purity is evident on the charge transfer properties, where crystal growth using higher purity precursors yields higher charge collection efficiency. Therefore, we propose that although impurities are not incorporated into the final crystal structure in solution-based growth, the presence of impurities during the growth clearly affects the quality of single crystalline MAPbBr3via crystallite boundaries, negatively affecting the electronic properties and decreasing the device performance. In this perspective, we demonstrate the use of high purity precursors to enhance the charge transfer properties towards developing efficient high energy radiation sensors and optoelectronic devices.
Disclaimer
The views and conclusions contained in this document are those of the authors and should not be interpreted as necessarily representing the official policies, either expressed or implied, of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was conducted at the Joint Institute for Advanced Materials at the University of Tennessee. Part of this research was conducted at the Center for Nanophase Materials Sciences based on user project (CNMS2017-102), which is sponsored by Oak Ridge National Laboratory by the Division of Scientific User Facilities, U.S. Department of Energy. ToF-SIMS measurements were conducted using instrumentation within ORNL's Materials Characterization Core provided by UT-Battelle, LLC under Contract No. DE-AC05-00OR22725 with the U.S. Department of Energy. XRD was performed at the Joint Institute for Advanced Materials (JIAM) Diffraction Facility, located at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville. Part of this research was financially supported by the Center for Materials Processing, a Center of Excellence at the University of Tennessee, Knoxville funded by the Tennessee Higher Education Commission (THEC). This material is based upon work supported by the U.S. Department of Homeland Security under Grant Award Number 2016-DN-077-ARI01.
References
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Efficient organometal trihalide perovskite planar-heterojunction solar cells on flexible polymer substrates, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 CrossRef PubMed  , 1–6.
H.-S. Kim, I. Mora-Sero, V. Gonzalez-Pedro, F. Fabregat-Santiago, E. J. Juarez-Perez, N.-G. Park and J. Bisquert, Mechanism of carrier accumulation in perovskite thin-absorber solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2242 CrossRef PubMed  , 1–7.
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths Exceeding 1 Micrometer in an Organometal Trihalide Perovskite Absorber, Science, 2013, 342(6156), 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mei, X. Li, L. Liu, Z. Ku, T. Liu, Y. Rong, M. Xu, M. Hu, J. Chen, Y. Yang, M. Grätzel and H. Han, A hole-conductor–free, fully printable mesoscopic perovskite solar cell with high stability, Science, 2014, 345(6194), 295–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, High-efficiency solution-processed perovskite solar cells with millimeter-scale grains, Science, 2015, 347(6221), 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Choi, X. Yang, Z. M. Norman, S. J. L. Billinge and J. S. Owen, Structure of methylammonium lead iodide within mesoporous titanium dioxide: active material in high-performance perovskite solar cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 127–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmadi, T. Wu and B. Hu, A Review on Organic–Inorganic Halide Perovskite Photodetectors: Device Engineering and Fundamental Physics, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(41), 1605242 CrossRef PubMed  , 1–24.
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Low-temperature solution-processed wavelength-tunable perovskites for lasing, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-K. Tan, R. S. Moghaddam, M. L. Lai, P. Docampo, R. Higler, F. Deschler, M. Price, A. Sadhanala, L. M. Pazos, D. Credgington, F. Hanusch, T. Bein, H. J. Snaith and R. H. Friend, Bright light-emitting diodes based on organometal halide perovskite, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 687–692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, Y. Shynkarenko, V. Morad, I. Cherniukh, O. Nazarenko, D. Kreil, T. Nauser and M. V. Kovalenko, Detection of gamma photons using solution-grown single crystals of hybrid lead halide perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 585–589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, P. Mulligan, W. Chuirazzi, H. Fang, C. Wang, B. R. Ecker, Y. Gao, M. A. Loi, L. Cao and J. Huang, Sensitive X-Ray Detectors Made of Methylammonium Lead Tribromide Perovskite Single Crystals, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Q. Xu, H. Wei, W. Wei, W. Chuirazzi, D. DeSantis, J. Huang and L. Cao, Detection of Charged Particles with a Methylammonium Lead Tribromide Perovskite Single Crystal, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. A, 2017, 848, 106–108 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Low trap-state density and long carrier diffusion in organolead trihalide perovskite single crystals, Science, 2015, 347(6221), 519–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Electron-Hole Diffusion Lengths >175 Um in Solution-Grown Ch3nh3pbi3 Single Crystals, Science, 2015, 967–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He and G. Maculan, High-Quality Bulk Hybrid Perovskite Single Crystals within Minutes by Inverse Temperature Crystallization, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(7586), 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Chang, H. Zhu, B. Li, F. H. Isikgor, Y. Hao, Q. Xu and J. Ouyang, Boosting the performance of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cell by controlling the precursor purity of perovskite materials, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(3), 887–893 RSC .
J. Yao, L. Yang, F. Cai, Y. Yan, R. S. Gurney, D. Liu and T. Wang, The impacts of PbI2 purity on the morphology and device performance of one-step spray-coated planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2(2), 436–443 RSC .
Y. Dang, Y. Liu, Y. Sun, D. Yuan, X. Liu, W. Lu, G. Liu, H. Xia and X. Tao, Bulk crystal growth of hybrid perovskite material CH3NH3PbI3, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17(3), 665–670 RSC .
Z. Lian, Q. Yan, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, L. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Pan, Q. Li, L. Wang and J.-L. Sun, High-Performance Planar-Type Photodetector on (100) Facet of MAPbI3 Single Crystal, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(16563), 1–10 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, Z. Yang, D. Cui, X. Ren, J. Sun, X. Liu, J. Zhang, Q. Wei, H. Fan, F. Yu, X. Zhang, C. Zhao and S. Liu, Two-Inch-Sized Perovskite CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) Crystals: Growth and Characterization, Adv. Mater., 2015, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Q. Han, S.-H. Bae, P. Sun, Y.-T. Hsieh, Y. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Single Crystal Formamidinium Lead Iodide (FAPbI3): Insight into the Structural, Optical, and Electrical Properties, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(11), 2253–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Tisdale, E. Muckley, M. Ahmadi, T. Smith, C. Seal, E. Lukosi, I. N. Ivanov and B. Hu, Dynamic Impact of Electrode Materials on Interface of Single-Crystalline Methylammonium Lead Bromide Perovskite, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(18), 1800476 CrossRef .
W. Peng, L. Wang, B. Murali, K.-T. Ho, A. Bera, N. Cho, C.-F. Kang, V. M. Burlakov, J. Pan, L. Sinatra, C. Ma, W. Xu, D. Shi, E. Alarousu, A. Goriely, J.-H. He, O. F. Mohammed, T. Wu and O. M. Bakr, Solution-Grown Monocrystalline Hybrid Perovskite Films for Hole-Transporter-Free Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(17), 3383–3390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Wang, L.-C. Li, M. Shellaiah and K. Wen Sun, Structural and Photophysical Properties of Methylammonium Lead Tribromide (MAPbBr3) Single Crystals, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 13643 CrossRef PubMed  , 1–14.
J. A. Kaduk and J. W. Reid, Typical values of Rietveld instrument profile coefficients, Powder Diffr., 2011, 26(1), 88–94 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Speakman, Estimating Crystallite Size Using XRD (MIT Center for Materials Science and Engineering,  March 8, 2008), http://prism.mit.edu/xray/CrystalSizeAnalysis.ppt (accessed June 27, 2018) Search PubMed .
W. Alexander, J. Sandoval and L. Van Den Berg, Characterization of strain and crystallographic defects in HgI 2 single crystals, Proc. SPIE, 2004, 5540, 1–10 CrossRef .
N.-G. Park, Perovskite Solar Cells: An Emerging Photovoltaic Technology, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dang, D. Ju, L. Wang and X. Tao, Recent Progress in the Synthesis of Hybrid Halide Perovskite Single Crystals, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 4476–4484 RSC .
A. M. A. Leguy, A. R. Goñi, J. M. Frost, J. Skelton, F. Brivio, X. Rodríguez-Martínez, O. J. Weber, A. Pallipurath, M. I. Alonso, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. T. Weller, J. Nelson, A. Walsh and P. R. F. Barnes, Dynamic disorder, phonon lifetimes, and the assignment of modes to the vibrational spectra of methylammonium lead halide perovskites, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(39), 27051–27066 RSC .
F. Chen, C. Xu, Q. Xu, Y. Zhu, Z. Zhu, W. Liu, X. Dong, F. Qin and Z. Shi, Structure Evolution of CH3NH3PbBr3 Single Crystal Grown in N,N-Dimethylformamide Solution, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18(5), 3132–3137 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Ginde and A. S. Myerson, Effect of Impurities on Cluster Growth and Nucleation, J. Cryst. Growth, 1993, 126, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .

          J. J. De Yoreo and P. G. Vekilov, in Reviews in Mineralogy and Geochemistry: Biomineralization, ed. Dove P. M., De Yoreo J. J. and Weiner S., Mineralogical Society of America, Washington, DC,  2003, vol. 54, p. 57 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, H. Zhang, S. Yuan, J. Wang, Y. Zhan and L. Zheng, An optical dynamic study of MAPbBr3 single crystals passivated with MAPbCl3/I3-MAPbBr3 heterojunctions, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(6), 4516–4521 RSC .
Y. Yamada, T. Yamada, L. Q. Phuong, N. Maruyama, H. Nishimura, A. Wakamiya, Y. Murata and Y. Kanemitsu, Dynamic Optical Properties of CH3NH3PbI3 Single Crystals As Revealed by One- and Two-Photon Excited Photoluminescence Measurements, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(33), 10456–10459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Lukosi, T. Smith, J. T. Tisdale, D. Hamm, C. Seal, B. Hu and M. Ahmadi, Methylammonium Lead Tribromide Semiconductors: Ionizing Radiation Detection and Electronic Properties,  2018, unpublished results Search PubMed.
J. C. Erickson, H. W. Yao, R. B. James, H. Hermon and M. Greaves, Time of flight experimental studies of CdZnTe radiation detectors, J. Electron. Mater., 2000, 29(6), 699–703 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Zanio, W. M. Akutagawa and R. Kikuchi, Transient Currents in Semi-Insulating CdTe Characteristic of Deep Traps, J. Appl. Phys., 1968, 39(6), 2818–2828 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Dong, W. Jie and Y. Xu, Charge Transport Behavior in Solution-Grown Methylammonium Lead Tribromide Perovskite Single Crystal Using α Particles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(26), 14355–14361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Georgiev and W. Gast, Digital Pulse Processing in High Resolution, High Throughput, Gamma-Ray Spectroscopy, IEEE Trans. Nucl. Sci., 1993, 40(4), 770–779 CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce01498a‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD data collected for single crystals and (b) powder XRD for low and high purity grown single crystalline MAPbBr3.	 

 	Fig. 2  Raman spectroscopy for 98%-based and high purity single crystalline MAPbBr3 from (a) 750–2000 cm−1 and (b) normalized spectra from 1400–1700 cm−1. (blue shading in 2a shows the area of interest for 2b).	 

 	Fig. 3  SEM images of (a and b) low purity MAPbBr3 single crystals as-grown and (c and d) high purity MAPbBr3 single crystals as-grown.	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized TRPL for MAPbBr3 single crystals grown with low purity and high purity precursors.	 

 	Fig. 5  
210Po alpha particle spectra collected at a −50 V bias for (a) the low purity MAPbBr3 detector and (b) high purity MAPbBr3 detector.	 
	(1)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ce01498a
‡ Both authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
