Strong up-conversion luminescence of rare-earth doped oxide films enhanced by gap modes on ZnO nanowires   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR07241D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR07241D
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 726-732Strong up-conversion luminescence of rare-earth doped oxide films enhanced by gap modes on ZnO nanowires†

        
          
            Jinlei 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Baosheng 
            Cao
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Luis 
            Rino
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yurui 
            Fang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Hu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhenyi 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yingzhou 
            Huang
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Bin 
            Dong
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory of Photosensitive Material and Device of Liaoning Province, Key Laboratory of New Energy and Rare Earth Resource Utilization of State Ethnic Affairs Commission & School of Physics and Materials Engineering, Dalian Minzu University, Dalian 116600, P. R. China. E-mail: bscao@dlnu.edu.cn; dong@dlnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics & I3N, University of Aveiro, Campus Universitário de Santiago, Aveiro 3810-193, Portugal
cKey Laboratory of Materials Modification by Laser, Electron, and Ion Beams (Ministry of Education), School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Dalian University of Technology, Dalian 116024, P. R. China
dSchool of Computer Science and Information Engineering, Chongqing Technology and Business University, Chongqing 400067, P. R. China
eDepartment of Applied Physics, Chongqing University, Chongqing 400044, P. R. China
Received 
      28th September 2017
    , Accepted 29th November 2017First published on 1st December 2017AbstractUp-conversion luminescence (UCL) from rare-earth doped oxide (RE) films has great potential for application in fields such as solar cells, bioanalysis, or display technologies. However, the relatively high phonon energy of oxide matrices usually facilitates nonradiative relaxation leading to low UCL efficiency. Herein, we report a three-layer hierarchical structure of Ag/ZnO nanowires (nw-ZnO)/RE composite films, which enhances the UCL of rare-earth doped oxide films. An optimization of the geometric structure of the composite films demonstrated an increase of UCL by up to almost two orders of magnitude in Er3+ and Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 films. This UCL enhancement is attributed to the formation of a very strong electric field in the tips of the nw-ZnO creating a highly effective electric field at the composite films, combined with reflection at the silver layer. Furthermore, we use the UCL properties of these novel Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films to demonstrate their possible use in ZnO-based photocatalytic processes to enhance the utilization of near-infrared sunlight in these devices.
Introduction
Up-conversion luminescence (UCL) of rare-earth doped films has been the subject of much attention due to their wide range of applications in displays, optoelectronic devices, new light sources, optical sensing, biological identification, etc.1–7 Compared with UCL bulk and nanocrystalline materials, UCL films have very attractive prospects for solar cells, optoelectronic devices, infrared detection and so on.8–12 However, a major problem for these applications is the low efficiency of UCL films. Among them, rare-earth doped fluoride films are well studied because fluoride is a highly efficient UCL matrix and their structure, size, and morphology can be well controlled.13 Compared to fluoride, oxide matrix based materials have a wide transparency range, good thermal conductivity, isotropic optical properties and high thermal, mechanical and chemical stability, which can stand extreme conditions such as high temperature, chemical reactivity, and other harsh environments.5,14–16 However, the relatively high phonon energy of most oxides leads to a modest UCL efficiency of rare-earth doped oxide materials and films. In order to improve the UCL properties of rare-earth doped oxide films, a lot of studies have been conducted, including the selection of oxides with lower phonon energy, sensitizer co-doping and morphology/size/surface modification control of oxides.5,14,16
Recently, extensive work has been performed to modify the local electromagnetic (EM) field on the emitting rare-earth material, aiming to enhance the UCL properties. Plasmon-enhanced UCL is one of the new hotspots,17 and different plasmonic structures/geometries of core–shell,18 core-spacer-shell,19 sphere assembly,20,21 and waveguide22 were studied. However, due to the short range (near field) nature of plasmonic phenomena, a nanoscale spacing between the metal surface and the rare-earth luminescent center is necessary. This accurate distance between the plasmonic metal material and luminescent center is difficult to realize in oxide matrixes because these are usually synthesized and/or annealed at high temperatures. To overcome these limitations, other nanostructures including photonic crystals,23 antenna dyes,24 and quantum dots25 are used to improve the EM environment. Among them, nanostructures supporting gap modes are sought as an effective solution which can be used as an alternative to the above structures.26
In this work, we realize, to the best of our knowledge for the first time, a great enhancement of UCL of oxide films through an Ag layer/ZnO nanowire (nw-ZnO) forest layer covered with a rare-earth doped oxide (RE) layer. Due to the combined effect of the local confinement of the electric field in the spaces between the nw-ZnO and reflections at the Ag layer, up to two orders of magnitude enhancement of the UCL intensity for the RE film was obtained.
Experimental
Sample fabrication
The Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films were synthesized by sequential preparation of three layers of Ag, nw-ZnO, and Er3+(Tm3+) doped YbMoO4 on glass substrates. First, the Ag layer was deposited by direct-current (DC) magnetron sputtering of the Ag target. Then, a ZnO seed was deposited on the Ag layer using radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering of the ZnO target. After that, a hydrothermal process was used to grow nw-ZnO based on the ZnO seeds. Next, a stoichiometric solution with rare-earth ions was deposited on the nw-ZnO layer using a spin-coating technique. The above-prepared samples were annealed at the heating rate of 3 K min−1 and kept at the annealing temperature of 773 K for 2 h, and then cooled down to room temperature in a furnace.
For comparison of the nw-ZnO forest layer versus a dense ZnO layer, a composite film of Ag/ZnO film/RE was prepared. A ZnO film was deposited using RF magnetron sputtering of the ZnO target. For the measurement of photocurrent properties, the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film was synthesized on the top of an ITO layer of a glass substrate.
Characterization techniques
The surface morphology of the films was observed using a Hitachi S-4800 scanning electron microscope (SEM) at an acceleration voltage of 5 kV. Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) spectroscopy with SEM was used to perform elemental mapping and obtain the EDX spectrum with an acceleration voltage of 15 kV. The phase structures of the samples were analyzed using a SHIMADZU XRD-6000 X-ray diffractometer (XRD) with Cu Kα radiation, using the scanning mode at 2θ ranging from 20° to 80° with a step length of 0.02° and a rate of 4.0° min−1. The UCL was measured with an integrating sphere under 980 nm laser diode (LD) excitation. The UCL spectra were analyzed using a CR131 photomultiplier tube coupled with a Jobin Yvon iHr550 monochromator. For the excitation power density dependence of UCL, the power density was adjusted from 2.0 to 4.35 W cm−2. The UV/visible/NIR absorption spectra of the samples were obtained on a Lambda 750 (PerkinElmer).
For the optical images of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film under 980 nm LD excitation, photographs were captured using a common digital camera without any filter. For the measurement of the photocurrent from the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film, a three-electrode system and Autolab electrochemical workstation were adopted to obtain the current–time curves using Pt as the counter electrode, Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode, the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film on ITO glass as the working electrode, sodium sulphate as the electrolyte, and 980 nm LD as the light source.
Modelling
All simulation results in this work were obtained using the finite element method (COMSOL 5.0 commercial package). The hexagonal prisms were located above the Ag film. When the incident light was illuminated from the nw-ZnO side normal to the substrate plane, its polarization was along the z-axis and the electric amplitude was 1 V m−1. The simulation domain was a cylinder 2000 nm in diameter and 2000 nm in height. The Ag film was a cylinder slab with a thickness of 28 nm, and the slab plane was extended to the perfect matched layer (PML). Scattering boundary condition and PMLs were used to reduce the boundary scattering.
Results and discussion
The synthesis process of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE UCL composite film is shown in the schematic diagram of Fig. 1a. An Ag layer was first deposited on a glass substrate, followed by the deposition of ZnO seeds using magnetron sputtering. Then a nw-ZnO layer was grown by the hydrothermal method followed by an Er3+ or Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 layer spin-coated on the top of nw-ZnO (details in the ESI†). Fig. 1b–d show the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the individual nw-ZnO layer and the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films. The inset of Fig. 1b indicates that nw-ZnO is rod-shaped with a hexagonal tip, not aligned along the direction perpendicular to the substrate, with a length and diameter of about 900 nm and 90 nm, respectively. The cross-section in Fig. 1c confirmed that the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film structure is made of three individual layers of Ag (about 28 nm), ZnO nanowires and Er3+ doped YbMoO4 (around 500 nm). Fig. 1d shows the flat surface morphology of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film with a Er3+ doped YbMoO4 particle size of about 200 nm. Fig. 1e shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) pattern of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE UCL composite film. The XRD result shows that the composite film is composed of a hexagonal phase of ZnO with preferential c-axis orientation, Ag element and the YbMoO4 phase. No secondary phases were detectable, indicating that the three layers did not react with each other. The XRD patterns of RE, Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films (Fig. S1†) and elemental mapping by Energy Dispersive X-Ray (EDX) analysis of the cross-section of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film (Fig. S2†) confirmed the above results, indicating the presence of three individual layers. It is noted that Ag signals cannot be detected because of the tiny thickness of the Ag layer and the low resolution of the EDX system. To exclude the influence of the rare earth doped YbMoO4 layer thickness, the cross-sectional SEM images of RE, Ag/RE, and nw-ZnO/RE films are shown in Fig. S3,† which indicate that the thicknesses of various YbMoO4 layers are almost the same.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. SEM images of (b) surface and cross-section (inset) of nw-ZnO, (c) cross-section and (d) surface of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (e) XRD pattern of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film and relevant diffractogram references. 
The ZnO nanostructure was selected due to the easy control of geometry to obtain several configurations,27–29 and as UCL films, we selected Er3+ (or Tm3+) doped YbMoO4 with the molar ratio of Er:Yb = 1:10 (or Tm:Yb = 1:50) as the rare-earth doped oxide layer because it is a proven procedure for UCL.30,31 Optical excitation using an optic-fiber-connected 980 nm LD and an integrating sphere is illustrated in Fig. 2a. Care was taken to keep all the experimental parameters – LD power, illuminated area of the sample, light path, distance from the probe to sample – fixed between different measurements, allowing for the direct comparison of UCL results from different samples. Fig. 2c and d show the typical UCL spectra of the individual layers of Er3+ (or Tm3+) doped YbMoO4 films. From the well-known energy diagram of the UCL process in the Er3+ (or Tm3+)/Yb3+ system (Fig. 2b),32 it can be seen that Yb3+, acting as a sensitizer, absorbs 980 nm photons populating the 2F5/2 level, from which sequential energy transfers to Er3+ (or Tm3+) populate the respectively multiple excited energy states. After nonradiative relaxation, the radiative decays of 2H11/2/4S3/2 → 4I15/2 and 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 (or 1G4 → 3H6/3F4 and 3H4 → 3H6 in Tm3+) result in green and red UCL of Er3+ (or blue, red, and near-infrared UCL of Tm3+) from rare-earth doped YbMoO4 films, respectively (Fig. 2c and d). In contrast to the Er3+ and Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 powders,30 the film's red emissions of the 4F9/2 → 4I15/2 transition of Er3+ (or 1G4 → 3F4 transition of Tm3+) are weak indicating a low nonradiative transition rate from the 4I11/2 to 4I13/2 Er3+ states (and a high transition rate of the near-infrared 3H4 → 3H6 radiative transition between Tm3+ states).
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical test path diagram. (b) Energy transfer UCL processes of Er(Tm)–Yb codoped systems. UCL spectra of (c) Er3+ and (d) Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 individual films. 
It is well known that tailoring of the EM environment with local geometries effectively enhances the UCL properties through improving either absorption or emission, even both processes.17 In Fig. 3a, we present the observed UCL spectra of RE individual films alongside with Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films and in Fig. 3b the enhancement factors (EFs) of the composite films relative to the individual RE films under the excitation power density of 2.0 W cm−2, where the green and red emissions related to the Er3+ doped samples and the blue and infrared emissions related to the Tm3+ ones. EF is defined as the integrated UCL intensity ratio of composite film to RE individual film. The different film architectures had presented no influence on the green (Er3+) and blue (Tm3+) UCL band shapes, however they provided significant effects on their UCL intensity.
 Fig. 3  (a) From bottom to top: UCL spectra of RE, Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films (left: Er3+ doped YbMoO4, right: Tm3+ doped YbMoO4). (b) Enhancement factors of UCL for Er3+ and Tm3+ doped Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films. Enhancement factor of (c) green and (d) blue UCL for Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films as a function of the power density; (e) optical images of Er3+ and Tm3+ doped Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films under 980 nm excitation with (left) bright field images and (right) dark field images. (f) Chromaticity coordinates (Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage – CIE1931) of the UCL from samples shown in (a). 
Compared with the individual Er3+ and Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 films, the UCL intensity of Ag/RE films was generally enhanced, with green (Er3+) and blue (Tm3+) emissions increasing less than one order of magnitude. We attribute this relative enhancement to the formation of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) on the surface of the Ag layer. This assignment is backed by the broad absorption bands around 980 nm due to the SPP resonance of Ag that can be seen in the absorption spectra of the Ag layer (Fig. S4†). The enhancement of red emissions of Er3+ and infrared emissions of Tm3+ is lower than that of green and blue emissions, which indicates that green and blue UCL can obtain more benefits from the EM field SPP enhancement than red and infrared emissions.
In the nw-ZnO/RE films, the UCL intensity also increases, compared with the individual Er3+ and Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 films, although less than Ag/RE films. Green and red emissions increased about 3.5 and 5.4 times, and blue and infrared emissions increased around 4.9 and 3.7 times, respectively. We attributed the observed EF of the nw-ZnO/RE films mainly to the influence of nw-ZnO on scattering. Fig. S5† shows the reflection spectra of the nw-ZnO film. ZnO nanowires display lower reflection than the Ag layer at blue, green and red bands, which indicates that the UCL is absorbed by the nw-ZnO layer, leading to lower UCL intensity. In addition, the green and red emissions of Er3+ and the blue and infrared emissions of Tm3+ are similarly enhanced, indicating that the nw-ZnO layer does not change the UCL populating processes.
It is exciting to observe that the UCL of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films presents a high enhancement, relative to the individual RE films, with an EF of about 71 and 32 respectively to the green emissions of Er3+ and blue emissions of Tm3+. The enhancement of UCL intensity in the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films can also be observed by studying the excitation power density dependent UCL enhancement. The UCL EF in Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films as a function of excitation power density is given in Fig. 3c and d. The EF of blue (Tm3+) UCL decreases with increasing excitation power density for Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films and saturates under high power density, which is similar to the others.33,34 The EF remains about 25 times for the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE film at high excitation power density when saturated (Fig. 3d). However, the EF of green (Er3+) UCL for Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films and that of blue (Tm3+) UCL for Ag/RE and nw-ZnO/RE films remain nearly unchanged with increasing excitation power density (Fig. 3c and d). It is implied that the EF of green and blue UCL is already saturated under the power density higher than 2.0 W cm−2. In the case of as low power density as 0.23 W cm−2, we could still detect green and blue UCL from the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE film but not from the RE film. It is expected that there will be a higher EF of green and blue UCL under lower power density and a similar power density-dependent EF evolution like blue UCL of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE film in Fig. 3d. Up to two orders of magnitude enhancement of UCL for the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film may result from the combined effects of the absorption enhancement and the increase of emission rate.
As can be seen from Fig. 3e, the area of Ag/nw-ZnO/RE UCL composite film samples with a uniform and good quality surface is as big as 3.5 × 3.5 cm2, with dazzling nearly pure green and blue light observed both in dark and bright surroundings (Fig. 3e and f). The dependence of the UCL intensity Iup on the pump power Ppump sheds further light on the underlying mechanism as Iup ∝ Pnpump where n is the number of laser photons required.35 For the green (Er3+) and blue (Tm3+) UCL intensity of Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films (Fig. S6†), the power law exponents are about 1.65 and 2.60, respectively, indicating two- and three-photon processes for Er3+ and Tm3+ doped Ag/nw-ZnO/RE UCL composite films, respectively.
As noted before, through the combination of the Ag layer and the nw-ZnO forest layer, the luminescence efficiency of RE films was effectively improved. Many architectures engineered in UCL materials can improve both absorption and emission processes by tailoring the EM fields at the position of an upconverting emitter.17 In order to achieve a better understanding of the effect of Ag/nw-ZnO geometries on the UCL properties, the Finite Element Method (FEM, COMSOL multi-physics 5.0) was used to simulate the electric field intensity distribution of several Ag/nw-ZnO geometries. The tailored EM field can alter UCL properties either by changing the absorption cross-section or/and the UCL emission efficiency, therefore we simulated the electric field enhancement matching to up-converter's absorption at the excitation wavelength of 980 nm, and UCL for the green emission of Er3+ at 550 nm and the blue emission of Tm3+ at 473 nm. As shown in Fig. 4a, the incident light was simulated as an x or y polarized plane wave, normal to the substrate, with wavelengths of 980, 550, and 473 nm. As the nw-ZnO forest was not grown with individual nanowires strictly perpendicular to the substrate, we expect a random distribution of titled angles and direction, therefore, different types of nw-ZnO configurations were studied in our simulations (Fig. 4 and S7†).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the model used in the simulation (left) with different ZnO nanowire gap modes (right). Simulated electric field intensity distribution of the ZnO gap at the wavelength of (b) 980 nm, (c) 550 nm and (d) 473 nm. The left and right electric field intensity distribution in (b)–(d) is in the x–z plane and y–z plane, respectively. The length of nw-ZnO and the thickness of the Ag layer are 900 nm and 28 nm, respectively. 
Even though ZnO is dielectric at the relevant wavelengths, it cannot support the waveguide mode in such a thin wire. However, the surface waves on the wire will form nanowire-gap modes in the forest within the small gaps between nanowires, therefore the electric field can be quite strong in the wave nodes. The Ag film acts as a mirror that reflects the excitation power lost from the transmission of the RE layer. In Fig. 4b–d, the calculated distribution of the local electric field enhancement (|E|2/|E0|2) in the x–z and y–z planes of one kind of ZnO nanowire gap configuration is presented, where |E|2 and |E0|2 are the magnitudes of the local electric field and the incident electric field, respectively. Apparent from the figure, the periodic increase of (|E|2/|E0|2 along the z-axis is prominently displayed, particularly the local electric field at the tip between two ZnO nanowires is significantly enhanced. The maximum electric field enhancement at the tip of the nw-ZnO gap is about 20, 70, and 50 times for the wavelength of 980, 550, and 473 nm, respectively. Since the RE layer is located at the top of ZnO nanowires, the UCL of the RE layer could be effectively changed. It can also be found that the intensity of the standing wave nodes is still strong on the top of the nw-ZnO forest layer with an average electric field enhancement of about 6, 10, and 12 times for the wavelength of 980, 550, and 473 nm, respectively, within the distance of 500 nm on the top of nw-ZnO. One should note that in the real condition, there is an upconverter layer on the top of the nw-ZnO layer, which will further confine the electric field on the UCL layer side at the nw-ZnO/RE interface due to the RE layer's high refractive index (the surrounding medium of ZnO is air). In this work, the length of the ZnO layer places the peak node of the standing wave at the top of ZnO nanowires. Fig. S7† presents the simulations considering another four different types of nw-ZnO configurations, showing similar results for the ones in Fig. 4. For the parallel distributed nw-ZnO, the electric field enhancement appeared only among the nw-ZnO, however, the maximum electric field was lower due to the missing of the nw-ZnO tip. For the situation of nw-ZnO closed together, the maximum electric field emerged at the tip of nw-ZnO.
From the above discussion, it is clear that the geometry (spatial gap, title, length) of nw-ZnO plays a vital role in the formation of local electric field enhancement and therefore the UCL of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films. To further explore this dependence, Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films with different lengths of nw-ZnO were prepared to study their UCL properties. Fig. 5 shows the green UCL spectra for RE = Er3+ and the UCL intensity dependence on the length (H) of nw-ZnO in the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE UCL composite films. Apart from the expected non-influence on the UCL spectral distribution, the results evidence the vital effect of the nw-ZnO length on the UCL intensity. By increasing the length of nw-ZnO up to about the wavelength of the IR excitation, the green UCL intensity increases, decreasing for larger lengths. The strongest luminescence is observed for nw-ZnO of 900 nm in length, which is the value when electric fields (both of 980 nm and 550 nm) formed peak nodes at the UCL layer with the gap modes (Fig. 4b and c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Green UCL spectra of Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films with the different lengths of ZnO nanowires. (b) Dependence of green UCL intensity on the length of ZnO nanowires. 
Next, we prepared samples where the nw-ZnO layer was replaced by a ZnO dense layer (ZnO film) prepared by magnetron sputtering. The XRD patterns of RE, Ag/RE, ZnO film/RE, and Ag/ZnO film/RE composite films (Fig. S8†) indicate the same phase structure as for the ZnO nanowires. Fig. S9† presents the UCL spectra and enhancement factors of ZnO film/RE, Ag/RE, and Ag/ZnO film/RE composite films. The green UCL of ZnO film/RE and Ag/ZnO film/RE composite films increased only 2 and 20 times compared with that of individual RE films, respectively. This significant reduction of the EF, when compared to the nw-ZnO structure, clearly indicates the importance of the space gap mode of nw-ZnO for the UCL efficiency.
Interestingly, the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film possesses a very broad light absorption band spanning from the near-UV to visible region (Fig. 6b), probably originated at the ZnO impurity ions created during the annealing process of the RE oxide on the top of nw-ZnO. Clearly, the light absorption range of the impurities-ions doped ZnO layer covers the UCL of the RE component in the composite film. As such, the strong UCL from the RE layer could be employed to excite the defect energy levels of the ZnO layer in the composite film, allowing us to obtain a near-infrared photoelectric conversion. To test this hypothesis, we prepared a photo-reactor (details in the Methods section) to measure the light-induced photocurrent in our composite films. Fig. 6a presents the schematic diagram of the experimental setup and Fig. 6c displays the photocurrent vs. time results for the as-fabricated films subjected to 980 nm LD irradiation. There is no noticeable photocurrent signal on the individual nw-ZnO film because the low photon energy of near-infrared light cannot induce the generation of available electrons in the ZnO film. The Ag/nw-ZnO composite film shows a weak photocurrent signal, which can be attributed to the plasmonic-induced “hot electrons” injection effect due to the Ag surface plasmon resonances.36,37 Notably, with the introduction of the RE layer on the composite film structure, the photocurrent of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film is increased by about one order of magnitude compared to that of the Ag/nw-ZnO film. This observation confirms the above assumption that the strong green UCL of the Ag/ZnO/RE composite films can drive the generation of charge-carriers in the defect states of the impurity-doped nw-ZnO layer for initiating the near-infrared photoelectric conversion. Thus, the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film may be of interest to harvest the near-infrared sunlight in photoelectric film materials.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the equipment for the test of the photocurrent of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (b) The absorption spectrum of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (c) Photocurrent vs. time plots for the individual nw-ZnO, Ag/nw-ZnO, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films under 980 nm LD irradiation. 
Conclusions
We experimentally demonstrated a strong increase of the UCL intensity of Er3+ or Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 films when in a three-layer structure of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. We attributed this UCL enhancement to the formation of a strong local electric field on the top of nw-ZnO where the RE layer was grown, due to the spatial gap modes of nw-ZnO. Finite Element Method simulations of the electric field distribution inside the realized structures confirmed the best geometry to achieve the observed UCL enhancements which are qualitatively consistent with the presented experimental results. After optimization of the geometric parameters of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film, a UCL enhancement of about two orders of magnitude, compared with the individual RE layer, was achieved. Moreover, this novel Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film with excellent UCL properties was used to obtain an apparent photocurrent under near-infrared excitation, which may be important for the utilization of near-infrared sunlight in ZnO-based photocatalytic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding provided by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 11474046), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Grant No. DC201502080202, DC201502080203), the Program for Liaoning Excellent Talents in University (LNET) (Grant No. LR2015016), the Science and Technique Foundation of Dalian (Grant No. 2015J12JH201), and the China Scholarship Council.
Notes and references
G. S. Maciel, A. Biswas, R. Kapoor and P. N. Prasad, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 1978–1980 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Niu, M. Hojamberdiev, F. M. Alamgir, Y. Cai and K. Jacob, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 361–371 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miteva, V. Yakutkin, G. Nelles and S. Baluschev, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 103002 CrossRef .
B. Dong, D. P. Liu, X. J. Wang, T. Yang, S. M. Miao and C. R. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 181117 CrossRef .
B. Dong, B. S. Cao, Y. Y. He, Z. Liu, Z. P. Li and Z. Q. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1987–1993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, D. Kim, J. Lee, S. Baek, J. Lee, R. Singh and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. R. Yin, T. S. Yang, Y. C. Yang, Z. Shen, P. Yao and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5029–5037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Huang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 690, 356–359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Cheng, B. Fuckel, R. W. MacQueen, T. Khoury, R. Clady, T. F. Schulze, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, M. J. Crossley, B. Stannowski, K. Lips and T. W. Schmidt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6953–6959 CAS .
J. de Wild, J. K. Rath, A. Meijerink, W. van Sark and R. E. I. Schropp, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2395–2398 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, W. Xu, L. H. Zhang, X. Bai, S. B. Cui, D. L. Zhou, Z. Yin, H. W. Song and D. H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5462–5471 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Liu, Z. Y. Zhang, C. X. Shan, Z. Q. Feng, J. S. Li, C. L. Song, Y. N. Bao, X. H. Qi and B. Dong, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16136 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. H. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Y. Chen, C. Zhang, M. H. Hong and X. G. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Silver, M. I. Martinez-Rubio, T. G. Ireland, G. R. Fern and R. Withnall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 948–953 CrossRef CAS .
I. Etchart, I. Hernandez, A. Huignard, M. Berard, W. P. Gillin, R. J. Curry and A. K. Cheetham, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1387–1394 RSC .
H. Q. Wang, M. Mackovic, A. Osvet, I. Litzov, E. Epelbaum, A. Stiegelschmitt, M. Batentschuk, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 340–346 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Wu, A. Garcia-Etxarri, A. Salleo and J. A. Dionne, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4020–4031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. J. Li, I. A. Ivanov, Y. Q. Qu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2865–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Deng, L. Sudheendra, J. B. Zhao, J. X. Fu, D. Y. Jin, I. M. Kennedy and E. M. Goldys, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 8 Search PubMed .
M. Saboktakin, X. C. Ye, S. J. Oh, S. H. Hong, A. T. Fafarman, U. K. Chettiar, N. Engheta, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8758–8766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, S. Xu, Y. S. Zhu, T. Liu, X. Bai, B. A. Dong, L. Xu and H. W. Song, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6971–6973 RSC .
E. Verhagen, L. Kuipers and A. Polman, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 334–337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Johnson, P. J. Reece and G. J. Conibeer, Opt. Lett., 2011, 36, 3990–3992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Zou, C. Visser, J. A. Maduro, M. S. Pshenichnikov and J. C. Hummelen, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Pan, C. del Canizo, E. Canovas, N. M. Santos, J. P. Leitao and A. Luque, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1923–1926 CrossRef CAS .
E. Calandrini, T. Venanzi, F. Appugliese, M. Badioli, V. Giliberti, L. Baldassarre, P. Biagioni, F. De Angelis, W. M. Klesse, G. Scappucci and M. Ortolani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 121104 CrossRef .
M. H. Huang, S. Mao, H. Feick, H. Q. Yan, Y. Y. Wu, H. Kind, E. Weber, R. Russo and P. D. Yang, Science, 2001, 292, 1897–1899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kar, B. N. Pal, S. Chaudhuri and D. Chakravorty, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 4605–4611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wei, L. H. Pan and W. Huang, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2011, 176, 1409–1421 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wu, B. S. Cao, F. Lin, B. J. Chen, J. S. Sun and B. Dong, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 18666–18673 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5642–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Boyer, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 847–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fisher, B. Zhao, C. Lin, M. Berry, P. S. May and S. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24976–24982 CAS .
H. Wang, Z. Yin, W. Xu, D. L. Zhou, S. B. Cui, X. Chen, H. N. Cui and H. W. Song, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10004–10009 RSC .
M. Pollnau, D. R. Gamelin, S. R. Luthi, H. U. Gudel and M. P. Hehlen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 3337–3346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nienhaus, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 45, 3–78 CrossRef .
H. M. Chen, C. K. Chen, M. L. Tseng, P. C. Wu, C. M. Chang, L. C. Cheng, H. W. Huang, T. S. Chan, D. W. Huang, R. S. Liu and D. P. Tsai, Small, 2013, 9, 2926–2936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07241dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. SEM images of (b) surface and cross-section (inset) of nw-ZnO, (c) cross-section and (d) surface of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (e) XRD pattern of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film and relevant diffractogram references.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical test path diagram. (b) Energy transfer UCL processes of Er(Tm)–Yb codoped systems. UCL spectra of (c) Er3+ and (d) Tm3+ doped YbMoO4 individual films.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) From bottom to top: UCL spectra of RE, Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films (left: Er3+ doped YbMoO4, right: Tm3+ doped YbMoO4). (b) Enhancement factors of UCL for Er3+ and Tm3+ doped Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films. Enhancement factor of (c) green and (d) blue UCL for Ag/RE, nw-ZnO/RE, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE films as a function of the power density; (e) optical images of Er3+ and Tm3+ doped Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films under 980 nm excitation with (left) bright field images and (right) dark field images. (f) Chromaticity coordinates (Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage – CIE1931) of the UCL from samples shown in (a).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the model used in the simulation (left) with different ZnO nanowire gap modes (right). Simulated electric field intensity distribution of the ZnO gap at the wavelength of (b) 980 nm, (c) 550 nm and (d) 473 nm. The left and right electric field intensity distribution in (b)–(d) is in the x–z plane and y–z plane, respectively. The length of nw-ZnO and the thickness of the Ag layer are 900 nm and 28 nm, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Green UCL spectra of Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films with the different lengths of ZnO nanowires. (b) Dependence of green UCL intensity on the length of ZnO nanowires.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of the equipment for the test of the photocurrent of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (b) The absorption spectrum of the Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite film. (c) Photocurrent vs. time plots for the individual nw-ZnO, Ag/nw-ZnO, and Ag/nw-ZnO/RE composite films under 980 nm LD irradiation.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07241d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
