Advances in three-dimensional graphene-based materials: configurations, preparation and application in secondary metal (Li, Na, K, Mg, Al)-ion batteri ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8EE03014F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8EE03014F
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2030-2053Advances in three-dimensional graphene-based materials: configurations, preparation and application in secondary metal (Li, Na, K, Mg, Al)-ion batteries

        
          
            Guangzhe 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Huang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhefei 
            Pan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiangyu 
            Su
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zongping 
            Shao
          
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Liang 
            An
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, The Hong Kong Polytechnic University, Hung Hom, Kowloon, Hong Kong SAR, China. E-mail: liang.an@polyu.edu.hk
bJiangsu National Synergetic Innovation Center for Advanced Material College of Energy & State Key Laboratory of Materials-Oriented Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 210009, China
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Curtin University, Perth, WA 6845, Australia. E-mail: zongping.shao@curtin.edu.au
Received 
      13th October 2018
    , Accepted 1st February 2019First published on 1st February 2019AbstractThree-dimensional (3D) graphene materials, consisting of unstacked two-dimensional (2D) graphene sheets serving as building blocks, have been widely reported in recent years. Various synthetic methods have been employed to prepare graphene materials with diverse 3D architectures, which show potential in a wide range of applications such as energy and environmental technologies. In particular, application of 3D graphene-based materials in metal (Li, Na, K, Mg, Al)-ion battery (MIB) systems has been reported often in recent years. However, the critical roles of 3D graphene materials in MIB systems have not been comprehensively discussed. Herein, we first summarize the configurations and preparation of 3D graphene materials. Second, we illustrate the metal-ion storage mechanisms in graphene layers, i.e. intercalation and adsorption. Third, we emphasize the superior functionalities of 3D graphene architectures as supporting and encapsulated materials in MIB applications. Last, we discuss the merits and drawbacks of various 3D graphene architectures in MIB systems. We aim to present a comprehensive understanding of 3D graphene materials and guide directions for future MIB design.
Guangzhe Li
Guangzhe Li received his BS degree (2015) from Jilin University, and MS degree (2018) from Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on metal-ion batteries.
Bin Huang
Bin Huang received his BS degree (2009) and MS degree (2012) from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University, and PhD degree (2016) from the School of Metallurgy and Environment at Central South University, China. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on lithium/sodium-ion batteries.
Zhefei Pan
Zhefei Pan received his BS degree (2015) and MS degree (2017) from the School of Energy Science and Engineering at Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on direct alcohol fuel cells.
Xiangyu Su
Xiangyu Su received his BS degree (2010) from Xi’an Jiaotong University, and MS degree (2011) from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on direct formate fuel cells.
Zongping Shao
Prof. Zongping Shao is a Professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed Professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and as a postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 to 2005. His current research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices.
Liang An
Liang An received his BS degree (2008) from Harbin Institute of Technology and PhD degree (2012) from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently an Assistant Professor in Department of Mechanical Engineering at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include advanced energy conversion and storage technologies, such as fuel cells and batteries.

Broader context
Assembling 2D graphene sheets into 3D graphene materials has received tremendous attention in the past years. By appropriate assembly methods, the outstanding properties of 2D graphene can be well preserved. Meanwhile, superior structural properties, such as interconnected networks and large surface areas, can be given to 3D graphene materials. Recently, various 3D graphene architectures have been constructed, which provide novel and attractive functions for energy and environmental applications. For example, graphene vertical sheets with an interconnected network and exposed graphene edges show promise in metal-ion storage, heavy metal ion detection, gas vapor detection, etc. Particularly, in the field of energy storage and conversion, metal-ion batteries have consistently been a competitive technology. In recent years, lots of efforts have been devoted to developing new metal-ion battery systems. Among them, 3D graphene materials play important roles in metal-ion storage and in constructing graphene-based composite electrodes. This article reviews the recent advances in 3D graphene-based materials, including their preparation and configurations, and specifies their application in various metal-ion batteries. The structure–performance relationship of applying 3D graphene architectures in metal-ion batteries is illustrated. Finally, the remaining challenges and future research directions are discussed.

1. Introduction
Graphene, with an intrinsic two-dimensional (2D) structure containing honeycomb-like carbon atoms, possesses extraordinary physicochemical properties, such as high thermal conductivity, high carrier mobility and good optical transparency.1 In order to achieve its practical use, the assembly of graphene layers on a macroscopic level is required. Here, 3D graphene materials, by our definition, are built from unstacked 2D graphene sheets serving as building blocks.2 They have received tremendous attention during the past years, since they not only inherit the outstanding properties of 2D graphene sheets, but also provide novel functions for energy storage and environmental applications.3–5 Up to now, 3D graphene materials with diverse architectures have been synthesized, including graphene balls,6 graphene fibers,7 graphene tubes,8 graphene scrolls,9 graphene networks,10 graphene vertical sheets,11 graphene cages,12 and graphene with other 3D architectures.13 To obtain all these architectures, various synthetic methods have been employed, which can be generally classified as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) methods,8,10,14 self-assembly methods,15–18 and other methods.19,20 In order to tune the structures and properties of 3D graphene materials in a synthetic procedure, templates were often used such as nickel foam and silica particles.21 The obtained 3D graphene materials with targeted designs show promise in various applications for energy storage, such as supercapacitors,22 lithium-ion batteries (LIBs),23 and sodium-ion batteries (SIBs).24
The lithium-ion battery is one of the most popular electrochemical energy storage devices and its industry has grown rapidly in the last thirty years. However, due to the limited lithium resources in the Earth's crust, LIBs may not meet the demands of sustainable development. In this regard, other metal (Na, K, Mg and Al)-ion batteries (MIBs) have been developed, which show great promise due to the large resource reserve of metals and compelling energy density compared to LIBs. In recent years, there have been an increasing number of studies on the applications of 3D graphene materials in MIBs.25,26 In their studies, basically, there are two functions of 3D graphene materials: one is working as metal-host materials to store metal ions effectively in graphene layers; the other is working as matrices to form 3D composite architectures.
3D graphene materials are promising metal-host materials for MIB applications. Metal ions, including Li+, Na+, K+, and Al3+, can intercalate into graphene layers or/and adsorb on the surface.27 In addition, graphene sheets with defective structures or heteroatom dopants offer enhanced ion adsorption effects, since metal ions can bind with defect sites such as edges28 and surface heteroatoms such as boron29 by Faradic reactions. Compared to conventional metal-ion storage via intercalation, such Faradic reactions offer a capacitive behavior, showing much faster ion diffusion kinetics and thus improving the rate capabilities of electrode materials.30
3D graphene architectures offer structural advantages in fabricating 3D composite electrodes.31 The diversity, tunability and functionalities of 3D graphene architectures enable rational design of composite electrodes for MIB applications. For example, the 3D graphene network contains interconnected graphene sheets and offers a highly porous structure. Its conductive network can serve as highways for electron transmission, and its porous structure enables electrolyte filtration, which accelerates ion transport by reducing the ion diffusion distance.32 In the meantime, the intrinsic physical properties of graphene sheets like high specific surface area, robustness and flexibility are suitable for supporting other metal-host materials to fabricate advanced composite electrodes. Therefore, metal-host material@3D graphene network electrodes can present enhanced electron and ion transport, resulting in improved metal-ion storage properties. In addition, some 3D graphene architectures like graphene spheres and graphene cages possess configuration advantages, which can not only enhance electron and ion transport but also construct an enclosure structure to buffer or accommodate the volume expansion of metal-host materials during cycling.12 As a result, improved cyclic stability can be achieved owing to less structural degradation of metal-host materials. Other 3D graphene architectures like graphene vertical sheets, with a large number of exposed edges, can also improve the power densities of LIBs by accelerating local ion diffusion at edge sites.
Up to now, there are a few review articles related to 3D graphene materials available in the open literature.33–46 Particularly, progress has been scattered in several reviews with a focus on preparation methods such as self-assembly33–35 or CVD methods,36 or with an emphasis on structures such as graphene sponges,3 graphene networks,37 or graphene spheres,38 or focusing on specific applications such as supercapacitors,33,39,40 catalysis,41,42 or LIBs.43–46 In addition to LIBs, the progress of other MIBs (Na, K, Mg, and Al) is also remarkable.23,47–58 A timely and comprehensive review focusing on MIB applications is thus deemed necessary.
In this review, we summarize the preparation and configurations of 3D graphene-based materials and specify their applications in various MIBs. We emphasize the significant roles of graphene layers, serving as intercalation sites and adsorption surfaces. We further discuss the superior functionalities of 3D graphene architectures as supporting materials and encapsulated materials in MIB applications. In addition, we also discuss the merits and drawbacks of applying different 3D graphene architectures as metal-host materials and matrices in MIB systems. At the end, we summarize the challenging issues that still remain and give future research directions.
2. 3D graphene architectures
2.1 Graphene spheres
Graphene spheres (graphene balls) refer to a type of 3D graphene materials with hollow and spherical secondary structure. There are mainly two types of graphene spheres divided by their surface morphologies. One is called crumpled graphene balls (CGBs), with many ridges and vertices on their surface. CGBs were first successfully prepared via an evaporating aerosol droplets method.6 Specifically, as shown in Fig. 1a, a graphene oxide (GO) suspension was nebulized to form aerosol droplets, followed by rapid evaporation. CGBs were thus formed due to the shrinkage of the droplets under hydrostatic pressure. The size of the CGBs was in the sub-micrometer range (Fig. 1b–g), which could be tuned by adjusting the concentration of the GO suspension. The other type of graphene balls (GBs) with relatively smooth surface morphologies can be prepared via a template-assisted method. For example, graphene balls were successfully grown on nickel nanoparticles (NPs) via carburization and segregation.59 The hollow graphene balls inherited the spherical structure of NPs, which served as the sacrificing template. Apart from NPs, other hard templates were also used to prepare GBs, such as silica spheres,60,61 polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) spheres,62 polystyrene spheres63 and MgAl layered double oxide spheres.64 The diameter of GBs was in a wide range from nanometers to micrometers, depending on the template structures. In addition, soft templates such as water droplets could also assist the construction of GBs.65,66 A water-in-oil (W/O) emulsion technique was reported to prepare hollow graphene oxide spheres (HGOS).65 In the preparation, the GO nanosheets would first restack around the water droplets due to their hydrophilic properties; then, by removal of water and oil, HGOS with a diameter in the range of 2–10 micrometers were obtained. By tailoring the synthetic conditions, the surface of HGOS could be either irregular and rough, or uniform and smooth. Graphene spheres with aggregation-resistant properties find potential applications in energy storage and conversion such as fuel cells67 and supercapacitors.68 In addition, their highly reactive edges also offer novel functions such as adsorption69 and friction reduction.70
 Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of the setup and the preparation of crumpled graphene balls. (b–d) SEM images of crumpled graphene balls prepared from different GO concentrations, which were 0.2 mg ml−1, 1 mg ml−1, and 5 mg ml−1, respectively. (e–g) High magnification SEM images of (b–d), respectively. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Graphene fibers, tubes and scrolls
Graphene fibers can be prepared by assembling GO sheets into fiber-type structures. Recently, light, flexible and multifunctional graphene fibers were successfully prepared by a dimensionally confined hydrothermal method.7 A GO suspension was first injected into a glass pipeline, followed by a hydrothermal reaction at 230 °C. The obtained graphene fiber had a linear structure with a diameter of 33 micrometers. Owing to the densely stacked graphene sheets along the fiber axis, the tensile strength of the graphene fiber could reach up to 420 MPa, showing excellent mechanical properties. Cao et al. reported the preparation of ultra-strong graphene fibers with superior tensile strength (0.5 GPa).71 They were prepared by a self-assembly method, by using giant GO sheets with high aspects ratios as building blocks. The diameter of the obtained fibers was as thin as 6 micrometers and the section morphology showed an origami-flower-like microstructure, in which graphene sheets were partially aligned and densely stacked with each other. In addition, the obtained graphene fibers also possessed excellent electronic conductivity (3.8–4.1 × 104 S m−1). Graphene fibers showed potential in multiple devices, including flexible fiber-type actuators, motors, photovoltaic cells, and supercapacitors.72,73
Graphene tubes, with a typical tubular structure and a larger diameter compared to single-wall carbon nanotubes (2–5 nm), were successfully prepared via a template-assisted CVD method.8,74 Nickel nanowires were reported as both the sacrificing template and the catalyst to prepare graphene nanotubes.8 The wall of graphene tubes contains several graphene layers, and the number of graphene layers can be tailored by adjusting the growth time. In another study, graphene tubes were grown on a porous anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) template by a carbothermic reduction reaction.74 They had a one-dimensional tubular structure and the diameter of a single tube was about 110 nm. The obtained graphene tubes could act as a medium for directional heat transport. In another study, a graphene/graphene tube composite was prepared by carbonizing dicyandiamide (DCDA) in the presence of iron species.75 The graphene nanotubes had no distinct orientations and the diameter of the nanotubes shows a wide range, from tens of nanometers to sub-micrometer. Similarly, bamboo-like nitrogen doped graphene tubes were also prepared by a high graphitization process of DCDA.76 The length of tubes was up to tens of micrometers, and the diameter of the tubes was sub-micrometer. The large size of graphene tubes could facilitate the anchoring of Pt nanoparticles and Pt nanoparticle anchoring on graphene tubes showed excellent oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) activity.
Graphene scrolls (carbon nanoscrolls), with a linear and tubular structure similar to multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), were also prepared.77,78 MWCNTs possess a coaxial tube structure, containing several to dozens of intact carbon atom layers with a hexagonal arrangement, with no exposed edges along the axial direction. Differently, graphene scrolls contain scrolled graphene layers with both open ends and edges along the axial direction. They were first prepared by a chemical route.17 A potassium-ion compound was first intercalated into graphite under a helium atmosphere to assist the exfoliation of graphite into separated graphene sheets. The following sonication treatment could induce scrolling of graphene sheets. The average diameter and length of graphene scrolls were about 40 nm and 1.3 μm, respectively. They also had a relatively large surface area contributed by their open ends, compared to the sealed carbon nanotubes. This unique structure shows promise for multiple applications such as adsorption, hydrogen storage and energy storage. Graphene scrolls were also prepared by a microexplosion method.77 Typically, Mn2+ was first infiltrated into the interlayer of GO sheets, followed by reacting with KMnO4 to obtain MnO2/GO composites. After adding H2O2, a large amount of oxygen was generated by H2O2 decomposition. The quick release of gas induced the exfoliation and scrolling of GO sheets. Finally, graphene scrolls were obtained after the chemical reduction and removal of solvent. The preparation enables the formation of different structures including one-sided nanoscrolls, diagonal nanoscrolls and two-sided nanoscrolls, as shown in Fig. 2a.78 The diameter of the obtained graphene scrolls was in the range from 20 to 100 nm (Fig. 2b–e). Graphene scrolls with excellent electrochemical properties showed great promise for applications such as supercapacitors78 and hydrogen evolution.79
 Fig. 2  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of graphene scrolls via a microexplosion method. (b–e) TEM images of the obtained graphene scrolls with different magnification. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH. 
2.3 Vertical graphene sheets
Vertical graphene sheets (VGS), also called carbon nanowalls (CNWs), have a unique structure with an interconnected 3D network, open channels and thin and exposed edges.11,80–82 VGS grown on a substrate are tightly fixed and show a highly directional orientation vertical to the substrate. The plasma enhanced chemical vapor method (PECVD) was mostly reported to prepare VGS.83–87 Wu et al.11 first reported the preparation of carbon nanowalls via the PECVD method. By introducing a mixture of gases of methane and hydrogen into the PECVD system, carbon nanowalls were grown on different substrates such as silicon, stainless steel and copper. The plasma could assist the vertical growth of nanocarbon layers with sharp edges, containing single graphene layers or folded double graphene layers. Hiramatsu et al.80 also prepared carbon nanowalls via the PECVD method but using different feedstocks including CF4 and C2F6.
Although the PECVD method was reported often, harsh conditions such as plasma sources are required to obtain high quality VGS.88,89 In order to simplify the preparation process, Zhao et al.90 directly carbonized carbon nanofibers (CNFs) in ammonia to obtain VGS on their surface. Radially oriented VGS were formed due to preferential etching with ammonia of the circumferentially oriented graphite layer (Fig. 3a–d). The height of VGS protruding outward from CNFs was several nanometers. Based on this work, Zeng et al. reported that further growth of VGS could be realized via a thermal CVD method.91 The formed VGS on CNFs could act as nucleation sites or crystal seeds to facilitate the growth of VGS (Fig. 3f). By introducing methane and hydrogen gas in thermal CVD, further growth of VGS could be achieved, and the height of the VGS was extended to 195 nm after four hours’ growth (Fig. 3g and h). By prolonging the growth time, VGS could merge with each other, forming porous graphene (Fig. 3i and j). The pore size was in the range from 20 to 100 nm, much smaller than the pore size of other porous graphene.92,93 The obtained VGS showed high electrical conductivity (1.2 × 105 S m−1), superhydrophobicity and high electromagnetic (EMI) shielding performance (60932 dB cm2 g−1). VGS could also be prepared by direct electrochemical anodization of graphite.94 The dense array of VGS showed excellent areal capacitance (1.3 F cm−2) and volumetric capacitance (3.9 F cm−3) in supercapacitors.
 Fig. 3  (a) Low magnification SEM images of carbon nanofibers. (b) High magnification SEM images of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. (c and d) TEM images of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A scheme for the preparation of graphene fibers. (f) SEM image of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. (g and h) SEM images of graphene fibers grown for 4 h with a methane concentration of 11.1%. (i and j) SEM images of graphene fibers grown for 10 h with a methane concentration of 11.1%. (k) An optical image of the graphene fiber membrane. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
2.4 Graphene networks
3D graphene networks are the most frequently reported 3D graphene architectures, and their mass production can be achieved via self-assembly methods.95–98 For example, a graphene hydrogel was successfully prepared via a one-step hydrothermal method.95 It had an interconnected porous network with randomly aligned sheets and the pore size was in the range of submicrometer to several micrometers. Qiu et al.96 also reported the synthesis of a highly compressible and ultralight graphene aerogel by chemical reduction of GO sheets. The obtained material had a foam-like structure with the pore size ranging from tens to hundreds of micrometers.
Graphene networks prepared by self-assembly methods often suffer from poor quality with abundant defects and intersheet junctions. CVD methods are an effective approach to prepare 3D graphene networks with high quality. Chen et al.10 first reported the growth of graphene foam (GF) on nickel foam. The obtained GF inherited the structure of the nickel foam and the graphene sheets were seamlessly interconnected. It also offered a high conductivity (exceeding 10 S cm−1), good mechanical properties and a high specific surface area (850 m2 g−1).
3D graphene networks show potential for many applications such as LIBs99 and sensors.100 In addition, 3D graphene networks can serve as scaffolds to prepare 3D graphene-based composites. Up to now, 3D graphene/metal oxides, 3D graphene/metal nanoparticles, 3D graphene/sulfide composites and 3D graphene/polymer composites have been prepared successfully,101 enabling multiple applications such as electrocatalysts102,103 and supercapacitors.104
2.5 Graphene cages
The construction of graphene cages with well-designed structures has been reported in recent years.12,105,106 Owing to the robustness, flexibility and high conductivity of graphene nanosheets, they offer superior properties in energy storage. Recently, conformal graphene cages were grown on silicon particles as stable anodes for LIBs.12 Nickel was coated on silicon particles for graphene growth and also as a sacrificing template to create void space between silicon particles and graphene cages (Fig. 4a). The as-prepared graphene cages possessed a wavy structure along the nickel grains, as shown in Fig. 4b–d. This unique structure could buffer the volume change of silicon particles during lithiation. Graphene cages were also prepared by carbon segregation from nickel nanoparticles.105 The pore size of graphene cages was in the range of 1–3 μm and the wall thickness was in the range of 20–30 nm. The graphene cages had multiple functions in constructing electrodes for lithium–sulfur batteries, including enhancing the electron transfer and providing a physical barrier to confine polysulfides. Very recently, 3D graphene cages encapsulated tin oxide nanoparticles were also prepared.106 Sulfur served as the sacrificing template to create the void space between tin oxide and graphene cages. After the growth of the graphene cage and template removal, the outer contour of the graphene cage was identical to that of the inner tin oxide particles. By simply adjusting the sulfur concentration, the volume of the void space could be tuned, as shown in Fig. 4e and f. As a result, graphene cages encapsulated tin oxide, as anodes in LIBs, exhibited an ultrahigh volumetric energy density (2123 mA h cm−3) and also good cyclic performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) A scheme illustration for 3D graphene cage synthesis. (b) TEM image of graphene encapsulated Si microparticles. (c) HRTEM image showing the layered structure of graphene cages. (d) Hollow graphene cage after the removal of Si microparticles. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration for constructing graphene cages with optimal void space. (f) TEM images of SnO2@graphene coated by sulfur with a weight ratio of 21%. (g) TEM images of SnO2@graphene with rough preparation for comparison. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
2.6 Other types of 3D graphene
3D graphene with a flower-like structure, a honeycomb-like structure and a hollow-cube structure was also reported.13,107,108 For example, 3D graphene with a honeycomb-like architecture was synthesized via a simple reaction between Li2O and CO, as shown in eqn (1).13 Li2O (s) + 2CO (g) → C (graphene) (s) + Li2CO3 (s)(1)
The simultaneously formed Li2CO3 can prevent the combination of graphene nanosheets into graphite. The obtained 3D graphene had a honeycomb-like structure and the cell size lay in the range of 50–500 nm. It showed high efficiency as catalyst for dye sensitized solar cells comparable to Pt electrodes. 3D graphene with a flower-like structure was also fabricated via a simple reaction between Li (liquid) and CO2, as shown in eqn (2).107 Li liquid was reacted with CO2 at 550 °C, followed by removal of Li2CO3. 4Li (l) + 3CO2 (g) → C (graphene) (s) + 2Li2CO3 (s)(2)
The obtained 3D graphene materials had a cauliflower-fungus-shape structure with high porosity and exposed edges. They exhibited ultrahigh areal capacitance (up to 1.16 F cm−2) and efficient mass loading (11.16 mg cm−2) as electrodes in supercapacitors.
The synthesis of graphene cubes with hollow structures was also reported recently.108 Plasma-etched NaCl with regularly arranged cube-like microstructures was used as the sacrificing template. After CVD growth and template removal, graphene hollow cubes were obtained. The average length of a single graphene cube unit was about 10 μm. The upper surface of cube units presented an interconnected graphene network and the side surface of cubes presented an uneven stair-stepping graphene network. All the cube units were well connected with each other, offering good electrical conductivity. In addition, they also possessed high mechanical strength and a large surface area. With these advantages, they exhibited high volumetric energy (657.2 mW h cm−3) and power densities (954.3 mW cm−3) as electrodes in supercapacitors.
3. Preparation methods
3D graphene with different structures can be prepared by CVD methods,8,10 self-assembly methods,15–17,95,96 electrochemical exfoliation methods,94 blowing synthesis methods,109etc. Among them, CVD and self-assembly are the two most frequently reported methods. Templates are also used in these methods to tune the pore structures of 3D graphene materials for various applications.110–124 The preparation methods with and without the assistance of templates are reviewed as follows.
3.1 CVD methods
CVD is an effective method to prepare graphene materials with good crystallization and few defects. Planar few-layered graphene was first prepared by thermal CVD in 2006.125 Since then, the preparation of 3D graphene materials via CVD methods has been widely reported.

3.1.1 Template-assisted CVD. 
In the CVD process, templates were used to tune the structures and properties of 3D graphene materials. Nickel foam is suitable for constructing graphene networks due to its high porosity, interconnected framework and catalytic effect.10 Self-standing graphene networks could be obtained after the removal of the template. In addition, due to the excellent conductivity of nickel foam (350 S cm−1), graphene networks preserving the template can serve as free-standing electrodes for energy storage applications.
Another commonly used template is silica spheres.54,126 3D graphene can inherit the structure of the silica template and the removal of silica is required for constructing electrodes due to its insulating nature. Other templates including MOFs,75 surface modified polystyrene balls,127 porous copper,128 MgO,129 and micro-structured NaCl108 were also exploited to fabricate 3D graphene with diverse architectures. Their properties and applications are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Properties and applications of 3D graphene prepared by template-assisted CVD methods




No.
Template
Structure
Electrical and mechanical properties
Surface area
Applications
Ref.




1
Nickel foam
Graphene interconnected framework: pore size: hundreds of micrometers; porosity ∼99.7%
Conductivity: 10 S cm−1 excellent mechanical robustness
850 m2 g−1



10



2
Nickel nanoparticles
Graphene hollow spheres with abundant pores: diameter of graphene spheres: 5–10 μm; pore size: up to 72 nm


285.3 m2 g−1
Biosensors

14



3
Nickel nanowires
Graphene hollow tubes: mean tube diameter: 70 nm; length of tube: up to several micrometers







8



4
Porous anodic aluminum oxide
Interconnected macroporous framework or graphene tubes: diameter of graphene nanotubes: 110 nm
Conductivity: 1290 S m−1


Heat transfer and thermal energy storage

74





Low sheet electrical resistance: 0.11 Ω sq−1


5
Cage containing MOFs
Graphene tubes: diameter: tens of nanometers to sub-micrometer


449 m2 g−1
ORR catalysts

75



6
NaCl
Graphene hollow cubes: length of graphene cube unit: ∼10 μm
Good flexibility and conductivity
1216 m2 g−1
Supercapacitors

108



7
Silica spheres
Hollow graphene balls: diameter of graphene spheres: 360–550 nm




Lithium–sulfur batteries

126



8
Polystyrene balls
Mesoporous graphene nanoballs: mean pore diameter: 4.27 nm
Conductivity: 6.5 S cm−1
508 m2 g−1
Supercapacitors

127



9
Nanoporous copper
Duct-like nanoporous graphene film: graphene pore size: 500–800 nm
Sheet electrical resistance: 23.3 Ω sq−1; high flexibility
586.3 m2 g−1
Supercapacitors

128



10
MgO flakes
Graphene honeycomb like framework containing nanocages: size of cages: 5–10 nm; lateral size of framework: 2 μm; thickness of framework: 50 nm
Conductivity: 54 S cm−1
240 m2 g−1
OER catalysts

129







3.1.2 Non-template CVD. 
Non-template CVD with the assistance of plasma is able to prepare graphene vertical sheets, in which plasma contributes to the vertical growth of graphene sheets, forming 3D architectures.84,87 The preparation of graphene fibers via a non-template CVD method was also reported recently.91 The graphene crystal seeds prepared beforehand and the etching effect of introduced hydrogen account for the vertical growth of graphene sheets. Graphene sheets would merge with each other after long-time growth, forming a 3D porous structure. This novel approach shows promise for the large-scale production of 3D graphene materials.

3.2 Self-assembly methods
Self-assembly methods are commonly used in GO suspension systems to prepare 3D graphene materials. By breaking the equilibrium state of the GO sheets in suspension under certain conditions, GO sheets can link with each other spontaneously. After the reduction of GO, 3D graphene materials can be obtained.

3.2.1 Template-assisted self-assembly. 
Templates are often used to adjust the pore structures of 3D graphene materials during the self-assembly process. For example, nickel foam is used to prepare 3D graphene materials with macroporous networks. Wang et al.16 reported the successful preparation of a reduced graphene oxide (rGO) network with sufficient mechanical strength, excellent conductivity and low density. Nickel foam was coated with GO via dip-coating, followed by electrochemical reduction and template removal. Melamine sponges130 and polyurethane sponges17 are also used as templates for the assembly of GO since they offer highly porous structures and ease of removal. In addition, they can serve as supports to prevent the agglomeration of graphene sheets. For example, Yang et al.17 prepared a graphene network with a high specific area using a polyurethane (PU) sponge as the template. The PU sponge was immersed into a GO suspension, followed by thermal annealing to removal the template. The obtained graphene network exhibited ultrahigh capacitive deionization performance with an excellent electrosorptive capacity of 4.95 mg g−1 and a fast desorption rate of 25 min.
Sulfur, with flowable, deformable and removable characteristics, could also serve as the template for the preparation of graphene cages. For example, tin oxide encapsulated by graphene cages was recently reported.106 In this work, sulfur was employed as the sacrificing template to create void space between tin oxide and graphene cages.106 Owing to the flowable property of sulfur, an intimate interfacial contact between tin oxide and sulfur was observed (Fig. 4f). By adjusting the original sulfur content to 21%, optimal void space between tin oxide and graphene cages was preserved, resulting in a high volumetric energy density for lithium storage (Fig. 4e–g). Other templates such as silica,131 soap bubbles92 and water droplets65 were also used to prepare 3D graphene materials.


3.2.2 Non-template self-assembly methods. 
3D graphene materials with random sheet-like structure can be prepared by non-template self-assembly methods. Different techniques have been used to induce the self-assembly of GO sheets. The vacuum centrifugal technique is able to prepare graphene sponges.132,133 Liu et al.132 first reported the successful synthesis of a graphene sponge on a large scale by evaporating colloidal GO suspensions. GO sheets were self-assembled in a layer-by-layer manner and their thickness can also be tuned by adjusting the concentration of the GO suspension. After thermally annealing in an Ar/H2 mixture, the graphene sponge with a 3D interconnected network was obtained. Similarly, by rapid evaporation of water droplets, CGBs could also be prepared.38,134 In addition, electrochemical reduction18 and chemical reduction by using agents such as ethylenediamine (EDA),135,136 vitamin C137–139 and hydrazine140 are also effective in inducing self-assembly of GO sheets.

3.3 Other methods

3.3.1 Electrochemical exfoliation. 
Electrochemical exfoliation is a efficient and environmental friendly approach to prepare 3D graphene materials.94,141,142 Zhang et al.94 reported the exfoliation of graphite into GO in a two-electrode system. Natural graphite adhering on the copper wire was used as the anode and Pt foil was used as the cathode.94 By applying a positive DC voltage, the graphite was partially oxidized into GO. After chemical reduction, rGO sheets anchored on graphite were obtained.


3.3.2 Blowing synthesis. 
Inspired by the food “blown sugar”, a blowing synthesis was employed to prepare strutted graphene.109 Glucose was mixed with ammonium salts and directly heated to 1350 °C. The released gases from the decomposition of ammonium salts blew the sugar into strutted graphene. It offered a foam-like structure containing large polyhedral bubbles, with an average diameter of 186 μm. Strutted graphene had a low density of 3.0 mg cm−3, which was comparable to carbon aerogels. It also possessed a good electric conductivity of 1 S m−1 and a high specific surface area of 1005 m2 g−1, thereby enabling a power density of 893 kW g−1 at 100 A g−1 in supercapacitors.


3.3.3 3D printing. 
3D printing refers to the process of connecting or solidifying materials to create 3D objects under the control of a computer. Sha et al.20 reported the synthesis of graphene foam via a 3D printing method. Nickel particles with a diameter of 2–3 μm were used as the template and catalyst and sucrose coated on nickel particles was used as the carbon source. A thin layer of powder containing sucrose-coated nickel particles was first set on the platform, followed by laser irradiation to produce graphene layers. After the first rastering, another thin layer of powder was manually added onto the top, followed by the same laser irradiation process. After repeating 20 times and template removal, the graphene foam was obtained. The obtained materials had excellent physical properties, such as a high porosity of 99.3%, a low density of 15 mg cm−3, a high electrical conductivity of 8.7 S cm−1 and a remarkable storage modulus of 11 kPa.


3.3.4 Laser scribed patterning. 
El-Kady et al.143 first reported the successful synthesis of porous graphene films via a simple all-solid-state approach by laser irradiation. Typically, a GO suspension was drop cast onto a commercial CD drive, followed by thermal reduction by laser irradiation. The originally stacked graphene sheets were well exfoliated in this process and the as-obtained porous graphene film displayed excellent conductivity (1738 S m−1) and excellent mechanical flexibility. This synthetic method was also employed in engineering graphene-based electronic devices with low-cost and commercialization possibilities.144

4. Metal-ion storage mechanisms
Graphene is regarded as a promising energy storage material in various MIB systems, including LIBs, SIBs, potassium-ion batteries (PIBs), and aluminum-ion batteries (AIBs).24,29,145–147 Metal-ion storage in graphene layers is generally achieved via intercalation or/and adsorption, as illustrated in Fig. 5. During charging, metal ions will be intercalated into graphene layers or/and adsorbed onto the graphene surface; for discharging, metal ions will be deintercalated or desorbed from graphene layers. In this chapter, we will illustrate and discuss the metal-ion storage mechanisms of graphene layers in different MIB systems.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of general mechanisms of metal-ion storage in graphene layers. 
4.1 Intercalation sites

4.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium ions, with a radius of 76 pm, are able to intercalate into graphitic carbon layers and form lithium–graphite intercalation compounds (Li-GICs), i.e. LixCn.148 Theoretically, one lithium atom can combine with six carbon host atoms at most in a charging process, according to eqn (3). xLi+ + xe− + Cn → LixCn(3)Based on theoretical calculations, it was predicted that the electrochemical behavior of Li+ intercalation and deintercalation in graphene layers resembles that of graphite.149–151 Experimental results further demonstrated this electrochemical behavior. High quality graphitized graphene with very few defects was prepared to study the lithium-ion storage behavior. The observation of a cathodic peak below 0.2 V demonstrated the intercalation of lithium ions into graphene layers.152


4.1.2 Sodium-ion batteries. 
Sodium-ion batteries are attractive for manufacturing large-scale energy storage devices due to the abundance and low cost of sodium resources.32 However, the large radius of sodium ions (102 pm) hinders their intercalation into graphitic carbon layers. Preliminary studies showed that the sodium–graphite intercalation compounds (Na–GICs) are also thermodynamically unstable, leading to severe volume expansion during sodiation.27,153 Recently, the intercalation of solvated sodium ions into graphite in ether-based electrolyte systems was realized, according to eqn (4).154 By sodium ion and solvent cointercalation, the graphite anode could deliver a reversible capacity of 150 mA h g−1 after 2500 cycles.155 Cn + e− + A+ + ysolv → A+ (solv)y Cn−(4)
Sodium ions can intercalate into graphene layers with large interlayer spacings. Cao et al.156 studied the theoretical energy cost for sodium-ion insertion as a function of carbon interlayer spacing. They found the energy cost for sodium insertion would drop with increased carbon interlayer spacings. As for few-layered graphene with an interlayer spacing of 0.37 nm, the energy cost for sodium insertion was only 0.053 eV, which was low enough to conquer for sodium insertion. Mechanism studies on sodium-ion storage in hard carbon further demonstrated this theory. Ding et al.157 studied the sodium-ion storage of carbon nanosheet frameworks, which contained 4–5 stacked surface graphene layers. During sodiation, the interlayer spacing of graphene layers was expanded from 0.396 nm to 0.416 nm at a low voltage below 0.1 V, demonstrating sodium insertion into graphene layers.


4.1.3 Potassium-ion batteries. 
Potassium is considered as a candidate for new MIB systems owing to its abundance, less complex surface reactions, high ionic conductivity and low redox potential of K/K+ (−2.92 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode). Hu et al.158 demonstrated that potassium ions can intercalate into the interlayer of graphitic materials by a three-step staging process resembling lithium intercalation: C → KC24 (Stage III) → KC16 (Stage II) → KC8 (Stage I). In a typical discharging profile, a relatively flat slope was observed in the voltage range of 0.35 V to 0.18 V, resulting from the formation of KC24 in Stage III. A voltage transition at 0.14 V was observed, indicating the formation of KC16 in Stage II. The remaining capacity was attributed to the formation of KC8 in Stage I. By such a three-step staging process, graphite displayed an initial intercalation capabity of 270 mA h g−1 at 5 mA g−1. The potassium-ion storage in graphene layers (rGO film) was also studied.29 Different from the potassium-ion storage behavior in graphite, dilute Stage I was formed in the voltage range of 0.37 to 0.24 V, and then a voltage transition from Stage VI at 0.24 V (KC72) to Stage II at 0.15 V (KC24) was observed. The remaining capacity below 0.5 V resulted from the synthesis of the Stage I compound (KC8). As a result, the rGO anode exhibited a stable capacity of 140 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1. Therefore, it was concluded that potassium ions could be stored in graphene layers through intercalation.


4.1.4 Aluminum-ion batteries. 
Owing to the abundance, low flammability, and three-electron redox properties of aluminum, aluminum-ion batteries (AIBs) have been extensively studied.159,160 Graphite was demonstrated to be an ideal material for aluminum-ion intercalation in an ionic liquid (AlCl3/[EMIm]Cl) electrolyte.161 The aluminum-ion storage mechanisms (eqn (5) and (6)) are revealed as follows, where n represents the molar ratio of carbon atoms to intercalated anions in the graphite. 4Al2Cl7− + 3e− ↔ Al + 7AlCl4−(5) Cn + AlCl4− ↔ Cn[AlCl4] + e−(6)
Although a breakthrough has been made in the Al/AlCl3−[EMIm]Cl/graphite system,161 the intercalation and de-intercalation of AlCl4− could only penetrate through the edges of graphite with a rather limited penetration path. Aiming to overcome this obstacle, defect-free graphene with more open edges was prepared to facilitate the ion intercalation. Chen et al.146 reported the preparation of defect-free graphene film with interconnected 3D infiltration channels by a high-temperature annealing treatment of rGO film. The porous surface structure facilitated the vertical infiltration of the electrolyte, thereby shortening the pathways for the transport of electrolyte ions. Meanwhile, 3D channels also acted as highways for the electron transfer. A substantially enhanced aluminum-ion storage property was observed, exhibiting superior rate performance (120 mA h g−1 at 400 mA g−1) and excellent cyclic performance (91.7% retention after 250000 cycles). It also had a wide operation temperature in the range of −40 to 120 °C and exhibited superior flexibility for wearable applications, with no capacity loss after folding 10000 times. Chen et al.162 also synthesized high-quality graphene microflowers for high-performance AIBs. The graphene microflower cathode exhibited a high capacity of 100 mA h g−1 without decay after 5000 cycles at 5 A g−1 and a good rate capability with a capacity of 92 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1. In addition, a high energy density of 40 W h kg−1 and a high power density of 3000 W kg−1 were achieved. The aluminum-ion storage properties of other reported 3D graphene materials are summarized in Table 2.50–54
Table 2 The configurations and performances of AIBs, PIBs and Mg-ion batteries




No.
Type
Anode
Cathode
Power density & energy density
Specific capacity
Ref.




1
AIB
Al foil
Porous graphene foam


Volumetric capacities up to 12.2 mA h cm−3; gravimetric capacity up to 151 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

57



2
AIB
Al foil
Graphene microflowers
Energy density: 40 W h kg−1, power density: 3000 W kg−1
100 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles

162



3
AIB
Al foil
rGO/SnS2
Energy density: 241 W h kg−1
112 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1

51



4
AIB
Al foil
Graphene nanoribbon@porous graphene


123 mA h g−1 at 50 A g−1 after 10000 cycles; high rate performance with a capacity of 111 mA h g−1 at 80 A g−1

52



5
AIB
Al foil
3D graphene mesh


57 mA h g−1 at 40C after 200 cycles

53



6
PIB
Nitrogen doped few layer graphene foam
K foil


210 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles

173



7
PIB
Phosphorus and oxygen dual-doped graphene
K metal


474 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles and 160 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 600 cycles

174



8
PIB
F-Doped graphene foam
K foil


165.0 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 200 cycles and 301.9 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1

175



9
PIB
Sb2S3 particles/graphene framework
KVPO4F
Energy density: 166.3 W h kg−1
548 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 and 340 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1

239



10
PIB
MoS2/rGO
K foil


381 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles; 679 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1, 178 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1

241



11
MIB
Activated carbon
rGO/V2O5 aerogel


100 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 200 cycles

245



12
MIB
FeVO4·0.9H2O/graphene
Mg-OMS-1
Energy density: 58.5 W h kg−1, power density: 50.8 W kg−1.
52.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles (97% retention)

246



13
MIB
Mg foil
Co3O4/graphene


16 mA h g−1 in the initial discharge

247






4.2 Adsorption surface

4.2.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
Graphene layers can provide the active surface for lithium-ion adsorption, displaying sufficient lithium storage. In 1995, Dahn et al.148,163 proposed that both sides of the graphene layer are capable of lithium-ion adsorption. This would theoretically synthesize the Li2C6 phase and thus exhibited a high capacity of 744 mA h g−1, which is twice as much as traditional graphite. Sonia et al.164 studied the lithium-ion storage properties of few-layered graphene with very few defects. The discharge profile for few-layered graphene below 0.3 V was fairly similar to that of bulk graphite. However, the lithium-storage capacities of few-layered graphene are four times greater than graphite (Fig. 6a and b). To explain the extra capacity of graphene, the kinetic behaviors of both electrodes were analyzed by using the power law formula (eqn (7)) i = avb(7)where b = 1 indicates the capacity is provided by a surface-controlled adsorption process and b = 0.5 indicates the capacity is provided by a diffusion-controlled intercalation process. By calculating the b value from the slopes of log(i) vs. log(v) plots at different potentials (Fig. 6c and d), the contribution from intercalation and adsorption to the overall capacity can be quantified. It was found that surface-controlled adsorption contributes a lot to the overall capacity, demonstrating graphene layers can serve as the adsorption surface for lithium-ion storage.
 Fig. 6  (a) Discharge curves for few layer graphene in the voltage window between 0.3 and 0.001 V (against Li/Li+). (b) Discharge curves for graphite in the voltage window between 0.3 and 0.001 V (against Li/Li+). (c and d) Cathodic and anodic CV scan of few layered graphene and the calculated slope value of log(i) vs. log(v). (e) The contributions of the surface-controlled process and the diffusion-controlled process. (f) A schematic illustration of the distribution of lithium ions on the graphene surface with increasing Li concentration. The yellow and cyan balls represent C and H atoms, respectively. The magenta, green, and black colored balls represent Li atoms that are in the 1st Li-layer, the 2nd Li-layer and the 3rd Li-layer above the graphene sheet, respectively. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Some studies reported graphene with heteroatoms or surface defects exhibiting a capacity even exceeding its theoretical value of 744 mA h g−1. For example, sulfur-doped graphene with a 3D cellular architecture displayed a reversible capacity of 1697 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1.55 The extra capacity needs further explanation. Many in-depth investigations were performed to understand this abnormal storage behavior.165–167 First principles calculations demonstrated that structural defects in graphene layers can bind with Li+ stably, offering extra lithium-ion storage capacity.165 In addition, Li atoms are energetically favorable to adsorb on various defects, whereas for non-defective graphene, lithium atoms could only situate at the hollow sites of hexagonal rings, forming LiC6.166 By using in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) characterization, the adsorption of lithium ions on defect sites was directly observed.166
The lithium storage behavior of graphene edges, as a special type of defective structure, was studied recently.167 It was found that the lithium storage capacity and lithium-ion diffusion ability at graphene edge sites were dramatically enhanced. Chananate et al.168 demonstrated that the energy barriers at graphene edge sites for lithium diffusion were 0.15 eV lower at most than those of the basal plane of graphene. In addition, the lithium-ion diffusion coefficient at graphene edge sites was 2 orders of magnitude higher than the planar graphene surface. Very recently, the excess capacity of graphene layers was further interpreted,164 as shown in Fig. 6f. In a typical lithiation process, lithium ions would first adsorb at the edges sites. Then, with the increase of lithium concentration, lithium ions started to move toward the center, distributing on the entire surface of graphene. After improving the lithium concentration to a certain extent, additional lithium ions could adsorb on the graphene surface, disrupting its original LiC6 configuration and forming more than one lithium layer.


4.2.2 Sodium-ion batteries. 
Graphene layers can also offer active surface for sodium-ion adsorption. Bai et al.169 obtained misaligned surface graphene layers on hard carbon by carbonizing sucrose at high temperature to study their sodium storage mechanisms. For the hard carbon obtained at 1000 °C, it exhibited a capacity of 123.1 mA h g−1 at the voltage region from 1.2 V to 0.1 V, namely sloping capacity. For the hard carbon obtained at 2000 °C, the sloping capacity was decreased to 48.8 mA h g−1. The decreased sloping capacity resulted from the evolution of hard carbon structures including surface graphene layers during carbonization. With the carbonization temperature increasing, the amounts of defects and surface functional groups on graphene layers dramatically decreased. Therefore, the adsorption effect of sodium ions on graphene layers with defects or functional groups was demonstrated. Li et al.170 further confirmed sodium adsorption on isolated graphene layers. No shift of (002) peaks in in situ XRD patterns (Fig. 7a) during charge and discharge demonstrated that sodium storage could not be assigned to sodium intercalation but sodium adsorption. In addition, ex situ XPS spectra of C 1s and Na 1s (Fig. 7b and c) showed a shift to higher energy in the plateau-voltage region below 0.12 V, which was attributed to the nanovoids filling. Young Soo Yun et al.171 demonstrated that sodium-ion adsorption could occur at defective sites on the basal plane of graphene with defects or N-substitution. Various structural defects could contribute to sodium-ion storage containing the following types: carbon vacancies (type 1), carbon divacancies (types 2, 3, and 4), carbon site changes (type 5), and adatoms (type 6) (Fig. 7d). The corresponding chemisorption energy of defect sites was also given (Fig. 7e). They also studied the sodium-ion storage behavior of graphene layers by carbonizing pyroprotein. It was observed that sodium ions were adsorbed on the disordered graphene layers, forming metallic sodium (Fig. 7f and g). Bommier et al.172 proposed a “three stage” mechanism for sodium-ion storage in nongraphitizable carbon based on their computational calculations. In the first stage in the sloping voltage region, sodium ions would adsorb at defects sites on the surface graphene layers; in the second stage in the plateau voltage region, sodium ions would intercalate into graphene layers; and in the last stage at the end of the plateau voltage region, sodium ions would fill the nanopores.
 Fig. 7  (a) In situ XRD patterns collected during the first discharge/charge in the voltage window of 0–2 V with a current density of 0.05C. (b) Ex situ XPS of C 1s spectra. (c) Ex situ XPS of Na 1s spectra. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Different types of defect sites in the basal plane of graphene. (e) DFT calculation data for the chemisorption energy of a given defect site with sodium ions. (f) HRTEM image of the sample before discharging. (g) HRTEM image of the sample after discharging to 0.005 V. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. 


4.2.3 Potassium-ion batteries. 
Heteroatom doped or defective graphene layers are also able to store potassium ions via surface adsorption.29,173–175 The potassium storage properties of boron doped graphene were studied by first principles calculations.29 It was found that carbon atoms substituted by boron atoms resulted in an electron deficiency. Such a deficiency of the electron distribution led to an enhancement of potassium-ion adsorption at boron doped sites. Theoretically, boron doped graphene could exhibit a high capacity of 546 mA h g−1, forming B4C28. In addition, boron doped graphene could also improve the safety of PIBs by preventing dendrite growth. Graphene with nitrogen dopants showed a similar adsorption effect.174 Pyridinic nitrogen could also lead to a local electron deficiency and produce an affinity to the electrons nearby K atoms. Therefore, such defect sites on graphene layers could enhance the potassium-ion storage properties. In addition, chemical dopants also enlarged the interlayer spacing of graphene layers, which facilitated the insertion and desertion of K+ ions. Fluorine doped graphene also showed superior potassium-ion storage properties, which was also attributed to the additional potassium bonding sites around the vicinity of fluorine atoms on graphene layers.175

5. Secondary metal-ion battery applications
3D graphene materials with structural functionalities play significant roles in fabricating composite electrodes. Aiming to develop advanced MIB systems, these functionalities should be well understood. In this chapter, we classify the functionalities of 3D graphene materials as supporting materials and encapsulated materials to discuss their roles and applications in MIB systems.
5.1 Supporting materials
3D graphene with high electric conductivity, structural advantages like an interconnected and porous network, and excellent mechanical properties like flexibility and robustness can act as supporting materials to fabricate 3D graphene-based composites. Specifically, in fabricating graphene-based electrodes with other metal-host materials for MIB applications, the 3D architectures of graphene have the following unique functions: (i) metal-host materials can be effectively loaded and fixed on the graphene sheets. The aggregation effect of metal-host materials with nanoparticles or layered structures can be suppressed. (ii) The interconnected conductive network of 3D graphene could enhance the electron transfer and the abundant pores inside the structure could facilitate the infiltration of electrolyte and shorten the metal-ion diffusion pathways. (iii) Graphene sheets with flexibility can mitigate the volume expansion of the loaded metal-host materials.136,176

5.1.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
Alloy materials (Si,25,177–181 and Ge,182–188), metal oxides (TiO2,189 SnO2,190–192 and Fe2O3193), metal sulfides (MoS2,194,195 SnS2,196,197 and SnS198), and Li4Ti5O12199 all belong to a new class of anode materials for LIB applications. By fabricating 3D graphene-based composites, some issues of these anode materials such as poor electron transfer and structural degradation can be inhibited. Silicon is a promising anode candidate due to its high theoretical capacity (4200 mA h g−1) but suffers from poor conductivity and large volume expansion (400%) during lithiation.25,182–186,200 3D graphene materials could tackle this problem by serving as conductive supporting materials. Harold et al.25 successfully prevented the pulverization of silicon by fabricating a silicon@graphene composite. It was prepared by dispersing silicon nanoparticles in GO solution, followed by thermal reduction. Silicon nanoparticles with a diameter in the range of 20–50 nm were well dispersed on the graphene sheets, forming a sandwich structure. The graphene-based composite electrodes exhibited a capacity of more than 1500 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 1 A g−1 in LIBs. A similar approach was used to synthesize graphene-based composites such as Ge nanoparticles@graphene and Sn nanoparticles@graphene, presenting enhanced lithium storage properties.182–186,200 Metal sulfides with layered structures show high theoretical capacities, such as MoS2 (670 mA h g−1), SnS2 (645 mA h g−1), and SnS (728 mA h g−1), however, they suffered from low conductivity or/and volume change during lithiation.194–196 Among them, MoS2 showed minimal volume expansion (103%) during lithiation, showing superiority compared to other metal sulfides. In order to improve its conductivity, MoS2 with honeycomb-like nanoarchitectures anchored on 3D graphene foam was prepared by a P123-assisted solution-phase method.194 The obtained material possessed a high specific surface area (182 m2 g−1), which provided sufficient interface for reactions. The 3D graphene/MoS2 composite displayed a high discharge capacity (1235.3 mA h g−1) at a low current density of 0.2 A g−1 after 60 cycles. Other metal sulfide/graphene composites were also successfully prepared. For example, a SnS2/graphene composite was prepared via a hydrothermal method.196 Different from pure SnS2 suffering from a rapid loss of capacity in preliminary cycles, SnS2/graphene composite anodes exhibited an increasing capacity at 0.1 A g−1 in the first 30 cycles and a stable capacity of 920 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. In addition, good rate capability with a capacity of 600 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 was also obtained.
Metal oxides show similar merits and drawbacks in lithium-ion storage to metal sulfide. 3D graphene supported metal oxide composites have been well summarized and discussed in several reviews, showing great enhancement in cyclic stability compared to pure metal oxide anodes.26,46,201 Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) has been regarded as a promising anode material for LIB applications recently.202 It has the merits of no structural changes during intercalation and de-intercalation of lithium ions and a high voltage plateau (1.5 V vs. Li+/Li) preventing the formation of lithium dendrites. However, its low lithium-ion diffusion efficiency (10−9 to 10−16 cm2 s−1) and poor electric conductivity lead to a poor rate capability for LIB applications. Based on this concern, 3D graphene foam/LTO was prepared to enhance the transport of lithium ions and electrons. As a result, 3D graphene foam/LTO anodes presented excellent rate performance with a capacity of 135 mA h g−1 at 200C (1C = 145 mA h g−1).199
Cathode materials, including metal oxide composites,203,204 phosphate,199 silicate99,205 and organic polymers,206,207 were also composited with 3D graphene materials to enhance their lithium storage properties. LiMPO4 (M represents Fe, Co, Ni and Mn), with a typical olivine structure, is attractive as a cathode material in LIBs. Typically, LiFePO4 (LFP) has realized industrialization in electric vehicles due to its stable discharge voltage plateau, thermal stability and chemical stability. However, it still suffers from poor conductivity and sluggish ion diffusion. Cheng et al.199 first reported a flexible full battery using LTO/graphene foam as the anode and LFP/graphene foam as the cathode. It presented a good rate capability with a capacity of 117 mA h g−1 at 10C for 100 cycles, as shown in Fig. 8a and b. Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) is also a very promising candidate due to its high theoretical capacity (197 mA h g−1) and a high average voltage of 4 V during cycling. Its intrinsic poor conductivity can be improved by fabricating 3D graphene/Li3V2(PO4)3 composites. Liu et al.208 demonstrated the transport of lithium ions in LIBs can be enhanced by preparing a Li3V2(PO4)3@graphene composite. It showed excellent rate performance with a capacity of 47 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 50C. Very recently, a LiNi0.6Co0.1Mn0.3O2 (NCM)/graphene ball composite was also prepared.209 Graphene balls were grown on SiO2 particles via a CVD method, followed by coating on NCM via ball milling. SiO2 played a dominant role in the ball milling, which facilitated the penetration of graphene balls into spaces between pristine NCM (Fig. 8c–i). Graphene balls, with a minimal content of 0.425 wt%, could substantially enhance the lithium storage properties. The composite cathodes presented much improved energy density (27.6%) compared to the traditional NCM material. In addition, good cyclic performance was demonstrated at different temperatures (25 °C and 60 °C), as shown in Fig. 8j.
 Fig. 8  (a) Rate performance of a flexible LTO/LFP/GF full battery. (b) Cyclic performance of the LTO/LFP/GF full battery at 10C. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Schematic illustration of the GB coating onto NCM. (d and f) SEM images of pristine NCM. (e and g) SEM images of NCM after graphene ball coating. (h and i) Graphene layers located between or coated along primary particles of LiNi0.6Co0.1Mn0.3O2. (j) Cycle life of the GB-NCM/GB full-cell at 60 °C and 25 °C at 5C. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
Metal oxide composites like LiMn2O4 (LMO) and LiNi1−x−yCoxMnyO2 (NCM) have been investigated extensively as cathodes in LIBs. LMO has merits including low cost, non-toxicity and safety, but poor conductivity (10−6 S cm−1) and the dissolution of Mn2+ in the electrolyte limit its practical use.203 Bak et al.203 reported the fabrication of a spinel LiMn2O4/rGO composite via a chemical route. Well dispersed LMO particles on rGO sheets exhibited a high capacity of 137 mA h g−1 at 1C and an improved rate capability with a capacity of 101 mA h g−1 at 100C. NCM is also a commercialized cathode material due to its high energy density, stable structure and low cost. However, it faces the issue of poor rate capability owing to the cation disorder during the thermal treatment, where lithium ions could detach from its original sites, leading to a limitation in the kinetics. In this regard, Jiang et al.210 reported the synthesis of a reduced GO network/LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 composite as a cathode material in LIBs. By anchoring NCM materials on a rGO network, the ion diffusion pathways were shortened, thus improving the ion diffusion kinetics. The Nyquist plots demonstrated that the charge transfer resistance of the rGO/LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 composite was significantly reduced. As a result, the composite cathode exhibited a capacity of 55 mA h g−1 at 20C (1C = 170 mA g−1). In comparison, pure LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 showed almost no capacity at 20C.
Li2MSiO4 (M represents Mn, Fe, Co, or Ni) possesses high theoretical capacity, low cost and thermal stability. The main obstacles to achieve its practical application are amorphization and Jahn–Teller distortion of Li2MSiO4 during lithiation, resulting in severe volume change. 3D graphene/Li2MSiO4 composites could inhibit the volume change, thereby enabling better lithium-ion storage properties.99,205 For instance, a graphene-based Li2FeSiO4 composite cathode for LIBs was constructed, which exhibited a high capacity of 313 mA h g−1 in initial discharge, 93% of its theoretical capacity (333 mA h g−1).99 In addition, a capacity of 45 mA h g−1 was obtained even at a high rate of 50C (1C = 166 mA g−1).
Organic polymers, such as organic sulfur compounds,44 carbonyl compounds,206,207 and conducting polymers,159 also show promise as cathode materials due to their high theoretical capacities and fast reaction kinetics. However, the intrinsic insulating properties and dissolution of organic polymers in organic electrolytes hamper their practical applications. Huang et al.211 fabricated a 3D graphene/PI composite by in situ polymerization of PI particles on the graphene surface. The composite showed an enhanced conductivity of 2.38 S cm−1 and improved charge transfer due to the strong coupling between graphene and PI particles. The composite cathodes exhibited a high reversible capacity (240 mA h g−1 at 0.04 A g−1) and good rate performance (102 mA h g−1 at 40 A g−1).


5.1.2 Sodium-ion batteries. 
Promising sodium-host anode materials include metal oxides,212–214 metal sulfides,215 phosphides,135,216–218 and Na2Ti3O7.219 Metal oxides, SnO2 for example, have a high theoretical capacity (1398 mA h g−1) but the pure SnO2 anode displayed a rapid capacity loss owing to severe volume expansion during sodiation.220,221 In this regard, Patra et al.212 reported the preparation of SnO2 particles on graphene sheets by a hydrothermal method with the existence of supercritical state CO2. Supercritical state CO2 could assist the uniform dispersion of SnO2 particles on graphene sheets owing to their near-zero surface tension. In addition, excellent penetration ability could also facilitate the mixing between graphene and SnO2 particles. As a result, 3D graphene/SnO2 displayed a reversible capacity of 400 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1, a high rate capability of 207 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 and also good cyclic performance with 82% retention after 100 cycles. Su et al.213 also reported SnO2 anchoring on graphene as anode materials, which exhibited a high reversible capacity over 700 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Other metal oxides (Fe3O4,214 Co3O4,222 MoO3,223 and Sb2O3224) have been also composited with 3D graphene materials, showing enhancements in sodium-ion storage properties.
Layered transitional metal sulfides have the structural advantage of large interlayer spacing for the accommodation of sodium ions. For example, MoS2 has a larger interlayer spacing (0.62 nm) compared to graphite (0.33 nm), which facilitates the intercalation of sodium ions. However, MoS2 layers can easily restack with each other due to their large surface energy, resulting in the loss of active surface area. Choi et al.215 synthesized a MoS2–graphene sphere composite by one-pot spray pyrolysis. The uniform graphene nanospheres suppressed the stacking of MoS2 layers, thereby lowering the barrier for Na+ intercalation. The composites displayed a capacity of 322 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 after 600 cycles. Similarly, SnS2 layers also have sandwich structures with large interlayer spacing (0.59 nm), which is advantageous for sodium intercalation. Exfoliated SnS2 anchored on graphene sheets was prepared to enhance the sodium storage.225 SnS2 nanoplates containing 2–5 layers were uniformly decorated on the surface of graphene by hydrolysis of lithiated SnS2, followed by hydrothermal treatment. It exhibited a high capacity of 610 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles and had a high rate capability with a capacity of 326 mA h g−1 at 40 A g−1. Apart from SnS2, SnS nanoparticles anchored on nitrogen-doped graphene were also prepared, exhibiting a high capacity of 509.9 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 1000 cycles.226
Phosphides have the merits of high theoretical capacities and low redox voltages as anode materials in SIBs.135,216–218 However, they suffer from low intrinsic electric conductivity and volume expansion during sodiation.217 In this regard, Wu et al.216 reported the preparation of a graphene/Ni2P composite via a template-assisted self-assembly method. 3D yolk–shell-like Ni2P nanoparticles were successfully embedded into porous graphene networks. The graphene/Ni2P hybrid anodes reached a capacity of 161 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1 after 100 cycles. Sn3P4, combining the good conductivity of Sn and high capacity of P, displays a high theoretical volumetric capacity (6650 mA h cm−3), a high conductivity (30.7 S cm−1) and a gravimetric capacity of 1132 mA h g−1 as promising anodes in SIBs. Micro-sized Sn3P4 particles could be prepared by a mechanical ball milling method, however, they had to face the pulverization issue during sodiation.227 Nano-sized Sn3P4 particles would suppress the pulverization effect, but they suffer from particle aggregation. In this regard, uniformly monodispersed Sn3P4 nanoparticles loaded on rGO sheets were prepared by an in situ low temperature solution-based phosphorization chemical transformation route. Since pulverization and aggregation of the particles are depressed, the composite anodes delivered a high capacity of 362 mA h g−1 after 1500 cycles at 1 A g−1.135 Other graphene-based composites such as 3D graphene/Na2Ti3O7 nanowires,219 3D graphene/Sn,228 3D graphene/NaTi2(PO4)3,229 and 3D graphene/MoSe2230 have also been synthesized, presenting enhanced sodium-ion storage properties.
Tremendous advancements have been made in developing cathode materials for SIB applications, including polyanion-based materials and organic polymers. Polyanion materials with 3D structures and large interstitial lattices enable fast sodium-ion diffusion kinetics as anodes in SIBs. Among them, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) with a NASICON-type framework (Fig. 9a) is attractive as anodes in SIBs owing to its high thermal stability, high operating voltage (3.4 V vs. Na/Na+) and rapid ionic mobility (exceeding 10−11 cm2 s−1). However, a limitation still resides in its poor conductivity.145,231,232 In this regard, Fang et al.232 reported the fabrication of carbon NVP particles with a carbon-coating layer embedded in a 3D graphene network. Through the double restriction of carbon layers and the graphene network, the structure of NVP particles can be well maintained (Fig. 9b–e). In addition, the incorporation of the graphene network also released the strain caused by volume changes of NVP particles during sodiation. As a result, the composite electrodes exhibited a capacity of 97.2 mA h g−1 at 10C and good cyclic performance with 82% capacity retention for 1500 cycles at 40C (Fig. 9f and g). Recently, carbon coated NVP nanocrystals wrapped by rGO sheets was successfully prepared.233 The composite cathode could achieve superior sodium storage properties due to the rapid Na+ and electron transport. It displayed a high reversible capacity of 115 mA h g−1 at 1C, high rate performance with a capacity of 86 mA h g−1 at 100C, a high energy density of 384 W h kg−1 at a low specific power of 0.4 kW kg−1 and also good cyclic performance with 64% retention after 10000 cycles. The sodium-ion storage properties of sodium vanadium fluorophosphates were also studied.234,235 A Na3V2O2(PO4)2F/carbon/graphene composite was successfully synthesized as a cathode in SIBs. 3D graphene with a nanoporous structure could facilitate electrolyte infiltration, thereby shortening the Na+ transport pathways.234 As a result, the composite cathode exhibited a capacity of 135.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and cyclic stability with a capacity retention of 96.8% at 2C after 50 cycles. Jin et al.235 also reported the preparation of a Na3V2O2(PO4)2F nanocube/C/graphene composite, which delivered a reversible capacity of 113.2 mA h g−1 at 1C.
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structure of Na3V2(PO4)3. Reproduced with permission.233 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b–e) SEM images and TEM images of 3D graphene/C/NVP composites. (f and g) Sodium storage properties of 3D graphene/C/NVP composites at 10C and 40C. (h) Crystal structure of Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4). Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i and j) SEM images and TEM images of 3D graphene/C/Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) composites. (k and l) Sodium storage properties of 3D graphene/C/Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) composites. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) is a type of mixed-polyanion material containing multiple intercalation sites for sodium-ion storage (Fig. 9h). Its practical application is limited by sluggish electron transfer. 3D graphene-based composite cathodes were constructed to improve the low conductivity of Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4). Zhang et al.236 fabricated a Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4)/C nanorod–graphene composite by a molten-salt synthetic strategy (Fig. 9i and j). The conductivity of the graphene-based composite (0.76 S cm−1 at 65 °C) was dramatically enhanced compared to the pristine Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4)/C nanorod composite (5.41 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 65 °C). As a result, the Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4)/C nanorod–graphene composite exhibited enhanced rate performance and good cyclic performance with 95% retention after 200 cycles at 1C, as shown in Fig. 9k and l.
Organic polymers have significant merits including high theoretical capacities and low cost but suffer from electrical insulation for SIB applications. Constructing graphene-based composite electrodes is a promising approach to solve this issue. Huang et al.211 reported the preparation of a 3D graphene/PI composite for sodium ion storage. It displayed a capacity of 213 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1 and good cyclic performance with 80% capacity retention after 1000 cycles. Poly (anthraquinonyl sulfide) (PAQS), with a high theoretical capacity of 225 mA h g−1 and insoluble properties in any solvent, is regarded as a promising cathode material for SIBs. Zhang et al.237 reported the successful preparation of a 3D graphene/PAQS composite via a dispersion-assembly strategy. Compared to pristine PAQS particles with severe aggregation, PAQS particles in the 3D graphene composite have a decreased particle size in the range of 100 to 200 nm. The composite cathode delivered a reversible capacity of 156 mA h g−1 at 0.1C (1C = 225 mA h g−1) and a capacity of 132 mA h g−1 at 0.5C with 84.1% capacity retention after 1000 cycles.


5.1.3 Aluminum-ion batteries. 
Metal sulfides with large interlayer spacings can serve as intercalation sites for aluminum-ion storage. For example, SnS2 with a lamellar structure and a large interlayer spacing (0.59 nm) can facilitate the intercalation and deintercalation of large AlCl4− (about 0.53 nm). However, bulk SnS2 material has a less porous structure for electrolyte infiltration, resulting in sluggish aluminum-ion diffusion kinetics.196 In view of this concern, SnS2 nanosheet@rGO network was successfully synthesized.51 SnS2 nanosheets were evenly distributed on the surface of rGO, enabling an increased number of active sites for aluminum-ion insertion. In addition, the porous structure of the rGO network also accelerated the ion transport. The composite cathode displayed a high energy density of 241 W h kg−1 and a good rate capability with a capacity of 112 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1. Recently, a novel cathode material, a Ni3S2/graphene composite, was prepared for AIB application.50 Graphene sheets could serve as highly conductive channels to reduce the intrinsic resistance of the composite cathode. The composite cathode exhibited a high discharge voltage plateau (∼1.0 V vs. Al/AlCl4−) and a discharge capacity of over 60 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1.


5.1.4 Potassium-ion batteries. 
Metal sulfides with large interlayer spacings can also serve as intercalation sites for potassium-ion storage. Constructing 3D graphene-based composite electrodes can further enhance their potassium-ion storage properties.238,239 For example, a novel PIB anode containing SnS2/rGO network was constructed, exhibiting a high capacity of 250 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles.238 Sb2S3 nanoparticles embedded in the graphene framework were also prepared, displaying an energy density of 166.3 W h kg−1 as the anode in a full PIB.239 A CoS quantum dot@graphene composite with a large surface area, high conductivity and robust structural stability was successfully synthesized.240 It displayed a high capacity of 310.8 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles as the PIB anode. In comparison, the pure CoS anode only exhibited a capacity of 126.3 mA h g−1 after 60 cycles. In another study, MoS2 with a flower-like structure was grown on rGO sheets via a solvothermal method.241 It exhibited a high reversible capacity of 381 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles as the PIB anode. Other applications of 3D graphene as supporting materials in PIBs are summarized in Table 2.173–175,238–241


5.1.5 Magnesium-ion batteries. 
Magnesium is a desirous anode material owing to its abundance in the Earth's crust and high volumetric energy density of 3837 mA h cm−3. In view of this, the magnesium-ion battery system was explored.242 Till now, the sluggish reaction kinetics in cathodes, derived from the strong polarizing effect of divalent Mg ions, hinders the development of Mg-ion batteries. For example, V2O5, as a cathode in Mg-ion batteries, suffered from a rapid capacity loss in the first 7 cycles.243 This is attributed to the sluggish reaction kinetics of Mg-ion intercalation and poor electrical conductivity of the V2O5 cathode. A 3D graphene and V2O5 composite was prepared to ameliorate this situation.244 A graphene decorated vanadium oxide nanowire aerogel was successfully prepared. The diffusion coefficient of Mg ions in the cathode was improved (∼3 × 10−11 cm2 s−1), resulting in an enhanced rate capability. The composite cathode exhibited a capacity of 320 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1. Moreover, it had good cyclic performance with 81% capacity retention after 200 cycles at 1 A g−1. In addition, magnesium-ion batteries also showed a wide temperature range of operation, with a capacity of over 200 mA h g−1 (>55 °C) and a reversible capacity of 40 mA h g−1 (−30 °C). Other promising electrode materials like nanowire Mg-OMS-2, Co3O4, MoS2, and FeVO4 were also anchored on 3D graphene materials, showing enhanced Mg-ion storage properties, which are summarized in Table 2.147,245–247

5.2 Encapsulated materials
3D graphene is increasingly playing the role of encapsulation in constructing graphene/metal-host material composite electrodes. Encapsulation of metal-host materials can be achieved either by self-assembly of graphene sheets or by template-assisted growth of graphene sheets. The particularities and advantages of 3D graphene as an encapsulated material can be summarized as follows. Firstly, rationally designed void space in the composite electrodes can be used to accommodate the volume expansion of metal-host materials. Secondly, the strains caused by volume changes of metal-host materials can be released due to the flexibility and mechanical robustness of graphene sheets. Thirdly, owing to the encapsulation effect of graphene, the pulverized metal-host materials cannot scatter into the electrolyte, thus preserving the electrical contact of the metal-host material. Lastly, a stable SEI film can be formed on the surface of graphene, thereby preventing side reactions.

5.2.1 Lithium-ion batteries. 
Metal oxides and alloys were encapsulated into 3D graphene materials to enhance their lithium-ion storage properties. For instance, MnO nanowires encapsulated in tubular graphene scrolls were prepared by a hydrothermal method, forming a core–sheath structure.248 The graphene scrolls were electronically connected with the MnO nanowires but mechanically isolated, leaving void spaces. In this way, graphene scrolls could enhance the electric conductivity as well as accommodate the volume expansion of metal oxides during lithiation. As a result, they displayed excellent storage and cyclic properties, with a capacity of 812 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 1000 cycles. In addition, 3D graphene encapsulated SnO2 hollow spheres was also prepared.249 As the composite anode in LIBs, a capacity of 552 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 was observed after 500 cycles, presenting remarkable enhancement compared to the pure SnO2 anode. Recently, graphene cages encapsulated SnO2 with an optimized size of the void space were constructed.106 The volume of the void space perfectly matched the expanded volume of tin oxide (∼260%) after lithiation. The resultant material exhibited a high volumetric energy density (2123 mA h cm−3) and high reversible capacity (974 mA h g−1). Xu et al.184 reported the preparation of graphene encapsulated germanium nanowires by a CVD method. Graphene shells with high flexibility could provide mechanical tight holding of Ge. Meanwhile, their high conductivity could also accelerate the transmission of electrons. The composite anode exhibited a high capacity of 1400 mA h g−1 at 1C (1C = 1600 mA g−1). Even at a high current density of 20C, a capacity of 517 mA h g−1 was still maintained.
3D graphene encapsulated cathode materials were also reported for LIB applications. The synthesis of aminoanthraquinone (AQ) nanowires encapsulated in a 3D graphene framework was reported.207 The 3D graphene framework could suppress the dissolution of AQ in the electrolyte by encapsulation. As a result, the composite cathode exhibited good cyclic stability with a capacity retention of 76% after 1000 cycles. V2O5 as a promising cathode material in LIBs suffered from a low conductivity (10−2–10−3 S cm−1) and low lithium-ion diffusion coefficient (10−12–10−13 cm2 s−1).250–252 In this regard, crumpled rGO encapsulated hollow V2O5 microspheres were prepared.253 The encapsulated crumpled rGO could prevent the dissolution of vanadium ions into the electrolyte and improve the electrolyte wettability of the composite cathode. The composite cathode offered a high energy density of 492 W h kg−1, a high capacity of 289 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1, and a high rate capability with a capacity of 163 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1. In addition, a capacity retention of 94% was obtained after 200 cycles at 2 A g−1.


5.2.2 Sodium-ion batteries. 
Phosphorus is a promising anode material in SIBs with a high theoretical capacity of 2596 mA h g−1. However, it suffers from an insulating electronic nature (1 × 10−14 S cm−1) and volume expansion (300%) during sodiation.254 With this consideration, a rGO encapsulated phosphorus/carbon composite was successfully prepared by a simple spray drying process.255 As a result, the composite anodes displayed a high reversible capacity of 2445 mA h g−1 and improved cyclic stability with a capacity retention of 95% after 100 cycles. Other novel anode materials in SIBs including VO2256 and NiCo2O4257 were also encapsulated by 3D graphene materials, showing enhanced sodium-ion storage capabilities. LTO is considered as a high safety anode in SIBs due to its high operating voltage (0.9 V), which can prevent the formation of sodium dendrites. In addition, it also offers an adequate theoretical capacity of 175 mA h g−1. The major obstacles to achieve its practical applications in SIBs are its intrinsic low ionic and electronic conductivity. With this consideration, a porous LTO nanofiber aerogel wrapped by graphene sheets was prepared.258 A stable SEI film was formed on the graphene, thereby enabling the durability of SIBs. The composite anodes exhibited a high capacity of 195 mA h g−1 and superior cyclic performance up to 12000 cycles in SIBs.
As for cathode materials in SIBs, Na3V2O2(PO4)2F shows promise due to its high reversible capacity (∼130 mA h g−1) and high average discharge voltage (∼3.8 V vs. Na+/Na). However, its poor conductivity limits practical use. In view of this, Na3V2O2(PO4)2F nanoparticles were encapsulated in 3D graphene skeleton by a spray drying method.259 The composite cathode exhibited a high specific capacity of 127.2 mA h g−1, an excellent rate capability with a capacity of 70.3 mA h g−1 at 100C and long cycling stability with 83.4% capacity retention over 2000 cycles. In addition, graphene encapsulated NVP was also prepared, showing a reversible capacity of 115.2 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 70.1 mA h g−1 at 30C.260

6. Merits and drawbacks
The application of 3D graphene architectures in MIB systems has merits and drawbacks. In this chapter, we discuss the strengths and weaknesses of different 3D architectures for MIB applications both in metal-ion storage and in fabricating composite electrodes.
CGBs self-assembled from GO sheets, despite their mass production capability and aggregation-resistant property, generally possess ill-defined molecular structures and porosity. Defects and oxygen-containing groups of CGBs result in much decreased electron mobility compared to defect-free graphene, and meanwhile, the polydispersity of pore sizes led to inhomogeneities in electrodes. These limitations hinder their applications in metal-ion storage.261 In comparison with CGBs, GBs prepared by CVD methods present well-defined pore structures and better crystallinity, enabling structural homogeneities and effective metal-ion storage with enhanced electron transfer.12,106 In addition, GBs can serve as encapsulated materials in fabricating composite electrodes, which has many configuration advantages.
3D graphene with linear secondary structures exhibits inferior metal-ion storage properties due to its sparse storage sites. For example, graphene fibers, with stacked graphene sheets forming compact structures, are not promising for metal-ion storage since metal ions hardly intercalate into the interlayers of graphene fibers. Graphene tubes and graphene scrolls containing less stacked graphene sheets also show relatively poor metal-ion storage capabilities because intercalation will primarily occur on the edges of tubes/scrolls at both ends.75,77 For the preparation of composite electrodes, graphene scrolls can encapsulate metal-host materials by forming core–sheath structures, thereby enhancing the sodium-ion storage properties.248
VGS with exposed edges present many unique advantages in metal-ion storage. For example, the lithium-ion diffusion at edge sites can be accelerated, thus enhancing the rate capabilities of LIBs.168 Meanwhile, graphene edges can also act as adsorption interfaces to store large amounts of metal ions via covalent interactions, forming metallic layers such as lithium layers or sodium layers.164,171
3D graphene networks are commonly reported as anode materials for metal-ion storage. Their interconnected networks enhance the electron transport and their highly porous structures facilitate the electrolyte infiltration and reduce the ion diffusion path.262 Despite these characteristics, their ascendancy is mainly reflected in fabricating graphene-based composite electrodes.5 3D graphene networks prepared by self-assembly methods have abundant surface functional groups, which provides opportunities for synthesizing composite materials due to the binding effect between the functional groups and other species. 3D graphene networks prepared by CVD methods offer well-defined structures, which can act as scaffolds to uniformly load other metal-host materials. It should be noted that the loading materials may be detached from the graphene networks during metal-ion intercalation, caused by the volume expansion and weak binding forces between the two phases.
The merits of graphene cages are reflected in fabricating graphene-based composite electrodes. Graphene cages can buffer or accommodate the volume expansion of metal-host materials to suppress the structural degradation of electrodes. In addition, in situ formation of graphene cages on metal-host materials ensures mechanical tight holding of metal-host materials, generating an encapsulation effect. Such an effect will alleviate the pulverization problem of the metal-host materials, thereby improving the stability of composite electrodes.43
7. Summary and outlook
3D graphene materials, with superior physicochemical properties, have received so much attention in recent years. In this review, we comprehensively summarize the configurations and preparation of 3D graphene materials and specify their applications in MIBs. Basically, two preparation methods, i.e. CVD and self-assembly, are used to construct various 3D graphene architectures, showing promise for energy and environmental applications. In particular, the applications of 3D graphene materials in MIB systems exhibit attractive metal-ion storage properties in many aspects, such as gravimetric energy densities, power densities and cyclic performance. We further reveal the reasons for these properties by illustrating metal-ion storage mechanisms in graphene layers and by discussing the functionalities of 3D graphene architectures. Last, the merits and drawbacks of applying different 3D graphene architectures in MIB systems are also discussed in detail.
Although promising, there are still some remaining challenges that hinder the application of 3D graphene materials in MIBs. As for preparation, self-assembly methods show potential for mass production of 3D graphene materials, however, the resultant materials possess inferior quality caused by defects and oxygen-containing groups. Extra annealing treatment is required to improve the quality of the products. The resultant materials also have ill-defined pore structures, leading to structural inhomogeneities in electrodes, thereby causing highly non-reproducible performance of MIBs. CVD methods are capable of obtaining high-quality graphene and precisely controlling the pore structures, however, harsh conditions such as high temperatures and low pressures limit the possibility of large-scale preparation.
As regards 3D graphene-based composite electrodes for MIB applications, some crucial issues need to be addressed. First, poor initial columbic efficiency makes composite electrodes unfeasible, since additional quantities of electrode material are required to supply the first charge. Second, complex electrochemical reactions between graphene layers and metal ions often result in capacity fluctuation, which hinders the practical use of MIBs. Third, the large pore volumes of 3D graphene materials require additional volumes of electrolyte to infiltrate, thereby decreasing the energy densities of MIBs. Fourth, the low densities of 3D graphene materials lead to low packing density and mass loading, which cannot meet the requirements for industry manufacturing. In addition, irrationally designed composite electrodes often cause low volumetric energy densities of MIBs. Last, the large voltage hysteresis of composite electrodes results in the low energy efficiency of MIBs.
Aiming to develop advanced MIBs, future research directions should focus on the preparation of 3D graphene materials and rational design of 3D graphene-based composite electrodes. As for preparation, feasible techniques to realize large-scale production of 3D graphene materials with high quality and controllable structures are still required. As for constructing 3D graphene-based composite electrodes, reducing the amount of 3D graphene material is advisable to develop MIBs with high energy densities. In addition, in order to solve the issue of volume expansion during metal-ion insertion, voids should be specifically reserved and designed to accommodate the volume expansion of metal-host materials. Furthermore, a better understanding of metal-ion storage mechanisms in MIBs is still required to give more guidance for battery design.
In conclusion, despite the current remaining issues, it is still very promising and inspiring to accelerate the industrialization process with tremendous efforts and change the landscape in energy storage technologies in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was fully supported by a grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China (Project No. 25211817).
References
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 RSC .
V. Chabot, D. Higgins, A. Yu, X. Xiao, Z. Chen and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1564 RSC .
X. Huang, Z. Yin, S. Wu, X. Qi, Q. He, Q. Zhang, Q. Yan, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Small, 2011, 7, 1876–1902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang, T. Sun, L. Xiao, Z. He, A. P. Katsoulidis, M. G. Kanatzidis, J. M. Gibson and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8943–8949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Dong, C. Jiang, H. Cheng, Y. Zhao, G. Shi, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1856–1861 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, Y. Hao, Z. Wang, H. Gong and J. T. L. Thong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4844–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Viculis, J. J. Mack and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2003, 299, 1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Qiao, T. Chong and Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 64–67 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16017 CrossRef .
H. Wang, K. Sun, F. Tao, D. J. Stacchiola and Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9210–9214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, J. Yang and X. Yan, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 348–353 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Q. Liu, J. Han, X. Zhang, J. Wang, Z. Li, H. Yan and L. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1137–1143 RSC .
Z. Y. Yang, L. J. Jin, G. Q. Lu, Q. Q. Xiao, Y. X. Zhang, L. Jing, X. X. Zhang, Y. M. Yan and K. N. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3917–3925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, K. Sheng, W. Yuan and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 291–293 RSC .
F. Han, O. Qian, B. Chen, H. Tang and M. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 730, 386–391 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sha, Y. Li, R. Villegas Salvatierra, T. Wang, P. Dong, Y. Ji, S. K. Lee, C. Zhang, J. Zhang, R. H. Smith, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, N. Zhao and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6860–6867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, W. Qiu, F. Wang, T. Zhai, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15792–15823 RSC .
X. Wu, D. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Jiang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Carbon, 2015, 92, 26–30 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, G. Zhang, T. Wang, X. Zhu, F. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Lu and F. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15738–15744 RSC .
D. Zhou, Y. Liu, W. L. Song, X. Li, L. Z. Fan and Y. Deng, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 316, 645–654 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Lee, K. B. Smith, C. M. Hayner and H. H. Kung, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2025 RSC .
X. H. Xia, D. L. Chao, Y. Q. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 785–807 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Hong, G. Yoon, H. Kim, K. Park, M. Park, W. Yoon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2963–2969 RSC .
C. Uthaisar, V. Barone and J. E. Peralta, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 113715 CrossRef .
S. Gong and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24418–24424 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, J. Qiu, C. Lai, M. Ling, H. Zhao and S. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 224–230 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. Chen and L. Dai, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 20, 429–438 CrossRef CAS .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 271–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, G. Shi and X. Duan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1666–1675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Kim, J. H. Oh, M. Kotal, N. Koratkar and I. K. Oh, Nano Today, 2017, 14, 100–123 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Shao, W. Lv and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5586–5612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, R. C. Haddon, R. Yan and E. Bekyarova, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1054–1063 RSC .
X. Yao and Y. Zhao, Chem, 2017, 2, 171–200 CAS .
M. Nazarian Samani, H. K. Kim, S. H. Park, H. C. Youn, D. Mhamane, S. W. Lee, M. S. Kim, J. H. Jeong, S. Haghighat Shishavan, K. C. Roh, S. F. Kashani Bozorg and K. B. Kim, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 50941–50967 RSC .
Z. Yang, S. Chabi, Y. Xia and Y. Zhu, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2015, 25, 554–562 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850–1865 RSC .
K.-Q. Lu, X. Xin, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4590–4604 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2165–2216 RSC .
B. Luo and L. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 456–477 RSC .
J. Y. Liu, X. X. Li, J. R. Huang, J. J. Li, P. Zhou, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5977–5994 RSC .
J. Zhu, J. Duan, R. Zhang, S. Jiang, N. Zhang and Y. Zhu, SpringerPlus, 2014, 3, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zai and X. Qian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8814–8834 RSC .
J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, D. Chao, D. Su, S. Liu, L. Chen, C. Chi, J. Lin, Z. X. Shen, J. Zhao, L. Mai and Y. Li, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Zhang, T. Gao, J. Han, X. Wang, B. Hultman, P. Xu, Z. Zhang, G. Wu and B. Song, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 105–111 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Yu, J. Tu, J. Wang, D. Tian, Y. Liu and S. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 2–11 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, B. Luo, D. Ye, X. Zhu, M. Lyu and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606132 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yu, B. Wang, D. Gong, Z. Xu and B. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604118 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Yang, L. Chen, P. Jiang, Z. Y. Guo, W. Wang and Z. P. Liu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 47655–47660 RSC .
X. Huang, Y. Liu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang, O. Noonan and C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 19416–19421 RSC .
M. M. Islam, C. M. Subramaniyam, T. Akhter, S. N. Faisal, A. I. Minett, H. K. Liu, K. Konstantinov and S. X. Dou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5290–5302 RSC .
X. Ma, G. Ning, Y. Sun, Y. Pu and J. Gao, Carbon, 2014, 79, 310–320 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sui, C. Wang, Q. Yang, K. Shu, Y. Liu, B. Han and G. G. Wallace, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18229–18237 RSC .
J. Zhang, B. Guo, Y. Yang, W. Shen, Y. Wang, X. Zhou, H. Wu and S. Guo, Carbon, 2015, 84, 469–478 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yoon, W. M. Choi, H. Baik, H. J. Shin, I. Song, M. S. Kwon, J. J. Bae, H. Kim, Y. H. Lee and J. Y. Choi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6803–6811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, Z. J. Jiang, X. Tian and L. Luo, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 455–463 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Jiang and Z. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19082–19091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Xue, Y. Zhou, W. Li, Y. Wang, W. Tu, Z. Zou, X. Wang and M. Xiao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Fan, Y. Y. Xia, W. W. Tjiu, P. K. Pallathadka, C. He and T. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2013, 243, 973–981 CrossRef CAS .
J. Le Shi, H. J. Peng, L. Zhu, W. Zhu and Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 96–105 CrossRef .
P. Guo, H. Song and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4867 RSC .
Y. Ding, H. Cheng, C. Zhou, Y. Fan, J. Zhu, H. Shao and L. Qu, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 255605 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiao, J. Damien, J. Luo, H. D. Jang, J. Huang and Z. He, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, X. Li, Z. Han, L. Yao, S. Shen and J. Yang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 87796–87801 RSC .
R. Wang, W. Guo, X. Li, Z. Liu, H. Liu and S. Ding, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 13930–13939 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dou, A. R. Koltonow, X. He, H. D. Jang, Q. Wang, Y.-W. Chung and J. Huang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, H. Sun, X. Zhao and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 188–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, Y. Zhang, P. Li and C. Gao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7103–7113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, C. Hu, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, 113 CrossRef .
M. Zhou, T. Lin, F. Huang, Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Bi, D. Wan and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2263–2269 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, P. Xu, W. Gao, S. Ma, G. Zhang, R. Cao, J. Cho, H. L. Wang and G. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1378–1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, H. Pan, D. Higgins, R. Cao, G. Zhang, H. Lv, K. Wu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Small, 2015, 11, 1443–1452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zeng, Y. Kuang, Y. Wang, Z. Huang, C. Fu and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4929–4932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zeng, Y. Kuang, G. Liu, R. Liu, Z. Huang, C. Fu and H. Zhou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3997 RSC .
Y. Shi, W. Gao, H. Lu, Y. Huang, L. Zuo, W. Fan and T. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6994–7002 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hiramatsu, K. Shiji, H. Amano and M. Hori, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 4708–4710 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, Z. Bo, G. Lu, S. Mao, S. Cui, Y. Zhu, X. Chen, R. S. Ruoff and J. Chen, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 202 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Davami, Y. Jiang, J. Cortes, C. Lin, M. Shaygan, K. T. Turner and I. Bargatin, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 155701 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lin, K. Davami, Y. Jiang, J. Cortes, M. Munther, M. Shaygan, H. Ghassemi, J. T. Robinson, K. T. Turner and I. Bargatin, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 295701 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Wu, X. Li, J. Yang, C. Du, W. Shen and J. Yan, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 318 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yu, G. Lu, Z. Bo, S. Mao and J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1556–1562 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Shang, P. Papakonstantinou, M. McMullan, M. Chu, A. Stamboulis, A. Potenza, S. S. Dhesi and H. Marchetto, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3506–3514 CrossRef CAS .
R. Garg, S. K. Rastogi, M. Lamparski, S. C. De La Barrera, G. T. Pace, N. T. Nuhfer, B. M. Hunt, V. Meunier and T. Cohen-Karni, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6301–6311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Azam, N. N. Zulkapli, N. Dorah, R. N. A. R. Seman, M. H. Ani, M. S. Sirat, E. Ismail, F. B. Fauzi, M. A. Mohamed and B. Y. Majlis, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2017, 6, 3035–3048 CrossRef .
M. Li, D. Liu, D. Wei, X. Song, D. Wei and A. T. S. Wee, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1–23 Search PubMed .
L. Zhao, Y. Qiu, J. Yu, X. Deng, C. Dai and X. Bai, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4902 RSC .
J. Zeng, X. Ji, Y. Ma, Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Ren, C. Zhi and J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705380 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhang, Y. Cao, P. Li, X. Zang, P. Sun, K. Wang, M. Zhong, J. Wei, D. Wu, F. Kang and H. Zhu, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 1477–1487 CrossRef CAS .
W. Fang, N. Zhang, L. Fan and K. Sun, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, X. Peng, Y. Li, L. Wang, K. Huo, L. Y. S. Lee, K. Y. Wong and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 515–523 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Yuxi Xu, K. Sheng and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324–4330 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chang, X. Huang, G. Zhou, S. Cui, P. B. Hallac, J. Jiang, P. T. Hurley and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jing, H. L. Tan, R. Amal, Y. H. Ng and K.-N. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15675–15682 RSC .
H. Zhu, X. Wu, L. Zan and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11724–11733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mao, K. Yu, J. Chang, D. A. Steeber, L. E. Ocola and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 33–36 Search PubMed .
Z. Yan, W. Yao, L. Hu, D. Liu, C. Wang and C. Lee, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5563–5577 RSC .
Z. Sun, W. Fan and T. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 250, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, C. Tang, B. Wang, H.-F. Wang, S. Gao, Y. Wang and Q. Zhang, New Carbon Mater., 2017, 32, 509–516 CrossRef .
X. Dong, H. Xu, X. Wang, Y. Huang, M. B. Chan-park and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, J. Sun, Y. Jin, W. Chen, C. Zu, R. Zhang, Y. Qiu, J. Zhao, D. Zhuo, Y. Liu, X. Tao, W. Liu, K. Yan, H. R. Lee and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603366 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, D. Kong, W. Lv, D. Tang, D. Han, C. C. Zhang, D. Liu, Z. Xiao, X. Zhang, J. Xiao, X. He, F. Hsia, C. C. Zhang, Y. Tao, D. Golberg, F. Kang, L. Zhi and Q. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 402 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chang, W. Wei, K. Sun and Y. H. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10183–10187 RSC .
N. Li, X. Huang, H. Zhang, Z. Shi and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 16803–16811 RSC .
X. Wang, Y. Zhang, C. Zhi, X. Wang, D. Tang, Y. Xu, Q. Weng, X. Jiang, M. Mitome, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, G. Chen, Y. Zhong, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700603 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhou, B. Xiong, J. Wang, X. Chen, R. O’Hayre and Z. Shao, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2013, 17, 1089–1098 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, Y. Zheng, F. Ye, X. Deng, X. Xu, M. Liu and Z. Shao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14446–14455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Xiong, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Chen, R. O’Hayre and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2013, 52, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhou, B. Xiong, Y. Zhao, X. Huang and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 88, 847–857 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xiong, Y. Zhou, Y. Zhao, J. Wang, X. Chen, R. O’Hayre and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2013, 52, 181–192 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, Y. Zhou and Z. Shao, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 283, 999–1005 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, B. T. Zhao, L. Zhu and Z. P. Shao, Carbon, 2015, 93, 48–58 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–23 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, G. Chen, J. Sunarso, Y. Zhu, R. Ran, Z. Zhu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1–8 CrossRef .
P. Tan, W. Kong, Z. Shao, M. Liu and M. Ni, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 155–189 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, S. Jiang, C. Su, R. Cai, R. Ran, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12310–12320 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Zhong, M. Tade, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–10 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Su, L. Zhou, H. Sun, A. Suvorova, T. Odedairo, Z. Zhu, Z. Shao and S. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 194, 7–15 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Somani, S. P. Somani and M. Umeno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 430, 56–59 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Chen, K. Li, G. Zhao, C. Sun, W. Chen, L. Ni and G. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 224, 527–533 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. I. Kim, J. C. Yoon and J. H. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6047–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qin, E. Liu, J. Li, J. Kang, C. Shi, C. He, F. He and N. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. Tang, H. Sen Wang, H. F. Wang, Q. Zhang, G. L. Tian, J. Q. Nie and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4516–4522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Yin, J. Li, S. Wang, Y. Guo and L. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706216 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532–19535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu and T. K. Seo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1930–1936 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, S. Chung, G. Oh and T. S. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 924–927 Search PubMed .
H. D. Jang, S. K. Kim, H. Chang, J. H. Choi, B. G. Cho, E. H. Jo, J. W. Choi and J. Huang, Carbon, 2015, 93, 869–877 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Li, J. Ma, C. Wang, X. Ge, S. Dong and L. Yin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .
M. Lao, Y. Zhang, W. Luo, Q. Yan, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–23 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. Zhao, G. Zhang, Y. Gao, L. Deng, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15482–15488 RSC .
S. Li, M. Wang and Y. Lian, Sci. China: Chem., 2016, 59, 405–411 CrossRef CAS .
G. Luo, H. Huang, C. Lei, Z. Cheng, X. Wu, S. Tang and Y. Du, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 366, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhou, R. O. Hayre and Z. Shao, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 1608–1614 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kamali, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2017, 52, 18–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wan, H. Bi, X. Xie, S. Su, K. Du, H. Jia, T. Xu, L. He, K. Yin and L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Strong, S. Dubin, M. F. El-Kady, A. Lech, Y. Wang, B. H. Weiller and R. B. Kaner, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1395–1403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, P. Kopold, P. A. Van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2409–2416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, H. Xu, S. Wang, T. Huang, J. Xi, S. Cai, F. Guo, Z. Xu, W. Gao and C. Gao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 7233 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, L. Z. Fan and L. Jiao, J. Power Sources, 2017, 340, 104–110 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pollak, B. Geng, K. J. Jeon, I. T. Lucas, T. J. Richardson, F. Wang and R. Kostecki, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3386–3388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lee and K. A. Persson, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Tian, Q. C. Zhuang, J. Li, Y. L. Shi, J. P. Chen, F. Lu and S. G. Sun, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 3204–3212 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiao, T. Wu, H. Li, F. Li and L. Niu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15979–15981 RSC .
X. Deng, K. Xie, L. Li, W. Zhou, J. Sunarso and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2016, 107, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jache and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10169–10173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Hong, Y. U. Park, J. Kim, I. Hwang and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, L. Xiao, M. L. Sushko, W. Wang, B. Schwenzer, J. Xiao, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3783–3787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, H. Wang, Z. Li, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, Z. Xu, B. Zahiri, X. Tan, E. M. Lotfabad, B. C. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11004–11015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Luo, J. Wan, B. Ozdemir, W. Bao, Y. Chen, J. Dai, H. Lin, Y. Xu, F. Gu, V. Barone and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7671–7677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. A. Zafar, S. Imtiaz, R. Razaq, S. Ji, T. Huang, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang and J. A. Anderson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5646–5660 RSC .
S. K. Das, S. Mahapatra and H. Lahan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6347–6367 RSC .
M. C. Lin, M. Gong, B. Lu, Y. Wu, D. Y. Wang, M. Guan, M. Angell, C. Chen, J. Yang, B. J. Hwang and H. Dai, Nature, 2015, 520, 325–328 CrossRef .
H. Chen, C. Chen, Y. Liu, X. Zhao, N. Ananth, B. Zheng, L. Peng, T. Huang, W. Gao and C. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. S. Xue, T. Zheng and J. R. Dahn, Carbon, 2017, 728, 3123129 Search PubMed .
F. J. Sonia, M. K. Jangid, B. Ananthoju, M. Aslam, P. Johari and A. Mukhopadhyay, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8662–8679 RSC .
Y. Liu, V. I. Artyukhov, M. Liu, A. R. Harutyunyan and B. I. Yakobson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1737–1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Q. Weng, X. Liu, X. Wang, D. M. Tang, W. Tian, C. Zhang, W. Yi, D. Liu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1164–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, J. H. Kim and M. Endo, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 183–194 CrossRef CAS .
C. Uthaisar and V. Barone, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2838–2842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai, Y. He, X. Zou, X. Zhao, P. Xiong and Y. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703217 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, X. Qi, X. Rong and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 5, 191–197 CrossRef .
Y. S. Yun, K. Y. Park, B. Lee, S. Y. Cho, Y. U. Park, S. J. Hong, B. H. Kim, H. Gwon, H. Kim, S. Lee, Y. W. Park, H. J. Jin and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6914–6921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bommier, T. W. Surta, M. Dolgos and X. Ji, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5888–5892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Share, A. P. Cohn, R. Carter, B. Rogers and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9738–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ma, K. Huang, J.-S. Ma, Z. Ju, Z. Xing and Q. Zhuang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7854–7861 RSC .
Z. Ju, S. Zhang, Z. Xing, Q. Zhuang, Y. Qiang and Y. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20682–20690 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, S. H. Lee and Y. K. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601329 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, T. Wang, F. Fan, L. Mei and B. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8243–8251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chang, X. Liu, Q. Zhao, Y. Huang, Y. Huang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31879–31886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Zhao, J. Wu, H. D. Jang, H. H. Kung and J. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1824–1829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kim, C. Oh, J. Kim, J. S. Kim, E. D. Jeong, J. S. Bae, T. E. Hong and J. K. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A6075–A6083 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lee, T. Liu, S. K. Kim, H. Chang, K. Eom, L. Xie, S. Chen, H. D. Jang and S. W. Lee, Carbon, 2017, 119, 438–445 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, K. H. Seng, D. Shi, Z. Chen, H. K. Liu and Z. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14115 RSC .
H. Kim, Y. Son, C. Park, J. Cho and H. C. Choi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5997–6001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, X. Zhu, X. Zhou, X. Liu, Y. Liu, Z. Dai and J. Bao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 28502–28508 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, L. Shen, H. Zheng and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1498–1503 RSC .
J. Ren, Q. Wu, H. Tang, G. Hong, W. Zhang and S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1821–1826 RSC .
C. Wang, J. Ju, Y. Yang, Y. Tang, J. Lin, Z. Shi, R. P. S. Han and F. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8897 RSC .
R. Mo, D. Rooney, K. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Ren, M. N. F. Hoque, J. Liu, J. Warzywoda and Z. Fan, Nano Energy, 2016, 21, 162–171 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ye, B. Zhao, R. Ran and Z. Shao, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 4055–4063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, D. Wu, J. Wang, S. Han, L. Lv, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2014, 10, 2226–2232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, B. Zhao, R. Ran, R. Cai, M. O. Tadé and Z. Shao, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 9367–9371 RSC .
M. Zhang, E. Liu, T. Cao, H. Wang, C. Shi, J. Li, C. He, F. He, L. Ma and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7035–7042 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Liu, D. Chao, J. Yan, J. Lin and Z. X. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7162–7169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chao, R. Jalili, Y. Ge, C. Wang, T. Zheng, K. Shu and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–10 CrossRef .
K. Chang, Z. Wang, G. Huang, H. Li, W. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2012, 201, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, X. Qi, Z. Zhang, G. Ai, Y. Liu, Z. Huang and J. Zhong, Ceram. Int., 2015, 42, 6572–6580 CrossRef .
B. Zhao, Z. Wang, F. Chen, Y. Yang, Y. Gao, L. Chen, Z. Jiao, L. Cheng and Y. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1407–1415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Z. Ping Chen, W. Cai Ren, F. Li and H. Ming Chen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 17360–17365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, B. Wang, X. Wang, J. Park, S. Dou, H. Ahn and K. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8378 RSC .
Q. Fang, Y. Shen and B. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 264, 753–771 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yuan, W. T. Li, W. Zhang, Y. S. He, C. Zhang, X. Z. Liao and Z. F. Ma, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 10849–10857 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bak, K. W. Nam, C. W. Lee, K. H. Kim, H. C. Jung, X. Q. Yang and K. B. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17309 RSC .
R. Jiang, C. Cui and H. Ma, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6406 RSC .
D. Rangappa, K. D. Murukanahally, T. Tomai, A. Unemoto and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1146–1151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Amin, Q. Meng, A. Ahmad, M. Cheng, M. Zhang, L. Mao, K. Lu and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1703868, 1–8 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, F. Bu, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 3419–3426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, G. Yang, X. Zhang, P. Gao, L. Wang, J. Fang, J. Pinto and X. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11039 RSC .
I. H. Son, J. H. Park, S. Park, K. Park, S. Han, J. Shin, S. G. Doo, Y. Hwang, H. Chang and J. W. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Jiang, S. Xin, J. S. Lee, J. Kim, X. L. Xiao and Y. G. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 2934 RSC .
Y. Huang, K. Li, J. Liu, X. Zhong, X. Duan, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2710–2716 RSC .
J. Patra, H. C. Chen, C. H. Yang, C. Te Hsieh, C. Y. Su and J. K. Chang, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 124–134 CrossRef CAS .
D. Su, H. J. Ahn and G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3131 RSC .
H. Liu, M. Jia, Q. Zhu, B. Cao, R. Chen, Y. Wang, F. Wu and B. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26878–26885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, Y. N. Ko, J. K. Lee and Y. C. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 1780–1788 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, P. Kopold, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Chen, G. Wang, X. Liu and H. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 11602–11616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, Z. Li and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, H. Xiao, F. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, X. Li, L. Z. Fan and Y. Deng, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 212–221 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xie, L. Li, X. Deng, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 726, 394–402 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Z. Cheng, H. Sun, H. Arandiyan, J. Li and M. Ahmad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 878–884 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Sreedhara, A. L. Santhosha, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9466–9471 RSC .
N. Li, S. Liao, Y. Sun, H. W. Song and C. X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5820–5828 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Kang, L. Jiao, C. Chen, K. Cao, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1325–1332 RSC .
X. Xiong, C. Yang, G. Wang, Y. Lin, X. Ou, J. H. Wang, B. Zhao, M. Liu, Z. Lin and K. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 1757–1763 RSC .
J. Qian, Y. Xiong, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1865–1869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Pan, W. Zhang, J. Ma, N. Yao, L. Xu, Y. S. He, X. Yang and Z. F. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 572–578 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, P. Kopold, Y. L. Ding, P. A. Van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6610–6618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Zhao, N. Li and Y. Du, Sci. China Mater., 2017, 60, 167–177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, H. Zhang, H. Yang, Z. Qi and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6048–6055 RSC .
J. Fang, S. Wang, Z. Li, H. Chen, L. Xia, L. Ding and H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1180–1185 RSC .
X. Rui, W. Sun, C. Wu, Y. Yu and Q. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6670–6676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, M. Liu, E. Uchaker, J. Dong, Q. Zhang, S. Hou, J. Li and G. Cao, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4287–4293 RSC .
H. Jin, J. Dong, E. Uchaker, Q. Zhang, X. Zhou, S. Hou, J. Li and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17563–17568 RSC .
S. Zhang, C. Deng and Y. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20538–20544 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Yang, F. Bu, K. Li, I. Shakir and Y. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15549–15556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lakshmi, Y. Chen, A. A. Mikhaylov, A. G. Medvedev, I. Sultana, M. M. Rahman, O. Lev, P. V. Prikhodchenko and A. M. Glushenkov, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 8272–8275 RSC .
Y. Lu and J. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60, 1533–1539 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, T. Zhou, Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Chen, H. Liu and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–9 Search PubMed .
K. Xie, K. Yuan, X. Li, W. Lu, C. Shen, C. Liang, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and B. Wei, Small, 2017, 13, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. D. Yoo, I. Shterenberg, Y. Gofer, G. Gershinsky, N. Pour and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2265 RSC .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. An, Y. Li, H. Deog Yoo, S. Chen, Q. Ru, L. Mai and Y. Yao, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, R. A. DiLeo, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi and E. S. Takeuchi, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2014, 3, A87–A90 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, K. Ye, K. Zhu, R. Cang, J. Yan, K. Cheng, G. Wang and D. Cao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 256, 357–364 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Kamar and E. Sheha, Mater. Sci.-Pol., 2017, 35, 528–533 CAS .
Y. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Gao, B. Wang, H. H. Liu, H. Wu, H. H. Liu and S. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7754–7765 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, G. Zeng, J. Chen, C. Lu and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4535–4542 RSC .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, Y. Zhao, L. Dong, X. Song, D. Li, C. Langford and X. Sun, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 32–44 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu and W. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4000 RSC .
K. Palanisamy, J. H. Um, M. Jeong and W. S. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wu, G. Li and F. Liu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 21849–21854 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pei, Q. Zhao, C. Chen, J. Liang and J. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 1652–1655 CrossRef CAS .
G.-H. Lee, M. R. Jo, K. Zhang and Y.-M. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3683–3690 RSC .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, L. Lin, G. Chen, X. Song, D. Xiong, D. Li and X. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4850–4860 RSC .
Y. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Xie, Y. Wang and B. Qu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 705, 314–319 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, H. Xu, T. Zhou, Z. Guo, L. Chen, M. Yan, L. Mai, P. Hu, S. Cheng, Y. Huang and J. Xie, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 2–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Yin, F. Xiong, C. Pei, Y. Xu, Q. An, S. Tan, Z. Zhuang, J. Sheng, Q. Li and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, X. Wang, P. Cui, Y. Wang, Y. A. Haleem, S. Wei, W. Huang, L. Song and W. Chu, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43591–43597 RSC .
H. J. Yen, H. Tsai, M. Zhou, E. F. Holby, S. Choudhury, A. Chen, L. Adamska, S. Tretiak, T. Sanchez, S. Iyer, H. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. Lin, L. Dai, G. Wu and H. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10250–10256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bo, S. Mao, Z. Jun Han, K. Cen, J. Chen and K. (Ken) Ostrikov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2108–2121 RSC .

Footnote† Equal contribution.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Guangzhe Li
	Guangzhe Li received his BS degree (2015) from Jilin University, and MS degree (2018) from Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen), China. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on metal-ion batteries.

Bin Huang
	Bin Huang received his BS degree (2009) and MS degree (2012) from the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Central South University, and PhD degree (2016) from the School of Metallurgy and Environment at Central South University, China. Currently, he is a Postdoctoral Fellow at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on lithium/sodium-ion batteries.

Zhefei Pan
	Zhefei Pan received his BS degree (2015) and MS degree (2017) from the School of Energy Science and Engineering at Harbin Institute of Technology, China. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on direct alcohol fuel cells.

Xiangyu Su
	Xiangyu Su received his BS degree (2010) from Xi’an Jiaotong University, and MS degree (2011) from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently pursuing his PhD degree at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University under the supervision of Dr An Liang. His current research is focused on direct formate fuel cells.

Zongping Shao
	Prof. Zongping Shao is a Professor at Nanjing Tech University, China, and also a joint-appointed Professor at Curtin University, Australia. He obtained his PhD from Dalian Institute of Chemical Physics, China in 2000. He worked as a visiting scholar at Institut de Researches Sur La Catalyse, CNRS, France, and as a postdoc at California Institute of Technology, USA from 2000 to 2005. His current research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, oxygen-permeable membranes, and low-temperature energy-conversion devices.

Liang An
	Liang An received his BS degree (2008) from Harbin Institute of Technology and PhD degree (2012) from The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology. He is currently an Assistant Professor in Department of Mechanical Engineering at The Hong Kong Polytechnic University. His research interests include advanced energy conversion and storage technologies, such as fuel cells and batteries.

Broader context
Assembling 2D graphene sheets into 3D graphene materials has received tremendous attention in the past years. By appropriate assembly methods, the outstanding properties of 2D graphene can be well preserved. Meanwhile, superior structural properties, such as interconnected networks and large surface areas, can be given to 3D graphene materials. Recently, various 3D graphene architectures have been constructed, which provide novel and attractive functions for energy and environmental applications. For example, graphene vertical sheets with an interconnected network and exposed graphene edges show promise in metal-ion storage, heavy metal ion detection, gas vapor detection, etc. Particularly, in the field of energy storage and conversion, metal-ion batteries have consistently been a competitive technology. In recent years, lots of efforts have been devoted to developing new metal-ion battery systems. Among them, 3D graphene materials play important roles in metal-ion storage and in constructing graphene-based composite electrodes. This article reviews the recent advances in 3D graphene-based materials, including their preparation and configurations, and specifies their application in various metal-ion batteries. The structure–performance relationship of applying 3D graphene architectures in metal-ion batteries is illustrated. Finally, the remaining challenges and future research directions are discussed.


 	Fig. 1  (a) A schematic illustration of the setup and the preparation of crumpled graphene balls. (b–d) SEM images of crumpled graphene balls prepared from different GO concentrations, which were 0.2 mg ml−1, 1 mg ml−1, and 5 mg ml−1, respectively. (e–g) High magnification SEM images of (b–d), respectively. Reproduced with permission.6 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) A schematic illustration of the preparation of graphene scrolls via a microexplosion method. (b–e) TEM images of the obtained graphene scrolls with different magnification. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Low magnification SEM images of carbon nanofibers. (b) High magnification SEM images of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. (c and d) TEM images of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) A scheme for the preparation of graphene fibers. (f) SEM image of carbon nanofibers with surface graphene sheets. (g and h) SEM images of graphene fibers grown for 4 h with a methane concentration of 11.1%. (i and j) SEM images of graphene fibers grown for 10 h with a methane concentration of 11.1%. (k) An optical image of the graphene fiber membrane. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A scheme illustration for 3D graphene cage synthesis. (b) TEM image of graphene encapsulated Si microparticles. (c) HRTEM image showing the layered structure of graphene cages. (d) Hollow graphene cage after the removal of Si microparticles. Reproduced with permission.12 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) A schematic illustration for constructing graphene cages with optimal void space. (f) TEM images of SnO2@graphene coated by sulfur with a weight ratio of 21%. (g) TEM images of SnO2@graphene with rough preparation for comparison. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 
Li2O (s) + 2CO (g) → C (graphene) (s) + Li2CO3 (s)	(1)
4Li (l) + 3CO2 (g) → C (graphene) (s) + 2Li2CO3 (s)	(2)

1	Nickel foam	Graphene interconnected framework: pore size: hundreds of micrometers; porosity ∼99.7%	Conductivity: 10 S cm−1 excellent mechanical robustness	850 m2 g−1	
	
10

2	Nickel nanoparticles	Graphene hollow spheres with abundant pores: diameter of graphene spheres: 5–10 μm; pore size: up to 72 nm	
	285.3 m2 g−1	Biosensors	
14

3	Nickel nanowires	Graphene hollow tubes: mean tube diameter: 70 nm; length of tube: up to several micrometers	
	
	
	
8

4	Porous anodic aluminum oxide	Interconnected macroporous framework or graphene tubes: diameter of graphene nanotubes: 110 nm	Conductivity: 1290 S m−1	
	Heat transfer and thermal energy storage	
74


	Low sheet electrical resistance: 0.11 Ω sq−1
5	Cage containing MOFs	Graphene tubes: diameter: tens of nanometers to sub-micrometer	
	449 m2 g−1	ORR catalysts	
75

6	NaCl	Graphene hollow cubes: length of graphene cube unit: ∼10 μm	Good flexibility and conductivity	1216 m2 g−1	Supercapacitors	
108

7	Silica spheres	Hollow graphene balls: diameter of graphene spheres: 360–550 nm	
	
	Lithium–sulfur batteries	
126

8	Polystyrene balls	Mesoporous graphene nanoballs: mean pore diameter: 4.27 nm	Conductivity: 6.5 S cm−1	508 m2 g−1	Supercapacitors	
127

9	Nanoporous copper	Duct-like nanoporous graphene film: graphene pore size: 500–800 nm	Sheet electrical resistance: 23.3 Ω sq−1; high flexibility	586.3 m2 g−1	Supercapacitors	
128

10	MgO flakes	Graphene honeycomb like framework containing nanocages: size of cages: 5–10 nm; lateral size of framework: 2 μm; thickness of framework: 50 nm	Conductivity: 54 S cm−1	240 m2 g−1	OER catalysts	
129


 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustrations of general mechanisms of metal-ion storage in graphene layers.	 
xLi+ + xe− + Cn → LixCn	(3)
Cn + e− + A+ + ysolv → A+ (solv)y Cn−	(4)
4Al2Cl7− + 3e− ↔ Al + 7AlCl4−	(5)
Cn + AlCl4− ↔ Cn[AlCl4] + e−	(6)

1	AIB	Al foil	Porous graphene foam	
	Volumetric capacities up to 12.2 mA h cm−3; gravimetric capacity up to 151 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
57

2	AIB	Al foil	Graphene microflowers	Energy density: 40 W h kg−1, power density: 3000 W kg−1	100 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 after 5000 cycles	
162

3	AIB	Al foil	rGO/SnS2	Energy density: 241 W h kg−1	112 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1	
51

4	AIB	Al foil	Graphene nanoribbon@porous graphene	
	123 mA h g−1 at 50 A g−1 after 10000 cycles; high rate performance with a capacity of 111 mA h g−1 at 80 A g−1	
52

5	AIB	Al foil	3D graphene mesh	
	57 mA h g−1 at 40C after 200 cycles	
53

6	PIB	Nitrogen doped few layer graphene foam	K foil	
	210 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles	
173

7	PIB	Phosphorus and oxygen dual-doped graphene	K metal	
	474 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1 after 50 cycles and 160 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 600 cycles	
174

8	PIB	F-Doped graphene foam	K foil	
	165.0 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 200 cycles and 301.9 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1	
175

9	PIB	Sb2S3 particles/graphene framework	KVPO4F	Energy density: 166.3 W h kg−1	548 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1 and 340 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1	
239

10	PIB	MoS2/rGO	K foil	
	381 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles; 679 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1, 178 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1	
241

11	MIB	Activated carbon	rGO/V2O5 aerogel	
	100 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 200 cycles	
245

12	MIB	FeVO4·0.9H2O/graphene	Mg-OMS-1	Energy density: 58.5 W h kg−1, power density: 50.8 W kg−1.	52.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles (97% retention)	
246

13	MIB	Mg foil	Co3O4/graphene	
	16 mA h g−1 in the initial discharge	
247

i = avb	(7)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Discharge curves for few layer graphene in the voltage window between 0.3 and 0.001 V (against Li/Li+). (b) Discharge curves for graphite in the voltage window between 0.3 and 0.001 V (against Li/Li+). (c and d) Cathodic and anodic CV scan of few layered graphene and the calculated slope value of log(i) vs. log(v). (e) The contributions of the surface-controlled process and the diffusion-controlled process. (f) A schematic illustration of the distribution of lithium ions on the graphene surface with increasing Li concentration. The yellow and cyan balls represent C and H atoms, respectively. The magenta, green, and black colored balls represent Li atoms that are in the 1st Li-layer, the 2nd Li-layer and the 3rd Li-layer above the graphene sheet, respectively. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) In situ XRD patterns collected during the first discharge/charge in the voltage window of 0–2 V with a current density of 0.05C. (b) Ex situ XPS of C 1s spectra. (c) Ex situ XPS of Na 1s spectra. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d) Different types of defect sites in the basal plane of graphene. (e) DFT calculation data for the chemisorption energy of a given defect site with sodium ions. (f) HRTEM image of the sample before discharging. (g) HRTEM image of the sample after discharging to 0.005 V. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Rate performance of a flexible LTO/LFP/GF full battery. (b) Cyclic performance of the LTO/LFP/GF full battery at 10C. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2012, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Schematic illustration of the GB coating onto NCM. (d and f) SEM images of pristine NCM. (e and g) SEM images of NCM after graphene ball coating. (h and i) Graphene layers located between or coated along primary particles of LiNi0.6Co0.1Mn0.3O2. (j) Cycle life of the GB-NCM/GB full-cell at 60 °C and 25 °C at 5C. Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structure of Na3V2(PO4)3. Reproduced with permission.233 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b–e) SEM images and TEM images of 3D graphene/C/NVP composites. (f and g) Sodium storage properties of 3D graphene/C/NVP composites at 10C and 40C. (h) Crystal structure of Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4). Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (i and j) SEM images and TEM images of 3D graphene/C/Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) composites. (k and l) Sodium storage properties of 3D graphene/C/Na7V4(P2O7)4(PO4) composites. Reproduced with permission.236 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Equal contribution.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
