Two-dimensional conjugated microporous polymer films: fabrication strategies and potential applications  - Polymer Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0PY01368D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0PY01368D
(Review Article)
Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 807-821Two-dimensional conjugated microporous polymer films: fabrication strategies and potential applications

        
          
            Zhengdong 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuhang 
            Yin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mustafa 
            Eginligil
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Laiyuan 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juqing 
            Liu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      *ab
aKey Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLOFE) & Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University (NanjingTech), 30 South Puzhu Road, Nanjing 211816, China. E-mail: iamjqliu@njtech.edu.cn; iamwhuang@njtech.edu.cn
bShaanxi Institute of Flexible Electronics (SIFE), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU), 127 West Youyi Road, Xi'an 710072, China
Received 
      24th September 2020
    , Accepted 14th December 2020First published on 28th December 2020AbstractTwo-dimensional conjugated microporous polymers (2D CMPs) are sheet/film-like CMPs with amorphous, permanent porous and π-conjugated structures, which have attracted considerable attention over the past few years. Owing to the excellent optoelectronic properties of conjugated polymers together with their microporous, sheet/film-like structures, 2D CMPs have several applications in molecular separation, energy storage, gas sensing, and optoelectronics. This review focuses on the latest advances in fabrication strategies and potential applications of 2D CMPs, with a particular emphasis on optoelectronic device applications. The current challenges and possible future research directions of 2D CMPs are also discussed briefly.
1. Introduction
Microporous polymers are a class of organic porous materials, which possess high surface area pores with diameters below 2 nm, including hyper-crosslinked polymers,1 polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIM),2,3 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),4 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),5,6 porous aromatic frameworks7,8 and conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs).9–11 Among them, PIMs are solution-processable conjugated polymers with permanent porous microporosity, allowing for film formation using solvent-based techniques.12,13 MOFs are normally constructed through linking metal ions together with a variety of polyatomic organic bridging ligands, accompanying with high porosities and superior surface areas. Owing to the coordination structures of MOFs, they also suffer from low thermal and hydrothermal stabilities, which severely limit their applications, particularly in industry.14 COFs are porous organic crystalline materials connected via strong covalent bonds, exhibiting high chemical stability and porosity.15 CMPs are an emerging class of polymers with extended π-conjugated, amorphous, and permanent porous structures.16–19 These unique structural features make CMPs a rich platform in which one can combine microporous structures with optoelectronic properties, something that has not been seen in other non-conjugated porous materials or non-porous conjugated polymers. In the past few years, the field of CMPs has proliferated tremendously, and different kinds of CMPs have been prepared. However, as it happens in any material development, there are obstacles on the way to demonstrate practical applications based on CMPs. Due to their cross-linked structure, CMPs exhibit a non-soluble property, which is a great limitation for solution-processed applications, especially in optoelectronic devices.
Many efforts have been made to tackle the above challenges.20–23 One effective strategy is to carry out the polymerization reaction of CMPs on special substrate surfaces, which will confine the polymerizations in 2D space for sheet-like or film-like CMPs, i.e., two-dimensional CMP (2D CMP) film formation.24,25 Apart from CMP films, some CMPs with a sheet-like structure were also prepared in solution.26 In the solid state, these CMP nanosheets often show bulk morphologies. Here, for the purpose of distinguishing from other porous materials, such as powder CMPs and other 2D polymers, we would like to introduce the following four features for the identification of 2D CMPs: (i) sheet/film-like materials in the physical sense, (ii) structurally amorphous repeat units, (iii) larger dimensions in the horizontal versus vertical directions, and (iv) covalent cross-linked structure with high stability. The 2D CMP thin films will trigger some unique mechanical, physical and electronic properties, which is important for many scientific and practical application purposes. A number of synthetic approaches, to fabricate CMP films based on on-surface polymerization, have been developed. The obtained 2D CMPs exhibited some special features, such as smooth surface, stable structure, large size, tunable thickness, and patterned structure. In comparison with powder CMPs, 2D CMP films have shown a broader application for gas or molecular separation, energy storage, chemical sensors, and optoelectronic devices.
There are some excellent reviews about the synthesis and applications of powder CMPs.10,16–18 However, an overall review, about the preparation strategies and applications of 2D CMP films, is necessary.27 In this paper, we provide a detailed summary of the recent developments about the on-surface preparation of 2D CMP films and their applications in different fields, especially in optoelectronic devices. At the end, the existing challenges about device fabrication and possible future research directions of 2D CMPs will be addressed.
2. Fabrication strategies
2.1 Solid surface-initiated polymerization
The main feature of solid surface-initiated polymerization is the prefunctionalization of the substrates by monomers containing active groups, such as –OH, –NH, –SH, bromobenzene, and so on, for the growth of 2D CMP films28–31 (Fig. 1). During the preparation process, the prefunctionalized substrates will be immersed in the monomer solution for the growth of CMP films on the substrate. For example, Park and coworkers modified the substrates by coating with a self-assembled monolayer of 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane. They dipped the amino-functionalized substrates into the monomer solution, by rinsing successively with a solvent to remove the unreacted monomers, and a single-layer film was formed. Then the substrate was dipped into another monomer solution to form the second layer.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagrams of the functionalization of the Si/SiO2 substrate and the growth of 2D CMP films on the substrate through surface-initiated polymerization. (i) Functionalization of the Si/SiO2 surface with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the Si/SiO2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (b) The modification of 2D rGO and the preparation of the sandwich-like CMP-Gr-CMP film. (i) Functionalization of rGO surfaces with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the rGO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic diagrams of MoS2 functionalization with functional molecules, as well as the preparation of MoS2-templated CMP nanosheets. (i) Functionalization of MoS2 surfaces with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the MoS2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The condensation reaction of tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)methane and tetrakis(4-isocyanatophenyl)methane. (e) The Sonogashira–Hagihara reaction of 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene with several different monomers. 
Porous nanofilms were prepared by repeating the above deposition steps multiple times. The key to obtaining large size CMP films with controllable thickness was the adjustment of deposition cycles32 (Fig. 1a and d). With this strategy, it was possible to prepare porous nanofilms successfully, but, in this method, the reaction solution should be changed for the synthesis of each new layer, which would make the reaction more complex. In another example, Kiriy and coworkers prepared 2D CMP nanofilms via a simple method. In their report, first, they covalently immobilized a Ni initiator onto organosilica microparticles, and then tetrafunctional thiophene-based (AB)2 monomers were added. The Ni-catalyzed polycondensation of monomers was carried out on organosilica microparticle surfaces, leading to the formation of 2D CMP films. The unbound CMP was formed with the same monomers, without the support of substrates.28 Tang and coworkers developed a surface-initiated Sonogashira–Hagihara polymerization for the synthesis of large-area and defect-free 2D CMP membranes.33 First, they functionalized silica wafers with bromobenzene. Then, the polymerization of 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene (1,3,5-TEB) with three different dibromobenzenes was carried out (Fig. 1a and e). The corresponding high porosity and mostly continuous void CMP films were obtained, indicating their potential applications in nano-filtration.
Solid substrates can also be functionalized with a sacrificial layer, such as metal–organic frameworks, for the growth of 2D CMP films. In a novel approach, which was developed by Tsotsalas and coworkers, the surface of metal–organic frameworks was functionalized with active monomers, which served as the starting point of the CMP growth.30 After the CMP films were prepared, metal–organic frameworks were dissolved in water/ethanol mixtures. Then free-standing 2D CMP nanomembranes were obtained. These results are important, because they showed that it is possible to transfer 2D CMP nanomembranes to any substrate, making several applications in various fields possible.
2D soft nanomaterials, such as graphene and monolayer disulfide (MoS2), can also be functionalized with organic molecules for the surface-initiated growth of 2D CMP films34–38 (Fig. 1b, c and e). Feng and coworkers functionalized reduced graphene oxide (rGO) surfaces with p-bromobenzene. Bromo-functionalized rGO can be dispersed in different kinds of solvent.34 After that, Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling polymerization between thiophene-, thiazole-, and pyridine-based monomers and 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene monomer was carried out in an organic solvent containing bromo-functionalized rGO. As a result, 2D CMP nanosheets were fabricated on the graphene surface with a lateral size between 200 nm to several micrometers. Apart from graphene, MoS2 nanosheets can also be used as templates for the preparation of 2D CMP films.36 For example, with 4-iodophenyl functionalized MoS2 as a template, sandwich-like MoS2-templated CMP nanosheets were obtained. The prepared composited nanosheets exhibited a high aspect ratio and a high surface area, indicating their high potential for applications in various fields.
2.2 Solid surface-confined polymerization
Although solid surface-initiated polymerization can be successful in the preparation of large area 2D CMP films, the functionalization of substrates is usually complex and difficult. Therefore, the direct growth of 2D CMP films on insulating or conducting substrates is more simple and attractive, which can be performed by solid surface-confined polymerization, such as the Schiff-base reaction, electropolymerization, oxidative polymerization, photopolymerization, and so on. The Schiff-base reaction is the coupling reaction between aromatic aldehyde and aromatic diamine monomers, which have been used to prepare large size single-layer or multi-layer 2D polymers under ambient conditions.39–41 Recently, 2D CMP films on the conducting rGO surface via the Schiff-base reaction were prepared by some of the authors of this review.42 The preparation process is as follows: the rGO covered SiO2/Si substrate was submerged in a solvent containing monomer precursors tetrakis(4-aminophenyl) porphyrin and thiophene-2,5-dicarbaldehyde for the growth of 2D CMP films. Due to the weak interaction between the monomers and rGO, the precursors were attached on the rGO surface for the cross-linking reaction. As a result, the CMP films were prepared on the rGO surface. The thicknesses of these films can be well controlled by tuning the monomer concentration or the polymerization time. These CMP films are insoluble and the morphology is almost the same as that of the original films after submerging them in different common organic solvents. This indicates their outstanding chemical stability, and their ability of being erosion-free is beneficial for applications in multilayer electronic devices.
Taking advantage of the electropolymerization of monomers (e.g. carbazole,43–58 thiophene59–61 and triphenylamine54 building blocks) with a low oxidation potential, 2D CMP films were also prepared in a three-electrode cell27 (Fig. 2). The three electrodes were the reference electrode (RE), the counter electrode (CE), and the working electrode (WE), where electropolymerization and film formation took place. Conductive electrodes, including glassy carbon, ITO, gold and platinum discs, were utilized as the WE. Besides, an electrolyte (e.g. tetrabutylammonium salts) was added in a suitable solvent or solvent mixture for the polymerization. An applied anodic potential led to the generation of cation radicals, which coupled the cross-linked films onto the anode electrode. The thickness of the films can be controlled by adjusting the scan cycles and the oxidation potentials.
 Fig. 2  Chemical structures of monomers for electropolymerization. 
The preparation of 2D CMP films via electropolymerization was reported for the first time by Ma and coworkers.44 They chose a monomer containing a tetrahedral tetraphenylmethane core and four peripheral carbazole groups for the reaction. The electropolymerization was carried out on the ITO electrode surface in an acetonitrile and dichloromethane mixed solution with tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate as the electrolyte. The thickness of the deposited film was increased linearly with the scan cycles, by about 5 or 10 nm per cycle under an applied potential of 0.97 or 1.0 V, respectively. The microporous structures of the film were observed by high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM). The micropore size of the film was less than 1.0 nm, which is consistent with the size of the pores obtained by theoretical modeling. Moreover, the film exhibited a root-mean-square (RMS) roughness of 1.6 nm, as determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM). The smooth surface in the AFM images indicated that the film has high potential for electronic device applications. Other multifunctional carbazole-based monomers have also been developed to prepare 2D CMP films through electropolymerization. As shown in Fig. 2, with the change of the functional groups and monomer structures, these 2D CMP films showed various adjustable features and surface areas.48,52,54,56,57
Apart from carbazole-based monomers, thiophene-based monomers have also been widely used in the preparation of 2D CMP films by electrochemical polymerization61–63 (Fig. 2). Jiang and coworkers reported the electropolymerization of thiophene-based monomers, that is benzotrithiophene (BTT) or 1,3,5-tri(2-thienyl)benzene (TTB), for the preparation of 2D CMP films.62 The thickness of both films exhibited a linear dependency on the cycle number; therefore, the film thickness can be well defined by simply adjusting the number of scan cycles. The thickness of BTT- and TTB-based films increased by 5.3 and 6.2 nm per cycle, respectively. Moreover, the RMS roughness of the two 60 nm thick 2D CMP films was 1.24 and 1.78 nm, respectively. The smooth surface morphology indicated their high potential for various applications.
Due to the high density of electron clouds, the carbazole-based monomers can also play a role in oxidative polymerization to form a cross-linked polymer structure under the catalysis of anhydrous FeCl3.64 In 2018, we reported the direct growth of wafer-scale 2D CMP films on SiO2/Si substrates via the 4,4′-di(9H-carbazol-9-yl)-1,1′-biphenyl-based oxidative coupling polymerization65 (Fig. 3a and b). Unlike the above-reported strategies in which the substrates were dipped into the monomer solution, the monomers were spin-coated on a clean substrate before polymerization. Then, the substrate covered with monomers was dipped into dichloromethane solution containing the FeCl3 catalyst for 2D CMP film growth. When rGO/SiO2/Si was used as a substrate, the CMP film could be grown on rGO to form large-area 2D CMP/rGO heterostructures via a simple full-solution process. The wafer-scale direct growth of 2D CMP and 2D CMP/rGO heterostructure films on the SiO2/Si substrate was an important step in their electronic device applications (Fig. 3d and e).
 Fig. 3  (a) The reaction scheme of the synthesis of 2D CMPs. (b) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of large-size 2D CMP films through solid surface-confined oxidative polymerization. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of large-area, patterned 2D CMP films through photopolymerization. (d) Photograph of the 2D CMP film grown on a wafer-scale SiO2/Si substrate. The top region of the substrate was covered with the 2D CMP while the bottom region was the bare SiO2/Si substrate. (e) TEM image of the free-standing 2D CMP film. (f) The optical image of patterned 2D CMP films. (a, b, d and e): Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c): Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The cross-linking reaction between carbazole-based monomers can also be carried out under xenon light illumination. Recently, we prepared large-area, patterned 2D CMP films via photopolymerization66 (Fig. 3c). After the carbazole-based monomer films were spin-coated onto SiO2/Si substrates, they were illuminated by xenon light. The 2D CMP nanofilm was formed, when the illumination time was increased to 25 min. Thicker nanofilms were prepared by increasing the polymerization time. The thickness of the nanofilms can be well controlled by increasing the polymerization time. Furthermore, by using photomasks, patterned 2D CMP films with different kinds of geometries were prepared (Fig. 3f). The photomask-assisted solid-state photopolymerization can been further used to prepare multilayer CMP nanofilms via the layer-by-layer growth method. The multilayer CMP nanofilms based on homostructures and heterostructures can also be prepared by using different precursors.67 This work presented an effective strategy for the precise control over the preparation of multilayer patterned homostructure and heterostructure conjugated polymer nanofilms for high performance integrated polymer electronics.
2.3 Liquid–liquid interface-confined polymerization
The above polymerizations for the preparation of 2D CMP films were carried out on solid substrate surfaces. Some recent work showed that large size 2D CMP films can also be synthesized at the liquid–liquid (organic solvent–water or oil–water) interfaces68,69 (Fig. 4). During the liquid–liquid interface-confined polymerization, first, a phase boundary of an immiscible biphasic system is formed by an organic phase (containing conjugated monomers) and an aqueous phase (containing catalysts). When the organic phase contacts with the immiscible aqueous phase, the cross-coupling reactions between the monomers tend to proceed with the help of catalysts to form a thin film at the phase boundary. Since the formed film is not soluble in either the organic solvent or water, 2D CMP films are obtained at the interface. In comparison with the solid substrate-confined polymerization, the 2D CMP films grown at liquid–liquid interfaces are really free-standing films and can be freely transferred to any desired substrates, which is beneficial for practical applications.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presentation of the preparation of imine oligomers by mixing tris(4-formyl phenyl)benzene (aldehyde) with ethylenediamine (amine) in xylene and stirring for 1 hour. (b) Spreading of the imine oligomers onto the water surface formed in a petri-dish. (c) Formation of a polyimine nanofilm over the water surface. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the free-standing nanofilm. The inset of (d) shows a higher magnification image of (d). The inset of (e) is a selected area electron diffraction pattern showing the amorphous nature of the nanofilm. (f) AFM height image and profile of the nanofilm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Wu and coworkers prepared large area 2D CMP films through liquid–liquid interface-confined polymerization.68 First, they dissolved conjugated monomers in an organic solvent and the catalyst in water for the polymerization. Then, the cross-linking reaction between the monomers was carried out at the oil–water interface, and 2D CMP films were obtained. The thickness of the 2D CMP films could be controlled from 30 nm to around 200 nm, by changing the monomer concentration. The above method is versatile and can readily be extended to different kinds of polymerizations, such as the Sonogashira–Hagihara reaction and the Schiff-base reaction. In another example, Pramanik and coworkers prepared a large area self-assembled porous polyimine nanofilm at the water–xylene interface.69 They first prepared dispersed imine oligomers by mixing tris(4-formyl phenyl)benzene (TFPB) and ethylenediamine (EDA) in xylene solvent (Fig. 4a). Then, specific volumes of the imine oligomer solution were carefully poured onto water to form a required interface (Fig. 4b). A large-area polyimine nanofilm was formed through the self-assembly of the oligomers, and the consequent cross-linking polymerization was catalyzed by water (Fig. 4c). Finally, highly crosslinked polyimine nanofilms were obtained (Fig. 4d–f).

Table 1 presents a summary of the merits, shortcomings, and types of monomers of 2D CMP fabrication strategies. By tuning the monomer concentration or polymerization time, large-area 2D CMP films with controllable thicknesses can be fabricated. It is worth pointing out that through solid surface-confined photopolymerization, patterned 2D CMP films with a precise shape were obtained, the potential use being in integrated electronics. As most of the monomers and polymerization reactions for the synthesized powder CMPs can be developed for the preparation of 2D CMP films, a variety of 2D CMP films have been obtained and shown wide applications. In the next section, these CMP film applications will be summarized.
Table 1 The advantages, shortcomings, and potential types of monomers for the mentioned CMP film fabrication methods




Fabrication methods
Advantages
Shortcomings
Types of monomers




Solid surface-initiated polymerization
Controllable film thickness, favorable for further functionalization
Less types of monomers, complex reaction process
Aromatic monomers containing special groups: –OH, –NH, –SH


Solid surface-confined polymerization
Controllable film thickness, patterned film
Unsatisfactory uniformity
Aromatic monomers containing more than two active groups


Liquid–liquid interface-confined polymerization
Controllable film thickness, various types of monomers, free-standing films
Wrinkled surface when transferred to a solid substrate
Aromatic monomers containing more than two active groups




3. Applications of 2D CMP films
The ultimate goal of any material development is practical applications. It can be especially rewarding when these applications are able to satisfy ambitious, but unaccomplished demands via novel and unique material properties, as in the case of 2D CMPs. 2D CMP films with an adjustable porous structure and particular functionalities can be easily realized through monomer change or post functionalization. With tunable physical and chemical properties, chemical inertness, and thermal stability, these 2D CMP films have high potential applications in molecular separation, energy storage, chemical sensors, optoelectronic devices, and possibly more.
3.1 Molecular separation
Due to their porous structure properties combined with their excellent stability, 2D CMP films have been widely used as membranes in molecular separation and nanofiltration.30,33,70–72 The nanoscale thickness with a 2D architecture makes 2D CMP films act as gaseous or liquid sieves, which have many advantages over bulk membranes. For instance, molecular separation requires free-standing sheets; therefore, lateral sizes above one micrometer are necessary. In this respect, the 2D CMP film growth on a solid substrate can be as large as the supporting substrates, which are large enough for molecular separation. For practical separation applications, other membranes are often used as supports for the 2D CMP films to enhance the mechanical stability and to reduce roughness-induced strain. For example, after obtaining free-standing 2D CMP films, Tsotsalas and coworkers transferred 2D CMP films onto polydimethylsiloxane/polyacrylonitrile (PDMS/PAN) for the fabrication of a 2D CMP/PDMS/PAN composite membrane. The different gas permeation properties of each layer enable the separation of the gas selectively.30 Tang and coworkers prepared three kinds of CMP membranes (p-CMP, m-CMP, and o-CMP) and transferred them onto a porous PAN substrate for organic-solvent nanofiltration (Fig. 5). All p-CMP, m-CMP, and o-CMP membranes exhibit high porosity and mostly continuous voids, as seen in the rigid models (Fig. 5a–e). They found that the CMP membranes showed the best methanol permeance in comparison with other membranes, such as polyarylate, polyamide, and metal–organic framework composite; this was attributed to their high structural rigidity and stability, as well as abundant permanent micropores33 (Fig. 5f–h). In addition, these CMP membranes also possess outstanding solvent permeance.
 Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of CMP membranes through C–C coupling reactions. Interconnected (green) and disconnected (red) voids in p-CMP (b), m-CMP (c), o-CMP (d) and polyamide (e) with respect to a probe of 1.2 Å radius, which represents the largest probe size that can diffuse across any of the rigid models. (f) Plot of solvent permeance through different CMP membranes against the solvent viscosity. (g) Permeance for methanol versus the reciprocal membrane thickness for p-CMP, m-CMP, and o-CMP. Previously reported polymer-based organic-solvent nanofiltration membranes are included for comparison. (h) Plot of hexane, methanol, and ethanol permeances as a function of time for p-CMP membranes. Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.2 Energy storage
The synthesis of 2D CMP films has also attracted a great deal of attention in terms of energy storage. In a recent study by Ma and co-workers, an example of a 2D CMP film with zinc porphyrin cores and carbazole linkages was prepared for supercapacitor application.56 Both the zinc porphyrin and carbazole functional groups exhibit reversible electrochemical properties, i.e., doping and dedoping, which are promising for supercapacitor utilization. Moreover, the porous and conjugated structural features of the films provide a high surface area and are useful for ion transportation. Therefore, a film-state supercapacitor with 2D CMP films, as an electrode, was developed. The capacitor showed a capacitance value of about 142 F g−1, which is almost the same as those of other pure conducting polymer-based electrodes. Due to the highly crosslinked structure and rich inherent pores of 2D CMP films, the capacitor exhibited robust stability at high current densities.
Due to their rigid molecular structure, thin film state, and other features, 2D CMP materials were used as carbon precursors for carbon nanosheets.36,73 The carbon nanosheets were prepared by pyrolyzing the 2D CMP materials at the optimized carbonization temperature under an inert atmosphere. The porous and 2D structure features remained after the carbonization process. Besides, by careful choice of monomers for the preparation of 2D CMP materials, carbon nanofilms doped with different kinds of heteroatoms have been prepared. In general, the properties of the carbon nanosheets largely depend on the doped heteroatoms and content, which can further influence possible applications. Dai and coworkers prepared a class of porous carbon nanosheets by carbonizing 2D CMPs incorporating metal atoms, nitrogen heteroatoms, and nanoholes at 950 °C.73 The prepared carbon nanosheets with a uniform metal/nitrogen distribution showed high stability in different kinds of solvents. The carbon nanosheets exhibited efficient electrocatalytic activities due to the existence of metal/nitrogen atoms. By thermal carbonization of the 2D sandwich-like porous polymers (such as graphene-based CMPs), a series of N-, S-doped or N/S co-doped porous carbon nanosheets exhibited outstanding supercapacitive behavior, which was superior to those of many reported N-doped porous carbons without graphene or heteroatom-doped porous carbons. Moreover, by direct pyrolysis of CMP/MoS2 sandwich-like nanosheets, nitrogen-doped 2D porous carbon nanosheets were obtained with large surface areas36 (Fig. 6). Due to the outstanding charge storage performance of Mo, these hybrid carbon nanofilms yielded higher capacitance than the MoS2-free carbonized CMPs, which indicated the vital contribution of the MoS2 layer to improve capacitance performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of CMP nanosheets through Sonogashira coupling reactions. (b) The preparation of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets through the carbonization process of CMP-MoS2-CMP nanosheets. (c) SEM image of CMP-MoS2-CMP nanosheets. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets. The inset of (e) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (f) STEM image of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets and the corresponding elemental mapping images for C, N, Mo and S. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
3.3 Catalysis
In addition, it is well known that n-doped carbon materials have high potential applications for metal-free electrocatalysts, such as application in the hydrogen evolution reaction and the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Alonso and coworkers prepared individual layers of 2D CMPs, which can form homogeneous and stable dispersions.74 As a result, through drop-casting the dispersion of 2D CMPs on a glassy-carbon rotating-disk electrode, the ORR property of 2D CMPs was investigated in aqueous KOH. It was found that in contrast to the bare glassy carbon electrode, the 2D CMP-modified electrodes showed improved ORR electrocatalytic activity (+150 mV).
Ultrathin semiconducting CMP nanosheets also showed great promise for photocatalytic water-splitting under visible light irradiation. Xu and coworkers prepared two kinds of CMP nanosheets via homopolymerization of 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene (TEB) and 1,3,5-tris-(4-ethynylphenyl)benzene (TEPB).26 These PTEB- and PTEPB-based CMP nanosheets were synthesized by using the monomers TEB and TEPB, respectively. They demonstrated the photocatalytic activity of PTEPB and PTEB nanosheets. The quantum efficiencies of PTEPB and PTEB nanosheets at 420 nm are 10.3% and 7.6%, respectively. They attributed these high quantum efficiencies to the unique porous, nanosheet-like, and highly conjugated structures with high charge carrier mobilities of 2D CMPs. Due to these special structural features, the photogenerated excitons could reach the polymer surface immediately, which could suppress the undesirable electron–hole recombination and further improve the quantum efficiencies.
3.4 Chemical sensors
Porous materials with a high surface area, such as metal–organic frameworks75 and covalent organic frameworks,76 have been explored as fluorescence-based chemical sensors. As another porous material with a high surface area, CMPs have proven to be a highly sensitive promising fluorescence-based chemical sensor.38,47,52,63,77–80 CMP films have microporous and conjugated structure features, which allow rapid photo-induced electron transfer to the skeletons. As a result, the fluorescence of the CMP films may change differently, when the films are exposed to explosives or dipped into the solution containing analytes or metal ions. The changing degree and rate of fluorescence intensity indicate the sensitivity of the films.
Jiang and coworkers reported the synthesis of a CMP film by using the 1,3,5-tris[4-(N-carbazolyl)phenyl]benzene (TPBCz) monomer, as a precursor, which consists of triphenylbenzene as the core and carbazole as the shell. Upon excitation, the CMP film exhibited deep-blue luminescence.47 When the film was exposed to benzonitrile vapor for only 20 s, the fluorescence intensity of the film was reduced by 67%. Furthermore, the fluorescence-off chemosensing can also be applied to other electron-deficient arenes. For example, when the films were exposed to dinitrobenzene, benzoquinone, and hexafluorobenzene for 20 s, the intensity of fluorescence was reduced by 75%, 87%, and 92%, respectively. It was found that the degree of fluorescence quenching depends on the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of arenes, since the lower LUMO energy level corresponds to higher detection sensitivity. Moreover, the CMP films are also sensitive to electron-rich arenes, such as toluene and benzene. Unlike electron-deficient arenes that quench the fluorescence, the exposure of films to electron-rich arenes enhanced the fluorescence intensity, indicating fluorescence-on sensing. Due to the low oxidation potential, the CMP films containing carbazole groups were also used as a fluorescent probe for redox-active ions. When the films were immersed in aqueous solutions of Fe3+, the fluorescence intensity of the films decreased greatly. Besides, Ma and coworkers designed and synthesized a CMP film containing photoresponsive azobenzene moieties.57 Interestingly, the size of the pores could be reversibly controlled through trans–cis isomerization of the CMP film under irradiation by laser beams with different wavelengths. It was found that the pore size of the CMP films in the trans-configuration is 1.47 nm, while in the cis-configuration, it is 0.87 nm. Therefore, the CMP system could be used as a controlled release system and has proven to have high potential in drug release and molecule memory applications.
Despite the above advances, fabrication of free-standing and highly flexible and sensitive 2D CMP films for chemical sensors has not been achieved. In a recent work, Scherf and coworkers fabricated CMP-based nanofibrous films, by electrospinning CMP/poly(lactic acid) (PLA) mixtures, to prepare chemical sensors.38 The CMPs, which were prepared by using tetraphenylethene (TPE)-cored monomers as precursors, exhibited high solid state photoluminescence quantum yields, as a result of the aggregate induced emission effect. Due to their high porosity properties, the CMP-based nanofibrous films exhibited high sensitivity to molecular vapor and metal ions. By exposing the nanofibrous films to 1,2-dinitrobenzene vapor for 2 min, the photoluminescence intensity of the films was significantly quenched. The intensity was further decreased as a function of the exposure time. When the films were exposed to electron-deficient analytes, e.g. 1,3,5-trinitrobenzene and 1,4-benzoquinone, the intensity decreased quicker compared to the previous cases. The quick quenching response originated from a photo-induced electron transfer between the CMP and the electron-deficient analytes.
3.5 Optoelectronic devices
Due to their π-conjugated, inherent nanopore, and thin-film structures, 2D CMP films have drawn attention for optoelectronic device applications. The electrical properties can be tuned by changing the functional groups. On the other hand, loading functional guest molecules or metal nanoparticles into the nanopore of CMPs can also introduce new electrical features. Most importantly, the film-state CMPs can be used in optoelectronic devices directly.

3.5.1 Light-emitting diodes. 
Ma and coworkers demonstrated the use of carbazole-based 2D CMP films in optoelectronic devices. The polymer light-emitting diode (PLED) with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/CMP films (≈10 nm)/P-PPV (75 nm)/CsF (1.3 nm)/Al (100 nm) was constructed, where CMP films acted as the anode interlayer and poly[2-(4-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)phenyl)-p-phenylenevinylene] (P-PPV) acted as the light-emitting layer.48 For comparison, devices without a CMP film and with a doped CMP film have also been prepared. The doped CMP film-based device exhibited a low turn-on voltage of 2.2 V and a high brightness of 33000 Cd m−2 with a luminous efficiency of 20.7 Cd A−1. The doped CMP film-based device exhibited much higher luminous efficiency than that of the undoped CMP film-based device (13.7 Cd A−1) and that of the device with PEDOT:PSS as an anode interlayer (15.1 Cd A−1).
Tunable luminescence films can also be achieved by doping a CMP film with multiple dyes. Jiang and coworkers demonstrated that the π-conjugated porous polymer film can serve as the antenna and prevent the doped dyes from aggregation49 (Fig. 7). By changing the dye components and contents, the energy-funneling engines were precisely manipulated, and different kinds of emission hues have been achieved. For example, by immersing the CMP films with a thickness of 20 nm in dichloromethane solutions containing different concentrations of coumarin 6 for 12 h, the luminescence colors gradually changed from deep blue to brilliant green (Fig. 7b). Moreover, through doping two dyes, i.e., coumarin 6 and Nile red, into the CMP film together, pure white luminescence can be achieved with a reasonable doping concentration (Fig. 7c and d). The change of the color resulted from energy transfer from the CMP film to the doped molecules (Fig. 7e). When incomplete energy transfer occurred, blue, green and red luminescence would be absent, opening a window to produce white emission. Remarkably, the Commission Internationale de L'Eclairage (CIE) coordinates (0.33, 0.31) of the white light emission film is very close to the CIE coordinates (0.33, 0.33) of standard pure white light (Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of POP films by the electro-oxidative coupling reaction. Inset: Cell setup for electro-oxidative coupling for the preparation of POP thin films on the ITO working electrode. The fluorescence spectral changes of the CMP film (b) doped with different concentrations of coumarin 6, (c) 3.19 mol% coumarin 6 with varying Nile red content, and (d) 0.63 mol% coumarin 6 with varying Nile red content. (e) Photos of the films exhibiting three primary emission colors and white luminescence under a UV lamp. (f) Luminescence engineering of thirty nanofilms traced by the CIE coordinates (dots on the map; arrows represent the trace). Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 


3.5.2 Polymer solar cells. 
2D CMP films can also act as an electrode interlayer in polymer solar cells (PSCs). A PSC with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS (30 nm)/CMP films (≈10 nm)/PCDTBT:PC71BM (90 nm)/CsF (1.3 nm)/Al (100 nm) was fabricated, where poly[N-9′′-hepta-decanyl-2,7-carbazole-alt-5,5-(4′,7′-di-2-thienyl-2′,1′,3′-benzothiadiazole)] (PCDTBT) acted as the active layer.44 As a comparison, undoped CMP film, doped CMP film, and pure PEDOT:PSS based devices were prepared. The doped CMP-based device exhibited the highest power-conversion efficiency (PCE) of 7.56%, open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 0.925 V, short-circuit current (JSC) of 12.44 mA cm−2, and fill factor (FF) of 65.7%. The improved performances of PSCs with the doped CMP film as the anode interlayer demonstrated its great potential in optoelectronic device applications. Moreover, other 2D CMP films, such as polyborane carbazole films that contain tris(2,3,5,6-tetramethylphenyl)borane and carbazole functional groups, have also been prepared and used as electrode interlayers in solar cells to improve the performance.46
2D CMP films can also be used as the active layer in PSCs62 (Fig. 8). For example, the BTT-CMP film, which is based on planar BTT units, exhibited a hole mobility of 7.34 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1, while the TTB-CMP film, which has a propeller-shaped structure TTB unit, exhibited a hole mobility of only 1.01 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1. The higher mobility of the BTT-CMP film than that of the TTB-CMP film was due to the planar structure of BTT. Moreover, the high mobility indicates that CMP films can be designed for device implementation. Therefore, PSCs with the structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CMP:C60 films/LiF/Al were fabricated. The devices with BTT-CMP:C60, as the active layer, exhibited a PCE of 5.02%. In contrast, the cells fabricated by using TTB-CMP:C60, as the active layer, yielded a PCE of 2.55%. These results indicate that, by selecting suitable monomers, highly efficient photoactive layers based on CMP films could be obtained for photo-energy conversion.
 Fig. 8  (a) The chemical structures of thiophene-based monomers BTT and TTB; BTT is planar whereas TTB is propeller-shaped. (b) Elementary pore structures of the BTT-CMP and TTB-CMP films (inset: photos of the films). (c) Device configuration of solar cells using BTT-CMP:C60 or TTB-CMP:C60 as photoactive layers. (d) Basic structure of the BTT-CMP and TTB-CMP skeletons and the C60 dopants (purple: C60) in the photoactive layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


3.5.3 Electrochromic devices. 
Various thiophene-based blocks have been utilized for the growth of 2D CMP films. Their reversible (electro)chemical redox properties, accompanied by drastic changes of their absorption spectra in the visible range, make them attractive for electrochromic devices. For example, Thomas and coworkers synthesized a dithienothiophene (DTT)-based CMP film on an ITO electrode and demonstrated electrochromic device possibilities81 (Fig. 9a). The obtained DTT-CMP film was further reduced by applying different voltages. A rapid color change from orange-red (0 V) to light green (1.2 V), and finally to light blue (1.4 V) was observed, which made a solid ground for electrochromic devices based on DTT-CMP films (Fig. 9b). The rapid color change during the doping/de-doping process could be easily followed even by the naked eye, indicating their potential applications in sensor technologies, such as detection of ammonia-based explosives.
 Fig. 9  (a) The chemical structure and spectroelectrochemical measurements of the DTT-CMP film on ITO. (b) The change of film color under different switching voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


3.5.4 Photodetectors. 
2D CMP nanofilms always exhibit low conductivity, which limits their potential in optoelectronic device applications. Recently, by precise control of the thermal annealing temperature (below 700, 750, and 800 °C), the conductivity of 2D CMP nanofilms was changed from low to semi- and high-conductivity82 (Fig. 10a and b). The different values of conductivity resulted from the degree of carbonization. The semiconductive carbonized 2D CMP exhibited a typical p-type semiconductor property. Furthermore, by coating carbon dots (CDs) onto it to form the CDs/carbonized 2D CMP heterostructure, a photodetector based on the heterostructure, which showed high UV light response, was formed (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) The photograph of the carbonized 2D CMP film. (b) The I–V curve of the carbonized 2D CMP as a function of the annealing temperature. (c) The I–V curves of the device measured with and without light illumination. Inset: Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on the carbonized 2D CMP/CDs heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.5.5 Polymer memory devices. 
Some 2D CMP films containing different kinds of heteroatoms, such as N and S atoms, can coordinate with metal ions to form a metal filament under an external voltage, which facilitates the electrical switching behaviors. Recently, we reported a polymer memory device with a simple structure of a 2D CMP nanofilm sandwiched between the bottom rGO electrode and the top Al electrode.31 The device exhibited a typical flash memory feature with superior retention stability. Due to the resistance to chemical solvents of the 2D CMP nanofilm, a P3HT layer was directly spin-coated onto the 2D CMP film, for the purpose of integrating a diode on top of the memory cells. The integrated diode was able to eliminate the cross-talk issue between memory cells, which was caused by parasitic current paths in a cross-bar array architecture.
By taking the merits of chemical and structural stabilities of the 2D CMP nanofilm, we recently reported the preparation of hierarchical hollow-pore nanostructure bilayer conjugated polymer films for memory devices.83 The hierarchical films contained the poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV) film with a hollow surface and the 2D CMP nanofilm (Fig. 11a). The memory device was outstanding with a high on/off ratio (>105) and a long retention time (>3.0 × 104 s), which was higher than those of conjugated polymer memory devices that had been reported (Fig. 11b–d). This work demonstrated that the bilayer heterojunction has great potential in the development of high performance polymer electronics.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the polymer memory device with the structure of ITO/2D CMP/hollow MEH-PPV/Al. The AFM images and the corresponding height profiles of the 2D CMP nanofilm (bottom) and the hollow MEH-PPV film (top). (b) Typical I–V characteristics of the polymer memory device. (c) Retention test of the memory device at a voltage of 0.2 V. (d) The comparison of the on/off ratio of various memory devices based on conjugated polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 

4. Conclusions and outlook
In this review, a brief summary of the fabrication strategies and potential applications of 2D CMPs over the last few years is presented. 2D CMP films were mainly synthesized on a substrate surface (e.g. solid substrates, 2D nanomaterials or liquid–liquid interface) via initiated or confined polymerizations.
Due to their inherent nanopore, π-conjugated, and thin-film structures, 2D CMP films have been shown to have high potential in various applications, such as molecular separation, energy storage, gas sensing, and optoelectronics. Despite the recent progress in this exciting research field, there is still need for further work which will be necessary to address several research questions about 2D CMPs and to demonstrate their particular advantages over conventional or other alternative materials.
The controllable synthesis of functional 2D CMP films is the first and critical chapter in these studies. Different synthesis strategies, such as solid–liquid interface or solid substrate confined polymerization, could be used to prepare large-area, patterned, and thickness controlled 2D CMP films. However, the preparation of 2D CMP films with a uniform thickness, a tunable pore size, and satisfactory electronic properties is still a challenge. In order to obtain large area and uniform 2D CMP films, the emerging air–liquid interface-confined polymerization method could be useful. Since the interfacial technologies strongly depend on the intrinsic properties of the precursors (such as solubility, catalytic activity, thermal stability, and functional groups), the rational design of new monomers and in-depth understanding of the interfacial synthesis become crucial. As the electronic properties of 2D CMP films could be tuned by introducing electron donor and acceptor functional groups into the polymer structures, control over the electronic properties is within reach and can be a major progress in the construction of novel functional 2D CMP films.
Another promising strategy is the integration of 2D CMP films with other semiconductor materials to prepare 2D van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures. Many studies have shown that the formation of vdW heterostructures based on 2D CMPs and semiconductors can lead to novel properties from several aspects, and it could help to overcome the inherent material limitations. The 2D heterostructures based on 2D CMPs can be prepared by manual stacking or in situ growth of 2D CMPs on inorganic 2D materials. Moreover, other materials, such as 0D quantum dots or nanoparticles, 1D nanofibers or nanotubes, and bulk 3D semiconductors, can also be mixed with 2D CMPs through dip/spin-coating, direct growing or transfer techniques to form mixed-dimensional vdW heterostructures.
An important handicap of conjugated polymers is their low electrical conductivity. In order to tackle this issue, in most applications, chemical doping methods have been used to improve the conductivity of polymer semiconductors. Chemical doping can also enhance the electrical conductivity of porous organic materials, such as covalent organic frameworks and metal–organic frameworks.84 Various functional materials, including small molecules, ionic liquids, and metal nanoparticles, have been used as chemical dopants. In comparison with the conventional conjugated polymers, 2D CMPs additionally possess microporous structures with optoelectronic properties. Thanks to their unique molecular structure, the doping strategies can also be used in constructing 2D CMP based nanocomposites in future studies, which can unlock the unprecedented advantages of multifunctional 2D CMP films.
In summary, 2D CMP films are a fascinating class of materials, which have gained importance due to their facile but highly efficient preparation methods and can have several high potential applications. Based on the recent promising advances, further research can pave the way to make 2D CMP films to be major tools in several research and application fields.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51703093, 61904150), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu (BK20171000), the Postdoctoral Innovative Talent Support Program (BX20180260), and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2018M64373).
References
L. Tan and B. Tan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3322–3356 RSC .
G. Cheng, B. Bonillo, R. S. Sprick, D. J. Adams, T. Hasell and A. I. Cooper, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5219–5224 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Budd, B. S. Ghanem, S. Makhseed, N. B. McKeown, K. J. Msayib and C. E. Tattershall, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2, 230–231 RSC .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2005, 310, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Xie, G. Skorupskii and M. Dincă, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 8536 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chong, S. Lee, B. Kim and J. Kim, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 423, 213487 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen and B. H. Han, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800040 CrossRef .
D. Chen, C. Liu, J. Tang, L. Luo and G. Yu, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10, 1168–1181 RSC .
J. X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, H. Niu, C. Dickinson, A. Y. Ganin, M. J. Rosseinsky and Y. Z. Khimyak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 8574–8578 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. Qiu, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. M. Lee and A. I. Cooper, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 2171–2214 CrossRef CAS .
N. B. McKeown and P. M. Budd, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 675–683 RSC .
N. B. McKeown, Polymer, 2020, 202, 122736 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Chen, X. Liu, S. L. Hanna, X. Wang, R. Taheri-Ledari, A. Maleki, P. Li and O. K. Farha, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7406–7427 RSC .
M. S. Lohse and T. Bein, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1870229 CrossRef .
A. I. Cooper, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1291–1295 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8012–8031 RSC .
J. Tan, W.-J. Chen and J. Guo, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 27, 1405–1411 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, L. Wang, Y. He, X. Chen, X. Wu, H. Xu, Y. Liao and M. Zhu, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 3393–3397 RSC .
S. Y. Moon, J. S. Bae, E. Jeon and J. W. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9504–9508 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cheng, T. Hasell, A. Trewin, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12727–12731 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, J. Guo and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 695–697 RSC .
X. Wu, H. Li, Y. Xu, B. Xu, H. Tong and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2375–2380 RSC .
J. Liu and C. Wöll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5730–5770 RSC .
P. Liu, A. T. Liu, D. Kozawa, J. Dong, J. F. Yang, V. B. Koman, M. Saccone, S. Wang, Y. Son and M. H. Wong, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1005–1012 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702428 CrossRef .
A. Palma-Cando and U. Scherf, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 827–841 CrossRef CAS .
V. Senkovskyy, I. Senkovska and A. Kiriy, ACS Macro Lett., 2012, 1, 494–498 CrossRef CAS .
D. Becker, N. Heidary, M. Horch, U. Gernert, I. Zebger, J. Schmidt, A. Fischer and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4283–4286 RSC .
P. Lindemann, M. Tsotsalas, S. Shishatskiy, V. Abetz, P. Krolla-Sidenstein, C. Azucena, L. Monnereau, A. Beyer, A. Gölzhäuser and V. Mugnaini, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 7189–7193 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lindemann, A. Schade, L. Monnereau, W. Feng, K. Batra, H. Gliemann, P. Levkin, S. Bräse, C. Wöll and M. Tsotsalas, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6815–6818 RSC .
M. Kim, M. Byeon, J.-S. Bae, S.-Y. Moon, G. Yu, K. Shin, F. Basarir, T.-H. Yoon and J.-W. Park, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7092–7095 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liang, H. Wang, X. Shi, B. Shen, X. He, Z. A. Ghazi, N. A. Khan, H. Sin, A. M. Khattak, L. Li and Z. Tang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 961–967 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhuang, F. Zhang, D. Wu, N. Forler, H. Liang, M. Wagner, D. Gehrig, M. R. Hansen, F. Laquai and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9668–9672 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhuang, F. Zhang, D. Wu and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3081–3086 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yuan, X. Zhuang, H. Fu, G. Brunklaus, M. Forster, Y. Chen, X. Feng and U. Scherf, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6972–6977 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, X. Zhuang, J. Yang, X. Feng and S.-i. Hirano, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16732–16739 RSC .
K. Yuan, P. Guo-Wang, T. Hu, L. Shi, R. Zeng, M. Forster, T. Pichler, Y. Chen and U. Scherf, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7403–7411 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Liu, C.-Z. Guan, S.-Y. Ding, W. Wang, H.-J. Yan, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10470–10474 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, L. Fan, X. Zhou, W. Q. Tian, Z. Guo, Z. Li, X. Li and S. Lei, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5864–5867 RSC .
W. Dai, F. Shao, J. Szczerbiński, R. McCaffrey, R. Zenobi, Y. Jin, A. D. Schlüter and W. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Yin, X. Wang, S. Ju, M. Song, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, S. Cheng, Z. Zhang and J. Liu, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2019, 1, 1900052 CrossRef .
Y. Dai, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Liu, R. Zhao, D. S. Wright, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and C. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 16397–16405 RSC .
C. Gu, Y. Chen, Z. Zhang, S. Xue, S. Sun, K. Zhang, C. Zhong, H. Zhang, Y. Pan, Y. Lv, Y. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhang, F. Huang and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3443–3448 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, T. Fei, Y. Lv, T. Feng, S. Xue, D. Lu and Y. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2702–2705 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, H. Zhang, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3049–3053 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, N. Huang, J. Gao, F. Xu, Y. Xu and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4850–4855 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Wu, H. Xu and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 11702–11706 CrossRef .
C. Gu, N. Huang, F. Xu, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8867–8874 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Hu, Z. Salmi, M. Lillethorup, E. B. Pedersen, M. Robert, S. U. Pedersen, T. Skrydstrup and K. Daasbjerg, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5864–5867 RSC .
C. Liu, H. Luo, G. Shi, L. Nian, Z. Chi and Y. Ma, Dyes Pigm., 2017, 142, 132–138 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, F. Li, P. Li, H. Wang, M. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Baumgarten and K. Müllen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2025–2031 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, E. Preis and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 8041–8047 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando and U. Scherf, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11127–11133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Räupke, A. Palma-Cando, E. Shkura, P. Teckhausen, A. Polywka, P. Görrn, U. Scherf and T. Riedl, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–7 CrossRef .
H. Zhang, Y. Zhang, C. Gu and Y. Ma, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402175 CrossRef .
R. Zhao, J. Han, M. Huang, F. Liu, L. Wang and Y. Ma, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1700274 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, X. Li, D. Guo, D. B. Shinde, D. Lu, L. Chen, X. Liu, L. Cao, A. M. Aboalsaud and Y. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Qin, H. Xu, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 13798–13802 CrossRef .
A. Yassin, R. Mallet, P. Leriche and J. Roncali, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1219–1225 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 6816–6824 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gu, N. Huang, Y. Chen, L. Qin, H. Xu, S. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Ma and D. Jiang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13594–13598 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palma-Cando, D. Woitassek, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 1118–1124 RSC .
Q. Chen, M. Luo, P. Hammershøj, D. Zhou, Y. Han, B. W. Laursen, C.-G. Yan and B.-H. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6084–6087 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. Song, S. Ju, X. Huang, X. Wang, X. Shi, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang, J. Chen and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4010–4017 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Y. Yin, F. Xiu, X. Wang, S. Ju, M. Song, Q. Chang, J. Chen, J. Liu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 7295–7301 RSC .
Y. Yin, Z. Liu, M. Song, S. Ju, X. Wang, Z. Zhou, H. Mao, Y. Ding, J. Liu and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11162–11169 RSC .
Z. Chen, M. Chen, Y. Yu and L. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1989–1992 RSC .
K. Tiwari, P. Sarkar, S. Modak, H. Singh, S. K. Pramanik, S. Karan and A. Das, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905621 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, H. Sin, B. Liang, Z. A. Ghazi, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, H. R. Alanagh, L. Li, X. Lu and Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900134 CrossRef .
P. Shao, R. Yao, G. Li, M. Zhang, S. Yuan, X. Wang, Y. Zhu, X. Zhang, L. Zhang and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., 2020, 59, 4401–4405 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, X. Jing, S. Zhao, P. Shao, Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, Y. Li, C. Gu, X. Wang and Y. Ye, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 8860–8864 CrossRef .
Z. Xiang, Y. Xue, D. Cao, L. Huang, J. F. Chen and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2433–2437 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Marco, D. Cortizo-Lacalle, I. Perez-Miqueo, G. Valenti, A. Boni, J. Plas, K. Strutyński, S. De Feyter, F. Paolucci, M. Montes, A. Khlobystov, M. Franco and A. Alonso, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 6946–6951 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Campbell, S. F. Liu, T. M. Swager and M. Dincă, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13780–13783 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, B. Dong, R. Ge, F. Jiang and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7108–7114 CrossRef CAS .
K. V. Rao, S. Mohapatra, T. K. Maji and S. J. George, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gopalakrishnan and W. R. Dichtel, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3813–3816 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Wang, W. Mo, H. Tang, Z. Cheng, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Ma, B. Li and X. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910275 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Mothika, A. Räupke, K. O. Brinkmann, T. Riedl, G. Brunklaus and U. Scherf, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 6483–6492 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bildirir, I. Osken, T. Ozturk and A. Thomas, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 9306–9311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ju, Y. Ding, Y. Yin, S. Cheng, X. Wang, H. Mao, Z. Zhou, M. Song, Q. Chang and C. Ban, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 17399–17404 RSC .
Y. Yin, Z. Zhou, X. Wang, H. Mao, C. Ban, Y. Chen, J. Liu, Z. Liu and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 1103–1109 CrossRef .
K. Fujie, K. Otsubo, R. Ikeda, T. Yamada and H. Kitagawa, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4306–4310 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagrams of the functionalization of the Si/SiO2 substrate and the growth of 2D CMP films on the substrate through surface-initiated polymerization. (i) Functionalization of the Si/SiO2 surface with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the Si/SiO2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group. (b) The modification of 2D rGO and the preparation of the sandwich-like CMP-Gr-CMP film. (i) Functionalization of rGO surfaces with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the rGO substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic diagrams of MoS2 functionalization with functional molecules, as well as the preparation of MoS2-templated CMP nanosheets. (i) Functionalization of MoS2 surfaces with functional molecules. (ii) Growth of CMP films on the MoS2 substrate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (d) The condensation reaction of tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)methane and tetrakis(4-isocyanatophenyl)methane. (e) The Sonogashira–Hagihara reaction of 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene with several different monomers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Chemical structures of monomers for electropolymerization.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The reaction scheme of the synthesis of 2D CMPs. (b) Schematic diagrams of the synthesis of large-size 2D CMP films through solid surface-confined oxidative polymerization. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of large-area, patterned 2D CMP films through photopolymerization. (d) Photograph of the 2D CMP film grown on a wafer-scale SiO2/Si substrate. The top region of the substrate was covered with the 2D CMP while the bottom region was the bare SiO2/Si substrate. (e) TEM image of the free-standing 2D CMP film. (f) The optical image of patterned 2D CMP films. (a, b, d and e): Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c): Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2018 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic presentation of the preparation of imine oligomers by mixing tris(4-formyl phenyl)benzene (aldehyde) with ethylenediamine (amine) in xylene and stirring for 1 hour. (b) Spreading of the imine oligomers onto the water surface formed in a petri-dish. (c) Formation of a polyimine nanofilm over the water surface. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of the free-standing nanofilm. The inset of (d) shows a higher magnification image of (d). The inset of (e) is a selected area electron diffraction pattern showing the amorphous nature of the nanofilm. (f) AFM height image and profile of the nanofilm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Solid surface-initiated polymerization	Controllable film thickness, favorable for further functionalization	Less types of monomers, complex reaction process	Aromatic monomers containing special groups: –OH, –NH, –SH
Solid surface-confined polymerization	Controllable film thickness, patterned film	Unsatisfactory uniformity	Aromatic monomers containing more than two active groups
Liquid–liquid interface-confined polymerization	Controllable film thickness, various types of monomers, free-standing films	Wrinkled surface when transferred to a solid substrate	Aromatic monomers containing more than two active groups

 	Fig. 5  (a) Synthesis of CMP membranes through C–C coupling reactions. Interconnected (green) and disconnected (red) voids in p-CMP (b), m-CMP (c), o-CMP (d) and polyamide (e) with respect to a probe of 1.2 Å radius, which represents the largest probe size that can diffuse across any of the rigid models. (f) Plot of solvent permeance through different CMP membranes against the solvent viscosity. (g) Permeance for methanol versus the reciprocal membrane thickness for p-CMP, m-CMP, and o-CMP. Previously reported polymer-based organic-solvent nanofiltration membranes are included for comparison. (h) Plot of hexane, methanol, and ethanol permeances as a function of time for p-CMP membranes. Adapted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Synthesis of CMP nanosheets through Sonogashira coupling reactions. (b) The preparation of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets through the carbonization process of CMP-MoS2-CMP nanosheets. (c) SEM image of CMP-MoS2-CMP nanosheets. (d) SEM and (e) HRTEM images of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets. The inset of (e) shows the corresponding SAED pattern. (f) STEM image of MoS2-based porous carbon nanosheets and the corresponding elemental mapping images for C, N, Mo and S. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis of POP films by the electro-oxidative coupling reaction. Inset: Cell setup for electro-oxidative coupling for the preparation of POP thin films on the ITO working electrode. The fluorescence spectral changes of the CMP film (b) doped with different concentrations of coumarin 6, (c) 3.19 mol% coumarin 6 with varying Nile red content, and (d) 0.63 mol% coumarin 6 with varying Nile red content. (e) Photos of the films exhibiting three primary emission colors and white luminescence under a UV lamp. (f) Luminescence engineering of thirty nanofilms traced by the CIE coordinates (dots on the map; arrows represent the trace). Adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) The chemical structures of thiophene-based monomers BTT and TTB; BTT is planar whereas TTB is propeller-shaped. (b) Elementary pore structures of the BTT-CMP and TTB-CMP films (inset: photos of the films). (c) Device configuration of solar cells using BTT-CMP:C60 or TTB-CMP:C60 as photoactive layers. (d) Basic structure of the BTT-CMP and TTB-CMP skeletons and the C60 dopants (purple: C60) in the photoactive layer. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The chemical structure and spectroelectrochemical measurements of the DTT-CMP film on ITO. (b) The change of film color under different switching voltages. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH& Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The photograph of the carbonized 2D CMP film. (b) The I–V curve of the carbonized 2D CMP as a function of the annealing temperature. (c) The I–V curves of the device measured with and without light illumination. Inset: Schematic diagram of the photodetector based on the carbonized 2D CMP/CDs heterostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the polymer memory device with the structure of ITO/2D CMP/hollow MEH-PPV/Al. The AFM images and the corresponding height profiles of the 2D CMP nanofilm (bottom) and the hollow MEH-PPV film (top). (b) Typical I–V characteristics of the polymer memory device. (c) Retention test of the memory device at a voltage of 0.2 V. (d) The comparison of the on/off ratio of various memory devices based on conjugated polymers. Adapted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
