Hierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanode materials for dye -sensitized solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2JM32402D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2JM32402D
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 15475-15489Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanode materials for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Hong-Yan 
            Chen
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dai-Bin 
            Kuang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Cheng-Yong 
            Su
          
          
        
      *
      MOE Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, P. R. China. E-mail: kuangdb@mail.sysu.edu.cn; cesscy@mail.sysu.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 20 84113015;   Tel: +86 20 84113015
Received 
      17th April 2012
    , Accepted 28th May 2012First published on 28th May 2012AbstractAs one of the most promising low cost alternatives to the traditional p–n junction photovoltaic device, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has attracted immense attention from academic and industrial researchers in the last two decades. The size, structure and morphology of photoanode materials have been found to show significant influence on the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. In this feature article, we briefly summarize the synthesis and properties of hierarchically micro/nanostructured semiconductor (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2) photoanode materials involving microspheres and one-dimensional nanostructure, and their photovoltaic performance in DSSCs.Hong-Yan ChenHong-Yan Chen is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow working with Prof. Cheng-Yong Su at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her BS degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University, and her Ph.D in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010, under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. Her current research interest lies in functional micro/nanostructured electrode and electrolyte materials for low-cost, quasi-solid/solid state dye-sensitized solar cells.Dai-Bin KuangDai-Bin Kuang has been a full professor at Sun Yat-sen University since 2008. He received his Ph.D in physical chemistry in 2003 from Sun Yat-sen University under the supervision of Prof. Han-Qin Liu. He joined Prof. Markus Antonietti’s group at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) in 2003, and moved to EPFL (Switzerland) in 2004 working with Prof. Michael Grätzel as a Postdoctoral Fellow. He has authored and co-authored over 50 refereed publications, which have been cited more than 2000 times by other scientists. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in photocatalysis and solar cells (such as dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells).Cheng-Yong SuCheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University. He obtained his Ph.D in 1996 from Lanzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Min-Yu Tan. He joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in 2001, and moved to the University of South Carolina in 2002 working with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye as a Postdoctoral Fellow. He is the author or co-author of over 200 peer-reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on clean environment and energy related metal–organic materials, catalysis and nanoscience.
1. Introduction
Renewable energy sources represent a worldwide hot topic over recent years due to the inevitable exhaustion of traditional fossil energy sources and the accompanying serious environmental contamination. As a typical renewable energy source, solar energy is believed to be an ideal alternative to traditional fossil energy, because it is green and inexhaustible, and is not limited by region. A photovoltaic device is needed to convert the solar energy to electricity, which is the so-called “solar cell”. Among the various photovoltaic devices, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is becoming a significant focus because of its low cost and abundant raw material, facile fabrication process, efficient photovoltaic performance and stability,1,2 in comparison with the traditional silicon solar cell,3–7 semiconductor compounds (CdTe, GaAs, CIGS, etc.),8,9 and organic/polymer solar cells.10–12 The concept of DSSC devices was inspired by the photosynthesis of green plants, in which the macroscopic absorption of visible solar light and the microscopic electron collection process are mutually separated but intelligently combined in a simple system; therefore, a DSSC device features a relatively high efficiency and a low cost. A breakthrough in DSSCs was achieved in 1991,13 when O'Regan and Grätzel innovatively employed a nanoscale wide band gap semiconductor nanocrystal (TiO2 nanoparticle) as the transporting medium of photo-induced electrons while using a ruthenium complex (N719) as the sensitizer to absorb the solar energy, and a photon–current conversion efficiency of as high as 7% was obtained. This value has been improved to over 12% in recent years by optimizing the corresponding components of the devices.14
Generally, a DSSC device consists of a photoanode of transparent fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass covered with a wide band gap nanocrystalline semiconductor (TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5, etc.), sensitizers anchored on the surface of the semiconductor, a redox-coupled electrolyte, typically containing iodide and triiodide ions (I−/I3−), and a counter electrode of FTO coated with platinum nanoparticles.15,16 As shown in Fig. 1, when irradiated by light, the “antenna” dye molecules anchored on the surface of the semiconductor are excited first to create exciton pairs which are rapidly split at the nanocrystalline surface, with the electrons being injected into the conduction band of the nanocrystalline semiconductor and subsequently transported to the outer circuit in milliseconds, and the resulting holes in the dye molecules being recovered by the I−/I3− redox couples in the liquid electrolyte. The oxidation state of I3− is further recovered by electrons transferred from the counter electrode. A closed circuit is thereby established to continuously convert the solar light to electricity. However, the injected electrons in the conduction band of the semiconductor can also be exhausted through recombining with either the surface defects of the semiconductor, or with excited dye molecules and the oxidation state species in the electrolyte. Therefore, wide photoabsorption of dyes for abundant photoelectron generation, rapid electron transfer at the photoanode, fast ion diffusion in the electrolyte, and efficient reduction of redox media at the counter electrode are the four key points determining the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs.
 Fig. 1  Sketch map of the structure and working mechanism of a DSSC device. 
The photoanode material is the key component of DSSCs which plays important roles in dye loading, electron injection, transportation and collection, and therefore exhibits significant influence on the photocurrent, photovoltage and the power conversion efficiency. Recently, tremendous efforts have been devoted to the design of the chemical composition, structure and morphology of the semiconductor photoanode.17 Different material structures, including zero dimensional (0D) nanoparticles,1,16 quasi-one dimensional (quasi-1D)/one dimensional (1D) nanostructures,18,19 and hierarchical nanoarchitectures,20 have been developed, of which the last kind of structure shows great potential in achieving high performance DSSCs. This review mainly focuses on the recent advance of the hierarchically structured photoanode. According to the structure of the primary building blocks and the dimension of the final secondary structure, the hierarchically structured photoanodes are divided into (i) nanoparticle based spherical micro/nanostructure, and (ii) quasi-1D/1D structure. The challenges and perspectives of the photoanode based on these nanostructures are also discussed in the last part of this feature article.
2. Development of photoanode materials
The photoanode of a DSSC works as an electron “vehicle” to transport the injected electrons from the excited dye molecules to the outer circuit, hence its properties show significant effects on the photocurrent and photovoltage of cells. Therefore, the photoanode materials need to meet several conditions: first, the energy gap of the semiconductor must match with that of the dye molecules to ensure an effective injection of the photo-induced electrons from the dyes to the semiconductor. Second, the semiconductor film must have a high surface area to adsorb more dye molecules, so as to harvest as much solar energy as possible. It has been reported that it is the monolayer of dye molecules bonded to the surface of the semiconductor that contributes to the conversion of sunlight to electricity; a further excess of dye or aggregates was useless or even adverse to the photoelectrical process. Therefore, an increase of surface roughness of the photoanode film is very important. Third, the porosity of the semiconductor film must be high enough to ensure that the electrolyte can permeate well into the interior of the film, forming a good ohmic contact at the interfaces between them. What’s more, the electron mobility of the semiconductor should be high enough to transport the injected electrons quickly to the outer circuit. Generally, wide band gap semiconductor nanomaterials, such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, Nb2O5, etc., are good candidates for this job, and the crystallinity, structure, and morphology of semiconductor films play an important role in determining the performance of the solar cells.21
Wide band gap semiconductor nanoparticles (∼20 nm) were first used to construct an efficient photoanode. These particles were deposited on the conductive substrate (usually FTO glass) via different methods such as doctor-blade,13,22 screen printing,23,24 spin coating,25 electrophoresis deposition,26,27etc., to form a film with a certain thickness, which can provide a large surface area and a relatively high porosity due to the small size of the particles (Fig. 2a). It has been demonstrated that a porous film consisting of nanoparticles 15 nm in size can supply an inner surface area as high as 780 cm2 per cm2 of geometric surface.1 Such a large surface area made it possible to adsorb enough dye for efficient light harvesting, and an overall conversion efficiency of over 7% can be obtained using either commercial nanoparticles or synthesized ones. This high performance was quite attractive for use as an alternative to the expensive commercial silicon based or compound semiconductor based solar cells.22,28,29 However, further improvement of this kind of nanoparticle based DSSC is hindered by the accompanying drawbacks of the nanoparticles. Films consisting of small-sized nanoparticles are “transparent” in the visible light range, that is the sunlight can transmit through the film without effective scattering, which is adverse for the uptake of light by the dye molecules.30,31 Moreover, the collection efficiency of photo-generated electrons in the nanoparticle based film is low due to the large amount of recombination that happens during their transportation process. The electron transport in nanoparticle films occurs via a trap-limited diffusion process, since the well permeated electrolytes can screen the macroscopic electric field while coupling easily with the photo-generated electrons. This is quite different from the drift process in the commercial p–n junction based solar cells, where a potential gradient is formed to drive the separation of the photo-generated carriers.28,32–34 The injected electrons thereby move randomly in the film and are “trapped” and “detrapped” million of times by the defects and surface state of the nanoparticles before they are collected, during which the recombination probability increases dramatically. The large number of grain boundaries existing in the small nanoparticle based films supplies more trapping sites and a much higher probability of electron recombination. As a result, the electron transport rate in this photoanode is much slower, with electron diffusivity Dn less than 10−4 cm2 s−1, about two orders of magnitude lower than that of the semiconductor single crystals.35,36 As determined by the Dn, the typical effective electron diffusion length (Ln) of the nanoparticle film was about 7–30 μm for cells operating at light intensities up to 0.1 sun.37–39 Therefore, reducing the recombination rate of photo-generated electrons is a key point to obtain an efficient DSSC.
 Fig. 2  (a) The structure of a nanocrystalline based photoanode with a random electron transport path; (b) the bi-layer structured photoanode with effective light scattering by the top layer of bigger particles; (c) the structure and electron transport path of a 1D nanowire array and (d) hierarchically structured 1D nanowire array photoanode. 
In order to enhance the utilization efficiency of incident solar light, a bi-layer structured nanoparticle film photoanode was designed consequently via introducing an extra layer of large particles onto the top of the original nanoparticle film as scattering layer to confine the incident light within the photoanode, thereby enhancing the light harvesting.31,40–43 As shown in Fig. 2b, although the strong light scattering may result in partial light loss, the incident light from the side of the transparent glass substrate can be bounded back by the large sized particle layers and reabsorbed by dyes, thus resulting in higher light collection efficiency and thereby a higher photo-generated current density. This effect can be confirmed by the UV-vis diffuse reflection spectrum. For example, the bi-layer nanoparticle photoanode consisting of a 12 μm layer of 20 nm nanoparticles and a 4 μm top layer of 400 nm particles exhibited a high monochromatic incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) value of 85% in the plateau region; moreover, the value at a wavelength of 700 nm was twice as high as that of the 12 μm thick TiO2 film without a scattering layer, resulting in a higher short circuit current (Jsc).41 Apart from the bigger particles, sub-micrometer solid/hollow spheres,44–46 macroporous structure,47 and 1D nanostructures such as nanotubes and nanorods,48–50etc., were also designed to work as the light scattering materials to provide high light-scattering efficiency and fast electron transport, and better photovoltaic performance was also obtained as expected. The light scattering layer can either be placed on the top or bottom of the small nanocrystalline layer, or can be mixed together with the small nanocrystals. However, the bigger size of the light scattering materials always decreased the surface area of the composite film at the same time and made the film much thicker, which would result in more difficult electron transport.
Since a 1D nanostructure, especially an aligned 1D nanostructure, such as nanowire, nanotube, and nanorod arrays, can provide a direct transport path for the injected electrons from the injection site to the collective electrode that largely shortens the electron diffusion distances (Fig. 2c), the 1D nanostructure based photoanode was developed to achieve better electron collection efficiency for DSSCs. The high crystallinity, and low number of grain boundaries and surface defects of 1D nanostructures can accelerate electron transport and reduce the possibility of interfacial recombination.35,51,52 In addition, the internal electric field inside single 1D nanostructures, e.g., a single nanowire, also helps to drive the transport of the injected electrons. It has been illustrated that the electron diffusion length of 1D nanostructures could be as long as 100 μm.53 Moreover, the large size of the 1D nanostructure (macroscopic in one direction) also contributes to the light scattering effect to enhance the light absorption of dye molecules. Encouraged by these excellent properties, a lot of attention has been attracted to the fabrication of 1D nanostructured photoanodes, including unordered or aligned arrays of TiO2, ZnO, and SnO2, etc.18,54–60 Different synthesis methods including electrochemical anodization,51,52,56,57,61 self-assembly method,58 hydro/solvothermal method,59,60 template method,62 gas-phase deposition,63,64 liquid-phase deposition,65etc., were developed to obtain tailored 1D nanostructures, and a relatively satisfactory conversion efficiency, for example, up to 8.07% based on an anatase TiO2 nanotube array photoanode, has been reported by our group in 2010.66 However, the performances of most 1D nanostructure based DSSCs were not as high as expected. In fact, their conversion efficiency was usually lower than that of nanoparticle based photoanodes since the surface area of the 1D nanostructures was too low to adsorb a large enough amount of dye molecules, which thereby seriously affected the photo-generated current density. Although the longer electron diffusion length of the 1D nanostructure made it possible to enhance the surface area by increasing the film thickness, e.g. ZnO nanowire arrays with a total thickness of up to 40 μm exhibited a power conversion efficiency of up to 7%65,67 which was the highest recorded value for bare ZnO, the fabrication of ultralong 1D nanostructures was still much more difficult due to the limitations of existing fabrication techniques. Moreover, the residues of organic molecules or other template materials for directing the growth of the 1D structure may also affect the electrochemical properties of the semiconductor materials.
As one solution to the drawbacks of the above-mentioned nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures, hierarchically structured photoanode materials were designed recently to enhance the performance of the DSSCs (Fig. 2d).17,20 Hierarchically structured materials normally refers to spherical, quasi-1D or 1D micro/nanoscale aggregates assembled by small building blocks, such as nanoparticles, nanorods, nanowires, nanoplates, etc. Since the primary building blocks of these structures are still small in size, a high surface area can be retained in the new photoanode film, leading to a high load of the dye molecules. Moreover, the relatively large size of the aggregates (usually in the micro- or sub-micrometer range), which is comparable to the wavelength of visible light, can result in an enhanced light scattering effect and thus a high light collection efficiency by the dyes. The much larger pores between the secondary aggregates may also be beneficial to the permeation of the electrolyte, making the mass transport inside the cells much faster. On the other hand, in the case of hierarchically structured aggregates consisting of 1D or quasi-1D nanostructures, an effective electron transport and high collection efficiency can be obtained. Compared to the nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures, the photovoltaic performance of hierarchical structure based photoanodes is superior, and they have been considered as a good candidate for constructing high performance DSSCs. A review and detailed discussion of this kind of photoanode is presented in Section 3 and Section 4.
3. Hierarchical spherical micro-/nano-architectures
The hierarchical spherical nanostructure was first invented and subsequently extensively studied to enhance the light harvesting efficiency of nanoparticle based photoanodes without sacrificing the total specific surface area of films. As mentioned before, a photoanode with a high surface area is essential for an efficient DSSC, and can be achieved by employing nanoparticles of ∼20 nm in diameter. However, the small-sized nanoparticle film photoanode suffers from a low light scattering effect and too small inner pores for the infiltration of the electrolyte. A micrometer or sub-micrometer sized spherical structure assembled from the primary nanoparticles can thereby ensure a high surface area of the as-formed photoanode film; moreover, the bigger size of the spherical assemblies, which is comparable to the wavelength of visible light, can enhance the light harvesting efficiency via the effective scattering effect, which increases the light transport length inside the photoanode film and thus increases the probability of photon absorption by dye molecules. In addition, the spherical structure can closely pack with each other to form a good transport path for the injected electrons; therefore, a higher Jsc can be expected.
3.1. Hierarchical spherical TiO2
TiO2 is the most extensively studied photoanode material for DSSCs due to its low cost, safety, and matched energy band structure. To overcome the disadvantages of big light-scattering particles showing a low specific surface area, a hierarchical nano-embossed hollow spherical TiO2 (NeHS TiO2) was first reported for use as a bifunctional photoanode material exhibiting both efficient generation of photon-generated electrons and good light-scattering property.68 The NeHS TiO2 particle (1–3 μm in diameter, wall thickness of ∼250 nm) film can adsorb a quantity of dye ∼5 times higher than the traditional 400 nm diameter scattering particles due to its higher surface area, although the light scattering ability of the NeHS TiO2 layer was a little lower than the latter. Therefore, an improved Jsc and thereby an overall energy-conversion efficiency of 10.34% was obtained when using these NeHS TiO2 particles as the light scattering layer of a nanocrystal based photoanode. However, the micrometer sized hierarchical TiO2 spheres were still too big to ensure a high enough specific surface area (58 m2 g−1 of NeHS particles) especially when working alone as photoanode materials for an efficient DSSC. Instead, sub-micrometer sized hierarchical spheres may exhibit a big advantage in dye uploading.69–71 As shown in Fig. 3a and b hierarchical nanoporous TiO2 spheres with a diameter of ∼250 nm consisting of nanoparticles of ∼10 nm can provide a BET specific surface area of as high as 117.9 m2 g−1, which was 1.7 times that of the films derived from commercial TiO2 nanoparticles (∼20 nm, 68.8 m2 g−1), leading to a high light harvesting ability due to a large amount of dye loading and an excellent light scattering effect.69 In addition, two types of pores, with large pores generated from the interstitial voids among the spherical structures (denoted as A, ∼55 nm for deformed spheres) and tiny internal pores formed between the TiO2 nanoparticles (denoted as B, ∼9.1 nm for deformed spheres) were formed in this film (Fig. 3b), which can facilitate fast electrolyte diffusion by shortening the ions’ diffusion path. The diffusion constant of I3− increased from 4.1 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 for commercial TiO2 nanoparticles to 4.9 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 for the nanoporous TiO2 spheres based DSSC. As a result, a better overall power conversion efficiency of 8.44% was achieved using this hierarchical film. In addition, the deformed spheres showed better performance than the perfect spheres due to their well-connected structure in the photoanode film (Fig. 3d). A similar concept was also adopted by Caruso et al. who employed mesoporous anatase TiO2 spheres with a diameter of 840 ± 40 nm consisting of nanoparticles to further enhance the light scattering effect for photon absorption.70 The hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 beads provided a high surface area of 108.0 m2 g−1, which in combination with the strong light-scattering ability contributed to a great improvement in photocurrent, that is, 12.79 mA cm−2 compared to 10.60 mA cm−2 for the commercial P25 nanoparticle based photoanode. Recently, hierarchical mesoporous TiO2 spheres with a surface area of as high as 193 m2 g−1 were prepared which exhibited a light-to-electricity conversion efficiency of 8.20%. This value was a 40% increase compared to the standard Degussa P25 photoanode.71
 Fig. 3  TEM images of TiO2 spheres with well-defined (a) and deformed structure (b) showing nanoporous assemblies of TiO2 nanoparticles, scale bar: 200 nm (inset: 20 nm); (c) diagram for the electrolyte diffusion through the external (A) and internal (B) pores in the nanoporous TiO2 spheres film; (d) current density–voltage (J–V) curves of solar cells with well-defined spheres (DSC-1), deformed spheres (DSC-2), and commercial nanoparticles (DSC-3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Recently, our group reported hierarchical yolk–shell anatase TiO2 beads for a bifunctional photoanode material in DSSCs.72 The yolk–shell beads, synthesized via a simple hydrothermal method, were 400–600 nm in size with single nanoparticles packed densely inside, forming multiple contacts with each other (Fig. 4a and b). Except for the strong light-scattering effect induced by the bigger bead size, the novel structured photoanode exhibited faster electron transport and longer electron lifetime than a commercial P25 nanoparticle based photoanode as measured by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and intensity-modulated photocurrent/photovoltage spectroscopy (IMPS/IMVS) (Fig. 4c). Moreover, as shown in Fig. 4d, the electron diffusion coefficient (Dn) of yolk–shell beads based DSSC was almost three times larger than that of P25. As a result, high electron collection efficiency (ηcc) of ∼99% under various light intensities was obtained in the as-prepared DSSC, leading to both a higher Jsc and Voc. It was found that the effective electron diffusion length in the yolk–shell TiO2 bead film was ∼70 μm, obviously superior to that of the P25 nanoparticle film (∼30 μm), under illumination at 30–150 W m−2. The excellent dynamic electron transit properties were attributed to good interior contact between neighboring nanoparticles arising from crystal intergrowth inside the beads during calcinations. The CO(NH2)2 added during the hydrothermal process was thought to act as a structure-directing agent affecting the morphology. This result indicated that a good connection between primary nanoparticles was essential to ensure a smooth transport path for photo-generated electrons. Therefore, strategies aiming to promote interior connection in the photoanode film, such as TiCl4 post treatment,73 a sintering process,74etc., were quite desirable in pursuing better photovoltaic performance. In addition, the hollow structure showed great capability in light scattering, which has also been proved by other hollow structures or multi-walled hollow sphere based photoanodes.46,75,76
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of hierarchical yolk–shell TiO2 beads prepared via a hydrothermal process at 160 °C (Sample-160); comparison of transport time and lifetime constant (c), electron diffusion coefficient (d) as a function of incident light intensity in P25 and yolk–shell TiO2 beads based DSSCs. Reproduced from ref. 72. 
As mentioned before, the hierarchical spherical nanostructure based photoanode can provide a multi-scale porous structure, with the bigger mesopores or even macropores formed by the stacking of the bigger assemblies and the small micropores formed by the stacking of primary nanoparticles. This special porous structure was quite advantageous for effective electrolyte permeation, especially for viscous electrolytes such as ionic liquids, gel electrolytes and solid state electrolytes. In addition to the commonly-used hydrothermal method, other methods including electrohydrodynamic (EHD) technique,77 template method,78–80 self-assembly method,81 and so on, were also employed to prepare multi-scale pores inside photoanode films. For example, a spherical TiO2 photoanode with micro/nano hierarchically branched inner channels can be achieved via a simple EHD technique, and a high η of 7.1% for a viscous ionic liquid electrolyte was obtained, which can be attributed to the enhanced light harvesting efficiency and improved transport of redox-active species in viscous electrolytes in the hierarchical porous films.77 TiO2 sub-micron spheres with hierarchical pores inside can be fabricated via grafting polymerization and a subsequent sol–gel process;78 a TiO2 photoelectrode with a composite pore structure of macropores and mesopores was prepared via a dual template method using holographic patterns and mesoscale colloidal particles as the templates, respectively.80 Both of them exhibited good potential when used as efficient photoanode materials for DSSCs.
3.2. Hierarchical spherical ZnO
As an alternative to TiO2, ZnO is another important photoanode material in DSSCs due to its similar band gap structure to TiO2, and most importantly, its much higher electron mobility of ∼205 to 300 cm2 V−1 s−1 than the latter (0.1–4 cm2 V−1 s−1).82 In addition, the morphology and structure of ZnO can be tailored facilely and a high crystallinity can be achieved using a relatively mild procedure compared to TiO2. Although the photovoltaic performance of ZnO is much lower than TiO2 due to poor dye adsorption and fast degradation of the dye molecules, its advantages are still thought to be favorable to improve the performance of DSSCs while decreasing the production cost. In fact, a bi-functional spherical assembly structure was first reported to improve the performance of ZnO based DSSCs in 2007 by providing both the high surface area and the strong light scattering capacity needed for effective light absorption by dye molecules (Fig. 5a,b).83–85 The sub-micrometer sized hierarchical ZnO spheres consist of densely packed nanoparticles and can be obtained either by a solvothermal method83 or by a polyol-mediated wet chemistry method.84,85 When used as the photoanode material for DSSCs, monodisperse ZnO spheres with diameters of ∼300 nm showed a conversion efficiency of ∼3.5% with a Jsc of ∼10.9 mA cm−2, extraordinarily higher than those obtained using a commercial ZnO nanoparticle based photoanode (η of 0.60% and Jsc of ∼1.65 mA cm−2).83 It was also found that the polydisperse spheres with a large average size or broad size distribution could result in better light-harvesting efficiency due to a better light scattering ability. This effect can be confirmed by gradually decreasing the size of the spheres to the primary nanoparticles: the conversion efficiency of the DSSC decreased accordingly. A conversion efficiency of as high as 5.4% was obtained for the optimized structure, as shown in Fig. 5c.84
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of a bi-functional hierarchical ZnO sphere consisting of densely packed nanoparticles; (b) SEM image of an individual ZnO sphere; (c) a comparison of the photovoltaic behaviors of different sized ZnO spheres: from sample 1 to sample 4, the spherical structure degraded gradually to smaller nanoparticles.84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
In addition to these bi-functional solid sub-micron spheres, the hollow ZnO structure was also found to be helpful to the light scattering. We prepared hierarchical ZnO hollow spheres (400–500 nm in diameter) consisting of ZnO nanoparticles with a diameter of ∼15 nm via a simple ultrasonic method (Fig. 6a).86 Although a smaller amount of dye was anchored on the ZnO hollow spheres based photoanode (6.81 × 10−8 mol cm−2) than on that of the nanoparticle based one (9.78 × 10−8 mol cm−2), an obviously higher Jsc and Voc was obtained for the former, indicating that the strong light scattering effect of the larger sized hollow spheres, confirmed by the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum (Fig. 6b), contributed a lot to the light collection efficiency. As a result, a conversion efficiency of 4.33% was obtained which was 38.8% higher than that of the nanoparticle photoelectrode (3.12%). Very recently, a multi-shelled ZnO hollow microsphere based photoanode was designed to harvest incident solar light effectively through scattering and multiple reflection inside hierarchically structured spheres.87Fig. 6c shows the evolution process of a ZnO hollow microsphere synthesized by using carbonaceous microspheres as templates and a simple programmable heating process to control the multi-shelled structure. Hollow microspheres with different numbers of defined shells and inter-shell spacings were achieved. Due to a greater ability to reflect and scatter light, increasingly higher light capture efficiency was observed with an increasing number of shells. Moreover, manipulating the inter-shell spaces, hence making alterations to the surface area and ability to reflect light, could also remarkably improve the energy conversion efficiency, as shown in Fig. 6d. Overall energy conversion efficiency of up to 5.6% was achieved from solar cells based on quadruple-shelled hollow microspheres with close double shells in the exterior and double-shelled hollow cores.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of hierarchical ZnO hollow spheres prepared via ultrasound irradiation; (b) comparison of diffuse reflectance spectra of a ZnO hollow sphere film (i) and a nanoparticle film (ii) with adsorbed N719 dye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Evolution process of the family of multi-shelled ZnO hollow microspheres; (d) diffuse reflectance spectra of ZnO hollow spheres with (a–d) single to quadruple shells and equal adjacent spaces and (e–f) double to quadruple shells and unequal adjacent spaces. Inset shows the light reflection ability of quadruple-shelled hollow microspheres with close double shells in the exterior and double-shelled hollow cores. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3.3. Hierarchical SnO2 architectures
SnO2 is another wide band gap semiconductor with similar photoelectrical properties to TiO2. Similar to ZnO, SnO2 possesses a higher electron mobility (∼100 to 200 cm2 V−1 s−1) than TiO2, suggesting a faster diffusion transport of photo-induced electrons in SnO2.88 However, the photovoltaic performance of a SnO2-based DSSC is lower than TiO2 because a faster electron recombination reaction exists in a SnO2-based photoanode, which results from a 300 mV positive shift in the conduction band/trap states relative to TiO2, and because of a poor uptake of dye with acidic carboxyl groups due to a lower isoelectric point (iep at pH 4–5) than anatase TiO2 (at pH 6–7).89,90 The conversion efficiency of a SnO2 photoanode has been reported to be about 5%.91–94 Efforts to enhance the photochemical properties were carried out by designing the SnO2 structure, such as nanoparticles, nanotubes, nanorods or hierarchical structured photoanodes,91–93 and/or by coating a thin layer of an isolating oxide onto the surface, such as TiO2, ZnO, Al2O3, or MgO, to restrain the photo-induced electron combination reaction.94–96 Similar to TiO2 and ZnO, bi-functional photoelectrode material consisting of TiO2-coated multi-layered SnO2 hollow microspheres (TiO2–SnO2 MHSs) was reported to improve the photoconversion efficiency.93 Since the multi-layered hollow spherical structure with hollow SnO2 microspheres coated with a ∼50 nm thick TiO2 shell could multiply, reflect and scatter the incident solar light, a higher Jsc was obtained for the TiO2–SnO2 MHSs photoanode. Moreover, the introduced TiO2 shell can work as an effective blocking layer to suppress the interfacial electron combination on the surface of the SnO2 MHSs, and as a result the TiO2–SnO2 MHSs showed a Voc of 664 mV, which was considerably higher than that of the single SnO2 MHSs (398 mV) and was a little lower than that of TiO2 nanoparticles (697 mV). A high conversion efficiency of ∼5.65% was obtained.
Recently, a hierarchical SnO2 octahedron was designed by our group to enhance the light harvesting performance of the photoanode, which exhibited a photo-conversion efficiency of as high as 6.40%.97 Different from the hydrothermal method used by Cao et al. for the assembly of ZnO spheres, a rapid and facile sonochemical process was used to synthesize the uniform hierarchical SnO2 octahedra of ∼1.0 μm in size consisting of SnO2 nanoparticles of ∼30 nm (Fig. 7a). Detailed investigation of the morphological evolution of the products revealed that the growth of the octahedra involved an assembly process from nanoparticles into nanorods, dendritic structures, irregular Sn6O4(OH)4 octahedra, and finally smooth Sn6O4(OH)4 octahedra with prolonged sonication reaction time, and a subsequent calcination process led to the formation of a hierarchical SnO2 structure (Fig. 7c). Although both the surface area and adsorbed dye amounts of the hierarchical SnO2 octahedra were smaller than those of the SnO2 nanoparticles, the hierarchical SnO2 octahedra based photoanode showed a higher power conversion efficiency of 3.17% due to the strong light scattering effect of octahedral structure (Fig. 7b and d) which contributed to the effective light absorption of the dyes. The conversion efficiency can be improved to 6.40% by further treating the octahedra based photoanode with TiCl4 to form a TiO2 blocking layer for retarding the recombination of electrons, as shown in Fig. 7b. This result is among the highest of the SnO2 based DSSCs reported so far.
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of hierarchical SnO2 octahedra; (b) J–V curves of octahedral SnO2 based DSSCs with different film thicknesses, (a) is without TiCl4 treatment and (b) is without both TiO2 blocking layer and TiCl4 treatment; (c) schematic illustration of the morphology evolution of a SnO2 octahedron. (d) Scheme of SnO2 octahedra based photoanode showing enhanced light-scattering effect. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
4. Hierarchical quasi-1D/1D micro-/nano-architectures
Since a large number of grain boundaries still exist in the nanoparticle based hierarchical spherical architectures, which are adverse for electron collection efficiency, assemblies of 1D nano-building blocks may offer new opportunities for better performance by providing enhanced electron transport properties. Compared to nanoparticles, a 1D nanostructure based photoanode can also result in higher light scattering efficiency. The reported hierarchical structures include quasi-1D spherical structures which were assembled by 1D building blocks, and 1D architectures which were formed by growing secondary structures on the surface of backbone 1D materials.
4.1. Quasi-1D hierarchical TiO2 architectures
Recently, we reported a hierarchical TiO2 microsphere (HTS) consisting of nanorods and nanoparticles as a tri-functional photoelectrode for DSSCs, which can provide both faster electron transport and longer electron lifetime.98 The anatase hierarchical TiO2 microspheres were fabricated via a simple acid-thermal method using titanium n-butoxide and acetic acid as the precursor solution. Fig. 8a shows the fresh product after the acid-thermal process which exhibits a spherical morphology with a diameter of around 2.1 μm consisting of nanoribbons. A subsequent calcination process converted it to an assembly of single crystalline anatase TiO2 nanorods and nanoparticles due to the decomposition of Ti-complex intermediates (Fig. 8b–d). The TiO2 microsphere based DSSC exhibited a high power conversion efficiency of 10.34% with a Jsc of as high as 18.78 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 826 mV, which was much higher than the P25 nanoparticle photoelectrode (8.1%). The great improvements in photovoltaic performance for hierarchical TiO2 sphere was mainly ascribed to three reasons: (i) the considerable surface area provided by the compactly assembled nanorods and nanoparticles, with which a dye adsorption of 149.85 nmol cm−2 was obtained by HTS, higher than that of the P25 nanoparticle photoanode (121.14 nmol cm−2); (ii) a higher light scattering ability provided by the micrometer sized spherical structure; (iii) faster electron transport rate and slower recombination rate due to the quasi-1D structure of building units. Fig. 8e and f show the electron transport time (τd) and electron lifetime (τr) of the cells as a function of light intensity. It is clear that the τd of the HTS based photoanode was shorter than that of P25. In fact, the electron diffusion coefficient [Dn = d2/(4 × τd), d is film thickness] of the HTS based cell was a factor of 2 larger than that of the P25 cell, confirming a faster electron transport rate in the HTS based film. Meanwhile, the HTS film exhibited a longer electron lifetime than the P25 film. As a result, a higher electron collection efficiency (ηcc = 1 − τd/τr) of 97.6% (under 90 W m−2) was obtained for the former, which was 6.6% larger than that of the P25 film. These results indicate that the hierarchical quasi-1D nanoarchitecture can overcome both the kinetic and light-scattering limitations of nanoparticles, and also the surface area limitation of one-dimensional nanostructures, making it a good candidate for photoanode materials for efficient DSSCs. Detailed studies of structure evolution during the reaction revealed that the growth mechanism of the HTS involved the formation of nanoparticles (denoted as NP) first, which subsequently assembled into nanofiber bundles (NF, after calcination) with prolonging of reaction time, and finally further assembled into the hierarchical microspheres (HTS). Further increasing the reaction time would result in bigger hierarchical ellipsoid spheres (ETS), as shown in Fig. 9a-l.99 A comprehensive study of the photovoltaic performance of the four different structured photoanodes revealed that the IPCE and hence Jsc increased from NP, NF cells to the HTS cell (Fig. 9n), which could be ascribed to the increasingly enhanced light harvesting efficiency (more and more dye loading and superior light scattering) and charge collection efficiency (faster and faster electron transport and slower charge recombination). Although the dye uploading of NF was lower than that of ETS due to its lower specific surface area, the much stronger light scattering effect of the former due to its larger size in the long axis direction compensated for this negative effect on the light harvesting to some extent. Consequently, a slightly higher Jsc and hence a higher η was obtained for NF cells. These results fully prove the significant influences of the morphology of the photoanode on the photovoltaic performance of DSSC devices.
 Fig. 8  SEM and TEM images of hierarchical anatase TiO2 microsphere (HTS) via acid thermal reaction before (a) and after (b–d) calcination. Electron transport time as a function of incident light intensity (e) and lifetime as a function of open-circuit voltage (f) for DSSCs based on Film I (P25), II (P25 + HTS), and III (HTS). Reproduced from ref. 98. 
 Fig. 9  SEM, TEM, HRTEM and SAED images of nanoparticles (NP, a–c), nanofibers (NF, d–f), hierarchical TiO2 spheres (HTS, g–i) and ellipsoid TiO2 spheres (ETS, j–l) prepared under different reaction conditions and calcined at 500 °C for 3 h. (m) Schematic illustration of photoanodes based on different structured materials; (n) IPCE spectra of DSSCs based on different structured photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 99. 
4.2. 1D hierarchical TiO2 architectures
To overcome the kinetic limitations of nanoparticles and the poor surface areas of 1D nanostructures, the formation of a hybrid structure via mixing them together was expected to provide both high surface area and fast electron transport, which should contribute to a better performance.100–103 However, a large number of grain boundaries still existed between them if no further treatments were conducted to enhance the connection between them, leading to serious electron recombination. A hierarchical composite architecture with TiO2 nanoparticles “growing” closely on 1D nanostructures provides opportunities to reduce the surface defects, so as to achieve better electron collection efficiency.104–108 Generally, the electron transport in this composite structure was slower than in the original 1D structures, such as nanorods, nanowires and nanotubes, because the existence of nanoparticles inevitably increases the electron transport distance. In addition, the grain boundaries may also enhance the probability of electron recombination. In some cases, a longer lifetime for a nanorod–nanoparticle composite structure compared to the original nanorod was obtained; this may be attributed to the particulate “shell” formed around the nanorod retarding the recombination of injected electrons in the nanorod with the outer electrolyte. Although the grain boundaries inside the particulate “shell” provide additional recombination opportunity, the first condition seemed to win out in the competition.109,110 Gao and co-workers reported an efficient 1D hierarchical TiO2 photoanode prepared by coating protonated TiO2 nanoparticles onto the surface of protonated nanorods (Fig. 10a and b) and its dynamic reaction kinetics were examined.105 The formation of the hierarchical structure involved the fabrication of TiO2 nanorods first, and a subsequent growth process of nanoparticles on their surface by using an aqueous solution of TiOSO4 as the precursor. In addition to the large specific surface area arising from the hierarchical composite structure, a lower charge-transfer resistance at photoanode–electrolyte interfaces, relatively fast electron transport and long electron lifetime were obtained for this hierarchical TiO2 photoanode, by avoiding the formation of a large number of grain boundaries. Fig. 10c and d show the calcination temperature dependent electron lifetime (τn) and transport time (τd) of nanoparticle, nanorod and hierarchical TiO2 based cells, respectively. It is obvious that the electron transport in hierarchical TiO2 is similar to in the nanorods but much faster than in the nanoparticle cell. The electron lifetime in hierarchical TiO2 is also much longer than in the nanoparticle cell, but is shorter than the original nanorod cell. Moreover, increasing the calcination temperature would lead to tight attachment of nanoparticles on the surface of the nanorods and fewer surface defects (Fig. 10a and b); as a result, longer τn and shorter τd were obtained for hierarchical TiO2 obtained at a higher temperature. Recently, Lin and co-workers reported a hierarchically structured TiO2 nanotube array based photoanode prepared by the facile electrochemical anodization fabrication of nanotubes first and then the hydrothermal growth of nanoparticles on their surface to create advantageous roughness, so as to increase the dye loading.106 When used as the photoanode of a DSSC, an exciting conversion efficiency of 7.2% in a back illumination mode can be obtained, which was higher than the sample treated by common TiCl4 solution. Qiu and co-workers reported a facile template method to grow long vertically aligned TiO2 nanotube arrays on FTO glass and a secondary hydrothermal coating process was employed to grow coarse particulate surface structure, leading to the formation of hierarchical double-shell TiO2 nanotube arrays with great surface roughness.111 The dye loading of the hierarchical nanotube arrays was typically 50% more than the original nanotube arrays, resulting in remarkably improved Jsc in DSSCs. Therefore, conversion efficiency of 5.74% (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2) was obtained by the photoanode based on a 20 μm thick hierarchical nanotube array, which is much higher than that of the original nanotube array (4.40%).
 Fig. 10  TEM images of the 1D hierarchical TiO2 calcined at (a) 500 °C and (b) 700 °C respectively; (c) schematic diagram of a 1D hierarchical TiO2 based DSSC, showing the processes involved in current generation. (d) Electron lifetime and (e) electron transport time for DSSCs based on 1D hierarchical TiO2, nanorods, and nanoparticles, respectively, as a function of the calcination temperature. Reproduced from ref. 105. 
Apart from nanoparticles, quasi-1D or 1D nano-branches such as nanorods and nanowires can also act as efficient decoration of the original 1D nanostructures for a larger amount of dye loading as well as faster electron transport.112–114 However, few reports were concerned with this issue for TiO2 photoanodes and the conversion efficiency was low, possibly due to the severe fabrication conditions. Fonzo and co-workers reported a forest-like film consisting of individual, high aspect ratio, tree-like nanostructures which not only improved the charge diffusion length but also provided a high surface area as well as light scattering, leading to an exciting photovoltaic performance.112 This special hierarchically structured film assembled from nanocrystalline particles of anatase TiO2 was directly grown on FTO at room temperature by a pulsed laser deposition (PLD) method, and the morphology was similar to a tree with branches of 500 nm in length and 40 nm in diameter (Fig. 11a and b). When used as the photoanode for a DSSC, the film of 7 μm thick exhibited a conversion efficiency of 4.9% in combination with C101 dye under 1 sun, and the electron lifetime was more than 1 order of magnitude higher than the reference TiO2 nanocrystalline film. What's more, as shown in Fig. 11b, the apparent tri-iodide diffusion coefficient D(I3−) in the nanoforest based cell was evaluated to be 3.3 × 10−8 cm2 s−1, two orders of magnitude higher than the nanocrystalline film, indicating that this hierarchical structure did not hinder the mass transport of tri-iodide in solvent-free ionic liquid electrolyte. However, the performance of this film was limited by the poor thickness and relatively complicated fabrication process. Very recently, we prepared hierarchical anatase TiO2 nanowire arrays consisting of long single crystalline nanowire trunks and short single crystalline nanorod branches on a Ti-foil substrate via a two-step hydrothermal growth process. By using transparent PEDOT/ITO-PET as the counter electrode, a flexible DSSC was assembled. It was very exciting that the all-flexible cell showed comparable photovoltaic performance to the rigid Pt/FTO-glass cell, and a conversion efficiency of as high as 4.32% was obtained.114
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of TiO2 nanoforest films prepared by a PLD method deposited at 40 Pa (left) and cross sections of films deposited at 20 and 40 Pa (right); (b) TEM image of a single tree and (c) high-resolution TEM image of a cluster of nanoparticles; (d) evolution of current density as a function of t−1/2 obtained by the chrono-amperometric method under 1 sun.112 Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic structure (top) and SEM image of ZnO NW forest (bottom) prepared via a hydrothermal method; (f) J–V curves of DSSC with ZnO NW forest. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
4.3. 1D ZnO hierarchical architectures
In fact, the hierarchically structured ZnO has been much more extensively studied then TiO2 due to the relatively mild fabrication conditions and the ease of controlling the fine structure. Similar to TiO2, ZnO nanoforest photoanodes consisting of high density, long branched “tree-like” hierarchical ZnO nanowires (NW) was also designed.115 As shown in Fig. 11e, this composite structure, which was prepared via a lengthwise growth (LG) process to grow the long NW trunks first, and a subsequent branched growth (BG) process to grow branches using an aqueous solution containing zinc nitrate hydrate, hexamethylenetetramine (HMTA) and polyethylenimine (PEI) as the precursor, is quite similar to the tree. The length of backbone and branch could be controlled conveniently by repeating the hydrothermal treatment. The nanoforest structure exhibited 350–500% improvement in overall energy conversion efficiency compared to that of the single backbone NW of the same length. A significant increase in conversion efficiency was observed by increasing the density of the hierarchical branches of the ZnO NW nanoforest, and the highest efficiency was 2.63% (Fig. 11f). It was believed that the enhanced surface area of the highly branched structure enabled higher dye loading and light harvesting, and the reduced charge recombination by directly conducting along the crystalline ZnO nanotree branches contributed to the better performance. In addition to the nanoforest structured photoanode, other hierarchically branched ZnO nanostructures, such as nanoflower,116 nanocactus,117 highly branched nanorod–nanowire,118–122 nanotetrapod structure,123 dendrite-like structure124 and others,125 were also designed for efficient DSSCs (Fig. 12). Because the 1D backbone and branches could provide fast electron transport and the branches could increase the specific surface area of films, resulting in a high dye loading, an improved photovoltaic performance superior than that of bare ZnO was usually achieved. For example, a DSSC based on a ZnO-nanoflower film fabricated by a hydrothermal method showed an energy conversion efficiency of 1.9%, much higher than that of the primary nanorod film (1.0%);116 the ZnO nanocactus array constructed by chemical bath deposition of secondary nanostructure, including shells and spines, on the surface of the original NW exhibited a conversion efficiency of 3.32%, nearly 2 times higher than that of the original ZnO NW;117 the highly branched ZnO nanowire array based DSSC exhibited a short-circuit current density and an energy conversion efficiency of 4.27 mA cm−2 and 1.51%, respectively, twice as high as those of the bare ZnO nanowire, due to the direct electron transport path in the photoanode films.119 In addition, ZnO nanotetrapods prepared by a metal vapor transport-oxidation method was reported to be a good candidate for effective photoanode materials.123 As shown in Fig. 12e, the arm of the nanotetrapods was 500–800 nm in length and 40 nm in mean diameter, which can connect well with neighboring structures, forming a photoanode film with a decent roughness factor of up to 400. Furthermore, the tetrapod structure can provide multiple pathways for electron transport (Fig. 12f), which in combination with the high surface area contributed to a conversion efficiency of up to 3.27% with a film thickness of 31.2 μm.
 Fig. 12  SEM and TEM image of (a) ZnO nanoflower, reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics. (b) Branched ZnO nanowires, scale bar: 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) Branched ZnO nanorod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (d) Branched structure of ZnO nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. (e) ZnO nanotetrapods and (f) schematic map showing a possible electron transport pathway across the nanotetrapod film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
Except for the 1D backbone, ZnO nanosheet backbone based hierarchical photoanodes were also reported to achieve high photovoltaic performance, since a nanosheet with a high degree of crystallinity can usually offer a fast electron transport rate.126–129 Xu and co-workers reported a hierarchical ZnO structure consisting of a framework of ZnO nanosheet arrays with dense nanowires grown on their surfaces (Fig. 13).126 The hierarchical nanowire-nanosheet structure based DSSCs exhibited a power conversion efficiency of 4.8%, twice as high as that of the DSSC constructed using a bare ZnO nanosheet array photoanode. This was due to the enlarged surface area and enhanced light scattering behavior of the hierarchical photoanode. Similar efforts were executed to fabricate ZnO nanorods on nanosheet structures,128 nanorods on nanorods or nanoneedles on nanoneedles,129 ZnO nanoflowers consisting of nanosheets,127etc. to achieve a better DSSC performance. In addition, a porous hierarchical disk-like ZnO based photoanode was also fabricated and a power conversion efficiency of 2.49% and an IPCE of 60% at 520 nm were obtained under 1 sun illumination.130 All of these results indicate that a high surface area is a key factor in obtaining a high power conversion efficiency; moreover, a highly crystalline 1D or even 2D nanostructure can retard the electron recombination effectively which is helpful in improving the photovoltaic performance. Very recently, a novel ZnO rod-in-tube nano-architecture has been prepared via a two step process including the initial growth of nanorod arrays by a hydrothermal process and a subsequent template-growth of the rod-in-tube structure by an ultrasonication irradiation process.131 Interestingly, the as-prepared ZnO rod-in-tube arrays were assembled by the self-stacking of hexagonal ZnO nano-rings along the 〈001〉 orientation of the nanorod templates. Since the tubular shell consisting of stacking nano-rings could enhance the specific surface area of the as-prepared film, a power conversion efficiency 75% higher than that of the single ZnO nanorod photoelectrode was achieved due to the larger amount of dye anchored on the rod-in-tube film photoanode.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of hierarchical ZnO nanowire on nanosheet architecture based DSSCs; (b) comparison of J–V curves of primary ZnO nanosheet arrays and hierarchical ZnO based DSSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
5. Summary and outlook
In conclusion, hierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanode materials consisting of small “building blocks”, such as nanoparticles and 1D nanostructures, show great capability in enhancing the performance of DSSCs. Detailed study of the properties of differently structured photoanodes including mesoporous spherical assemblies, hollow spheres, nanoforests, and highly branched 1D architectures, etc., reveals that the better photovoltaic performance can be mainly attributed to the enhanced light harvesting ability and fast electron transport of hierarchically structured films. The hierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanode can provide a relatively high surface area for abundant dye loading; moreover, the strong light scattering effect resulting from their large size also contributes to the high light collection efficiency. Furthermore, the well connected crystalline structure, especially the 1D building blocks, can enhance the electron transport to achieve high electron collection efficiency. It is emphasized that the good connection between either primary nanoparticles or secondary assembly structures is very important for photo-generated electron transport. This can be achieved by designing the structure of the photoanode, or by executing post treatment such as sintering and surface modification. Furthermore, the bigger pores inside the hierarchically structured films are also beneficial to the permeation and diffusion of electrolyte in the photoanode, forming good ohmic contact. These features make the hierarchically structured nanostructures good candidates for developing low cost, highly efficient DSSCs.
In order to enhance the stability of DSSCs for practical application, quasi-solid state and all solid state DSSCs were highly pursued in recent years. Since the quasi-solid/solid state electrolytes are too viscous to penetrate into the densely packed photoanode films, bigger interior pores are usually needed.132,133 The hierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanodes feature a multi-scale inner porous structure, and thus should be good candidates for efficient quasi-solid or solid state DSSCs. Some works concerning the hierarchical nanostructure based quasi-solid state DSSC have been done in recent years,69,70,117 but the results were not as satisfactory as expected. Studies on the fabrication of highly conductive quasi-solid/solid state electrolytes, optimizing the photoanode structure and the sensitizer, and a comprehensive study of the interfacial properties of photoanode–dye–electrolyte interfaces should be done to obtain stable and efficient DSSCs.
The most intensively studied photoanode material so far is nanostructured TiO2 with low energy (101) surfaces exposed. It has been illustrated that the high energy surfaces such as anatase (001) surfaces are liable to adsorb the COOH group, forming a strong bond with dye molecules.134–136 Therefore, photoanode materials with more high energy faces exposed should contribute to the high photovoltaic performance of DSSCs.137,138 It was reported that the overall energy conversion efficiency of a DSSC based on anatase TiO2 nanosheet-based hierarchical sub-micrometer spheres with over 90% (001) facets exposed could be up to 7.51%, which was 43% higher than the standard commercial P25 film (5.26%).136 However, the synthesis of nanostructures with exposed high energy facets is somewhat difficult, and many efforts are needed to further improve their performance.
As an alternative to ruthenium complexes or organic dyes, semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) sensitizers have recently attracted immense interest due to their unique photophysical and photochemical properties.139 The theoretical maximum efficiency of a QD-sensitized solar cell (QDSSC) is much higher than that of ruthenium complex or organic dye based solar cells, which gives it great potential in achieving a breakthrough in the energy conversion efficiency. Since the size of QDs is much greater than that of dye molecules, more spaces in the photoanode film are needed to achieve sufficient QDs loading. Therefore, the traditional nanoporous nanoparticle based films should not be suitable to perform this role because their pore size may be too small. With regard to the multi-scale porous structure and high porosity of hierarchically micro/nanostructured photoanodes, they are considered as appropriate candidates for constructing efficient QDSSCs. However, little work concerning this issue has been reported. Recently, we prepared a CdS/CdSe QDs co-sensitized photoanode using hierarchical TiO2 microspheres as the electrode material, with which a high coverage of QDs on the TiO2 surface was obtained. The dynamic study revealed that the quasi-1D nanostructure of TiO2 played an important role in speeding up the electron transport and enhancing electron collection efficiency, hence a power conversion efficiency of as high as 4.81% was obtained.140 These results suggest the developing potential of hierarchically structured photoanode materials in QDSSCs, and further research is required in this field. In short, although many constructive efforts have been made to design novel hierarchical structures so as to achieve excellent photovoltaic performance, work is still lacking for a breakthrough in the energy conversion efficiency and the development of stable DSSCs for practical applications, which should be the biggest challenge but also the biggest opportunity in the development of DSSCs.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the 973 Program (2012CB821701) and NSF Projects (21121061, 20873183, 21173272, 201103236 and U0934003) of China, the Program for New Century Excellent Talents in University (NCET-11-0533), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation funded project (Grant no. 20100480050, 201104374) and Research Fund for the Doctoral Program of Higher Education (20100171110014, 20110171120026).
Notes and references
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. C. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Chapin, C. S. Fuller and G. L. Pearson, J. Appl. Phys., 1954, 25, 676 CAS .
D. E. Carlson and C. R. Wronski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1976, 28, 671 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rech and H. Wagner, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1999, 69, 155 Search PubMed .
P. Sana, J. Salami and A. Rohatgi, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1993, 40, 1461 Search PubMed .
A. Rohatgi, S. Narasimha, S. Kamra and C. P. Khattak, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 1996, 17, 401 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Bertness, S. R. Kurtz, D. J. Friedman, A. E. Kibbler, C. Kramer and J. M. Olson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Afzaal and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1597 RSC .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924 CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, S. Rühle and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 91 CrossRef CAS .
P. Roy, D. Kim, K. Lee, E. Spiecker and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 45 RSC .
G. K. Mor, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, K. Shankar and C. A. Grimes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 2011 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6769 RSC .
R. Jose, V. Thavasi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2009, 92, 289 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, T. Kida, M. Akiyama, K. Inoue, S. Tsunematsu, K. Yao, H. Noma and E. Abe, Electrochem. Commun., 2003, 5, 369 CrossRef CAS .
R. Knödler, J. Sopka, F. Harbach and H. W. Grünling, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1993, 30, 277 CrossRef .
K. Srikanth, M. M. Rahman, H. Tanaka, K. M. Krishna, T. Soga, M. K. Mishra, T. Jimbo and M. Umeno, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 171 CrossRef CAS .
C. Natarajan and G. Nogami, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1547 CAS .
J. Yamamoto, A. Tan, R. Shiratsuchi, S. Hayase, C. R. Chenthamarakshan and K. Rajeshwar, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1823 Search PubMed .
D. Cahen, G. Hodes, M. Grätzel, J. F. Guillemoles and I. Riess, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2053 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hore, E. Palomares, H. Smit, N. J. Bakker, P. Comte, P. Liska, K. R. Thampi, J. M. Kroon, A. Hinsch and J. R. Durrant, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 412 RSC .
T. P. Chou, Q. Zhang, B. Russo, G. E. Fryxell and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6296 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J. E. Moser and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13280 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Peter, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630 RSC .
J. van de Lagemaat, N. G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2044 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson and R. E. Chandler, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1181 CrossRef CAS .
M. Law, L. E. Greene, J. C. Johnson, R. Saykally and P. D. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 455 CrossRef CAS .
L. Forro, O. Chauvet, D. Emin, L. Zuppiroli, H. Berger and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 633 CrossRef CAS .
T. Oekermann, D. Zhang, T. Yoshida and H. Minoura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 2227 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Fisher, L. M. Peter, E. A. Ponomarev, A. B. Walker and K. G. U. Wijayantha, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 949 CrossRef .
S. Nakade, M. Matsuda, S. Kambe, Y. Saito, T. Kitamura, T. Sakata, Y. Wada, H. Mori and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 10004 CrossRef CAS .
D.-B. Kuang, S. Ito, B. Wenger, C. Klein, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4146 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. G. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ito, P. Chen, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska, P. Péchy and M. Grätzel, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 603 CAS .
S. Hore, C. Vetter, R. Kern, H. Smit and A. Hinsch, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 1176 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Yu, Y. J. Kim, H. J. Kim, C. Lee and W. I. Lee, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 532 RSC .
J. Yu, Q. Li and Z. Shu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6293 CrossRef .
X. Wu, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3565 RSC .
S.-H. Han, S. Lee, H. Shin and H. Suk Jung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 546 Search PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Tao, D. T. Wang, Y. Z. Zheng and J. F. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qu, W. Zhou, K. Pan, C. G. Tian, Z. Y. Ren, Y. Z. Dong and H. G. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 9205 RSC .
Q. Zheng, H. Kang, J. Yun, J. Lee, J. H. Park and S. Baik, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5088 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, N. R. Neale, A. Miedaner and A. J. Frank, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 69 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. Mor, K. Shankar, M. Paulose, O. K. Varghese and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2005, 6, 215 .
J. R. Jennings, A. Ghicov, L. M. Peter, P. Schmuki and A. B. Walker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohsaki, N. Masaki, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada, T. Okamoto, T. Sekino, K. Niihara and S. Yanagida, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 4157 RSC .
S. H. Kang, S. H. Choi, M. S. Kang, J. Y. Kim, H. S. Kim, T. Hyeon and Y. E. Sung, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 54 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paulose, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, G. K. Mor, B. Hardin and C. A. Grimes, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 1446 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, A. Ghicov, S. P. Albu and P. Schmuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16454 CrossRef CAS .
M. Adachi, Y. Murata, J. Takao, J. Jiu, M. Sakamoto and F. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 14943 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, K. Shankar, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose, T. J. Latempa and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3781 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gong, C. A. Grimes, O. K. Varghese, W. C. Hu, R. S. Singh, Z. Chen and E. C. Dickey, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 3331 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. F. Martinson, M. S. Goes, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, M. J. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4015 CrossRef CAS .
J. Conradt, J. Sartor, C. Thiele, F. Maier-Flaig, J. Fallert, H. Kalt, R. Schneider, M. Fotouhi, P. Pfundstein, V. Zibat and D. Gerthsen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3539 CrossRef CAS .
E. Galoppini, J. Rochford, H. Chen, G. Saraf, Y. Lu, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16159 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Xu, P. Shin, L. L. Cao and D. Gao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 125 CrossRef .
B.-X. Lei, J.-Y. Liao, R. Zhang, J. Wang, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15228 CAS .
C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8122 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Koo, Y. J. Kim, Y. H. Lee, W. I. Lee, K. Kim and N. G. Park, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 195 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Kim, M. H. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. Lim, Y. S. Choi, N. G. Park, K. Kim and W. I. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3668 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Chen, F. Z. Huang, Y. B. Cheng and R. A. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2206 CrossRef CAS .
W.-G. Yang, F.-R. Wan, Q.-W. Chen, J.-J. Li and D.-S. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2870 RSC .
J.-Y. Liao, H.-P. Lin, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 1627 RSC .
B. C. O'Regan, J. R. Durrant, P. M. Sommeling and N. J. Bakker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14001 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yan, Y. Qiu, W. Chen, M. Zhang and S. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2168 RSC .
J. H. Park, S. Y. Jung, R. Kim, N.-G. Park, J. Kim and S.-S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2009, 194, 574 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Fan and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhai, Y. Zhao, X. L. Sheng, L. Jiang, C. H. Yang, Z. W. Sun, Y. F. Li and D. B. Zhu, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 856 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Park, D. K. Roh, R. Patel, E. Kim, D. Y. Ryu and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8521 RSC .
J. T. Park, J. H. Koh, J. A. Seo and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17872 RSC .
C.-Y. Cho and J. H. Moon, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2971 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmed, A. Du Pasquier, D. P. Birnie and T. Asefa, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3002 Search PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang, C. S. Dandeneau, X. Y. Zhou and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4087 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Chou, Q. Zhang, G. E. Fryxell and G. Z. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2588 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402 CrossRef CAS .
Q. F. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1654 CrossRef CAS .
C.-X. He, B.-X. Lei, Y.-F. Wang, C.-Y. Su, Y.-P. Fang and D.-B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8757 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dong, X. Lai, J. E. Halpert, N. Yang, L. Yi, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Z. Tang and L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1046 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jarzebski and J. Marton, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 299C .
A. N. M. Green, E. Palomares, S. A. Haque, J. M. Kroon and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12525 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fukai, Y. Kondo, S. Mori and E. Suzuki, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1439 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy and J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22032 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gubbala, V. Chakrapani, V. Kumar and M. K. Sunkara, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2411 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qian, P. Liu, Y. Xiao, Y. Jiang, Y. Cao, X. Ai and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2002, 14, 2930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chappel, S. G. Chen and A. Zaban, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3336 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith and C. Ducati, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1259 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Wang, J.-W. Li, Y.-F. Hou, X.-Y. Yu, C.-Y. Su and D.-B. Kuang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8620 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Liao, B.-X. Lei, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4079 RSC .
J.-Y. Liao, J.-W. He, H. Xu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 7910 RSC .
J. G. Chen, C. Y. Chen, C. G. Wu, C. Y. Lin, Y. H. Lai, C. C. Wang, H. W. Chen, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7201 RSC .
B. Tan and Y. Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 15932 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Yoon, S. R. Jang, R. Vittal, J. Lee and K. J. Kim, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 180, 184 CrossRef CAS .
P. Joshi, L. Zhang, D. Davoux, Z. Zhu, D. Galipeau, H. Fong and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1507 RSC .
A. Z. Hu, C. X. Cheng, X. Li, J. A. Jiang, R. M. Ding, J. H. Zhu, F. Wu, J. P. Liu and X. T. Huang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 6, 91 Search PubMed .
J. Qu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 2003 RSC .
M. Ye, X. Xin, C. Lin and Z. Lin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3214 CrossRef CAS .
V.-M. Guerin and T. Pauporte, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2971 RSC .
C. Yip, C. Mak, A. Djurišić, Y. Hsu and W. Chan, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2008, 92, 589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong, L. Wang, R. Gao, B. Ma and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19389 RSC .
W.-P. Liao and J.-J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9255 RSC .
F. W. Zhuge, J. J. Qiu, X. M. Li, X. D. Gao, X. Y. Gan and W. D. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1330 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, F. Di Fonzo, A. L. Bassi, C. S. Casari, V. Russo, G. Divitini, C. Ducati, C. E. Bottani, P. Comte and M. Graetzel, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2562 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shao, J. Sun, L. Gao, S. Yang and J. Luo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6824 RSC .
J.-Y. Liao, B.-X. Lei, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5750 RSC .
S. H. Ko, D. Lee, H. W. Kang, K. H. Nam, J. Y. Yeo, S. J. Hong, C. P. Grigoropoulos and H. J. Sung, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo, D. L. Kwong and J. X. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263501 CrossRef .
C.-T. Wu and J.-J. Wu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13605 RSC .
H. Dong, L. Wang, R. Gao, B. Ma and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 19389 RSC .
H. M. Cheng, W. H. Chiu, C. H. Lee, S. Y. Tsai and W. F. Hsieh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Fu, J. Sun, Y. Xie, J. Liu, H. L. Wang and X. W. Du, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 166, 196 Search PubMed .
D. I. Suh, S. Y. Lee, T. H. Kim, J. M. Chun, E. K. Suh, O. B. Yang and S. K. Lee, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 442, 348 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Zhu, G. H. Zhou, H. Y. Ding, A. H. Liu, Y. B. Lin and N. L. Li, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2010, 45, 1075 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, H. F. Zhang, I. M. Hsing and S. H. Yang, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1057 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Baxter and E. S. Aydil, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 607 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haller, T. Suguira, D. Lincot and T. Yoshida, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2010, 207, 2252 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, M. Dai, Y. N. Lu and L. T. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 2776 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cheng, Y. Shi, C. Zhu, W. Li, L. Wang, K. K. Fung and N. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10631 RSC .
J. Qiu, M. Guo and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2358 Search PubMed .
L. Xu, Q. Chen and D. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11560 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Wang, C. M. L. Wu, W. S. Cheung, L. B. Luo, Z. B. He, G. D. Yuan, W. J. Zhang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 13157 Search PubMed .
Q.-P. Luo, B.-X. Lei, X.-Y. Yu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8709 RSC .
J. N. de Freitas, A. F. Nogueira and M. A. De Paoli, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5279 RSC .
B. Li, L. Wang, B. Kang, P. Wang and Y. Qiu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 549 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chen, Y. L. Tan, C. M. Li, Y. L. Cheah, D. Y. Luan, S. Madhavi, F. Y. C. Boey, L. A. Archer and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6124 CrossRef CAS .
W. Q. Fang, J. Z. Zhou, J. A. Liu, Z. G. Chen, C. Yang, C. H. Sun, G. R. Qian, J. Zou, S. Z. Qiao and H. G. Yang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1423 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Yang, J. M. Li, Y. L. Wang, F. Zhu, W. M. Shi, F. R. Wan and D. S. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 1809 RSC .
H. Zhang, Y. Han, X. Liu, P. Liu, H. Yu, S. Zhang, X. Yao and H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8395 RSC .
J. Yu, J. Fan and K. Lv, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2144 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737 CAS .
X.-Y. Yu, J.-Y. Liao, K.-Q. Qiu, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9494 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Hong-Yan Chen	Hong-Yan Chen is currently a Postdoctoral Fellow working with Prof. Cheng-Yong Su at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her BS degree in 2005 from Northeast Normal University, and her Ph.D in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry Chinese Academy of Sciences (ICCAS) in 2010, under the supervision of Prof. Lei Jiang. Her current research interest lies in functional micro/nanostructured electrode and electrolyte materials for low-cost, quasi-solid/solid state dye-sensitized solar cells.
Dai-Bin Kuang	Dai-Bin Kuang has been a full professor at Sun Yat-sen University since 2008. He received his Ph.D in physical chemistry in 2003 from Sun Yat-sen University under the supervision of Prof. Han-Qin Liu. He joined Prof. Markus Antonietti’s group at the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Germany) in 2003, and moved to EPFL (Switzerland) in 2004 working with Prof. Michael Grätzel as a Postdoctoral Fellow. He has authored and co-authored over 50 refereed publications, which have been cited more than 2000 times by other scientists. His current research interest is in the field of new energy materials, focusing on functional nanostructured materials and their applications in photocatalysis and solar cells (such as dye-sensitized solar cells and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells).
Cheng-Yong Su	Cheng-Yong Su is the Cheung Kong Professor of Chemistry at Sun Yat-sen University. He obtained his Ph.D in 1996 from Lanzhou University under the supervision of Prof. Min-Yu Tan. He joined Prof. Wolfgang Kaim's group at Stuttgart University as an Alexander von Humboldt Research Fellow in 2001, and moved to the University of South Carolina in 2002 working with Prof. Hans-Conrad zur Loye as a Postdoctoral Fellow. He is the author or co-author of over 200 peer-reviewed publications and 6 book chapters. His current research interest is in the field of supramolecular coordination chemistry and materials, focusing on clean environment and energy related metal–organic materials, catalysis and nanoscience.

 	Fig. 1  Sketch map of the structure and working mechanism of a DSSC device.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The structure of a nanocrystalline based photoanode with a random electron transport path; (b) the bi-layer structured photoanode with effective light scattering by the top layer of bigger particles; (c) the structure and electron transport path of a 1D nanowire array and (d) hierarchically structured 1D nanowire array photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of TiO2 spheres with well-defined (a) and deformed structure (b) showing nanoporous assemblies of TiO2 nanoparticles, scale bar: 200 nm (inset: 20 nm); (c) diagram for the electrolyte diffusion through the external (A) and internal (B) pores in the nanoporous TiO2 spheres film; (d) current density–voltage (J–V) curves of solar cells with well-defined spheres (DSC-1), deformed spheres (DSC-2), and commercial nanoparticles (DSC-3). Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of hierarchical yolk–shell TiO2 beads prepared via a hydrothermal process at 160 °C (Sample-160); comparison of transport time and lifetime constant (c), electron diffusion coefficient (d) as a function of incident light intensity in P25 and yolk–shell TiO2 beads based DSSCs. Reproduced from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of a bi-functional hierarchical ZnO sphere consisting of densely packed nanoparticles; (b) SEM image of an individual ZnO sphere; (c) a comparison of the photovoltaic behaviors of different sized ZnO spheres: from sample 1 to sample 4, the spherical structure degraded gradually to smaller nanoparticles.84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2008 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image of hierarchical ZnO hollow spheres prepared via ultrasound irradiation; (b) comparison of diffuse reflectance spectra of a ZnO hollow sphere film (i) and a nanoparticle film (ii) with adsorbed N719 dye. Reproduced with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Evolution process of the family of multi-shelled ZnO hollow microspheres; (d) diffuse reflectance spectra of ZnO hollow spheres with (a–d) single to quadruple shells and equal adjacent spaces and (e–f) double to quadruple shells and unequal adjacent spaces. Inset shows the light reflection ability of quadruple-shelled hollow microspheres with close double shells in the exterior and double-shelled hollow cores. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM images of hierarchical SnO2 octahedra; (b) J–V curves of octahedral SnO2 based DSSCs with different film thicknesses, (a) is without TiCl4 treatment and (b) is without both TiO2 blocking layer and TiCl4 treatment; (c) schematic illustration of the morphology evolution of a SnO2 octahedron. (d) Scheme of SnO2 octahedra based photoanode showing enhanced light-scattering effect. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM and TEM images of hierarchical anatase TiO2 microsphere (HTS) via acid thermal reaction before (a) and after (b–d) calcination. Electron transport time as a function of incident light intensity (e) and lifetime as a function of open-circuit voltage (f) for DSSCs based on Film I (P25), II (P25 + HTS), and III (HTS). Reproduced from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM, TEM, HRTEM and SAED images of nanoparticles (NP, a–c), nanofibers (NF, d–f), hierarchical TiO2 spheres (HTS, g–i) and ellipsoid TiO2 spheres (ETS, j–l) prepared under different reaction conditions and calcined at 500 °C for 3 h. (m) Schematic illustration of photoanodes based on different structured materials; (n) IPCE spectra of DSSCs based on different structured photoanodes. Reproduced from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images of the 1D hierarchical TiO2 calcined at (a) 500 °C and (b) 700 °C respectively; (c) schematic diagram of a 1D hierarchical TiO2 based DSSC, showing the processes involved in current generation. (d) Electron lifetime and (e) electron transport time for DSSCs based on 1D hierarchical TiO2, nanorods, and nanoparticles, respectively, as a function of the calcination temperature. Reproduced from ref. 105.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM image of TiO2 nanoforest films prepared by a PLD method deposited at 40 Pa (left) and cross sections of films deposited at 20 and 40 Pa (right); (b) TEM image of a single tree and (c) high-resolution TEM image of a cluster of nanoparticles; (d) evolution of current density as a function of t−1/2 obtained by the chrono-amperometric method under 1 sun.112 Reproduced with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic structure (top) and SEM image of ZnO NW forest (bottom) prepared via a hydrothermal method; (f) J–V curves of DSSC with ZnO NW forest. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM and TEM image of (a) ZnO nanoflower, reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2007, American Institute of Physics. (b) Branched ZnO nanowires, scale bar: 1 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2008 American Chemical Society. (c) Branched ZnO nanorod. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. (d) Branched structure of ZnO nanowire. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2007 Elsevier. (e) ZnO nanotetrapods and (f) schematic map showing a possible electron transport pathway across the nanotetrapod film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of hierarchical ZnO nanowire on nanosheet architecture based DSSCs; (b) comparison of J–V curves of primary ZnO nanosheet arrays and hierarchical ZnO based DSSCs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
