Hybrid superlattices of two-dimensional materials and organics  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS00148A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS00148A
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6866-6883Hybrid superlattices of two-dimensional materials and organics

        
          
            Yujia 
            Huang†
, 
      
        
          
            Jia 
            Liang†
, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Wang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shujia 
            Yin
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wangyang 
            Fu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Chunlei 
            Wan
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of New Ceramics and Fine Processing, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, Beijing, 100084, China. E-mail: hongweizhu@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn; wancl@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Received 
      25th May 2020
    First published on 2nd September 2020AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) materials have received extensive interest due to their exceptional properties. It is strongly required to assemble 2D materials in bulk quantities for macroscopic applications, but this is highly restricted by the aggregation of 2D materials. Constructing three-dimensional (3D) hybrid superlattices of alternating 2D materials and organic molecule layers provides a new path to access the exceptional properties of 2D materials in bulk quantities. In this tutorial review, the emerging concept of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices is systematically illustrated. The abundant compositions and the various structures of inorganic and organic sublattices in hybrid superlattices are presented, followed by a summary of the chemical interactions between them. Many facile techniques have been developed for hybrid superlattices, enabling precise control of the structure. There are also various interesting mechanisms inside unique hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices that can help tune the properties, including electron transfer, quantum confinement, interlayer coupling, multiple interface effects, etc. The rich chemistry and abundant mechanisms of these hybrid superlattices can enhance the performance beyond the reach of existing materials, and provide new opportunities in various applications, including rechargeable batteries, catalysis, thermoelectrics, advanced electronics, superconductors, optoelectronics, etc.
Yujia Huang
Yujia Huang received her bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in 2016 and later obtained her master's degree from Tokyo Institute of Technology. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on the synthesis and multifunctional applications of composites and hybrid superlattice materials based on graphene and other two-dimensional materials.
Jia Liang
Jia Liang received her bachelor's degree from Tsinghua University in 2018. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on flexible thermoelectric generators based on inorganic/organic hybrid superlattices and other high-performing inorganic thermoelectric materials.
Chen Wang
Chen Wang received his BS degree in physics from China and PhD degree in materials science and engineering (2016) from University of California Los Angeles, USA. He has rich post-doctoral and various research experiences in low-dimensional materials and devices, especially layered materials hetero-integration and electronic devices. His current research interests focus on nanomaterials integration and electronic device design for next generation highly-integrated functional nanosystems.
Shujia Yin
Shujia Yin received her bachelor's degree from Tsinghua University in 2017. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on the synthesis and thermoelectric properties of inorganic/organic hybrid superlattices based on transition metal dichalcogenides.
Wangyang Fu
Wangyang Fu received his PhD degree from Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. During his study in Europe, he was also the recipient of a Veni grant (NWO, Netherlands), an APM grant (SNF, Switzerland), and a Humboldt grant (AvH, Germany) for young researchers. Currently he is a tenure-track associate professor in Tsinghua University. Dr Fu's research interests focus on the development of nanoelectronic biochemical sensors based on 2D materials.
Hongwei Zhu
Hongwei Zhu is a Professor of School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree in Mechanical Engineering (1998) and PhD degree in Materials Processing Engineering (2003) from Tsinghua University. After Post Doc studies in Japan and the USA, he began his independent career as a faculty member at Tsinghua University (2008–present). His current research interests involve structural design and engineering of nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.
Chunlei Wan
Chunlei Wan is currently an Associate Professor of School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree (2003) and PhD degree (2008) in Tsinghua University. He did postdoc research in Prof. Kunihito Koumoto's group at Nagoya University of Japan and became an assistant professor there. He joined Tsinghua University in 2015. His research interests include hybrid thermoelectric materials, thermal barrier coating materials and structural ceramics.

Key learning points
(1) Compositions and structures of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(2) Synthesis strategies of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(3) Unique mechanisms of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(4) Applications of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.

1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) materials have attracted increasing attention in recent years due to superior functionalities, such as mechanical, electrical, magnetic, and optical properties. There is a large family of these materials, including graphene,1,2 transition metal dichalcogenides,3,4 black phosphorus,5 MXenes,6–9 and the traditional clays2 and double hydroxides10 with a layered structure. It is strongly required to assemble these 2D materials into three-dimensional (3D) bulk architectures for macroscopic applications, in which the exceptional properties of individual 2D sheets could be fully accessed. However, 2D materials have a strong tendency to restack or aggregate, leading to weakening or even disappearance of the 2D characteristics.1
Intercalation of alkali metal atoms into 2D materials has become an approach to combine the 2D materials into a bulk structure, but the electronic structure is seriously altered, and the materials show poor stability in air.11 There are also many reports to alternatively assemble different 2D materials into a superlattice based on the van der Waals heterostructures. Through the rational design of components, 2D state of electrons, phonons, and photons can be established in the superlattice and enable new devices with outstanding performance. However, it becomes increasingly difficult to form a high-order superlattice structure, due to the processing incompatibility between the dissimilar 2D materials.5
Another choice would be incorporating organic molecules into the structure of 2D materials, forming a new hybrid superlattice. The difference between the two sublattices in both structures and characteristics is maximized, which can enrich the library of superlattices based on 2D materials. These superlattices allow a large number of combinations of the inorganic and organic sublattices and high flexibility in structure configurations. The interlayer spacing and arrangement of the components in superlattices are thus highly tunable through the composition adjustment and synthetic conditions.5 The opening of the interlayer space not only prevents the agglomeration of 2D materials, but also offers channels for mass transfer.7 It can also enable precise dimensionality transition by decoupling the interaction between neighboring inorganic layers, leading to the emergence of 2D states and characteristics, as well as the quantum confinement effect. Taking the hybrid CdSe/monoamine as an example, the unique quantum well superlattice structure of alternating ultrathin [CdSe] layers and insulating monoamine layers has brought about a prominent 2D exciton effect.12 The introduction of inorganic/organic interfaces and the synergistic effect between inorganic and organic sublattices could further add an unprecedentedly new dimension to manipulate 2D materials, and bring new opportunities in widespread applications, including electrochemical energy storage,4,13–16 energy conversion,1,10,17–24 advanced electronics,5,25–27 superconductors,28–31 electromagnetic interference (EMI) shielding and absorption,6,8,32 optics,27,33–39 and strengthening and toughening.2,6
Although the concept of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices appeared a few years ago, and was rapidly developed, a comprehensive review has not yet been conducted. With the purpose to convey the new concept and stimulate future research work, we summarize the recent development of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices. This review starts with an introduction of the compositions, structures, chemical interactions, and special characterization techniques of the hybrid superlattices. Then, the synthesis strategies, including both the top-down and bottom-up approaches, are introduced. The unique mechanisms of these hybrid superlattices are also discussed. Finally, the applications brought by the abundant composition and rich chemistry of these hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices are covered.
2. Compositions and structures of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices
There are some important elements involved in hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices, including inorganic and organic sublattices, the structure configurations of these sublattices, and the manner of how these interact with each other to form the superlattice structure. In order to illustrate these basic concepts, the compositions, structure configurations, chemical interactions, and special characterization techniques are briefly introduced.
2.1 Compositions

2.1.1 The inorganic sublattices. 
The inorganic sublattices cover a broad range of materials, mainly layered materials with weak interlayer van der Waals interaction or exchangeable interlayer ions. The layered structure can either accommodate organic molecules into the interlayer space, or be exfoliated into nanosheets and reassembled with organic molecules to form hybrid superlattices. The compositions and characteristics of these inorganic materials are summarized in Fig. 1f–j.
 Fig. 1  The schematic structures of (a–e) organic and (f–j) inorganic components in hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices, including organometallic coordination complexes ((a) FePc), quaternary ammonium salts ((b) CTAB and TBAB), alkylamines ((c) HMDA), cyclic compounds ((d) AN), polymers ((e) PEG), (f) TMDs, (g) black phosphorus, (h) MXenes, (i) layered oxysalts (VOPO4·2H2O), and (j) LDHs. 
(1) Layered transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs, Fig. 1f) can be expressed as MX2 [MX2 = X–M–X], where M refers to a transition metal atom, and X refers to a chalcogen atom, such as S, Se, or Te. Regardless of whether it is semiconducting MoS21,4,5,19,27,34,40 and WSe2,3 semi-metallic MoTe2 and WTe2,28 metallic TiS2,14,17,21–23 or superconducting TaS2,32 all these have homologous superlattices through the intercalation of foreign organics into these typical quasi-2D materials. In addition, other layered chalcogenides, such as SnSe2,30,41 CdSe,12 FeSe,29,31 Bi2Se3,24 and Cr2Ge2Te6,42 are also common inorganic components.
(2) Graphene2 is a monolayer of hexagonally arranged sp2-bonded carbon atoms. As its mono elemental analogues, black phosphorus (Fig. 1g),5 borophene, silicene, and germanene are also potential ingredients in the formation of hybrid superlattices through opening the interlayer space of the multilayers. Transition metal carbides or nitrides (MXenes, Fig. 1h) are a novel 2D material with a metallic backbone, and this can be described using the formula, Mn+1XnTx (n: 1–3), where M refers to an early transition metal, X is carbon or nitrogen, and T represents a surface terminal group (–O, –F and –OH).7 The functional groups not only act as functional active sites, but also enable the interaction with organic species. Therefore, MXene-based inorganic/organic superlattices are emerging.6–9
(3) In clays2 with a self-assembled nanolaminate structure, the naturally intercalated cations between the aluminosilicate sheets can be exchanged with cationic organics to form “organoclays”. Layered double hydroxides (LDHs, Fig. 1j) are expressed by the formula, [M2+1−xM3+x(OH)2]x+[An−x/n]x−·mH2O (M2+ and M3+ are divalent and trivalent metal cations [Mg2+, Co2+, Ni2+, and Al3+], respectively; An− is an anion for charge balance), and are a kind of ionic material, where exchangeable anions are distributed in interlayer galleries between positively charged backbones made of metal hydroxide octahedral layers. Through the anion-exchange process or self-assembly of delaminated 2D unilamellar nanosheets, LDHs/organic superlattices can be formed.10
(4) Since the interlayer interaction can easily break, layered oxysalts (Fig. 1i) have a long history as the intercalation hosts in organic-intercalated inorganic superlattices, such as triethylene glycol (TEG)-, tetrahydrofuran (THF)-,13 ferrocene-43 or phenylamine (PA)-15 intercalated VOPO4, and zincophosphate/organic33 superlattices.
(5) Layered halide perovskites,37,38 such as PbIn35,44,45 and PbBrn,39 have also exhibited a great potential in inorganic/organic superlattices for optoelectronic applications.
(6) The choices of inorganic sublattices can also go beyond the layered materials. Through atomic/molecular-layer-deposition (ALD/MLD) or other novel technologies, some metal oxide/organic superlattices can be fabricated, such as ZnO-,18,20,26,46 TiO2-,18,25,47 Fe2O3-,36 and Al2O3-organic25 superlattices.


2.1.2 The organic sublattices. 
For the other building block of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices, there are almost infinite choices in the organic sublattices. According to the structural characteristics, these organics (Fig. 1a–e) can be divided into three groups: small metal-free organic molecules, organometallic coordination complexes, and polymers.
(1) Small metal-free organics, especially those with N-containing groups, have been commonly adopted for superlattices due to their potential to interact with inorganic layers. For example, the lone pair electrons of nitrogen atoms in the –NH2 group can enable the formation of chemical bonds from organic amines,32 such as methylamine (MeNH2),3 hexylamine (HA),17,21–24,32 ethylenediamine,48 hexamethylenediamine (HMDA) (Fig. 1c),29 tris(2aminoethyl)amine (TAEA),7 PA,15 1-naphthylamine (AN, Fig. 1d), and 1,8-bis(dimethylamino)naphthalene (BDMAN).40 These organics have tunable chain lengths with varying carbon atom numbers, and different shapes, including ammonium (methyl-, butyl- or phenylethyl-ammonium, MA,39n-BA,44 or PEA45), quaternary ammonium salts5,9,27,31,42 (Fig. 1b) with a linear backbone (lauryl-, cetyl-, or octadecyl-trimethylammonium bromide, LTAB, CTAB, or OTAB), or branched chains (tetra-butyl, tetra-heptyl, or tetra-decyl-ammonium bromide, TBAB, THAB, or TDAB), benzene,36,46,47 and other cyclic compounds.15,33–35,40 Among these organics, some molecules have relatively larger sizes, such as spiropyran,34 1,4-di(pyridine-4-yl)benzene (bpyb),33 and tetraethyl benzidine (EtDAB).35 In addition to the molecular form,22,32 some organics can also enter superlattices in the form of ions.17,21,23,24 These variable sizes, shapes and forms are critical parameters to tune the compositions, interlayer distance, and electron-transfer effect in superlattices.5,27 In addition, polar organic solvents, such as N-methyl formamide (NMF),32N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF),45 dimethylsulphoxide (DMSO),21 TEG, THF,13,16 and some ionic liquids,14,28 have also been used as organic components.
(2) Some transition metal atoms or ions are coordinate bonded with organic ligands in organometallic complexes, such as ferrocene,43 cobaltocene (Co(Cp)2),30,41 iron porphyrin (Fe-PP),10 and Fe-phthalocyanine (FePc)19 (Fig. 1a). The presence of metals leads to the stronger electron-transfer ability to interact with inorganic sublattices, when compared to that of metal-free organics.10,19
(3) It is possible to introduce large polymers, such as polyethylene oxide (PEO),4 polyvinyl alcohol (PVA),2 poly(diallyl dimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA),1 polyaniline (PANI),8 cellulose,6 and polyethylene glycol (PEG, Fig. 1e),17 into the hybrid superlattices, due to the functional groups for interaction with inorganics. An effective approach is to attract monomers into the inorganic interlayers by electrostatic adsorption, and induce in situ polymerization.8 The direct interaction with polymers and inorganics via van der Waals forces2 and hydrogen bonds,6 or the reduced intercalation energy by intercalant substitutions in the pre-expanded inorganic interlayers17 all contribute to the formation of inorganic/polymer superlattices.
Organic molecules can also be decorated to show various properties, which can further enrich the functionalities of the hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices. This includes polar molecules or polymers with dipole moments,17,21,22 doped polymers with tunable electrical conductivity, hydrophobic molecules,37 magnetic molecules, photochromic molecules,34etc.

2.2 Structure configurations
Compared with the conventional superlattices, the hybrid superlattices show high flexibility in structure configurations, enabling high tunability in their properties. This includes the structure of the inorganic sublattice and the various structural arrangements of organic sublattices that can be mediated by compositions and synthesis conditions.

2.2.1 Structure of the inorganic sublattices. 
For hybrid superlattices, inorganic sublattices are typically composed of isolated inorganic monolayers with a similar structure of their bulk counterparts. However, in some cases, the interaction between inorganic and organic sublattices leads to structural disorder, or even phase transition of the inorganic sublattices. For example, the interlayer interaction in FeSe/organic superlattices resulted in the structural distortion of the FeSe plane, which showed a wave-like shape in the transmission electron microscope (TEM) images.31 In the hybrid MoS2/cetyltrimethylammonium (CTA) superlattice, the charge transfer from CTA+ cations induced the 2H → 1T phase transition of MoS2, in which the semi-metallic 1T phase is not stable in the monolayer form.27 In addition, the individual inorganic layers might display turbostratic disorder (a random rotation or translation along the stacking direction), which causes asymmetric peak broadening in the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns.40 The inorganic sublattices can also be comprised of two or more stacking inorganic layers, and form a high-stage structure, rendering more tunability for material dimensionality and properties. The high-stage structure can be established by the compositional design. As shown in Fig. 2, the number of inorganic layers n of the (n-BA)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 superlattice was tunable, leading to a transition of material dimensionality.44 The high-stage hybrid superlattice can also be realized by tuning the synthesis conditions in the process of ALD/MLD,47 redox intercalation,43 and electrochemical intercalation.5
 Fig. 2  The structure transition of the (n-BA)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 superlattice with a reduced number of inorganic layers (a determined structure). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2020 Springer Nature Limited. 


2.2.2 Arrangement of the organic sublattices. 
Until now, the precise structure of the organic sublattices has not been fully understood, which may be sensitive to many conditions, such as the carrier density of the inorganic layers, the pH value, the temperature, etc.40 In addition, many processes, such as leaching components from the layers, incorporation of extra solvent molecules, or counterions,17,23,24 further complicate the issue. There have already been some hypothetical models to describe the structure of the organic sublattices, such as interfingered monolayer structures or paraffin-like bilayer structures, which are also reproduced by theoretical modeling.19,29,43 However, these models should be further experimentally verified for each hybrid superlattice. The structure of the hybrid MoS2/BDMAN superlattice was refined with XRD data, and the BDMAN molecules showed a monolayer structure with ordered packing (Fig. 3a1), which was also convinced by the high resolution TEM (HRTEM) observation.40 In contrast, in the hybrid MoS2/AN superlattice, a bilayer of AN molecules was formed (Fig. 3a2). In many other cases, the orientation of the organic molecules may not be so ordered and cannot be clearly resolved. Burrard-Lucas et al. used neutron powder diffraction (NPD) to determine the crystal structure of Lix(ND2)y(ND3)1−yFe2Se2.49 Similarly, the C2H8N2 molecules were determined to be located at a 4h general site but with four possible diagonal orientations (Fig. 3b), indicating the orientation disorder of the C2H8N2 molecules in the FeSe-based superlattice.48 The scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) observation directly showed that the monolayer Co(Cp)2 molecules confined in two SnSe2 layers were parallel to the basal plane and connected head to head in a short-range but showed long-range disorder (Fig. 3c).30 In most cases, the hybrid superlattices may not hold a perfect 3D periodic structure. Instead, organic molecules in superlattices could be ordered within the local area due to their mutual interaction,17,21,22 but their spatial distribution and orientation could be random or disordered in the whole structure.
 Fig. 3  The arrangement of the organic sublattices. The approximate positions of organic molecules in (a1) β-(BDMAN)0.2MoS2 and (a2) γ-(AN)0.4MoS2 from the refinement against XRD patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b1) The resolved crystal structure of the Li0.31(3)(C2H8N2)0.52(7)Fe2.03(2)Se2 superlattice at 295 K, with the orientational disorder of the C2H8N2 molecules, as determined by the refinement against NPD patterns, and (b2) the simplified crystal structure that omitted the superimposed orientational disorder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2019 American Physical Society. (c) The STM image and schematic structure of the Co(Cp)2 molecules in the SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) The TEM images and the speculated structures of restacked MoS2 with less PEO (peo1-MoS2) and more PEO (peo2-MoS2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) The XRD patterns and the schematic structures of TiS2 single crystal, HA-intercalated TiS2, and TiS2(HA)x(NMF)y foil. The parallel orientation of HA molecules in the foil was determined by polarized Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (f) The speculated structures of Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2−zSe2 before and after post-annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref.29, Copyright 2016 The Physical Society of Japan. 
In most research, the arrangement of organic molecules was reasonably speculated based on the hypothetical model according to the sizes of organic molecules, interlayer spacing, and compositions.5,29 For example, as the parallel configuration is stable for linear polymers with ultra-long molecule chains, the MoS2/PEO superlattice can show either a monolayer or bilayer structure according to the interlayer spacing and the width of the PEO chain (Fig. 3d).4 In the Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2−zSe2 superlattice, with the increase in post-annealing temperature, the originally vertical HMDA molecules might de-intercalate and gradually incline towards the FeSe layers, as demonstrated by the decreased interlayer spacing of Fig. 3f.29 Similarly, after the co-intercalation of solvent molecules and post-annealing of the TiS2/HA superlattice, the organic layers might change from a paraffin-like bilayer to a parallel monolayer structure (Fig. 3e).22 These speculated structures certainly need further experimental verification.
Nevertheless, the organic molecules in the organic sublattices with various structures can contribute to the tunable superlattice structure, especially the interlayer distance. A higher organic/inorganic ratio may result in thicker organic layers and thus large interlayer spacing of inorganic layers.47 In the aforementioned MoS2/PEO superlattice (Fig. 3d), the interlayer distance expanded from 0.62 nm to 1.22 nm, with less PEO, and 1.40 nm, with more PEO.4 The molecule size of organics is another key factor.13 The interlayer distances of MoS2–TBAB, THAB, and TDAB superlattices were 19.15 Å, 23.48 Å, and 24.60 Å, respectively.5 Since these three intercalants had four equivalent substitutional groups, the effect of orientation was negligible, and different molecule sizes dominated the interlayer spacing.

2.3 Chemical interactions between inorganic and organic sublattices
There are various interactions between inorganic and organic sublattices, which not only contribute to the integrity of the superlattice structure, but also result in distinct physical and chemical properties. These typical chemical interactions include the following:

2.3.1 Electrostatic interactions. 
Electrostatic interactions inside superlattices are usually the Coulomb forces that exist between oppositely charged inorganic and organic layers. These inorganic layers have a localized charge or externally injected electrons, which allows ionized organic molecules to be attracted into the layer gap through electrostatic interaction, and stabilized through charge balance, such as in the case of the TiS2[(HA)x(DMSO)y] superlattice (Fig. 4a).23
 Fig. 4  The chemical interactions in superlattices. The schematic illustration of (a) the electrostatic interaction in the TiS2[(HA)x(DMSO)y] superlattice with a speculated structure (Reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright 2017 The Author(s)), (b) the determined structure of Co(Cp)2 molecules confined in the van der Waals gap of SnSe2 layers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society), (c) the speculated structure of hydrogen bonds between CNFs and Ti3C2Tx (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (d) the speculated structure of coordination bonds formed in the [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice (Reproduced with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry). 


2.3.2 Hydrogen bonds. 
It is possible to form hydrogen bonds between the covalent-bonded hydrogen atoms of organics and atoms (O, F, and N) with a large electronegativity in inorganics. For example, the –OH groups of TEG were hydrogen bonded with the O atoms of VOPO4.13 The hydrogen bonds could also be formed between the surface functional groups on the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets and the –OH groups of cellulose nanofibers (CNFs) (Fig. 4c), leading to the closely packed lamellar superlattice structure with improved mechanical properties.6


2.3.3 van der Waals forces. 
The van der Waals force is the weak electrostatic interaction between permanent dipoles or instantaneous dipoles, which is not negligible in inorganic/organic superlattices.19 For instance, Co(Cp)2 molecules were intercalated into the van der Waals gap of SnSe2 layers, and coupled with SnSe2 layers by weak van der Waals interactions (Fig. 4b).30 Furthermore, the van der Waals force that connects the pristine 2D inorganic layers has a significant influence on the interlayer interaction of inorganic/organic superlattices.


2.3.4 Coordinate bonds. 
Coordinate bonds are special covalent bonds that comprise a pair of electrons from a ligand and a vacant orbital from a central ion. The [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice is a kind of coordination-driven superlattice architecture.33 The supramolecular zincophosphate was coordinatively linked by the bridging bpyb to form a pillar-layered structure, as shown in Fig. 4d. When coordinating to Zn2+, the coordinative competition between neutral bpyb and negative-charged phosphate ions was quite weak, promoting the formation of a layered superlattice hybrid structure.

2.4 Special characterization techniques of hybrid superlattices
In order to investigate superlattice architectures in detail, it is strongly required to develop special techniques for the characterization of the compositions, orientation of organic molecules, electronic and atomic structures, etc.

2.4.1 
            In situ and real-time techniques. 

In situ and real-time techniques offer unique insights into the fabrication process, structure evolution, and performance changes of superlattices. For instance, in situ Raman spectra were used to monitor the electrochemical intercalation process of black phosphorus/organic superlattice due to the dependence of the optical bandgap on the layer number.5 In addition, in situ TEM equipped with electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) can detect the changes in the structure and electronic properties such as the loss of organic species. After annealing the tetrabutylammonium ion (TBA+) and H2O co-intercalated Mo2TiC2Tx superlattice at 500 °C, the changes in these element contents were demonstrated by EELS. Due to the loss of TBA+, the electrical resistance exhibited a 69% decrease.9


2.4.2 Polarized Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. 
The orientation of organic molecules inside inorganic/organic superlattices can be speculated by polarized FT-IR spectroscopy, according to the principle that the optical transition moment of organic molecules changes with the polarized incident light. As shown in Fig. 5a, by varying the angle (α) of incident IR, the orientation of the molecular axis (γ) can be derived from the intensity ratio of the horizontally and vertically polarized incident light, taking the angle of the optical transition moment to the molecular axis (θ) into account at the same time. Wan et al. applied polarized FT-IR spectroscopy based on the C–H stretching band, in order to calculate the orientation (tilt angle of the molecule to the substrate normal) of organic molecules inside the TiS2/HA superlattice.17
 Fig. 5  The special characterization techniques of superlattices. (a) The schematic illustration of the polarized FT-IR measurement and (b) the 1D electron density map that determined the structure of the TiS2(HA)0.097(PEG)0.028 superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) The XANES and the determined structure of Co(Cp)2 molecules in the SnSe2 interlayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


2.4.3 X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy. 
Angle-resolved X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) is another effective method to investigate the orientation of organic molecules based on the angle-dependent absorption of the X-ray through the characteristic organic groups. As shown in Fig. 5c, when the angle between the basal plane and incident light increased, the π* resonance was enhanced, while the σ* resonances weakened, indicating that the cyclopentadienyl rings of Co(Cp)2 molecules were perpendicular to the basal plane of SnSe2 layers.30 Furthermore, XANES can reveal the interactions between inorganic and organic species. For the VOPO4-based superlattices, organic molecules with stronger electronegativity contributed to the higher oxidation state of vanadium, which caused the edge shift and pre-edge feature in vanadium K-edge XANES.13


2.4.4 One-dimensional electron density map. 
The XRD spectrum reflects the electronic and atomic structure information of the materials. Therefore, derived from the XRD peak intensities corrected for Lorentz-polarization effects, the one-dimensional (1D) electron density could be obtained from the Miller index, the interlayer distances of the inorganic frame, and the structure factors, which provides the structure information of inorganic layers. As shown in Fig. 5b, the 1D electron density map along the c-axis of the TiS2(HA)0.097(PEG)0.028 superlattice was presented with three clear sharp peaks near the origin, which corresponded to the triple atomic planes of the TiS2 frame. The small centrosymmetric peaks belonged to organic molecules, verifying the superlattice spatial structure.17 This method was also helpful to describe the Bi2Se3/HA superlattice structure.24

3. Synthesis strategies
In order to attain the inorganic/organic superlattices, several advanced synthesis strategies have been developed, which are summarized into two strategies in the present review. In the bottom-up approaches, the monolayers or nanosheets of materials, or the precursors transform and assemble into superlattices. The superlattices can also be directly derived from a 3D bulk through intercalation or spontaneous reaction. During this process, the 3D structure evolves to an alternately parallel 2D lattice, which can be vividly described as the top-down strategy.
3.1 Bottom-up approaches

3.1.1 Atomic/molecular layer deposition. 
ALD/MLD is an effective process for forming single-phase layer-by-layer hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.18,20,25,36,46,47 ALD/MLD can directly deposit successive inorganic/organic layers linked by strong chemical bonds, and precisely control the layer spacing and composition via a self-limiting gas-surface reaction. The process cycle of ALD/MLD is the sequential pulse of an inorganic metal precursor, inert gas, organic precursor with at least two functional groups, and inert gas (Fig. 6a).46 In the synthesis of the ZnO/benzene superlattice, the superlattice was deposited on a silicon substrate at 220 °C using the layer-engineered technique of ALD/MLD.46 The diethyl zinc and water, as the inorganic precursor, were both maintained at room temperature in the ALD cycles, while hydroquinone (HQ), as the organic precursor, was heated to 120 °C in the MLD cycles. By altering the respective cycles of ALD and MLD, the layer thickness can be accurately determined. The superlattice film thickness is based on the total number of cycles. Similar methods were applied to fabricate the TiO2/benzene superlattice with a significantly reduced thermal conductivity,47 and the Fe2O3/benzene superlattice with a tunable bandgap energy for optoelectronics.36
 Fig. 6  The schematic illustration of synthesis strategies, including bottom-up approaches: (a) ALD/MLD process (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society), (b) the LBL self-assembly of LDH/Fe-PP superlattice on the indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass substrates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry), and (c) the antisolvent-assisted synthesis of (MAI)x(PEAI)yPbI2(DMF)z superlattice in DMF/DMSO solvent (Reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim); and top-down approaches: (d) the electrochemical intercalation and solvent exchange process of the TiS2-based superlattice. The superlattice structure was determined by the high-angle annular dark-field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) observation, the polarized FT-IR spectroscopy, and the interlayer spacing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 


3.1.2 Self-assembly technique. 
Due to electrostatic attraction, oppositely charged inorganic and organic species may self-assemble to build an alternately stacked superlattice structure.1,6,7,10,22,32 The solution-phase direct assembly is the most facile and economical self-assembly approach, during which the inorganic and organic suspensions are directly mixed to form the flocculation of the superlattice powder. For instance, the anionic graphene oxide was first modified by cationic PDDA to avoid the repulsion between same charged components. Then, the negative charged MoS2 and positively charged PDDA-graphene nanosheet suspensions were mixed, leading to the immediate flocculation of alternately stacked MoS2 and PDDA-graphene layers.1 This simple technique enables large-scale production, but agglomerations may occur, with a resultant inhomogeneous structure.
The layer-by-layer (LBL) self-assembly can precisely control the composition, structure, and morphology of the superlattices. It is a periodic process performed through the alternate deposition of oppositely charged building blocks on a substrate (Fig. 6b).10 Similar to ALD/MLD, the thickness of LBL superlattices linearly increases with the deposition cycle number. There were two techniques involved in the LBL assembly of the Ti3C2Tx/TAEA superlattice.7 In the spin-assisted assembly, the treated substrates were repeatedly dipped into the TAEA solution, water, Ti3C2Tx dispersion, and water again by a robot. In the vacuum-assisted spray-LBL assembly, the same solutions were alternately sprayed on the substrate using the airbrushes, which enabled the coating of superlattices on various substrates, such as nonwovens and aerogels. Although LBL self-assembly allows the controlled fabrication of multilayer structures in the superlattices, time- and energy-consuming problems are inevitable during the cycle process.
The vacuum-assisted filtration or evaporation self-assembly method is effective for the preparation of superlattice foils without substrates, such as free-standing TaS2-,32 TiS2-,22 and MXenes-6 organic superlattice foils. The control of the filter paper or evaporation dish sizes makes it possible to produce large-area superlattice foils.32


3.1.3 Hydro/solvothermal reaction. 
The hydro/solvothermal method widely applied in the synthesis of 2D materials is novel for the fabrication of inorganic/organic superlattices.19,33 For example, in order to synthesize the MoS2/FePc superlattice, FePc and the precursor of MoS2, (NH4)2MoS4, were mixed and dissolved in DMF.19 Then, the reactant solution was transferred to an autoclave, and allowed to react at 200 °C for 12 hours. Finally, the FePc-intercalated MoS2 superlattice powder was collected after the reaction. The product phases, crystallinity, and morphology might be tunable by changing the reaction temperature, time, atmosphere, and reactant precursors. However, the detailed process for these hydro/solvothermal reactions in fabricating superlattice structures has rarely been studied.


3.1.4 Antisolvent diffusion method. 
The antisolvent diffusion method is a common approach to separate a single component as crystals, during which the target product is soluble in the main solvent but insoluble (or slightly soluble) in the antisolvent. This solubility difference of target crystals in two mutual soluble solvents can also be applied in inorganic/organic superlattices. As shown in Fig. 6c, first, the inorganic and organic components are dissolved in the main solvent as the starting precursor.45 Then, the antisolvent is added to promote the nucleation of the superlattice, which can grow with the evaporation of the mixed solvent. Using this method, Wang et al. fabricated the first lead-iodide superlattice, PbI2/EtDAB superlattice.35

3.2 Top-down approaches

3.2.1 Electrochemical intercalation. 
The electrochemical method can effectively intercalate organic molecules into inorganic frames through electron transfer, redox, and ion diffusion.5,17,21,23,27,28,42 For instance, when a weak constant current of 20–30 μA passed through the electrode for a calculated time, the FeSe single crystal, as the cathode, obtained the electrons and was reduced with the intercalation of TBA+ in the electrolyte, forming the (TBA)FeSe superlattice.31 The determined current and time helped to estimate the amount of charge transfer and intercalated ions. In addition, electrochemical intercalation can certainly be applied with a constant voltage. Under a constant voltage of about 1.8 V, and driven by the Coulomb forces, hexylammonium cations (HA+) were inserted between opening van der Waals gaps of negatively charged TiS2 layers, with part of Ti4+ reduced to Ti3+. Through the cation-dipole effect, the polar solvent DMSO in the electrolyte was co-intercalated, which surrounded the organic cations, forming the TiS2[(HA)x(DMSO)y] superlattice (Fig. 6d).21 The CTAB molecules were intercalated into black phosphorus under the sweep voltage from 0 V to 3 V.5 The intercalation current curve and its first derivative exhibited apparent stepwise reactions, which were partitioned into six regions: from bulk intercalation to few-layer (four-layer to ten-layer), trilayer, bilayer black phosphorus formation, and monolayer phosphorene molecular superlattice (MPMS) fabrication. This partitioned intercalation process revealed a staging evolution of inorganic layers, depending on the reaction voltage, indicating that superlattices with different inorganic arrangements could be produced under a controlled voltage, as mentioned in Section 2.2.2.
It is noteworthy that the electrochemical parameters vary with the sample dimension, morphology (sharp or rough edges), and design structure, and all these considerably affect the final superlattice structure. A fast scan or a very short step duration time may result in an incompletely intercalated structure, and an excessively large voltage scan step may cause sample cracking. An incorrect stop voltage would cause strongly mixed phases, especially during the intermediate states. Multiple scans with different parameters can gradually modify the superlattice structure to a relatively pure phase through slowly increasing the intercalation level. Furthermore, adopting a moderately increased environmental temperature can boost the intercalation efficiency. Electrochemical intercalation can always be combined with solution immersion, in order to exchange intercalants for optimized structures and performances.17,21


3.2.2 Chemical intercalation and substitutions. 
Analogously to the intercalation of alkali metal ions into some van der Waals crystals by simple solution immersion,11 some organic molecules can enter inorganic frames by diffusion from solutions driven by thermodynamics. For example, ferrocene can be inserted into layered VOPO4·2H2O with the assistance of polar solvents, such as acetone and 2-propanol.43 However, the combinations of reactive organic molecules and inorganic frameworks are rare due to the great total reaction energy. The intercalation of metal ions following multiple substitutions of intercalants, which requires less energy, offers a strategy to insert organics into inorganic crystals that cannot directly react by soaking in an organic solution. In order to establish the Bi2Se3-based inorganic/organic superlattice, Bi2Se3 was initially dipped in the n-butyllithium solution, during which the small and mobile Li+ opened the interlayer gap.24 Through further immersion in the NaNO3/DMSO solution, the interlayer Li+ was replaced by Na+. The DMSO molecules also entered the interlayers through the solvation effect, which further expanded the interlayer spacing. Finally, the Na+ was exchanged with HA+, and the target Bi2Se3HAxDMSOy superlattice was formed. The organic sublattice consisted of three parallel organic layers with the symmetric bilayer of HA+ and a middle layer of DMSO molecules, as demonstrated by the 1D electron density distribution map. Similarly, the Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2−zSe2 superlattice was fabricated by the immersion of FeSe powder into the solution of lithium metal dissolved in HMDA.29


3.2.3 Lewis acid–base neutralization reaction. 
The Lewis acid-base reaction is an important principle in the construction of inorganic/organic superlattices. Organic species, such as alkylamines with lone pair electrons in the nitrogen atoms, can donate electrons, and act as a Lewis base. Inorganic species, such as transition metal compounds with unfulfilled d orbitals, can accept electrons, and function as a Lewis acid. This Lewis acid–base neutralization reaction may occur spontaneously at room temperature or be accelerated by heating or mechanical grinding. For example, through the facile mechanical grinding of HA liquid and the TaS232 or TiS222 powder, the Lewis acid-base reaction occurred, leading to the formation of ionic chemical bonding in the superlattices. The superlattice powder can further self-assemble into thin foils with an alternatively stacked structure through the co-intercalation of the solvents and exfoliation of nanosheets.

4. Unique mechanisms in hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices
Due to the hybrid superlattice structure, there are unique mechanisms in the hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices that lead to superior properties.
4.1 Tunability of interlayer distance
As a unique characteristic of inorganic/organic superlattices, the organic layers effectively suppress the aggregation of 2D inorganic materials and open the interlayer space. Due to the pillaring effect, the small organic molecules help to construct the ordered dense packing superlattice structure without agglomerations of the inorganic layers,7 while large organic species can build the loosely stacked structure with a greatly expanded interlayer spacing.1 The control of the synthesis parameters can further adjust the interlayer spacing, as discussed in Section 2.2. This tunable interlayer distance can modulate the connectivity of the inorganic backbone, which affects the mechanical and electrical properties of superlattices.7 The opening interlayer channel also enables the explosion of active sites,1,10 and provides more surface and space for external substance accommodation,7 leading to efficient mass transfer, diffusion, and storage, especially in electrochemical applications (Fig. 7a).1
 Fig. 7  The unique mechanisms in superlattices. (a) The schematic illustration of mass transfer, diffusion, and storage in the interlayer space of MoS2/PDDA-graphene superlattice with a speculated structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Effects of multiple interfaces on the EM waves in the TaS2/organic superlattice. The superlattice structure was determined by the polarized FT-IR spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The theoretical structural modeling and charge transfer in the FePc/MoS2 superlattices. Red/green: charge accumulation/depletion regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The superexchange interaction in Cr2Ge2Te6 and the double-exchange interaction in the Cr2Ge2Te6/TBA superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. The energy band structures of (e1) pristine SnSe2 and (e2) SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice, respectively. The photon energy hν = 32 eV, and the conduction band is marked with a dotted line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2018 University of Science and Technology of China. (f) The band structures of monolayer WSe2, expanded WSe2, and the WSe2/MeNH2 superlattice. Horizontal dashed lines indicate the Fermi levels with respect to the vacuum. Gray/red: band contribution from the WSe2 layers/intercalated molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
4.2 Interlayer coupling effect
Organic species that act as an interlayer separation can alter the interactions between inorganic layers, such as Coulomb interaction, cooper pairs coupling, and magnetic coupling, which significantly affects the mechanical, electrical, and magnetic properties of superlattices. The insertion of soft organic molecules can break the interlayer coupling between neighboring inorganic layers, which alters the rigid and brittle nature.32 In some superlattices, the introduced organic cation would screen the Coulomb interaction between electrons,28 and simultaneously reduce the interlayer coupling of cooper pairs in the inorganic layers,29 leading to a diverse effect on electrical properties, such as superconductivity. In addition, the dielectric mismatch between the adjacent layers resulted in dielectric screening, and tunable carrier mobilities.17 The reduction in interlayer coupling is also often associated with the 2D magnetism, which is correlated with intrinsic spin fluctuations and electronic structures. For instance, the intercalation of TBA+ into the magnetic material Cr2Ge2Te6 led to a shift in magnetic coupling, from a weak super-exchange interaction to a strong double-exchange interaction (Fig. 7d).42 The direct coupling significantly reinforced the magnetic coupling degree between Cr spins, leading to the huge enhancement in Curie temperature, from 67 K to 208 K, and the change in magnetic easy axis from the 〈001〉 direction to the ab-plane.
4.3 Quantum confinement effect
For hybrid superlattices, the organic layers effectively isolate the inorganic frameworks, and increase the interlayer spacing, allowing the inorganic sublattices to achieve a nearly 2D state.29 When the high-stage inorganic sublattices evolve to the monolayer limit, the inorganic sublattices demonstrate a quantum confinement effect. Therefore, the superlattices have a tunable bandgap structure, and the optical and electrical properties are drastically different from the bulk counterparts. For instance, with the decrease in the effective thickness of the inorganic layers, the optical bandgap energy increased, which was due to the quantum confinement effect.5,36 Using angle band photoelectron spectroscopy for characterization, the energy band structures of the SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice significantly differed before and after the intercalation, as shown in Fig. 7e.41 Under different incident photoelectron energies, the Kz direction dispersion became smaller after intercalation, exhibiting strong 2D characteristics. Another example was the indirect to direct bandgap transition. The first-principles calculations have proven that very short intercalants, such as surfactant MeNH2, can electronically decouple inorganic layers, leading to the indirect to direct bandgap transition. Fig. 7f illustrates that the WSe2/MeNH2 superlattice theoretically possessed a direct bandgap similar to the monolayer WSe2.3
4.4 Electron-transfer effect
The interactions between adjacent inorganic and organic sublattices, especially the electron-transfer effect, also play a vital role in modulating the properties of superlattices. Through electrostatic attraction, the electron transfer of 0.52e from the FePc molecule with the strong electron-donating ability to the MoS2 anion occurred, accompanied by the Fe cation that protruded towards the S site, as shown in Fig. 7c.19 In contrast, the electrons transferred from the PbI2 layers to EtDAB molecules, which increased the hole concentration of p-type PbI2 layers, thereby enhancing the electrical conductivity.35 Furthermore, the charge transfer helps to generate active ions, phases, or radicals, and the charge injection ratio can further adjust the compositions by varying the contents or sizes of organic molecules, which are important in electronic, electrochemical, and optical applications.1,5,19,27,33
4.5 Multiple interface effects
The introduction of inorganic/organic interfaces causes strong matter scattering, the sliding effect, and the interfacial mismatch phenomenon. For instance, the phonons will be drastically scattered by the heterogeneous interfaces, resulting in the considerably reduced cross-plane thermal conductivity,18 while the multiple interfacial reflections of electromagnetic (EM) waves contributed to the efficient EM energy attenuation (Fig. 7b).32 In addition, the network formed by well-connected interfaces was beneficial for the effective stress transfer and friction energy dissipation for mechanical properties.6 The light-responsive isomerization led to interfacial electric dipoles perpendicular to the interlayers.34
5. Applications
The abundant compositions and unique mechanisms in hybrid superlattices have offered great flexibility to tune the physical and chemical properties of materials, leading to excellent functionalities in the superlattices over a wide range of applications, including energy storage and conversion,1,4,7,10,13–24 advanced electronics,5,25–27 superconductivity,28–31 EMI shielding and absorption,6,8,32 optics,27,33–39 mechanical properties,2,6,21–23,32 and novel applications.30
5.1 Rechargeable batteries
The 2D materials have been considered as active materials for electrodes in batteries, since the ion insertion/extraction reactions in these 2D structures with an open framework have exhibited excellent electrochemical performances, such as high redox activity and rate capability. However, these 2D materials undergo irreversible restacking in electrode processing or device fabrication, leading to decreased active surfaces and sluggish ion transport.13 Forming a hybrid inorganic/organic superlattice can make a compact and integral structure, in which 2D materials are spatially isolated by organic molecules with durable electrochemical performance. Furthermore, these organic molecules increase the interlayer distance between the inorganic 2D monolayers and facilitate the carrier ion transportation in the interlayer space, which brings new opportunities for energy storage (Fig. 7a). In the TEG- or THF-intercalated VOPO4 superlattice, the decreased energy barrier (0.22 eV) for Na+ diffusion, was much lower than that of pristine VOPO4 (0.72 eV).13 Thus, the rate capability and cycling stability were remarkably improved. This interlayer expansion effect was particularly important in multivalent ion batteries, in which the diffusion energy barrier was extremely high due to the strong ion-host interaction. It has been found that in situ intercalated 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium ions supported the interlayer space of TiS2 as a pillar.14 The coordination number of Mg2+ to the sulfur atoms in TiS2 layers decreased from six to three, leading to a remarkably reduced Mg2+ diffusion barrier, and an ultra-high rate capability and cycling.14 This effect was also demonstrated in the fast diffusion kinetics and cycling stability of Mg2+ in VOPO4 nanosheets by expanding the interlayer spacing.15 In addition, the intercalation of organic molecules (THF, or TEG) with dipoles could shield the Coulomb interaction between the carrier ions and the host framework, thereby contributing to the efficient ion diffusion and enhanced electrochemical performance.16 However, there was an incompatibility concern between these molecules and the Mg-metal anode and electrolytes, especially water. Therefore, a robust and polar molecule PEO was introduced (Fig. 3d), which may enhance ion mobility through the solvation effect, in addition to the interlayer expansion effect in MoS2 (Fig. 8).4
 Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of approaches to enhance the Mg2+ diffusion kinetics in interlayer expanded MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
5.2 Electrocatalysis
Considering the limited resources and environmental pollution, it is important to develop green energy conversion technologies, such as water splitting and fuel cells. In these technologies, high-efficiency catalysts are essential for the electrocatalytic reactions, including the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). One effective strategy to improve the electrocatalytic performance is to increase the quantity and enhance the activity of exposed active sites in the catalysts. Due to the expanded interlayer space for more exposed active sites (Fig. 7a) and the charge-transfer effect for higher activity, inorganic/organic superlattices have emerged as promising electrocatalysts. For instance, in the CoNi-LDH/Fe-PP superlattice, the Fe-PP molecules not only prevented the aggregations of LDHs that covered the active sites, but also acted as electron transfer mediators to improve the content of active Co3+.10 As a result, the superlattice exhibited superior OER properties with an ultralow overpotential (264 mV) at 10 mA cm−2, and a remarkably decreased Tafel slope of 37.6 mV dec−1. Kwon et al. further synthesized the MoS2/FePc superlattice as a bifunctional electrocatalyst, which utilized the electron-transfer effect between the FePc molecules and MoS2 layers (Fig. 7c).19 The 1T′ phase MoS2 led to a high HER activity (an overpotential of 0.123 V and a Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1), and the nonplanar Fe–N4 site contributed to the excellent ORR performance (a half-wave potential of 0.89 V and a Tafel slope of 35 mV dec−1).
5.3 Thermoelectrics
Thermoelectric materials can directly convert thermal and electrical energy without waste emission, and have been regarded as a rising clean energy technology. In particular, with the rapid development of wearable electronics, flexible thermoelectrics have aroused extensive interest as a portable power supply to harvest electricity from human body heat. Inorganic/organic superlattices with an electron-transmitting, but phonon-blocking structure, are potential flexible thermoelectric materials. As discussed in Section 4.5, owing to the phonon scattering at the interfaces of mutually different layers, the thermal conductivities of the ZnO/HQ superlattice and TiO2/HQ superlattice turned out to be 4.15 ± 0.43 and 0.66 ± 0.04 W m−1 K−1, respectively, which were notably lower than the original values.18 Furthermore, using the ALD/MLD method, the ZnO/organic layers could be deposited on flexible substrates, such as cotton textiles, showing improved flexibility and low thermal conductivities.20 A more instructive example was the TiS2/[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z] superlattice, with alternating TiS2 monolayers and organic cations.21 The inorganic layers were injected with electrons, which were stabilized by organic cations, leading to the n-type carriers for current and energy transport, while organic layers contributed to the ultralow thermoelectric conductivity. The increased electrical conductivity of 790 S cm−1, a power factor of 0.45 mW m−1 K−2, and an in-plane thermal conductivity of 0.69 W m−1 K−1 were attained. Furthermore, by controlling the dielectric mismatch using polar organic molecules with different dielectric constants, the electron mobility of TiS2 layers was tuned through the dielectric screening of the Coulomb-impurity scattering process, generating a significant enhancement in the thermoelectric figure of merit.17 Furthermore, the carrier concentration of the superlattices could be optimized by the organic content for improved thermoelectric performance, based on the electroneutrality principle. By vacuum heating of the hybrid TiS2/organic superlattice, the effectively reduced carrier concentration resulted in a high power factor of 904 μW m−1 K−2.23 The thermoelectric application of superlattices is not limited by synthetic methods. A large-area flexible foil of high-performance TiS2/HA superlattice can be fabricated through a facile technique involving the intercalation, exfoliation, and self-assembly process.22
5.4 Advanced electronics
The inorganic/organic superlattices that comprise heterogeneous materials exhibit unique electrical properties that could be used for new-generation electronics and optoelectronics. In the superlattices fabricated by ALD/MLD, self-assembled organic layers (SAOLs) provide structural flexibility and molecular functionality, while inorganic layers offer the potential for electronic performances as well as thermal and mechanical stability. Furthermore, the interaction between inorganic and organic sublattices provides an extra degree of freedom for materials electronic structure tunability, and accordingly, device functionality. SAOLs/Al2O3/SAOLs/TiO2 superlattices could provide a combination of high dielectric constants and high dielectric strength, and were thereby expected to function as a gate dielectric of low-voltage-operating organic thin-film transistors (TFTs).25 Furthermore, the ZnO/SAOLs superlattice displayed superior flexibility, transparency in the visible range, and ultrahigh field-effect mobility (>7 cm2 V−1 s−1), and was developed for active semiconducting channel layers of TFTs (Fig. 9).26 In addition to the flexibility, the presence of organic layers separates the inorganic layers, which achieves a monolayer-like performance in bulk. Wang et al. fabricated a series of atomic layer molecular superlattice, such as MPMS.5 The derived superlattice transistors achieved a large on/off current ratio over 107, remarkable mobility, and exceptional stability. The electronic structure calculations revealed that the MPMS exhibited a bandgap of 2.13 eV, which agreed with the experimentally observed bandgap of 2.26 eV in MPMS, and was approximately 0.19 eV higher than that of the monolayer phosphorene (1.94 eV) due to the molecule interaction with phosphorous. The MPMS device, as a demonstration of quasi-monolayer phosphorene, which is intrinsically unstable, exhibited p-type characteristics with a presentable mobility of 328 cm2 V−1 s−1. This outperformed the best few-layer (<5 nm thick) black phosphorus devices, and approached the theoretical limit predicted for monolayer phosphorene (250–400 cm2 V−1 s−1). With weak van der Waals interactions and indirect chemical bonds, single or few-atom inorganic layers can be readily isolated, mixed, matched, and combined to create a class of high-order hybrid superlattices with drastically different atomic structures or electronic properties beyond traditional lattice matching specifications. The hybrid superlattices can also control the confinement and transport of electrons at the level of single-atom thickness, and provide devices with unprecedented performances or functions beyond the reach of traditional materials.
 Fig. 9  The schematic illustration of the TFTs with active channel layers of the SAOLs/ZnO nanohybrid (a speculated structure) and gate dielectrics on flexible substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. 
5.5 Superconductivity
For superconductors, determining how to improve the low superconducting transition temperature (Tc) has long been given concern. Due to the sensitivity of superconductivity to dimensionality, inorganic/organic superlattices offer the opportunity to tune Tc by realizing the 2D characteristics in the 3D state. The organic layers effectively reduce the interactions between electrons in inorganic layers, leading to the 2D electronic structure, and thereby increasing Tc.29 For instance, Hosono et al. investigated the correlation of Tc with interlayer spacing (d) in FeSe-based superconductors, with mainly alkaline metals and organics co-intercalation.29 They synthesized three phases of Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2−zSe2 superlattices with various d values (Fig. 3f) that exhibited different Tc values. Compared with the references in the study, it was found that as d expanded, Tc enhanced, because the enhanced two-dimensionality would increase the density of states (DOS) at the Fermi level and improve the nesting condition at the Fermi surface. However, the improvement of Tc would become optimal (∼45 K) at a certain threshold value of d (∼9 Å), and the electron doping level became dominant. Shi et al. further fabricated the pure organic/FeSe superlattice through the intercalation of a more chemically inert TBA+.31 Due to the avoided impurities and disorder on the FeSe plane as well as the significant increase in d, the superlattice exhibited a higher Tc of 50 K, which broke the limit of 45 K. The organic molecules in the superlattices could also introduce a charge carrier doping effect and additional phonon modes, which further improved the superconductivity.28 For example, the introduction of organic molecules into the non-superconducting WTe2 bulk crystals not only triggered the superconductivity, but also achieved a higher Tc (2.3 K), when compared to that (0.82 K) of monolayer WTe2.28 Furthermore, the tailored topological properties, such as the emergence of weak topological insulators from Weyl semimetals (Fig. 10), was realized in the MoTe2- and WTe2-organic superlattices with weakened interlayer coupling.
 Fig. 10  (a) The speculated structures of MoTe2 bulks before and after organic ion intercalation, and (b) the schematic illustration of the transition from type-II Weyl fermion to superconducting weak topological insulators (TI) through intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2019 Science China Press. 
5.6 Electromagnetic interference shielding and absorption
The TMDs- and MXenes-based superlattices with high-concentration mobile carriers to interact with an EM field are promising EMI shielding and absorbing materials. The construction of the inorganic/organic superlattice structure not only reduces the density and enables the structural flexibility, but also introduces interfacial effects for stronger interaction with EM waves. The laminated superlattice structure can effectively boost the multiple interfacial reflections of EM waves that cause considerable energy loss.6 The interfacial charge accumulation between the insulating organic and conducting inorganic layers may further give rise to the dissipation of EM energy. Zong et al. successfully fabricated the highly flexible TaS2(HA)x(NMF)y superlattice foil that exhibited an ultrahigh electrical conductivity of 1.2 × 103 S cm−1.32 As shown in Fig. 7b, the multiple reflections of EM waves among the interfaces in the superlattice and the dielectric loss caused by the micro-capacitors-like organic molecules contributed to the EMI shielding effectiveness value of 31 dB in the X-band, which was higher than that of graphene-based thin films. Wei et al. further explored the microwave absorption properties of the Ti3C2Tx/PANI superlattice.8 The interfaces and the resistor-capacitor circuits that consisted of MXene/PANI layers caused the effective attenuation of the EM wave, leading to a large maximum reflection loss of −56.30 dB at 13.8 GHz, with a wide effective absorption bandwidth of ∼4 GHz and a thickness of 1.8 mm.
5.7 Optoelectronic and photo-response properties
Hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices offer new opportunities in optoelectronic and photo-response properties due to the compositional versatility and the quantum confinement effect. In contrast to the 3D hybrid halide perovskite, 2D hybrid superlattices can be formed by inserting various organic molecules between halide perovskite layers.37 The insulating organic layers act as potential walls, while the conducting perovskite layers serve as potential wells. Although the intrinsic photovoltaic performance of the 2D superlattice is not as high as the 3D perovskite, the tunable bandgap due to the quantum confinement may provide high efficiency in tandem solar cells combined with the 3D perovskite. In addition, the versatility of organic molecules provides advantages, when compared with the 3D perovskite. Through the incorporation of hydrophobic molecules, the 2D hybrid superlattices exhibit superior moisture stability.37 The incorporation of the radical form of EtDAB can broaden the photoconductive response band.35 In addition to photovoltaic applications, 2D perovskite superlattices are of particular interest in light-emitting diode applications due to the multi-quantum well structure, in which the external quantum efficiency can be higher than 10%.38 In the (RNH3)2[CH3NH3PbBr3]nPbBr4 superlattice, the organic sublattices decoupled the inorganic layers and promoted the localization of excitons within individual layers, which endowed this hybrid superlattice with enhanced light outcoupling and tunable wavelength as photonic sources.39 The charge transfer between non-optical active inorganics and organics can also create outstanding photochromic or optoelectronic properties in hybrid superlattices. For instance, the charge-transfer effect generated the radicals in the non-photochromic extended dipyridine units, which was the origin of photochromic performance in the [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice (Fig. 11).33,50 Furthermore, various photo-switchable inorganic/organic superlattices have been fabricated by introducing photochromic organics. The photochemical isomerization of photochromic spiropyran to merocyanine generated positive vertical dipoles at the MoS2/organic interface, thereby reducing the work function and inducing strong spatially varying n-type doping, which enables the light-responsive electrical properties of superlattice.34
 Fig. 11  The schematic illustration of the photochromic performance of the [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2019 the Partner Organisations. 
5.8 Mechanical properties
Light-weight and high-strength materials can reduce the weight of structural components and improve service performance, which is of great significance to aerospace, military, and automotive fields. Inspired by mica in nature, it is known that the layered structure of an inorganic/organic hybrid can enhance the strength with reduced density. Analogously, the artificial lamellar microstructure of inorganic reinforcing nanofillers within a ductile organic matrix contributed to the excellent mechanical properties of inorganic/organic superlattices. The pull-out or fracture deformation modes, and the enhanced interfaces formed by the parallelly aligned nanosheets result in efficient energy dissipation, which further improves the strength and toughness. For instance, in the superspreading fabricated graphene oxide (GO)/clay/carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/PVA nanocomposites,2 the 5–30 μm CNTs formed a braided structure between the GO/clay layers, strengthening the interfacial interaction between nanosheets. Meanwhile, when the distance between nanosheets reached a critical value, the hydrogen bonds between the polymers around the nanosheets were the strongest, achieving optimal properties. The tensile strength and Young's modulus of the superlattice reached up to 1215 ± 80 MPa and 198.8 ± 6.5 GPa, which were 9.0 and 2.8 times higher, respectively, when compared to those of natural nacre. In addition, the alternatively stacked soft organic layers and rigid inorganic layers also give rise to the mechanical flexibility of the superlattices. When soft organic molecules enter the van der Waals gap and expand the interlayer spacing of inorganic layers, the rigid framework becomes soft and flexible, which enables the large deformation, without severe performance deterioration. For example, when bending the highly flexible TiS2/organic superlattice foil to a radius of as low as 3 mm, the electrical resistance remained almost unchanged.22
6. Conclusions and future directions
The emerging hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices provide a new dimension to access the exceptional properties of the 2D materials in bulk quantities for macroscopic applications. The rich chemistry and abundant mechanisms of hybrid superlattices offer new opportunities to realize performances beyond the reach of the existing materials, as evidenced by the rapidly growing breakthrough in vast applications.
As the concept of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices has just appeared, there are plenty of new opportunities in the application of this concept. Firstly, the broad choices of inorganics and infinite variants of organic molecules lead to numerous new superlattice compositions, most of which have not yet been explored in various applications with a potentially unexpected performance. New technologies will be developed to further extend the choices of inorganic materials, beyond the layered materials, which will further increase composition versatility. Secondly, considering the complex arrangement of the various molecules in the organic sublattices, determining the real structure and evaluation of the structural order and uniformity deserve further investigations, which are of great significance for the improvement of performances and understanding the underlying mechanism. In addition, the 2D states and interactions between inorganics and organics at the atomic scale provide a new platform to trigger new functionalities that are not presented in the existing materials. For example, the coexistence of ferromagnetism and superconductivity was established in a SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice, in which the strong confinement of Co(Cp)2 molecules reduced the coordination field and led to the high spin with a ferromagnetic character, while the electron donation from cyclopentadienyls to the inorganic layers triggered the superconducting behavior.30 Finally, the hybrid superlattices with powerful functionalities exhibit great potential in nano- or micro-devices for practical technological applications. However, most research efforts are still in the laboratory stage. Critical issues, such as the repeatability and stability of the superlattices, as well as the cost control of wafer-scale synthesis techniques, remain to be solved.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the China Key National R&D Plan (No. 2017YFA0700705), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51590893 and No. 51788104) and Tsinghua MSE Interdisciplinary Innovation Grant No. 531204402.
References
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai, L. Nurdiwijayanto and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 997–1005 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, P. Zhang, J. Zhou, S. Qi, Y. Yamauchi, R. Shi, R. Fang, Y. Ishida, S. Wang, A. P. Tomsia, L. Jiang and M. Liu, Nature, 2020, 580, 210–215 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kempt, A. Kuc, J. H. Han, J. Cheon and T. Heine, Small, 2018, 14, 1803910 CrossRef .
Y. L. Liang, H. D. Yoo, Y. F. Li, J. Shuai, H. A. Calderon, F. C. R. Hernandez, L. C. Grabow and Y. Yao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2194–2202 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Q. He, U. Halim, Y. Liu, E. Zhu, Z. Lin, H. Xiao, X. Duan, Z. Feng, R. Cheng, N. O. Weiss, G. Ye, Y. C. Huang, H. Wu, H. C. Cheng, I. Shakir, L. Liao, X. Chen, W. A. Goddard, III, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nature, 2018, 555, 231–236 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Cao, F. F. Chen, Y. J. Zhu, Y. G. Zhang, Y. Y. Jiang, M. G. Ma and F. Chen, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4583–4593 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, A. VahidMohammadi, Z. Wang, L. Ouyang, M. Beidaghi and M. M. Hamedi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2558 CrossRef .
H. Wei, J. Dong, X. Fang, W. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Qian, Z. Jiang and Y. Huang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 169, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Hart, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. C. Lang, B. Anasori, D. Pinto, Y. Pivak, J. T. van Omme, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. L. Taheri, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 522 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Zhou, Z. Li, M. Shao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11516–11523 RSC .
F. Xiong, H. T. Wang, X. G. Liu, J. Sun, M. Brongersma, E. Pop and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6777–6784 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. F. Hao, J. H. Wang, X. Cui, X. X. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 10781–10790 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, Y. Zhu, X. Peng, Z. Fang, W. Chu, Y. Wang, Y. Xie, Y. Li, J. J. Cha and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6273–6279 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Yoo, Y. Liang, H. Dong, J. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Liu, L. Ma, T. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Ru, Y. Jing, Q. An, W. Zhou, J. Guo, J. Lu, S. T. Pantelides, X. Qian and Y. Yao, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 339 CrossRef .
L. M. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. H. Zhang, K. Zhang, F. Y. Xiong, S. S. Tan, Q. Y. An, Y. M. Kang, Z. Zhou and L. Q. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801984 CrossRef .
H. J. Lee, J. Shin and J. W. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705851 CrossRef .
C. Wan, Y. Kodama, M. Kondo, R. Sasai, X. Qian, X. Gu, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, R. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6302–6308 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Niemelä, A. J. Karttunen and M. Karppinen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10349–10361 RSC .
I. S. Kwon, I. H. Kwak, J. Y. Kim, H. G. Abbas, T. T. Debela, J. Seo, M. K. Cho, J. P. Ahn, J. Park and H. S. Kang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14266–14275 RSC .
A. J. Karttunen, L. Sarnes, R. Townsend, J. Mikkonen and M. Karppinen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600459 CrossRef .
C. Wan, X. Gu, F. Dang, T. Itoh, Y. Wang, H. Sasaki, M. Kondo, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, G. J. Snyder, R. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 622–627 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, R. Tian, A. B. Azizi, Y. Huang, Q. Wei, R. Sasai, S. Wasusate, T. Ishida and K. Koumoto, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 840–845 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan, R. Tian, M. Kondou, R. Yang, P. Zong and K. Koumoto, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1024 CrossRef .
P. A. Zong, P. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and C. Wan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800842 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Lee, K. H. Lee, S. Im and M. M. Sung, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 1146–1153 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Park, K. S. Han, B. H. Lee, S. Cho, K. H. Lee, S. Im and M. M. Sung, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 348–352 CrossRef CAS .
Q. He, Z. Lin, M. Ding, A. Yin, U. Halim, C. Wang, Y. Liu, H. C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 6819–6826 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Rousuli, S. Shen, K. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Luo, J. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, W. Duan, H. Yao, P. Yu and S. Zhou, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hosono, T. Noji, T. Hatakeda, T. Kawamata, M. Kato and Y. Koike, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2016, 85, 013702 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Mu, H. Shan, Y. Guo, J. Wu, Y. Su, Q. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Zhao, X. Cui, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16398–16404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Shi, N. Z. Wang, B. Lei, J. J. Ying, C. S. Zhu, Z. L. Sun, J. H. Cui, F. B. Meng, C. Shang, L. K. Ma and X. H. Chen, New J. Phys., 2018, 20, 123007 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Zong, D. Yoo, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, S. Yin, J. Liang, Y. Wang, K. Koumoto and C. Wan, Small, 2020, 16, 1901901 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Ge, S. D. Han, Q. Wei, J. H. Li and G. M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3920–3923 RSC .
M. Gobbi, S. Bonacchi, J. X. Lian, A. Vercouter, S. Bertolazzi, B. Zyska, M. Timpel, R. Tatti, Y. Olivier, S. Hecht, M. V. Nardi, D. Beljonne, E. Orgiu and P. Samori, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2661 CrossRef .
G. E. Wang, G. Xu, N. N. Zhang, M. S. Yao, M. S. Wang and G. C. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2692–2695 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tanskanen and M. Karppinen, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 12, 1800390 CrossRef .
J. L. Yan, W. M. Qiu, G. Wu, P. Heremans and H. Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11063–11077 RSC .
N. Wang, L. Cheng, R. Ge, S. Zhang, Y. Miao, W. Zou, C. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Cao, R. Yang, Y. Wei, Q. Guo, Y. Ke, M. Yu, Y. Jin, Y. Liu, Q. Ding, D. Di, L. Yang, G. Xing, H. Tian, C. Jin, F. Gao, R. H. Friend, J. Wang and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jagielski, S. F. Solari, L. Jordan, D. Scullion, B. Blulle, Y. T. Li, F. Krumeich, Y. C. Chiu, B. Ruhstaller, E. J. G. Santos and C. J. Shih, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 387 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Bushmarinov, A. S. Goloveshkin, N. D. Lenenko, V. I. Zaikovskii, A. A. Korlyukov, A. S. Golub and I. L. Eremenko, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 5162–5167 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Mu, Doctoral Thesis, University of Science and Technology of China,  2018 .
N. Wang, H. Tang, M. Shi, H. Zhang, W. Zhuo, D. Liu, F. Meng, L. Ma, J. Ying, L. Zou, Z. Sun and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 17166–17173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Qian, Z. Ju, L. Peng and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6071–6075 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leng, W. Fu, Y. Liu, M. Chhowalla and K. P. Loh, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 1–19 Search PubMed .
L. Gao, F. Zhang, C. Xiao, X. Chen, B. W. Larson, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901652 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Karttunen, T. Tynell and M. Karppinen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 13105–13114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Krahl, A. Giri, J. A. Tomko, T. Tynell, P. E. Hopkins and M. Karppinen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701692 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, D. Wang, Q. Huang, H. Wu, R. Sun, X. Fan, Y. Song, S. Jin and X. Chen, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 99, 094503 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burrard-Lucas, D. G. Free, S. J. Sedlmaier, J. D. Wright, S. J. Cassidy, Y. Hara, A. J. Corkett, T. Lancaster, P. J. Baker, S. J. Blundell and S. J. Clarke, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Ge, Y. Han, S. D. Han, J. H. Li and G. M. Wang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2435–2440 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yujia Huang
	Yujia Huang received her bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tsinghua University in 2016 and later obtained her master's degree from Tokyo Institute of Technology. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on the synthesis and multifunctional applications of composites and hybrid superlattice materials based on graphene and other two-dimensional materials.

Jia Liang
	Jia Liang received her bachelor's degree from Tsinghua University in 2018. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on flexible thermoelectric generators based on inorganic/organic hybrid superlattices and other high-performing inorganic thermoelectric materials.

Chen Wang
	Chen Wang received his BS degree in physics from China and PhD degree in materials science and engineering (2016) from University of California Los Angeles, USA. He has rich post-doctoral and various research experiences in low-dimensional materials and devices, especially layered materials hetero-integration and electronic devices. His current research interests focus on nanomaterials integration and electronic device design for next generation highly-integrated functional nanosystems.

Shujia Yin
	Shujia Yin received her bachelor's degree from Tsinghua University in 2017. She is currently a PhD student in Prof. Chunlei Wan's group at Tsinghua University. Her current research interests are focused on the synthesis and thermoelectric properties of inorganic/organic hybrid superlattices based on transition metal dichalcogenides.

Wangyang Fu
	Wangyang Fu received his PhD degree from Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. During his study in Europe, he was also the recipient of a Veni grant (NWO, Netherlands), an APM grant (SNF, Switzerland), and a Humboldt grant (AvH, Germany) for young researchers. Currently he is a tenure-track associate professor in Tsinghua University. Dr Fu's research interests focus on the development of nanoelectronic biochemical sensors based on 2D materials.

Hongwei Zhu
	Hongwei Zhu is a Professor of School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree in Mechanical Engineering (1998) and PhD degree in Materials Processing Engineering (2003) from Tsinghua University. After Post Doc studies in Japan and the USA, he began his independent career as a faculty member at Tsinghua University (2008–present). His current research interests involve structural design and engineering of nanomaterials for energy and environmental applications.

Chunlei Wan
	Chunlei Wan is currently an Associate Professor of School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, China. He received his BS degree (2003) and PhD degree (2008) in Tsinghua University. He did postdoc research in Prof. Kunihito Koumoto's group at Nagoya University of Japan and became an assistant professor there. He joined Tsinghua University in 2015. His research interests include hybrid thermoelectric materials, thermal barrier coating materials and structural ceramics.

Key learning points
(1) Compositions and structures of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(2) Synthesis strategies of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(3) Unique mechanisms of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.
(4) Applications of hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices.


 	Fig. 1  The schematic structures of (a–e) organic and (f–j) inorganic components in hybrid inorganic/organic superlattices, including organometallic coordination complexes ((a) FePc), quaternary ammonium salts ((b) CTAB and TBAB), alkylamines ((c) HMDA), cyclic compounds ((d) AN), polymers ((e) PEG), (f) TMDs, (g) black phosphorus, (h) MXenes, (i) layered oxysalts (VOPO4·2H2O), and (j) LDHs.	 

 	Fig. 2  The structure transition of the (n-BA)2(CH3NH3)n−1PbnI3n+1 superlattice with a reduced number of inorganic layers (a determined structure). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44, Copyright 2020 Springer Nature Limited.	 

 	Fig. 3  The arrangement of the organic sublattices. The approximate positions of organic molecules in (a1) β-(BDMAN)0.2MoS2 and (a2) γ-(AN)0.4MoS2 from the refinement against XRD patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 40, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (b1) The resolved crystal structure of the Li0.31(3)(C2H8N2)0.52(7)Fe2.03(2)Se2 superlattice at 295 K, with the orientational disorder of the C2H8N2 molecules, as determined by the refinement against NPD patterns, and (b2) the simplified crystal structure that omitted the superimposed orientational disorder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2019 American Physical Society. (c) The STM image and schematic structure of the Co(Cp)2 molecules in the SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (d) The TEM images and the speculated structures of restacked MoS2 with less PEO (peo1-MoS2) and more PEO (peo2-MoS2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) The XRD patterns and the schematic structures of TiS2 single crystal, HA-intercalated TiS2, and TiS2(HA)x(NMF)y foil. The parallel orientation of HA molecules in the foil was determined by polarized Fourier-transform infrared (FT-IR) spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22, Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (f) The speculated structures of Lix(C6H16N2)yFe2−zSe2 before and after post-annealing. Reproduced with permission from ref.29, Copyright 2016 The Physical Society of Japan.	 

 	Fig. 4  The chemical interactions in superlattices. The schematic illustration of (a) the electrostatic interaction in the TiS2[(HA)x(DMSO)y] superlattice with a speculated structure (Reproduced with permission from ref. 23, Copyright 2017 The Author(s)), (b) the determined structure of Co(Cp)2 molecules confined in the van der Waals gap of SnSe2 layers (Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society), (c) the speculated structure of hydrogen bonds between CNFs and Ti3C2Tx (Reproduced with permission from ref. 6, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society), and (d) the speculated structure of coordination bonds formed in the [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice (Reproduced with permission from ref. 33, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  The special characterization techniques of superlattices. (a) The schematic illustration of the polarized FT-IR measurement and (b) the 1D electron density map that determined the structure of the TiS2(HA)0.097(PEG)0.028 superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (c) The XANES and the determined structure of Co(Cp)2 molecules in the SnSe2 interlayers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  The schematic illustration of synthesis strategies, including bottom-up approaches: (a) ALD/MLD process (Reproduced with permission from ref. 46, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society), (b) the LBL self-assembly of LDH/Fe-PP superlattice on the indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glass substrates (Reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry), and (c) the antisolvent-assisted synthesis of (MAI)x(PEAI)yPbI2(DMF)z superlattice in DMF/DMSO solvent (Reproduced with permission from ref. 45, Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim); and top-down approaches: (d) the electrochemical intercalation and solvent exchange process of the TiS2-based superlattice. The superlattice structure was determined by the high-angle annular dark-field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) observation, the polarized FT-IR spectroscopy, and the interlayer spacing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21, Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 7  The unique mechanisms in superlattices. (a) The schematic illustration of mass transfer, diffusion, and storage in the interlayer space of MoS2/PDDA-graphene superlattice with a speculated structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 1, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Effects of multiple interfaces on the EM waves in the TaS2/organic superlattice. The superlattice structure was determined by the polarized FT-IR spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32, Copyright 2019 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) The theoretical structural modeling and charge transfer in the FePc/MoS2 superlattices. Red/green: charge accumulation/depletion regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19, Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The superexchange interaction in Cr2Ge2Te6 and the double-exchange interaction in the Cr2Ge2Te6/TBA superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42, Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. The energy band structures of (e1) pristine SnSe2 and (e2) SnSe2/Co(Cp)2 superlattice, respectively. The photon energy hν = 32 eV, and the conduction band is marked with a dotted line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41, Copyright 2018 University of Science and Technology of China. (f) The band structures of monolayer WSe2, expanded WSe2, and the WSe2/MeNH2 superlattice. Horizontal dashed lines indicate the Fermi levels with respect to the vacuum. Gray/red: band contribution from the WSe2 layers/intercalated molecules. Reproduced with permission from ref. 3, Copyright 2018 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  A schematic illustration of approaches to enhance the Mg2+ diffusion kinetics in interlayer expanded MoS2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  The schematic illustration of the TFTs with active channel layers of the SAOLs/ZnO nanohybrid (a speculated structure) and gate dielectrics on flexible substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26, Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The speculated structures of MoTe2 bulks before and after organic ion intercalation, and (b) the schematic illustration of the transition from type-II Weyl fermion to superconducting weak topological insulators (TI) through intercalation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2019 Science China Press.	 

 	Fig. 11  The schematic illustration of the photochromic performance of the [Zn(HPO4)(bpyb)0.5]·3H2O superlattice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50, Copyright 2019 the Partner Organisations.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
