Effect of supporting electrolyte on capacitance and morphology of electrodeposited poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) derivatives bearing reactive func ...  - Molecular Systems Design & Engineering (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1ME00171J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1ME00171J
(Paper)
Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2022, 7, 460-479Effect of supporting electrolyte on capacitance and morphology of electrodeposited poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) derivatives bearing reactive functional groups†

        
          
            Baran 
            Sarac
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tolga 
            Karazehir
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Hans-Detlev 
            Gilsing
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jürgen 
            Eckert‡
ad and 

        
          
            A. Sezai 
            Sarac
          
        
      *e
aErich Schmid Institute of Materials Science, Austrian Academy of Sciences, 8700 Leoben, Austria
bDepartment of Energy System Engineering, Adana Alparslan Türkeş Science and Technology University, 01250 Saricam, Adana, Turkey
cInstitute of Thin Film and Microsensoric Technology (IDM), 14513-Teltow, Germany
dDepartment of Materials Science, Chair of Materials Physics, Montanuniversität Leoben, 8700 Leoben, Austria
ePolymer Science and Technology, Istanbul Technical University, 34469 Istanbul, Turkey. E-mail: sarac@itu.edu.tr
Received 
      20th November 2021
    , Accepted 26th January 2022First published on 31st January 2022AbstractThe interactions between the electrolyte and electroactive species in redox active PProDOT derivatives can be enhanced with better-performing electrodes for electrochemical energy conversion and storage. Differently functionalized 3,4-propylenedioxythiophenes (ProDOTs) are electropolymerized from acetonitrile using Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, or NaClO4 as an electrolyte to evaluate the electrochemical performance of the considered polymer derivatives, as well as under monomer-free conditions. We propose a new equation to assess the kinetics of the diffusion-limited adsorption process with two independent solved parameters: diffusion slope k and power exponent b. Electron-donating groups attached to the monomer stabilize radical cation and dication formation during electrogrowth. The ProDOT–Br structure has a low oxidation potential owing to the electron-rich group in the heterocyclic structure, which grants access to a radical cation intermediate and interaction with the ions of the electrolyte. Surface roughness and morphology are assessed by atomic force microscopy and scanning electron microscopy, respectively. The changes in the Fourier transform infrared spectrum are more pronounced with the selection of electrolyte type than the type of derivatives. Except the –OBz derivative, the largest specific capacitance calculated from the area under the final cyclic voltammetry curves is obtained for Et4NBF4, followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4. In all systems, the –OPhCH2OH derivative exhibited the lowest electrolyte diffusion. More pronounced diffusion is observed for the PProDOT derivatives measured in Et4NPF6 and Et4NBF4 electrolytes, whereas the lowest diffusion is obtained for the NaClO4 electrolyte. Findings in this study provide new insights into the factors requiring attention upon tailoring assemblies for organic electronic applications.

Design, System, Application
With this study, we introduce, for the first time, a comprehensive approach to determine the intrinsic properties of 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) derivatives, which enables new application possibilities in energy, biomedical, and sensor material development. ProDOT derivatives bearing reactive functional groups like bromomethyl (ProDOT–Br), tolylsulfonyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OTs), benzyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OBz), and hydroxymethylphenoxymethyl (ProDOT–OPh) as precursors were electropolymerized and examined comparatively in three different electrolytes, namely tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (Et4NBF4), tetraethylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Et4NPF6) and sodium perchlorate (NaClO4). To evaluate the concentration and diffusion effects, we propose a new and a more practical equation which can be used when the adsorption of anions from the electrolyte is very rapid compared to diffusion. The largest specific capacitance in general is highest in Et4NBF4 electrolyte followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4. Different morphologies, roughness and characteristic absorption bands can be attained by changing the electrolyte which also influences the impedance and Mott–Schottky behavior. The investigated ProDOT derivatives can be used as polymeric interfaces in assembly systems to optimize charge carriers in organic electronic devices. This study involves chemistry, materials science and energy fields due to the in-depth investigation of electropolymerization, and electrochemistry, surface, spectroscopic and structural characterization of functionalized thiophene-based electroconductive polymers.

1. Introduction
The electrochemical polymerization of thiophene derivatives demands careful adjustment of a number of experimental parameters like solvent, monomer concentration, supporting electrolyte, electrode type, cell geometry and applied electrical conditions influencing structural and physicochemical properties of the electrodeposited polythiophene. A suitable solvent should possess a high dielectric constant to induce ionic conductivity combined with an adequate electrochemical resistance against decomposition. From aprotic media of low nucleophilicity like acetonitrile (ACN) and propylene carbonate (PC), polythiophenes of high conductivity can be deposited with reasonable current efficiencies.1 A supporting electrolyte is added to provide high ionic conductivity of the medium and doping of the deposited polymer. The choice of the salt depends upon its solubility, nucleophilicity, and degree of dissociation. Usually, polythiophenes are electrodeposited in the presence of anions like ClO4−, PF6−, BF4− and CF3SO3− associated with lithium, sodium or tetraalkylammonium cations. Also, an ionic liquid can be used as an electrolyte.2–4 Electrochemical behavior is strongly influenced by the nature of anion and cation of the electrolyte. The use of different electrolytes causes changes in the shape and position of the voltammetric waves of specific polythiophene.1
The effect of the supporting electrolyte on the electrochemical properties has been investigated for several structurally diverse polythiophenes. The electrodeposition of poly(3-methylthiophene) from ACN onto platinum (Pt) in the presence of PF6−, ClO4−, BF4− and CF3SO3− with Li+ or Bu4N+ as counter-ion gave cyclic voltammograms of similar shape for the first three anions, whereas CF3SO3− produced a broader anodic wave.5 Further experiments revealed that the anion controls the electrodeposition process and the formation of the polymer structure, whereas the cation influences the process of charging and discharging.6 Results independently obtained for this system demonstrated that films produced with lithium salts exhibit lower oxidation potentials than films electrogenerated with tetrabutylammonium salts and the electrolyte dependency of the charge transport rates.7 Poly(3-methylthiophene) synthesized on polyethylene terephthalate (PET)/indium-tin-oxide (ITO) from ACN using ClO4− and BF4− with Li+, Na+ and Bu4N+, Et4N+, respectively, exhibited the highest conductivity in the presence of NaClO4 as the electrolyte.8
The electrical properties of copolymers of 3-alkylthiophenes also were affected by the type of electrolyte (LiClO4/ACN or Et4NBF4/ACN) used in the electrodeposition onto Pt. Whereas polymer films of 3-methyl- and 3-hexylthiophene as well as polymer films of 3-methyl- and 3-octylthiophene exhibited lower resistivity when synthesized with LiClO4, the polymer films of 3-hexyl- and 3-octylthiophene showed the lowest charge resistance when obtained with Et4NBF4. The difference was explained by a high level of doping caused by attraction forces between ClO4− and BF4− anions and positively charged radical cation and dication species in the copolymer matrix.9
Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) is characterized by its low oxidation potential due to the electron-donating oxygen atoms, a moderate band gap, high number of π-conjugation because of the rigidity of the ethylene bridge, decent conductivity, high environmental stability and reversible switching between oxidized and reduced state. PEDOT has been commercialized as an aqueous polymeric dispersion using poly(styrenesulfonic acid) as dopant,10 leading to various applications in electrochromic devices,11,12 organic electronics,13,14 solar cells,15 sensors,16,17 actuators,18 biomedical engineering and bioelectronics,19,20 thermoelectric materials,21,22 and supercapacitors.23–25
Deposition of PEDOT onto Pt from ACN in the presence of ClO4−, PF6−, BF4− and CF3SO3− with lithium, tetraethyl- and tetrabutylammonium cation indicated a strong influence of the anion on the conductivity and morphology of the polymer film. Whereas ClO4− produced the highest conductivity values, negative shifts of the monomer oxidation potential were observed for PF6− and BF4−.26 Also the biocompatibility of electrosynthesized PEDOT films was influenced by the doping ion.27,28 The structure of PEDOT films electrogenerated onto ITO substrates using ACN with LiCF3SO3 contains aggregated grains connected by polymeric networks.29 PEDOT electrodeposited onto glassy carbon (GC) from PC using PF6−, BF4−, CF3SO3− with Li+ and Bu4N+ developed different morphologies: PF6− created fibril-like structures exhibiting a very homogeneous composition, but with BF4− and CF3SO3− less thick homogeneous films were obtained.30 Also, the solvent has a significant influence on the morphology of PEDOT. Polymer films made in PC have a smoother morphology than those generated from ACN. The differences between PC and ACN are based on the different solubilities of the EDOT oligomers. Small anions mediate the formation of a more open morphology and low conductivity.31 Therefore, differences in conductivity depending on the electrolyte were detected: at room temperature, a value of 200–300 S cm−1 for PF6− doping, and a value of 20–30 S cm−1 for BF4− and CF3SO3− doping was observed, respectively.32
Although poly(3,4-propylenedioxythiophene) (PProDOT) and its derivatives bearing an additional carbon atom in the alkylene ether bridge were initially developed for the improvement of the electrochromic properties of PEDOT,33,34 a multitude of non-functionalized and functionalized PProDOT derivatives have been later on synthesized for application in photovoltaics,35–44 sensors,45–49 biosensors,50–54 actuators,55 and supercapacitors.56–65 Electrodeposition of poly[3,4-(2,2-dimethylpropylenedioxy)thiophene] (PProDOT–Me2) onto carbon fiber microelectrode (CFME) from ACN revealed decreasing low-frequency capacitance values for different electrolytes in the order Et4NPF6 > Et4NBF4. Using PC or dimethylformamide (DMF) instead of ACN as the solvent led to reduced low-frequency capacitance values.66 The electrosynthesis of PProDOT–Me2 onto Au/Kapton was conducted from ACN or PC with Bu4NBF4 and LiCF3SO3 salts using cyclic voltammetry (CV) and potentiostatic method. Analysis of the variation of experimental parameters elucidated that the electrolyte concentration has a large effect on the areal capacitance due to increasing ionic conductivity and rapid counter-ion diffusion at high electrolyte concentrations. The nature of the electrolyte is influencing the areal capacitance to a lesser extent, wherein the smaller anion BF4− was more advantageous because of its higher mobility through the film. The electropolymerization method used was found to have a significant effect on the morphology of the polymer film due to specific polymerization mechanisms.67 Furthermore, electrochromic properties of PProDOT–Me2 depend on the type, amount and composition of the supporting electrolyte.68 Electrocoating of poly[3,4-(2,2-dibutylpropylenedioxy)thiophene] (PProDOT–Bu2) on CFME from ACN was carried out in the presence of ClO4− with Li+, Na+ and Et4N+ as well as BF4− and PF6− with Bu4N+ as the counter-ion, respectively. Peaks currents of the film growth showed a similar rising trend with the increase of low-frequency capacitance for all electrolytes, except Et4NClO4. The highest double-layer capacitance value was observed for NaClO4. In spite of different electrolytes, similar polymeric morphologies appeared with one exception: Bu4NBF4, LiClO4, and Bu4NPF6 produced homogeneous grainy coatings, whereas, with NaClO4, a more porous structure was obtained.69,70
Electrogeneration of poly[3,4-(2,2-dibenzylpropylenedioxy)thiophene] (PProDOT–Bz2) on CFME from ACN using Bu4NPF6, LiClO4, NaClO4, and Bu4NBF4 as electrolyte created polymer films of different thicknesses. The highest capacitance and formation of a nanofiber network with a highly porous structure were detected for Bu4NPF6. The perchlorate salts also exhibited porous structures but less than Bu4NPF6. The tetrafluoroborate salt showed less capacitive behavior and smooth morphology.71 During electropolymerization of 3,4-(2-benzylpropylenedioxy)thiophene (ProDOT–Bz) on CFME from ACN using the same electrolytes, different oxidation potentials of the monomer in the range of 1.20–1.36 V were observed, following the order NaClO4 < LiClO4 < Bu4NBF4 = Bu4NPF6. Nanofiber network structures obtained with LiClO4 showed the highest capacitance. Other types of morphologies with NaClO4 and Bu4NBF4 gave lower capacitances despite nearly the same film thickness.72
Recently, we have proposed several electropolymerized 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene derivatives bearing reactive functional groups like bromomethyl (ProDOT–Br), tolylsulfonyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OTs), benzyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OBz), and hydroxymethylphenoxymethyl (ProDOT–OPh) as precursors targeting for bioelectronics and supercapacitors.73,74 Developing robust polymer systems for these applications needs a deep understanding of the relationship between morphology and ionic and electronic conductivity.75–77 Interactions between the electrolyte and electroactive species in redox active PProDOT derivatives are critical for designing higher-performance electrodes for electrochemical energy storage and conversion. By the advantage of solubility and processability of PProDOTs which depend mainly upon the functional side chains, and the attached dopant ions during electropolymerization facilitate them with electrical and optical properties. The delocalization of π bonds plays an essential role in the generation of charge carriers like polarons and bipolarons, which are responsible for the transition from insulating to conducting state. Tuning charge carriers by functional groups and anion doping in PProDOTs help to improve the electrochemical properties in different electrolytes, and their versatile structural variability prior to electrodeposition investigated herein will serve as precursors and target materials in bioelectronics and supercapacitor applications.
Therefore, in the present work, we report on investigating the effect of various electrolytes on the electrochemical properties of differently functionalized PProDOTs. Electrodeposition of the polymers onto glassy carbon (GC) and ITO glass was conducted from ACN in the presence of Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4 using CV for characterization by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), Fourier transform infrared-attenuated total reflectance spectroscopy (FTIR-ATR), scanning electron microscopy (SEM), X-ray diffraction (XRD) and Mott–Schottky (M–S) analysis.
2. Experimental
2.1. Materials
3,4-Propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT, 97%) and tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (Et4NBF4, 99%), tetraethylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Et4NPF6, 99%) and sodium perchlorate (NaClO4, ≥98%) were received from Sigma Aldrich and used without further purification. Acetonitrile and dichloromethane (Sigma-Aldrich) were of analytical grade. ProDOT–Br, ProDOT–OTs, ProDOT–OBz, and ProDOT–OPh were synthesized as reported previously.73
2.2. Electropolymerization & characterization
Electropolymerizations were performed on GC (for monomer-free CV, EIS and M–S measurements) or ITO glass (for AFM, SEM, FTIR-ATR measurements) by CV between −0.5 V and 1.6 V for 10 cycles at a scan rate of 0.05 V s−1 using PARSTAT 4000A, AMETEK Scientific Instruments potentiostat/galvanostat equipped with a Versa Studio software package. GC or ITO glass was used as a working electrode, Ag/AgCl (3 M NaCl/Saturated AgCl) with a redox potential of +0.209 V vs. a standard hydrogen electrode at 25 °C as a reference electrode, and platinum wire as a counter electrode. Dissolved oxygen was minimized by argon gas purging for 10 min before each electrochemical analysis. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were conducted to monitor the electrical properties of each polymer coated on GC electrodes at room temperature using a conventional three-electrode cell at open circuit potential condition in 0.1 M electrolyte/ACN solution. The frequency range was from 1 MHz to 0.01 Hz, and the AC signal amplitude was 10 mV. The ZSimpWin V 3.10, an AC impedance data analysis software, was utilized to fit the appropriate equivalent circuit model to the impedance spectra. Structural analysis of the polymer-coated ITO glass electrodes was implemented using Fourier transform infrared-attenuated total reflectance spectroscopy (FTIR-ATR, Bruker Vertex 70 ATR) in the range of 400–4000 cm−1. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Gemini Leo Supra 35 VP) and energy dispersive X-ray analysis (EDX) were performed for polymers coated on ITO glass. AFM studies were carried out by a Nanoscope ezAFM+ with a cantilever tip radius of 10 nm. The images were retrieved using the non-contact mode of the AFM. Mott–Schottky (M–S) experiments were conducted to determine the semiconducting properties of polymer-coated electrodes using the PARSTAT 4000A potentiostat/galvanostat with a conventional cell arrangement. The capacitance measurements for Mott–Schottky plots were performed in 0.1 M electrolyte/ACN solution. M–S experiments were performed at potentials between −0.4 V and 1.5 V at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz with successive 20 mV steps.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Monomer types and electrochemical polymerization steps
A comparison of the electropolymerized differently substituted ProDOTs and used electrolytes is given in Table 1. π-conjugated systems in a polymer of ProDOT derivatives are expected to inherit the following advantages: (1) high capacity a priori to structural properties; (2) isolated and linear conjugated π-system (see Fig. 1), electrochemical polymerization and interaction of electrolyte with the substituted ProDOT on GC; (3) enhanced π–π intermolecular interactions; (4) constant charged and discharged states for enhancing cyclability; (5) better charge transport; (6) possible layer-by-layer molecular arrangement due to the π–π stacking, and accordingly, improved electronic transport.
Table 1 Comparison of type and structure of monomer and the corresponding electrolytic solution in which the monomer is being electrocoated




Sample no.a
Type of monomerb
Electrolytec
Structure of the monomer





a For electrochemical coating and monomer-free CV measurements, electrode: GC. For SEM, AFM, and FTIR-ATR: ITO glass electrodes were used.
b Concentration of Electrolyte: 0.1 M in acetonitrile (ACN).
c Monomer concentration of 10 mM.





1
ProDOT–Br
NaClO4





2
ProDOT–Br
Et4NBF4


3
ProDOT–Br
Et4NPF6


4
ProDOT–OBz
NaClO4





5
ProDOT–OBz
Et4NBF4


6
ProDOT–OBz
Et4NPF6


7
ProDOT–OPh
NaClO4





8
ProDOT–OPh
Et4NBF4


9
ProDOT–OPh
Et4NPF6


10
ProDOT–OTs
NaClO4





11
ProDOT–OTs
Et4NBF4


12
ProDOT–OTs
Et4NPF6


13
ProDOT
Et4NBF4







 Fig. 1  Scheme of the electrochemical polymerization and interaction of electrolyte with the substituted ProDOT on GC. 
3.2. Electrochemical polymerization of substituted ProDOTs
The electrodeposition of differently functionalized ProDOTs on GCE was performed in three electrolyte solutions (0.1 M Et4NBF4/ACN, Et4NPF6/ACN, and NaClO4/ACN) consisting of 10 mM ProDOT derivatives at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 by 10 deposition cycles. Fig. 2 shows the influence of the used electrolyte for different ProDOT derivatives deposited onto GCE in various electrolyte/ACN solutions. The polymerization behavior of ProDOTs depends on both different electrolyte and substituent types. An enhancement in current density, that is, polymerization efficiency for –OPh, –OBz, and –OTs derivatives, follows the order of PF6− > BF4− > ClO4−, as was reported in electrochemical polymerization of thiophene.78 However, this increase in the current density with increasing cycle number for ProDOT–Br within BF4− is comparatively higher than those for PF6− and ClO4−, and also for other ProDOT counterparts. This is probably due to less steric hindrance of linear –CH2Br side chain than its counterparts, leading to the migration of small BF4− anion toward the ProDOT backbone (easier than that of PF6− anion), resulting in more efficient polymerization. This finding is consistent with the previous report that the growth rates of polyindole film in the ionic liquid BMImBF4/ACN are faster than that of polyindole growth in BMImPF6/ACN dependent on the nature of the ionic liquid and size of dopant ions, where the size of PF6− dopant ions are larger than BF4−.79
 Fig. 2  Electropolymerization of (a) PProDOT in Et4NBF4 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (b) ProDOT–Br in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (c) ProDOT–OBz in three electrolytes on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (d) ProDOT–OTs in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (e) ProDOT–OPhCH2OH in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer free-curve (inset). Electropolymerization was performed at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 by 10 deposition cycles. 
The potential window selected for each electrolyte or derivative indicates a suitable polymer film growth. As reported earlier, no polymer formation attains at a lower potential, or the polymerization rate is prolonged to reach desired film thickness. In comparison, at a higher potential, polymer film does not regularly grow in patterns due to over-oxidation of the generated polymeric film.80,81 For the NaClO4 case, more anodic potential to initiate the polymerization is required, so a low current density is observed compared to Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6. It was reported that monomer charge density for polymerization of thiophene by ClO4−, BF4−, and PF6− anions decreased in the order of PF6− > BF4− > ClO4−.78 The higher Q value obtained with BF4− and PF6− anions indicates an enhancement of the oligomer formation and consequently a more efficient polymer deposition. In addition, the higher current density for PF6− anion than that of BF4− anion can be attributed to the higher alkaline character PF6− anion, which promotes the loss of H+ in the polymerization process.78 The linear increase in current for all ProDOTs indicates the electroactive film formation on the GCE surface. The anodic oxidation onset potentials for ProDOTs in different solvent–electrolyte systems estimated from the first CV cycle in cyclic voltammogram are shown in Table 2. Oxidation of ProDOT in 0.1 M Et4NBF4/ACN initiated at 1.49 V. However, in the case of PrODOT–Br and ProDOT–OTs, oxidation onset in 0.1 M Et4NBF4/ACN shifts to a higher value, which were 1.72 V and 1.75 V, respectively. Moreover, ProDOT derivatives were oxidized at a lower potential in 0.1 M Et4NPF6/ACN than in Et4NBF4/ACN and NaClO4/ACN. These results indicate that the oxidation potential of monomers in different electrolyte systems shows a noticeable difference. As shown in Fig. 2, multistep scanning potential of monomer ProDOT and ProDOT derivatives in various electrolyte systems result in a broad redox wave generally generated in the region from 0.2 to 0.8 V associating with redox behavior of electrodeposited PProDOTs, indicating the formation of conductive polymers.69,71,72 Cathodic polymer oxidation peak (Epc) in 0.1 M Et4NBF4/ACN shifted to a higher potential value for PProDOTs compared to that of PProDOT reference. The magnitude of observed, i.e. Epc and Epa, for PProDOTs increases in the order of NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 electrolyte systems. Generally, during the electrodeposition, electron-donating groups have higher π-electron density in the thiophene ring, making the electropolymerization more efficient, while the electron-withdrawing groups deactivate the ring towards electropolymerization by raising the oxidation potential.82,83 Here, substituted electron-donating or -withdrawing groups are not directly linked to the conjugated thiophene backbone, but they are attached to the 3,4-propylenedioxy bridge, where steric hindrance is probably of major importance rather than electronic effect. In addition, propylenedioxy substitution planarizes the polythiophene backbone by lowering the bandgap.84 The electron-rich groups mediate to proceed through the electro-oxidation step smoothly, but the intermediate radical cations are a little less reactive in the presence of relatively electron-poor groups, i.e. ProDOT–OPh, ProDOT–OBz, and ProDOT–OTs.85 –OPhCH2OH, –OBz, and –OTs are bulky substituents compared to linear chain –CH2Br leading to more steric hindrance than –CH2Br, where smaller current densities of oxidation and reduction peaks are obtained for these cases. The aforementioned bulky substituent causes a steric hindrance between two adjacent thiophene rings, which may perturb the conjugated system, and hence, directly affect the conductivity.86
Table 2 Oxidation onset potential of ProDOT derivatives in various electrolytes on the GCE (0.1 M Et4NBF4/ACN, Et4NPF6/ACN, and NaClO4/ACN)




Electrode
Oxidation onset potential/V in Et4NBF4
Oxidation onset potential/V in Et4NPF6
Oxidation onset potential/V in NaClO4




PProDOT
1.49
—
—


PProDOT–Br
1.72
1.51
1.71


PProDOT–OBz
1.50
1.41
1.66


ProDOT–OPh
1.50
1.47
1.69


ProDOT–OTs
1.75
1.54
1.77




The peak potentials of the cyclic voltammograms in monomer-free solutions are influenced by diffusion-limited and kinetically controlled processes (Fig. 3a). If a redox process is solely influenced by diffusion, the peak potential should, in general, be independent of the scan rate. However, when the electrode kinetics plays a predominant role, the scan rate affects the entire voltammetric response, in particular the location of the peak potential.88 The CV waveform of reversible peaks is complex due to the combinatorial effects of polarization and diffusion. The change between the two peak potentials (Ep), ΔEp, is not small values and these results from the effects of substituted PProDOTs coating nature and diffusion rate of electrolyte ions.
 Fig. 3  (a) CV of monomer free of PProDOT–Br in Et4NBF4, inset is ln ipavs. ln ν. (b) ipvs. ν of PProDOT derivatives in Et4NBF4. (c) Non-linear fitting of ipa = kνb as a function of PProDOT derivatives in Et4NBF4. (d) Comparison of PProDOT–Br in three electrolytes using non-linear fitting of ipa = kνb. (e) Cspvs. PProDOT derivatives measured in a monomer-free environment. (f) Epvs. ln ν for –OTs and –Br derivative comparison. Inset is Epvs. ν. 
The shift towards more positive or more negative potential can easily be inferred from the nature of the redox process. The anodic and cathodic current density increases with the scan rate from 25 mV s−1 to 1000 mV s−1. The anodic peak shifts towards higher potentials with increasing scan rate. This concludes that anion doping takes place at high electrode potentials and low scan rates, demonstrating capacitive behavior at higher potentials. The Randles–Sevcik equation (eqn (1))88 determines the increase in peak current ip (A) linearly with the square root of the scan rate ν (V s−1), where n is the number of electrons transferred in the redox event, A (cm2) the electrode surface area (i.e. geometric surface area), C0 (mol cm−3) the bulk concentration of the electrolyte, and D0 (cm2 s−1) the diffusion coefficient of the oxidized analyte: ip = 268600n3/2ACD1/2ν1/2 = k′ν1/2,(1)where k′ is the slope of the equation, which is determined according to the diffusion or adsorption of species by restricting the change of power ν. Anodic peak (ipa) and cathodic peak (ipc) currents are directly comparable to ν in the potential scan range 0–1000 mV s−1versus Ag/AgCl, and the peak forms are attributes of an adsorption-limited process (Fig. 3a). This means that the electrocoated PProDOTs on the working electrode during the redox cycles are stable, and thus, large capacitive currents are examined around the anodic potentials. This is because of the films' charging and discharging upon the oxidation and reduction and electroactivity of coating, and the slope of these lines depends on the functional groups of PProDOT due to the development of porosity when electrolyte anions are transferred in and out of the films.
The comparison of the slopes (k) indicates the effect of diffusion of electrolyte anions to the ring of polymers for different PProDOT derivatives in three different electrolytes (Table 3). For PProDOT–Br, the most prominent slope is obtained for the Et4NBF4 electrolyte, followed by –OTs, –OBz and –OPhCH2OH derivatives, respectively. Et4NPF6 tends to have lower values for –CH2Br and –OTs derivatives and the same values for –OBz and –OPhCH2OH derivatives. Due to the extremely thin coatings of NaClO4, we could not attain a clear peak signal from –CH2Br and –OPhCH2OH derivatives. –OTs and –OBz derivatives in NaClO4 have the smallest slopes, indicating very slow reaction kinetics in this electrolyte. The linear relationship between the redox peak current (ip) with the scan rate (ν) implies that the reaction of the PProDOTs with electrolytes was mainly a surface-controlled process. This result shows that the formation of PProDOTs on the carbon electrodes influenced the surface state. In the Et4NBF4/ACN electrolyte solution, the slope of peak current density vs. scan rate plot in Fig. 3b represented high ion storage (increased slope) in polymer-coated thin films due to pseudocapacitance contribution. EIS can also be employed to ascertain the potential, where the contribution of pseudocapacitive charge storage is dominant for polymer-coated GC electrodes (more explanations were given in section 3.5). EIS measurements were performed at different bias potentials in the range between 0–1.4 V with a 0.2 V potential step considering the oxidation range of polymer film. The real capacitance at a low frequency of 10 mHz from capacitance Bode plot versus applied bias potential and the cyclic voltammogram at 25 mV s−1 for PProDOT–Br are given in Fig. S1.† Two coupled redox peaks at 0.46/0.42 V and 0.73/0.67 V were observed for PProDOT–Br, indicating two unique electronic environments, which might correspond to the redox properties induced by the bromo substituent.89 The shape of the plot of Crevs. V in Fig. S1† is in good agreement with the shape of the CV of the PProDOT–Br, corroborating the pseudocapacitance contribution at selected potentials associated with two coupled redox peaks for PProDOT–Br. This reveals considerable capacitance increase with the increasing potential indicating Faradaic capacitance of PProDOT–Br. Since there is a peak to peak separation shift with scan rate (Fig. 3a), our case can be an electrochemically quasi-reversible system, and ions of electrolytes are freely diffusing species. It is mainly considered that deviation from linearity in plots of ipvs. ν1/2 suggest electron transfer may also be occurring additionally through surface adsorbed species, as well.
Table 3 Comparison of polymers in terms of constant k (coverage of electrolyte anion) in Et4NBF4 [ip (A), ν (V s−1)]




Polymer
Slope of ipa = k′′·ν ×10−4 (R-squared)
Normalized
Slope of ipa = k·νb × 10−4 (R-squared)
Normalized

b





ProDOT
7.789 (0.992)
6.94
7.778 (0.993)
7.04
1.12


ProDOT–Br
8.431 (0.986)
7.51
8.410 (0.994)
7.61
1.25


ProDOT–OTs
6.488 (0.983)
5.78
6.476 (0.995)
5.86
1.29


ProDOT–OBz
2.270 (0.984)
2.02
2.267 (0.994)
2.05
1.20


ProDOT–OPh
1.122 (0.986)
1.00
1.105 (0.986)
1.00
0.95


BF4− (–CH2Br)
8.226 (0.999)
8.49
8.249 (0.999)
8.36
0.94


PF6− (–CH2Br)
2.551 (0.999)
2.63
2.543 (0.999)
2.58
1.03


ClO4− (–CH2Br)
0.969 (0.977)
1.00
0.987 (0.999)
1.00
0.77




In the used anions of PF6−, BF4−, and ClO4−, the more coordinating the anion, the more likely it has undesired interactions with the cation, the solvent, or the analyte. Our results show that for ProDOT–Br, the maximum current density in the Et4NBF4 is higher than Et4NPF6 solutions, that is, the current densities corresponding to the characteristic peaks are much more significant in the Et4NBF4 electrolyte depending on coordinating nature and solubility. For the electrochemically reversible electron transfer process by diffusing electrolyte ions onto redox active material, Randles–Sevcik equation is valid where the plots of ipvs. ν1/2 should be linear. On the other hand, in the case of electrode adsorbed or coated redox-active materials, the current response is defined by eqn (2):87,88 (2)where F is the Faraday's constant, R the universal gas constant, T the temperature, and Γ* the surface coverage of the adsorbed species in mol cm−2. The slope of the second equation with respect to ipvs. ν is k′′.
In this equation, adsorption and diffusion events can be described by placing a variable to the power of ν: ip = kνb.(3)This proposed equation allows to determine and adjust the data according to both variables, namely k and b. Since we do not restrict the power of scan rate by 1 or 0.5, we included a power parameter result suitable fittings, including the effect of diffusion and the adsorption. The peak current response generally varies linearly with the scan rate (ν). However, the careful evaluation of data and nonlinear fitting of ip = kνb indicates that the dependence of scan rate is varying, referring that the diffusion is effective in the adsorption process to a certain extent for all the PProDOT derivatives (Fig. 3d). The fitting has high R-squared values (between 0.991–0.995), confirming the accuracy. According to the data, it can be considered that the adsorption process is diffusion-controlled.
The anion exchange properties indicate that the coordinating nature of the anions is in the order PF6− > ClO4− > BF4−, which agrees with the order of association constants.90 The weak nucleophilicity and strong electron-withdrawing nature of the fluorine atom and the Lewis acidic character of the boron atom could be the primary factors for the least coordinating ability of BF4−.91 On the other hand, they are all categorized as “non-coordinating” anions; thus, they have a slight propensity to serve as ligands.92 For such types of anions, the forces that maintain the bonding network are the π–π stacking interactions (as discussed further in section 3.4).93 The presence of adsorbed or coated redox-active materials is also observed for ProDOT–Br in different electrolytes where an apparent deviation from linearity is observed (Fig. 3d). The curves can also be fitted by the ip = kνb equation with high accuracy.

Fig. 3e displays the calculated specific capacitance Csp values for the ProDOT derivatives in three different electrolytes (eqn (4)): (4)
Where  is the area under the current vs. potential curve, ν = 25 mV s−1, ΔV varying between 1.5–2 V and A = 0.0314 cm2. The higher storage capacity is delivered at lower scan rates. The highest specific capacitance is obtained for the Et4NBF4 electrolyte, followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4, indicating that electrolyte type strongly affects the capacitance of the electrode. The ionic size of the anion decreases in the following order of PF6− > ClO4− > BF4−. It is expected that the capacitance should be enhanced in the case of smaller anions due to the increasing accessibility of the ions to pores via increasing mobility of ions in the bulk solution.94 For the –OTs and –CH2Br derivatives, the use of Et4NBF4 delivers a tremendous increase in the specific capacitance, reaching Csp = 20.17 mF cm−2 and 13.56 mF cm−2 for the –CH2Br and –OTs derivatives, respectively, which is higher than that for the PProDOT reference (Csp = 12.28 mF cm−2). This could be attributed to the porosity of –OTs and –CH2Br derivatives matching well with the actual size of the electrolyte ions, where SEM images show porous structures for –OTs and –CH2Br derivatives prepared in the Et4NBF4 electrolyte (see Fig. 5). This finding is supported by comparatively stronger FTIR-ATR peaks obtained, where the bands at ∼528–532 cm−1 indicate the formation of polaronic charges in the polymeric thiophene ring chain. The exception is the –OBz derivative, where Csp is larger for the Et4NPF6 (Csp = 7.90 mF cm−2) than the Et4NBF4 (Csp = 4.82 mF cm−2) electrolyte. In Fig. 3f, it is shown that Epvs. scan rate is also prominent compared to the exponential dependence on ipvs. ν (in Fig. 3c and d). Our findings show that ip = kνb equation is more suitable for the practical analyses of these data types to understand and differentiate the scan rate and square root of scan rate dependence. In fact, b values also indicate deviation from scan rate dependence, meaning some amount of diffusion contribution is present as the equation is scan rate dependent. To conclude, this approach seems to be effective in quick evaluation by having several polymers in different electrolytic solutions.
3.3. Morphology and roughness analysis

Fig. 4 compares the tribological characteristics of all the samples electrocoated in three different solutions. Generally, the lower roughness for electro-coated films is observed for the NaClO4 case compared to the other two electrolytes, followed by increased roughness for Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6. The morphologies of PProDOTs bearing different functional groups electrocoated with various electrolytes show pronounced differences (Fig. 5). For PProDOT–Br, flower-shaped structures with high porosity (Et4NBF4), spiky ball-shaped texture (Et4NPF6), or homogenously patterned texture (NaClO4) are observed. PProDOT–OBz in Et4NBF4 has a network-type structure, whereas a rough hilly texture is observed for the coating in Et4NPF6. Homogeneously dispersed sub-micron-sized particles (inset) are obtained for electrocoating in NaClO4. PProDOT–OPh contains particles on the surface, especially on Et4NPF6, the largest. PProDOT–OTs in Et4NBF4 has the highest amount of surface asperities, followed by the Et4NPF6 and NaClO4 electrolyte. Although no strict correlation can be found between the individual surface morphology and electrochemical properties, in general, it can be said that different derivatives prepared in Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6 have relatively larger surface roughness than the samples prepared in NaClO4, which enhances the specific capacitance. This finding means that the interaction between the functional substituted groups of PProDOT derivatives and anions of electrolyte has a more noticeable impact on Csp than the size of anions.
 Fig. 4  AFM images of samples electropolymerized in (a) NaClO4, (b) Et4NBF4, and (c) Et4NPF6. Sample numbers are provided in Table 1. 
 Fig. 5  SEM images of PProDOT derivatives in different electrolytes. 
Variation in formed morphology depends on the rate of polymerization and the size of dopant anions.80,95 The porous morphology has been confirmed before in PEDOT coatings, a very similar chemical structure to ProDOT, obtained in acetonitrile (ACN)–Et4NBF4.96 The rough, porous morphology is again obtained when the EDOT monomer is coated in propylene carbonate solution with PF6− containing electrolyte.97 On the other hand, the PEDOT morphology and roughness depend mainly on the substrate material as the coating is performed in ACN:ClO4−, where a compact film structure was seen for the platinum substrate.98 The results can also be attributed to the enhanced dielectric constant of the ACN with NaClO4 addition instead of Et4NPF4 or Et4NPF6 yielding lower electropolymerization rates and smoother bulk films.99 Based on these results, the lower roughness for ProDOT derivatives on glassy carbon is attained by using NaClO4.
3.4. Structural and chemical analysis
Generally, strong diffraction peaks are rarely seen in these polymers due to their π–π intermolecular interactions coming from their highly crystalline nature.100,101 The polar tosyl and weakly polar benzene groups induce π–π stacking with a displacement due to dipole–dipole attraction102 and the possible formation of S⋯S interactions.103,104 X-ray diffraction pattern of the π–π stacking region is provided in Fig. 6. The peaks at 15.3, 18.0 and 21.6 most probably represent the π–π stacking promoted by the benzyl, tosyl and phenyl groups,105 which do not exist in ProDOT and ProDOT–Br.
 Fig. 6  X-ray diffraction patterns of the ProDOT and its derivatives. The marked peaks correlate with the π–π stacking. 
The FTIR-ATR results confirm a dramatic change of the chemical environment around ProDOT rings caused by both dopant anion and disturbing the interaction between ProDOT rings and substituents. Generally, the broad absorption band observed above 1600 cm−1 for overall spectra is a typical characteristic of conducting polymers attributed to the absorption of the free charge carrier.106 For PProDOT–Br doped with BF4− anion, the absorption bands at around 1157 and 1028 cm−1 can be attributed to the C–O–C bond stretching in the alkylenedioxy group (Fig. 7a). The characteristic C–S–C bonds in the thiophene ring were observed at around 941, 866, and 708 cm−1. The absorption at 1500 and 1384 cm−1 correspond to the CC and C–C stretching in the thiophene ring of PProDOT, indicating a successful polymerization.107,108 It can be seen that dopant influences the position of the absorption band. Particularly, the ClO4− dopant shifts the corresponding characteristic absorption bands towards higher wavenumbers (C–O–C bond stretching vibration band; 1055 and 1173 cm−1, C–S–C bonds vibration band; 777, 879, and 947 cm−1, the CC and C–C stretching band in polythiophene ring; 1504 and 1323 cm−1) probably due to different interaction of electrolyte ions with the polaronic structure of the polymeric unit, and absorption intensity decrease. In the case of PProDOT–OBz in different electrolytes, C–O–C stretching is observed between 1182–1007 cm−1. PProDOT–OBz also shows peculiar infrared bands: the aromatic CC and C–C stretching vibration appearing at 1502 to 1354 cm−1 is unique for monomeric thiophene in the polythiophene, referring to successful polymerization shifting with electrolyte type. Moreover, when comparing PProDOT–OBz in different solvents (Fig. 7b), the C–S–C stretching band is located around 939 and 729 cm−1. The same characteristic is observed for ClO4− dopant again; it is shifted due to electrolyte ion interaction in substituted ProDOT opposite ionic groups if there are any polaronic sites in the PProDOT derivatives chain backbone. PProDOT–OTs (Fig. 7c) and PProDOT–OPh (Fig. 7d) show all characteristic absorption bands of C–O–C, C–S–C, CC and C–C. The shift of absorption band towards higher wave number for PProDOT–OPh is more pronounced than that of PProDOT–OTs, indicating the influence of the substituted group.
 Fig. 7  FTIR absorptions spectra of (a) PProDOT–Br, (b) PProDOT–OBz (c) PProDOT–OTs, and (d) PProDOT–OPh in various electrolytes. 
3.5. Impedance and Mott–Schottky analysis
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to investigate the capacitive behavior and study the effect of dopant anion on electrochemical properties of PProDOT coated electrodes. Fig. 8 shows the Nyquist plots of PProDOT derivatives in three different electrolytes. It can be seen that the shape of the plot strongly depends on the type of dopant anion as well as on the different substituents on PProDOT. However, the Nyquist plots of the PProDOTs are similarly revealed that depressed semicircles at high-frequency region corresponding to double-layer capacitance and charge transfer resistance of the polymer coated electrode, and a straight line towards low and medium frequency region indicating capacitive and mass transfer behavior. As shown in Fig. 8a and b, for all derivatives, the low-frequency straight lines are almost vertical except for PProDOT–OPh, indicating good capacitive behavior in Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6. The deviation from vertical lines toward the imaginary axis means that electrodes were fully charged with a changing slope due to the fast diffusion of ions into the pores of electrodes during the charging process.109 The exception is the –OPhCH2OH derivative showing a slope of 4.4 (Fig. 8a). Furthermore, a relatively higher diffusion behavior is observed for the PProDOT derivatives measured in Et4NPF6 electrolyte compared to other electrolyte systems; the slope varies between 13.3 (–OPhCH2OH) up to 33.0 (–OBz) (Fig. 8b), indicating the lower Warburg region and faster electrolyte diffusion kinetics than that of Et4NBF4 and NaClO4.110,111 In the Et4NBF4 electrolytes, the increase in Zim is larger than Zre; thus, the low-frequency vertical line corresponding to higher diffusion kinetics with high slope values (between 14.4–17.1) indicates that most of the surface of the electrode is fully accessible for the BF4− anions than that of the ClO4− anion. Therefore, the smallest diffusion behavior is obtained for the NaClO4 electrolyte; it varies between 3.5 (–OPhCH2OH) and 7.9 (–CH2Br) (Fig. 8c). Thus, in all systems, the –OPhCH2OH derivative has the lowest electrolyte diffusion, whereas –CH2Br is the highest, which is in line with CV measurements. In NaClO4, it can be seen that the capacitive or diffusion/transport behavior at lower frequency domain is shifted to higher resistance along the x-axis of Nyquist plot and presents much higher resistance than those of Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6, as well. This can be linked to NaClO4 electrolyte generating a polymer film with compact nanostructures, which is probably lesser the penetration of electrolyte ions into the polymer network leading to low diffusion of ions, low capacitance value and high resistance.112
 Fig. 8  Nyquist plots of the PProDOT derivatives in (a) Et4NBF4, (b) Et4NPF6 and (c) NaClO4. The insets show the magnified regions of the high-frequency data. (d) ∣Z∣ vs. PProDOT derivatives. ∣Z∣ values are extracted from Bode magnitude plots corresponding to the 10 mHz values at OCP condition. 
In Fig. 8d, absolute impedance values of ∣Z∣ vs. PProDOT derivatives indicate that all three electrolytes show the lowest impedance (resistance). Here, ∣Z∣ values are extracted from Bode Magnitude plots corresponding to the 10 mHz values and representing the quasi-DC resistance since the frequency is low and close to the direct current. Relatively low values of impedance ∣Z∣ at 10 mHz are attained in the case of PProDOT–Br and PProDOT–OBz, which can be compared with the high resistance in NaClO4 for the PProDOT–OPh. The large bulky –OPhCH2OH group prevents the diffusion of NaClO4 into the intraplanar structure which was also observed in the case of low diffusion and capacitance values.
The dopant anion affects the capacitance of polymer coated electrode, summarized in Fig. 9, presenting the real and imaginary parts of the capacitance of the electrochemical cell as a function of the frequency (capacitance Bode plots). More information could be acquired by revealing the impact of dopant anion since this representation highlights the electrode–electrolyte interface in terms of capacitance instead of resistance. In this representation of impedance results, the real capacitance corresponds to capacitance measured via DC range, and the imaginary capacitance corresponds to energy losses via dissipation.113Cre at 0.01 Hz represents the highest deliverable capacitance which is 18.29 mF cm−2, 8.25 mF cm−2, 1.38 mF cm−2 for PProDOT–OBz in 0.1 M Et4NPF6, Et4NBF4, and NaClO4, respectively. Furthermore, the capacitance value of ProDOT based electrodes, except that –OTs derivative, decreases in the following order of Et4NPF6 Et4NBF4, and NaClO4. In the case of the –OTs derivative, the capacitance value in Et4NBF4 is higher than that of the Et4NPF6, where more ions can penetrate the well-developed PProDOT–OTs film prepared in Et4NBF4 electrolyte rather than the Et4NPF4 electrolyte leading to optimized charge storage process due to more size reduction of polymeric structure that improves the charge storage capability.114,115
 Fig. 9  Bode plots of the real capacitance for PProDOT derivatives in (a) Et4NPF6/ACN, (b) Et4NBF4/ACN, (c) NaClO4/ACN, (d) Bode plots of the imaginary capacitance for PProDOT derivatives in Et4NPF6/ACN, Et4NBF4/ACN, and NaClO4/ACN at OCP conditions. 
In Et4NBF4, as seen from Fig. 9b, –CH2Br and –OBz functional derivatives deliver much higher capacitance than that of PProDOT, while capacitance of –OTs and –OPhCH2OH functional derivatives is lower than that of PProDOT. This is because the substituent on the ProDOT backbone induces pronounced changes in the properties and structure of the obtained polymers, which has been proved in section 3.3 when the morphology of the ProDOT derivative is different. The low capacitance for –OTs and –OPhCH2OH functional derivatives than that of ProDOT itself is probably due to the deviation of conjugated backbone causing a deterioration of the overlap between their orbitals on consecutive ProDOT rings, and thus, shortening the effective mean conjugation length leading to a decrease in capacitance. The relaxation time constant can be derived from the frequency at maximum Cim (τ0 = ωmax−1) from Fig. 9d for PProDOT–Br and PProDOT–OBz in ET4NBF4, Et4NPF6 and NaClO4, revealing quantitatively the performance of PProDOTs coated electrodes giving valuable insight into the role of dopant anion within the frequency response. The τ0 of PProDOT–Br was calculated to be 0.15 s, 0.16 s, 0.46 s for Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, NaClO4, respectively, which is shorter than those of PProDOT–OBz, 0.23 s for Et4NBF4, 0.24 s for Et4NPF6, and 3.67 s for NaClO4, indicating that the full capacitance of the cell can be reached a better fast charging time within Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6 rather than NaClO4 electrolyte systems.
For the measured EIS data, an equivalent circuit of Rs(Q1(R1(Q2R2)))(Q3R3) is suggested to find a link between the experimental and the simulated impedance data that can better explain the interface of GC/PProDOTs/solution. Here, Rs represents the solution resistance due to the combined series resistance of the electrolyte, current collectors, electrode, and the contact resistance of electrode/current collector. The first parallel combination including constant phase element (CPE) and resistor (CPE1 and R1) explains the electrolyte/polymer interface, which is the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) and charge-transfer resistance (Rct).116 Moreover, the second parallel arrangement of CPE and resistor (CPE2-R2), which is serially connected to R1 expresses the capacitance and resistance behavior of the bulk polymer film. A CPE3 element was introduced in parallel to the R3, accounting for the resistance of charges moving between the polymer coating and the glassy carbon.70 Table S1† presents the change of each parameter as a function of electrolyte type and type of derivative. R1 varies between 1.58 Ω cm2 and 10.40 Ω cm2 depending on the selected derivative and electrolyte.
The EIS measurements reveal that polymer film doped with different dopant anions shows different kinetic behaviors. For the –CH2Br functional derivative, the charge transfer resistances in Et4PF6 (4.34 Ω cm2) and Et4NBF4 (4.14 Ω cm2) are small, and the electrochemical system is kinetically fast compared to other counterparts in the same electrolyte and NaClO4 electrolyte (234.43 Ω cm2), implying a very low electrical resistance between the ProDOT–Br grains. This can be ascribed to the steric and electronic natures of the 3–4 substituent on ProDOT and the mobility of dopant anion, which are important factors determining the morphology and electrochemical properties.117 Here, the constant phase element contrary to pure capacitance was introduced to describe the inhomogeneity at the porosity, electrode/electrolyte interface, and ion diffusion, described by the following equation (eqn (5)): (5)Here, n is a fractional exponent, and the value of n ranges between 0 and 1, , ω = 2πf is the angular frequency. When n = 0, Y0 corresponds to an ideal resistor, and when n = 1, it refers to an ideal capacitor (Y0 = C). Whereas for n = 0.5, it describes the homogeneous semi-infinite diffusion.118 As seen from Table S1,† the value of n for CPE1 closes to one, indicating a capacitor behavior rather than a resistor. Relatively lower CPE1 values are obtained for the NaClO4 electrolyte, and the highest Q1 is always attained for the EtNPF6 electrolyte. This means that the PF6− ions accumulate more than the other ions at the interface, consistent with the previous study, where it has been reported that the polypyrrole (PPy) film doped with PF6− anion has faster kinetics and larger charge capacity than a film doped with ClO4− anion, and also a PPy film prepared in LiPF6/PC presents rougher surface morphology than a PPy film prepared in LiClO4/PC.119 The charge transfer resistance at the polymer–electrolyte interface generated in the NaClO4 electrolyte is highest for the PProDOT coating, related to the conductivity of coated polymer film that depends on the dopant anion used for the electropolymerization. The conductivity of the electrodeposited PEDOT by PF6− anion higher than that of electrodeposited by ClO4− anion was reported.80 The low conductivity for PProDOT coating attained in NaClO4 is also confirmed by the low double-layer capacitance obtained in this electrolyte. The higher charge storage capacity of the sample doped with BF4− and PF6− anions are also attained.
Mott–Schottky results reveal that the semiconducting properties of polymer modified electrodes are very different depending on the dopant anion and substituent on ProDOT. This dependent response of dopant anion and substituent on ProDOT is given in Fig. 10, where the impedance measurements at different potentials ranging between −0.4 V and 1.5 V at a fixed frequency of 1 kHz was used to construct Mott–Schottky plots by drawing the inverse of squared space-charge capacitance (1/CSC2) against the applied bias potential. It is accepted that the space-charge capacitance is much larger than those of Helmholtz, and diffuse layer capacitances which can be neglected, and thus, the capacitance is equal to CSC. Mott–Schottky theory is only acceptable when the change of capacitance with potential is linear, by which the flat band potential and a donor or an acceptor density of polymer-coated electrodes from the linear portion of the Mott–Schottky plot can be estimated. Therefore, for the p- and n-type semiconductors, the Mott–Schottky equations are given in eqn (6) and (7), respectively:120 (6) (7)Here, CSC is the space-charge capacitance, A the area, NA the acceptor density, ND the donor density, T the absolute temperature, e the electronic charge, ε the vacuum permittivity, E the applied voltage, EFB the flat band potential, kB Boltzmann's constant and εp the relative permittivity of polymer films (the assumption of 3.5).121 The analyses were done from the linear parts of the C−2vs. E graph in Fig. 10. It is clearly seen that at a certain bias potential below 0 V or 0.5 V for PProDOT derivatives in Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4, the value of the inverse of squared capacitance escalates ascribing to the formation of an inversion layer leading to an apparent n-type conductivity with a positive slope.122 As for the depletion condition, with a negative slope between a certain bias potential which mean that all ProDOT derivatives show p-type semiconducting behavior up to 1 V in Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, NaClO4. On the other hand, beyond 1 V, PProDOT–Br in Et4NPF6 and PProDOT–OBz in Et4NPF6 and Et4NBF4 represent additional linear parts with a positive slope indicating n-type semiconducting behavior. The results obtained in the Mott–Schottky analysis can be ascribed to the variation of resistance leading to varying capacitance determined by impedance measurements, which can be explained in terms of the electronic structure of obtained polymeric material varying with dopant anions. The Mott–Schottky parameters for PProDOT, PProDOT–Br, PProDOT–OBz, PProDOT–OTs, and PProDOT–OPh in three different electrolytes (0.1 M Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4 mixture of ACN) are given in Table S2.† It is possible to calculate EFB where the x-intercept gives the flat-band potential. When the Fermi level of the semiconductor is flat, we obtain the flatband potential where there is no charge depletion. When an applied external potential at the interface of semiconductor/electrolyte is altered from cathodic to anodic potentials, the Fermi level can be artificially varied by mediating three different electrolytes for the p-type polymer-coated electrodes as the Fermi level directly corresponds to the electrochemical potential.123 The EFB of PProDOT–Br was estimated to be 0.26, 0.33, and 0.93 V in Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4, respectively, where the lowest EFB was calculated for Et4NBF4. In the case of the PProDOT–OBz and PProDOT–OTs in Et4NPF6, the lowest EFB value was estimated to be 0.0 V and 0.07 V, respectively. However, for PProDOT–OPh in NaClO4, the lowest EFB value was estimated to be 0.28 V. Variation of flatband with nature of dopant anion and different substituents on ProDOT is consistent with the beginning of the redox peak of the corresponding polymer in a voltammogram. This is associated with charging the polymer-coated electrode, which explains the sharp decrease of C−2 with applied bias potential toward the x-axis. The slope of this straight line gives the acceptor density or donor density. Therefore, the influence of dopant anion on the semiconducting properties of PProDOT coating is clearly seen from Table S2.† The acceptor density for PProDOT–Br, PProDOT–OBz, PProDOT–OTs coated GC in Et4NBF4 shows a slightly lower value compared to PProDOT. However, the acceptor density for PProDOT–OPh is nearly two times lower than that of PProDOT, indicating the distinctive influence of substituent group upon the semiconductive and electrical properties of PProDOTs. Among the substituted PProDOTs, PProDOT–OTs thin film has the highest acceptor density (NA1 = 4.04 × 1022) in NaClO4. On the other hand, –OPhCH2OH in NaClO4 and Et4NBF4 depicts the lowest acceptor density down to 1.53 × 1020 and 9.23 × 1020, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Mott–Schottky plots of (a) –CH2Br, (b) –OBz, and (c) –OTs, and (d) –OPhCH2OH derivatives of PProDOT. 
4. Conclusions
In this study, the electrolyte effect on ring-substituted electropolymerized ProDOT derivatives is investigated in detail by electrochemical methods for the processability and functionalization of PProDOT, substituted functional groups on ProDOT is introduced and evaluated for the electrocoating performance of four derivatives, namely –CH2Br, –OPhCH2OH, –OTs, and –OBz, as well as for their monomer-free forms in three different electrolytes, i.e. Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4. Electropolymerization of these monomers and monomer-free characterization are performed by cyclic voltammetry. Except for the –OBz derivative, the largest specific capacitance calculated from the area under the final CV curves is obtained for Et4NBF4, reaching Csp = 20.17 mF cm−2 and 13.56 mF cm−2 for the –CH2Br and –OTs derivatives, followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4. Our findings show that compared to the classical Randles–Sevcik equation, which depends on the concentration and diffusional properties of the electroactive species, the derived ip = kνb equation with k and a variable b exponent can be more suitable for the practical analyses of the samples where the adsorption of anions from the electrolyte is very rapid compared to diffusion.
Due to their π–π intermolecular interactions coming from their (semi)crystalline nature, the polar tosyl and weakly polar benzene groups induce π–π stacking with a displacement due to dipole–dipole attraction in the case of benzene ring containing ProDOTs and the possible formation of S⋯S interactions. The highest specific capacitance is obtained for the Et4NBF4 electrolyte, followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4, indicating that electrolyte type strongly affects the capacitance of the electrode. The ionic size of the anion decreases in the following order of PF6− > ClO4− > BF4−. In the used anions, the more coordinating the anion, it tends to exhibit fewer interactions with the cation, the solvent, or the analyte. ProDOT–Br has shown the maximum current density in the Et4NBF4 higher than Et4NPF6 solutions depending on coordinating nature and solubility. In all electrolyte systems, the –OPhCH2OH derivative has the lowest electrolyte diffusion, whereas –CH2Br is the highest which is found to be in line with monomer-free CV measurements.
The lowest roughness values are attained by AFM for the NaClO4 electrolyte. A highly porous, spiky ball-shaped, and relatively homogenous morphology is obtained from FESEM measurements for the Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4 electrolytes, respectively. The changes in the chemical environment around ProDOT thiophene rings are induced by electrolyte anion doping, as confirmed by FTIR-ATR. From the EIS data the highest Q1 is always attained for the EtNPF6 electrolyte, which suggests that the PF6− ions accumulate more at the interface than the other ions. A Mott–Schottky analysis reveals that the largest and smallest NA values are observed for the –OTs and –OPhCH2OH derivatives in the NaClO4 electrolyte, respectively. From Mott–Schottky analysis, PProDOT–Br and PProDOT–OBz has the highest capacitance within Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6 which is in line with the lowest charge transfer resistance confirmed by the EIS. The relaxation time constant of PProDOT–Br is found to be shorter for Et4NBF4, Et4NPF6, and NaClO4, than those of PProDOT–OBz as a representative of bulky substituents in the same electrolyte, and which also indicates that the full capacitance of the cell can be reached a better fast charging time within Et4NBF4 and Et4NPF6 rather than NaClO4 electrolyte systems.
The structural derivatives of ProDOTs in different electrolytes studied here can be used as a model for interfaces studies, while understanding the interfacial interactions is crucial to optimize the charge carriers and key parameters in organic electronic devices. This study also elucidates further on controlling the charge transport parameters by substituting functional groups and anion doping in polyalkylenedioxythiophene structures. Tuning charge carriers by substituting functional groups and anion doping in PPrODOTs by varying functionalization are shown to have a predominant impact on the electrochemical properties of investigated polymers, and their functionalities are reported to shape the energy level related properties of these polymers, with particular reference to n- and p-doping induced charged states.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the European Research Council under the Advanced Grant “INTELHYB – Next generation of complex metallic materials in intelligent hybrid structures” (Grant ERC-2013-ADG-340025) and the Ministry of Science and Higher Education of the Russian Federation in the framework of the Increase Competitiveness Program of MISiS (grant number K2-2020-046). Skillful technical assistance by Dr. Heike Faltz (IDM) and Mr. Jürgen Weber (IDM) is gratefully acknowledged.
References
J. Roncali, Chem. Rev., 1992, 92, 711–738 CrossRef CAS .
K. Gurunathan, A. V. Murugan, R. Marimuthu, U. P. Mulik and D. P. Amalnerkar, Mater. Chem. Phys., 1999, 61, 173–191 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Pringle, M. Forsyth, D. R. MacFarlane, K. Wagner, S. B. Hall and D. L. Officer, Polymer, 2005, 46, 2047–2058 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2397–2409 RSC .
P. Marque, J. Roncali and F. Garnier, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 218, 107–118 CrossRef CAS .
I. Villareal, E. Morales and J. L. Acosta, Polymer, 2001, 42, 3779–3789 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Reynolds, S.-g. Hsu and H. J. Arnott, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 1989, 27, 2081–2103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ates, T. Karazehir and N. Uludag, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 3302–3312 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. M. Cervantes, D. C. Bento, E. C. R. Maia, R. V. Fernandes, E. Laureto, G. J. Moore, G. Louarn and H. de Santana, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2014, 25, 1703–1715 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Elschner, S. Kirchmeyer, W. Lövenich, U. Merker and K. Reuter, PEDOT Principles and Applications of an Intrinsically Conductive Polymer, CRC Press, Boca Raton,  2011 Search PubMed .
R. Singh, J. Tharion, S. Murugan and A. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19427–19435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dubey, X. Tao, C. Cochrane and V. Koncar, IEEE Access, 2020, 8, 182918–182929 Search PubMed .
G. Huseynova, Y. Hyun Kim, J.-H. Lee and J. Lee, J. Inf. Disp., 2020, 21, 71–91 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Ko, H. B. Lee and J.-W. Kang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000168 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia and S. Dai, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2021, 32, 12746–12757 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liao, H. Si, X. Zhang and S. Lin, Sensors, 2019, 19, 218 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Gao, J. Yu, Q. Tian, J. Shi, M. Zhang, S. Chen and L. Zang, Chemosensors, 2021, 9, 79 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hu, Y. Xue, J. Xu and B. Lu, Front. Robot. AI, 2019, 6, 114 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Sultana, H. C. Chang, S. Jefferson and D. E. Daniels, J. Pharm. Invest., 2020, 50, 437–444 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Donahue, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, S. Inal, J. Qu, R. M. Owens, D. Mecerreyes, G. G. Malliaras and D. C. Martin, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 140, 100546 CrossRef .
Z. Fan and J. Ouyang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800769 CrossRef CAS .
S. Panigrahy and B. Kandasubramanian, Eur. Polym. J., 2020, 132, 109726 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, G. F. Richardson, Q. Meng, S. Zhu, H. C. Kuan and J. Ma, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 042001 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ni, Y. Chen, H. Song, C. Liu, X. Yang and K. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 1323–1333 RSC .

          M. Karakoti, S. Pandey, N. G. Sahoo, A. Dandapat and S. Mahendia, Polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT)-Based Supercapacitor Applications, Conducting Polymers-Based Energy Storage Materials, ed. D. Inamuddin, R. Boddula, M. F. Ahmer and A. M. Asiri, Boca Raton,  2019, pp. 235–254,  DOI:10.1201/9780429202261 .
P. H. Aubert, L. Groenendaal, F. Louwet, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and G. Zotti, Synth. Met., 2002, 126, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baek, R. A. Green and L. A. Poole-Warren, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2014, 102, 2743–2754 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Skorupa, D. Więcławska, D. Czerwińska-Główka, M. Skonieczna and K. Krukiewicz, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Seki, M. Takahashi and M. Takashiri, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 15957–15965 RSC .
R. Kiebooms, A. Aleshin, K. Hutchison and F. Wudl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 11037–11039 CrossRef CAS .
E. Poverenov, M. Li, A. Bitler and M. Bendikov, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4019–4025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Aleshin, R. Kiebooms, R. Menon and A. J. Heeger, Synth. Met., 1997, 90, 61–68 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gunbas and L. Toppare, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1083–1101 RSC .

          S. O. Hacioglu, H. Z. Kaya, Y. A. Udum and L. Toppare, in Electrochromic Smart Materials: Fabrication and Applications, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2019, pp. 51–102,  10.1039/9781788016667-00051 .
B. C. Thompson, Y.-G. Kim and J. R. Reynolds, Macromolecules, 2005, 38, 5359–5362 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Campos, A. J. Mozer, S. Günes, C. Winder, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, B. C. Thompson, B. D. Reeves, C. R. G. Grenier and J. R. Reynolds, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3531–3546 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, T. I. Ryu, M. Song, K.-J. Yoon, M. J. Lee, I. A. Shin, G.-D. Lee, J. W. Lee, Y.-S. Gal and S.-H. Jin, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2008, 46, 6175–6184 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Huang, Z.-Y. Ho, D. Kekuda, C.-W. Chu and K.-C. Ho, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19125–19130 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Lee, P. Y. Chen, C. Y. Hsu, J. H. Huang, W. H. Ho, H. C. Chen and K. C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2009, 188, 313–318 CrossRef CAS .
K.-M. Lee, C.-Y. Hsu, P.-Y. Chen, M. Ikegami, T. Miyasaka and K.-C. Ho, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 3375–3379 RSC .
Y. L. Liang, B. Peng, J. Liang, Z. L. Tao and J. Chen, Org. Lett., 2010, 12, 1204–1207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, J. H. Yum, H. J. Butt, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 2814–2819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, T. Bessho, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, J. Frey, C. Yi, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10631–10639 RSC .
J.-C. Chou, Y.-C. Huang, T.-Y. Wu, Y.-H. Liao, C.-H. Lai, C.-M. Chu and Y.-J. Lin, Polymers, 2017, 9, 271 CrossRef PubMed .
R. S. Dudhe, J. Sinha, A. Kumar and V. R. Rao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 148, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Vobecka, R. Blue, F. Vilela, P. J. Skabara and D. Uttamchandani, Micro Nano Lett., 2012, 7, 962–964 CrossRef .
R. Blue, Z. Vobecka, P. J. Skabara and D. Uttamchandani, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 176, 534–542 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Q. Zhao, W. Zou, Q. Qu and F. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 244, 891–896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdulla, A. Ali, R. Jamal, T. Bakri, W. Wu and T. Abdiryim, Polymers, 2019, 11, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dulgerbaki, A. U. Oksuz and S. Ahmad, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 122, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Jetzschmann, G. Jágerszki, D. Dechtrirat, A. Yarman, N. Gajovic-Eichelmann, H.-D. Gilsing, B. Schulz, R. E. Gyurcsányi and F. W. Scheller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5178–5183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Niu, L. Rao, P. Liu, W. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. Zuo, K. Chai, S. Chen, J. Xu and X. Duan, Synth. Met., 2018, 246, 282–288 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Niu, K.-K. Chai, M.-X. Zeng, T.-T. Wang, C.-Y. Zhang, S. Chen, J.-K. Xu and X.-M. Duan, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2019, 37, 451–461 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, R. Jamal, Y. Ge, W. Zhang, Z. Yu, Y. Yan, Y. Liu and T. Abdiryim, Carbon, 2020, 161, 842–855 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gaihre, S. Ashraf, G. M. Spinks, P. C. Innis and G. G. Wallace, Sens. Actuators, A, 2013, 193, 48–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Stenger-Smith, C. K. Webber, N. Anderson, A. P. Chafin, K. K. Zong and J. R. Reynolds, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A973–A977 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Sarac, H. D. Gilsing, A. Gencturk and B. Schulz, Prog. Org. Coat., 2007, 60, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Stenger-Smith, A. Guenthner, J. Cash, J. A. Irvin and D. J. Irvin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A298–A304 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Liu and J. R. Reynolds, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3586–3593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kumar, H. J. Choi, A. Bund, J.-B. Baek and Y. T. Jeong, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12268–12274 RSC .
A. W. Lang, J. F. Ponder, A. M. Österholm, N. J. Kennard, R. H. Bulloch and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23887–23897 RSC .
L. R. Savagian, A. M. Österholm, J. F. Ponder, K. J. Barth, J. Rivnay and J. R. Reynolds, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804647 CrossRef PubMed .
M. G. Ersozoglu, H. D. Gilsing, A. Gencturk and A. S. Sarac, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 9504–9519 CrossRef CAS .
S. Deshagani, A. Das, D. Nepak and M. Deepa, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2020, 2, 1190–1202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Karazehir, B. Sarac, H. D. Gilsing, J. Eckert and A. S. Sarac, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 070543 CrossRef .

          A. Sezai Sarac and A. Gencturk, in Low-Dimensional and Nanostructured Materials and Devices: Properties, Synthesis, Characterization, Modelling and Applications, ed. H. Ünlü, N. J. M. Horing and J. Dabrowski, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2016, pp. 461–476,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-25340-4_18 .
D. E. Shen, L. A. Estrada, A. M. Österholm, D. H. Salazar, A. L. Dyer and J. R. Reynolds, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7509–7516 RSC .
Y. Zhu, M. T. Otley, F. A. Alamer, A. Kumar, X. Zhang, D. M. D. Mamangun, M. Li, B. G. Arden and G. A. Sotzing, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1378–1386 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Sarac, A. Gencturk, H. D. Gilsing, B. Schulz and C. M. Turhan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2009, 9, 2877–2886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Turhan, A. S. Sarac, A. Gencturk, H. D. Gilsing, H. Faltz and B. Schulz, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 511–515 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Sarac, S. E. Ozgul, A. Gencturk, B. Schulz, H. D. Gilsing and H. Faltz, Prog. Org. Coat., 2010, 69, 527–533 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Sarac, S. E. Ozgul, H. Faltz, A. Gencturk, H. D. Gilsing and B. Schulz, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 8043–8053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Karazehir, B. Sarac, H.-D. Gilsing, S. Gumrukcu, J. Eckert and A. S. Sarac, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2021, 6, 214–233 RSC .
T. Karazehir, B. Sarac, H.-D. Gilsing, J. Eckert and A. S. Sarac, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168, 086503 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, B. A. Collins, M. Sessolo, E. Stavrinidou, X. Strakosas, C. Tassone, D. M. Delongchamp and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11287 CrossRef PubMed .
K. D. Fong, T. Wang, H.-K. Kim, R. V. Kumar and S. K. Smoukov, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2014–2020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Onorato and C. K. Luscombe, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2019, 4, 310–324 RSC .
R. Schrebler, P. Grez, P. Cury, C. Veas, M. Merino, H. Gomez, R. Cordova and M. A. del Valle, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 430, 77–90 CrossRef CAS .
J. Arjomandi, D. Nematollahi and A. Amani, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 5 CrossRef .
M. A. del Valle, A. M. Ramirez, L. A. Hernandez, F. Armijo, F. R. Diaz and G. C. Arteaga, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2016, 11, 7048–7065 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. del Valle, A. M. R. Ramirez, F. R. Diaz, M. A. Pardo, E. Ortega and F. Armijo, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2018, 13, 12404–12419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rybakiewicz, L. Skorka, G. Louarn, R. Ganczarczyk, M. Zagorska and A. Pron, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 472–483 CrossRef CAS .
D. Asil, A. Cihaner, F. Algi and A. M. Önal, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2008, 618, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Kim and J. L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16880–16889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Mishra, R. Sahoo, A. V. Ambade, A. Q. Contractor and A. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1896–1900 RSC .
V. Bethmont, A. El Kassmi, F. Fache and M. Lemaire, Synth. Met., 1998, 93, 197–201 CrossRef CAS .
N. Elgrishi, K. J. Rountree, B. D. McCarthy, E. S. Rountree, T. T. Eisenhart and J. L. Dempsey, J. Chem. Educ., 2018, 95, 197–206 CrossRef CAS .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, in Electrochemical Methods: Fundamentals and Applications, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ, 2nd edn,  2001 Search PubMed .
D. Mantione, N. Casado, A. Sanchez-Sanchez, H. Sardon and D. Mecerreyes, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 2721–2724 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Schnebeck, E. Freisinger and B. Lippert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 168–171 CrossRef CAS .
O.-S. Jung, Y. J. Kim, Y.-A. Lee, K.-M. Park and S. S. Lee, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 844–850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Chew, M. A. Healy, M. I. Khalil and N. Logan, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1975, 1315–1318,  10.1039/dt9750001315 .
C. Janiak, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2000, 3885–3896,  10.1039/b003010o .
E. Ismar, T. Karazehir, M. Ates and A. S. Sarac, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 45723 CrossRef .
H. Okamoto and T. Kotaka, Polymer, 1999, 40, 407–417 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bodart, N. Rossetti, J. E. Hagler, P. Chevreau, D. Chhin, F. Soavi, S. B. Schougaard, F. Amzica and F. Cicoira, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17226–17233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Blanchard, B. Carre, F. Bonhomme, P. Biensan, H. Pages and D. Lemordant, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 569, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
F. S. Belaidi, A. Civélas, V. Castagnola, A. Tsopela, L. Mazenq, P. Gros, J. Launay and P. Temple-Boyer, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 214, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kiefer, G. A. Bowmaker, R. P. Cooney, P. A. Kilmartin and J. Travas-Sejdic, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2593–2599 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Wang, H. L. Dong, L. Jiang and W. P. Hu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 422–500 RSC .
M. Tang, S. L. Zhu, Z. T. Liu, C. Jiang, Y. C. Wu, H. Y. Li, B. Wang, E. J. Wang, J. Ma and C. L. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 2600–2614 CAS .
C. L. Wang, H. L. Dong, H. X. Li, H. P. Zhao, Q. Meng and W. P. Hu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 4155–4160 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Wang, H. L. Dong, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2208–2267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Sun, L. Tan, S. D. Jiang, H. L. Qian, Z. H. Wang, D. W. Yan, C. G. Di, Y. Wang, W. P. Wu, G. Yu, S. K. Yan, C. R. Wang, W. P. Hu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1882–1883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Karazehir, B. Sarac, H.-D. Gilsing, S. Gumrukcu, J. Eckert and A. S. Sarac, Mol. Syst. Des. Eng., 2021, 6, 214–233 RSC .
I. Carrillo, E. S. de la Blanca, M. I. Redondo, M. V. García, M. J. González-Tejera, J. L. G. Fierro and E. Enciso, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 136–142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jamal, L. Zhang, M. Wang, Q. Zhao and T. Abdiryim, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2016, 26, 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiang, A. Ali, R. Jamal, S. Ding, Z. P. Zhong and T. Abdiryim, Polym. Compos., 2019, 40, 1989–1999 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gupta, A. K. Singh and R. Prakash, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 519, 1016–1019 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhou, J. Guo, S. Zhang and Y. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 283, 1468–1474 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, X. Zheng, Y. Li, H. Zheng, Y. Liu and S.-i. Suye, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 067502 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, H. Yang and J. Kwak, Electrochem. Commun., 2002, 4, 128–133 CrossRef CAS .
A. Oz, S. Hershkovitz, N. Belman, E. Tal-Gutelmacher and Y. Tsur, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 288, 311–314 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, H. P. Wu, Y. N. Meng and Z. X. Wei, Small, 2014, 10, 14–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. G. H. Staaf, P. Lundgren and P. Enoksson, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 128–141 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Chen, T. C. Wen, C. C. Hu and A. Gopalan, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 47, 1305–1315 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. J. Zhang, S. C. Xu and J. X. Wang, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 655–661 CrossRef CAS .
T. Karazehir, M. Ates and A. S. Sarac, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, G107–G114 CrossRef CAS .
T. Osaka, K. Naoi, H. Sakai and S. Ogano, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 285–289 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. Krishnan and M. Garnett, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2006, 1, 283–303 CAS .
J. Gasiorowski, A. I. Mardare, N. S. Sariciftci and A. W. Hassel, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 691, 77–82 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gasiorowski, A. I. Mardare, N. S. Sariciftci and A. W. Hassel, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 834–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Adán-Más, T. M. Silva, L. Guerlou-Demourgues and M. F. Montemor, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 289, 47–55 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1me00171j‡ Adjunct with National University of Science and Technology “MISiS”, Leninsky Prosp., 4, 119049, Moscow, Russia.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Design, System, Application
With this study, we introduce, for the first time, a comprehensive approach to determine the intrinsic properties of 3,4-propylenedioxythiophene (ProDOT) derivatives, which enables new application possibilities in energy, biomedical, and sensor material development. ProDOT derivatives bearing reactive functional groups like bromomethyl (ProDOT–Br), tolylsulfonyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OTs), benzyloxymethyl (ProDOT–OBz), and hydroxymethylphenoxymethyl (ProDOT–OPh) as precursors were electropolymerized and examined comparatively in three different electrolytes, namely tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (Et4NBF4), tetraethylammonium hexafluorophosphate (Et4NPF6) and sodium perchlorate (NaClO4). To evaluate the concentration and diffusion effects, we propose a new and a more practical equation which can be used when the adsorption of anions from the electrolyte is very rapid compared to diffusion. The largest specific capacitance in general is highest in Et4NBF4 electrolyte followed by Et4NPF6 and NaClO4. Different morphologies, roughness and characteristic absorption bands can be attained by changing the electrolyte which also influences the impedance and Mott–Schottky behavior. The investigated ProDOT derivatives can be used as polymeric interfaces in assembly systems to optimize charge carriers in organic electronic devices. This study involves chemistry, materials science and energy fields due to the in-depth investigation of electropolymerization, and electrochemistry, surface, spectroscopic and structural characterization of functionalized thiophene-based electroconductive polymers.



1	ProDOT–Br	NaClO4	


2	ProDOT–Br	Et4NBF4
3	ProDOT–Br	Et4NPF6
4	ProDOT–OBz	NaClO4	


5	ProDOT–OBz	Et4NBF4
6	ProDOT–OBz	Et4NPF6
7	ProDOT–OPh	NaClO4	


8	ProDOT–OPh	Et4NBF4
9	ProDOT–OPh	Et4NPF6
10	ProDOT–OTs	NaClO4	


11	ProDOT–OTs	Et4NBF4
12	ProDOT–OTs	Et4NPF6
13	ProDOT	Et4NBF4	



 	Fig. 1  Scheme of the electrochemical polymerization and interaction of electrolyte with the substituted ProDOT on GC.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electropolymerization of (a) PProDOT in Et4NBF4 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (b) ProDOT–Br in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (c) ProDOT–OBz in three electrolytes on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (d) ProDOT–OTs in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer-free curve (inset), (e) ProDOT–OPhCH2OH in NaClO4, Et4NBF4, and Et4NPF6 on GC and monomer free-curve (inset). Electropolymerization was performed at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 by 10 deposition cycles.	 

PProDOT	1.49	—	—
PProDOT–Br	1.72	1.51	1.71
PProDOT–OBz	1.50	1.41	1.66
ProDOT–OPh	1.50	1.47	1.69
ProDOT–OTs	1.75	1.54	1.77

 	Fig. 3  (a) CV of monomer free of PProDOT–Br in Et4NBF4, inset is ln ipavs. ln ν. (b) ipvs. ν of PProDOT derivatives in Et4NBF4. (c) Non-linear fitting of ipa = kνb as a function of PProDOT derivatives in Et4NBF4. (d) Comparison of PProDOT–Br in three electrolytes using non-linear fitting of ipa = kνb. (e) Cspvs. PProDOT derivatives measured in a monomer-free environment. (f) Epvs. ln ν for –OTs and –Br derivative comparison. Inset is Epvs. ν.	 
ip = 268600n3/2ACD1/2ν1/2 = k′ν1/2,	(1)

ProDOT	7.789 (0.992)	6.94	7.778 (0.993)	7.04	1.12
ProDOT–Br	8.431 (0.986)	7.51	8.410 (0.994)	7.61	1.25
ProDOT–OTs	6.488 (0.983)	5.78	6.476 (0.995)	5.86	1.29
ProDOT–OBz	2.270 (0.984)	2.02	2.267 (0.994)	2.05	1.20
ProDOT–OPh	1.122 (0.986)	1.00	1.105 (0.986)	1.00	0.95
BF4− (–CH2Br)	8.226 (0.999)	8.49	8.249 (0.999)	8.36	0.94
PF6− (–CH2Br)	2.551 (0.999)	2.63	2.543 (0.999)	2.58	1.03
ClO4− (–CH2Br)	0.969 (0.977)	1.00	0.987 (0.999)	1.00	0.77
	(2)
ip = kνb.	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  AFM images of samples electropolymerized in (a) NaClO4, (b) Et4NBF4, and (c) Et4NPF6. Sample numbers are provided in Table 1.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM images of PProDOT derivatives in different electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 6  X-ray diffraction patterns of the ProDOT and its derivatives. The marked peaks correlate with the π–π stacking.	 

 	Fig. 7  FTIR absorptions spectra of (a) PProDOT–Br, (b) PProDOT–OBz (c) PProDOT–OTs, and (d) PProDOT–OPh in various electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Nyquist plots of the PProDOT derivatives in (a) Et4NBF4, (b) Et4NPF6 and (c) NaClO4. The insets show the magnified regions of the high-frequency data. (d) ∣Z∣ vs. PProDOT derivatives. ∣Z∣ values are extracted from Bode magnitude plots corresponding to the 10 mHz values at OCP condition.	 

 	Fig. 9  Bode plots of the real capacitance for PProDOT derivatives in (a) Et4NPF6/ACN, (b) Et4NBF4/ACN, (c) NaClO4/ACN, (d) Bode plots of the imaginary capacitance for PProDOT derivatives in Et4NPF6/ACN, Et4NBF4/ACN, and NaClO4/ACN at OCP conditions.	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 10  Mott–Schottky plots of (a) –CH2Br, (b) –OBz, and (c) –OTs, and (d) –OPhCH2OH derivatives of PProDOT.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1me00171j
‡ Adjunct with National University of Science and Technology “MISiS”, Leninsky Prosp., 4, 119049, Moscow, Russia.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
