Structural and electronic properties of dye-sensitized TiO 2 for solar cell applications: from single molecules to self-assembled monolayers  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC00554C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC00554C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 4346-4373Structural and electronic properties of dye-sensitized TiO2 for solar cell applications: from single molecules to self-assembled monolayers

        
          
            Mariachiara 
            Pastore
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Thibaud 
            Etienne
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Filippo 
            De Angelis
          
          
        
      *ac
aComputational Laboratory for Hybrid Organic Photovoltaics (CLHYO), CNR-ISTM, via Elce di Sotto 8, I-06123, Perugia, Italy. E-mail: mariachiara.pastore@univ-lorraine.fr; filippo@thch.unipg.it;  Fax: +39 075 585 5606;   Tel: +39 075 585 5523
bCNRS, Théorie-Modélisation-Simulation, SRSMC, Boulevard des Aiguillettes, 54506 Vandoeuvre-lès-Nancy, France
cCompuNet, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia, Via Morego 30, 16163 Genova, Italy
Received 
      5th February 2016
    , Accepted 23rd March 2016First published on 23rd March 2016AbstractWe review computational contributions to the understanding of the physical principles underlying interface phenomena related to dye adsorption at the surface of titanium oxide, within the scope of dye sensitized solar cell applications. We focus our attention on the theoretical studies aimed at computationally representing dye-sensitized solar cells under realistic conditions, e.g. by including the solvent and the electrolyte in interactions with dye-sensitized TiO2 through protocols accounting for thermal nuclear motion. The impact of dye clustering and self-aggregation into monolayers on the optical and transport properties of dye-sensitized TiO2 is addressed. Computational studies of surface protonation, charge- and energy-transfer, or the influence of the presence of additive agents or co-sensitizers are also reviewed in relation to the electronic, spectroscopic, kinetic and diffusion properties of self-assembled dye monolayers sensitizing TiO2.
Mariachiara Pastore
Mariachiara Pastore is a CNRS Researcher at the Equipe Théorie-Modélisation-Simulation (TMS) at the Université de Lorraine (France). She obtained her PhD in 2009 in theoretical chemistry from the University of Ferrara. She worked as a post-doc at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics of Istituto CNR di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari in the research group of Dr Filippo De Angelis, where she developed novel approaches and methodologies for the spectroscopy of organic sensitizers and their aggregates on oxide surfaces. In 2013 she was awarded as the best young CNR researcher (under 35 years) in Chemical and Materials Science. In 2014 she got the “Carla Roetti” prize from the Italian Chemistry Society, dedicated to theoretical and computational chemists under 40. Her research interests mainly lie in the area of theoretical and computational spectroscopy, applied to new materials for photovoltaic devices.
Thibaud Etienne
Thibaud Etienne is a postdoctoral researcher at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics of Istituto CNR di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari. He obtained a joint PhD between Belgium (University of Namur, under the supervision of Dr Eric A. Perpète and Dr Catherine Michaux) and France (University of Lorraine, under the supervision of Pr Xavier Assfeld and Antonio Monari) in theoretical chemistry in 2015. His main interests lie in the determination and characterization of the electronic excited states of complex molecular systems, more particularly the electron density topological rearrangement occurring upon light-absorption. Since 2015 he has been performing research as a post-doc under the supervision of Dr Filippo De Angelis in the field of perovskite solar cells and excited state topological analyses. In 2016 he was awarded the Gaston Berthier Award from the French Theoretical Chemistry Network for his PhD.
Filippo De Angelis
Filippo De Angelis is a senior research scientist and a deputy director at the CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology, in Perugia, Italy. He is the founder and co-leader of the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics in Perugia. He earned a BS in Chemistry in 1996 and a PhD in Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry in 1999, both from the University of Perugia, Italy. He is an expert in the development and application of quantum chemical methods to the study of the structural, electronic, and optical properties of complex molecules and materials including transition metals. His main research interests are in the field of hybrid/organic photovoltaics, optoelectronics and non-linear optics, employing first principles computational methods to predict and interpret the properties of new and existing materials. He is the 2007 recipient of the Raffaello Nasini Gold Medal of the Inorganic Chemistry Division of the Italian Chemical Society.
I. Introduction
The progressive depletion of fossil fuels along with the dramatic increase in environmental pollution and noxious gas emissions has stimulated an urgent need for renewable energy technologies. Since solar radiation strikes the earth's surface at a continuous rate of 1.2 × 105 TW, largely overcoming our current worldwide power demand, converting solar energy into electricity1 or storing it in chemical fuels (producing oxygen and a reduced fuel from water)2 represents one of the most challenging scientific and technological tasks. In this perspective, nanostructured dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs),3–7 which have been recently successfully transferred to actual industrial applications, represent promising alternatives, with a comparable cost and, in principle, a lower environmental impact, to traditional silicon-based photovoltaic devices.
Two electrodes and a redox mediator are the three main components of a DSC. Solar light absorption occurs at the photo-electrode interface, where a dye sensitizer is chemically bound to a wide band gap mesoporous semiconductor substrate (usually TiO2). The photo-excited electrons are then injected into the unoccupied semiconductor states (CB), and the charge hole which is created on the dye upon excited state charge injection into the semiconductor CB is transferred to the redox mediator, which is regenerated by a catalyst at the counter-electrode, closing the circuit (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Global scheme of the electronic processes occurring in a direct-type third-generation solar cell. (1) The dye (D) catches a photon and enters its electronic excited state (D*), from which (2) it can inject an electron into the semiconductor conduction band. This electron will flow (3) through the circuit and reduce (4) the electrolyte, which will react (5) with the oxidized dye D+ to regenerate it into D. 
Up to now, the highest-performance DSC devices employing the liquid I−/I3− electrolyte8 are those sensitized with Ru(II)-based dyes, such as N3, N719 or C106,9,10 although a number of promising alternatives are being developed to tackle ruthenium scarcity, including for instance iron-based solar cells.11,12 Metal-free dyes13–15 have also been developed, with overall efficiencies approaching 10%.16,17 In conjunction with ferrocene or cobalt-based electrolytes, organic dyes have been shown to clearly outperform Ru(II) dyes.13,18–22 Moreover, the recent replacement of the dye sensitizer with hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials has represented a revolution in the DSC technology, with unprecedented certified power conversion efficiency exceeding 20%.23–25 From a different perspective, the use of a mixture of dyes having complementary absorption spectra represents an appealing strategy to obtain panchromatic TiO2 sensitization,26–41 and, as a matter of fact, the new DSC efficiency record, exceeding 14%, has been reported for co-photosensitized solar cells exploiting two metal-free sensitizers bearing an alkoxysilyl and a carboxylic anchoring group, respectively.42
General “golden rules” to appropriately design and combine isolated DSC components (i.e. dyes,43–47 semiconductors48,49 and electrolytes50,51) are derived from simple considerations on the material's structural, redox and optical properties.7,52 A potential highly-efficient dye should, in fact, possess broad and intense absorption, associated with a long-lived charge-separated excited state, strongly coupled to the oxide CB states, and ground and excited state oxidation potentials properly aligned to the redox potential of the mediator and the semiconductor CB respectively, favouring extremely fast electron injection and regeneration kinetics.53 The overall cell efficiency is, however, strongly affected by the rate/efficiency of the charge separation processes taking place at the multiple metal oxide/dye/electrolyte heterointerfaces. Thus, besides optimization of standalone components (i.e. dyes, semiconductors and redox shuttles), optimizing the energy level matching, the morphology and the optical properties of the dye/TiO2 interface is crucial to boost the device efficiency.54–62 A recent work also reports on the use of dye monolayers as a hole transporting material, by exploiting intermolecular hole migration.63,64 As a matter of fact, under working conditions, dye sensitizers are usually closely packed on the semiconductor surface.65–69 The molecular structure of the dye,70–75 surface protonation,61 as well as the general dyeing conditions (e.g. solvent, dipping time, use of co-adsorbents, etc.) can, however, significantly modify the surface coverage of the dye.
Prototypical organic dyes, bearing a cyanoacrylic anchoring group and characterized by an adsorption configuration with the dye almost perpendicular to the substrate surface,76–79 usually present high surface coverage (∼2 molecules per nm2).65,66 For D–π–A organic dyes anchored by means of a rhodanine-3-acetic acid anchoring group, on the other hand, lower surface densities have been reported (0.3–0.6 molecules per nm2).67 The lower surface coverage is basically related to the different anchoring configuration adopted by these dyes,77,80,81 lying bent with an angle of about 45° with respect to the TiO2 surface. This adsorption mode, which is typical of indoline dyes, is characterized by strong π-stacking interactions, which are manifested by fast hole transfer among surface adsorbed dyes.82 Ruthenium dyes usually show surface coverages in the range of 0.3–0.8 molecules per nm2,68,83 although a value of 1.8 molecules per nm2 has been reported upon formation of dye multilayers.83 Since the macroscopic DSC efficiency is directly influenced by the molecular and supramolecular characteristics of the dye layer, extensive experimental and computational efforts have been focused, in the last few years, on the conformational, topological, optical and charge transfer properties of dye-sensitized TiO2 surfaces.57,65,76,84–95 The commonly accepted picture, mainly grounded on a Langmuir-type adsorption behavior,96,97 is that dye molecules organize themselves on the TiO2 surface into highly ordered self-assembled monolayers (SAM),98–100 although the existence of dye multilayers83 and inhomogeneous films101 has been reported. The complexity of the dye/metal oxide interface morphology has been, however, recently reported by a number of joint experimental and computational investigations aimed at characterizing the self-assembly properties of both organic and inorganic sensitizers on TiO2 surfaces,85,88 the existence of multi-conformational binding modes84,86,89 and competitive adsorption.90 By using high-resolution scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) and spectroscopy (STS), atomic force microscopy (AFM), electronic structure and molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, these studies provided atomic-level insights into the heterogeneous adsorption modes, molecular arrangement, topography and interfacial energy level alignment of dye-sensitized TiO2. This fruitful interaction between theory and experiment as well as the large number of studies published in the last few years demonstrate that modern first principles computational methodologies, such as those based on density functional theory (DFT) and its time dependent extension (TDDFT), provide the theoretical/computational framework to describe most of the desired properties of the individual dye/semiconductor/electrolyte systems and of their relevant interfaces.
This review is organized as follows: Section II is devoted to the discussion of the different dye/electrolyte and electrolyte/dye-sensitized TiO2 interactions. It especially reviews two types of redox shuttles: iodine and iodine-free (cobalt complexes) mediators, combined with inorganic sensitizers containing ruthenium or with all-organic dyes carrying coumarin, carbazole or ethylenedioxythiophene moieties. Section III addresses the influence of dye self-aggregation (dimer clustering) on the whole optical properties of the dye-semiconductor interface. The computational treatment of dynamical effects and self-aggregation of indoline dyes at the surface of TiO2 nanoclusters has then been addressed, showing how indoline monolayers can be adsorbed onto anatase. The optical and charge-separation properties are subsequently reported in Section IV, where the aim is to account for numerous physical phenomena allowing one to computationally approach realistic cell conditions. In particular, photoabsorption and charge-injection properties were modelled, incorporating a co-adsorbing agent in contact with the dye, chemically anchored at the surface of anatase nanoclusters. The impact of surface protonation is then reported, in relation to the energy level shift and the electronic coupling of the dye–TiO2 cluster. The effect of incorporating solvent monolayers at the vicinity of the dye-nanocluster heterojunction is also reported, before energetic and electron/hole transport phenomena are finally studied within a dye monolayer in Section V, through FRET (Förster Resonance Energy Transfer), analyzed for co-sensitized interfaces and for dyadic donor–acceptor dyes.
II. Interaction between redox mediators and dye-sensitized TiO2
Amongst the various factors influencing the global efficiency of a solar cell, the appropriate energy level alignment of the diverse components (the dye, the electrolyte, and the semiconductor) is often considered as a truly determining factor, which must be duly taken into account when designing new devices. In this regard, the appropriate combination of an (in)organic dye with a given redox couple is of seminal importance for the preparation of viable devices, and the various restrictions inherent to the use of the most widespread mediator (I−/I3−, see below) in conjunction with organic dye sensitizers have already been extensively studied. Alternative organic redox couples were also introduced to overcome the limitations of the classical iodide/triiodide couple, but they suffer from the similarity to the I−/I3− couple as they also involve a two-electron redox process.102–105
In spite of these considerations, at present, the most exploited redox shuttle is the iodide/triiodide redox couple which, despite its corrosive character and some diffusion limitations, is still preferred since it leads to more stable and efficient cells due to extremely slow triiodide/TiO2 recombination kinetics and a rapid regeneration process of the oxidized dye. Unfortunately, while the combination of this mediator couple with inorganic ruthenium-based dyes is often regarded as very promising, the above mentioned regeneration agent has already been shown to inflate the occurrence of unwanted interactions with metal-free dyes, which are unfavourable to photocurrent generation, hence decreasing the overall cell efficiency and lifetime.
It is established that the recombination process occurring between oxidized dyes and injected electrons is not only due to the action of the mediator on the dye or the semiconductor themselves, and that this recombination phenomenon is not the only factor leading to a global decrease of efficiency. However, the highly undesired interactions between the redox couple and the dyes in their oxidized state are known to be responsible for the limited exploitation of certain sensitizers. Indeed, while it is commonly accepted that the adsorbed dye monolayer acts as an insulator by preventing direct interactions between the semiconductor and the recombination agent, it is also established that there exist certain atoms or dye fragments that favour stable interactions between the dye itself and the mediator, leading to a strong increase in the mediator concentration in the vicinity of the semiconductor surface, hence promoting the aforementioned unwanted recombination processes.
II.1 Interaction between metal-free sensitizers and iodide-based mediators
As far as the interaction between organic chromophores and iodine-based redox couples is concerned, multiple studies have shown that there might exist a stabilizing interaction between I2 and the ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) moiety of metal-free dyes, in which sulphur and/or oxygen atoms can act as a binding site for iodine. Indeed, it has been shown that using a bis-EDOT rather than a single EDOT fragment in the organic dye induces a substantial enhancement of the sensitizer's tendency to form charge-transfer complexes with I2.
This has firstly been assessed by means of quantum mechanical calculations106 on two sensitizers/I2 adducts, named MP124–I2 (single EDOT, the left part of Fig. 2) and MP-I-50–I2 (bis-EDOT, the right part of Fig. 2) complexes, for which the equilibrium structures have been computed by DFT/B3LYP/6-31G(d) in the gas phase. Interaction energy between the dyes and iodine has further been deduced from single-point calculations on the equilibrium geometries of the complexes at the second-order Möller–Plesset (MP2) level.
 Fig. 2  Sketch of the two EDOT-containing compounds investigated in the electrolyte–dye interaction survey.106 
To check the reliability of the employed computational protocol, preliminary calculations were carried out where the structures of EDOT–I2 and thiophene–I2 complexes were optimized using MP2 instead of DFT, prior to interaction energy evaluation. The DFT/MP2 strategy was then applied to MP-I-50 for which three binding sites were identified: the direct oxygen-I2 (OI) and two oxygen-I2-sulfur sites (OIS-1 and OIS-2). The difference between OIS-1 and OIS-2 can be assigned to the proximity of the –CN moiety close to OIS-2, and it was identified that the OI interaction mode is the one displaying the highest interaction energy amplitude (8.1 kcal mol−1) with a binding distance of 2.93 Å. Note that OIS-1 adduct formation has also been shown to be energetically feasible, though the complexes are only stabilized by weak I–O and I–S interactions. In light of these conclusions, speculations have been made, related to the relationship between EDOT–I2 complex formation and charge-recombination kinetics of MP-I-50 and two other EDOT-containing dyes experimentally exhibiting similar behaviour.
Following the ability of this strategy to appropriately retrieve crucial information regarding the dye-redox shuttle interactions, the DFT/MP2 protocol has been applied in a second contribution107 to two coumarin-containing dyes and a carbazole-containing sensitizer, interacting with I2 and I3− accompanied (or not) by the lithium cation. The sketch of the selected dyes, named NKX2587, NKX2697 and MK3, is reproduced in Fig. 3, where we see that the difference between the first two dyes is the number of thiophene subunits (one for NKX2587 and three for NKX2697) separating the coumarin and the cyanoacrylic acid moieties, while MK3, for which the coumarin-donor part has been replaced to include a carbazole, contains three thiophene units in its bridge.
 Fig. 3  Sketch of coumarin-containing NKX2587 and NKX2697 dyes, and the carbazole-containing MK3 sensitizer. 
By exploiting this selection of chromophores, it was possible to separately assess the influence of the presence of coumarin carbonylic oxygen/carbazole nitrogen binding sites for iodine, and the spatial extension of the bridge, more precisely the number and relative position of sulphur binding site(s). A larger 6-311G(d,p) basis set was employed for both geometry optimization and single-point calculations. Since some dispersion interaction might take place upon complexation, single-point calculations of the binding energies were also carried out using B3LYP and dispersion-corrected B3LYP-D3, M06 exchange–correlation functional, and MP2 levels of theory. To assess the influence of the solvent medium, calculations were done in the gas phase and in acetonitrile solvent (using the conductor-like polarizable continuum model – C-PCM) when the B3LYP/6-311G(d,p) and MP2/6-311G(d,p) levels of theory are considered.
Various complexation sites were identified. As far as NKX2587 was concerned, iodine was shown to interact selectively with the carbonylic oxygen of the coumarin fragment (O–I2), with the sulfur atom of the thiophene (S1–I2) and with the cyano group of the cyanoacrylic acid anchoring function (CN–I2). Additionally, I3− was shown to interact with the nitrogen of the donor's fused rings (dye–I3−). Regarding the directionality of these interactions, one sees107 that while the complexation of iodine with S1 and CN is collinear with a distance of ca. 3.41 Å and 2.93 Å, respectively, in the case of the dye–I3− interaction, the nitrogen–iodine axis is orthogonal to the triiodide's molecular axis, with a characteristic distance between the fused ring's nitrogen and the triiodide centre of mass being quite substantial (4.98 Å). The angle between iodine and the coumarin's carbonyl group in NKX2587 is 123° with a distance of approximately 2.84 Å.
When the number of thiophene units is increased to three (namely S1, S2 and S3, with S3 being the closest to the anchoring function and S1 being the farthest) in NKX2697, we see that when going closer to the CN group (from S1 to S3) the bonding distance between iodine and sulphur increases (from 3.38 Å for S1 to 3.48 Å and 4.23 Å for S2 and S3 respectively), denoting an increasing weakness of the sulfur–iodine bond due to the growing proximity of the cyano group. The same trend is observed for MK3.
A more general conclusion related to the iodine–dye interaction strength for the two coumarin-containing sensitizers can be deduced by observing the binding energies, which reveal that the preferred binding site for the two dyes is the carbonyl group of the coumarin itself. The cyano's nitrogen follows and finally comes the sulfur of the thiophene vicinal to the coumarin (S1). Such conclusion is in perfect agreement with the previous statement related to the EDOT–[O]–iodine and EDOT–[S]–iodine binding energies (−6.9 and −5.1 kcal mol−1 respectively) as well as the thiophene–[S]–iodine interaction energy (−4.5 kcal mol−1), computed at the DFT/MP2 level of theory.106 When comparing DFT and MP2 binding energies, we see in Table 1 of ref. 107 that while B3LYP slightly underestimates the iodine–dye interaction with respect to MP2, corrected-DFT (B3LYP-D3 and M06 xc-functionals) on the other hand overestimates these values. If one now considers the influence of solvation on the binding energies, the general trend reported in ref. 107 for NKX2587, NKX2697 and MK3 is that embedding the molecular systems into a polar medium such as acetonitrile decreases the iodine–dye interaction magnitude.
Besides, the interaction between the preferential binding sites of the sensitizers and the lithium cation was investigated, together with the dye–Li+–I3− adduct formation. Indeed, it was previously reported108 that the electron-rich moieties of a coumarin-based dye can attract the lithium cation and bind the triiodide. For simulating this phenomenon, two situations were considered, where (i) the triiodide interacts directly with the lithium bound to the coumarin's carbonyl group and (ii) the triiodide interacts with the nitrogen of the dye's donor fused rings. Results show107 that the lithium cation lies at about 1.90 Å from the carbonyl oxygen, and that it has no significant role to play in triiodide complexation with the dye, especially when I−3 is not interacting directly with the cation, which is the most stable solution. Indeed, the (ii) adduct has been shown to be more stable than the (i) adduct by 2.3 and 3.6 kcal mol−1 when the interaction energy was computed from single-point B3LYP and MP2 calculations, respectively, and both interaction distances and energies were shown not to be substantially affected by the presence of Li+ in the vicinity of pyran.
The anchoring dynamics of the representative NKX2587 adsorbed on the TiO2 cluster was investigated by Car–Parrinello Molecular Dynamics (CPMD) simulations over 3.2 ps. The CPMD results show that, due to the rigidity of the whole NKX2587 structure, the latter can be considered as mostly remaining orthogonal to the surface through the dynamics, without experiencing any striking geometrical distortion. Further, optimization of (I2)-NKX2587@(TiO2)38 (see Fig. 4) showed that only slight variations in the coumarin–[CO]–I2 bond angle (∼150°) and distance (2.84 Å) with respect to the isolated or solvated adducts occur (a bond angle of 123° and a bond distance of 2.85 Å). As the average carbonyl oxygen–titanium oxide surface distance during the NKX2587@(TiO2)82 dynamics and the optimized distance for NKX2587@(TiO2)38 were close (11.9 and 11.0 Å), it was therefore concluded that a reliable estimation of the iodine–semiconductor distance can be made from the optimized dye@(TiO2)38 structures by evaluating the distance between the binding sites and the surface (see Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Interaction between iodine and the coumarin moiety in NKX2587, chemically anchored at the surface of a (TiO2)38 cluster. Reprinted with permission from M. Pastore, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5965–5973. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
This approach also allowed us to comment the relative importance of the TiO2–dye–iodine and TiO2–dye–lithium cation interactions, and more especially the influence of the electrolyte or ion complexation on the recombination phenomenon. Indeed, the binding site distance to the surface was related to the experimental cell lifetime with high iodine concentrations.109 According to the optimized structures of the dye@nanocluster systems, indeed, the coumarin's carbonyl binding site of NKX2587 is closer (11 Å) to the surface with respect to that of NKX2697 (17 Å), in agreement with its shorter lifetime.
II.2 Cobalt-based redox shuttle and Ru(II)-dye sensitized TiO2
If one is now interested in an inorganic redox shuttle, interacting with a transition metal complex as a sensitizer, there is a recent mixed computational/experimental survey aimed at assessing the efficiency of Ru-sensitizer/Co-redox couples as well as organic/iodine, organic/inorganic and inorganic/iodine couples. In terms of lifetime, it was shown experimentally that the inorganic sensitizers have an increased lifetime when they are in contact with the iodine electrolyte rather than with the cobalt redox shuttle, while the organic sensitizers investigated (D21L6 and D25L6) have no striking preference regarding the nature of the regenerating agent.
The ruthenium-based sensitizers investigated in ref. 110 are the well-known N719 and Z907 dyes (in N719 two carboxylic acid groups were replaced by alkyl chains), while the cobalt complex is the tris-bipyridine [Co(Bpy)3]2+/3+ with different coupling patterns based on its high-spin/low-spin states. The aim of the related investigation was to unveil the regeneration mechanism of oxidized Ru dyes N719 and Z907 by the d7Co(II) electrolyte in order to explain the loss of efficiency caused by replacing the iodine electrolyte by a cobalt complex. In its reduced state, this d7 complex can be in high-spin (quartet) or low-spin (doublet) states, though it was reported111 that at room temperature, the quartet form of [Co(bpy)3]2+ is predominant. However, the regeneration rate of the ruthenium complex from its oxidized to its reduced state by a covalently-bound cobalt complex was shown to be higher when the latter is in its low-spin state, due to decreased intramolecular reorganization with respect to its high-spin counterpart. When considering more realistic cell conditions, where the sensitizer is chemically grafted at the surface of titanium oxide, and the cobalt redox shuttle is not covalently bound to the Ru-complex but free to diffuse through the medium and to interact with the sensitizer's ligands, Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics simulations were used to investigate the nature of the dye-sensitized interface and redox mediator interactions. To this end, N719 (carrying one proton for the sake of global charge neutrality) adsorbed onto a (TiO2)128 nanocluster was analyzed in the presence of an oxidized tris-bipyridine cobalt(III) complex during 9 ps CPMD simulation. This simulation gave some novel insights into the dye regeneration process in general, and allowed the rationalization of the mechanism of Ru-sensitizer regeneration by the cobalt complex.
The starting point of the simulation is a N719(1H)3− dye anchored to the anatase slab through three carboxylic groups69,112–114 and the [Co(bpy)3]3+ complex at about 15 Å from the sensitizer. After local optimization and thermalization to 350 K for 2 ps, the CPMD simulation first showed a temporary decrease of the cobalt–ruthenium distance from 15 to 8 Å and of the cobalt–TiO2 surface distance from ca. 22.5 Å to 16 Å during the first 3 ps, attributed to the negative charge carried by the carboxylate group, attracting the positively-charged cobalt complex. Over time, we observe a net decrease of the distance between the cobalt complex and the TiO2 surface, this distance being lower than the Ru–TiO2 distance around the end of the simulation. Three snapshots were taken from the CPMD simulation, at 3.2, 7.2 and 8.6 ps, respectively, in order to evaluate the strength of the electrolyte–sensitizer interaction. For this purpose, the titanium oxide slab was removed from the structures before optimization was performed using the DFT B3LYP/LANL2DZ level of theory, with acetonitrile effects retrieved from the C-PCM model. Binding energies were found to be lying in the 0.46–0.71 eV range for the three optimized geometries, with the highest binding strength found for the positively-charged mediator interacting with three carboxylate groups. Fig. 5 displays the structure of the three snapshots taken through the molecular dynamics trajectory.
 Fig. 5  Starting point of the trajectory (STARTING STRUCTURE), and three snapshots taken at 3.2 ps (1), 7.2 ps (2) and 8.6 ps (3) along the [Co(bpy)3]3+/N719(1H)3−@(TiO2)128 CPMD trajectory. Reprinted with permission from E. Mosconi, J.-H. Yum, F. Kessler, C. J. G. Garcia, C. Zuccaccia, A. Cinti, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19438–19453. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
The effect of the presence of B(CN)4− counterions was also assessed, and shown to result in a global decrease of the binding energies between the two Ru-based complexes and [Co(bpy)3]3+.
Subsequently, a three-step injection-regeneration mechanism was proposed (see Fig. 6) involving an initial 2,4Co(II)–1Ru(II) adduct, evolving into 2,4Co(II)–2Ru(III) after light-absorption and electron injection, and finally into 1,3Co(II)–1Ru(II) after redox electron–exchange occurred during the regeneration of Ru(II).
 Fig. 6  Proposed three-step regeneration mechanism of a Ru-based complex by a Co mediator. Reprinted with permission from E. Mosconi, J.-H. Yum, F. Kessler, C. J. G. Garcia, C. Zuccaccia, A. Cinti, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19438–19453. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
For the secondary adduct, hypotheses regarding the coupling pattern between 2,4Co(II) and 2Ru(III) in various spin states were also examined, referring to the possible ferro- or anti-ferromagnetic behaviour of the adduct (2Co(II)–2Ru(III), see the left part of Fig. 7) or to a global triplet or quintet (the right part of Fig. 7) for 4Co(II)–2Ru(III). As it was shown that at room temperature, the low-spin form of the cobalt complex prevails as the triplet [3Co(bpy)3]3+ is 1.7 eV higher in energy than the singlet form of the complex,115,116 it has been deduced that the regeneration mechanism should preferably lead to a closed-shell Co(III)–Ru(II) adduct.
 Fig. 7  Coupling pattern between the LS/HS Co-mediator and the oxidized Ru-sensitizer. 
Regeneration kinetics were also studied using a Marcus charge-transfer model117 for the complexes of N719(1H)3−, N719(2H)2− and Z907(0H)−2 with [Co(bpy)3]2+. Reaction profiles were constructed to highlight that the low-spin state of the cobalt complex leads to much lower activation barriers than its high spin counterpart for the three adducts; this behaviour was assigned to lower reorganization energies.
Kinetics aspects were by other means demonstrated to play an important role in the design of viable devices. This perspective was more extensively reported118 again for iodine-free redox shuttles, with special attention devoted to the comparison of iodine-free metallorganic complexes and metal-free redox shuttles, considering what is known about the recombination/regeneration kinetics of nickel, cobalt, or iron-based electrolytes, which displayed remarkable charge-transfer kinetics. Recent findings actually paved the way for the design of new redox couples leading to higher photovoltage, combined with a decreased recombination rate which, unlike most of the sulphur redox couples, remains quite substantial for this type of metal-based electrolyte. Finally, a recent survey57 on a metal-free sensitizer coupled with a cobalt-based redox couple unveiled how an enhanced dye coverage at the electrode, controlled by the dye bath with tuneable concentration, can provoke a dramatic increase of the overall cell performance, which was explained by the increased electron lifetime induced by a high TiO2 passivation.
III. Dye aggregation: dynamical and optical properties
Intermolecular interactions among adsorbed dye sensitizers may directly affect the charge generation at the dye/TiO2 interface (a higher dye loading absorbs more photons) and, as previously discussed, may also have indirect beneficial effects on the photovoltage by preventing the recombination reactions between TiO2-injected electrons and oxidized species in the electrolyte. The formation of a homogeneous (partial) dye layer was recently shown to be critical for DSC performances.119 More often, however, strong dye/dye interactions on the semiconductor surface also have the drawback of introducing undesired effects which may lower the DSC efficiency. Among these we mention filtering effects by non-TiO2-adsorbed dye molecules, possibly found as a dye overlayer, which would absorb light but not produce photocurrent. Also, strong dye aggregation is known to induce intermolecular excited state quenching phenomena, reducing the DSC photocurrent.120–122 In some cases, however, controlled aggregation has been proven to enhance the photocurrent generation as a result of the larger light-absorption window of the aggregates.60,121,123–125 Appropriate molecular engineering and the use of anti-aggregation co-adsorbents (such as chenodeoxycholic acid, CDCA) can prevent to some extent the dye-aggregation on the nanocrystalline-TiO2 surface, improving the overall photovoltaic performance.124,126–130
To the best of our knowledge, the first computational study on the aggregation of organic dyes on realistic TiO2 nanoparticle models was put forward by some of us in 2009.80 The developed approach, based on a combination of MP2, DFT and TDDFT calculations, fully accounted for the experimental evidence of strong aggregation of the indoline D102 dye when adsorbed on the TiO2 surface and also identified, in the case of dimeric aggregate models, the most stable mutual arrangements. Excited state calculations carried out on the preferred dimeric structures were also able to almost quantitatively reproduce the measured red-shifts. In the framework of a static picture (T = 0 K), however, all the dyes adopt the most stable configuration (bidentate or monodentate)78 on an ideal semiconductor substrate. It should be kept in mind, however, that this is just a special case hardly realized from a statistical point of view and that, as we shall illustrate later, a realistic description of the dye/semiconductor interface should properly consider the effect of thermal fluctuations.81,86,131–135
III.1 Self-aggregation: dimer clustering
We just mentioned self-aggregation as a possible source of cell efficiency lowering. It might take place when the solar cell implies the chemical anchoring of organic π-conjugated systems at the surface of a semiconductor. The intermolecular interaction, mostly of dispersive nature, such as π-stacking, is favoured by the structural properties of the monomers. Indeed, the planarity of some π-conjugated cores enhances the possibility of stabilization of the dimer form of the system, due to the communication between the π-structure of the fragments forming the multi-chromophore cluster. This communication also favors the intermolecular charge-transfer, which constitutes a deactivation pathway, i.e. a possible factor for the decrease of the photocurrent generation probability due to the limitation of the possibility of charge-injection into the semiconductor conduction band. For tackling such problems, the synthesis of novel organic sensitizers often implies the grafting of alkyl groups, which are supposed to prevent the dimerization process.
A recent computational study on organic chromophore aggregation reports the influence of self-aggregation on the structural, energetic and electronic properties of four sensitizers.136 This investigation has been placed in the framework of the Kasha's molecular exciton model137 which characterizes the splitting of excited states occurring upon sensitizer dimerization. This simple model is exploited for characterizing the optical properties of the four above-mentioned dyes, with segregation being made between the two dyes bearing alkyl groups and the two remaining dyes. In particular, the absorption spectra and topological properties of the excited states of monomer/dimer dyes were compared.

III.1.1 Kasha's molecular exciton theory. 
This simple model aims at justifying theoretically the splitting of excited states occurring as a consequence of dimer formation. This splitting is well described for dispersive dimers of identical fragments, for which the low-energy absorption spectrum is characterized by two transition energies (ΔE+ and ΔE−) instead of one (ΔEm) for the corresponding monomer. The difference between ΔE+ and ΔE− is the energy difference between the two adiabatic states ψ+ and ψ− ψ± = 2−1/2(ψ†1ψ2 ± ψ1ψ†2)(1)and can be assigned to the coupling between the two diabatic states ψ†1ψ2 and ψ1ψ†2 where, respectively, the first monomer is in its excited (ground) state, and the second monomer is in its ground (excited) state. The coupling term characterizing the excited state splitting and the energy difference between the two adiabatic states, ΔE±, is written as (2)where μtx is the transition dipole moment of monomer x, and r is the position vector in a three-dimensional Euclidean space connecting the two monomers' centre of mass. We see that the splitting amplitude is equivalent to the expected value of the operator 12, giving rise to the coupling between the two diabatic states corresponding to each monomeric excitation. The presence of monomeric transition dipole moments in the above equation implies that the magnitude of the excited state splitting relies on the relative configuration of the two monomers in the cluster. Note that Kasha's molecular exciton coupling theory is a simplified model, which does not account in its formalism for the possible inter-molecular charge-transfer, a quite common phenomenon occurring upon dye dimerization.
This excited state energy splitting is graphically depicted in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Illustration of the excited state splitting within Kasha's molecular exciton theory. 
In Fig. 8, the “†” superscripts account for the fact that the monomer indicated by the corresponding wavefunction is in its excited state. On the other hand, the “*” superscripts simply point to the complex conjugate of a wavefunction.


III.1.2 Remarkable dimer configuration. 
It has to be noted that for certain peculiar relative orientations between monomers 1 and 2, in spite of the effectiveness of the excited state splitting, one of the two states might appear as a dark state (i.e. an electronic transition from the ground state to this dark state will have symmetry-induced vanishing oscillator strength). The appearance of such dark states can be justified geometrically by the additivity of transition dipole moments in the multi-chromophore cluster, and the mathematical dependence of the oscillator strength quantity with respect to the total transition dipole moment. Typically, two parallel (respectively, anti-parallel) monomers will lead to the generation of a dark ψ− state (respectively, ψ+) as reported in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Geometrical justification of the existence of dark states in multichromophore clusters, for certain remarkable relative configurations of the two monomers, e.g. parallel (top) and anti-parallel (bottom). 


III.1.3 Structural modifications of the π-conjugated moieties. 
While the role of dimerization in the alteration of the optical features of the dye is known, the influence of grafting an alkyl group to the π-structure is less understood. Indeed, this structural modification of the dye is supposed to prevent the interaction between the organic conjugated skeletons of multiple monomers, but theoretical calculations of dimer stabilization energies showed that the chemical grafting of hexyl groups to simple organic compounds leads to a forced overall planarity of the two molecular sub-systems with hexyl groups pointing outward from the cluster, favouring the dispersive intermolecular interactions (π-stacking) and intermolecular charge-transfer, which was quantitatively assessed through a natural population analysis. In contrast, two dyes with no hexyl group but bearing t-butyl fragments will exhibit a lower stabilization energy amplitude. One should thus be aware of the influence of dimerization on the photo-physics of a dye, and should perform a critical analysis of the possibility of efficiency reduction due to structural deformation induced by adding specific alkyl moieties to certain dyes. This important feature should therefore be duly taken into account when designing novel metal-free molecular systems, targeted for highly-efficient solar-based devices, as a favoured communication between the π-structures of molecular sub-systems may lead to an intermolecular charge-transfer, quenching the electron injection of the dye in the conduction band of the semiconductor.

III.2 Dynamics and self-aggregation of indoline dyes on TiO2
Due to its high efficiency in solid state devices138 and strong tendency to form molecular aggregates on the TiO2 surface, a number of studies focused on the indoline D102 dye (top panel of Fig. 10)139 both in solution and in dye-sensitized TiO2 substrates.59,80,86,140–143 A computational study modelling the aggregation of organic dyes adsorbed on TiO2 models was reported by some of us in 2009.80 More recently, an extension of this “zero temperature” dimeric modelling study was reported,143 where the authors by combining large-scale reactive force field-based simulations with TDDFT excited state calculations on extended molecular aggregates (up to five molecules) provide an atomistic description of the morphology (aggregation, short/long range order, different anchoring configurations) and optical properties of the D102 sensitized TiO2 substrates.
 Fig. 10  (Top) D102 chemical structure; (bottom left) initial configuration with the carboxylic groups placed on top of the selected undercoordinated titanium atoms; (bottom right) (a and b) initial configurations of the molecular dynamics runs involving the adsorption of 8 (a) and 12 (b) molecules on the small supercell (40.8397_15.1040 Å2). Configurations obtained at the end of the simulations (i.e. after 100 ps) are in (c) 8 dyes (small supercell – fast heating); (d) 12 dyes (small supercell – slow heating); and (e) 8 dyes (small supercell – slow heating). (f) Final configuration of the 12 dyes randomly adsorbed on the large supercell (40.8397_30.2080 Å2). The slab is rendered by means of a grey solid surface, whereas the dyes are rendered through the CPK model (colour codes: O = red, C = cyan, S = yellow, N = blue, H = white). Cell borders are displayed as dark grey lines and a white rectangle representing the simulation box is also shown. 

III.2.1 Dye monolayer dynamics and spectroscopy on the anatase (101) surface. 
To characterize the TiO2 sensitization process and to investigate the possibility of self-aggregation and multisite-binding modes, 8 and 12 molecules were adsorbed (the left panel of Fig. 10) on a (TiO2)256 periodic slab (ca. 41 and 15 Å along the x (101) and y (010) directions).143 The resulting coverages correspond to densities of about 1.30 and 1.95 molecules per nm2, respectively, which reproduce the typical dye densities (1–2 molecules per nm2) reported in the literature.144 Simulations at lower coverages were also considered by depositing 12 molecules on a larger slab (about 41 × 30 Å) obtained by replicating twice the super cell described above in the y direction (density close to 1 molecule per nm2). As shown by the final patterns in the right panel of Fig. 10, the initial vertical order was disrupted by the intermolecular interactions between the dyes. These forces act concertedly by inducing cooperative bending of the molecular chains in specific directions, which were determined essentially by the orientation of the surface connected moieties. Indeed, even though the initial contact points with the interface were preserved, the redistribution of the positions of both the surface and dye atoms, due to their reciprocal attraction, generated new links which drove the free portion of the molecules (donor region), to a mutual reorganization through stacking and T-shaped interactions. The maximization of the number of contact points and ring–ring coupling seems to be the main driving forces for domain formation. In fact, after establishing (sub-ps timescale) strong interactions with the interface (three contact points) and after packing the phenyl rings, the flexibility of the dyes was reduced and their configuration remained stable. In the final configurations islands of ordered molecules are found, essentially arising from the motion of the tethered chains. Also, in the slow heating cases (8DsS and 12DsS) a more coherent organization of the dyes is observed, due to the fact that the dyes could reorganize their structures more effectively in relation to the surrounding species and could better get anchored to the TiO2 top layer.
All the MD trajectories revealed that D102 binds to the TiO2 anatase (101) surface through four different anchoring modes (Fig. 11): monodentate (with one carboxylic oxygen), homogeneous bidentate (with both carboxylic oxygens), heterogeneous bidentate (one carboxylic oxygen and the sulphur atom of the rhodanine moiety) and tridentate (both carboxylic oxygens and the sulphur atom). The monodentate anchoring mode was rarely observed, being energetically unfavoured and short-living due to the relatively high coverage and packed molecular arrangement. The other binding modes were all possible but the preferred one was that having three contact points, which could be realized through the readjustment of the Ti atom of the top layer of the slab and the simultaneous bending of the dye towards the neighbouring adsorbed molecules, which induced the rotation of the –CH2–COO– moiety of the adsorbate.
 Fig. 11  Possible binding modes identified during the MD simulations. Monodentate (with one carboxylic oxygen – a), homogeneous bidentate (with both carboxylic oxygens – b), heterogeneous bidentate (one carboxylic oxygen and the sulphur atom c) and tridentate (both carboxylic oxygens and the sulphur atom – d). Only a few atoms of the surface and the connected portion of the dye are displayed. Adapted from ref. 143. 
A deeper analysis of the trajectories in ref. 143 also showed that when the molecules are allowed to slowly relax towards their better interacting configurations, the majority of them improve and reinforce the binding to the surface by moving the sulfur atom towards the close neighbouring Ti sites. This is clearly easier when they have enough space available that is in the case of average densities. Other relevant insights provided by the MD results concern the arrangement of the adsorbed acceptor portion of the dye in relation to the surrounding units. Data on the ring–ring distances (considering the ring centres) and ring plane angles for all the neighbouring adsorbates show that the tendency of the acceptors to adopt parallel orientations is marked above all on the slab with the highest density of molecules. Even though the rings are located preferentially far from each other, the structures are almost always aligned due to mutual interactions (π-stacking), which determine coordinated movements and a final order.
Finally, from the dynamics of self-assembled and isolated D102, one can evaluate the thermal-averaged spectral shift due to dye aggregation on the TiO2 surface. A marked spectral broadening and a significant red-shift (0.23 eV) of the D102 absorption spectrum when passing from solution (absorption maximum at 2.53 eV) to sensitized-TiO2 film (absorption maximum at 2.30 eV)71 manifest the prominent tendency of D102 to form J-aggregates on the TiO2 electrode. Although the measured spectral shift when going from dye solution to TiO2 film is usually the result of a complex interplay of different effects (intermolecular interaction, protonation/deprotonation, solvation etc.),61 such a large red-shift and band broadening are clear signatures of strong dye–dye interactions on the TiO2 substrate. In Fig. 12 the spectrum of five molecular aggregates averaged over the randomly extracted MD snapshots (red line) is compared with the corresponding one obtained from the MD trajectory of the isolated D102 molecule adsorbed on the TiO2 substrate (blue line). The absorption spectrum calculated for five molecular aggregates is red-shifted by 0.16 eV (maximum absorption at 2.08 eV) when compared to that of the isolated molecule (maximum absorption at 2.24 eV), and a low-energy tail, characteristic of J-aggregates, clearly appears. A deeper analysis of the mutual arrangements of the dyes in the aggregate clusters was performed by measuring the ring–ring distances (considering the ring centres) and the ring plane angles for all the neighbouring adsorbates. These data revealed that the tendency of the indoline-acceptor moieties to adopt parallel orientations is marked and increases as the molecule density on the surface increases. Even though the rings are located preferentially far from each other comparison with the plane–plane angle plot suggests that the structures are almost always aligned due to mutual interactions which determine high electronic coupling (marked spectral shift), coordinated movements and a final order. Finally, we notice that the calculated shift almost quantitatively reproduces the experimentally observed shift and also coincides with that reported in ref. 80 for the most stable dimeric D102 aggregate. This confirms that the inclusion of thermal fluctuations by classical simulations and the use of extended aggregate models provide a reliable description of the optical properties of the dye layer, with a satisfactory agreement between the calculated and the measured optical responses.
 Fig. 12  Comparison between the calculated averaged absorption spectrum of selected D102 aggregates composed of 5 molecules (red full line) and that of the isolated D102 monomer (blue full line); red (blue) vertical lines correspond to the unbroadened calculated excitation energies and oscillator strengths. The spectra have been normalized and simulated with a Gaussian broadening with s = 0.3 eV. D102 HOMO and LUMO isodensity surface plots are also shown. 

IV. Optical properties and charge separation in realistic cell environments
The DSC is an intimate complex system, involving electron transfer processes at multiple interfaces, thus in real cases the interdependencies among the various components and the efficiency of the various desired electron transfer and charge transport processes against the recombination losses dictate the overall device performance.
The overall cell efficiency η is obtained as (3)where Voc (the open circuit voltage of the cell) is the difference between the quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor under illumination and the redox potential of the mediator (see Fig. 1); Jsc is the photocurrent density at short circuit, FF is the fill factor and PI is the intensity of the incident light. While the redox potential of the mediator is basically constant under operation conditions due to the high concentration of redox species,145,146 the quasi-Fermi level (EF,n) of the semiconductor depends “statically” on the semiconductor CB energy and “dynamically” on the charge density accumulated in the semiconductor.147 Clearly, the open circuit voltage has only an indirect dependence on the nature of the sensitizer layer, which can either affect the rate of recombination reactions77,107 as discussed above or change the energetics of the semiconductor CB states.148 On the other hand, the photocurrent, Jsc, is directly proportional to the dye's injection efficiency, ϕINJ, defined in terms of the ratio between the injection rate kINJ and the possible radiative (kR) and nonradiative (kNR) deactivation processes for the excited states of the surface adsorbed dye. Various spectroscopic studies have reported ultrafast injection kinetics on sub-picosecond time scales,149 orders of magnitude faster than the typical time scales of the competing deactivation processes. Electron injection is thus not usually considered a limiting factor of cell efficiency, although it has been reported that it might become an issue in pre-industrial, working devices.150 In the adiabatic framework,151 the injection rate depends on two factors: (i) the squared electronic coupling matrix element between the donor and the acceptor, |H|2 (ii) the Franck–Condon weighted density of states (FCWD), which is a function of the reorganization energy λ and of the driving force ΔG° (see eqn (4) and (5)).151 (4) (5) The electronic coupling depends on the spatial overlap between donor and acceptor states, while the driving force is dictated by the alignment of dye/semiconductor energy levels and the density of unoccupied semiconductor states. In the case of a manifold of acceptor states, typical of semiconductors, the FCWD reduces to a pure density of states (the right hand side of eqn (4)). From the theoretical side, to calculate the injection rate using eqn (9), one needs to evaluate the coupling between the dye injecting orbital (LUMO) and the totality of the unoccupied semiconductor CB states, upon localization of the interacting complex orbitals on the donor (dye) and acceptor (TiO2) species.152–155 It is therefore clear that the energetics of the semiconductor CB directly influences the interfacial electron injection dynamics and it is also well known that, in turn, different factors,156 such as the local pH,157,158 the concentration of potential determining ions (e.g. Li+),59,108,159–162 and also the nature of the electrolyte solvent160,163–165 affect the position of the CB edge. Proton adsorption onto metal oxide surfaces shifts the position of the valence band edge maximum and conduction band edge minimum away from the vacuum level by 59 mV per pH unit, following the Nernst equation. Similar pH effects have been reported also for sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 films,166–170 where surface protonation has been effectively employed to positively shift the conduction band edge thus improving Jsc.156,170–174 Analogously, electrolyte additives, such as lithium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Li-TFSI), 1-ethyl-3-methylmidazolium-TFSI (EMIM-TFSI), tetra-n-butylammonium (TBA+) or 4-t-butylpyridine (TBP), are also widely used to modulate photocurrent and photovoltage.175–183 It has been demonstrated that Li ions in proximity (even adsorbed) of the TiO2 surface induce a positive shift in the CB edge,174 reducing the open circuit voltage of the cell but, as discussed by Durrant and co-workers,156 possibly increasing the density of states available for electron injection from the dye's excited state. The effect of surface protonation, as well as that of other potential determining ions, on the measured Jsc is actually more complicated than a mere shift in the semiconductor CB, since the dye's excited states, in particular its nature, its energy and the coupling with the TiO2 CB states can also be significantly influenced.59,141,184,185 In the following we separately discuss the modelling of the effect of ionic additives (Section IV.1)59 and adsorbed protons (Sections IV.2 and IV.3)158 on the optical and charge generation properties of the dye-sensitized TiO2 interface; the effects of the solvent molecules at the interface and those interacting with the dye are analysed in Section IV.4.
IV.1 Modelling the dye/additive@TiO2 heterointerface: light absorption and charge injection
Abrusci et al. investigated the effect of lithium cations on the charge generation and device efficiency in P3HT/D10271-based solid state DSCs,184 achieving an order of magnitude increase in the photocurrent when the Li-TFSI salt (Fig. 13, top a) is used with the expected drop in the open circuit photovoltage. The sizeable increment in the photocurrent was essentially ascribed to the increased charge-transfer nature of the dye's excited state, which shifts at lower energies (from 2.61 to 2.42 eV), resulting in a higher coupling with the TiO2 CB states and in an accelerated electron injection. The use of the ionic liquid EMIM-TFSI (Fig. 13, top b) was also shown to provide a similar effect on the excited state, with comparable red-shift (0.25 eV) and increased photocurrent but with a negligible drop in the Voc. Similar spectral shifts were also reported by Zhu et al.,141 who observed a significant broadening of the principal absorption band going from solution to TiO2 film, suggestive of dye aggregation phenomena,71,80 associated with a 0.15 eV red-shift of the absorption onset; addition of Li-TFSI also contributes to the red-shift, further lowering the absorption onset by 0.12 eV but leaving unchanged the absorption maximum.
 Fig. 13  (top) Molecular structures of (a) Li-TFSI and (b) EMIM-TFSI additives. (bottom) Optimized geometries of D102@(TiO2)82, D102/Li+@ (TiO2)82, D102/Li-TFSI@(TiO2)82 and D102/EMIM+@(TiO2)82. Adapted from ref. 59. 
First-principles modelling of the dye/additive@TiO2 interfaces shows that when the dye is grafted on the oxide surface (the bottom panel of Fig. 13), the Li+ cation closely interacts with both dye and TiO2, being immobilized in a sort of “cage”. As is also apparent, this is not the case for the larger-sized EMIM+ cation, which cannot so closely interact with the TiO2 surface and is, instead, localized at about 3 Å from both the dye (carbonylic oxygen) and TiO2. The negatively charged TFSI− basically interacts with the indoline donor moiety (the bottom panel of Fig. 13). As is apparent in Fig. 14, the presence of the additives at the interfaces is predicted by TDDFT (B3LYP/6-311G**//PCM) to notably affect the dyes' optical properties depending on the solvent (environment) polarity, while, on the other hand, the effect of the solvent polarity on the dye's excited state is negligible without additives, with the absorption maximum red-shifting only by 0.02 eV from an apolar (chlorobenzene) to a polar (acetonitrile) environment. When the additives are included, the polar acetonitrile sizably shields the electrostatic field generated by the cationic species interacting with the anchoring unit where the LUMO is localized. Going from the apolar to the polar environment, the predicted stabilization of the CT S0 → S1 state reduces from −0.24 to −0.12 eV in the case of the smaller lithium cation and from −0.08 to −0.01 eV in the case of the larger EMIM+; similarly for D102/Li-TFSI the calculated shift goes from −0.18 eV (chlorobenzene) to −0.08 (acetonitrile). The predicted 0.24 eV shift in the presence of Li+ in the apolar environment, which we can nearly compare with the solid state TiO2 film without the hole-transporter, agrees with that of ca. 0.20 eV observed by Abrusci et al.184 upon the addition of Li-TFSI. The calculated −0.08 eV shift for the D102/EMIM+ system is instead significantly smaller than that of 0.25 eV reported by the same authors.184 We note that the data discussed above are calculated by simply removing the TiO2 cluster from the optimized dye/additive/TiO2 structures and re-protonating the dye molecules. Reference calculations of the dye/additive complex on the TiO2 cluster, however, quantitatively confirm the spectral red-shifts found in solution.
 Fig. 14  Calculated absorption spectra in chlorobenzene and acetonitrile for D102 (red), D102/Li-TFSI (black), D102/EMIM+ (green) and D102/Li+ (blue). The spectra were plotted using a Gaussian broadening of 0.2 eV. 
How does the presence of additives at the interface influence the electron injection kinetics? Referring to eqn (4) and considering the deprotonated dye as the electron donor unit and the protonated semiconductor cluster, including the additive species, as the acceptor unit, the position of the diabatic TiO2 density of states (DOS) and of the dye's LUMO, the coupling matrix elements (V) between the dye's LUMO and the TiO2 empty states and, finally, the injection rate distribution (Γ), defined as Γ = |H|2ρ(E), can be obtained in solvents (Fig. 15). In line with the above discussed strong electrostatic effect in an apolar solvent (chlorobenzene), it is evident (the upper left panel of Fig. 15) that the inclusion of the additives induces a sizeable shift in the TiO2 density of virtual states (CB) toward lower energies, significantly larger for the system containing Li+ with respect to that in the presence of EMIM+. For the complex in chlorobenzene solution the calculated CB shifts are about 0.28 (Li+) and 0.21 eV (EMIM+), qualitatively in line with the observed 0.30/0.08 mV decrease in Voc for Li-TFSI/EMIM-TFSI in P3HT/D102 DSCs184,186 and with previous theoretical results.148,174,187,188 Inclusion of additives (in chlorobenzene) results in considerable lowering of the sensitizer's LUMO energy, amounting to about 0.55 eV for the system containing Li+ and to 0.29 eV for that in the presence of EMIM+. This large stabilization of the dye's LUMO due to the presence of the cationic additives close to the anchoring moiety is the origin of the above discussed red-shift of absorption spectra calculated in chlorobenzene and experimentally observed in apolar medium.184
 Fig. 15  TiO2 density of CB states (upper panels), coupling between the D102 LUMO and the semiconductor virtual states (middle panels) and injection rates (lower panels) as a function of the energy (E) for the system in chlorobenzene (left) and acetonitrile (right) solutions. Red lines refer to D102@TiO2, blue lines to D102/Li+@TiO2 and green lines to D102/EMIM+@TiO2. For comparison reasons this energy trend has been divided by 10. The vertical lines represent the energy position of the LUMO in each system. All the energy trends have been obtained introducing a Gaussian broadening of 0.3 eV. Figure adapted from ref. 59. 
It is also evident (see middle panels) that the presence of additives between the dye and the semiconductor surface strongly influences the coupling matrix element values, in particular in the lower energy region, as attested by the appearance of a pronounced maximum in the coupling energy dependence when Li+ is included in the system. These trends are clearly reflected in the corresponding injection rates reported in the lower panel of Fig. 15. The model predicts an increase of about 0.046 eV in the injection rate (corresponding to 22 fs in the injection time) when the Li+ is added to the solution and 0.009 eV (9 fs) for the complex in the presence of EMIM+. These results, in line with the increased photocurrent values reported by Snaith and co-workers,184 also provide a rational and a quantitative estimation of the well documented experimental observation that increasing the lithium salt concentration in the electrolyte can result in an increase in photocurrent generation. Similar results extend to the systems in acetonitrile solution (Fig. 15), although in this case solvent screening reduces the observed effects.
IV.2 Surface protonation: energy level shifts and dye/TiO2 electronic coupling
The linear decrease in the energy of the TiO2 CB edge as the number of protons adsorbed on the surface increases (as in Fig. 16) was modelled in ref. 158 and quantified to be 0.1 eV per H+. When one proton moves to the dye@TiO2 interface, similarly to what we have discussed above for the cationic additives in the D102-sensitized TiO2 film,59 the effect on the injection rates upon surface protonation can be basically attributed to two interplaying factors: (i) the dependence of the TiO2 DOS and of the dye's LUMO position on the number of H+ adsorbed on the surface; and (ii) the variation of the coupling matrix elements between the sensitizer and the semiconductor. To investigate the effect of the molecular/electronic structure of the dye, here we discuss and compare the cases of two different organic dyes, the conjugated JK2 dye, which is constituted by a substituted triphenylamine donor linked to the cyanoacrylic moiety by two thiophene rings,140,189–191 and the non-conjugated D102 sensitizer, presented above, composed of a substituted indoline donor group directly bound to a rhodanine-3-acetic anchoring unit.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the adsorption position of protons on the (TiO2)82 cluster; optimized geometries of the (b) JK2 and (c) D102 dyes adsorbed onto the (TiO2)82 cluster in bridged bidentate (BB) anchoring geometry. 
The results for JK2@(TiO2)82 (b in Fig. 16) and D102@(TiO2)82 (c in Fig. 16) in both 1H and 5H forms (see the proton adsorption scheme in panel a of Fig. 16) are displayed in Fig. 17 and some calculated relevant quantities extracted upon the diabatization step are listed in Table 1.
 Fig. 17  Absolute value of the coupling matrix elements (Vdk) between the dye LUMO and the TiO2 virtual states (green sticks), injection broadening Γ(E) function (blue line) and DOS relative to the virtual localized (diabatic) orbital of the semiconductor (red line) for the JK2@TiO2 and D102@TiO2 systems in the 1H (left panels) and 5H (right panels) protonation form as a function of the energy (E). The gaussian broadening used to reproduce both the TiO2 DOS and the Γ(E) function is equal to 0.3 eV. Note that in the case of the D102 dye (bottom panels) both the coupling matrix elements (Vdk) and the Γ(E) function were multiplied by 10. From ref. 158. 
Table 1 Calculated energies (in eV) of the diabatic TiO2 conduction band (CBDIA), dye's HOMO and LUMO and HOMO–LUMO gap (GAPDIA), injection function, Γ(E), evaluated at the energy of the diabatic LUMO, ΓDIA(LUMODIA)




System
Prot. no.
CBDIA
LUMODIA
HOMODIA
GAPDIA

Γ
DIA(LUMODIA)




JK2
1H
−3.846
−3.025
−5.100
2.074
0.231


5H
−4.220
−3.337
−5.214
1.877
0.375






D102
1H
−3.999
−2.593
−5.188
2.596
0.003


5H
−4.391
−2.699
−5.188
2.489
0.005




As is apparent from the data calculated for the JK2 dye (upper panels in Fig. 17), the addition of an increasing number of protons on the TiO2 surface produces an increase in the coupling matrix elements, above all in the lower energy region. The largest coupling elements are in fact those corresponding to the lower energy TiO2 unoccupied states. Going to higher energies, the coupling values progressively tend to decrease. Small deviations from this trend can be observed only in the dye LUMO energetic region where the coupling matrix elements tend to slightly increase due to the extreme proximity (in energy terms) of the interested TiO2 states with respect to the donor orbital. As a consequence, the corresponding Γ(E) function shows a pronounced maximum in the TiO2 CB edge region. By extracting the Γ(E) function at the diabatic LUMO position, one obtains injection rate values of 0.23 eV for the 1H form and 0.37 eV for the 5H form (see Table 1), which result to be somewhat larger than those calculated for the corresponding conjugated L0 dye in ref. 158. This nicely exemplifies the effect of the donor state energy on the electron injection kinetics: in the JK2 case, in fact, the dye's LUMO is calculated at lower energies and can inject into the CB states for which the electronic coupling is higher (i.e. the LUMO position falls in the region where the Γ(E) function shows the maximum). Turning now to the non-conjugated D102 dye, the calculated injection rates are 0.003 (1H) and 0.005 eV (5H) (Table 1), consistent with the non-conjugated structure of the dye and with the negligible localization of the dye's LUMO on the carboxylate anchoring group. Interestingly, comparing the CB and LUMO energy levels for the two different dyes, reported in Table 1A, one can notice that while the extent of the CBDIA down-shift as the number of protons increases does not depend on the particular dye adsorbed, different dyes show different down-shifts of the LUMO when going from the 1H to 5H forms. While for the conjugated JK2 the LUMO stabilization is ca. 0.33 eV, comparable to the ca. 0.40 eV shift of the CB edge, we observe a sizeably smaller stabilization of the D102 LUMO, amounting to about 0.1 eV. This is clearly the consequence of the different electronic structure of the interface: the energy levels of the conjugated dyes (JK2 in this case) are more strongly perturbed by surface protonation and the stabilization of the TiO2 CB edge translates into a similar stabilization of the dye's LUMO, while the LUMO of the uncoupled D102 dye is practically unaffected by what happens to the TiO2 DOS. As a consequence of the progressive charge accumulation on the surface, the dye's HOMO also turns out to be stabilized in the case of the conjugated dyes: in the JK2 dye, the HOMO stabilization is about 0.1 eV, while, for the same reasons discussed above, the D102 HOMO is practically unchanged upon TiO2 protonation. The different HOMO and LUMO energy shifts with surface protonation lead on average to the reduction of the dye's HOMO–LUMO gap (see Table 1) with increasing number of adsorbed protons. The entity of such HOMO–LUMO gap variation is strongly dependent on the peculiar electronic structure of the dye, and it is fully in line with the observed red-shift of the absorption spectrum of D5-sensitized TiO2 upon acidic treatment, which was recently reported by some of us.61 To better rationalize the relationship between the predicted change in the optical properties of the protonated dye-sensitized TiO2 film,61 the calculated enhanced injection rates and the measured photocurrents and device efficiencies, we report in the next section a spectroscopic and photovoltaic study of protonated and non-protonated sensitized TiO2 films employing a prototypical D–π–A organic dye (D5).
IV.3 Impact of TiO2 acidification on the spectroscopic and photovoltaic properties
In Fig. 18, the UV-vis absorption spectra and the corresponding IPCE curves of D5 + CDCA@TiO2 for both protonated and non-protonated cases are reported. For D5 + CDCA@TiO2, the recorded absorption spectrum shows a maximum at 441 nm, in good agreement with the 444 nm absorption peak reported in the literature;192 moving to protonated TiO2, the absorption maximum slightly shifts at longer wavelengths, appearing at 446 nm. The spectra in Fig. 18 also show that substrate protonation results in the expected enhancement in absorbance arising from an increase in dye loading, already observed in the literature.173,193 The photovoltaic data of all devices are collected in Table 2.
 Fig. 18  (left) Uv-vis absorption spectra of D5 with CDCA adsorbed both on titania (black line) and on protonated titania (red line). (right) Calculated IPCE obtained from the UV-vis absorption spectra of the D5-sensitized titania layer (left panel). From ref. 61. 
Table 2 Photovoltaic data of D5-based devices. From ref. 61




Cell
Acidic treatment

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF
Eff. (%)




C1
No
5.780
0.734
0.688
2.92


C2
No
6.150
0.734
0.636
2.87


C3
Yes
7.500
0.713
0.699
3.74


C4
Yes
6.453
0.724
0.647
3.02




As is apparent from the photovoltaic data above, photoanode protonation (C3 and C4 cells) leads to a significant improvement in the measured photocurrent density compared to that of untreated photoanodes (C1 and C2 cells), while the open circuit voltages slightly decrease, in line with the results of previously published studies.160,167 The subtle variations observed in the FF values for cells built under the same conditions are due to unavoidable fluctuations in the reproducibility of the device fabrication procedure. Solely based on the experimental results, the measured higher photocurrent values might be rationalized as arising from the spectral modifications shown in Fig. 18 (left panel), namely (i) an increased absorbance and (ii) an extension of the absorption spectral window due to the spectral red-shift. On the other hand, the results of the theoretical analysis presented above clearly show that the presence of protons on the titania surface always translates into higher electronic coupling and injection rates and hence possibly into higher photocurrents, under the assumption that the recombination losses are not affected by substrate protonation. To disentangle the effects of the spectral red-shift and the improved interfacial charge separation on the measured photocurrents, one can calculate the maximum gain in Jsc caused by the improved spectral properties. First of all, from the D5-sensitized-protonated-TiO2 absorption spectra (Fig. 18, left panel), the “theoretical” IPCE (reported in Fig. 18, right panel) can be obtained by using the well-known equation: IPCE = 1 − 10A(6)where A is the absorbance of D5-sensitized-protonated-TiO2 absorption spectrum. Then Jsc can be determined from the calculated IPCE and eqn (6) by applying the equation: (7)where Pin is the incident power of solar spectrum and IPCEλ is, for our case, the IPCE calculated using eqn (6). By comparing the photocurrent densities obtained from eqn (7), it is found that the maximum photocurrent gain imputable to the spectral red-shift and increased absorbance when going to protonated titania should be of about 0.7 mA cm−2, this value being considerably lower than the increment found in the measured photocurrents (see Table 2), amounting to about 1.4 mA cm−2. These findings, in agreement with the theoretically predicted higher electronic coupling and injection rates, confirm that, in addition to the augmented dye loading and the spectral red-shift, which might yield higher photocurrent values, the surface protonation increases the interfacial electronic coupling between the dye and the semiconductor, overall improving the charge separation and charge injection processes.
IV.4 Solvent effect on dye-sensitized TiO2
In order to treat the solar cells under the most realistic conditions, the effect of the chemical environment on the adsorption geometry and stability as well as the electronic structure of electrolyte/dye-sensitized TiO2 adducts was duly taken into account.164 Indeed, it is known that the molecular vicinity of the heterojunction influences the global efficiency of a given cell. Especially, water molecules in the surrounding of the interface are highly undesired,194 as they might cause partial dye desorption from the titanium oxide surface or just weakening of the interaction between the dye and TiO2.195,196 Titanium dioxide, sensitized with three Ru-based dyes, namely N719, Z907 (see Section II.2 above) and N3, exhibits variable behavior with respect to the presence of water, in relation to the chemical composition of the dye. Indeed, it was shown that substituting two carboxylic acid groups of N719 by hydrophilic chains to give Z907 did efficiently protect the TiO2 surface from water adsorption, while replacing two of the N719 carboxylic acid protons by tetra-n-butyl ammonium to give N3 did not significantly affect the dye amount in the vicinity of the titanium oxide surface.
It is therefore established that water in the proximity of the heterojunction affects the whole cell efficiency. So do other solvents, and studies have been carried out to show that when the cell efficiency is considered in relation to the liquid medium with which the dye-sensitized TiO2 and the electrolyte are in contact, acetonitrile is the solvent that provides the best results.
As the adsorption geometry and energy of the dye play an important role in photocurrent generation (adsorption mode of molecules has indeed been extensively investigated), a first-principles study evaluating the effect of water and acetonitrile solvents on the adsorption energy/geometry, together with the related impact on the electronic properties of adsorbed dyes, has been carried out on three prototypical sensitizers, benzoic acid (BA), 2-cyano-3-phenyl-acrylic acid (CA) and 4-(diphenylamino)phenylcyanoacrylic acid (L0).164 Joint DFT/CPMD calculations were exploited to model the adsorption of the dyes on a dye-sensitized three-layer 48-unit periodic anatase slab in contact with solvent molecules (CPMD) and (38-TiO2)-dye/solvent nanostructures (DFT). Three monodentate and one bidentate binding modes were identified and inspected. After the geometries were optimized in vacuo, water or acetonitrile solvent molecules were added in order to saturate the titanium sites at the surface of the anatase slabs.
The act of adding a monolayer of water molecules to the optimized structures was shown to impact the bidentate titanium-[O]-dyes distances (where the [O] points the binding-carboxylic acid oxygen of the sensitizers). Replacing water by acetonitrile monolayer results in an elongation of the dye-slab (titanium–oxygen) binding distances and decrease of the adsorption energy. A similar behaviour is observed when a water monolayer is added to one of the monodentate structures, while acetonitrile leads to modifications of the binding mode: the structure switches from a molecular to a dissociative monodentate. Solvent molecules were also shown to favour the deprotonation of the dye by modifying the acid/base properties of the dye-sensitized system.
The (101) TiO2 surface was also studied covered by solvent molecules saturating all the five-coordinated titanium atoms through water–[O]–Ti centers or acetonitrile–[N]–Ti centers. Here [O] and [N] stand for the oxygen (respectively nitrogen) atom of water (acetonitrile) solvent molecules. Different inter-water molecular interactions are also identified in the optimized structures. The results show that while water is able to compete with the dye for chemical anchoring at the surface of anatase, acetonitrile displays a lower ability to compete with the sensitizers.
The computed interaction between the slab and water or acetonitrile leads to an upward shift of 1.2 eV (water) and 2.4 eV (acetonitrile) for the conduction band, which was attributed to the increase of negative charge at the titanium oxide surface due to the donor character of the adsorbed water molecules. Those results were shown to be in good agreement with previous theoretical and experimental data.
DFT was then employed to investigate the electronic structure of sensitized TiO2 in the presence of solvent. The three previously mentioned dyes (BA, CA and L0) were studied, anchored to the TiO2 nanocluster, in the absence/presence of coadsorbed solvent. Computational results indicate that the presence of water up-shifts the anatase conduction band by 0.2 to 0.5 eV with respect to data obtained in vacuo. Acetonitrile solvent shifts this conduction band upward by 0.6 to 1.0 eV with respect to dye sensitized-TiO2 in the presence of water. This actually means that the presence of chemically-anchored dye reduces the impact of the chemical environment when the latter is restricted to solvent molecules in the vicinity of the titanium oxide slab surface.
V. Energy and electron/hole transfer within dye monolayers
The morphology of the dye monolayer, apart from directly influencing the optical and charge-generation properties of the dye-sensitized TiO2, clearly determines the rate and efficiency of energy, electron and hole transfer processes among the adsorbed species.197 In the following we shall discuss how long-ranged energy transfer processes81,198 and lateral hole diffusion86 in realistic dye/TiO2 interfaces can be effectively modelled to provide an experimentally observable result, also taking into account thermal fluctuations by means of ab initio molecular dynamic simulations. In the following the dipole moment (in the case of long range energy transfer) and electronic coupling terms (in the case of hole transfer) are calculated for isolated dyes or dimeric dye arrangements without considering the TiO2 surface, but keeping them in the conformation adopted when they are adsorbed on the semiconductor surface. This approximation is legitimate by the fact that usually the perturbation on the electronic structure and the optical properties of the dye grafted on the TiO2 surface is weak and simply translates into a systematic small charge delocalization toward the TiO2 substrate148 and a slight spectral shift.140
V.1 Förster resonance energy transfer in co-sensitized interfaces and dyadic donor–acceptor dyes
Long-range energy transfer processes (Förster type)199 among dye sensitizers having complementary absorption spectra are widely exploited in dye-sensitized solar cell devices to achieve panchromatic absorption either by co-sensitization strategies26–32,42 or by the use of light absorbing antennae chemically tethered to the sensitizing dye. FRET is mediated by the coupling of two resonant dipoles in the presence of an electric field.200 The geometry of the donor–acceptor system directly determines the energy transfer rate, which is given by: (8)where τ0 is the lifetime of the donor excited state, R0 is the Förster radius, rD and rA are the position vectors of the donor and the acceptor respectively. The Förster radius, defined as the distance between the donor and the acceptor when the FRET has a 50% probability,200 can be obtained from the donor luminescence efficiency, QD, the overlap integral of the donor emission spectrum, FD, the acceptor absorption spectrum εA, and the orientation factor κ2: (9)with NA being the Avogadro's number and n the refractive index of the medium. The dimensionless orientation factor κ2 can vary from 0 (antiparallel dipoles) to 4 (parallel dipoles) and it is given by: κ2 = (cosγ − 3cosαcosβ)2(10)where the angles α, β and γ define the relative orientation between the two interacting dipole moments.201 For randomly oriented dipole moments, κ2 is equal to 2/3 (isotropic regime) but for different geometries and distributions it can be precisely calculated.202–204
Here we shall show how first-principles calculations and computational modelling strategies can be applied to quantitatively predict FRET parameters and rates in both co-sensitized TiO2 interfaces198 and dyadic “antenna” systems.81 In the co-sensitization approach, for instance, FRET from an energy relay dye (ERD) to the sensitizing dye (SD) can be exploited to increase the photocurrent, when both dyes are anchored to the metal oxide surface or when the ERD is dispersed in the electrolyte solution.200,205 Recently, a first-principles modelling study on the FRET processes between a zinc naphthalocyanine ERD (AS02) and a Ru(II) SD (C106), when both are anchored onto the TiO2 surface (Fig. 19),197 has been reported by some of us.
 Fig. 19  Molecular structures and the co-adsorption scheme of C106 and AS02. 
We have calculated the adsorption mode of both AS02 and C106 on TiO2 and then modelled the incremental co-sensitization pathways, making use of the TiO2-optimized geometries of the individual fragments. By evaluating the coupling between the transition dipole moments of the various determined ERD-SD assemblies the corresponding κ2 values were precisely calculated and, using these values in eqn (2) along with the experimental quantities determined by Hardin et al., new estimates of the Föster radii were reported. Having determined corrected Föster radii and exact donor–acceptor separations, we recomputed the FRET rates using the experimental fluorescence decay lifetime,197 showing that when the energy transfer partners are adsorbed on TiO2, some preferential NIR-ERD/SD orientations dictated by the surface topology can lead to variation of kFRET rates by 2–3 orders of magnitude. The co-adsorption scheme modelling was carried out by starting from 1:1 AS02:C106 closely interacting arrangements and arriving to consider 1:4 AS02:C106 packing schemes, which reproduce the experimental coverage of ca. 80% (C106) and ca. 20% (AS02). A detailed description of the aggregate selection is provided in ref. 198, while here we only show in Fig. 20 the most stable 1:4 co-adsorption scheme, which was employed to calculate the κ2, Förster radii and FRET rates.
 Fig. 20  Energetically favoured 1:4 AS02:C106 co-adsorption patterns and FRET donor/acceptor labelling. 
To calculate κ2 the vector distance between the donor and acceptor ground-to-excited transition dipole moments is defined as the distance between the centres of nuclear charges (rDA) for each AS02–C106 couple (see Table 3). For the AS02 transition dipole moment the averaged dipole moment of the two near-degenerate S1 and S2 transitions201 is considered.198 The rDA values are roughly comparable to the calculated distances between the Ru and Zn metal centres (rRu–Zn, see Table 3). Using eqn (10) we computed for each D–A geometry the value of κ2 and recalculated the Förster radii, R′0, by correcting the values reported by Hardin et al.197 with our calculated κ2. The shortest separations are predicted for the AS02–C106_1 (1.027 nm) and AS02–C106_3 (1.054 nm) D–A couples, Fig. 20, which are also the structures with the largest stabilization energies (−18.1 and −12.6 kcal mol−1 respectively) and the largest κ2 values, 1.46 and 0.54, respectively. For the AS02–C106_2 and AS02–C106_4 D–A structures (see Fig. 20), we obtained considerably smaller κ2 values (0.08 and 0.15) and longer intermolecular distances of 1.680 and 1.495 nm, respectively. The κ2 values reported in Table 3, and consequently the Förster radii and their sixth power, R′06, substantially differ from the values used in ref. 197 to estimate the FRET rate. Here, the largest calculated κ2 value is 1.46, more than two times larger than the value of 2/3 valid in solution, and the corrected FRET radius is between 1.7 and 2.1 nm, again larger than the 1.5–1.8 nm range reported by Hardin et al.; the smallest κ2 value is instead 0.08 (AS02–C106_2), with the corresponding Förster radii of 1.1–1.3 nm. With reference to eqn (8), it is clear that the small differences in the calculated FRET radii become very relevant since the corrected R′06 values vary from 1.8 to 85.8 nm6. In Table 3 we report our estimates of the FRET rates (k′FRET) for each D–A couple, calculated using eqn (8) using the experimental fluorescence decay lifetime of 2.75 ns197 and the corrected R′0 and |rDA| values obtained in this work. For the most interacting D–A couple (AS02–C106_1) we predicted a FRET rate between 7.5 × 109 and 2.7 × 1010 s−1, which is notably numerically the same value obtained in ref. 197 (see Table 3). In other words, we calculate a shorter D–A separation and a shorter Förster radius than in ref. 197, obtaining the same R0/|rDA| ratio and thus obtaining the same FRET rates, being proportional to the sixth power of the above-mentioned ratio. The calculated rates in Table 3 show that unfavourable ERD-SD orientations with very low κ2 values and large distances, like for instance the AS02–C106_2 couple, yield a sizeable reduction in the FRET rates, up to three orders of magnitude.
Table 3 Calculated interaction energies, Eint, (kcal mol−1), charge centre and Ru–Zn distances (nm), κ2 and corresponding corrected R′0, R′06 (in nm) and FRET rates, k′FRET, for each AS02–C106 D–A couple. Couple labelling is illustrated in Fig. 20. The last row reports the corresponding experimental values taken from ref. 197




D–A couple

E
int (kcal mol−1)
|rDA| (nm)
|rRu–Zn| (nm)

κ
2


R′0 (nm)

R′06 (nm6)

k′FRET (s−1)




AS02–C106_1
−18.1
1.027
0.908
1.46
1.7
24.1
7.5 × 109












2.1
85.8
2.7 × 1010


AS02–C106_2
−3.8
1.680
1.416
0.08
1.1
1.8
2.9 × 107












1.3
4.8
7.8 × 107


AS02–C106_3
−12.6
1.054
1.221
0.53
1.4
7.5
2.0 × 109












1.7
24.1
6.4 × 109


AS02–C106_4
−1.4
1.495
1.702
0.15
1.2
3.0
9.8 × 107












1.4
7.5
2.4 × 108


Exp.197


0.914


0.67
1.5
11.4
7.1 × 109












1.8
34.0
2.3 × 1010




This model also provides an estimate of the electronic coupling for hole transfer from the SD to the NIR-ERD. As an example, for the most interacting AS02–C106_1 configuration (see Fig. 20), we calculate a rather small electronic coupling of ∼10−3 eV. Thus one can scrutinize and possibly control at the same time both FRET and hole transfer processes, which constitute a dead end for the DSCs functioning in the present architecture.
If inclusion of dynamical aspects is expected to have a relatively small impact when the FRET process occurs between co-adsorbed donor and acceptor units in close packing,198 it becomes, in principle, mandatory in dyadic systems. Indeed, in spite of its large popularity in deriving quantitative structural information on biological macromolecules, the validity of the fundamental assumptions underlying the modelling of FRET processes has recently been questioned.206–211 Basically, the most debated issue is the above mentioned “isotropic regime”, whereby both the donor and the acceptor are assumed to rapidly sample all possible orientations, resulting in an average orientational factor for the dipolar interaction κ2 of 2/3. A second assumption which is implied in the isotropic model is that the distance between the donor and the acceptor unit is not correlated to their relative orientations.210 As a consequence, in recent years molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been largely employed to study the simultaneous motion of the donor/acceptor pair, thus supporting FRET experiments in obtaining structural parameters in various fields, including biology.208,212–216 To the best of our knowledge, the first study investigating the effect of thermal fluctuations on the FRET processes in antenna-acceptor dye sensitizers was recently reported by some of us.81 By combining Car–Parrinello Molecular Dynamics (CPMD) and Time Dependent DFT calculations we have characterized the dynamical evolution of FRET processes in two dyadic carbazole–phenothiazine (CZ–PTZ distance) dyes60,81 where the CZ unit, linked to PTZ via an alkyl C6H12 chain, acts as an antenna donor and the PTZ unit is a TiO2-anchored acceptor. The two dyes (see Fig. 21), hereafter termed CSORG1 and CSORG4 after ref. 60, differ in the anchoring group and hence in the relative mobility of the CZ and PTZ constituents. CSORG1 shows electron conjugation between PTZ and the cyanoacrylic acid anchoring group, enforcing the PTZ moiety to an almost perpendicular arrangement with respect to the TiO2 surface. In CSORG4, in contrast, the PTZ moiety is allowed to bend more freely about the rhodanine-3-acetic acid anchoring group.
 Fig. 21  (top) Molecular structures of the CSORG1 and CSORG4 dyes. Donor (CZ) and acceptor (PTZ) moieties are enclosed in blue and red frames, respectively. (bottom) Scheme of the penta-coordinated Ti atoms on the anatase TiO2(101) surface, representing the grid of possible dye adsorption sites. The super-cells employed for full-packed CSORG1 (red) and CSORG4 (blue) are demarked as dashed frames, each corresponding to the minimal surface area for full coverage by the dye. 
The different anchoring group also induces a markedly different adsorption minimum-energy configuration onto the semiconductor surface,77 with CSORG1 standing up almost perpendicular to the TiO2 surface and CSORG4 lying bent over the surface plane. Accordingly, the minimal area to accommodate one anchored molecule of CSORG4 (right panel of Fig. 21) without atomic superimpositions with periodic images (4a0 × 2b0 dashed blue frames) is twice that required by CSORG1 (4a0 × 1b0 dashed red frames in the left panel). The isolated dyes are simulated by employing large super-cells to decouple the electronic and steric influence of the neighbouring dyes in the periodic replica. By reducing the dimensions of the simulated super-cells to the minimum dimension preserving the TiO2 periodicity and avoiding atomic superimpositions, we basically reduce the space between periodically replicated dye images, thus effectively sampling intermolecular interactions. For simulations of the isolated dyes, an orthorhombic super-cell of 32 × 32 × 32 Å3 was employed, within periodic boundary conditions. For full-packed simulations smaller super-cells of 4a0 × 1b0 × 32 (i.e., 15.16 × 10.24 × 32) Å3 and 4a0 × 2b0 × 32 (i.e., 15.16 × 20.48 × 32) Å3 for CSORG1 and CSORG4, respectively, were used. The interaction with the TiO2 surface is not explicitly taken into account, and the more stable bidentate adsorption mode60 is enforced by fixing the atomic coordinates of the carboxylate anchoring moiety with those obtained in the optimized dye/TiO2 assemblies.60 The FRET geometrical parameters (donor–acceptor distance rDA and the dipole-orientation factor κ2 entering eqn (11)) were computed for a set of 474 snapshots along the CPMD trajectories (see ref. 81 for CPMD and excited state calculation details). For each snapshot, the structures of the donor (CZ) and acceptor (PTZ) moieties of both CSORG1 and CSORG4 were extracted from the respective entire-dye structure by cutting the alkyl chain departing from the selected (CZ or PTZ) unit after two carbon atoms (see Fig. 21) and saturating with H (–C2H5). The donor–acceptor distance rDA was taken to be the distance between the centre of the nuclear charges of CZ and that of PTZ.
For the CSORG1 dye, close-packing was shown to induce more fluctuations in the relative orientation of CZ and PTZ than those observed for the isolated dye, and, on average, a greater κ2 (1.08 to be compared with 0.99). The thermally averaged κ2 values obtained from the CPMD trajectories were, however, in both the considered cases considerably higher than the static values (0.58 and 0.51 for isolated and full-packed conditions, respectively) calculated at the CP optimized geometry, and also appreciably higher than the commonly used isotropic-model value 2/3. On the other hand, CSORG1 was found to experience a CZ–PTZ distance shortening during the CPMD simulation with respect to its static configuration (average donor–acceptor distances of 11.42 Å and 11.70 Å under isolated and full-packed conditions versus the static values of 12.36 Å and 12.32 Å, respectively).81 These results suggest that both a static and an isotropic model should largely underestimate the FRET rate for CSORG1. Concerning CSORG4, the thermally averaged κ2 of 0.82 was considerably larger than that calculated on the CP optimized structure and closer to that of CSORG1, albeit its maximum value (2.99 reached at 17.44 ps) was lower than that calculated for CSORG1. Also in this case, a considerable effect of the molecular packing on κ2, with an increase in both the maximum (3.56, recorded at 19.35 ps, versus 2.99) and average (0.99 versus 0.82) values, was found. More markedly than in CSORG1, a static picture was seen to provide κ2 values lower than the thermally averaged values both under isolated and full-packed conditions (0.24 and 0.31 versus 0.82 and 0.99, respectively). The latter values are found to be, as in CSORG1, appreciably higher than the isotropic-model value 2/3. On the other hand, for CSORG4 the thermally averaged donor–acceptor distance varied only modestly with respect to the static picture both under isolated and full-packed conditions (11.41 Å and 11.17 Å versus 10.98 Å and 11.29 Å, respectively). At this point, a comparative analysis of the FRET rate estimates resulting from the three models considered so far (i.e. the static model, the isotropic model and the model including thermal fluctuations) is possible. It is a common practice to assume all photophysical quantities in eqn (8) and (9) (τ0, QD and the overlap integral between the donor emission and the acceptor absorption spectra) to be independent of the dynamical structural changes.210 The FRET rate (eqn (8)) can, therefore, be put in the form kF = Cκ2rDA−6 = Ck′F(11) where we have introduced the scaled FRET rate k′F having units of Å−6.

Fig. 22 displays the scaled FRET rates k′F of both CSORG1 (left panels) and CSORG4 (right panels) under isolated (top panels) and full-packed conditions (bottom panels) as a function of time, computed using both the instantaneous values of κ2 (black line) and the isotropic-model value of 2/3 (red line). The scaled FRET rates obtained from the static (CP optimized) κ2 and rDA values are also reported (blue line).
 Fig. 22  The scaled FRET rate k′F (see Table 4) for both CSORG1 (left panels) and CSORG4 (right panels) under isolated (top panels) and full-packed conditions (bottom panels) computed using instantaneous values of κ2 (black line) or the isotropic-regime value 2/3 (red line). The scaled FRET rates obtained from the static κ2 and rDA values are also reported (blue line). Figure taken from ref. 81. 
As suggested by the analysis of the FRET parameters, the static FRET rates are largely exceeded both in the isotropic and thermally averaged picture. In the case of CSORG1, the isotropic model always yielded a non-negligible underestimation of the FRET rates compared to the instantaneous values, which appeared to be more pronounced in the last 10 ps of the simulation, where the orientational relaxation is faster and hence κ2 oscillations are stronger. Moving to the isolated CSORG4, the isotropic approximation was found to predict largely overestimated k′F corresponding to the sizable donor–acceptor distance shortening, occurring here within 13 and 15 ps. Such distance decrease, in fact, was accompanied during the simulation by a simultaneous fall of κ2, which is clearly not accounted for in the isotropic regime. Interestingly, an opposite effect was encountered under full-packed conditions, where the isotropic-model estimate was lower than the fully dynamical one around 15 ps, when the CZ–PTZ distance strongly decreased. The close molecular packing appeared, in fact, to promote, in this region (between 13 and 15 ps), a favourable orientation between the transition dipole moments of the CZ and PTZ moieties, resulting in highly enhanced energy transfer rates.
The above outlined picture is fully confirmed by the scaled FRET rate time-averaged values reported in Table 4. The predicted FRET rates in a static picture were in any case considerably lower than the average values obtained both in the isotropic and fully dynamical models. On the other hand, with the exception of full-packed CSORG4, the average rates estimated using the instantaneous distances and an average 2/3 value for κ2 (isotropic model) for the remaining three cases were also a poor approximation to those calculated with the instantaneous values of κ2. In the isotropic approximation, in fact, the FRET rate of CSORG1 was underestimated, which was found to be 25% and 51% under isolated and full-packed conditions, respectively. For CSORG4, in contrast, a large overestimation (40%) was found in the isolated-condition simulation, while a surprisingly good agreement, within 3%, was obtained under full-packed conditions.
Table 4 Static (CP-optimized), isotropic and fully dynamical average values of the scaled FRET rate k′F for CSORG1 and CSORG4 under both isolated and full-packed conditions






Static
Isotropic
Thermally averaged




CSORG1


Isolated



k′F × 106 (Å−6)
0.163
0.436
0.573


Full-packed



k′F × 106 (Å−6)
0.146
0.315
0.477






CSORG4


Isolated



k′F × 106 (Å−6)
0.135
0.530
0.379


Full-packed



k′F × 106 (Å−6)
0.151
0.750
0.769




In summary, an important result emerging from our simulations is that for both dyes a static (minimum-energy) picture provides largely underestimated FRET rates under both isolated and full-packed conditions when compared to the dynamically averaged one. The isotropic model, on the other hand, though significantly improving over the static model, still fails to reproduce the dynamically averaged values in three out of the four considered cases. This indicates that accounting for thermal fluctuations should be mandatory for the appropriate modelling of FRET processes in dyadic dye–TiO2 DSSCs as those modelled in our study.
V.2 Hole diffusion within dye monolayers
Upon electron injection in the semiconductor CB, lateral hole diffusion within the dye layer can occur,217 especially in solid-state DSCs where the hole transport materials cannot completely fill the mesoporous TiO2 electrode.64,218–221 This phenomenon of lateral hole hopping is also relevant in the context of the transport of charges to catalytic sites for water splitting, solar fuel production, molecular transistors, batteries, or any other molecular electronic device.222–224 Therefore, being able to predict the kinetics of charge diffusion within a molecular monolayer is of significant interest. In recent work, some of us have modelled the lateral hole transport between dyes on sensitized TiO2 nanocrystalline films investigating the relationship between molecular configuration and the bulk diffusion coefficient of holes across the monolayer.86 Experimentally, hole diffusion has been observed to depend on the nature of the dye and the surrounding medium. This is rationalized given that the chemical structure of the dyes and their physical arrangement in a given system will control their electronic interactions and hence the conductivity of the monolayer. Indeed, one can expect the lateral hole hopping rate to depend on the separation between dye molecules, which, in turn, depends on the density (or loading) of molecules on a given surface and the electronic coupling between the charge donor and acceptor (which is strongly dependent on the geometry of the pair of molecules) and on the dynamics of molecular rearrangement. Thus, to get a realistic evaluation of the lateral hole diffusion rates, taking into account the effect of both intermolecular interactions and thermal fluctuations, we have combined quantum chemical calculations of electronic structure and coupling with ab initio CPMD simulations or rigid molecular packing (RMP)225 and kinetic Monte Carlo.226 We note that, in a fully quantum mechanical picture, the Hamiltonian describing electronic coupling should be continually updated for the new conformations in a self-consistent manner, although this is most important for systems with a high degree of order, such as organic semiconductors.227 In our work, to reduce the computational cost for our more disordered system, we adopted an approximate approach decoupling molecular conformation and electronic coupling. We considered the two indoline D102 and D149 dyes (Fig. 23a and b, respectively), which have different degrees of conformational disorder on the TiO2 surface and a different surface coverage due to different packing motifs.80 This allowed us to examine the influence of this disorder on transport. We choose these dyes because they perform well in solid-state DSSCs228,229 and because their hole diffusion coefficient is among the highest reported.82,220
 Fig. 23  Chemical structures of D102 (a) and D149 (b). The anchoring group to the TiO2 surface is circled in red in both cases. We assume that the dye molecules bind to the surface in a bidendate mode where the two oxygens of the deprotonated carboxylic acid groups are attached to different five coordinated titanium atoms. (c) The most energetically favourable intermolecular spacing for D102 (blue) and D149 (green).80 The (xy) plane shows the (101) TiO2 surface. 
The packing arrangement of D102 and D149 dyes on the anatase surface is given in Fig. 23c, where (xy) is the plane of the (101) surface. The basis of vectors {aD102, bD102} and {aD149, bD149} generates the lattice of attachment points for D102 and D149, respectively. Because D102 and D149 are not symmetric about the anchoring group, we expect these different configurations to have a potentially important impact on the electronic coupling. We assumed the full coverage of the TiO2 surface following the adsorption patterns determined in ref. 80 (see Fig. 23, part c for the labelling of pairs), which well reproduce the measured dye loading and coverage.67 Since the dyes adopt a bidendate anchoring mode, there are two possibilities for one molecule to sit on the surface; this determines the relative orientation of two molecules in a pair: both with the same relative orientation, one dye1 (in 0,0) flipped or dye2 (in 0,xa) flipped (Fig. 24e).
 Fig. 24  Probability density distributions of the logarithm of the squared electronic coupling (in eV2) for the different paired configurations. The insets illustrate the spacing of the dyes as given in Fig. 23, part c. (a) D102 separated by aD102. (b) D102 separated by bD102. (c) D149 separated by aD149. (d) D149 separated by bD149. (E) Schematic representation of the three configurations considered in this work. Figure taken from ref. 86. 
We address the variety of conformations in two ways. First, in order to sample the conformations explored in short times, less than the time for a typical charge transfer event (∼1 ns), we use Car–Parrinello molecular dynamics. However, in order to explore the conformations visited on time scales longer than charge hopping times, we adopted a less expensive method by approximating the set of conformations by those that are compatible with rotations of the dyes around their bidentate binding sites defined by the two oxygens of the anchoring group. For a more detailed description of the methodology and of the modelling of the arrangement of D102 and D149 on the (101) TiO2 surface we refer the reader to ref. 86 sampled coordinates of molecular pairs from both the CPMD trajectory and the RMP were used as inputs into a molecular pair calculation in vacuum (B3LYP/LANL2DZ) with the projective method,230 to calculate distributions of transfer integrals Jij.

Fig. 24 shows the density plots of the squared electronic coupling calculated for the conformations sampled by CPMD (green curve). For D102 separated by aD102 (Fig. 24, part a) and bD102 (Fig. 24, part b) and D149 separated by bD149 (Fig. 24, part d), we observe narrow distributions with a peak position around 10−6 eV2 (see the dotted green lines in Fig. 24, parts a–d for guidance). This implies that the fluctuations in pair geometry sampled by CPMD are rather small. In contrast, for D149 separated by aD149, the distribution is much wider and slightly shifted toward weaker couplings, which is assigned to the effect of steric hindrance pushing the dyes apart. To study the effect of a wider range of conformations on electronic coupling, we also show in Fig. 24Jij2 distributions from RMP, where different angles of rotation of the dye around its anchoring group are sampled uniformly. CPMD has been performed only for pairs of dyes having the same relative orientation. Therefore, the range of electronic couplings sampled by CPMD can be compared with the distribution obtained from PACKMOL for the same orientations only (black curve). The peak position of the distributions for the two sampling methods is similar for D102 separated by bD102 and D149 separated by bD149 (Fig. 24, parts b and d). For D102 separated by aD102 and D149 separated by aD149 (Fig. 24, parts a and c), it appears that CPMD generates a distribution slightly shifted toward weaker couplings. This suggests that in this direction RMP is underestimating the true extent of steric repulsion of the dye molecules, compared to that obtained from a full CPMD treatment.
The calculated electronic coupling distributions can be used with a continuous-time random walk algorithm (CTRW)226,231 to simulate hole diffusion across the dye molecule monolayer. twait is the adaptive time step, after which a hole changing its site depends on the rate of charge transfer and hence on the square of electronic coupling, Jij2, between nearest neighbours. Therefore, we have to consider the relative time scales of the various configurational changes with respect to the hole hopping to appropriately integrate the Jij distributions within the CTRW algorithm. To treat the problem appropriately we would need a statistical ensemble of conformations that spans the full range of dye dynamics. To limit the computational effort, we use the cheaper RMP generated conformations to include the effect of changing conformations on hopping. In this approach, the fastest dynamics are neglected. To examine this approximation, we use our CPMD generated ensemble to estimate the effect of fast dynamics on hopping rates. Three algorithms are implemented as described below and in more detail in ref. 86
(1) The fast limit, where the molecular rearrangement is much faster than the hole hopping time. This applies to the distributions calculated using CPMD, as the geometrical changes reported here cover up to 25 ps.
(2) The static limit, where the molecular rearrangement is much slower than the hole hopping time. In practice, this is equivalent to randomly assigning a value of electronic coupling (sampling the distributions generated using RMP) to every bond of the lattice at the beginning of the simulation and keeping it unchanged.
(3) The intermediate regime where the molecular rearrangement happens on a similar time scale to hole hopping. A new parameter is introduced: the renewal time, tren, after which the electronic coupling of each bond of the lattice is randomly reassigned.232 Here, we use the distributions of Jij for the pairs of dyes generated using RMP (also using Boltzmann-weighted CTRW). The fastest dynamics are neglected in this scenario (i.e., we do not obtain any Jij from the CPMD generated distributions) and hence the kinetic Monte Carlo simulation is expected to underestimate the hole diffusion coefficient relative to the case where both large amplitude conformation changes and fast dynamics are included, as we show below.
For each charge transport simulation, we track the mean square displacement, drms, of the charge on the two-dimensional lattice and calculate the diffusion coefficient, Dcalc, from the variation of the average drms with respect to time (Table 5).
Table 5 Diffusion coefficients calculated using the continuous time random walk algorithm (see ref. 86 for computational details). The experimental data are shown for comparison, where the measured apparent diffusion coefficient is converted into a two-dimensional coefficient Dexp = 2/3D2D,exp220




Case

D
D102 (cm2 s−1)

D
D149 (cm2 s−1)




Fast limit
4.5 × 10−7
6.1 × 10−7


Single value (reference)
1.5 × 10−7
1.6 × 10−8


Static limit
1.5 × 10−9
1.7 × 10−8



t
ren = 10−1 s
3.5 × 10−10
3.5 × 10−8



t
ren = 10−3 s
2.4 × 10−9
3.8 × 10−8



t
ren = 10−5 s
1.7 × 10−9
4.5 × 10−8



t
ren = 10−6 s
6.5 × 10−9
5.3 × 10−8



t
ren = 10−7 s
3.3 × 10−8
9.2 × 10−8



D
2D,exp

9.6(2.0) × 10−8
2.5(0.8) × 10−7




The fast limit (1), where we use the average of the squared electronic coupling from the CPMD distribution, shows the highest diffusion coefficients. Within this limit, the conformational disorder is limited to small fluctuations around an upright, reasonably well-coupled dye geometry; hence, the hole moves faster across the lattice. The static limit (2) is the case where the disorder is maximal because the lattice is frozen, and we logically obtain the lowest diffusion coefficients for both dyes in this limit. The difference between Dcalc calculated for both dyes is the greatest. The diffusion coefficient increases as the renewal time decreases. Indeed, after each time interval, tren, the bonds of the lattice are reassigned with a different Jij, drawn from the distribution. As a result, the charge is more likely to escape a weakly coupled site and moves faster across the lattice. For D102, we see that the diffusion coefficient with the smallest renewal time (10−7 s) is 95 times higher than the diffusion coefficient within the static limit. For D149, it is only 2.6 times higher. This can be rationalized by looking at the Jij distributions given in Fig. 24, parts b and d. The distributions are much wider for D102 than they are for D149, which implies higher disorder. Therefore, the reassignment of the electronic coupling has a stronger effect for D102, which explains the bigger increase in the diffusion coefficient. It thus seems that dynamical disorder helps charge conduction for our two-dimensional dye monolayer, in line with what was observed in three-dimensional organic semiconductors.233 It is interesting to see how our calculated diffusion coefficients compare with the measured ones. Because a straightforward comparison will still not be rigorous, we focus here on the relative kinetics of the two dyes. We observe that it is the intermediate regime at short renewal time that reproduces the experimental trend best. The ratio of the diffusion coefficient between the two dyes is consistent between calculated (DD149,calc ≈ 2.7DD102,calc) and measured (DD149,exp ≈ 2.6DD102,exp) values. This implies that the hole diffusion kinetics observed in real systems can be explained by a fast rearrangement of the molecules adsorbed on TiO2. This corroborates previous observations where the diffusion coefficient is found to decrease when the viscosity of the surrounding hole transporting medium increases.220,234,235 Indeed, we expect a slower rearrangement of the molecular lattice in a viscous environment and therefore, as demonstrated in ref. 86, a lower diffusion coefficient. In conclusion, it was proven that a static model cannot give a diffusion coefficient high enough to explain the experimental trend, as opposed to a model with a rearranging lattice. Thus, this suggests that it is likely to be the motion of the dyes on the surface that allows the fast conduction of holes through the monolayer. As a result, a greater range of configurational disorder will result in a slower hole transfer dynamics but can be balanced by a fast rearrangement of the molecules, which allows charges to escape structurally trapping configurations. Consequently, the viscosity of the medium surrounding the dyes is likely to play a role, as it may slow down the molecular dynamics. To design fast conducting molecular wires, one needs to account for the freedom of the molecules once attached on the substrate.
VI. Summary and conclusions
We reviewed the various aspects of interfacial phenomena taking place at the vicinity of the dye–TiO2 heterojunction, and as a consequence of the chemical anchoring of dye sensitizers onto the semiconductor surface. More especially, we addressed different points related to several physical phenomena characterizing this anchoring, under the most realistic conditions available computationally, i.e. by paying attention to the environment of the grafting zones and by accounting for the dynamical nature of the systems' structure. To this end, we first highlighted the importance of the interaction between the dye-sensitized TiO2 and the regenerating agent, when the latter is a classical iodine redox couple, or a cobalt complex. It was especially highlighted that depending on the composition of organic dye sensitizers, some atoms (especially oxygen and sulphur) can serve as binding sites for iodine, decreasing its average distance to the surface and favouring the recombination process.
We also reported recent studies on dye aggregation, by considering a simple model involving two monomers clustering into a dimer. Geometrical considerations were addressed, and the remarkable optical properties of the dimer, resulting from the interaction between the subsystems, were justified using the molecular exciton theory of excited state splitting. A more evolved approach accounting for the dynamical motion of dye monolayers highlighted the fact that upon clustering, the various constituents of the monolayer are chemically anchored at the surface of anatase through different binding modes. Spectral shifts were evaluated and attributed to self-aggregation. We further reported a computational study related to the optical and charge-separation properties of dye-sensitized semiconductor nanoclusters under realistic conditions where the heterointerface was modelled by including a dye additive. Depending on the structure of the co-adsorbing agent and the solvent used for computing the optical properties of the adducts, the calculations revealed that while the presence of additives can affect the optical properties of the dye in relation to its environment, this environment, modelled by a polarizable continuum method, was shown not to strongly impact the optical characteristics of the additiveless dye.
A theoretical investigation related to proton adsorption was then reported, where electronic structure calculations highlighted the fact that injection rate values are strongly affected by the number of protons that are adsorbed at the surface of TiO2. Spectroscopic photovoltaic studies of protonated and non-protonated sensitized TiO2 further showed that TiO2 absorption shifts to longer wavelengths upon proton adsorption. Moreover, it was reported that an acidic treatment of titanium oxide also leads to higher interfacial electronic coupling and dye coverage, as well as higher photocurrent values, confirming that this treatment leads to an overall better photovoltaic performance.
Including a solvent monolayer in the vicinity of the heterojunction in the computational treatment of the interface showed that while water is able to compete with the dye for occupying titanium oxide sites, acetonitrile on the other hand did not have the same characteristics. This was revealed by observing the modification of dye–Ti bond distances in the presence or absence of the solvent monolayer, and by comparing the sensitized TiO2 conduction band energy in vacuo and in the presence of solvent.
Energy and charge-transfer issues were then addressed through the report of a study highlighting that when modelling the co-sensitization of TiO2 it appears that some preferential dye orientations can be dictated by the surface topology and influence the resonance energy transfer occurring between the two co-sensitizers, with the FRET coefficient varying by two-to-three orders of magnitude. The inclusion of dynamical effects was also reported for dyadic systems by combining CPMD with TDDFT for the study of time-dependent FRET of anatase sensitized with two dyes differing in their anchoring function (cyanoacrylic acid and rhodanine-3-acetic acid respectively).
Finally, hole diffusion into dye monolayers was reported for two indoline-based compounds with different degrees of conformational disorder and different surface coverage on the titanium oxide surface. CPMD, rigid molecular packing and kinetic Monte Carlo calculations were performed to evaluate the lateral hole diffusion rates, electronic coupling distribution and charge mean square displacement. The time random walk algorithm was also exploited to calculate diffusion coefficients, and compare the theoretical results with experimental reality implying a fast molecular rearrangement of adsorbed molecules, which could not be retrieved from a static model.
Dye-sensitized solar cells are now a relatively mature field of application of photovoltaic technology with relevant industrial perspectives. Theoretical and computational modelling has definitely contributed to the deep understanding of the factors underlying solar cell efficiency and the interplay among various cell components in defining the final device properties. In this review we have offered an overview of the employed computational strategies and of relevant results, which we believe to represent the most up to date cutting edge of dye-sensitized modelling. The recent emergence of perovskite solar cells has definitely changed the landscape of hybrid/organic photovoltaics, casting new problems on the playground, which again call for the use of advanced computational modelling strategies. We believe that most of the work done on dye-sensitized solar cells will be transferred to perovskite solar cell modelling, whereby similar computational modelling strategies may be appropriately adapted to the new perovskite challenge.
Acknowledgements
Thibaut Very is gratefully acknowledged for the reproduction of the DSC scheme. The authors thank MIUR-PRIN 2010–2011 20104XET32 “DSSCX” for financial support.
Notes and references
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
K. J. Young, L. A. Martini, R. L. Milot, R. C. Snoeberger III, V. S. Batista, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2503–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan, M. Grätzel and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 10525–10528 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bai, I. Mora-Seró, F. De Angelis, J. Bisquert and P. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10095–10130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, Y. Li, S. Chen, J. Liu, J. Zhanga and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016 10.1039/C5EE03309H .
Z. Yao, M. Zhang, H. Wu, L. Yang, R. Li and P. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3799–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1819–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, G. Viscardi, P. Liska, S. Ito, B. Takeru and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16835–16847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2004, 164, 3–14 CrossRef .
T. Duchanois, T. Etienne, M. Beley, X. Assfeld, E. A. Perpète, A. Monari and P. C. Gros, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 3747–3753 CrossRef CAS .
T. Duchanois, T. Etienne, C. Cebrián, L. Liu, A. Monari, M. Beley, X. Assfeld, S. Haacke and P. C. Gros, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 2469–2477 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11442–11445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Wang, D. Zhou and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1401–1406 RSC .
W. Sharmoukh, A. Attanzio, E. Busatto, T. Etienne, S. Carli, A. Monari, X. Assfeld, M. Beley, S. Caramori and P. C. Gros, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 4041–4050 RSC .
S. Ito, H. Miura, S. Uchida, M. Takata, K. Sumioka, P. Liska, P. Comte, P. Pechy and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5194–5196 RSC .
W. Zeng, Y. Cao, Y. Bai, Y. Wang, Y. Shi, M. Zhang, F. Wang, C. Pan and P. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1915–1925 CrossRef CAS .
T. Daeneke, T.-H. Kwon, A. B. Holmes, N. W. Duffy, U. Bach and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 213–217 CrossRef PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Feldt, U. B. Cappel, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10551–10558 CAS .
P. J. Cameron, L. M. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1447–1453 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 838–842 CrossRef PubMed .
F. De Angelis, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 3349–3360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Clifford, A. Forneli, H. Chen, T. Torres, S. Tan and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1693–1696 RSC .
K. Sayama, S. Tsukagoshi, T. Mori, K. Hara, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpou, Y. Abe, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80, 47–71 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Martínez-Díaz, G. de la Torre and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7090–7108 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, C. Li, W. Wang, X. Wang and B. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 773–776 RSC .
J.-H. Yum, S.-R. Jang, P. Walter, T. Geiger, F. Nüesch, S. Kim, J. Ko, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4680–4682 RSC .
C.-M. Lan, H.-P. Wu, T.-Y. Pan, C.-W. Chang, W.-S. Chao, C.-T. Chen, C.-L. Wang, C.-Y. Lin and E. W.-G. Diau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6460–6464 CAS .
J.-H. Yum, E. Baranoff, S. Wenger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 842–857 CAS .
M. D. Brown, P. Parkinson, T. Torres, H. Miura, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23204–23208 CAS .
C. Siegers, U. Würfel, M. Zistler, H. Gores, J. Hohl-Ebinger, A. Hinsch and R. Haag, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 793–798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Thampi, M. Grätzel and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 5670–5671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Q. Fan, C. Kim, B. Fang, K.-X. Liao, G.-J. Yang, C.-J. Li, J.-J. Kim and J. Ko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7747–7754 CAS .
R. Y. Ogura, S. Nakane, M. Morooka, M. Orihashi, Y. Suzuki and K. Noda, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 073308 CrossRef .
H. Ozawa, R. Shimizu and H. Arakawa, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 3198–3200 RSC .
D. Kuang, P. Walter, F. Nüesch, S. Kim, J. Ko, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10906–10909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Nguyen, H. K. Mulmudi, D. Sabba, S. A. Kulkarni, S. K. Batabyal, K. Nonomura, M. Grätzel and S. G. Mhaisalkar, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 16182–16186 RSC .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. C. Basile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, K. NazeeruddinMd and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J.-i. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
L.-L. Li and E. W.-G. Diau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
J. N. Clifford, E. Martinez-Ferrero, A. Viterisi and E. Palomares, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1635–1646 RSC .
S. Ahmad, E. Guillen, L. Kavan, M. Gratzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3439–3466 CAS .
B. Bozic-Weber, E. C. Constable and C. E. Housecroft, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2013, 257, 3089–3106 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, T. Umeyama and S. Ito, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1809–1818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, J. Wu, U. V. Desai and D. Gao, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2420–2424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Shi and Y. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9394–9405 CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan and G. Luo, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 2136–2173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Yen, H.-H. Chou, Y.-C. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu and J. T. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8734–8747 RSC .
R. Katoh and A. Furube, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 20, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bazzan, J. R. Deneault, T.-S. Kang, B. E. Taylor and M. F. Durstock, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3268–3274 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, N. Cai, Y. Wang, R. Li, Y. Yuan and P. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8282–8286 RSC .
V. Johansson, L. Ellis-Gibbings, T. Clarke, M. Gorlov, G. G. Andersson and L. Kloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 711–718 RSC .
M. Pazoki, P. W. Lohse, N. Taghavinia, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 8503–8508 RSC .
S. Mahanta, H. Matsuzaki, T. N. Murakami, R. Katoh, H. Matsumoto and A. Furube, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1657–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Agrawal, T. Leijtens, E. Ronca, M. Pastore, H. Snaith and F. De Angelis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14675–14685 CAS .
G. Marotta, M. A. Reddy, S. P. Singh, A. Islam, L. Han, F. De Angelis, M. Pastore and M. Chandrasekharam, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9635–9647 CAS .
G. Marotta, M. G. Lobello, C. Anselmi, G. Barozzino Consiglio, M. Calamante, A. Mordini, M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1116–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Vaissier, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24337–24341 CAS .
D. Moia, U. B. Cappel, T. Leijtens, X. Li, A. M. Telford, H. J. Snaith, B. C. O'Regan, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18975–18985 CAS .
D. Moia, T. Leijtens, N. Noel, H. J. Snaith, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5889–5894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, M. Zhang, M. Pastore, R. Li, F. De Angelis and P. Wang, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 976–983 RSC .
A. Dualeh, F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, T. Moehl, C. Yi, F. Kessler, E. Baranoff, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1572–1578 CAS .
W. H. Howie, F. Claeyssens, H. Miura and L. M. Peter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1367–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. De Angelis, G. Vitillaro, L. Kavan, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18124–18131 CAS .
M. J. Griffith, M. James, G. Triani, P. Wagner, G. G. Wallace and D. L. Officer, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 12944–12950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Agrawal, M. Pastore, G. Marotta, M. A. Reddy, M. Chandrasekharam and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9613–9622 CAS .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura and S. Uchida, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3036–3037 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, K. Sumioka and S. Uchida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12218–12219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abbotto, V. Leandri, N. Manfredi, F. De Angelis, M. Pastore, J.-H. Yum, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2011, 6195–6205 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, N. Koumura, Y. Cui, M. Takahashi, H. Sekiguchi, A. Mori, T. Kubo, A. Furube and K. Hara, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3993–4003 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Eriksson, I. Josefsson, H. Ellis, A. Amat, M. Pastore, J. Oscarsson, R. Lindblad, A. I. K. Eriksson, E. M. J. Johansson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, S. Fantacci, M. Odelius and H. Rensmo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 252–260 RSC .
M. Hahlin, E. Johansson, S. Plogmaker, M. Odelius, L. Sun, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1507–1517 RSC .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 920–928 RSC .
C. Anselmi, E. Mosconi, M. Pastore, E. Ronca and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15963–15974 RSC .
K. S. V. Gupta, J. Zhang, G. Marotta, M. A. Reddy, S. P. Singh, A. Islam, L. Han, F. De Angelis, M. Chandrasekharam and M. Pastore, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 113, 536–545 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 556–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Urzúa-Leiva, S. Rampino, R. Arratia-Perez, E. Mosconi, M. Pastore and F. D. Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 16490–16499 Search PubMed .
A. Fattori, L. M. Peter, H. Wang, H. Miura and F. Marken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11822–11828 CAS .
L. Ellis-Gibbings, V. Johansson, R. B. Walsh, L. Kloo, J. S. Quinton and G. G. Andersson, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9431–9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Kley, C. Dette, G. Rinke, C. E. Patrick, J. Čechal, S. J. Jung, M. Baur, M. Dürr, S. Rauschenbach, F. Giustino, S. Stepanow and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 563–569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Voïtchovsky, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, N. Tétreault, U. Rothlisberger, F. Stellacci, M. Grätzel and H. A. Harms, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10834–10842 Search PubMed .
V. Vaissier, E. Mosconi, D. Moia, M. Pastore, J. M. Frost, F. De Angelis, P. R. F. Barnes and J. Nelson, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4731–4740 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Sewvandi, C. Chen, T. Ishii, T. Kusunose, Y. Tanaka, S. Nakanishi and Q. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20184–20192 CAS .
S. Godlewski, A. Tekiel, W. Piskorz, F. Zasada, J. S. Prauzner-Bechcicki, Z. Sojka and M. Szymonski, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8536–8545 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sasahara, K. Fujio, N. Koide, L. Han and H. Onishi, Surf. Sci., 2010, 604, 106–110 CrossRef CAS .
G. Raffaini, L. Melone and C. Punta, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7581–7583 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Yang, J. Zhang, R. Li, M. Zhang and P. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1037–1042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, W. Ma, Y. Jiao, J. Wang, X. Shan, H. Li, X. Lu and S. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22359–22369 CAS .
E. M. J. Johansson, R. Lindblad, H. Siegbahn, A. Hagfeldt and H. Rensmo, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1006–1017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pazoki, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
A. Byrne, N. J. English, U. Schwingenschlögl and D. F. Coker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21–30 CAS .
A. Fattori, L. Peter, K. McCall, N. Robertson and F. Marken, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2010, 14, 1929–1936 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, K. Yaguchi and A. Furube, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2011, 511, 336–339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lim, Y. S. Kwon, S.-H. Park, I. Y. Song, J. Choi and T. Park, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14647–14653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pechy, T. Renouard, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, P. Liska, L. Cevey, E. Costa, V. Shklover, L. Spiccia, G. B. Deacon, C. A. Bignozzi and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1613–1624 CrossRef .
J. H. Fendler, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3196–3210 CrossRef CAS .
P. Marquet, G. Andersson, A. Snedden, L. Kloo and R. Atkin, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9612–9616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tian, X. Jiang, Z. Yu, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7328–7331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, H. Li, Y. Luo, K. Li, Q. Meng, M. Armand and L. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3358–3365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. R. Jennings, M. Parameswaran and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 564–571 CAS .
M. Planells, L. Pellejà, J. N. Clifford, M. Pastore, F. De Angelis, N. López, S. R. Marder and E. Palomares, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1820–1829 CAS .
M. Pastore, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5965–5973 CAS .
A. Furube, R. Katoh, K. Hara, T. Sato, S. Murata, H. Arakawa and M. Tachiya, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16406–16414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyashita, K. Sunahara, K. Nishikawa, Y. Uemura, N. Koumura, K. Hara, A. Mori, T. Abe, E. Suzuki and S. Mori, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 17874–17881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Mosconi, J.-H. Yum, F. Kessler, C. J. G. García, C. Zuccaccia, A. Cinti, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19438–19453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Krivokapic, M. Zerara, M. L. Daku, A. Vargas, C. Enachescu, C. Ambrus, P. Tregenna-Piggott, N. Amstutz, E. Krausz and A. Hauser, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2007, 251, 364–378 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and A. Selloni, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424002 CrossRef PubMed .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 6054–6061 CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14156–14157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yoshimura, M. J. Uddin, N. Amasaki and T. Ohno, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 10846–10853 CrossRef CAS .
K. Krist and H. D. Gafney, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 951–958 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, J. Chem. Phys., 1956, 24, 966–978 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, M. Liang and J. Chen, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1541–1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan, L. Xiaoe and T. Ghaddar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7203–7215 Search PubMed .
S. Tatay, S. A. Haque, B. O'Regan, J. R. Durrant, W. J. H. Verhees, J. M. Kroon, A. Vidal-Ferran, P. Gavina and E. Palomares, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3037–3044 RSC .
A. Ehret, L. Stuhl and M. T. Spitler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9960–9965 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Dan-oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and K. Hara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7224–7230 CAS .
M. Kawasaki and S. Aoyama, Chem. Commun., 2004, 988–989 RSC .
A. C. Khazraji, S. Hotchandani, S. Das and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 4693–4700 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sayama, S. Tsukagoshi, K. Hara, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpou, Y. Abe, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 1363–1371 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, W. M. Campbell, E. E. Bonfantani, K. W. Jolley, D. L. Officer, P. J. Walsh, K. C. Gordon, R. Humphry-Baker, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15397–15409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-W. Lee, H.-P. Lu, C.-M. Lan, Y.-L. Huang, Y.-R. Liang, W.-N. Yen, Y.-C. Liu, Y.-S. Lin, E. W.-G. Diau and C.-Y. Yeh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1403–1412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, R. Charvet, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14336–14341 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Li, H. Lin, P. Pechy, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Dalton Trans., 2009, 10015–10020 RSC .
L. Han, A. Islam, H. Chen, C. Malapaka, B. Chiranjeevi, S. Zhang, X. Yang and M. Yanagida, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6057–6060 CAS .
J. Calbo, M. Pastore, E. Mosconi, E. Orti and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4709–4719 RSC .
R. Gebauer and F. De Angelis, New J. Phys., 2011, 13, 085013 CrossRef .
S. Feng, Q.-S. Li, P.-P. Sun, T. A. Niehaus and Z.-S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22504–22514 CAS .
W.-L. Ding, Q.-S. Li and Z.-S. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19948–19959 CAS .
J. R. Christianson and J. R. Schmidt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 3731–3740 RSC .
T. Etienne, L. Chbibi, C. Michaux, E. A. Perpète, X. Assfeld and A. Monari, Dyes Pigm., 2014, 101, 203–211 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CrossRef CAS .
U. Bach, D. Lupo, P. Comte, J. E. Moser, F. Weissörtel, J. Salbeck, H. Spreitzer and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1998, 395, 583–585 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt-Mende, U. Bach, R. Humphry-Baker, T. Horiuchi, H. Miura, S. Ito, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 813–815 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pastore, S. Fantacci and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 3685–3700 CAS .
R. Zhu, C.-Y. Jiang, B. Liu and S. Ramakrishna, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 994–1000 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kruger, R. Plass, L. Cevey, M. Piccirelli, M. Gratzel and U. Bach, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 2085–2087 CrossRef CAS .
S. Monti, M. Pastore, C. Li, F. De Angelis and V. Carravetta, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 2787–2796 CAS .
H. A. Harms, N. Tétreault, V. Gusak, B. Kasemo and M. Grätzel, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 9037–9040 RSC .
S. Rühle, M. Greenshtein, S.-G. Chen, A. Merson, H. Pizem, C. S. Sukenik, D. Cahen and A. Zaban, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18907–18913 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rühle and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17946–17951 CrossRef .
J. Liu, D. Zhou, M. Xu, X. Jing and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3545–3551 CAS .
E. Ronca, M. Pastore, L. Belpassi, F. Tarantelli and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 183–193 CAS .
Y. Tachibana, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 20056–20062 CrossRef CAS .
A. Listorti, B. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3381–3399 CrossRef CAS .

          J. E. Moser, in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ed. E. K. Kalyanasundaram, EPFL Press, Lausanne,  2010, pp. 403–456 Search PubMed .
I. Kondov, V. Vallet, H. Wang and M. Thoss, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 5467–5477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, H. Wang, P. Persson and M. Thoss, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 22A529 Search PubMed .
L. Lasser, E. Ronca, M. Pastore, F. De Angelis, J. Cornil, R. Lazzaroni and D. Beljonne, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9899–9909 CAS .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5798–5809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Koops, B. C. O'Regan, P. R. F. Barnes and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4808–4818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rothenberger, D. Fitzmaurice and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1992, 96, 5983–5986 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ronca, G. Marotta, M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16927–16940 CAS .
G. Boschloo and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 7860–7868 CrossRef CAS .
G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 1426–1430 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Hagfeldt, X.-R. Xiao and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 55, 267–281 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Watson and G. J. Meyer, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1391–1406 CrossRef CAS .
B. Enright, G. Redmond and D. Fitzmaurice, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 6195–6200 CrossRef CAS .
E. Mosconi, A. Selloni and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5932–5940 CAS .
C. Verdi, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis, M. Marsili and P. Umari, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 155410 CrossRef .
A. Zaban, S. Ferrere, J. Sprague and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 55–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zaban, S. Ferrere and B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 452–460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kalyanasundaram, N. Vlachopoulos, V. Krishnan, A. Monnier and M. Graetzel, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 2342–2347 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Yan and J. T. Hupp, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6867–6870 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qu and G. J. Meyer, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 6720–6728 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang and G. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15417–15421 CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, T. Yamaguchi, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4272–4276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jung, J.-K. Lee, S. Lee, K. S. Hong and H. Shin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8476–8480 CAS .
F. Labat, T. Le Bahers, I. Ciofini and C. Adamo, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1268–1277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Haque, E. Palomares, B. M. Cho, A. N. M. Green, N. Hirata, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 3456–3462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuang, C. Klein, H. J. Snaith, J.-E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Comte, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 769–773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nakade, T. Kanzaki, W. Kubo, T. Kitamura, Y. Wada and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3480–3487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Mueller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Graetzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382–6390 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo, L. Häggman and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144–13150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kato, M. Fujimoto, T. Kado, S. Sakaguchi, D. Kosugi, R. Shiratuchi, W. Takashima, K. Kaneto and S. Hayase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A1105–A1108 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Kelly, F. Farzad, D. W. Thompson, J. M. Stipkala and G. J. Meyer, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 7047–7054 CrossRef CAS .
R. Katoh, A. Furube, M. Kasuya, N. Fuke, N. Koide and L. Han, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3190–3196 RSC .
G. Boschloo, H. Lindström, E. Magnusson, A. Holmberg and A. Hagfeldt, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2002, 148, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abrusci, R. Kumar, M. Al-Hashimi, M. Heeney, A. Petrozza and H. Snaith, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2571–2579 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, J. Liu, C. Qin, H. Chen, A. Islam and L. Han, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3637–3645 CAS .
A. Abate, T. Leijtens, S. Pathak, J. Teuscher, R. Avolio, M. E. Errico, J. Kirkpatrik, J. M. Ball, P. Docampo, I. McPherson and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 2572–2579 RSC .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, A. Selloni, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3189–3195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Le Bahers, F. Labat, T. Pauporté, P. P. Lainé and I. Ciofini, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 133, 8005–8013 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. O. Kang, J. Ko, J. H. Yum, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, D. Di Censo, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 16701–16707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, J. H. Yum, F. De Angelis, E. Mosconi, S. Fantacci, S.-J. Moon, R. H. Baker, J. Ko, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2487–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pastore, E. Mosconi, F. De Angelis and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7205–7212 CAS .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Edvinsson, T. Marinado, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2245–2247 RSC .
Z.-S. Wang, F.-Y. Li and C.-H. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 9210–9217 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mikoshiba, S. Murai, H. Sumino and S. Hayase, Chem. Lett., 2002, 1156–1157 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci and R. Gebauer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 813–817 CrossRef CAS .
H.-L. Lu, Y.-H. Lee, S.-T. Huang, C. Su and T. C. K. Yang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 158–162 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Hardin, A. Sellinger, T. Moehl, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-E. Moser, P. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10662–10667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pastore and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2146–2153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7–17 RSC .
E. T. Hoke, B. E. Hardin and M. D. McGehee, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 3893–3904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mårtensson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 229, 449–456 CrossRef .
A. Blumen, J. Klafter and G. Zumofen, J. Chem. Phys., 1986, 84, 1397–1401 CrossRef CAS .
J. Drake, J. Klafter and P. Levitz, Science, 1991, 251, 1574–1579 CAS .
G. Calzaferri and K. Lutkouskaya, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 879–910 CAS .
G. K. Mor, J. Basham, M. Paulose, S. Kim, O. K. Varghese, A. Vaish, S. Yoriya and C. A. Grimes, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2387–2394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Muñoz-Losa, C. Curutchet, B. P. Krueger, L. R. Hartsell and B. Mennucci, Biophys. J., 2009, 96, 4779–4788 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Speelman, A. Muñoz-Losa, K. L. Hinkle, D. B. VanBeek, B. Mennucci and B. P. Kruege, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 3997–4008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-P. Hsu, Z.-Q. You and H.-C. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1204–1212 CAS .
D. B. VanBeek, M. C. Zwier, J. M. Shorb and B. P. Krueger, Biophys. J., 2007, 92, 4168–4178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Beierlein, O. G. Othersen, H. Lanig, S. Schneider and T. Clark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5142–5152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Merchant, R. B. Best, J. M. Louis, I. V. Gopich and W. A. Eaton, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 1528–1533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Schuler, E. A. Lipman and W. A. Eaton, Nature, 2002, 419, 743–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Margittai, J. Widengren, E. Schweinberger, G. F. Schröder, S. Felekyan, E. Haustein, M. König, D. Fasshauer, H. Grubmüller, R. Jahn and C. A. M. Seidel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 15516–15521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Unruh, K. Kuczera and C. K. Johnson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14381–14392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hoefling, N. Lima, D. Haenni, C. A. M. Seidel, B. Schuler and H. Grubmüller, PLoS One, 2011, 6, e19791 CAS .
P. Bonhôte, E. Gogniat, S. Tingry, C. Barbé, N. Vlachopoulos, F. Lenzmann, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1498–1507 CrossRef .
L. Yang, U. B. Cappel, E. L. Unger, M. Karlsson, K. M. Karlsson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 779–789 RSC .
U. Bach, Y. Tachibana, J.-E. Moser, S. A. Haque, J. R. Durrant, M. Grätzel and D. R. Klug, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 7445–7446 CrossRef CAS .
D. Moia, V. Vaissier, I. Lopez-Duarte, T. Torres, M. K. Nazeeruddin, B. C. O'Regan, J. Nelson and P. R. F. Barnes, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 281–290 RSC .
C. T. Weisspfennig, D. J. Hollman, C. Menelaou, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Joyce, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, N. Evans, S. M. Zakeeruddin, I. Exnar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3163–3167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9283–9285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hu, K. C. D. Robson, E. E. Beauvilliers, E. Schott, X. Zarate, R. Arratia-Perez, C. P. Berlinguette and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1034–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Martínez, R. Andrade, E. G. Birgin and J. M. Martínez, J. Comput. Chem., 2009, 30, 2157–2164 CrossRef PubMed .
V. M. Kenkre, E. W. Montroll and M. F. Shlesinger, J. Stat. Phys., 1973, 9, 45–50 CrossRef .
A. Troisi, D. L. Cheung and D. Andrienko, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 116602 CrossRef PubMed .
I. K. Ding, N. Tétreault, J. Brillet, B. E. Hardin, E. H. Smith, S. J. Rosenthal, F. Sauvage, M. Grätzel and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2431–2436 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Petrozza, S. Ito, H. Miura and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1810–1818 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Valeev, V. Coropceanu, D. A. da Silva Filho, S. Salman and J.-L. Brédas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 9882–9886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768–1778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Druger, A. Nitzan and M. A. Ratner, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 79, 3133–3142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Geng, Q. Peng, L. Wang, H. Li, Y. Liao, Z. Ma and Z. Shuai, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3568–3572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bonhote, E. Gogniat, S. Tingry, C. Barbé, N. Vlachopoulos, F. Lenzmann, P. Comte and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 1498–1507 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4446–4452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Mariachiara Pastore
	Mariachiara Pastore is a CNRS Researcher at the Equipe Théorie-Modélisation-Simulation (TMS) at the Université de Lorraine (France). She obtained her PhD in 2009 in theoretical chemistry from the University of Ferrara. She worked as a post-doc at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics of Istituto CNR di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari in the research group of Dr Filippo De Angelis, where she developed novel approaches and methodologies for the spectroscopy of organic sensitizers and their aggregates on oxide surfaces. In 2013 she was awarded as the best young CNR researcher (under 35 years) in Chemical and Materials Science. In 2014 she got the “Carla Roetti” prize from the Italian Chemistry Society, dedicated to theoretical and computational chemists under 40. Her research interests mainly lie in the area of theoretical and computational spectroscopy, applied to new materials for photovoltaic devices.

Thibaud Etienne
	Thibaud Etienne is a postdoctoral researcher at the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics of Istituto CNR di Scienze e Tecnologie Molecolari. He obtained a joint PhD between Belgium (University of Namur, under the supervision of Dr Eric A. Perpète and Dr Catherine Michaux) and France (University of Lorraine, under the supervision of Pr Xavier Assfeld and Antonio Monari) in theoretical chemistry in 2015. His main interests lie in the determination and characterization of the electronic excited states of complex molecular systems, more particularly the electron density topological rearrangement occurring upon light-absorption. Since 2015 he has been performing research as a post-doc under the supervision of Dr Filippo De Angelis in the field of perovskite solar cells and excited state topological analyses. In 2016 he was awarded the Gaston Berthier Award from the French Theoretical Chemistry Network for his PhD.

Filippo De Angelis
	Filippo De Angelis is a senior research scientist and a deputy director at the CNR Institute of Molecular Sciences and Technology, in Perugia, Italy. He is the founder and co-leader of the Computational Laboratory for Hybrid/Organic Photovoltaics in Perugia. He earned a BS in Chemistry in 1996 and a PhD in Theoretical Inorganic Chemistry in 1999, both from the University of Perugia, Italy. He is an expert in the development and application of quantum chemical methods to the study of the structural, electronic, and optical properties of complex molecules and materials including transition metals. His main research interests are in the field of hybrid/organic photovoltaics, optoelectronics and non-linear optics, employing first principles computational methods to predict and interpret the properties of new and existing materials. He is the 2007 recipient of the Raffaello Nasini Gold Medal of the Inorganic Chemistry Division of the Italian Chemical Society.

 	Fig. 1  Global scheme of the electronic processes occurring in a direct-type third-generation solar cell. (1) The dye (D) catches a photon and enters its electronic excited state (D*), from which (2) it can inject an electron into the semiconductor conduction band. This electron will flow (3) through the circuit and reduce (4) the electrolyte, which will react (5) with the oxidized dye D+ to regenerate it into D.	 

 	Fig. 2  Sketch of the two EDOT-containing compounds investigated in the electrolyte–dye interaction survey.106	 

 	Fig. 3  Sketch of coumarin-containing NKX2587 and NKX2697 dyes, and the carbazole-containing MK3 sensitizer.	 

 	Fig. 4  Interaction between iodine and the coumarin moiety in NKX2587, chemically anchored at the surface of a (TiO2)38 cluster. Reprinted with permission from M. Pastore, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5965–5973. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Starting point of the trajectory (STARTING STRUCTURE), and three snapshots taken at 3.2 ps (1), 7.2 ps (2) and 8.6 ps (3) along the [Co(bpy)3]3+/N719(1H)3−@(TiO2)128 CPMD trajectory. Reprinted with permission from E. Mosconi, J.-H. Yum, F. Kessler, C. J. G. Garcia, C. Zuccaccia, A. Cinti, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19438–19453. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed three-step regeneration mechanism of a Ru-based complex by a Co mediator. Reprinted with permission from E. Mosconi, J.-H. Yum, F. Kessler, C. J. G. Garcia, C. Zuccaccia, A. Cinti, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and F. De Angelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19438–19453. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Coupling pattern between the LS/HS Co-mediator and the oxidized Ru-sensitizer.	 
ψ± = 2−1/2(ψ†1ψ2 ± ψ1ψ†2)	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 8  Illustration of the excited state splitting within Kasha's molecular exciton theory.	 

 	Fig. 9  Geometrical justification of the existence of dark states in multichromophore clusters, for certain remarkable relative configurations of the two monomers, e.g. parallel (top) and anti-parallel (bottom).	 

 	Fig. 10  (Top) D102 chemical structure; (bottom left) initial configuration with the carboxylic groups placed on top of the selected undercoordinated titanium atoms; (bottom right) (a and b) initial configurations of the molecular dynamics runs involving the adsorption of 8 (a) and 12 (b) molecules on the small supercell (40.8397_15.1040 Å2). Configurations obtained at the end of the simulations (i.e. after 100 ps) are in (c) 8 dyes (small supercell – fast heating); (d) 12 dyes (small supercell – slow heating); and (e) 8 dyes (small supercell – slow heating). (f) Final configuration of the 12 dyes randomly adsorbed on the large supercell (40.8397_30.2080 Å2). The slab is rendered by means of a grey solid surface, whereas the dyes are rendered through the CPK model (colour codes: O = red, C = cyan, S = yellow, N = blue, H = white). Cell borders are displayed as dark grey lines and a white rectangle representing the simulation box is also shown.	 

 	Fig. 11  Possible binding modes identified during the MD simulations. Monodentate (with one carboxylic oxygen – a), homogeneous bidentate (with both carboxylic oxygens – b), heterogeneous bidentate (one carboxylic oxygen and the sulphur atom c) and tridentate (both carboxylic oxygens and the sulphur atom – d). Only a few atoms of the surface and the connected portion of the dye are displayed. Adapted from ref. 143.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison between the calculated averaged absorption spectrum of selected D102 aggregates composed of 5 molecules (red full line) and that of the isolated D102 monomer (blue full line); red (blue) vertical lines correspond to the unbroadened calculated excitation energies and oscillator strengths. The spectra have been normalized and simulated with a Gaussian broadening with s = 0.3 eV. D102 HOMO and LUMO isodensity surface plots are also shown.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 13  (top) Molecular structures of (a) Li-TFSI and (b) EMIM-TFSI additives. (bottom) Optimized geometries of D102@(TiO2)82, D102/Li+@ (TiO2)82, D102/Li-TFSI@(TiO2)82 and D102/EMIM+@(TiO2)82. Adapted from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 14  Calculated absorption spectra in chlorobenzene and acetonitrile for D102 (red), D102/Li-TFSI (black), D102/EMIM+ (green) and D102/Li+ (blue). The spectra were plotted using a Gaussian broadening of 0.2 eV.	 

 	Fig. 15  TiO2 density of CB states (upper panels), coupling between the D102 LUMO and the semiconductor virtual states (middle panels) and injection rates (lower panels) as a function of the energy (E) for the system in chlorobenzene (left) and acetonitrile (right) solutions. Red lines refer to D102@TiO2, blue lines to D102/Li+@TiO2 and green lines to D102/EMIM+@TiO2. For comparison reasons this energy trend has been divided by 10. The vertical lines represent the energy position of the LUMO in each system. All the energy trends have been obtained introducing a Gaussian broadening of 0.3 eV. Figure adapted from ref. 59.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the adsorption position of protons on the (TiO2)82 cluster; optimized geometries of the (b) JK2 and (c) D102 dyes adsorbed onto the (TiO2)82 cluster in bridged bidentate (BB) anchoring geometry.	 

 	Fig. 17  Absolute value of the coupling matrix elements (Vdk) between the dye LUMO and the TiO2 virtual states (green sticks), injection broadening Γ(E) function (blue line) and DOS relative to the virtual localized (diabatic) orbital of the semiconductor (red line) for the JK2@TiO2 and D102@TiO2 systems in the 1H (left panels) and 5H (right panels) protonation form as a function of the energy (E). The gaussian broadening used to reproduce both the TiO2 DOS and the Γ(E) function is equal to 0.3 eV. Note that in the case of the D102 dye (bottom panels) both the coupling matrix elements (Vdk) and the Γ(E) function were multiplied by 10. From ref. 158.	 

JK2	1H	−3.846	−3.025	−5.100	2.074	0.231
5H	−4.220	−3.337	−5.214	1.877	0.375


D102	1H	−3.999	−2.593	−5.188	2.596	0.003
5H	−4.391	−2.699	−5.188	2.489	0.005

 	Fig. 18  (left) Uv-vis absorption spectra of D5 with CDCA adsorbed both on titania (black line) and on protonated titania (red line). (right) Calculated IPCE obtained from the UV-vis absorption spectra of the D5-sensitized titania layer (left panel). From ref. 61.	 

C1	No	5.780	0.734	0.688	2.92
C2	No	6.150	0.734	0.636	2.87
C3	Yes	7.500	0.713	0.699	3.74
C4	Yes	6.453	0.724	0.647	3.02
IPCE = 1 − 10A	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
κ2 = (cosγ − 3cosαcosβ)2	(10)

 	Fig. 19  Molecular structures and the co-adsorption scheme of C106 and AS02.	 

 	Fig. 20  Energetically favoured 1:4 AS02:C106 co-adsorption patterns and FRET donor/acceptor labelling.	 

AS02–C106_1	−18.1	1.027	0.908	1.46	1.7	24.1	7.5 × 109

	
	
	
	
	2.1	85.8	2.7 × 1010
AS02–C106_2	−3.8	1.680	1.416	0.08	1.1	1.8	2.9 × 107

	
	
	
	
	1.3	4.8	7.8 × 107
AS02–C106_3	−12.6	1.054	1.221	0.53	1.4	7.5	2.0 × 109

	
	
	
	
	1.7	24.1	6.4 × 109
AS02–C106_4	−1.4	1.495	1.702	0.15	1.2	3.0	9.8 × 107

	
	
	
	
	1.4	7.5	2.4 × 108
Exp.197	
	0.914	
	0.67	1.5	11.4	7.1 × 109

	
	
	
	
	1.8	34.0	2.3 × 1010

 	Fig. 21  (top) Molecular structures of the CSORG1 and CSORG4 dyes. Donor (CZ) and acceptor (PTZ) moieties are enclosed in blue and red frames, respectively. (bottom) Scheme of the penta-coordinated Ti atoms on the anatase TiO2(101) surface, representing the grid of possible dye adsorption sites. The super-cells employed for full-packed CSORG1 (red) and CSORG4 (blue) are demarked as dashed frames, each corresponding to the minimal surface area for full coverage by the dye.	 
kF = Cκ2rDA−6 = Ck′F	(11)

 	Fig. 22  The scaled FRET rate k′F (see Table 4) for both CSORG1 (left panels) and CSORG4 (right panels) under isolated (top panels) and full-packed conditions (bottom panels) computed using instantaneous values of κ2 (black line) or the isotropic-regime value 2/3 (red line). The scaled FRET rates obtained from the static κ2 and rDA values are also reported (blue line). Figure taken from ref. 81.	 

CSORG1
Isolated

k′F × 106 (Å−6)	0.163	0.436	0.573
Full-packed

k′F × 106 (Å−6)	0.146	0.315	0.477


CSORG4
Isolated

k′F × 106 (Å−6)	0.135	0.530	0.379
Full-packed

k′F × 106 (Å−6)	0.151	0.750	0.769

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structures of D102 (a) and D149 (b). The anchoring group to the TiO2 surface is circled in red in both cases. We assume that the dye molecules bind to the surface in a bidendate mode where the two oxygens of the deprotonated carboxylic acid groups are attached to different five coordinated titanium atoms. (c) The most energetically favourable intermolecular spacing for D102 (blue) and D149 (green).80 The (xy) plane shows the (101) TiO2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 24  Probability density distributions of the logarithm of the squared electronic coupling (in eV2) for the different paired configurations. The insets illustrate the spacing of the dyes as given in Fig. 23, part c. (a) D102 separated by aD102. (b) D102 separated by bD102. (c) D149 separated by aD149. (d) D149 separated by bD149. (E) Schematic representation of the three configurations considered in this work. Figure taken from ref. 86.	 

Fast limit	4.5 × 10−7	6.1 × 10−7
Single value (reference)	1.5 × 10−7	1.6 × 10−8
Static limit	1.5 × 10−9	1.7 × 10−8

t
ren = 10−1 s	3.5 × 10−10	3.5 × 10−8

t
ren = 10−3 s	2.4 × 10−9	3.8 × 10−8

t
ren = 10−5 s	1.7 × 10−9	4.5 × 10−8

t
ren = 10−6 s	6.5 × 10−9	5.3 × 10−8

t
ren = 10−7 s	3.3 × 10−8	9.2 × 10−8

D
2D,exp
	9.6(2.0) × 10−8	2.5(0.8) × 10−7

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
