Single-crystal silicon-based electrodes for unbiased solar water splitting: current status and prospects  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00638E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00638E
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2158-2181Single-crystal silicon-based electrodes for unbiased solar water splitting: current status and prospects

        
          
            Zhibin 
            Luo
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tuo 
            Wang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, China. E-mail: jlgong@tju.edu.cn; wangtuo@tju.edu.cn
Received 
      5th August 2018
    First published on 2nd January 2019AbstractWater splitting for hydrogen production by harvesting sunlight is widely accepted as one of the most promising routes to relieve the energy crisis and environmental issues caused by excessive use of fossil fuels. Earth-abundant silicon (Si) is emerging as a suitable candidate for a photoelectrode material for efficient solar water splitting. This review describes the current status and prospects of single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes in photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting for hydrogen production. We start with highlighting the recent achievements in single-crystal Si-based photocathodes and photoanodes for PEC water reduction and oxidation. We then discuss the recent progress in the design and fabrication of unbiased solar water splitting cells with single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes. Finally, we provide an overview from the optimization of a single-crystal Si-based electrode (both a photocathode and a photoanode) to the integration of a full cell for unassisted overall solar water splitting.
Zhibin Luo
Zhibin Luo obtained his BS (2012) degree in chemical engineering and technology from South China University of Technology. He is currently a graduate student at Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Jinlong Gong and Prof. Tuo Wang. Luo works in the Energy & Environmental Catalysis Laboratory at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology. He is interested in designing and synthesizing metal oxides and silicon-based photoelectrodes for solar water splitting.
Tuo Wang
Tuo Wang received his BS degree from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems, Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer in Tualatin, Oregon. He joined the faculty of the School of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University, where he is currently a full professor. His research focuses on nanostructured thin film materials for photocatalysis.
Jinlong Gong
Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Prof. George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.
1. Introduction
Solar energy is one of the most abundant and inexhaustible natural resources, which could be an ideal alternative for traditional fossil fuels to fulfil the entire energy demand for the whole world to relieve the worldwide energy crisis and environmental issues if utilized effectively.1–5 Since the pioneer work on electrochemical water oxidation for oxygen generation using a TiO2 electrode by Honda and Fujishima in 1972,6 solar water splitting for hydrogen production employing semiconductors as photocatalysts has become a holy grail to convert and store solar energy into chemical bonds (H2), which is also a highly desirable approach to address the daily and seasonal variabilities in solar energy.7 The solar water splitting process consists of two half reactions, including water oxidation on a photoanode and water reduction on a photocathode. In principle, a photoanode is made of an n-type semiconductor, while a photocathode is made of a p-type semiconductor.8,9 The ultimate goal of our efforts is to build a solar water splitting cell composed of a photoanode and a photocathode, driving water oxidation and hydrogen generation simultaneously in an unbiased configuration. Although many kinds of semiconductors have been investigated as photoelectrodes for water oxidation or reduction, no single semiconductor has yet satisfied all the basic requirements for manufacturing a practical photoelectrode, including low cost, high efficiency and stability under real operation conditions. According to a preliminary calculation, covering not less than 1% of the land on the earth with just 10% efficient unbiased solar water splitting cells could generate the equivalent hydrogen fuel to satisfy the annual global energy demand. Silicon (Si), one of the most widely used semiconductors in the electronics and photovoltaics (PV) industries, reaching a PV-based solar to electricity conversion efficiency of higher than 25%, exhibits the potential to meet most of the requirements for practical water splitting application.10–12 Upon appropriate doping, Si could be used as both a photoanode and a photocathode. The advantages of Si such as earth-abundance, strong visible light absorption and large-scale production in industry also make it a promising candidate for solar water splitting. Generally, a low overpotential and a large photocurrent density are two key parameters to obtain a high solar to hydrogen (STH) conversion efficiency.13 Although there have been numerous investigations on metal oxide semiconductors that have achieved extremely low overpotentials, their saturated photocurrent densities are lower than that of single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes, limiting their STH efficiencies.14–17 Recently, more and more reports on single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes have benchmarked STH efficiencies higher than 10%.18,19 Thus, it is optimistic that the industrialization of solar water splitting cells for hydrogen production would be realized using Si-based photoelectrodes in the near future.
Since solar water splitting is a hot topic that has been explored for a long time, there are enormous comprehensive works on the expertise of model designs and basic considerations to convert sunlight efficiently.7,10,20–25 Our review focuses on highlighting the recent efforts towards developing efficient and stable single-crystal Si-based electrodes for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. First, we briefly introduce the basic properties of the Si material. And then the strategies for designing and manufacturing highly efficient photoanodes and photocathodes are outlined. Finally, the advances of PEC tandem cell configurations are summarized.
2. Single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes
Si is the second abundant element on the earth. Single-crystal Si is one of the most important crystal materials in the development frontier for new materials, and is mainly used as a semiconductor material in solar photovoltaic power generation. It has a perfect diamond crystal lattice and a band gap of about 1.1 eV, which could utilize a large portion of the solar spectrum.26 Intrinsic Si could be doped with elements in different valence states to form n-type or p-type semiconductors, which are used as photoanodes or photocathodes (Fig. 1). Despite all the aforementioned attractive advantages, the actual experimental PEC water splitting efficiencies for many single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes (both photoanodes and photocathodes) are far from satisfactory to meet the practical need for solar hydrogen production.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of band bending in (a) n-Si and (b) p-Si photoelectrodes at equilibrium in contact with solution. (CB, the conduction band edge; VB, the valence band edge; and EF, the Fermi level.) 
Charge generation, transport and reaction are the basic procedures involved in a semiconductor for photocatalytic solar energy conversion, where charge recombination is inevitable.20,27,28 So strategies for improving the above processes will be described in our following review.
3. Strategies for improving the PEC performance of single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes
3.1. Nanostructuring for enhanced light harvesting
Light harvesting is the prelude to photocatalytic reaction for a photoelectrode. Basically, the spectral distribution of solar radiation plays a crucial role in providing appropriate photovoltages (i.e. chemical potentials of electrons and holes in the conduction and valence bands of the absorber substrate, respectively) for water splitting,23,25 and then, narrowing the bandgap, reducing the loss of light reflection, and regulating the penetration path for the photons are key aspects in improving the light harvesting efficiency.14,29 As the bandgap of Si is as small as ∼1.1 eV, Si could absorb the ultraviolet (UV, ranging from 280 to 400 nm) and visible light (VL, ranging from 400 to 800 nm), as well as a large section of the infrared portion (IR, ranging from 800 to 4000 nm) in the solar spectrum. As the Si substrates used as photoelectrodes are often fabricated with a thickness of larger than 400 μm, light transmission is an ignorable factor in light harvesting.30,31 Strategies will be discussed in detail for increasing the light absorption efficiency of single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes based on reducing the light reflection and managing the diffusion path of photons.
Si nanostructures have a promising advantage in offering tunable light absorption for facilitating solar energy conversion compared with their bulk counterparts.26,32–34 The development of nanostructured Si-based photoelectrodes could offer strong light absorption, which is due to the enhanced light scattering and interference. These nanostructures exhibit excellent performance in light harvesting, and their efficiencies are closely related to the aspect ratios of the nanoarray structures. When light travels into the nanoarrays, multiple scattering would occur within the intervals due to their high aspect ratios.35,36 As a result, the optical penetration depth in the nanostructures could be increased effectively, enhancing their light harvesting ability. Multifarious nanostructures have been developed for single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes, including nanowires (Fig. 2a), nanopillars (Fig. 2b), nanopyramids (Fig. 2c), mesoporous textures (Fig. 2d) and so on.
 Fig. 2  Different nanostructures of the Si photoelectrodes. (a) SEM image of a pn+-Si wire array; inset, tilted SEM image of an electrode after partial infilling with wax;48 (b) SEM image of pristine Si nanopillar arrays;40 (c) the cross-sectional SEM image of a p-Si pyramid structure;18 and (d) top-view SEM image of nanotextured black Si.55 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Previously, a ray optics model was established by Atwater and coworkers to investigate the light absorption properties in a Si nanowire array morphology.37,38 They experimentally and computationally clarified that Si nanowire arrays exhibit superior optical properties over planar electrodes, including enhanced light harvesting with low areal packing fractions, extended near infrared absorption and effective optical properties over a wide range of incident angles. Achieving maximum sunlight conversion efficiencies for tandem devices, however, requires not only that the nanowire structures provide effective absorption of the incident sunlight, but also that the nanowires should be optimally sized for efficient charge carrier collection. This conclusion is not limited to nanowire structures, as other well-defined nanostructures also encounter similar situations. To minimize the dark current of the nanostructures, the charge carrier recombination at the surfaces should be prevented by surface passivation or cocatalyst loading.
A p-type Si (p-Si) nanowire array photocathode was successfully manufactured by Oh and Hwang for hydrogen production. The nanowire array structure was obtained via a metal-catalyzed electroless etching process on the bulk Si substrate. They explained that the dimensions of the Si nanowire arrays are close to the wavelength of visible light, and these Si nanowires could serve as an antireflective and light trapping layer to reduce the reflection of incident photons, thus increasing the photocurrent density for the photocathode.39 The average diameter and the length of the Si nanowire were 100 nm and 20 μm, respectively. The bare planar Si electrode shows an ignorable photocurrent density before −0.5 V versus reversible hydrogen electrode (vs. RHE), while the Si nanowire electrode exhibited a remarkable photocurrent density with an anodic shift of about 200 mV. Upon loading Pt nanoparticles as the electrocatalyst, the water reduction performances of these photocathodes were greatly enhanced. The Si nanowire electrode achieved an onset potential of 0.42 V vs. RHE, which was higher than that of the planar Si electrode (0.33 V vs. RHE).
Zhang et al. reported that the efficient light harvesting capability that resulted from the formation of a Si nanopillar structure was one of the important factors for the remarkable hydrogen production performance of a 3D p-Si/NiCoSex nanopillar photocathode.40 In addition, Fang and Shen reported the fabrication of a pyramid-textured n+p-black Si photocathode via a controllable Cu-catalyzed etching method for hydrogen production. When compared with a planar p-Si electrode, the onset potential of the pyramid-textured n+p-black Si photocathode showed an anodic shift of ∼200 mV to −0.1 V vs. RHE, and its saturation photocurrent density increased from 22.7 to 32.6 mA cm−2.18
Apart from the above typical examples, many well-defined nanostructures with high aspect ratios are also effective in enhancing the light harvesting to increase the PEC activity for single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes.31,41–44
3.2. Forming buried junctions for higher photovoltages
For single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes, the n-type Si (n-Si) usually acts as a photoanode for PEC water oxidation, while the p-Si acts as a cathode for water reduction. Si possesses a relatively small photovoltage compared with many other metal oxide semiconductors (e.g. BiVO4,45 WO3,46 Cu2O,47etc.), due to its small band gap (∼1.1 eV) and unfavorable band positions. Oh and Hwang reported the investigations on planar and nanowire array p-Si for PEC hydrogen production. Their nanowire array p-type yielded a photovoltage of 0.42 V, which is among the highest values ever reported for hydrogen generation on p-Si/electrolyte solid/liquid interfaces.39 However, this PEC performance is far from satisfactory for effective hydrogen production due to the possibility that the Si valence band edge is not sufficiently positive versus the hydrogen reduction potential to afford a high photovoltage.48
Introduction of a buried pn+ homojunction is an effective strategy to increase the photovoltage of a p-Si photocathode for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (Fig. 3a and b). And the photogenerated electron–hole pairs could be effectively separated in the depletion region of the pn+ junction. Usually, doping elements enter the Si substrate through thermal diffusion, and thus there is always a declining gradient dopant concentration profile in the electrode.49–51 A highly doped thin layer of several nanometers often exists at the outer layer of the pn+ homojunction, and the minority carriers can easily tunnel through. Lewis and Atwater investigated the application of pn+ junctions in p-Si nanowires for PEC water reduction. A phosphorus precursor was used as the dopant source in their investigation to form an n+ emitter layer.52–54 Upon loading a Pt thin film as an HER catalyst, the pn+-Si nanowire array photocathode yielded an STH efficiency of higher 5% under the simulated sunlight illumination, while the STH efficiency of p-Si nanowires with Pt HER catalyst was only about 0.2%. Obviously, the pn+-Si nanowire array photocathode exhibited a more positive onset potential than that of its p-Si nanowire array counterpart (Fig. 3c and d).55 This remarkable enhancement of the PEC performance for the pn+-Si nanowire array/Pt electrode might be due to the increased photovoltage created by the pn+ buried homojunction (Fig. 3b).48 Recently, Shen and coworkers reported a pyramid-structured pn+-Si photocathode with a high photovoltage of 0.56 V.56
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of band bending in (a) p-Si and (b) n+p-Si photoelectrodes in contact with the H+/H2 redox couple under illumination. Ecb, the conduction band edge; Evb, the valence band edge; and EF, the Fermi level. EF,p and EF,n, the hole and electron quasi-Fermi levels, respectively, under illumination. The photovoltage (Voc) is larger for n+p-Si samples due to increased band bending at the n+/p interface relative to the aqueous solution/p-Si interface; J–V behaviors of nanowire array (c) p-Si and (d) n+p-Si electrodes in the acidic electrolyte. (Data were collected at a series of light intensities for 0, 11, 23, 48, 100 and 210 mW cm−2.)48 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Forming a pn buried homojunction is also an effective approach to increase the photovoltage of an n-Si photoanode for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). The junction structure in the n-Si is always denoted as np+.57,58 Thermal diffusion and ion implantation are the most common methods used to prepare an np+ homojunction in an n-Si substrate (the same as forming a pn+ homojunction in a p-Si substrate). Shi and colleagues fabricated an np+-Si photoanode using an ion implantation method with boron as the dopant source for PEC water oxidation. This np+-Si photoanode yielded an impressively large photovoltage of about 620 mV and a high applied bias photon-to-current efficiency (ABPE) of approximately 3.3% with an ultrathin NiFe alloy layer as an OER catalyst.59
Although pn+-Si usually serves as a photocathode for PEC hydrogen production, there are also some reports on PEC water oxidation using a pn+-Si. Gong and coworkers demonstrated a facile integration of an n+p-Si substrate and a NiFe-layered double hydroxide (LDH) OER catalyst using a partially oxidized Ni connecting layer for PEC hydrogen production.57 In this model system, the n+p homojunction exhibited an onset potential of 0.78 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent density of ∼37 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE for PEC water oxidation, reaching the highest performance ever reported for monocrystalline Si-based photoanodes.
In addition to the pn buried homojunction, another well-known p-i-n buried junction from solar cell structures could also significantly increase the photovoltage for an electrode.24 Wang and his colleagues designed and fabricated a high-performance p-i-n heterojunction by sandwiching a single-crystal n-Si substrate between p-type amorphous Si and n+-type amorphous Si thin films.19 This composite device could be used as both a photoanode and a photocathode with a high photovoltage of 670 mV. Catalyzed by sol–gel NiOx, this device could obtain a current density of 21.48 mA cm−2 (1.23 V vs. RHE) for water oxidation. Upon loading sputter-deposited Pt as the HER catalyst, this device exhibited an excellent hydrogen evolution performance with an onset potential of 640 mV and an STH efficiency of 13.26%.
3.3. Robust protection layers for high stability
In addition to efficient light harvesting and large photovoltages, long-term stability is another critical factor in designing a practical Si-based photoelectrode for water splitting. Si is sensitive to corrosion and passivation under aqueous conditions, and therefore, a corrosion-resistant protection layer that allows efficient transportation of photogenerated charge carriers (electrons or holes) is urgently desired. Although both the HER and the OER essentially take place in the aqueous solutions to split the water, the reduction of H+ and the oxidation of OH− are known to be more energetically favorable than the reduction and oxidation of H2O molecules.60,61 Therefore, strongly acidic (low pH) electrolytes are usually preferred for hydrogen production with single-crystal Si-based photocathodes, whereas alkaline (high pH) electrolytes are often needed for water oxidation with single-crystal Si-based photoanodes.
So far, enormous efforts have been made in designing and fabricating effective protection layers for efficient and chemically stable single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes. As single-crystal Si-based cathodes and anodes work in two extremely different solution environments, the protection layers could be divided into two main categories, acid-resistant and alkali-resistant materials, which are suitable for photocathodes and photoanodes, respectively.

3.3.1. Protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes. 
When used as a photocathode, the Si surface exposed to neutral or acidic solutions might be passivated rapidly by forming amorphous SiO2 or H2SiO3, severely impeding the electron extraction to the electrode surface for hydrogen evolution. Using protection layers is an effective approach to ensure a stable PEC water reduction performance for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes. Materials used as the protection layers should be inert to strong acids and stable in aqueous solutions, as well as effective in separating the Si surface from the electrolyte.
3.3.1.1. Ultrathin metal layers. 
Due to their excellent intrinsic conductivity for charge transport, metals that are insoluble in strongly acidic solutions can be used as protective layers for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes. Specht and coworkers demonstrated that a Pt thin film could be adopted as an effective protection layer for a p-Si electrode for hydrogen production, reaching an impressive long-term stability of more than 60 days in a 1.0 M HCl aqueous electrolyte. In their study, the Pt layer also served as an HER catalyst for facile water reduction reaction.62 Several other noble metals have also been applied as protection layers to stabilize the p-Si electrode and suppress the passivation on the Si surface in the early investigations (such as Au, Ag, etc.).63 However, these noble metal layers failed to provide adequate stability and remarkable activity for p-Si. The unsatisfactory performance of these noble metals compared with that of Pt might be due to their relatively low HER catalytic activity, as well as their unfavorable interfacial contact and limited Schottky barrier height at the metal/Si junction.
Some non-noble metals have also been investigated as alternative protection layers to lower the utilization of noble metals. However, most of them are instable under strongly acidic conditions. Chorkendorff and colleagues reported a thin metallic Ti layer deposited on a pn+-Si electrode to serve as a conductive protection layer, thus drastically enhancing its stability. The Ti protection layer on the pn+-Si electrode could effectively prevent the oxidation of the Si surface. Although the Ti surface will also be oxidized, the photogenerated electrons could easily transport through the semiconducting TiO2. Only a small increase in the efficiency of PEC water reduction was observed for the Ti protected pn+-Si electrode compared with a bare pn+-Si electrode, which suggested that the metallic Ti thin film served as a protection layer rather than an HER catalyst.54
3.3.1.2. Metal compound layers. 
Despite the facile fabrication process and reliable stability of metallic protection layers, their intrinsic light absorption and reflection would severely hamper the light absorption for the underlying absorbers. On the other hand, the direct contact of the metal on the Si substrate would also produce a high density of interfacial defect states, leading to the formation of abundant charge traps. Thus, many transparent conductive compounds (metal oxides or metal sulfides) have been investigated as protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes.
TiO2 is the most widely used protective material owing to its superior optical transmittance (band gap ≥ 3.0 eV), good electron conductivity, and excellent stability in harsh aqueous environments over a wide pH range.64–66 Chorkendorff and coworkers demonstrated that single-crystal Si-based photocathodes with atomic layer deposition (ALD)-grown TiO2 protection layers could yield a long-term stability of more than 30 days for hydrogen evolution (Fig. 4b).53 These TiO2 protected pn+-Si electrodes reached a photocurrent density of ∼22 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V vs. RHE under the red part of simulated sunlight illumination (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2) in 1 M HClO4. The thickness of their ALD-grown TiO2 thin film was about 100 nm; thus Chorkendorff et al. concluded that photogenerated electrons transfer through the TiO2 layer via its conduction band rather than by direct tunnelling. They also found that vacuum annealed ALD TiO2/5 nm Ti/n+p-Si showed better stability compared with the unannealed electrode in a 24 hour chronoamperometry test (Fig. 4a). It is suggested that improving the crystallinity of the TiO2 layer helps in obtaining a more stable electrode by eliminating the electron trapping Ti3+.
 Fig. 4  (a) A 24 hour stability evaluation of the unannealed and vacuum annealed 100 nm ALD TiO2 protected electrodes with Pt as an HER catalyst at 0.3 V vs. RHE in 1 M HClO4 solution, and (b) the stability of the vacuum annealed sample extended to 2 weeks. The samples were irradiated with the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).53 (c) Schematic structure of an epitaxial SrTiO3-protected Si photocathode and (d) its stability as indicated by the steady-state photocurrent characterization at an applied bias of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M H2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The inset shows a gas chromatogram of the produced gas.67 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
A minimal band offset and a high-quality interface are essential to facilitate electron transport through the protection layer for efficient hydrogen evolution. SiTiO3 is one of the few semiconductors that could be epitaxially grown on the Si substrate (lattice mismatch of about −1.7%) with a very low density of interface states. Ji et al. showed that the Si-based photocathode with a thin SrTiO3 epitaxial protective layer grown by molecular beam epitaxy could offer efficient and stable PEC performance for hydrogen production.67 The conduction band alignment of the p-Si/SrTiO3 junction was found to be very close to zero, and this minimal conduction band offset could greatly enhance the transport of photogenerated electrons from the p-Si electrode through the SrTiO3 layer for water reduction. This epitaxial SrTiO3/p-Si heterojunction electrode exhibited an AM 1.5G saturation current density of ∼35 mA cm−2 and an onset potential shift of ∼450 mV, as well as a stable hydrogen evolution performance in 0.5 M H2SO4 for more than 35 hours without any attenuation.
Although protection layers made of thick semiconductor materials could provide excellent stability for photoelectrodes, the series resistance and tunnelling barrier in these layers are unfavorable for charge carrier transport.68–70 In particular, the series resistance is sensitive to the thickness for metal oxides with low doping levels. Ultrathin protective metal oxide layers are promising candidates as alternatives to those thick metal oxide protection layers. Al2O3 is a high-quality tunnelling insulator, which could be adopted as a passivation layer for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes with a corrosion-resistant ability under acidic conditions (mainly due to the cathodic protection effect), while the photogenerated electrons are able to transport through by direct tunnelling and then react with water (or protons) for hydrogen production.71 Shen and coworkers reported an efficient and stable p+n-Si photocathode protected with a 2 nm ALD-grown Al2O3 thin layer in an electrolyte containing 0.5 M K2SO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4, which exhibited an impressive stability of up to 138 hours for continuous PEC hydrogen generation without fading (Fig. 5a).72 The Al2O3 layer should be thin enough to ensure the photogenerated electron tunnelling.
 Fig. 5  (a) Stability test of the np+ and n+p photocathodes with and without a 2 nm Al2O3 layer for H2 evolution with a bias of −1.0 V vs. RHE in an electrolyte containing 0.5 M K2SO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 under 100 mW cm−2 illumination.72 (b) Chronoamperometry analysis of the MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0.24 V vs. RHE), MoSx/MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0 V vs. RHE), and MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0.2 V vs. RHE) electrodes under the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2) in 1 M HClO4 solution. (MoSx was re-deposited on MoSx/MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si three times.)76 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing Group. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
MoS2 and the MoSx family are also promising candidates for effective protection layers to stabilize the photocathodes, exhibiting outstanding stability in strongly acidic electrolytes.73–75 Chorkendorff et al. presented a MoS2 protected pn+ junction Si photocathode for stable hydrogen evolution.76 The MoS2 layer was prepared by magnetron sputtering, followed by vulcanization, which simultaneously served as a protective layer and an HER catalyst, offering a considerable stability of over five days for hydrogen production at 0 V vs. RHE in 1 M HClO4 (Fig. 5b). However, the poor conductivity and the intrinsic light absorption of MoS2 and its family are the two key limitations hampering the efficient solar to hydrogen conversion for the protected photocathodes.
In addition to the above candidates, many other materials have also been investigated as protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes, such as WS2,77 reduced graphene oxide (RGO),78 TiN,79etc. Unfortunately, most of them show poor performance in protecting the photocathodes, and more efforts are still urgently needed to stabilize the photocathodes for application in a realistic system.


3.3.2. Protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photoanodes. 
Compared with the widely used metal oxide semiconductors, single-crystal Si-based photoanodes show a more suitable bandgap (∼1.1 eV) for light absorption and excellent charge transport properties. However, similar to single-crystal Si-based photocathodes, single-crystal Si-based photoanodes suffer from poor stability in aqueous solutions. Under the OER conditions, Si is thermodynamically prone to self-oxidation, forming an insulating SiO2 layer on the Si surface, and thus blocking the photogenerated holes from participating in water oxidation. Therefore, introducing a protective layer to isolate the Si-based photoanodes from the electrolyte is a necessary approach for stable PEC water oxidation.80 Water oxidation prefers strongly alkaline conditions. Thus, these protection layers should be insoluble in strongly alkaline solutions.
3.3.2.1. Ultrathin metal layers. 
Similar to the metallic protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photocathodes, some metallic thin films are also suitable to protect single-crystal Si-based photoanodes owing to their intrinsic superior conductivity and inert nature. Vesborg et al. demonstrated that an np+-Si electrode could be well protected using a 4 nm Ir thin film by sputter deposition against corrosion during water oxidation in a strongly acidic electrolyte (1 M H2SO4).81 An 18 hour long-term stability was achieved at 1.23 V vs. RHE under filtered simulated sunlight illumination (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2) (Fig. 6a). For another example, Wang and Sun used a sputter-deposited thin Au layer to protect the np+-Si photoanode for efficient and stable PEC water oxidation in 1 M NaOH.82 The OER activity of this photocathode was maintained over more than 800 cycles of CV measurements.
 Fig. 6  (a) 18 h long-term chronoamperometry tests of 2 nm IrOx/Ir/p+n-Si under different annealing conditions at 1.23 V versus RHE in acidic electrolyte measured under the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).81 (b) Chronoamperometric J–t curve of an np+-Si/SiOx/NiFe photoelectrode at 1.80 V (vs. RHE) in 1.0 M K-borate electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).59 (c) Stability test for a 2 nm Ni protected n-Si electrode. Insets in (b) and (c) show details of current fluctuations caused by oxygen gas bubble release.83 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2013, AAAS. 
Taking the economic factors into account, non-noble metal materials are suitable choices as the protection layers for single-crystal Si-based photoanodes owing to their low cost and abundance. Kenney and colleagues found that n-Si protected with a 2 nm e-beam evaporation deposited Ni thin film could yield high stability for PEC water oxidation in aqueous solutions (KOH, pH = 14 and borate buffer, pH = 9.5).83 The Ni layer not only acted as a protection layer against corrosion, but also served as an electrocatalyst for efficient water oxidation. The Ni protected n-Si photoanode showed a long-term stability of over 80 hours for PEC water oxidation without any decay in an electrolyte containing 0.65 M K-borate and 0.35 M Li-borate (pH = 9.5) (Fig. 6c).
More recently, a NiFe alloy protected np+-Si photoanode has been designed and fabricated for efficient water oxidation by Shi and coworkers.59 The NiFe alloy layer atop the Si surface possessed a hierarchical nanostructure due to the self-confined growth process, where 3 nm thick NiFe alloy islands were well dispersed on a 3 nm thick compact NiFe alloy thin film. During the PEC water oxidation process, a thin Ni(Fe)OOH layer would form on the NiFe surface, acting as a highly active OER catalyst, and the Ni and Fe underneath the oxide layer would still remain in their metallic states. The NiFe alloy protected np+-Si photoanode exhibited high stability of more than 100 hours for water oxidation in alkaline aqueous solutions (both 1 M KOH and 1 M K-borate) (Fig. 6b).
3.3.2.2. Metal compound layers. 
Although noble metals or the oxides/oxyhydroxides formed on the non-noble metal surface could protect the n-Si in alkaline solutions, the intrinsic light absorption of these metallic protection layers still remains a serious issue, limiting the light absorption of the n-Si electrode. The transparent conductive semiconductor protection layers are also favorable candidates for stabilizing the n-Si electrodes due to their superior light transmission. As photogenerated holes must be extracted through the protection layer and arrive at the electrode/electrolyte interface for water oxidation, the protection layers for the n-Si photoanodes should be efficient in hole transport.
Direct tunnelling is a common mechanism of hole transport in an ultrathin protection layer with high resistivity for n-Si photoanodes. McIntyre and colleagues demonstrated an n-Si photoanode protected with a 2 nm corrosion-resistant ALD-grown TiO2 tunnelling oxide layer for efficient and stable water oxidation.84 This ALD-grown TiO2 protection layer was thick enough to afford continuous PEC water oxidation in the corrosive solution, while also being thin enough to permit effective hole transport via direct tunnelling. PEC water oxidation on this TiO2-protected n-Si photoanode could continue for over 24 hours in 1 M NaOH, whereas it quickly failed without TiO2 protection (Fig. 7a). The overpotential for the n-Si/TiO2/IrOx electrode linearly increased with the increase of the thickness of the TiO2 layer, resulting in a photovoltage loss of over 200 mV for a 12 nm thick TiO2 layer. In addition, Sharp and coworkers created biphasic layers consisting of active Co(OH)2 electrocatalyst atop the robust and compact Co3O4 layers using plasma-enhanced ALD to stabilize the n-Si electrode.85 The optimal thickness of the Co3O4 thin film was estimated to be 3.2 ± 0.2 nm. In conjunction with its good chemical stability, this integrated np+-Si/Co3O4/Co(OH)2 photoanode could offer at least 72 hour continuous operation in 1 M NaOH while permitting effective hole extraction through tunnelling for water oxidation (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Constant potential lifetime tests at 1.7 V (vs. NHE) on a 0.196 cm−2 sample in 1 M NaOH solution on (solid line) Ir/TiO2/p+-Si and (dashed line) Ir/p+-Si anodes in the dark.84 (b) Normalized photocurrent of a p+n-Si/Co3O4/Co(OH)2 photoelectrode for more than 72 h of continuous operation in 1 M NaOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), while a bare p+n-Si photoelectrode degrades almost immediately (inset).85 (c) Chronoamperometry of an np+-Si photoanode coated with a 44 nm TiO2 thin film and Ni islands for over 100 hours at 0.93 V vs. SCE in 1.0 M KOH; the illumination intensity was 1.25 sun.86 (d) Chronoamperometry of an n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx photoanode at 1.63 V (vs. RHE) in 1.0 M KOH solution under 1.1 sun of simulated solar illumination.58 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2014, AAAS. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the optical transparency of many oxide protection layers, efficient charge transport would be greatly limited owing to their relatively high resistivity. In particular, thicker protection layers are essential for long-term stability. Lewis and colleagues introduced an “electronically leaky” thick amorphous TiO2 thin film (44 nm) to stabilize the underlying n-Si electrode and facilitate the hole extraction for water oxidation simultaneously.86 The conduction mechanism in this thick TiO2 layer is different from that of the ultrathin layer by direct tunnelling. X-ray photoelectron spectra revealed that abundant defect states existed in the ALD-grown “electronically leaky” TiO2 layer, and these defect states were attributed to the amorphous structure or chemical impurities in the ALD process. Thus, the photogenerated holes could efficiently transport through the thick TiO2 layer via the defect states. Upon being protected by this thick “electronically leaky” TiO2 layer, the Si photoanode showed a stable PEC oxygen evolution in 1 M KOH for over 100 hours with a 100% Faradaic efficiency (Fig. 7c). Sharing the same “leaky” protection layer concept, a high-performance n-Si photoanode protected with a 50 nm thick ALD-grown CoOx thin film was also reported by Lewis et al.58 The n-Si/SiOx/CoOx heterojunction photoanode reached a long-term stability of over 2500 hours for water oxidation in 1 M KOH (Fig. 7d).
Fundamentally different from the hole conduction mechanisms of thick oxide layers (defect states) and thin oxide layers (direct tunnelling), valence band alignment is another common hole transport mechanism of p-type semiconducting oxides under water oxidation conditions. A chemically stable and active NiOx-based p-type oxide has been investigated as the protection layer for n-Si and np+-Si photoanodes for water oxidation in alkaline electrolytes by Lewis and coworkers.87 The negative slope of the Mott–Schottky plot in the electrochemical impedance spectroscopy verified that this sputtered NiOx was a p-type semiconductor (Fig. 8a). The as-prepared np+-Si photoanode could be well protected with a 75 nm NiOx layer, yielding a stable photocurrent density of ∼32 mA cm−2 at 1.73 V vs. RHE for over 1200 hours in PEC water oxidation (Fig. 8b).
 Fig. 8  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of p+-Si|NiOx in 50 mM Fe(CN)63− and 350 mM Fe(CN)64− in 1.0 M KCl in the dark. (b) Chronoamperometry of np+-Si|NiOx and n-Si|NiOx photoanodes at an applied bias of 1.73 V (vs. RHE) under simulated illumination. The insets show SEM images of surface damage to p+-Si|NiOx and n-Si|NiOx electrodes after stability tests of 300 and 686 h, respectively.87 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Based on various types of protection layers reported previously, it is clear to conclude that high intrinsic chemical stability, minimal parasitic light absorption, and facile charge extraction are the essential virtues for a practical protection layer to guarantee high PEC stability and performance.

3.4. Interfacial engineering for facile charge transport
Charge transport at the interface between the Si electrode and the multifunctional layers is one important step in the PEC water reduction or oxidation. Direct contact of metals or metal oxides at the Si surface might introduce unfavorable Fermi level pinning at the interface that yields relatively low open circuit voltages (Voc). Additionally, there are always abundant unsaturated dangling bonds on the Si/SiOx surface, leading to a high density of interfacial defects that serve as trapping centers. Thus, a high quality tunnelling insulator layer is often introduced to modify the undesirable direct contact between the Si surface and metallic layer, which is also known as a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) junction.88,89 In addition to the interfacial modification, the ultrathin tunnelling layer plays a crucial role in effectively facilitating the minority charge carrier transport across the MIS structure with minimal recombination. Although Pt is a highly active HER catalyst, the photovoltage of the MIS junction formed by the Pt layer and the underlying p-Si substrate with its native oxide is very low, which may be due to the small difference in work function between p-Si and Pt. Talin and Moffat reported a high-performance MIS junction using PtTi bilayer collectors and a high quality rapid thermal oxidation (RTO) SiO2 tunnelling layer (Fig. 9a).90 The RTO SiO2 layer could modify the Si surface to a very low density of interfacial defects. The p-Si/RTO SiO2/Ti MIS junction could generate a large photovoltage owing to the lower work function of the Ti layer compared with the p-Si substrate (Fig. 9b). Additionally, the Ti layer could also provide good adhesion for the Pt top layer.
 Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional high resolution TEM image of an optimized bilayer 20/30nm Pt/Ti collector deposited on 2 nm RTO SiO2|p-Si. Insets: Top-view SEM image of a standard sample consisting of 500 μm diameter PtTi collectors (top right), and high-angle annular dark-field TEM image of the tunnelling oxide (bottom right), and (b) J–V curves of various samples in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).90 (c) Energy band diagram of n-Si/SiOx,RCA/Al2O3/Pt/Ni after aging for 18 hours (the metallic Ni film was partially transformed into NiOx and Ni(OH)2) and (d) cyclic voltammetry of MIS photoanodes with various interfacial layers and metal overlayers in 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).91 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
With a similar MIS concept, Smith and colleagues demonstrated that an n-Si photoanode could achieve a high photovoltage by optimizing the interfacial energetics of the MIS junction (Fig. 9c).91 The onset potential for the n-Si/SiOx,native/Pt(2 nm)/Ni(4 nm) photoanode was +22 mV relative to E°(O2/OH−) (1.23 V vs. RHE), which was more positive than that of an n-Si/SiOx,native/Pt/Ni photoanode with an Al2O3 interlayer (2 nm) (−230 mV relative to E°(O2/OH−)), indicating the effectiveness for surface passivation of Si (Fig. 9d).
Similarly, although some metal oxides could provide good protection for the underlying n-Si substrate, the direct contact often yields a relatively low photovoltage owing to the nonoptimal energetics at the interface between the n-Si and the metal oxide layer. Lewis et al. demonstrated that an ALD-grown CoOx compact layer was introduced as an insert layer in the n-Si/NiOx photoanode, optimizing the interfacial energetics for better charge transport.92 A thin layer SiO2 was produced on the Si surface by etching the n-Si substrate in a Radio Corporation of America Standard etchant solution (75 °C for 10 minutes, denoted SiOx,RCA). A cross-sectional TEM image of the n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx electrode clearly showed that the thicknesses of the native SiOx and ALD-grown CoOx on the n-Si surface were about 2 nm and 3 nm, respectively (Fig. 10a). Upon introduction of the interfacial CoOx layer, the n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx photoanode showed a cathodic shift of 165 mV, reaching an onset potential of −239 ± 3 mV relative to E°(O2/OH−) (1.23 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 10b). Li et al. also clearly demonstrated the importance of controlling the interfacial energetics in enhancing the performance for an n-Si/ITO (indium doped tin dioxide, ITO) photoanode.93 They first employed a TiOx thin layer to modify the interfacial contact of the ITO layer at the Si/SiOx surface, eliminating the undesirable interface defects. The n-Si/TiOx/ITO electrode achieved an enhanced photocurrent density owing to the suppressed charge recombination with the modification of TiOx. Subsequently, a NiOOH surface layer was introduced on the n-Si/TiOx/ITO electrode via photo-assisted electrochemical deposition, which could further enhance the built-in electric field and barrier height of the heterojunction electrode by increasing the surface work function (Fig. 10c). Finally, the optimized n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH photoanode could obtain an unprecedentedly low onset potential of 0.9 V vs. RHE as well as a surface charge separation efficiency higher than 90% over a wide range of applied biases for water oxidation (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  (a) High-resolution TEM image of a cross-section of an n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx sample, and (b) J–V curves of n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx and n-Si/SiOx,RCA/NiOx photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).92 (c) Energy band diagram of the n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH Schottky photoanode under thermodynamic equilibrium in the dark, and (d) J–V curves of n-Si/TiOx/ITO, n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH, and p++-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH photoelectrodes in 1 M LiOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).93 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In light of the aforementioned reported approaches, it is important to eliminate the interfacial defects and Fermi level pinning, while manipulating the interfacial energetics for maximum photovoltages.
3.5. Accelerating the surface reactions
Due to the sluggish reaction kinetics on a Si surface, a large overpotential always exists for water reduction and especially for water oxidation, which would in turn reduce the available photovoltage output, and thus limit the solar conversion efficiency of the Si photoelectrode. It is a universal and effective approach to lower the energy loss for the H2 or O2 evolution reaction on the Si surface by loading cocatalysts.94

3.5.1. Cocatalysts for the HER. 
p-Si is usually used as a hydrogen evolving photocathode, in which the built-in electric field generated by band bending drives the electrons towards the surface for water reduction. Although the conduction band of p-Si is higher than the H2/H+ redox potential, HER cocatalyst still needs to be accelerated because of the slow HER kinetics on the surface of the electrode. As hydrogen evolution is favorable in electrolytes with high H+ concentration, the HER cocatalyst should be stable in strongly acidic aqueous environments.
3.5.1.1. Metallic materials. 
Pt and its family are widely accepted as the most efficient cocatalysts for PEC hydrogen evolution.95 Many Si-based photocathodes could achieve high PEC performance using Pt as the HER cocatalyst (Fig. 11a and b). Pt is a highly active HER catalyst, but it is extremely rare and expensive. Suffering from its intrinsic high light absorption, Pt HER catalyst often designed as ultrathin or discontinuous films and small nanoparticles, which could minimize the impact on light absorption of the underlying Si substrate.
 Fig. 11  (a) J–V curves of the SiHJ photocathodes with different thicknesses of Pt used as HER catalysts in 1 M H2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).19 (b) J–V curves under chopped illumination of the Pt2/n+p-Si and TiO2/Pt2/n+p-Si photoelectrodes measured in 1 M HClO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).56 (c) J–V data for a representative Ni–Mo coated n+p-Si microwire array electrode measured in pH 4.5 KHP buffer under simulated illumination.96 (d) Linear sweep voltammograms of the n+p-Si electrode with and without the MoS2 layer in H2-purged 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under simulated solar illumination.97 (e) PEC stability measurement for a 67 nm MoS2/Al2O3/n+p-Si electrode for H2 generation 1 M HClO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: J–V curves after 0 and 120 h PEC water splitting.98 (f) Linear sweep voltammograms of the CoP-n+p-Si photoelectrode in contact with 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under simulated solar illumination initially and after 24 h of continuous PEC reaction.99 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Cost-effective materials with a comparable or outperforming catalytic activity compared to Pt and its family are the best choices for large-scale solar hydrogen production. Low cost HER catalysts based on earth-abundant elements have been designed and investigated, such as NiMo alloys, CoP, MoS2, and so on. Lewis et al. investigated the PEC hydrogen evolution activity of NiMo alloys on the pn+ junction Si electrode.96 This NiMo alloy catalyzed pn+-Si junction photocathode exhibited comparable HER activity with that of a benchmarked Pt catalyzed pn+-Si junction photoelectrode. The pn+-Si/NiMo alloy electrode yielded an onset potential of approximately 0.56 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent density of 21.8 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE (Fig. 11c), reaching an STH efficiency of about 3.5% in the H2-purged pH 4.5 KHP buffer under simulated illumination.
3.5.1.2. Metal compound materials. 
MoS2 is also a classical material used as an HER catalyst. However, MoS2 shows a rather low HER activity in the bulk form, and thus it is often used as nanoparticles. It has been confirmed by density functional theory (DFT) calculations that the edges of the MoS2 nanoparticles are the active sites for the HER. Chorkendorff and coworkers synthesized nanoparticulate MoS2 samples in the UHV system and systematically investigated their morphologies using STM.97 The MoS2 nanoparticles appeared to be flat polygons with conducting edge sites. By evaluating the HER activity of the prepared MoS2 samples, the normalized HER activity for each sample presented a very good linear relationship versus the length of the MoS2 edge site, which clearly revealed that the edge site is the active site. Later, Jaramillo et al. introduced a MoS2 thin film on the pn+-Si photocathode via thermally sulfurizing the sputtered Mo metal thin film.98 This MoS2 layer simultaneously served as an HER catalyst and protection layer for the pn+-Si photocathode. Although the pn+-Si/MoS2 photocathode showed a relatively low PEC water reduction performance owing to the low HER active site exposure for a planar MoS2, it demonstrated a high stability of more than 100 hours for hydrogen evolution. To further promote the efficiency, highly catalytically active [Mo3S13]2− clusters were incorporated, which improved the photocurrent onset potential of the pn+-Si/MoS2 photocathode from 0.32 to 0.40 V vs. RHE (Fig. 11d). Recently, Shen and colleagues reported a highly efficient and stable Al2O3 (2 nm) protected pn+-Si photocathode with vertically standing grass-like MoS2 nanowires.99 This extremely porous nanostructure of MoS2 enabled the exposure of abundant HER active sites, boosting the PEC hydrogen evolution performance. As a result, the MoS2 catalyzed Si photocathode reached an onset potential of 0.4 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent density of 35.6 mA cm−2 at 0 V for PEC water reduction in 1.0 M HClO4 (Fig. 11e).
CoP is also a promising earth-abundant HER catalyst. Jaramillo and colleagues recently reported that CoP thin films could serve as highly active HER catalysts for Si photocathodes.100 The CoP thin films were grown on the pn+-Si substrates by phosphating the evaporation coated Co metal layer via a red phosphorus vapor phase phosphating method. This CoP thin film showed a high average turnover frequency, reaching 0.48 H2 s−1 and 1.0 H2 s−1 with overpotentials of 100 mV and 120 mV, respectively. Upon integrating the CoP thin film, the pn+-Si photocathode could achieve a photocurrent density of −10 mA cm−2 at 0.345 V (Fig. 11f), generating an excellent PEC hydrogen production performance among the noble metal-free Si photocathodes. Additionally, this integrated Si photocathode showed high stability over 10000 CV cycles in the potential range between −0.3 and 0.1 V vs. RHE.


3.5.2. Cocatalysts for the OER. 
n-Si serves as the photoanode for oxygen evolution, in which the built-in electric filed drives the photogenerated holes to the surface for water oxidation. It has been widely accepted that the complex 4e−/4h+ process in the water oxidation makes it more difficult and slower than the water reduction. And this suggests the importance of the design and introduction of effective OER cocatalysts in facilitating water oxidation on n-Si photoanodes. Usually, OER catalysts on n-Si photoanodes should be able to enhance the charge transfer kinetics, as well as promote the surface charge separation (i.e., surface energetics). Additionally, OER cocatalysts should be functionally stable under high pH conditions.
3.5.2.1. Noble metal compound materials. 
Although there still remain a lot of debates whether alkaline or acidic electrolytes would be suitable for a complete PEC cell, almost all earth-abundant materials serving as OER cocatalysts showed limited catalytic activity and stability under neutral or acidic conditions. And thus, it is interesting to design and investigate stable OER cocatalysts in a strongly acidic operation environment. So far, only Ir-based materials have readily been available for stable water oxidation at low pH. McIntyre and coworkers reported the design and manufacture of a TiO2 protected Si photoanode with an optically transparent Ir OER catalyst (∼3 nm) for PEC water oxidation from pH 0 to pH 14 with a photovoltage of approximately 550 mV (Fig. 12a).84 Water oxidation on this photoanode could maintain for over 8 hours in a strongly acidic and oxidative electrolyte. Subsequently, Vesborg et al. also demonstrated that np+-Si photoanodes could be protected and activated by sputter deposited Ir and IrOx thin films (4 nm and 2 nm, respectively) against corrosion without protection layers during the PEC water oxidation.81 This optimized np+-Si/Ir/IrOx photoanode could obtain a photocurrent density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.12 V vs. RHE (Fig. 12b), which enables PEC water oxidation with a long-term stability of at least 18 hours in 1 M H2SO4 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2). Although Ir-based catalysts exhibit considerable OER activity in acidic solutions, their high cost remains a limitation for their commercialization.
 Fig. 12  (a) Water electrolysis of the n-Si/TiO2/Ir electrodes in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) in acidic, neutral, and basic solutions.84 (b) J–V curves of the IrOx/Ir/p+n-Si photoanodes with different IrOx thicknesses measured in 1 M H2SO4 under the red part of simulated AM 1.5G (λ > 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).81 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
3.5.2.2. Earth abundant metal compound materials. 
Earth abundant metal compound materials, such as Fe, Co, Ni metal oxides and other low-cost transition metal oxides, are promising to replace noble metal-based OER cocatalysts in PEC cells owing to their scalability and low price.101–104 The vacant d orbitals in the transition metals might simultaneously serve as bonding and adsorptive orbitals for the intermediates during the water oxidation process, and thus they exhibit superior catalytic behavior over non-transition metals. Kenney et al. demonstrated a stable and high-performance MIS photoanode by integrating a 2 nm thick electron beam evaporated Ni layer on an n-Si substrate with its native oxide for water oxidation in alkaline electrolytes.83 In addition to protecting the underlying n-Si substrate against corrosion in the electrolyte, the metallic Ni layer could also serve as a highly active OER cocatalyst for efficient water oxidation (when oxidized). A photovoltage of ∼500 mV was obtained by this n-Si/Ni (2 nm) photoanode (Fig. 13a). A NiOx layer was also synthesized by spin-coating followed by a thermal annealing treatment as the OER catalyst for an np+-Si junction photoanode by Wang and Sun (Fig. 13b).82 Furthermore, Lewis and coworkers also investigated the properties of a reactively sputtered NiOx layer on both n-Si photoanodes and np+-Si photoanodes.87,92 The optimized np+-Si/NiOx photoanode yielded a remarkable onset potential of −200 mV relative to the E°(O2/OH−) (1.23 V vs. RHE), and a photocurrent density of ∼30.9 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13c), as well as an STH efficiency of ∼2.1%. With an ultrathin CoOx interlayer (2 nm thick), the junction energetics for the n-Si/NiOx photoanode could be optimized and yielded a large photovoltage of 565 mV. This optimized n-Si/CoOx/NiOx photoanode exhibited a 165 mV negative shift in the photocurrent onset potential compared with that of an n-Si/NiOx photoanode without the CoOx interlayer. Additionally, CoOx thin films deposited using ALD were also demonstrated by Lewis and colleagues to assist water oxidation on the n-Si photoanode.58 A representative n-Si photoanode with a 50 nm thick CoOx catalytic layer exhibited an onset potential of 1.0 V vs. RHE, a photocurrent density of 23.2 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE (Fig. 13d), and a solar to oxygen conversion efficiency of ∼1.5%.
 Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves of Ni-coated n-Si anodes with different Ni thicknesses in 1 M KOH under approximately twice the sun illumination (225 ± 10 mW cm−2), a 2 nm Ni-coated n-Si anode in the dark, and 2 nm Ni on metallic, heavily doped n++Si in the dark.83 (b) J–V curves of the ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx junction on different substrates in 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).82 (c) PEC behavior of p+-Si|NiOx, n-Si|NiOx and np+-Si|NiOx in 1.0 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).87 (d) J–V curves for n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH solution under 110 mW cm−2 of simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination.58 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, AAAS. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
CoOOH was introduced as a highly active cocatalyst on an n-Si substrate to assist water oxidation by Switzer and colleagues.105 At first, they deposited metallic Co thin layers directly on n-Si via a simple electrodeposition method in a 0.1 M CoCl2 plating solution (pH = 4). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images showed that Co(OH)2 platelets were generated on the Co films. It was speculated that hydrogen evolution always occurred during the metal deposition at a potential of −1.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl, creating an alkaline environment near the electrode surface, which was beneficial for the Co(OH)2 formation. Finally, the Co(OH)2 was converted to CoOOH as the active cocatalyst for water oxidation (Fig. 14a). NiOOH is another cocatalyst with high OER activity similar to CoOOH. It was deposited on an n-Si/TiOx/ITO Schottky junction to facilitate the hole extraction for water oxidation via an electro-oxidation deposition method by Li et al.93 The higher surface energy level of the NiOOH compared with ITO contributed to the driving force to allow photogenerated holes to transfer from ITO to NiOOH. Eventually, the n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH photoanode achieved a record low onset potential of about 0.9 V vs. RHE with a charge separation efficiency of up to 100% for water oxidation (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 14  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry comparing p+-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH in the dark and n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2);105 (b) J–V behavior of Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH, Ni/NiOx, Ni coated n+p-Si/SiOx anodes, and Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH and Ni/NiOx coated nonphotoactive p++-Si electrodes in 1.0 M KOH solution under simulated AM 1.5G back illumination (100 mW cm−2).64 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The highly efficient NiFe-layered double hydroxide (LDH) is another promising OER catalyst in the transition metal compound family due to its unique layered structure that is favorable for water molecule diffusion and gas release. Gong et al. demonstrated that NiFe-LDH layers could be electrodeposited onto the p-side surface of an n+p-Si electrode using a partially activated Ni thin film (with a thin NiOx surface layer) as a bonding layer for excellent PEC water oxidation.57 NiOx exhibited a good contact with the NiFe-LDH owing to their similar elemental composition and structure, in conjunction with their high capacity of hole accumulation; thus photogenerated holes could be easily transferred from the NiOx to the NiFe-LDH to facilitate oxygen evolution. This integrated photoanode adopted back illumination to avoid the light shielding issue, and therefore, the NiFe-LDH thin film could be sufficiently thick for better catalytic activity. Consequently, the as-prepared photoanode yielded a superior PEC water oxidation performance with a record-breaking low onset potential of ∼0.78 V vs. RHE, an extremely high photocurrent density of ∼37 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE under simulated illumination in 1.0 M KOH (Fig. 14b), and a high ABPE efficiency of ∼4.3% at 1.02 V vs. RHE.
In spite of the above progress, there are still many challenges and opportunities in designing effective cocatalysts with superior stability, good adhesion, high activity and optical transparency for efficient solar water splitting.

4. Single-crystal Si-based tandem cells for spontaneous water splitting
Unbiased solar water splitting cells consisting of p-type photocathodes and n-type photoanodes for hydrogen production and water oxidation are attractive devices for cost-effective solar-fuel conversion.106 The overall water splitting efficiency for a PEC tandem cell could be evaluated according to the intersection point of the photocurrent density–potential (J–V) curves for the photocathode and photoanode. The maximum operation current density (Jop) for the tandem cell lies at the intersection of the two J–V curves. The absence of the intersection of two J–V curves means insufficient driving force for the photoelectrolysis of water. The STH efficiency for an unbiased solar water splitting cell should be measured in a two-electrode configuration, and the efficiency (η) can be calculated following the equation: ηSTH = Jop × 1.23/Pin × 100%(1)where Pin is the power density of the illumination. The STH efficiency could be dramatically increased by increasing the fill factors for the photoelectrodes, due to the strong sensitivity of the Jop related to the fill factors. Larger photocurrent densities for the photoelectrodes are desirable under the operation point, while more negative and/or positive onset potentials are favorable for the photocathode and the photoanode, respectively. Therefore, the overall water splitting performance of a tandem cell mainly depends on the individual photoelectrodes in the low bias region. As reported by a recent comparative technoeconomic analysis for renewable solar hydrogen production, a feasible PEC tandem cell system should achieve an efficiency higher than 10% and a lifetime longer than 5 years in order to become economically competitive with the traditional hydrogen production from fossil fuels.107,108
4.1. Single-crystal Si-based photocathodes
To date, researchers have made considerable progress in the PEC activity of single-crystal Si-based photocathodes. The record onset potential for the single-crystal Si-based photocathode was reported to be 0.64 V vs. RHE by Wang and colleagues, which was achieved by an amorphous Si/crystalline Si heterojunction with 2 nm sputter-deposited Pt catalyst,19 while the onset potential for a traditional pn+-Si/Pt photocathode is about 0.56 V vs. RHE.56 In order to enable spontaneous water splitting in PEC tandem cells, the corresponding photoanodes should achieve onset potentials more negative than these Si-based photocathodes.
Generally, the onset potentials of available photoanode candidates vary depending on the materials, which are 0.2–0.4 V vs. RHE for TiO2 and BiVO4, and 0.4–0.6 V vs. RHE for WO3 and Fe2O3. These photoanodes are often designed and fabricated on transparent conductive substrates (always an FTO substrate), and a tandem illumination model is often adopted in these single-crystal Si-based photocathode tandem configurations. A transparent photoanode always serves as the top absorber, which has a relatively large bandgap to absorb more energetic photons, whereas a Si-based photocathode acts as the bottom absorber to absorb the remaining incident sunlight owing to its relatively small bandgap (Table 1). This tandem illumination model can make the maximum use of sunlight.109
Table 1 Performance comparison of different PEC tandem devices consisting of Si-based photocathodes for overall water splitting




Photocathode
Photoanode
Electrolyte
Water splitting performance
Ref.




p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3
TiO2
0.25 M Na2SO4 (pH 7.25)

J
op = 0.15 mA cm−2, STH = 0.18%

110



a-Si/TiO2/Pt
Fe2O3/NiFeOx
0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH 11.8)

J
op = 0.74 mA cm−2, STH = 0.91%

111



p-Si/Pt
W/WO3
0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 7.0)

J
op = 0.12 mA cm−2, H2 evolution rate = 0.204 μmol h−1 cm−2

112



n+p-Si/Ti//TiO2/Pt
p+n-Si/FTO/WO3
1.0 M HClO4

J
op = 0.39 mA cm−2, STH = 0.24% (dual-side simulated 1 sun illumination)

113



p-Si/Pt
Mo:BiVO4/Co-Pi
0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 5.5)

J
op = 0.46 mA cm−2, STH = 0.57%

114





TiO2 is a popular and well-studied photoanode material due to its good charge transport properties and superior chemical stability in the full pH range environments. In particular, a TiO2 photoanode offers a typical onset potential of 0.2 V vs. RHE due to its large photovoltage. Jin and Wang designed and fabricated a PEC tandem device in a parallel illumination configuration, consisting of a p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3 core/shell/dendritic nanowire array photocathode and a dendritic TiO2 nanotube array photoanode, for unbiased hydrogen production in the neutral pH solution (Fig. 15a). N2 annealing further improved the onset potential of the p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3 photocathode from 0.38 V vs. RHE to 0.46 V vs. RHE (the onset potential was calculated at a photocurrent density of −0.1 mA cm−2). The full cell finally afforded an unbiased photocurrent density of approximately 0.15 mA cm−2, leading to an STH efficiency of about 0.18%.110 However, the large bandgap (∼3.2 eV) of TiO2 severely limits its light absorption to only 5% of the solar spectrum. Therefore, the STH efficiency of this tandem cell is extremely low.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3 core/shell/hierarchical nanowire array photocathode and TiO2/TiO2 core/shell nanotube array photoanode tandem cell and their J–V curves in an aqueous solution containing 0.25 M Na2SO4 buffered at pH = 7.25 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).110 (b) Steady-state J–V behaviors of various hematite photoelectrodes with a Si photocathode, and (c) net photocurrent during the first 10 h of operation using NiFeOx-modified regrowth hematite (rgH II) with a TiO2/Pt loaded a-Si photocathode in 0.5 M phosphate solution (pH 11.8) in a two-electrode, tandem configuration under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: Schematics of overall unassisted water splitting in a tandem configuration.111 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
Hematite (α-Fe2O3) has been investigated as a promising photoanode material owing to its suitable bandgap (∼2.0 eV) for excellent visible light absorption, robust chemical stability, and abundance. However, there are also some limitations strongly hindering its PEC activity, including its extremely short hole diffusion length (2–4 nm), short carrier lifetime, sluggish surface water oxidation kinetics and so on. Wang et al. demonstrated the first unbiased water splitting tandem cell using a hematite photoanode when pairing with a Pt catalyzed and TiO2 protected amorphous Si photocathode.111 The hematite photoanode achieved a benchmark onset potential of 0.45 V vs. RHE by simultaneously reducing the surface disorders and loading a highly active NiFeOx OER cocatalyst, enabling overall unassisted water splitting in 0.5 M phosphate solution (pH = 11.8) (Fig. 15b). An STH efficiency of 0.91% and a long-term stability of 10 hours have been realized by this tandem cell.
WO3 is another n-type semiconductor that has been widely investigated as a photoanode for oxygen evolution in a PEC tandem device. This is attributed to its good charge transport properties, a relatively large hole diffusion length (about 150 nm) and a suitable bandgap of ∼2.7 eV, enabling visible light harvesting in the solar spectrum. Shangguan and Zhou presented a self-biasing PEC tandem cell, which consists of a WO3 photoanode and a Pt-catalyzed p-Si photocathode for spontaneous water splitting under visible-light illumination (Fig. 16a).112 However, the short carrier lifetime and slow surface reaction kinetics for WO3 also greatly hamper its water oxidation performance. This tandem cell system exhibited a photocurrent density of about 0.12 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH = 7.0) under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). And the hydrogen evolution was verified by gas chromatography analysis at a rate of 0.204 μmol h−1 cm−2. Later, Lewis and Xiang demonstrated a fully integrated and acid-stable solar-driven water splitting system consisting of np+-Si/FTO/WO3 as the anode and pn+-Si/Ti/TiO2/Pt as the cathode with an STH efficiency of 0.24% in 1.0 M HClO4 (Fig. 16b).113 A hydrogen production rate of about 0.17 mL h−1 was observed in this tandem cell for more than 20 hours of sustainable operation under dual side illumination (200 mW cm−2).
 Fig. 16  (a) Energy-level diagram of the self-biasing WO3/W-Pt/Si PEC cell for water splitting. EF is the Fermi level.112 (b) Cross-sectional schematic of a monolithically integrated photoelectrode assembly of a photoanode (WO3/FTO/p+n-Si) and a photocathode (Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p-Si).113 (c) Simplified electron energy diagram of a BiVO4/Si nanoarray tandem cell for overall water splitting, and (d) intersection point of the J–V curves of the two types of electrodes in aqueous 0.1 M potassium phosphate solution buffered to pH 5.5 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: J–V curve of the two-electrode system Co-Pi/Mo:BiVO4 against the Pt/p-Si nanoarray photocathode.114 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The ternary oxide BiVO4 has become an outstanding candidate among all the metal oxide photoanodes due to its small bandgap (about 2.4 eV) that enables efficient visible light absorption, and higher charge transport properties compared with Fe2O3. The most favorable virtue of BiVO4 is the relatively negative valence band position, which offers an extremely low onset potential of about 0.2 V vs. RHE for water oxidation due to its large photovoltage (larger than 1.0 V). Recently, Li et al. reported a Pt-catalyzed p-Si nanowire array/BiVO4 PEC tandem cell for sunlight driven overall water splitting (Fig. 16c).114 This integrated tandem system realized unassisted water splitting under simulated sunlight illumination with a photocurrent density of around 0.46 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16d), and an STH conversion efficiency of 0.57%.
4.2. Photocathode candidates for tandem devices consisting of single-crystal Si-based photoanodes
In recent years, n-Si has emerged as a promising candidate for photoanode material for water oxidation. However, the valence band edge of n-Si is too negative for water oxidation, which requires a large overpotential as the driving force. To the best of our knowledge, there are few reports on tandem systems for spontaneous solar water splitting with single-crystal Si-based photoanodes due to their relatively small photovoltages (the onset potentials are often positive than 0.8 V vs. RHE). And therefore, in this section, we will focus on emerging high-performance photocathodes that have been reported with extremely positive onset potentials, which show great potential to pair with n-Si photoanodes (Table 2).
Table 2 Performance of photocathode candidates that could pair with single-crystal Si-based photoanodes for overall water splitting




Photocathode
Electrolyte
Onset potential
Photocurrent@0 V vs. RHE
Ref.




a-Si/TiO2/Pt
0.5 M KH2PO4 (pH 4)
0.93 V vs. RHE
11.6 mA cm−2

115



Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt
0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 4.26)
1.02 V vs. RHE
2.95 mA cm−2

116



CuBi2O4/Pt
0.3 M K2SO4 + 0.2 M K2HPO4 (pH 6.65)
>1.0 V vs. RHE
0.5 mA cm−2 (0.4 V vs. RHE)

117



Au/CuBi2O4/Pt
0.1 M Na2SO4
0.9 V vs. RHE
1.2 mA cm−2

118



CuBi2O4/Ag:CuBi2O4
0.1 M NaOH (pH 12.8)
1.1 V vs. RHE
1.5 mA cm−2 (0.6 V vs. RHE)

119



CuFeO2
1.0 M NaOH
0.98 V vs. RHE
0.085 mA cm−2 (0.6 V vs. RHE)

120



CuFeO2/NiFe-OOH/reduced graphene oxide
1.0 M NaOH
0.65 V vs. RHE
2.4 mA cm−2 (0.4 V vs. RHE)

121





A TiO2 protected amorphous Si (a-Si/TiO2) photocathode has been demonstrated by Javey and Ager for efficient and stable hydrogen production (Fig. 17a).115 Impressively, upon loading Pt as the HER cocatalyst, a quite positive onset potential of 0.93 V vs. RHE was obtained by this a-Si/TiO2 photocathode (Fig. 17b). Importantly, Ni–Mo could serve as an alternative active HER cocatalyst to Pt for this a-Si/TiO2 photocathode, reaching a slightly negative onset potential of about 0.87 V vs. RHE and a comparable photocurrent density of approximately 11 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 17  (a) SEM image shows the cross-section of an a-Si photocathode with Pt as catalyst. The scale bar is 400 nm, and (b) J–V plots of a representative a-Si photocathode under different simulated solar illumination intensities in 0.5 M aqueous potassium hydrogen phthalate solution under different simulated solar illumination intensities.115 (c) Typical cross-sectional TEM image of the TiO2(15 nm)/Ga2O3(20 nm)/Cu2O structure, and (d) J–V curves of Pt/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O samples with different TiO2 deposition temperatures in 0.5 M Na2SO4–0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH = 4.26) under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).116 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
To develop photocathodes with low onset potentials, Cu-based p-type materials are also promising candidates. This is attributed to their earth abundance, nontoxicity and high charge mobility. One of the good choices is Cu2O, which has a favorable conduction band position for water reduction and permits a large photovoltage with a direct bandgap of 2.1 eV. Although the application of Cu2O as an efficient photocathode has been inhibited by poor photostability and fast electron (minority carrier) recombination, enormous efforts have been made to address these limitations. Introduction of a protection layer and a buffer layer are effective means to improve the photostability and reduce the charge recombination, respectively. Delaunay et al. successfully increased the photovoltage of a TiO2-protected Cu2O photocathode by introducing a Ga2O3 buffer layer (Fig. 17c).116 Benefiting from the formation of a buried Cu2O/Ga2O3 pn junction and elimination of the conduction band discontinuity at the Cu2O/Ga2O3 interface, the optimized Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt electrode achieved an extremely positive onset potential of 1.02 V vs. RHE and a photocurrent density of −2.95 mA cm−2 at 0 V vs. RHE under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (Fig. 17d).
In addition to Cu2O, many ternary Cu-based oxides (such as CuBi2O4 and CuFeO2) have been identified as potential photocathode materials for PEC water splitting. Berglund and colleagues reported a CuBi2O4 photoanode synthesized by a facile drop-casting method, which could produce an onset potential of about 1.0 V vs. RHE for hydrogen evolution (Fig. 18a and b).117 But this CuBi2O4 photocathode only yielded a photocurrent density of 0.5 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE. Later, Lei and Zhang prepared CuBi2O4 thin films on FTO substrates by an electrochemical deposition method.118 They verified that the introduction of an Au interlayer was beneficial to improve the crystallinity of CuBi2O4. Finally, the modified CuBi2O4 could produce a photocurrent onset potential of around 0.9 V vs. RHE and a sustained hydrogen evolution for about 50 minutes (Fig. 18c and d). Recently, Choi et al. carefully investigated the coverage and surface area of CuBi2O4 thin films prepared in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and ethylene glycol (EG) solutions.119 They demonstrated that the formation of Ag-doped CuBi2O4 was favorable in the DMSO solution, where Ag doping helped in increasing the hole concentration in CuBi2O4 and suppress its anodic photocorrosion, while CuBi2O4 prepared in EG resulted in more uniform and complete coverage. Consequently, the optimized CuBi2O4/Ag-doped CuBi2O4 electrode showed a photocurrent onset of 1.1 V vs. RHE for water reduction (a photovoltage larger than 1 V) (Fig. 18e and f), which represented the lowest onset potential for a photocathode.
 Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a CuBi2O4 photocathode synthesized by a straightforward drop-casting procedure (inset: photograph), and (b) J–V scans for the CuBi2O4 and CuBi2O4/Pt photocathodes in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with Ar bubbling or with H2O2 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).117 (c) Top view SEM image of a CuBi2O4 sample prepared via cathodic electrodeposition, and (d) chopped curves of CuBi2O4 thin films grown on FTO and FTO/Au substrates in 0.1 M Na2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).118 (e) SEM image of a Ag-doped CuBi2O4 thin film synthesized by an electrochemical synthesis method (inset: photograph of the Ag-doped CuBi2O4 thin film after stability measurement), and (f) J–V plots of CuBi2O4 and CuBi2O4/Ag–CuBi2O4 photocathodes measured in 0.1 M NaOH (pH 12.8) saturated with O2 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).119 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Similar to CuBi2O4, CuFeO2 is another promising candidate with a considerably low onset potential for PEC water reduction. Choi and coworkers prepared a p-type CuFeO2 thin film electrode using a new electrodeposition method.120 This electrodeposited CuFeO2 possessed a bandgap of about 1.55 eV with a more negative conduction band edge against the reduction potential for water (E°(H2/H+), 0 V vs. RHE), enabling an onset potential of 0.98 V vs. RHE for hydrogen evolution in 1.0 M KOH (Fig. 19a and b). Lee et al. demonstrated an enhanced onset potential of about 0.75 V vs. RHE obtained by a CuFeO2 photocathode with a hybrid microwave annealing (HMA) treatment (Fig. 19c and d).121 When further modified with a NiFe-LDH/reduced graphene oxide electrocatalyst, the HMA-treated CuFeO2 photocathode exhibited a photocurrent density of −2.4 mA cm−2 at 0.4 V vs. RHE, reaching the highest performance among the CuFeO2-based photocathodes.
 Fig. 19  (a) Top-view SEM image of a p-type CuFeO2 film prepared via an electrodeposition route, and (b) chopped J–V curves in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar and O2 (simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2)).120 (c) High resolution SEM image showing the surface morphology of a CuFeO2 film by hybrid microwave annealing and (d) J–V curves of HMA, HMA-NiFe, and HMA-NiFe/RGO under chopped illumination of the simulated 1 sun in Ar purged 1 M NaOH.121 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the aforementioned CuBi2O4 and CuFeO2, a number of new ternary CuxMyOz (M = metal) oxides are also promising materials as p-type semiconductors in artificial photosynthesis.122 They have excellent absorption properties within the visible light spectrum with tunable bandgap energy, ranging from ∼1.2 to 3.0 eV, superior charge carrier mobility and thermodynamically favorable band positions for water reduction. Research efforts should be made in surface modifications and design of their chemical compositions as well as structures for greater stability and higher efficiency in aqueous solutions. The earth abundance and nontoxicity of these ternary CuxMyOz oxides indeed will continue to make them ideal candidates as the top absorbers to pair with single-crystal Si-based photoanodes in overall water splitting.
5. Summary and outlook
High efficiency and high stability photoelectrodes are essential to achieve unbiased solar water splitting for hydrogen production. Benefiting from its earth abundance, narrow bandgap and wide range of applications in the electronics and photovoltaics industries with an extensive knowledge base, single-crystal Si is recognized as an extremely attractive photoelectrode material for solar water splitting. However, Si-based photoelectrodes are usually sensitive to corrosion in aqueous electrolytes and suffer from sluggish water reduction or water oxidation kinetics.
In this article, we have briefly reviewed the strategies to solve the thermodynamics and kinetics problems of Si, which would enable its practical applications in spontaneous solar water splitting. Compared to the planar counterparts, single-crystal Si photoelectrodes with tailored nanostructures (including nanowires, nanopillars, nanopyramids, etc.) could simultaneously maximize light absorption by trapping the incident light inside the nanostructure channels, enhance the charge separation via shortening the charge carrier diffusion path toward the electrolyte, and improve the charge collection efficiency through increasing the surface area of the solid/liquid interface. And then, the introduction of buried junctions could effectively increase the photovoltage of Si electrodes. Further, corrosion-resistant protective layers that could allow efficient charge carrier (electron or hole) transport are adopted to guarantee long-term stability for Si electrodes. In particular, the versatile ALD technique has been demonstrated as a powerful tool to provide conformal coating with precise thickness of the protective layers for high stability. Subsequently, the charge transfer between the protective layer and Si substrate could be boosted by optimizing direct tunnelling or introducing defect channels, as well as forming MIS structures with high quality passivation layers. Upon loading the HER and OER cocatalysts, the sluggish hydrogen and oxygen evolution kinetics on Si surfaces could be greatly enhanced.
To construct efficient single-crystal Si-based tandem cells for unbiased solar water splitting, the primary concern is the coupling of photocathodes and photoanodes with sufficient photovoltages to drive the photoelectrolysis of water. Due to the relatively small bandgap and thus small photovoltage of single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes, a wide bandgap semiconductor is always required to achieve unbiased overall water splitting. Single-crystal Si-based photocathodes are often coupled with n-type oxide semiconductors (e.g. TiO2, BiVO4, WO3, Fe2O3, etc.) with relatively wider bandgaps for spontaneous water splitting. Although there are seldom reports on tandem systems consisting of single-crystal Si-based photoanodes, it is expected that n-Si photoanodes should be paired with p-type candidates with larger bandgaps than Si, so that relatively positive onset potentials could be obtained on the cathode side. These cathode candidates include amorphous Si, Cu2O, CuBi2O4, CuFeO2, and a number of new ternary CuxMyOz (M = metal) oxides.
Currently, the STH efficiency of PEC tandem devices consisting of a single-crystal Si-based photocathode and metal oxide photoanodes is far from the touchstone for practical applications, due to the relatively low photocurrent densities for the metal oxide based photoanodes. On the other hand, although some promising candidate photocathodes, such as amorphous Si, Cu2O, CuBi2O4, CuFeO2, etc., could pair with single-crystal Si-based photoanodes, their poor stability and low photocurrent density are their severe limitations. Thus, there are only a limited number of reports on tandem systems with relatively low STH efficiencies, and intensive further research is needed for practical applications.
The candidate materials as photocathodes and photoanodes for single-crystal Si-based tandem devices are summarized in Fig. 20,123 with their charge carrier mobilities in Table 3, indicating their ideal maximum STH efficiencies for solar water splitting.117,124–127 This conclusive picture provides a basic guide to design and fabricate optoelectronically suitable absorber materials for efficient tandem systems. Besides, the basic requirements of facile charge transport and separation, as well as fast surface reaction kinetics, should also be taken into consideration to minimize the carrier loss. Finally, developing stable electrodes or robust protection layers for the electrodes would play important roles in improving the system stability.
 Fig. 20  The summary of theoretically attainable efficiencies for candidate materials as photoanodes and photocathodes for tandem systems with single-crystal Si-based (a) photocathodes and (b) photoanodes. (The STH isoefficiency contour plot was adapted from ref. 123. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer International Publishing Switzerland.) 
Table 3 Charge carrier mobilities for some typical anode and cathode materials




Material
Mobility
Ref.
Material
Mobility
Ref.




TiO2
1 cm2 V−1 s−1

124

a-Si
0.5–1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1

126



Fe2O3
0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1

125

Cu2O
6 cm2 V−1 s−1

125



WO3
10 cm2 V−1 s−1

125

CuBi2O4
0.0012 cm2 V−1 s−1

117



BiVO4
0.044 cm2 V−1 s−1

125

CuFeO2
0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1

127





Despite the current achievements, further studies on understanding the fundamentals of charge transport in protective layers are essential for obtaining highly stable single-crystal Si-based photoelectrodes. And the development of robust thin films with superior charge transport properties and high compatibility for the underlying photoelectrodes is of equal importance. The strategy of combining protection layers with different catalysts could also be applicable for all kinds of photoelectrodes besides Si-based electrodes.
Due to the complex 4-eletron/4-proton nature, the OER tends to be more difficult and slower than the HER. This highlights the importance of clarifying the complex electron/hole transfer and surface reaction behavior of water oxidation, which could be enabled by modern characterization techniques, including scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM), surface enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy (SEIRAS), and in situ X-ray absorption techniques such as X-ray Absorption Spectroscopy (XAS), etc. for PEC cells coupled with synchrotron radiation facilities.
Furthermore, the design and construction of novel PEC cell configurations could offer another strategy to boost the efficiency for overall water splitting, such as the wireless cell structure,128 tandem absorber structure,129,130etc. In addition, the illumination areas for the photoanode and photocathode could also be balanced to maximize the Jop for a maximum STH.
With ongoing progress in single-crystal Si-based photoelectrode systems, it is clear that the unbiased single-crystal Si-based tandem cell for water splitting will see the light of day soon.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the National Key R&D Program of China (2016YFB0600901), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21525626, U1463205, 21722608, 51861125104), and the Program of Introducing Talents of Discipline to Universities (B06006) for financial support.
References
J. J. H. Pijpers, M. T. Winkler, Y. Surendranath, T. Buonassisi and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 10056–10061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10718–10732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Zhang and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4395–4422 RSC .
N. Zhang, M. Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y. J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Quan, S. J. Xie, Y. Wang and Y. J. Xu, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2017, 33, 2404–2423 CAS .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Niu, D. Han, T. Liu, G. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700555 CrossRef .
S. Kment, F. Riboni, S. Pausova, L. Wang, L. Wang, H. Han, Z. Hubicka, J. Krysa, P. Schmuki and R. Zboril, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3716–3769 RSC .
K. Sun, S. H. Shen, Y. Q. Liang, P. E. Burrows, S. S. Mao and D. L. Wang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8662–8719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter and K. G. U. Wijayantha, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1983–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Schüttauf, M. A. Modestino, E. Chinello, D. Lambelet, A. Delfino, D. Dominé, A. Faes, M. Despeisse, J. Bailat, D. Psaltis, C. Moser and C. Ballif, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F1177–F1181 CrossRef .
S. Chu, W. Li, Y. Yan, T. Hamann, I. Shih, D. Wang and Z. Mi, Nano Futures, 2017, 1, 022001 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, V. Haeublein, N. Liu, N. Nhat Truong, E. M. Zolnhofer, H. Tsuchiya, M. S. Killian, K. Meyer, L. Frey and P. Schmuki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3763–3767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, C. Zhao, B. Giri, P. Allen, X. Xu, H. Joshi, Y. Fan, L. V. Titova and P. M. Rao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3463–3474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, K. Zhang, P. Li, M. S. Jung, M. J. Jeong and J. H. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11819–11823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cai, H. Xiong, X. Su, H. Zhou, M. Shen and L. Fang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 203902 CrossRef .
H. P. Wang, K. Sun, S. Y. Noh, A. Kargar, M. L. Tsai, M. Y. Huang, D. L. Wang and J. H. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2817–2824 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, A. Wang, T. Zhang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4645–4660 RSC .
L. Yuan, C. Han, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 35, 1–36 Search PubMed .

          H.-J. Lewerenz and I. D. Sharp, in Integrated Solar Fuel Generators, ed. I. D. Sharp, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2019, pp. 1–42,  10.1039/9781788010313-00001 .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
U. Wurfel, A. Cuevas and P. Wurfel, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2015, 5, 461–469 Search PubMed .
K. T. Fountaine, H. J. Lewerenz and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13706 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Ma, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 96–116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Z. B. Luo, C. C. Li and J. L. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7469–7484 RSC .
D. A. Grave, N. Yatom, D. S. Ellis, M. C. Toroker and A. Rothschild, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706577 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mohajernia, S. Hejazi, A. Mazare, N. T. Nguyen and P. Schmuki, Chemistry, 2017, 23, 12406–12411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, J. Shi, W. Zi, P. Wang and S. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4324–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Chen, K.-C. Yang, C.-W. Liu, Y.-R. Lu, C.-L. Dong, D.-H. Wei, S.-F. Hu and R.-S. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 422–432 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Huan, G. Rousse, S. Zanna, I. T. Lucas, X. Xu, N. Menguy, V. Mougel and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 4792–4796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ali, A. Hussain, R. Ahmed, M. K. Wang, C. Zhao, B. U. Haq and Y. Q. Fu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 59, 726–737 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ali, F. Zhou, K. Chen, C. Kotzur, C. Xiao, L. Bourgeois, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Wang, Z. Yu, V. Liu, M. L. Brongersma, T. F. Jaramillo and S. Fan, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 235–240 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Xi, M. F. Schubert, J. K. Kim, E. F. Schubert, M. Chen, S.-Y. Lin, W. Liu and J. A. Smart, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 176–179 CrossRef CAS .
E. D. Kosten, E. L. Warren and H. A. Atwater, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 3316–3331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Kelzenberg, S. W. Boettcher, J. A. Petykiewicz, D. B. Turner-Evans, M. C. Putnam, E. L. Warren, J. M. Spurgeon, R. M. Briggs, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 239–244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Oh, J. Kye and S. Hwang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 298–302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Ding, D. He, H. Liu, W. Liu, Z. Li, B. Yang, X. Zhang, L. Lei and S. Jin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3113–3119 RSC .
Y. Su, B. Sun, S. Chen, H. Yu and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 14832–14836 RSC .
S. Zhong, Z. Huang, X. Lin, Y. Zeng, Y. Ma and W. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 555–561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, M. Li, P. Fu, R. Li, D. Song, C. Shen and Y. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Elbersen, W. Vijselaar, R. M. Tiggelaar, H. Gardeniers and J. Huskens, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6781–6796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chang, T. Wang, P. Zhang, J. Zhang, A. Li and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8356–8359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. H. Do, C. Nguyen Van, K.-A. Tsai, L. T. Quynh, J.-W. Chen, Y.-C. Lin, Y.-C. Chen, W.-C. Chou, C.-L. Wu, Y.-J. Hsu and Y.-H. Chu, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 153–160 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schreier, J. Luo, P. Gao, T. Moehl, M. T. Mayer and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. A. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, C. Li, S. Liu, T. Wang and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 91–100 RSC .
M. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Ling, W. Qiu, F. Wang, T. Liu, Y. Song, X. Liu, P. Fang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2490–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, H. Chen, G. Chang, X. Lin, Y. Zhang, A. Aldalbahi, C. Peng, J. Wang and C. Fan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 14072–14078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Roske, E. J. Popczun, B. Seger, C. G. Read, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, P. C. Vesborg, B. S. Brunschwig, R. E. Schaak, I. Chorkendorff, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, D. S. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Grätzel and I. Chorkendorff, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25902–25907 RSC .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, Z. Zhang, X. Yin, A. Kvit, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, X. Yan, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17045 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. Zheng and M. Shen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 18744–18751 RSC .
B. Guo, A. Batool, G. Xie, R. Boddula, L. Tian, S. U. Jan and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1516–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 892–897 RSC .
X. Yu, P. Yang, S. Chen, M. Zhang and G. Shi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601805 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, H. Ji, W. Ma, C. Chen and J. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2705–2711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kim, N. Nishimura, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Jang, H. Jun, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5375–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. U. Maier, M. Specht and G. Bilger, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 859–864 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakato, T. Ohnishi and H. Tsubomura, Chem. Lett., 1975, 883–886 CrossRef CAS .
F. Riboni, N. Nhat Truong, S. So and P. Schmuki, Nanoscale Horiz., 2016, 1, 445–466 RSC .
J. Resasco, H. Zhang, N. Kornienko, N. Becknell, H. Lee, J. Guo, A. L. Briseno and P. Yang, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 80–88 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yang, Y. Yu, M. B. Starr, X. Yin, Z. Li, A. Kvit, S. Wang, P. Zhao and X. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7574–7580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 84–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, F. H. Saadi, M. F. Lichterman, W. G. Hale, H.-P. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Plymale, S. T. Omelchenko, J.-H. He, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3612–3617 CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, K. W. Kemp, T. Ito, A. Walsh, C. E. Chidsey, P. K. Hurley and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 99–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. L. Laskowski, M. R. Nellist, R. Venkatkarthick and S. W. Boettcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 570–579 RSC .
H. H. Huang, Y. S. Liu, Y. M. Chen, M. C. Huang and M. C. Wang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 200, 3309–3313 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fan, J. Min, Y. Li, X. Su, S. Zou, X. Wang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 213901 CrossRef .
G.-L. Zang, G.-P. Sheng, C. Shi, Y.-K. Wang, W.-W. Li and H.-Q. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3033–3039 RSC .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, B. Seger, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20000–20004 RSC .
L. Zeng, Y. Liu, S. Lin, W. Qarony, L. Tao, Y. Chai, X. Zhang, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 174, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
B. Koo, S. Byun, S.-W. Nam, S.-Y. Moon, S. Kim, J. Y. Park, B. T. Ahn and B. Shin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705136 CrossRef .
S. K. Choi, W.-S. Chae, B. Song, C.-H. Cho, J. Choi, D. S. Han, W. Choi and H. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14008–14016 RSC .
M. F. Lichterman, K. Sun, S. Hu, X. Zhou, M. T. McDowell, M. R. Shaner, M. H. Richter, E. J. Crumlin, A. I. Carim, F. H. Saadi, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 11–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mei, B. Seger, T. Pedersen, M. Malizia, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1948–1952 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, S. H. Shen, J. S. Cheung, X. L. Pang, N. Park, J. G. Zhou, Y. F. Hu, Z. L. Sun, S. Y. Noh, C. T. Riley, P. K. L. Yu, S. H. Jin and D. L. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4612–4625 RSC .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. G. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. J. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duhnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, K. A. Walczak, M. Favaro, J. W. Beeman, L. H. Hess, C. Wang, C. Zhu, S. Gul, J. Yano, C. Kisielowski, A. Schwartzberg and I. D. Sharp, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 335–341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, M. T. McDowell, A. C. Nielander, S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, F. Yang, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 592–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhu and M. N. Chong, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 347–373 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. D. Prange, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2487 RSC .
D. V. Esposito, I. Levin, T. P. Moffat and A. A. Talin, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 562–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Digdaya, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, B. J. Trzesniewski, E. C. Garnett and W. A. Smith, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 RSC .
T. Yao, R. Chen, J. Li, J. Han, W. Qin, H. Wang, J. Shi, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13664–13672 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
J. R. McKone, E. L. Warren, M. J. Bierman, S. W. Boettcher, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3573–3583 RSC .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. A. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653–9661 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jorgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, S. C. Lee, K. D. Fong, J. Kibsgaard, R. Sinclair and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400739 CrossRef .
R. Fan, J. Mao, Z. Yin, J. Jie, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. Zheng and M. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6123–6129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Hellstern, J. D. Benck, J. Kibsgaard, C. Hahn and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501758 CrossRef .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M. J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T. C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Chemelewski, H.-C. Lee, J.-F. Lin, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2843–2850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cai, J. Zhao, H. Li, J. Park, I. S. Cho, H. S. Han and X. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 624–632 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dang, T. Wang, C. Li, J. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Gong, Engineering, 2017, 3, 285–289 CrossRef .
J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers and J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1150–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Brillet, J.-H. Yum, M. Cornuz, T. Hisatomi, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 824–828 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Pinaud, J. D. Benck, L. C. Seitz, A. J. Forman, Z. Chen, T. G. Deutsch, B. D. James, K. N. Baum, G. N. Baum, S. Ardo, H. Wang, E. Miller and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1983 RSC .
M. R. Shaner, H. A. Atwater, N. S. Lewis and E. W. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2354–2371 RSC .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjällström, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 138, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kargar, J. Khamwannah, C. H. Liu, N. Park, D. Wang, S. A. Dayeh and S. Jin, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 289–296 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7447 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Chen, J. Li, X. Li, K. Huang, B. Zhou and W. Shangguan, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 1276–1281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West, J. Jin, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, J. Feng, T. Fang, X. Zhao, Z. Li and Z. Zou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9905–9910 RSC .
Y. J. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. B. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Hisatomi, O. Watanabe, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, K. Domen and J.-J. Delaunay, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1493–1500 RSC .
S. P. Berglund, F. F. Abdi, P. Bogdanoff, A. Chemseddine, D. Friedrich and R. van de Krol, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4231–4242 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cao, N. Nasori, Z. Wang, Y. Mi, L. Wen, Y. Yang, S. Qu, Z. Wang and Y. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8995–9001 RSC .
D. Kang, J. C. Hill, Y. Park and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4331–4340 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Read, Y. Park and K. S. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1872–1876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Jang, Y. B. Park, H. E. Kim, Y. H. Choi, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6054–6061 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sullivan, B. Zoellner and P. A. Maggard, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5999–6016 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Sivula, in Photoelectrochemical Solar Fuel Production: From Basic Principles to Advanced Devices, ed. B. J. Giménez and S. Springer, Cham,  2016, pp. 493–512,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-29641-8_12 .
L. Forro, O. Chauvet, D. Emin, L. Zuppiroli, H. Berger and F. Lévy, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 633–635 CrossRef CAS .

          W. A. Smith, in Photoelectrochemical Solar Fuel Production: From Basic Principles to Advanced Devices, ed. B. J. Giménez and S. Springer, Cham,  2016, pp. 163–197,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-29641-8_4 .
G. Kim, S. J. Kang, G. K. Dutta, Y. K. Han, T. J. Shin, Y. Y. Noh and C. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9477–9483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Prévot, X. A. Jeanbourquin, W. S. Bourée, F. Abdi, D. Friedrich, R. van de Krol, N. Guijarro, F. Le Formal and K. Sivula, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4952–4962 CrossRef .
W.-H. Cheng, M. H. Richter, M. M. May, J. Ohlmann, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth, T. Hannappel, H. A. Atwater and H.-J. Lewerenz, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1795–1800 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. May, H.-J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Young, M. A. Steiner, H. Döscher, R. M. France, J. A. Turner and T. G. Deutsch, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17028 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Zhibin Luo
	Zhibin Luo obtained his BS (2012) degree in chemical engineering and technology from South China University of Technology. He is currently a graduate student at Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Jinlong Gong and Prof. Tuo Wang. Luo works in the Energy & Environmental Catalysis Laboratory at the School of Chemical Engineering and Technology. He is interested in designing and synthesizing metal oxides and silicon-based photoelectrodes for solar water splitting.

Tuo Wang
	Tuo Wang received his BS degree from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin, both in chemical engineering. After gaining another year of research experience as a postdoctoral associate, he joined Novellus Systems, Inc. (currently Lam Research Corp.) as a process development engineer in Tualatin, Oregon. He joined the faculty of the School of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University, where he is currently a full professor. His research focuses on nanostructured thin film materials for photocatalysis.

Jinlong Gong
	Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD degree from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Prof. George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Cheung Kong Chair Professorship. His research interests include catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and synthesis and applications of nanostructured materials.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of band bending in (a) n-Si and (b) p-Si photoelectrodes at equilibrium in contact with solution. (CB, the conduction band edge; VB, the valence band edge; and EF, the Fermi level.)	 

 	Fig. 2  Different nanostructures of the Si photoelectrodes. (a) SEM image of a pn+-Si wire array; inset, tilted SEM image of an electrode after partial infilling with wax;48 (b) SEM image of pristine Si nanopillar arrays;40 (c) the cross-sectional SEM image of a p-Si pyramid structure;18 and (d) top-view SEM image of nanotextured black Si.55 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of band bending in (a) p-Si and (b) n+p-Si photoelectrodes in contact with the H+/H2 redox couple under illumination. Ecb, the conduction band edge; Evb, the valence band edge; and EF, the Fermi level. EF,p and EF,n, the hole and electron quasi-Fermi levels, respectively, under illumination. The photovoltage (Voc) is larger for n+p-Si samples due to increased band bending at the n+/p interface relative to the aqueous solution/p-Si interface; J–V behaviors of nanowire array (c) p-Si and (d) n+p-Si electrodes in the acidic electrolyte. (Data were collected at a series of light intensities for 0, 11, 23, 48, 100 and 210 mW cm−2.)48 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A 24 hour stability evaluation of the unannealed and vacuum annealed 100 nm ALD TiO2 protected electrodes with Pt as an HER catalyst at 0.3 V vs. RHE in 1 M HClO4 solution, and (b) the stability of the vacuum annealed sample extended to 2 weeks. The samples were irradiated with the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).53 (c) Schematic structure of an epitaxial SrTiO3-protected Si photocathode and (d) its stability as indicated by the steady-state photocurrent characterization at an applied bias of 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M H2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). The inset shows a gas chromatogram of the produced gas.67 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Stability test of the np+ and n+p photocathodes with and without a 2 nm Al2O3 layer for H2 evolution with a bias of −1.0 V vs. RHE in an electrolyte containing 0.5 M K2SO4 and 0.5 M H2SO4 under 100 mW cm−2 illumination.72 (b) Chronoamperometry analysis of the MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0.24 V vs. RHE), MoSx/MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0 V vs. RHE), and MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si (0.2 V vs. RHE) electrodes under the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2) in 1 M HClO4 solution. (MoSx was re-deposited on MoSx/MoS2/Mo/n+p-Si three times.)76 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, AIP Publishing Group. Copyright 2013, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) 18 h long-term chronoamperometry tests of 2 nm IrOx/Ir/p+n-Si under different annealing conditions at 1.23 V versus RHE in acidic electrolyte measured under the red part of the simulated AM 1.5G (λ ≥ 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).81 (b) Chronoamperometric J–t curve of an np+-Si/SiOx/NiFe photoelectrode at 1.80 V (vs. RHE) in 1.0 M K-borate electrolyte under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).59 (c) Stability test for a 2 nm Ni protected n-Si electrode. Insets in (b) and (c) show details of current fluctuations caused by oxygen gas bubble release.83 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2013, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Constant potential lifetime tests at 1.7 V (vs. NHE) on a 0.196 cm−2 sample in 1 M NaOH solution on (solid line) Ir/TiO2/p+-Si and (dashed line) Ir/p+-Si anodes in the dark.84 (b) Normalized photocurrent of a p+n-Si/Co3O4/Co(OH)2 photoelectrode for more than 72 h of continuous operation in 1 M NaOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2), while a bare p+n-Si photoelectrode degrades almost immediately (inset).85 (c) Chronoamperometry of an np+-Si photoanode coated with a 44 nm TiO2 thin film and Ni islands for over 100 hours at 0.93 V vs. SCE in 1.0 M KOH; the illumination intensity was 1.25 sun.86 (d) Chronoamperometry of an n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx photoanode at 1.63 V (vs. RHE) in 1.0 M KOH solution under 1.1 sun of simulated solar illumination.58 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2014, AAAS. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Mott–Schottky plot of p+-Si|NiOx in 50 mM Fe(CN)63− and 350 mM Fe(CN)64− in 1.0 M KCl in the dark. (b) Chronoamperometry of np+-Si|NiOx and n-Si|NiOx photoanodes at an applied bias of 1.73 V (vs. RHE) under simulated illumination. The insets show SEM images of surface damage to p+-Si|NiOx and n-Si|NiOx electrodes after stability tests of 300 and 686 h, respectively.87 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Cross-sectional high resolution TEM image of an optimized bilayer 20/30nm Pt/Ti collector deposited on 2 nm RTO SiO2|p-Si. Insets: Top-view SEM image of a standard sample consisting of 500 μm diameter PtTi collectors (top right), and high-angle annular dark-field TEM image of the tunnelling oxide (bottom right), and (b) J–V curves of various samples in 0.5 M H2SO4 solution under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).90 (c) Energy band diagram of n-Si/SiOx,RCA/Al2O3/Pt/Ni after aging for 18 hours (the metallic Ni film was partially transformed into NiOx and Ni(OH)2) and (d) cyclic voltammetry of MIS photoanodes with various interfacial layers and metal overlayers in 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).91 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) High-resolution TEM image of a cross-section of an n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx sample, and (b) J–V curves of n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx/NiOx and n-Si/SiOx,RCA/NiOx photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).92 (c) Energy band diagram of the n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH Schottky photoanode under thermodynamic equilibrium in the dark, and (d) J–V curves of n-Si/TiOx/ITO, n-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH, and p++-Si/TiOx/ITO/NiOOH photoelectrodes in 1 M LiOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).93 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) J–V curves of the SiHJ photocathodes with different thicknesses of Pt used as HER catalysts in 1 M H2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).19 (b) J–V curves under chopped illumination of the Pt2/n+p-Si and TiO2/Pt2/n+p-Si photoelectrodes measured in 1 M HClO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).56 (c) J–V data for a representative Ni–Mo coated n+p-Si microwire array electrode measured in pH 4.5 KHP buffer under simulated illumination.96 (d) Linear sweep voltammograms of the n+p-Si electrode with and without the MoS2 layer in H2-purged 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under simulated solar illumination.97 (e) PEC stability measurement for a 67 nm MoS2/Al2O3/n+p-Si electrode for H2 generation 1 M HClO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: J–V curves after 0 and 120 h PEC water splitting.98 (f) Linear sweep voltammograms of the CoP-n+p-Si photoelectrode in contact with 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte under simulated solar illumination initially and after 24 h of continuous PEC reaction.99 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Water electrolysis of the n-Si/TiO2/Ir electrodes in the dark and under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) in acidic, neutral, and basic solutions.84 (b) J–V curves of the IrOx/Ir/p+n-Si photoanodes with different IrOx thicknesses measured in 1 M H2SO4 under the red part of simulated AM 1.5G (λ > 635 nm, 38.6 mW cm−2).81 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) J–V curves of Ni-coated n-Si anodes with different Ni thicknesses in 1 M KOH under approximately twice the sun illumination (225 ± 10 mW cm−2), a 2 nm Ni-coated n-Si anode in the dark, and 2 nm Ni on metallic, heavily doped n++Si in the dark.83 (b) J–V curves of the ITO|Au|ITO|NiOx junction on different substrates in 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).82 (c) PEC behavior of p+-Si|NiOx, n-Si|NiOx and np+-Si|NiOx in 1.0 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).87 (d) J–V curves for n-Si/SiOx,RCA/CoOx photoanodes in 1.0 M KOH solution under 110 mW cm−2 of simulated AM 1.5G solar illumination.58 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, AAAS. Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Linear sweep voltammetry comparing p+-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH in the dark and n-Si/SiOx/Co/CoOOH 1 M KOH under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2);105 (b) J–V behavior of Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH, Ni/NiOx, Ni coated n+p-Si/SiOx anodes, and Ni/NiOx/NiFe-LDH and Ni/NiOx coated nonphotoactive p++-Si electrodes in 1.0 M KOH solution under simulated AM 1.5G back illumination (100 mW cm−2).64 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 
ηSTH = Jop × 1.23/Pin × 100%	(1)

p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3	TiO2	0.25 M Na2SO4 (pH 7.25)	
J
op = 0.15 mA cm−2, STH = 0.18%	
110

a-Si/TiO2/Pt	Fe2O3/NiFeOx	0.5 M K2HPO4 (pH 11.8)	
J
op = 0.74 mA cm−2, STH = 0.91%	
111

p-Si/Pt	W/WO3	0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 7.0)	
J
op = 0.12 mA cm−2, H2 evolution rate = 0.204 μmol h−1 cm−2	
112

n+p-Si/Ti//TiO2/Pt	p+n-Si/FTO/WO3	1.0 M HClO4	
J
op = 0.39 mA cm−2, STH = 0.24% (dual-side simulated 1 sun illumination)	
113

p-Si/Pt	Mo:BiVO4/Co-Pi	0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 5.5)	
J
op = 0.46 mA cm−2, STH = 0.57%	
114


 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic representation of the p-Si/TiO2/Fe2O3 core/shell/hierarchical nanowire array photocathode and TiO2/TiO2 core/shell nanotube array photoanode tandem cell and their J–V curves in an aqueous solution containing 0.25 M Na2SO4 buffered at pH = 7.25 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).110 (b) Steady-state J–V behaviors of various hematite photoelectrodes with a Si photocathode, and (c) net photocurrent during the first 10 h of operation using NiFeOx-modified regrowth hematite (rgH II) with a TiO2/Pt loaded a-Si photocathode in 0.5 M phosphate solution (pH 11.8) in a two-electrode, tandem configuration under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: Schematics of overall unassisted water splitting in a tandem configuration.111 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2015, Elsevier Ltd. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Energy-level diagram of the self-biasing WO3/W-Pt/Si PEC cell for water splitting. EF is the Fermi level.112 (b) Cross-sectional schematic of a monolithically integrated photoelectrode assembly of a photoanode (WO3/FTO/p+n-Si) and a photocathode (Pt/TiO2/Ti/n+p-Si).113 (c) Simplified electron energy diagram of a BiVO4/Si nanoarray tandem cell for overall water splitting, and (d) intersection point of the J–V curves of the two types of electrodes in aqueous 0.1 M potassium phosphate solution buffered to pH 5.5 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2). Inset: J–V curve of the two-electrode system Co-Pi/Mo:BiVO4 against the Pt/p-Si nanoarray photocathode.114 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

a-Si/TiO2/Pt	0.5 M KH2PO4 (pH 4)	0.93 V vs. RHE	11.6 mA cm−2	
115

Cu2O/Ga2O3/TiO2/Pt	0.5 M Na2SO4 + 0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH 4.26)	1.02 V vs. RHE	2.95 mA cm−2	
116

CuBi2O4/Pt	0.3 M K2SO4 + 0.2 M K2HPO4 (pH 6.65)	>1.0 V vs. RHE	0.5 mA cm−2 (0.4 V vs. RHE)	
117

Au/CuBi2O4/Pt	0.1 M Na2SO4	0.9 V vs. RHE	1.2 mA cm−2	
118

CuBi2O4/Ag:CuBi2O4	0.1 M NaOH (pH 12.8)	1.1 V vs. RHE	1.5 mA cm−2 (0.6 V vs. RHE)	
119

CuFeO2	1.0 M NaOH	0.98 V vs. RHE	0.085 mA cm−2 (0.6 V vs. RHE)	
120

CuFeO2/NiFe-OOH/reduced graphene oxide	1.0 M NaOH	0.65 V vs. RHE	2.4 mA cm−2 (0.4 V vs. RHE)	
121


 	Fig. 17  (a) SEM image shows the cross-section of an a-Si photocathode with Pt as catalyst. The scale bar is 400 nm, and (b) J–V plots of a representative a-Si photocathode under different simulated solar illumination intensities in 0.5 M aqueous potassium hydrogen phthalate solution under different simulated solar illumination intensities.115 (c) Typical cross-sectional TEM image of the TiO2(15 nm)/Ga2O3(20 nm)/Cu2O structure, and (d) J–V curves of Pt/TiO2/Ga2O3/Cu2O samples with different TiO2 deposition temperatures in 0.5 M Na2SO4–0.1 M KH2PO4 (pH = 4.26) under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).116 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) SEM image of a CuBi2O4 photocathode synthesized by a straightforward drop-casting procedure (inset: photograph), and (b) J–V scans for the CuBi2O4 and CuBi2O4/Pt photocathodes in 0.3 M K2SO4 and 0.2 M phosphate buffer (pH 6.65) with Ar bubbling or with H2O2 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).117 (c) Top view SEM image of a CuBi2O4 sample prepared via cathodic electrodeposition, and (d) chopped curves of CuBi2O4 thin films grown on FTO and FTO/Au substrates in 0.1 M Na2SO4 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).118 (e) SEM image of a Ag-doped CuBi2O4 thin film synthesized by an electrochemical synthesis method (inset: photograph of the Ag-doped CuBi2O4 thin film after stability measurement), and (f) J–V plots of CuBi2O4 and CuBi2O4/Ag–CuBi2O4 photocathodes measured in 0.1 M NaOH (pH 12.8) saturated with O2 under simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2).119 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Top-view SEM image of a p-type CuFeO2 film prepared via an electrodeposition route, and (b) chopped J–V curves in 1 M NaOH purged with Ar and O2 (simulated AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2)).120 (c) High resolution SEM image showing the surface morphology of a CuFeO2 film by hybrid microwave annealing and (d) J–V curves of HMA, HMA-NiFe, and HMA-NiFe/RGO under chopped illumination of the simulated 1 sun in Ar purged 1 M NaOH.121 Reproduced with permissions. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  The summary of theoretically attainable efficiencies for candidate materials as photoanodes and photocathodes for tandem systems with single-crystal Si-based (a) photocathodes and (b) photoanodes. (The STH isoefficiency contour plot was adapted from ref. 123. Reproduced with permission. Copyright 2016, Springer International Publishing Switzerland.)	 

TiO2	1 cm2 V−1 s−1	
124
	a-Si	0.5–1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1	
126

Fe2O3	0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1	
125
	Cu2O	6 cm2 V−1 s−1	
125

WO3	10 cm2 V−1 s−1	
125
	CuBi2O4	0.0012 cm2 V−1 s−1	
117

BiVO4	0.044 cm2 V−1 s−1	
125
	CuFeO2	0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1	
127


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
