Light-driven bimorph soft actuators: design, fabrication, and properties  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0MH01406K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0MH01406K
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 728-757Light-driven bimorph soft actuators: design, fabrication, and properties

        
          
            Yuanhao 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiajia 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiyu 
            Feng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hao 
            Zeng
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Feng
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300350, P. R. China. E-mail: lwang17@tju.edu.cn; weifeng@tju.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Ceramics and Machining Technology, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300350, China
cSmart Photonic Materials, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences, Tampere University, P.O. Box 541, Tampere, FI-33101, Finland
Received 
      31st August 2020
    , Accepted 27th October 2020First published on 27th October 2020AbstractSoft robots that can move like living organisms and adapt to their surroundings are currently in the limelight from fundamental studies to technological applications, due to their advances in material flexibility, human-friendly interaction, and biological adaptation that surpass conventional rigid machines. Light-fueled smart actuators based on responsive soft materials are considered to be one of the most promising candidates to promote the field of untethered soft robotics, thereby attracting considerable attention amongst materials scientists and microroboticists to investigate photomechanics, photoswitch, bioinspired design, and actuation realization. In this review, we discuss the recent state-of-the-art advances in light-driven bimorph soft actuators, with the focus on bilayer strategy, i.e., integration between photoactive and passive layers within a single material system. Bilayer structures can endow soft actuators with unprecedented features such as ultrasensitivity, programmability, superior compatibility, robustness, and sophistication in controllability. We begin with an explanation about the working principle of bimorph soft actuators and introduction of a synthesis pathway toward light-responsive materials for soft robotics. Then, photothermal and photochemical bimorph soft actuators are sequentially introduced, with an emphasis on the design strategy, actuation performance, underlying mechanism, and emerging applications. Finally, this review is concluded with a perspective on the existing challenges and future opportunities in this nascent research Frontier.
Yuanhao Chen
Yuanhao Chen is currently a graduate student at the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Ling Wang. He obtained his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tianjin Polytechnic University in July 2018. His current research focuses on the design, synthesis, and properties of photoactive soft materials and their promising applications in bioinspired soft robotics.
Ling Wang
Ling Wang is a Full Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He received his PhD in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2013. Prior to joining Tianjin University, he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Advanced Materials and Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University (USA) and Senior Research Fellow at the Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering of Texas A&M University (USA). His research interests focus on the design, synthesis, and properties of smart soft materials, bioinspired materials, and functional nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from soft robotics, adaptive camouflage, and additive manufacturing to energy and safety issues.
Wei Feng
Wei Feng is a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD from the Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2000. He worked as a JSPS Fellow and Postdoctoral Researcher at Osaka University (Japan) and Tsinghua University (China), respectively. In 2004, he became a Full Professor in Tianjin University, and he received the support of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include photoresponsive organic molecules and their derivatives, thermal-conductive and high-strength carbon-based composites, and two-dimensional fluorinated carbon materials and polymers.
1. Introduction
Soft-bodied actuators are ubiquitous in living organisms ranging from terrestrial species to sea animals like worms, starfish, and octopuses. Their highly compressible and stretchable bodies allow excellent adaptation to ever-changing environments, easy access to small apertures to shelter or prey, and agile actions.1–4 Even inside the body of human beings, over 650 skeletal muscles that comprise 40% of the total mass are found to play key roles in performing complex, sophisticated controlled movements and obtaining vital functions.5 Taking inspiration from natural creatures, researchers have recently devoted extensive efforts toward developing stimuli-responsive soft actuators that can be powered externally and wirelessly, toward next-generation soft robotics with built-in biomimic intelligence.6–12 Compared with conventional robots made of rigid components, as often seen in daily technologies such as automatic vacuum cleaners, drones, and driverless vehicles, bioinspired soft robotics have tried to address the challenges related to “human-friendly” working strategies and compliance to environment interactions. Built with soft materials, responsive, and self-regulating capacities, a robot is expected to execute complicated tasks with intelligent adaptation to ever-changing physical situations.13,14
In general, soft actuators are highly deformable structures or material pieces with nanocomposites converting various forms of external stimulations or input energy into desired forces/torques via mechanical reactions. A wide range of soft materials such as gels,15,16 liquid crystals (LCs),17–23 and liquid metals24 have been used to construct smart actuators that can be actively powered upon various stimuli such as light,25,26 electric field,27 magnetic field,28 and humidity,29 or passively via pneumatic or hydraulic,30,31 combustion,32 and biohybrid actuation.33 To date, the soft robot market is dominated by vacuum-powered pneumatic actuators, as commercialized in mobile robots, wearable devices, and rehabilitative technologies. However, one of the grand challenges for pneumatic-typed actuation is the necessity of a tethered connection to an external pump, which prevents device miniaturization. To address this issue, synthetic soft materials possessing optical-to-mechanical-energy conversion capacity have recently attracted significant research attention owing to their remarkable features such as remote, spatial, and temporal controllability.34,35 As one of the most versatile, inexhaustible, and sustainable energy source, light is ubiquitous in our daily lives, as its physical parameters, such as intensity, wavelength, and polarization, can be facilely tailored with high spatial/temporal resolution. The on-demand control techniques through laboratory-level mirror scanners, digital micromirrors, and commercially available computer projectors make the motion of light-fueled robots versatile, sophisticated, and multifunctional.36–39 All these prior achievements can shed light on the future of soft robotics, where compact-sized, untethered, and biomimic soft machines could be powered by sunlight illumination.
With regard to the realization of light-driven soft actuators, there are three kinds of material architectures that are often adopted, namely, homogenous,40 gradient,41 and bimorph (or bilayered, even multilayered) soft actuators.42,43 For a homogenous actuator, an inhomogeneous light field (spatially patterned or penetration-induced gradient) is needed to actuate the structure. For an actuator with a built-in composition gradient (usually across the thickness), uniform light irradiation can induce deformation. These two types of actuators possess obvious advantages in terms of monolithic components and material stability, but they face grand challenges related to improving the sensitivity, programmable deformability, and facile fabrication. In contrast, a light-driven bimorph soft actuator, i.e., a combination between one photoactive layer with a passive layer, allow integration between materials with distinguished differences in responsive behaviors into a single actuator piece, providing large mechanical mismatch upon stimuli and therefore endowing unprecedented features such as ultrasensitivity, programmability, superior compatibility, robustness, and ease in fabrication.44 As a platform to combine different-behavior materials, light-driven bimorph soft actuators have been advanced by the rich literature of molecular photoswitches, photothermal nanomaterials, and photoresponsive functional polymers for setting up the active layer and abundance in the selection of thin material layers with broad mechanical properties. Not only the Young's modulus, coefficient of thermal expansion (CTE), and photomechanical strain of different layers could be easily customized, but also on-demand “twisting” between the layers enables versatile actuation capabilities.45–48 For example, structural anisotropy could be facilely achieved by introducing anisotropic nanomaterials, yielding bending, spiral, and twisting bioinspired shape morphing or motion.49 Furthermore, both surface wrinkling and shape deformation of soft actuators could be programmed by tailoring different layer thicknesses and induced strain between them. All these strategies endow numerous exciting possibilities for developing bioinspired soft robotics with programmable functions and versatile shape reconfiguration.
In this review, we provide an account of the recent state-of-the-art advances in light-driven bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal and photochemical effects. First, we introduce the working principle of bimorph soft actuators and promising synthesis strategies toward light-driven soft actuators (Section 2). Photothermal bimorph soft actuations endowed with photothermal-induced expansion, photothermal-induced phase change, and photothermal-induced desorption are discussed in Section 3. Photochemical bimorph soft actuators are subsequently discussed, with a special emphasis on liquid crystalline and hybrid systems (Section 4). The fundamental design strategies are investigated, and their actuation performance, underlying mechanism, and emerging applications are highlighted. In the last section, we conclude with perspectives on the existing challenges and future opportunities in light-driven biomimic soft actuators toward their cutting-edge applications. This review aims to formulate a guideline from photoactive molecules/material to actuating structures and emerging applications, covering contents with regard to material design, sample fabrication, and related photo-mechanisms under the “umbrella” of light-driven bimorph soft actuators (Scheme 1). A summary of the scattered reports in the literature in this emerging research field is expected to attract more attention of researchers from multidisciplinary fields and prompt the development of light-driven bimorph soft actuators toward diverse applications such as soft robotics, mechanical metamaterials, and other bioinspired artificial intelligent systems.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of light-driven bimorph soft actuators and emerging applications. 
2. Fundamentals of bimorph soft actuators
To endow soft actuators with photoresponsiveness, one can adopt materials amongst various chemical selections, such as molecular switches (e.g., azobenzene with shape reconfigurability) and embed functional nanomaterials or dyes capable of heat transfer into a soft matrix. Physically, the cause of shape changes, for instance, bending deformation in a cantilever/strip, can only be achieved by setting up a stress field across the thickness. Importantly, such stress can become dynamic by controlling the external-light irradiation, resulting in reversible actuation and switching of the material properties. Different physical-structure-based approaches have been developed to achieve the desired stress fields inside the actuator materials, which can be divided into three categories: homogenous, built-in gradient, and bimorph actuators (Fig. 1a). As mentioned above, the bilayered approach that combines an active layer with a passive layer in a single material system could facilitate soft actuators with unprecedented features such as ultrasensitivity, programmability, robustness, and easy controllability, and therefore, it is of great significance. It should also be noted that bimorph soft actuators can be powered by various external stimuli such as light,50,51 temperature,52,53 humidity,29 electricity, and magnetic field due to versatile selections in their chemical composition.35,54,55 In this section, we will discuss the general physical mechanism on a bending bilayered cantilever and then introduce the chemical agents taking the roles of photoinduced robotic activities.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations showing the (a) homogenous structure, gradient structure, and bimorph structure; (b) bending mechanism of bimorph soft actuators; and (c) programmable deformation of bimorph soft actuators. 
2.1 Bending mechanism of a bilayer
Bimorph actuators can be traced back to 1925,56 when Timoshenko first proposed the systematic theory of a cantilever formed by two material layers, dealing with a uniform curvature induced by different CTEs between two metallic thermostats (Fig. 1b). The bending curvature of a bimorph actuator is proportional to the difference in elongation between the two layers and inversely proportional to the thickness of the strip. The bending radius ρ can be expressed as  where T0 is the room temperature, h1 and h2 are the thickness of the two layers, E1 and E2 denote their moduli of elasticity, and α1 and α2 are the coefficients of expansion.
In a photoactive bimorph soft actuator, the active layer dominates the volume/shape change (to expand or shrink), which is largely restricted by the passive layer. The competition between the layers, therefore, builds up the stress field across the thickness, resulting in a bending deformation once the layers are exposed to the field of light stimulus. Rational design principles should include the maximization of functionalities between both the layers, for instance, to obtain a large photoinduced stain in the active layer while maintaining mechanical feasibility in the passive one. It should be noted that multifarious shape deformation such as handiness-dependent spirals or twisting could be facilely programmed and fabricated through the appropriate control of anisotropy in one of the laminated layers (Fig. 1c). However, there is a risk of delamination between the two layers, and a stable and robust interface is a prerequisite for fabricating a high-performance actuator. For this, several critical procedures are considered in the design and fabrication of different material systems as follows: (i) use of pressure-sensitive adhesive such as acrylic ester or tape to bond both the layers;57,58 (ii) taking advantage of some unreacted functional groups at the interfaces to glue layers via the crosslinking of covalent bonding;59 (iii) spin-coating the polymerizable precursors (material for one layer), such as PDMS, on top of a supporting layer, followed by curing;60,61 (iv) plasma treatment that increases the number of polar groups on its surface, enabling an enhancement in the surface wetting and bonding ability.62
2.2 Photoactive agents for bimorph soft actuators
To obtain light-driven deformation at the active layer, photoactive agents such as photothermal nanotransducers (nanoparticles or organic dyes) or photochemical molecular switches (e.g., azobenzene) should be incorporated into the soft-matter matrix. These photoactive agents can serve to absorb light photons and facilitate mechanical actuation through diverse mechanisms such as photothermal expansion, desorption, phase transition, photochemical reconfiguration, etc. Each mechanism has its own strengths and limitations. In the following, we try to provide a brief introduction about the different agents and their characteristics with regard to photothermal and/or photochemical actuations.

2.2.1 Photothermal agents. 
The typical photothermal agents are often divided into two main categories: inorganic and organic. A high photothermal conversion efficiency can be expected in a variety of inorganic agents such as carbon-based nanomaterials,63–69 metallic nanoparticles,70–73 semiconductor nanostructures,74 transition metal carbides or nitrides, etc.75,76 Carbon-based functional nanomaterials such as reduced graphene oxide (RGO) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have been reported to exhibit superior photothermal conversion efficiency and therefore have been widely doped as a dispersed agent, adjacent layer, or modifier of bimorph soft actuators.50,77 Owing to the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) effect, metallic nanoparticles such as gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and anisotropic gold nanorods (AuNRs) could selectively absorb some specific wavelength range of incident light and convert it into localized heat. It should be noted that their energy conversion efficiency is closely related to its own size,78–81 and therefore, photoabsorption at the desired wavelength could be facilely achieved by tuning the intrinsic property of plasmonic nanostructures. Recently, researchers have found that MXenes with unique 2D nanostructures exhibited high thermal conductivity, superior photothermal effect, and hydrophilic features.82 For example, Chen et al. demonstrated that MXenes exhibited 30.3% photothermal conversion efficiency upon near-infrared (NIR) irradiation at 808 nm at an intensity of 1 W cm−2.83,84 Many organic photothermal agents have been widely utilized in polymeric matrices such as polypyrrole (PPy) organic polymers and polydopamine (PDA).85,86 Compared with inorganic analogs, these organic photothermal agents exhibit much better compatibility with polymeric matrices, although issues such as relatively low energy conversion efficiency and photobleaching persist.87 In general, selecting a photothermal agent for bimorph soft actuators should account for the following factors: (1) compatibility with the soft-matter matrix; (2) rightly tuned photoabsorption covering the targeted wavelength range; (3) a high photothermal conversion efficiency; and (4) low cost (low synthesis complexity and maintenance of stability).88,89


2.2.2 Photochemical agents. 
Photochemical actuation of bimorph soft actuators is usually achieved by introducing photoswitchable molecules into the active layer based on an anisotropic soft-matter matrix. For example, liquid crystal elastomers (LCEs) with oriented molecular distribution can be deformed by photoswitches or photosensitive chromophores whose light-driven dynamic geometrical changes at the nanoscopic level can be autonomously amplified into macroscopic shape changes. Many photochromic materials such as spiropyran, diarylethenes, and azobenzene derivatives have been reported to show reversible geometrical changes under light irradiation at appropriate wavelengths.36,90 Spiropyran and spirooxazine can undergo an electrocyclic ring-opening reaction from a closed spiro form to a planar merocyanine form upon UV-light exposure. The reversible process does not automatically occur unless irradiated with visible light or heated in the dark; meanwhile, they are very attractive photochromic materials owing to their excellent photocoloration, strong photofatigue resistance, and fast thermal relaxation.91 Diarylethenes are known to exhibit a geometrical transformation from a ring-opened form to a ring-closed form under UV-light irradiation, whereas the reverse process can only be activated under visible-light irradiation, rendering outstanding thermal stability.92 Diarylethenes and their derivatives have been considered as one of the most promising candidates for optical memory applications because of the remarkable thermal stability of both the photoisomers, fast photocyclization, and electrical conductivity. Azobenzene and its derivatives are one of the most widely studied photochromic materials in the field of light-driven soft actuators owing to their dramatic difference in the molecular configurations at the trans and cis states.93–97 Irradiated by UV light, azobenzene can convert from the planar (trans isomer) to bent (cis isomer) form, and reverse isomerization can be achieved via the thermal relaxation or irradiation of visible light at a certain wavelength. Importantly, these azobenzene derivatives have superior compatibility with the polymer matrix of main-chain or side-chain polymers,98–101 fast response, and high cycling stability under reasonable actuation strain.

3. Photothermal bimorph soft actuators
The mechanism behind the photothermal actuation of a bimorph soft actuator is straightforward. The organic dyes or functional nanoparticles loaded into the soft-matter matrix convert the absorbed external-light photons into in situ thermal energy via nonradiative thermal relaxation around the photoactive agents. This localized hot zone then dissipates heat into the global polymer environment, setting up a stress field via contraction or expansion between the laminated bilayers and consequently resulting in the subsequent deformation of the entire structure. Herein, light-driven bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal expansion are first discussed, where the photothermal agents could be introduced into the photoactive layer or could directly function as a photoactive layer. Then, we illustrate the bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal contraction, which could be induced by the photothermal desorption of water or the photothermal phase transition including metal–insulator transition (MIT), hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition, and liquid crystalline nematic–isotropic (N–I) transition.
3.1 Soft actuators based on photothermal expansion
It is well known that the volume of a material changes upon temperature variations, and this degree of change is closely related to the intrinsic CTE. By exposing to an elevated temperature, the material volume (or shape) can expand via elastic deformation, thereby enabling a qualitative evaluation of deformation by considering the structural geometry and related CTEs, which form the design basis for photothermal bimorph soft actuators. Table 1 lists the CTEs of some representative materials that have been used for soft robotic applications. Usually, the CTE of most polymers is positive, and its value varies with the different chemical structures. The CTE of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) is as large as 300 ppm K−1, while the CTE of polyimide (PI) is only 28 ppm K−1. Interestingly, the CTEs of some carbon nanomaterials such as graphene, single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs), and RGO are negative. A general approach for fabricating bimorph soft actuators is by combining two layers with different CTEs. Herein, we introduce some typical examples with an emphasis on different photothermal agents, design strategies, and fabrication methods.
Table 1 CTEs of representative materials for use in photothermal bimorph soft actuators




Materials
CTE [ppm K−1]
Ref.




Poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)
300–310

77



Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
127

114



Biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP)
137

58



Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)
>200

103



Polycarbonates (PC)
65

118



Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
40

42



Polyimides (PI)
28

49



Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)
60

123



Paper
10

58



Graphene
−1

102



Single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)
−1.5

104



Reduced graphene oxide (RGO)
−20

50






3.1.1 Photothermal agents as part of the photoactive layer. 
Light-driven bimorph soft actuators can be achieved by introducing photothermal agents into the active layer, and this method shows several advantages such as superior photothermal stability and high photothermal conversion efficiency. It should be noted that the homogeneous dispersion of responsive agents into the soft-matter matrix is not only a critical step to achieve good performance with regard to the light absorption efficiency and consistence of actuation, but also contributes to a change in the CTE and/or Young's modulus. For example, Jiang et al. incorporated 5 wt% graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) with PDMS to construct PDMS–GNPs/PDMS bimorph soft actuators,105 where the introduction of GNPs induce differences in the CTEs and Young's moduli of the pure PDMS passive layer and PDMS–GNPs active layer. Wang et al. found that the degree of shape change and response speed of PDMS–GNPs/PDMS bimorph soft actuators could also be modulated by changing the doping concentration of graphene nanomaterials,61 while Tang et al. developed bimorph soft actuators comprising a passive layer of pure PDMS and an active layer of PDMS composites with RGO and thermally expanding microspheres (TEMs) that had significantly enhanced the CTE of PDMS.77 Upon NIR-light irradiation, the RGO induced a rapid temperature increase from 20 to 110 °C in 30 s, and a subsequent large volume increase in the TEM (350% in diameter and 4000% in volume) within 15 s. As a result, the bimorph soft actuator (20 × 2 × 1.4 mm3) could bend toward the PDMS side into a semicircle (180°), which enabled further origami-like self-folding such as the shapes of cars, boxes, and pyramids. Leeladhar et al. developed light-fueled reversible GNP–PDMS/Au tubular bimorph soft actuators with large shape deformation and fast response by doping GNPs into the PDMS matrix,106 and the resulting three-dimensional tubular soft actuators could transform into a flat sheet within 8 s under NIR-light irradiation. Interestingly, Lim et al. developed a light-driven Venus flytrap based on polypropylene (PP)/PDMS bimorph soft actuators,107 where the active layer of PP was doped with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) possessing superior photothermal properties; further, the large CTE mismatch between PP and PDMS ensured an ultrasensitive and significant shape shifting upon external-light exposure. The photothermally driven reversible shape folding with large deflection up to 150° and displacement of >20 mm was achieved by appropriately controlling the thickness of each layer. Such PP–PEDOT/PDMS bimorph soft actuators with large actuation are expected to generate complex chaotic architectures with programmable capability, which can find promising applications in areas such as biomedical devices, microfluidic devices, aerospace, etc.
In general, light-driven uniform expansion is often observed in bimorph soft actuators with photothermal nanomaterials randomly dispersed in the active layer. This leads to a straightforward bending (no twisting) toward the passive side of the structure. Controlling the alignment of anisotropic nanoagents such as aligned CNTs can tune the anisotropicity of the active layer and achieve complex and programmable deformation of soft actuators.108 Inspired by anisotropic tissue alignments in pinecones and in Bauhinia variegata pods that contribute to seed opening and twisting movements, respectively, Deng et al. demonstrated light-driven bimorph soft actuators with programmable deformations by applying a coating of paraffin wax doped with aligned CNTs on a PI substrate. In this case, aligned CNTs functioning as cellulose fibrils were used as geometrical constraints within the structures that mimicked the anisotropic tissues of a plant (Fig. 2a and b).49 Importantly, varying the cutting angle on an actuator sheet along different CNT orientations could result in versatile deformations upon visible-light irradiation. The angle α is defined as the difference between the CNT orientation and the longitudinal direction of the strip. When α = 90°, an apheliotropic bending angle of ∼85° was observed upon light irradiation, while a phototropic bending angle of ∼60° when α = 0°. In contrast, light-driven reversible left- and right-handed helical transformations were observed when α = 45° and 135°, respectively. They further developed a bioinspired artificial robotic arm with remote controllability by combining the bending and helical deformations of bimorph soft actuators and obtained the claw opening and telescopic arm elongation upon light irradiation. Interestingly, upon turning off the light, the claw would grasp and catch an object, and the robotic arm would contract and lift the object (Fig. 2c). They also noted that light-driven dynamic actuations could be accomplished within milliseconds, and soft actuators exhibited excellent fatigue resistance even after 100000 working cycles.
 Fig. 2  Light-driven bimorph soft actuators with programmable shape deformations by applying a coat of paraffin wax doped with aligned CNTs on a PI substrate. (a) Phototropic and apheliotropic bending of bimorph soft actuators along different CNT alignment directions. (b) Schematic of the mechanism of apheliotropic bending and phototropic bending. (c) Photographs of a light-driven mechanical arm based on bimorph soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Inspired by aligned cellulose fibril structures in natural plants (Fig. 3a), Deng et al. fabricated aligned laser-induced graphene (LIG) patterns by a one-step direct laser writing (DLW) method and demonstrated a light-driven PVDF/LIG/PI soft actuator by sandwiching LIG between an active PVDF polymer and a passive PI polymer (Fig. 3b).109 The active PVDF layer exhibited strong solvent-swelling ability and large CTE. The aligned LIG can not only serve as a geometrically constraining structure to inhibit the expansion of the PVDF in the alignment direction, but also function as efficient photothermal agents that stimulated the expansion of PVDF upon light irradiation. The bending curvature of the resulting soft actuators varied upon different irradiation intensities (Fig. 3c), and different shape configurations could be achieved based on the geometrically constraining effect from the aligned LIG structures. For instance, by changing the LIG alignment angle from 90° to 45°, the flower-shaped soft actuator was found to exhibit different shape transformations from bending to helical curling under reversible light actuation (Fig. 3d and e). Interestingly, the authors demonstrated a miniature five-legged robot, which could move away from the light source under different frictions experienced by legs dictated by the local light intensity (Fig. 3f). These strategies can provide new insights into the development of bioinspired soft actuators or machines with complex and reconfigurable motion toward novel multifunctional devices.
 Fig. 3  Bioinspired light-driven PVDF/LIG/PI soft actuators with laser-tailored graphene structures. (a) Mechanism of reversible opening and closing states of a pinecone. (b) Schematic of the alignment of LIG using the DLW method and light-driven dynamic function of soft actuators. (c) Photographs of PVDF/LIG/PI soft actuators under light exposure with different distances. (d and e) Photographs of a flower-shaped soft actuator with different LIG alignment angles. (f) A light-driven five-legged crawling soft robot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright© 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.2 Photothermal agents directly used as the photoactive layer. 
Many material layers made from photothermal agents have been found to exhibit outstanding photon-to-heat conversion efficiency and reasonably low CTEs; some of them possess negative CTEs, such as CNTs,110 graphene,111 PPy,112 and nanocrystalline metals.113 Therefore, these nanoagents have been used to directly form the active layer of light-driven bimorph soft actuators.114–116 For instance, Tai et al. developed light-driven SWCNT/PVDF bimorph soft actuators, where the fast, powerful light-driven actuation performances were believed to result from the negative CTE and high coefficient of hygroscopic expansion (CHE) of the SWCNT layer as well as high CTE and low CHE of the PVDF layer.114 Yang et al. demonstrated an autonomous CNT/PDMS bimorph soft actuator with a curled droplet shape, and continuous wavelike self-oscillation was observed upon continuous light excitation.115 Such unique cyclic wavelike oscillating motion was enabled through a photon-to-mechanical negative feedback loop dominated by light-fueled actuation, photothermal response delay, and superior mechanical elasticity of the soft actuators. It should be noted that the cyclic oscillating motion with different frequencies and amplitudes could be facilely achieved by modulating the exposure intensity and incident direction of external light. Interestingly, a self-locomotive artificial snake with a phototaxis was also demonstrated, which could continuously crawl upon a spatial and temporal constant light source. Such unique self-sustained motion could open up applications in future autonomous soft robotics.
Hu et al. developed a light-driven smart robot based on CNTs/PDMS bimorph soft actuators, where CNTs were simultaneously used as a photothermal agent and a passive layer.117 The remarkable performances of the bilayers could be attributed to the fact that they show fast response (<5 s) and ultralarge deformation (angle change >200°; curvature >2 cm−1) because of the large mismatch in the CTEs between CNTs and PDMS, high optical absorption of CNTs, and stable and durable CNT–polymer interface. The bimorph soft actuator could jump through elastic snapping, thereby mimicking a gymnast's somersault. Zhang et al. reported a robust SWCNT/polycarbonate (PC) bimorph soft actuators with large deflection, fast response speed, and extreme light sensitivity.118,119 The bimorph structures were fabricated by the vacuum filtration of a SWCNT solution on a 10 mm-thick PC membrane with a pore size of 0.4 mm (Fig. 4a). Noteworthily, the responsive wavelength range of the resulting bimorph soft actuators could be facilely tuned by changing the chirality distribution of the SWCNTs. Upon constant light irradiation, the PC/SWCNT bimorph soft actuators exhibited a self-sustained oscillation at a frequency of ∼5 Hz under the self-shadowing effect. Interestingly, the concept of “smart” curtains was demonstrated by using this material, which exhibited open or close reaction under sunlight exposure (Fig. 4b and c). A microscale motor was also developed, in which the inclined light irradiation induced a drop in the curvature on the illumination side, inducing a torque to drive the structure away from the light source at a speed of ∼6 cm s−1 (Fig. 4d and e). Recently, Wang et al. developed light-driven bimorph soft actuators exhibiting swift morphing behaviors by transferring a stacked graphene assembly (SGA) onto a polyethylene (PE) film.120 When the temperature was increased, the SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator was able to curl with the SGA layer wrapped inside, and it would flatten when the temperature was reduced to the initial value (Fig. 5a). When pretreated with a heating and a subsequent cooling process in a constrained space, the SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator spontaneously coiled into a roll with the PE layer wrapped inside once the constraint was removed. Interestingly, programmable SGA/PE bimorph soft actuators with a variety of shape-morphing configurations could be developed by taking advantage of the asymmetric elastoplastic behavior of SGA, which enabled the realization of SGA/PE bimorph soft actuators that could perform distinct functions such as sit-up robots, artificial iris, and artificial water lily (Fig. 5b and c). Importantly, different light-driven untethered locomotion of SGA/PE bimorph soft actuators could be achieved under controlled infrared (IR)-light illumination. For example, the SGA/PE bimorph roll was found to exhibit a rolling motion upon lateral IR-light illumination on the left side (Fig. 5d), where the direction of IR illumination was believed to play a critical role in making the roll to move. In contrast, the SGA/PE bimorph roll exhibited an uncoiling motion upon vertical IR illumination. These results were expected to open a new door for the development of complex and reconfigurable structures using a scalable process toward emerging application in areas of soft robotics, biomimetic devices, and many other systems in satellites and spacecraft.
 Fig. 4  Light-driven PC/SWCNTs bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic for fabricating PC/SWCNTs bilayer structure and light-driven actuation. (b and c) Smart curtains based on bimorph soft actuators. (d) Schematic of the working mechanism of PC/SWCNTs bimorph macroscale motors. (e) Optical image of a light-driven forward-moving motor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright© 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 5  Light-driven SGA/PE bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic illustration of fabricating SGA/PE bimorph films and thermal-induced shape morphing. (b) Programmed different configurations obtained by customizing SGA or PE, and the corresponding stress distribution. (c) Light-driven shape morphing of programmed bimorph soft actuators. (d) Lateral IR-light-driven rolling locomotion of an SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator. (d) Vertical IR-light-driven unfolding of SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright© 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
Efforts have also been devoted toward developing light-driven bimorph soft actuators with enhanced performance and functionality by combining different photothermal agents into a single layer. Hu et al. reported RGO–CNT/PDMS bimorph soft actuators with RGO and CNTs as the passive layer.121 It was found that a pure RGO–CNT monolayer could quickly reach the maximum temperature of 100 °C upon external-light irradiation (250 mW cm−2), resulting in an angular change in the soft actuator from 84° to 563° in 3.6 s. Interestingly, a light-fueled crawler-type robot was fabricated with RGO–CNT/PDMS and could perform fast and sophisticated functionalities, mimicking the tank track motion, under external sunlight exposure. Beyond carbon-based nanomaterials, some plasmonic nanoparticles such as AuNRs exhibit high photothermal efficiency, and their LSPR could be facilely controlled across a broad spectral range.122 Han et al. reported a laser-printed holistic artificial muscle (HAM) made from a AuNRs@GO nanocomposite layer and a thermally expansive PMMA polymer layer.123 To fabricate this light-driven artificial muscle, first, the PMMA and AuNRs@GO nanocomposite was sequentially coated onto a LightScribe-enabled DVD, and laser scribing was utilized to write thermal conductive nodes on the AuNRs@GO layer in the light of computer-designed patterns (Fig. 6a). Fig. 6b shows the laser scribing a Taiji diagram that consists of AuNRs@GO and AuNRs@RGO on a PMMA film, where the pattern was clearly visible in the photothermal images due to the different temperature changes upon light irradiation. Fig. 6c shows the COMSOL simulation and internal stress distribution of a bimorph soft actuator consisting of a PMMA layer and a composite layer of AuNRs@GO, where GO has been reduced to RGO in the middle of the composite layer and different thermal strains in the two layers upon changing temperature: the composite layer sustains a tensile force, while the PMMA layer bears a compressive force. The light-driven bimorph soft actuators with different functionalities were then peeled off the DVD followed by boundary cutting, and they were used as an HAM. For example, a set of hand skeletons were fabricated by integrating a prepatterned HAM into PDMS (Fig. 6d), and light-driven dynamic hand manipulation was achieved by locally actuating the structures. Interestingly, light-driven Venus flytrap and spider-like soft robots were also demonstrated. The artificial Venus flytrap could capture and release an object by switching a laser beam on and off (Fig. 6e), while the 2D-patterned artificial spider could deform into 3D shapes and walk through a plane by remote manipulation using laser beams (Fig. 6f). The nanofabrication strategy presented herein was expected to bridge the gap between the ideal requirement and realistic limitations of bioinspired soft actuators, which could find important applications in diverse fields from soft robotics to human–machine interface technologies.
 Fig. 6  Laser-printed holistic artificial muscle based on PMMA and AuNRs@GO bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (b) IR images of AuNRs@GO and AuNRs@RGO bimorph films under different levels of irradiation from a filament lamp. (c) COMSOL simulation and internal stress distribution of a bimorph soft actuator consisting of a PMMA layer and a composite layer of AuNRs@GO. Light-driven (d) artificial hand, (e) artificial Venus flytrap, and (f) artificial spider. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright© 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

3.2 Soft actuators based on photothermal contraction
The CTE value of a material can be positive or negative. Thermal expansion is observed in materials with a positive CTE, while thermal contraction or shrinkage occurs in materials with a negative CTE. It has been reported that many functional materials can undergo contraction across the entire volume or along a certain direction within the structure, as exemplified by graphene,111 poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAm),124,125 and LCE.126 Many efforts have been devoted toward fabricating light-driven bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal contraction, adopting mechanisms such as light-induced desorption and phase transitions (e.g., MIT, hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition, and N–I transition). In this section, we introduce the recent advances achieved in bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal contraction.

3.2.1 Contraction induced by photothermal desorption. 
Many advanced nanomaterials and functional polymers are known to have abundant hydrophilic groups that can significantly adsorb water molecules when exposed to moisture. Upon temperature elevation or photothermal irradiation, these materials raise their temperature and exhibit a volume shrinkage because of the reversible adsorption and desorption of water under the environment with high humidity. For example, graphene oxide (GO) with abundant oxygen-containing groups was found to be highly sensitive to environmental humidity since it provides numerous hydrophilic sites for reversible water adsorption/desorption.127,128 When the temperature is increased, the desorption of water occurs between the adjacent GO sheets, resulting in vertical collapse and transverse contraction.128–131 Yang et al. developed GO–PDA–AuNPs/PDMS bimorph soft actuators that integrated the photothermal expansion of the PDMS layer and photothermal water desorption (shrinkage) of the GO–PDA–AuNPs layer.62 Zhang et al. designed and fabricated bimorph soft actuators that exhibited bidirectional shape-bending actuations upon exposure to light or humidity (Fig. 7).130 The bimorph structure comprised a GO layer and a composite layer of nanosized graphite (Nano-G) and PVDF, as shown in Fig. 7a. GO was selected as an active layer responsive to moisture and Nano-G@PVDF used as the passive layer (Fig. 7b). In addition, Nano-G@PVDF layer with a relatively large CTE was active under light irradiation, where the GO layer was passive due to its low CTE. Taking advantage of the complemental moisture and photothermal actuations, the authors developed a bidirectional walking robot that could move along orthogonal directions by using light and humidity for actuations (Fig. 7c). A square-shaped cellulose paper was used as the main body of this walking robot with eight legs that were made of Nano-G@PVDF/GO bimorph soft actuators. The four pairs of legs were divided into two groups, that is, one with GO as the upper layer and the other with Nano-G@PVDF as the upper layer. Upon exposing the robot to high moisture of ∼100%, the walking legs were found to bend toward the Nano-G@PVDF side. As a result, the legs with Nano-G@PVDF as the upper layer bent upward, and the legs with GO as the upper layer bent downward. Upon changing the environmental humidity, the walking robot moved toward the X-axis direction with the legs bent downward and recovered alternately (Fig. 7d). Interestingly, in an environment of constant humidity, external-light irradiation could drive the upward bending of the legs with GO as the upper layer and the downward bending of legs with Nano-G@PVDF as the upper layer. The robot could move along the Y-axis direction by appropriately switching the light source on and off (Fig. 7e). Moreover, Dong et al. developed a programmable GO–PPy bimorph soft actuator that exhibited superior actuating performance in response to light, humidity, and temperature owing to the different water adsorption or desorption capability between GO and PPy.129–131 Inspired by tendril climber plants, light-driven smart grippers with helical structures were demonstrated to capture and release the target objects. A soft walking robot based on the GO–PPy bimorph soft actuator could mimic the forward movement of an inchworm moving under intervals of light irradiation. These unprecedented strategies can provide a robust and versatile method for developing advanced and programmable soft robotics with truly bioinspired intelligence.
 Fig. 7  Bimorph soft actuators with bidirectional bending actuations. (a) Schematic fabrication process of Nano-G@PVDF/GO bimorph film. (b) Schematic of the actuation mechanism of Nano-G@PVDF/GO soft actuators. (c) Bidirectional walking robot that can move along different directions in response to environmental humidity and external light irradiation. (d) Soft robot walking along the X-axis direction upon changing the environmental humidity. (e) Soft robot walking along the Y-axis direction upon switching the light irradiation on and off. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright© 2020, Elsevier. 
Gao et al. demonstrated the design and fabrication of a photothermally actuated complex origami based on GO/ethylene cellulose (EC) bimorph soft actuators,132 by patterning GO onto an EC substrate in a heterogeneous manner (Fig. 8a). The CTE value of GO was highly related to the reversible removal and intercalation of water between the adjacent atomic layers, and a negative CTE is often observed in a humid environment. When combined with an EC layer with a highly positive CTE, the large CTE mismatch endowed GO/EC soft actuators with intensive deformation and fast actuation. It should be noted that GO can not only act as a photothermal agent, but also enable programmable shape deformation of the soft actuators via appropriate alignment. For this, the authors demonstrated different shape programming to obtain 3D architectures such as triangular rings encoded with a positive or negative curvature and annulus rings with central or axial symmetry as well as mechanical metamaterials encoded with a positive or negative Poisson's ratio (Fig. 8b–e). Importantly, these complex 3D origamis can be reversibly switched between their 3D and 2D states by controlling the external light. Interestingly, the light-driven dynamic bloom of a bioinspired origami flower was also demonstrated, where the artificial flower could mimic a series of intermediate blossom and fully flattened states by the application of NIR light at different intensities (Fig. 8f and g). Moreover, humidity- and light-driven bimorph soft actuators that combined different carbon nanomaterials such GO–CNT and GO–RGO were reported to enable unprecedented actuating performances such as ultrafast response, high reversibility ultralarge deformation, and on-demand control over the deformation direction.133–140 These strategies are expected to offer newer insights into the development of light-driven bimorph soft actuators with tunable functionalities for various promising applications such as soft robotics, mechanical metamaterials, and other bioinspired artificial and intelligent nanosystems.
 Fig. 8  Light-driven complex origamis based on GO/EC bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process. (b) Triangular ring encoded with positive and negative curvatures. (c) Annulus ring encoded with central symmetry. (d and e) Mechanical metamaterials encoded with positive and negative Poisson's ratios, respectively. (f) Natural buds and flowers of gold climber (Tristellateia australasiae A. Rich.). (g) Light-driven dynamic bloom of bioinspired artificial origami flower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright© 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Taking advantage of the extraordinary water adsorption/desorption capacity of cellulose-based materials, Weng et al. fabricated humidity- and light-driven graphite-paper bimorph soft actuators via the deposition of graphite on a paper, which is the so-called pencil-on-paper approach.58 Cai et al. reported leaf-inspired asymmetric bimorph soft actuators with 2D MXene–cellulose composites coated onto a PC membrane (Fig. 9), mimicking not only the sophisticated nanoarchitecture of natural leaves toward swelling and shrinking upon water adsorption and desorption, but also exhibited solar-harvesting and energy conversion functionalities.84 MXene–cellulose nanocomposite ink was prepared and then filtered onto a porous PC membrane for fabricating asymmetric soft actuators. Biocompatible cellulose nanofibers were used to enable material robustness and rapid actuation, while the PC membrane facilitated water insertion/extraction into/from the MXene–cellulose nanocomposites. It was found that MXene and nanocellulose could be readily associated and dissociated with small humidity fluctuations owing to the abundant existence of hydrophilic functional groups on their surface. Due to the excellent photothermal properties of 2D MXene, the resultant bimorph soft actuators were found to exhibit autonomous and reversible shape-bending deformation upon changing the environmental humidity and external-light irradiation (Fig. 9a–d). The actuation process of the resulting MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators were simulated via a finite element model, where the actuation mainly resulted from the mismatch in the volume changes between the two layers and the bending angle was closely related to the contractile and expansive force generated under NIR-light irradiation (Fig. 9e). The authors also demonstrated programmable soft actuators with 2D MXene–cellulose coating as the active hinges, and a variety of sophisticated light-driven actuating structures could be obtained, such as U-shape curvature and self-folding box (Fig. 9f and g). For example, the active hinges of the self-folding box could autonomously fold upon NIR-light irradiation; the resulting box unfolded into its original state after the light was turned off. These bioinspired adaptive soft actuators integrated with advanced sensing systems134 are expected to find promising applications in areas of soft robotics, information encryption, smart camouflage, human–machine interface, and many emerging intelligent wearable technologies.
 Fig. 9  Leaf-inspired MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators. (a and b) A natural leaf and its sophisticated nanoarchitecture, respectively. (c and d) Schematic of the structure and the actuating mechanism of MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators, respectively. (e) The simulated actuation of MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators via a finite element model. Light-driven shape-programmable bimorph soft actuators: (f) U-shaped curvature and (g) self-folding box. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright© 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Besides cellulose-based functional nanomaterials,58,135,136 many material systems with abundant oxygen-containing groups have been used for the fabrication of light-driven soft actuators. Li et al. developed light-driven bimorph soft actuators comprising carbon black photothermal agents, waterborne acrylic adhesive swelling/shrinking layer, and a passive layer made of a polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film.42 Ji et al. reported light-driven robust bimorph soft actuators based on PDA-modified reduced graphene oxide (PDA–RGO), which was prepared by spin-coating UV-cured Norland Optical Adhesive (NOA) 63 onto a PDA–RGO layer.85 Upon NIR-light irradiation, the hydrophilic PDA–RGO layer could swell/shrink by the absorption/desorption of water, resulting in the efficient bending/unbending motion of the structure owing to the rational combination of strong adhesion, superior hydrophilicity, thermal conductivity, and photothermal conversion of PDA and RGO sheets. Tu et al. demonstrated TiO2-patterned agarose@CNTs/agarose bimorph soft actuators, where CNTs acted as the photothermal agents and the hydrophilic groups of agarose enabled an extraordinary swelling/shrinking capacity.137 The TiO2 pattern with a high refractive index could not only help shape programming such as left-hand and right-hand twisting, but also partly reflect light irradiation eligible for spatially selective photothermal actuations. Zhang et al. utilized a CaCl2 aqueous solution to pattern the surface of sodium alginate/PVDF bimorph soft actuators, thereby obtaining humidity- and sunlight-driven programmable shape deformations.138 Undoubtedly, these strategies that take advantage of unique functional materials have greatly promoted the performance of light-driven bimorph soft actuators with versatile and complex motion; more innovative measures can be taken into account for different application fields for improving the mechanical strength with inorganic materials, such as metals, semiconductors, and other novel nanocomposites.


3.2.2 Contraction induced by photothermal phase transition. 
Many functional materials are known to exhibit different phase transitions (such as MIT, hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition, and N–I transition) at a certain temperature, which could lead to discontinuous volume changes in the materials and subsequent contractions in the structure. MIT can often be observed in vanadium dioxide (VO2), a well-known thermochromic material. For example, the lattice structure of VO2 can transform from the monoclinic (insulating, I) to the rutile (metallic, M) phase when the temperature is above 68 °C (Fig. 10a). Such a unique transition can result in a contraction of ε ∼ 1% along the c-axis of the rutile phase.140–142 It should be noted that the volumetric work density of VO2 is up to 7–28 J cm−3 with a high elastic modulus of ∼140 GPa, which is 3 orders of magnitude higher than that of human muscles (∼0.008 J cm−3).142 Importantly, VO2 was found to exhibit superior energy efficiency (7.7%) and an intrinsically fast transition process.143,144 Liu et al. reported Cr/VO2 bimorph soft microactuators formed via the photolithography technique,142 which exhibited a large change in the curvature upon the MIT of VO2 (68 °C). Many efforts had been devoted toward reducing the MIT temperature and improving the efficiency of VO2-based soft actuators by VO2 doping or deposition of prestressed VO2 films on some specific substrates.145–147 Wang et al. integrated the high photothermal absorption of SWCNTs on the surface of VO2 (Fig. 10b),147 and they found that the SWCNTs/VO2-based soft actuator could be efficiently powered with approximately half the power required for bare VO2-based soft actuators (6.0 × 104 mW cm−2). Ma et al. lowered the MIT temperature of VO2 to approximately 34 °C by doping 1.5 wt% W onto the VO2 film.148 Upon integrating with SWCNTs, the actuation power of this W–VO2/SWCNTs soft actuator was significantly decreased to 250–800 mW cm−2 with a response time of ∼28.5 ms. Recently, Chen et al. developed anisotropic super-aligned VO2 nanowire array (NA)/CNT bimorph soft actuators (Fig. 10c and d).149 Interestingly, a strain of ∼0.614%, which was close to that of the single-crystalline ones, was achieved along the longitudinal direction, and the resulting VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators possessed many other superior actuation performances such as fast response of ∼15 Hz, a giant displacement/length ratio of 0.83, high work density of 2.64 J cm−3, and long lifetime of more than 1000000 actuation cycles. Taking advantage of the cutting-direction-dependent bending morphologies in a VO2 NA/CNT sheet, light-powered insect-scale soft robots were demonstrated to exhibit multiple functions such as biomimetic lifter and gripper, soft crawlers, and wings of flying robots (Fig. 10e and f). These strategies could pave the way toward versatile light-driven soft robotics at the insect scale and with extensive mechanical capacities.
 Fig. 10  VO2-based bimorph soft actuators. (a) Resistance change of VO2 as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of SWCNTs/VO2-based soft microactuator and COMSOL simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators at different temperatures: (c) 25 °C and (d) 70 °C. (e) Schematic of fabricating VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators by a laser beam with an adjusted cutting angle (θ). (f) Helical twisting of VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators at θ = 45° under strong light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
PNIPAm is known to exhibit hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition, where the polymer segments of PNIPAm could be hydrated, swollen, or opened below a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) of ∼32 °C, whereas they would become more compact, shrunken, or collapsed above the LCST.150 It should be noted that PNIPAm can shrink with a volume variation of about 90% from a hydrophilic state to a hydrophobic state,151 which has been considered as one of promising materials candidates for fabricating light-driven soft robots. Kim et al. reported a light-driven bimorph hydrogel actuator using PNIPAm–rGO as the active layer and polyacrylamide (PAAm) as the passive one.152 Owing to the superior compatibility and water dispersibility of GO inside hydrogels,153 the authors were able to chemically reduce the GO sheets in situ in the hydrogel network, thereby avoiding rGO aggregation. As shown in Fig. 11a, there was a complete difference in the linear swelling ratio between PAAm and PNIPAm–rGO composite. The as-prepared PNIPAm–rGO/PAAm bimorph soft actuators could undergo volume contraction upon external-light irradiation owing to the enhanced photothermal efficiency of rGO. Interestingly, the light-driven bidirectional motion of turning inside out could be achieved by tuning the swelling ratio of each layer in the initial state (Fig. 11b), and the actuation behavior could be independently manipulated by local light irradiation (Fig. 11c). Using a similar strategy, Shi et al. developed a light-driven PNIPAm–AuNPs/PAAm bimorph hydrogel actuator by introducing AuNPs into the PNIPAm hydrogel.154 The resulting bimorph soft actuators were found to show reversible motion and hand-like finger flexion upon local irradiation. Chen et al. reported a light-driven PNIPAm–GO/GO bimorph hydrogel actuator with GO acting as both a passive layer and a photothermal agent.155 It was reported that hydrogel actuators could self-fold into desirable shapes in response to external stimuli through programmed origami.156,157 Zhu et al. demonstrated light-driven shape-programmable hydrogel actuators with zero Poisson's ratio by precisely controlling the spatial arrangements of AuNPs grafted with PNIPAm in between the nonresponsive polymer stacks.158 It should be noted that the wavelength-selective light-driven programmable deformation of PNIPAm-based soft actuators could be facilely obtained by controlling the thicknesses of nonresponsive and responsive layers as well as introducing plasmonic nanoparticles (such as AuNPs and nanoshells) with different shapes and sizes (Fig. 11d and e). These programmable soft actuators could promote the development of next generation “smart” soft robots, artificial muscles, and beyond.
 Fig. 11  Hydrogel-based bimorph soft actuators. (a) Linear swelling ratio, λf, of PNIPAm–rGO and PAAm as a function of light irradiation time. (b) Light-driven bidirectional bending of bimorph hydrogel actuators. (c) Selective light control of bimorph hydrogel actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright© 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) Wavelength-selective light-driven deformation of PNIPAm-based soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) ELP/rGO bimorph hydrogel actuators for light-driven soft crawler and “joint” bending of fingers on an artificial hand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Besides PNIPAm, many other hydrogels such as elastin-like polypeptides (ELPs) also exhibited hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition upon changing temperatures; they became soluble below a transition temperature and above this temperature, their phases were separate. Wang et al. demonstrated light-driven ELP/rGO bimorph hydrogel actuators by crosslinking ELP-functionalized rGO into an ELP-based soft network,159 where diverse mechanical motion could be obtained by controlling the shape and surface patterns in addition to modulating the positioning, timing, and path of external-light irradiation. For example, the authors developed a hand-shaped soft actuator, and they could actuate the “joints” of the fingers in any position and arbitrary order along each finger (Fig. 11f). Although great advances have been achieved in the development of light-driven hydrogel-based soft actuators, some critical issues or drawbacks need to be further addressed. The first one is the slow response speed compared with other soft actuators. For this, three useful methods can be implemented: (i) changing the molecular structure of the hydrogel segment, for example, the comb-type grafted hydrogels could respond to environmental temperature at a faster speed;160,161 (ii) adjusting the LCST to a lower level;162 (iii) improving the photothermal conversion efficiency of the photothermal agents163 or using a higher laser power. The second one affords low mechanical strength, which is one of the huge barriers toward the development of hydrogel-based soft actuators and their applications in complex surroundings. To resolve this problem, diverse methods have been proposed, such as nanocomposite gels,164 reinforcing by nanofibrillated cellulose,165 or cellulose nanocrystals.166 It should be noted that although these reported methods could increase the mechanical strength and the deswelling rate of hydrogels, some adverse effects could occur, such as decreased strain, slow swelling rate, and small deformation degree.
N–I phase transition is often observed in thermotropic liquid crystal polymers (LCPs) such as LCEs and liquid crystal networks (LCNs).167–170 Upon increasing the temperature, the aligned liquid crystal mesogenic units become amorphously oriented, which can induce dramatic and reversible contraction (30–400%) along the direction of alignment.171,172 Light-driven soft actuators could be facilely achieved by introducing photothermal molecules or nanomaterials into thermotropic LCPs. By introducing CNTs into an LCE, CNT–LCE composite films were reported to display a reversible and significant contraction in response to light irradiation.173–175 For example, Marshall et al. proposed that LCE–CNT artificial muscles with the desired molecular alignment and optimized CNT loading amount could induce stress of several kilopascals, stroke of 10%, and responsive action within a few seconds.174 Taking advantage of silicone as a passive layer, Moua et al. fabricated an IR-light-driven hinge composed of SWCNTs–LCE composite/silicone bimorph soft actuators (Fig. 12a).167 Upon IR-light irradiation, the significant in-plane negative strain of SWCNTs–LCE layer was constrained by the silicone elastomer layer, resulting in bending toward the LCE side (Fig. 12b). As walking devices, the IR-light-driven inchworm-inspired robot was able to crawl up a ratcheted hill at a 50° incline with a walking velocity of 0.1 mm s−1 when IR-light irradiation was alternately turned on and off (Fig. 12c–e). Interestingly, the directional movement of the as-prepared walking robot on a ratcheted substrate could be realized by the scanning movement of IR light from its front to the center. Inspired by the unique feature of cuttlefish skins, Chen et al. developed a light-driven smart bimorph soft actuator that could simultaneously modulate the surface color and shape morphology under IR-light irradiation.176 To fabricate this bimorph soft actuator with a unique structure color, the crosslinked polystyrene nanoparticles were assembled on the PDMS surface to form an elastomeric photonic crystal layer. Upon IR-light irradiation, the bimorph soft actuators were able to exhibit reversible deformation within the irradiated region, leading to synergistic coupling between the shape change in the laminated layer and color variation in the photonic crystal layer in the same region.
 Fig. 12  Light-driven SWCNTs–LCE/silicone bimorph soft actuator. (a) Schematic of the deformation of SWCNTs–LCE/silicone bimorph soft actuator upon IR-light irradiation. (b) Photograph showing the deformation of a bimorph soft actuator when the IR light is turned on and off. (c and e) Photographs showing light-driven LCEs-based soft crawler on (d) a ratcheted substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright© 2013, Wiley-VCH. 
Besides CNTs, many other photothermal nanoagents with strong light absorption and high photothermal conversion efficiency, such as graphenes177–179 and metal nanoparticles,180,181 have been used as nanofillers in LCE-based soft actuators. For example, taking advantage of the superior photothermal effect of AuNRs, Yang et al. developed AuNR–LCE soft actuators that could dramatically shrink upon 808 nm NIR-light illumination,180 which could lift up a piece of capillary glass pipette with a weight load (∼3.0 mg) under NIR stimulus. However, there is an unambiguous issue involved—compatibility between the LCE matrix and the photothermal agent. Because of this, the doping concentration of the photothermal agent is limited, which restricts the photothermal effect and weakens the photoactuation speeds of the LCN actuators. A possible solution is to modify the surface of the inorganic nanofillers with appropriate (polymer) ligands before doping into the material system.182 On the other hand, the incorporation of nanofillers can dramatically change the mechanical properties of LCEs and also affect its actuation behavior.173 Therefore, many efforts have been devoted toward fabricating LCE-based bimorph soft actuators by integrating the photothermal nanoagents on the surface of LCEs.183,184 For example, Dong et al. constructed soft actuators by simply packing a thin RGO top layer and a LCN bottom layer together with an inactive and adhesive polymer middle layer.184 Upon irradiating the RGO side with a moving NIR light, a travelling wave was generated along the as-prepared soft actuator, which transformed the soft actuator into an effective caterpillar walker with unprecedented light-driven locomotion capability. Recently, Lan et al. reported an NIR-photodriven polymeric oscillator by selectively coating a PDA polymer layer onto a splay-aligned LCN film.185 It was found that PDA-coated LCN soft actuators could even exhibit fast and steady oscillation under focused sunlight, and a solar power generator was developed to convert solar energy into mechanical work and electricity. The strategy of using solar light to drive polymeric oscillators is expected to provide new alternatives to the design and manufacturing of advanced functional soft robotics and solar power generation devices. Interestingly, Zuo et al.186 reported a wavelength-selective light-driven bimorph soft actuator by light irradiation at three different wavelengths (520, 808, and 980 nm). The LCE-based bimorph soft actuator was prepared via a crossed angle of 45° between the alignments of two LCE layers. The resulting bimorph soft actuator could perform right-handed helical twisting upon NIR-light irradiation at 808 nm while executing a shape-bending deformation under NIR-light irradiation at 980 nm. Overall, the fundamental mechanism behind these light-driven LCE-based soft actuators is the N–I transition of LCEs, and the incorporation with a highly effective photothermal agent in LCEs could open new opportunities for the development of bioinspired soft robotics toward their applications in diverse fields.182
In summary, we have introduced the recent developments in photothermal bimorph soft actuators in this section. Photothermal actuations result from light-induced dynamic stress gradient and the subsequent shape change in bimorph soft actuators, where external-light energy is converted into in situ heat via the nonradiative thermal relaxation processes of organic dyes or functional nanoparticles. Photothermal expansion and photothermal contraction are two dominating mechanisms for light-driven bimorph soft actuators. Some typical materials for the actuation realization are summarized in Table 2. Bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal expansion are generally developed by combining two layers with different CTEs, where photothermal agents can function either as a part of the photoactive layer or directly as the photoactive layer. Bimorph soft actuators based on photothermal expansion often involve materials with negative CTEs such as hydrogels, graphene derivatives, and LCPs. The mechanism of photothermal contraction mainly includes the photothermal desorption of water molecules and photothermally induced different phase transitions such as MIT, hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition, and N–I transition. Although visible-light-driven systems have been demonstrated, photothermal bimorph soft actuators are mostly powered by NIR light due to the higher photothermal conversion efficiency, which could open a new door for developing sunlight-driven bimorph soft actuators since more than 50% solar radiation arrives at the earth in the form of NIR radiations. Further, it should be noted that the actuating performances of bimorph soft actuators are closely related to their overall thickness and the choice of photothermal agents and soft materials with large CTE differences. Photothermal actuating strategies are expected to play increasingly important roles in the development of light-fueled soft robotics with rapid actuation.
Table 2 Mechanism, materials, structures, and actuating performances of the representative photothermal bimorph soft actuators




Mechanism
Materials
Thickness d [μm]
Light intensity P [mW cm−2]
Time t [s]
ΔT [°C]
Curvature κ [cm−1]
Ref.




Photothermal volume expansion
PI/paraffin wax/CNT
33
100 (Vis)
0.87
20
0.74

49



PDMS/PDMS–GNPs
130
2950 (NIR)
5
60
0.4

105



PDMS/RGO–CNTs
120
250 (Vis)
3.6
80
0.35

121



PC/CNTs
11
100 (Vis)
0.87
25
0.63

118



PMMA/AuNRs–RGO
25
50 (NIR)
0.5
35
2.0

123







Photothermal volume contraction
Photothermal desorption
BOPP/graphite/paper
67
300 (NIR)
10
41.4
1.9

58



PC/MXene–cellulose
20
80 (NIR)
6.6
54.5
0.84

84



PDA–rGO/NOA-63
10
22 (NIR)
2
—
0.96

85



GO/EC
40
140 (NIR)
10.3
25
2.0

132



Metal–insulator transition
VO2/SWCNTs
0.92
38000 (Vis)
0.008
68
2.2

139



W–VO2/CNTs
1.68
800 (Vis)
0.029
34
4.4

148



Hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition
PNIPAm–AuNPs/PAAm
235
150 (Vis)
24
—
4.28

154



g-PNIPAm–MNP/PAAm
50
41.8 (Vis)
60
—
75

160



GO/GO–PNIPAm
—
200 W (NIR)
90
25
2.2

155



Nematic–isotropic transition
LCE–SWCNTs/silicone
400
1160 (NIR)
10
68
2.8

167



LCE–dyes/LCE
500
180 (NIR)
32
47
3.2

186



LCE/SWCNTs
275
4500 (NIR)
15
55
2.8

176






4. Photochemical bimorph soft actuators
Photochemical soft actuation that couples remote light and chemical molecular reactions toward mechanical motion is another smart actuation principle. It should be noted that the sun-tracking leaf of the Cornish mallow plant is a typical example of such an emerging mechanism in nature, where a combination of chemical light receptors and signal-transmitting compounds in plants was believed to tune the leaf movement to face the moving sun throughout the day.187,188 Many different photochromic materials such as spiropyran, diarylethenes, and azobenzene derivatives that exhibit reversible photochemical reactions upon light irradiation have been utilized to develop light-driven soft actuators.189–192 LCPs with ordered nanostructures are known to exhibit unprecedented advantages and promising potential in the development of light-fueled soft robotics owing to their fascinating features such as entropic elasticity of polymeric elastomers and photodeformable ability upon the introduction of photochemical molecules.17 Herein, we mainly focus on the recent advances in the development of photochemical bimorph soft actuators that can be achieved by introducing azobenzene into LCPs, where light-driven dynamic geometrical changes in the azobenzene molecules can be autonomously amplified into macroscopic and reversible shape deformation in the polymer structure. Moreover, we introduce the development of bimorph liquid crystalline actuators combined with both photochemical and photothermal actuation.
4.1 Azobenzene-based bimorph liquid crystalline actuators
Light-driven reversible shape deformation of azobenzene-based liquid crystalline actuators is usually induced by a configuration change in azobenzene and variations in the orientation of the surrounding liquid crystalline molecules, which can be subsequently amplified into macroscopic deformation of the soft actuators. It is well known that two reversible isomeric states are often observed in azobenzenes upon light irradiation at an appropriate wavelength: a rod-like trans isomer that can stabilize the liquid crystalline structure and a bent-shaped cis isomer that tends to destabilize the liquid crystalline phase. It should be noted that the photothermal effect was also observed in azobenzene derivatives,34 and azobenzene also exhibited some special photochemical properties such as photoreorientation upon polarized-light irradiation.193–195 Taking advantage of the photoinduced phase transition in azobenzene-doped LCs, the introduction of azobenzene units into LCP-based films with different molecular alignments has been demonstrated to facilitate a variety of light-driven actuations such as bending, twisting, and buckling.196
Interestingly, light-driven bimorph soft actuators that combine a photoactive LCE layer with a passive layer were found to endow soft actuators with unprecedented features such as ultrasensitivity, programmability, superior compatibility, robust functionality, and easy controllability. For example, Ikeda et al. pioneered a novel sophisticated light-driven plastic motor based on azobenzene-doped bimorph liquid crystalline actuators.197 LCE films with azobenzene in the crosslinker were first fabricated by photopolymerizing the LC mixture in a glass cell coated with rubbed PI alignment layers, and bimorph soft actuators were subsequently developed by laminating the photoactive LCE layer with a flexible low-density polyethylene (LDPE) film. A plastic motor belt made of such a bilayer could be fabricated by connecting both the ends, and it was placed onto a homemade pulley system. Interestingly, the belt could rotate and drive the two pulleys in a counterclockwise direction under UV-light irradiation from one side and simultaneously visible-light irradiation from the other side. It is worth noting that the opposite rotation of this motor can be facilely realized by simply exchanging the irradiation positions of the UV and visible lights. The light-driven plastic motor could directly convert external-light energy into mechanical work without any gears, batteries, and electric wires, which paves a new way for the development of noncontact and battery-free advanced soft robotics. Moreover, Yu et al. reported light-driven cantilever soft actuators by coating azobenzene-based photoactive LCP on an LDPE substrate with microgroove structures acting as the alignment layers.198 A bimorph soft actuator with homogeneously aligned mesogens along the groove direction could be obtained after solvent evaporation and thermal annealing. An optical pendulum generator was developed for converting light energy into electricity by attaching copper coils onto one free end of the as-prepared actuator. Upon UV-light irradiation, a continuous and self-sustained oscillation could be achieved, which was used as an optical pendulum generator for producing an alternating voltage under a magnetic field and continuous external-light irradiation. It was found that the light-driven output electricity was proportional to the changing rate in the magnetic flux and was closely related to parameters such as light intensity and film thickness. The strategy disclosed herein could provide important insights into the development of light-fueled soft actuators toward solar-harvesting and energy storage applications.
Zhao et al. developed light-driven moving wheels and spring-like motors based on bimorph liquid crystalline actuators (Fig. 13).101 They designed and synthesized azobenzene-containing LCEs via the catalytic transesterification reaction, and the resulting highly stretched LCE film was laminated with a flexible 45 μm-thick biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP) film to fabricate the bimorph soft actuators. The bimorph actuator was cut into a rectangular stripe (85 mm × 8.5 mm) and then rolled into a wheel with a closed tubular shape. When the LCEs acted as the outer layer of the wheel, the nonuniform bending of the LCEs upon UV-light irradiation resulted in a decrease in the curvature of the bilayer on the light-facing side. As shown in Fig. 13a, the right side under UV-light irradiation tended to flatten, while the left side without exposure remained unchanged. Such asymmetric photoinduced shape deformation led to a change in the mass center to the left side, thereby resulting in a torque that could roll the artificial robotic wheel away from the light source on a flat surface, as shown in Fig. 13c. Interestingly, the wheel-rolling direction could be easily reversed toward the light source by setting the stretched LCE film as the inner layer (Fig. 13b). In this case, UV-light irradiation could pass through the transparent BOPP outer layer, and the UV-induced shape bending of the inner LCE layer could increase the curvature of the bimorph soft actuators instead of flattening the outer layer, while the left part of the artificial robotic wheel remained unchanged. As a result, this asymmetric UV-induced shape deformation resulted in a shift in the wheel's mass center to the right side, thereby leading to a torque that could drive the wheel rolling toward the light (Fig. 13d). The authors also demonstrated light-driven spring-like motors using as-prepared BOPP/LCEs bimorph soft actuators, where light could be facilely transferred into mechanical energy to execute a variety of robust and tunable motion at the macroscopic scale. It was found that both artificial robotic wheels and bioinspired spring-like motors could roll toward or away from the UV-light source by setting the stretched LCE film as the outer or inner layer, respectively, and the rolling speed could be easily modulated by changing the amount of stored energy in the LCE film with different degrees of elongation. The strategy discussed here is anticipated to pave new ways toward the development of light-driven soft robotics.
 Fig. 13  Light-driven moving wheels based on bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. Schematic showing the mechanism of (a) rolling away from the light source or (b) rolling toward the light source. Photographs showing the continuous light-driven forward rolling wheels with the LCE film set as the outer layer (c) and backward rolling wheel with LCE film set as the inner layer (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Homogeneously aligned LCE films with azobenzene in the crosslinkers are known to exhibit reversible shape deformation under UV-light irradiation due to the photoinduced reduction in the mesogenic ordering.199 Researchers have made some efforts to develop light-driven bimorph soft actuators based on LCE films with azobenzene in the side chain.160,161 For example, Hagaman et al. developed light-driven bimorph soft actuators via 3D-printed polysiloxane LCs with pendant azobenzene groups onto commercially available Kapton PI thin films.200 Upon UV-light irradiation, a gradient stress was generated between the active and passive layers via the photoinduced volume expansion from the trans–cis isomerization of azobenzene, and the as-prepared bimorph soft actuators were found to exhibit rapid and reversible mechanical actuation, with a full cycle completed within seconds. Yu et al. reported light-driven bimorph soft actuators for bioinspired artificial robotic swimmers that could exhibit fast, continuous, and on-demand remote-controlled motion at the liquid–air interfaces.201 The bimorph soft actuators were fabricated by coating an LCP film (7.3 μm) with azobenzene (in the side chains) onto a PI substrate (14.8 μm). Upon UV-light irradiation, photoinduced volume expansion resulted in a distinctive shape-bending direction toward the PI side, and the bimorph film would rapidly return to its original shape in about 2 s, as shown in Fig. 14a. The reversible shape-bending and shape-unbending deformations were believed to result from the generation and elimination of UV-light-induced stress between the active and passive layers. Interestingly, light-driven artificial swimmers based on the as-prepared bimorph soft actuators were found to exhibit continuous forward motion away from the light source on the surface of a liquid (ethanol:water = 1:1), and the motion would immediately stop upon the removal of light. The authors elaborated the motion mechanism of artificial swimmers as the “dolphin kick” style. The artificial swimmer film was found to remain still and flat when placed on a liquid surface with the Kapton side facing the liquid interface. Upon UV-light irradiation on the edge, the film would bend downward and beat the liquid (like a dolphin fluttering its tailfin), and, in turn, the liquid pushed the structure and propelled it forward (Fig. 14b and c). It is worth noting that the recovery process of the deformed soft actuators on the liquid surface is significantly accelerated compared to that in air. Importantly, the authors demonstrated on-demand directional control over swimming, such as forward and rotational motion, mimicking the behaviors of a dolphin. The light-driven swimming bimorph soft actuators could open a new door for the development of bioinspired soft robotics toward diverse applications such as light-controllable transportation, underwater tasks, and beyond.
 Fig. 14  Light-driven artificial swimmers based on bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Schematic of photoinduced bending based on LCPs/PI bimorph soft actuators. (b and c) Schematic showing the swimming mechanism and images of bioinspired artificial swimmer propelled by UV irradiation, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright© 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
To develop light-driven bimorph soft actuators with programmable attributes, Zhao et al. designed and synthesized a novel main-chain liquid crystalline Diels–Alder dynamic network (LCDAN), and bimorph soft actuators were fabricated by laminating a monodomain LCDAN strip with a flexible Kapton PI film.203 It should be noted that such a bimorph soft actuator could be facilely programmed into any desired shape due to the excellent programming and reprocessing properties of LCDANs. For example, the bimorph soft actuator could be programmed into a light-driven artificial caterpillar arching walker. With two well-designed ends for unequal friction on the substrate surface, the robotic walker could crawl forward upon alternating UV-light on/off cycles. The bimorph soft actuator could be also programmed into a rotating wheel. Under UV-light illumination, the curvature of the light-exposed side decreased yielding shape bending toward the outer LCDAN layer; the resulting asymmetric curvature would roll the robotic wheel away from the light source. Schenning et al. demonstrated reprogrammable light-driven bimorph soft actuators with arbitrary initial shapes by spray-coating PET polymers onto azobenzene-contained LCPs, where PET played an important role in increasing the ductility and alignment of mesogens in the LCPs.204 Shape programming and shape morphing were achieved by using different stimuli. Arbitrary configurations such as origami-like folds and different handed helicities were achieved by thermally shaping and fixing of the thermoplastic PET. It was found that these thermally fixed geometries could be reversibly actuated upon light exposure, and a variety of area-specific actuations such as winding, unwinding, and unfolding were observed. By using this method, two identical helical actuators were made to actuate in contrasting manners, as shown in Fig. 15a, resulting in helical winding and helical unwinding upon UV-light illumination. It should be noted that opposing actuation modes within a single sample could be achieved by integrating two opposite helical twisted structures into the same bimorph soft actuators, where multiple intermediately shaped morphing configurations were possible (Fig. 15b). Interestingly, the authors also demonstrated light-driven accordion-like bimorph soft actuators that simultaneously exhibited complex actuation behaviors such as origami-like bending and spiral helical unwinding (Fig. 15c). The strategy disclosed herein is expected to open numerous possibilities for developing bimorph soft actuators toward programming and reconfigurable soft robotics.
 Fig. 15  Reprogramming light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Light-driven spiral actuators with an LCP layer on the inside and outside of the helix. (b) Light-driven dual-mode soft actuators composed of two sections with an LCN on the outside and inside. (c) Shape programming and light-driven complex shape morphing in a single soft actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Yu et al. reported light-driven bimorph soft actuators by laminating dual-dye upconversion polyurethane onto azobenzene-containing LCEs (Fig. 16a).205 The dual-dye upconversion system was based on highly effective red-to-blue triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA); the upconversion polyurethane film was developed by codoping a Pt(II) complex tetraphenyltetrabenzoporphyrin (PtTPBP) sensitizer with a 9,10-bis(diphenylphosphoryl)anthracene (BDPPA) fluorescent dye (Fig. 16b). Under light excitation at 635 nm, the polyurethane layer doped with PtTPBP & BDPPA was found to generate an intense blue emission that was well matched with the absorption band of an azotolane-containing liquid crystalline layer, resulting in the bending of the bimorph soft actuators toward the light source (Fig. 16c and d). The upconversion polyurethane layer could upconvert 635 nm irradiation into blue emission that was subsequently absorbed by the azotolane moieties in the LCE layers via the emission–reabsorption process, thereby inducing molecular-level trans–cis photoisomerization and macroscopic shape deformation. Photoinduced shape bending toward the light source was believed to result from the gradient adsorption of blue light across the LCE film and light-driven contraction at its front surface region. Interestingly, it was found that polyurethane played an important role in achieving light-driven bimorph actuators, and the LCEs coated with only PtTPBP & BDPPA exhibited no shape-bending behavior upon red-light irradiation at 635 nm. The strategy disclosed herein is expected to provide newer insights into the development of long-wavelength light-driven soft robotics with advanced upconversion nanotechnology.
 Fig. 16  Red-light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators based on upconversion technology. (a) Schematic mechanism of upconversion-based light-driven bimorph soft actuators. (b) Illustration of PtTPBP (sensitizer), BDPPA (annihilator), and upconversion emission upon 635 nm excitation, LC monomer, and crosslinker. (c) Schematic of the fabrication of upconversion-based bimorph soft actuators. (d) Photograph of red-light-driven actuation of bimorph soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society. 
4.2 Soft actuators with synergistic photochemical and photothermal effects
Photothermal and photochemical effects can be simultaneously used to develop light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators, and both mechanisms have their own strengths.206,207 For photochemical actuation, photochemical molecules, such as azobenzenes, are preferably required to be covalently bonded within an LCP network. The cis–trans isomerization of typical azobenzenes is usually photoactivated upon long-wavelength irradiation such as 450–550 nm, and the long lifetime of the cis isomer often leads to a relatively slow actuation speed of several seconds or even minutes. For photothermal actuation, photothermal agents can be easily doped into an LCP network to generate efficient actuation upon light irradiation with different wavelengths ranging from the visible to the NIR range. It is worth noting that photothermal actuators can rapidly deform, within seconds to milliseconds, depending on the heat capacity. Therefore, a combination of two different mechanisms in a single actuator should enable robust, programmable, and reconfigurable soft photoactuators that respond to multiple wavelengths and execute sophisticated motion tasks.47,208 The “actuation on command” could be expected in light-driven bimorph soft actuators via the synergistic use of photochemical and photothermal effects.
Zhao et al. reported a generic approach to develop both NIR- and UV-light-driven soft actuators with enhanced photoactuation by integrating polymer-functionalized AuNRs with azobenzene-containing liquid crystalline networks (ALCNs).209 Interestingly, AuNRs–ALCN films with stretched alignment were found to exhibit two different actuation behaviors powered by UV-vis and NIR light. Upon UV-light irradiation, AuNRs–ALCN film underwent bending motion and maintained the bent state unless exposed to visible light. In contrast, the AuNRs–ALCN film showed reversible bending and unbending motion just by turning the NIR light on and off (Fig. 17a). The UV-light-driven contraction force was believed to originate from both trans–cis photoisomerization of azobenzene and photothermally induced polymer-chain relaxation, and such an active force would not drop completely upon turning off the UV-light irradiation because of the remaining abundant cis-state azobenzenes. Besides, the NIR-light-driven actuation force was found to only depend on the shape contraction when heated above its LC-phase-transition temperature, and such light-driven reversible shape change could be easily achieved just by turning on and off the NIR-light irradiation. Importantly, the authors developed light-driven bimorph soft actuators that could execute localized, specific, and programmable motion tasks by laminating a stretched AuNRs–ALCN layer with a commercially available transparent BOPP film (thickness: ∼45 μm). The as-prepared bimorph soft actuators were found to exhibit different UV-light-driven shape bending in the downward or upward directions with the AuNRs–ALCN layer set as the bottom or top layer, respectively (Fig. 17b). The authors demonstrated a variety of versatile and complex motions based on these bimorph soft actuators, for example, light-driven artificial caterpillar robotic walker that could crawl forward on a ratcheted substrate and photocontrolled plastic “athletes” that could do push-ups and sit-ups via locally programming the alignment of the AuNRs–ALCN layer in the athlete's arms and waist, respectively (Fig. 17c). Moreover, the authors proposed the concept of light-driven artificial crane that could perform distinct photomechanical functions including grasping, lifting up, lowering down, and releasing an object, based on the photomechanical effects combining photochemically driven trans–cis photoisomerization and photothermally induced liquid crystalline–isotropic phase transition. As shown in Fig. 17d, the gripper could grasp and firmly hold a tubular-shaped object upon UV-light irradiation, and the telescopic arm could lift up the object upon NIR-light illumination owing to a rapid contraction in length resulting from the photothermally induced LC–isotropic phase transition. Such light-driven bimorph soft actuators based on synergistic photochemical and photothermal effects open numerous possibilities for the development of truly advanced, biomimetic, and intelligent soft robotics.
 Fig. 17  Light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators through synergistic application of photochemical azobenzene and photothermal AuNRs. (a) Schematic showing the photothermal and photochemical mechanisms for different shape-bending behaviors driven by NIR and UV-vis light. (b) Schematic of light-driven bending downward and upward with the AuNRs–ALCN layer set as bottom layer or top layer, respectively. (c) Images of light-driven plastic “athletes” that could do push-ups and sit-ups. (d) Schematic of light-driven artificial “crane” that can execute a series of robot-like motion tasks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright© 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Inspired by plant tendrils in nature, Yang et al. demonstrated a light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuator exhibiting wavelength-selective 3D deformations (bending and chiral twisting) by a combination of photochemical azobenzene with organic photothermal dye in polysiloxane-based LCEs (Fig. 18a).210 In the bimorph structure, the top layer was made of a uniaxially aligned LCE loaded with an azobenzene chromophore and an NIR-absorbing dye, which would exhibit bending upon UV-light irradiation and shrinking upon NIR-light irradiation due to the cis–trans isomerization of azobenzene and the photothermal-heating-induced LC-to-isotropic phase transition in the photothermally absorbing dye, respectively. In contrast, the bottom layer was composed of LCEs doped with only the NIR-absorbing dye, which could only respond to external NIR-light irradiation (Fig. 18b). The two layers were obliquely glued together, and the different orientations between the bottom and top layers (aligning at an inclined angle of 45° or −45°) could lead to left-handed or right-handed helical curling upon light irradiation (Fig. 18c). Interestingly, it was found that the resulting bimorph soft actuators exhibited similar bending behaviors toward UV light while right-handed or left-handed twisting actuation upon NIR-light irradiation. The strategy disclosed herein is expected to offer new inspirations for the development of next-generation light-driven soft actuators that could perform diverse 3D movements according to the external excitations at different wavelengths, which could find important applications in areas such as soft machines, biomimetic devices, and beyond.
 Fig. 18  UV- and NIR-light-driven polysiloxane-based bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Bending and chiral twisting in plant tendril of cucumbers. (b) Chemical compositions of the top layer (formula 1) and bottom layer (formula 2) of bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (c) Schematic for fabricating light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright© 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
In summary, we have introduced the recent developments in photochemical bimorph soft actuators, with an emphasis on the strategy of introducing photoresponsive azobenzene molecules into the active layer based on anisotropic liquid crystalline systems, as summarized in Table 3. Azobenzene molecules could either be covalently crosslinked into the main-chain network or be bonded in the side chain of the crosslinked polymer network. Most azobenzene-based bimorph liquid crystalline actuators can be reversibly driven under alternating UV- and visible-light irradiation, while NIR-light-driven systems have also been realized via optical upconversion strategies. It is worth noting that “actuation on command” was achieved in light-driven bimorph soft actuators via the synergistic use of photochemical and photothermal effects, where a combination of two different photoactuation mechanisms in a single actuator is expected to enable robust, programmable, and reconfigurable soft photoactuators that could independently respond to multiple wavelengths and execute sophisticated motion tasks upon simultaneous photochemical and photothermal actuation in a single device.
Table 3 Mechanism, materials, structures and actuating performance of representative photochemical bimorph soft actuators




Mechanism
Materials
Thickness d [μm]
Light intensity P [mW cm−2]
Time t [s]
Photoinduced force [mN]
Displacement [mm]
Ref.




Photochemical
LCN/PI
22.1
150 (UV)
2.4
55
23

201



LCE/PE
65
240 (UV)
60
130
—

197



LCN/PET
16
170 (UV) & 300 (blue)
15
—
18

204



PLAZ/LDPE
25
270 (UV)
5
180.1
—

202



LCP/PI
20
100 (UV)
5
72
—

98









Materials
Thickness d [μm]
Light intensity P [mW cm−2]
Time t [s]
ΔT [°C]
Stress [MPa]
Ref.




Photochemical and photothermal
GO/ALCN
120
700 (NIR)
15
54
1.35

47



70 (UV)
15
47.6
0.74


AuNR–ALCNs/BOPP
150
6700 (NIR)
40
150
3

209



20
100 (UV)
30
—
8


20
20 (Vis)
30
—
0




5. Conclusion and perspective
In this review, we discuss the state-of-the-art advancements in light-driven bimorph soft actuators, actuation mechanism, and emerging applications. The simple design principle, i.e., a combination of a photoactive layer and a passive one in a single bimorph system, is believed to endow numerous, unprecedented features such as ultrasensitivity, programmability, superior compatibility, robust functionality, easy controllability, and superior actuating performance. Compared with soft actuators powered by other stimuli such as pneumatic, humidity, and electric and magnetic fields, light-fueled smart systems could be one of the best candidates for the development of untethered, programmable, and reconfigurable soft robotics owing to their superior optical-to-mechanical energy conversion capacity and unique features of remote, spatial, and temporal controllability. Light as an inexhaustible and sustainable energy source is ubiquitous in our daily lives, and its physical parameters such as intensity, wavelength, and polarization can be facilely tailored with high spatial and temporal resolution. In light-driven bimorph soft actuators, the active layer basically dominates the volume change (expanding or shrinkage), which is often restricted by its mechanical mismatch from the passive layer, thereby resulting in bending deformation in response to external-light irradiation. Light energy can be converted into mechanical energy for deformation, and the corresponding actuation mechanisms are based on photothermal or photochemical effects. To fabricate light-driven bimorph soft actuation, photoactive agents need to be incorporated, such as photothermal nanotransducers (nanoparticles or organic dyes) or molecular photoswitches (e.g., azobenzenes), into the soft-matter matrix. These photoactive agents can serve to absorb the external-light irradiation and facilitate photomechanical actuation via diverse optical processes such as photothermal expansion, photothermal desorption, photothermal phase transition, photochemical configuration changes, etc. A variety of photothermal bimorph soft actuators has been developed. Besides an abundance in the selection of photoactive and passive materials, the physical parameters of soft materials such as Young's modulus and CTE of different layers could be easily customized on-demand; for example, the anisotropy of bimorph soft actuators can be facilely achieved by introducing anisotropic nanomaterials into appropriate layers, and sophisticated control over the anisotropy direction could generate a wide variety of shape deformations and bioinspired motion such as bending, spiraling, twisting, and oscillation. Photochemical bimorph soft actuators could be fabricated by introducing photoresponsive azobenzene into the active layer based on the anisotropic soft-matter matrix of LCPs, where light-driven dynamic geometrical changes in the azobenzene molecules could be autonomously amplified into macroscopic and reversible shape deformation such as bending and curling under external-light irradiation. Moreover, light-driven bimorph soft actuators could also be developed by the synergistic use of photochemical and photothermal actuations. Table 4 illustrates the figures of merit for different bimorph soft actuators on the basis of photothermal expansion, photothermal contraction, and photochemical actuation. Undoubtedly, light-driven bimorph soft actuators could open numerous exciting possibilities for developing bioinspired soft robotics with programmable and reconfigurable functions toward diverse applications ranging from artificial muscles to biomedical technologies.
Table 4 Figures of merit for different bimorph soft actuators with regard to photothermal expansion, photothermal contraction, and photochemical actuation




Actuation modes
Mechanisms
Advantages
Limitations
Applications
Ref.







Expansion of active layer in response to light
• High curvature
• Susceptible actuation performance due to heat exchange with external environment
• Soft gripper

42 and 49



• Fast actuation speed
• Soft crawler

42, 109, 120 and 123



• Versatility in selection of material
• Soft swimmer

105



• Easy programming
• Soft jumper

117





• Light-driven motor

118 and 120





• Smart curtain

118





• Artificial iris

120





• Metamaterials

77 and 84





• Power generation

115 and 185










Desorption of water molecules
• High curvature
• Relatively low stability
• Smart curtain

58



• Versatility in selection of material
• Irreversible actuation in dry environment
• Soft crawler

84, 85 and 130



• Easy programming


• Soft gripper

135







• Wearable sensor

136



Metal–insulator transition
• Fast actuation speed
• High actuation energy
• Soft lifter

149



• Excellent stability
• Limited programming
• Soft crawler

149



• High volumetric work density








• Superior energy conversion efficiency








Hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition
• High curvature
• Low mechanical properties
• Artificial hands

154 and 159



• Tissue-like softness
• Sluggish actuation speed
• Soft crawler

159



• Superior biocompatibility
• Risk of dehydration in the ambient condition






Nematic–isotropic phase transition
• Superior mechanical properties
• Relatively sluggish actuation speed
• Soft crawler

167, 176 and 184



• Excellent stability
• Limited curvature


• Inherent anisotropy











Light-driven configuration change of molecular photoswitch in liquid crystalline matrix
• High adaptability in different environment
• Sluggish actuation speed
• Soft gripper

209



• Excellent stability
• Limited curvature
• Soft crawler

203



• Superior mechanical properties


• Soft swimmer

201



• Inherent anisotropy


• Light-driven motor

101, 197 and 203







• Power generation

198





Although extensive advancements have been achieved in the design and fabrication of light-driven bimorph soft actuators, overall development is still at a very preliminary stage, with many challenges and critical issues that need to be addressed. Compared with soft actuators based on homogenous and gradient structures, there is a risk of delamination taking place at the interface between both the layers in bimorph soft actuators. Hence, exploring novel strategies to obtain a stable and robust interface is a prerequisite for developing light-driven bimorph soft actuators with superior performance. For photothermal bimorph soft actuators, an excellent photothermal agent should meet the following requirements: high photothermal conversion efficiency to ensure efficient photothermal actuation, broad photoabsorption covering the entire solar spectrum toward sunlight actuation, and superior compatibility with the soft-matter matrix, as well as synthesis simplicity, good photostability, and low cost. For photochemical bimorph soft actuators, researchers have mainly focused on introducing photoswitchable azobenzene molecules into the anisotropic liquid crystalline matrix. More attention should also be paid to many other promising soft-matter matrix systems and photochromic materials such as spiropyran and diarylethenes. Moreover, infinite golden opportunities may still be hidden in the future research of light-driven bimorph soft actuators. Taking advantage of the unique bimorph structure, soft actuators could be integrated with many emerging advanced functional materials such as photonic coatings with bioinspired camouflage capability,211 2D/3D nanostructures with promising functions of signal detection and electromagnetic shielding,212,213 and electronic skins and flexible integrated devices with self-feedback loops.214 The marriage of bimorph soft actuators with additive manufacturing technologies could bring real breakthroughs in the future development of artificial soft robots with bioinspired intelligence and more sophisticated capabilities.215 Biohybrid artificial robots that combine living cells with bimorph soft actuators could help reproduce similar organ or tissue construction and functions of organisms.216 Through evolution and natural selection over billions of years, nature has offered us unlimited precious gifts of soft actuation with extraordinary complexity and high efficiency, such as birds flying freely in the sky and fish swimming in the water. Our research should aim to learn from nature and inspire and surprise us in answering fundamental questions in the development of truly intelligent soft actuators. It should be noted that a variety of light-driven soft actuators, i.e., photoactuators, have been currently developed with multifunctional soft materials and different actuating mechanisms. These photoactuators have demonstrated promising applications in many fields such as smart switches, artificial muscles, soft robotics, and biomedical science.217–221 However, applications of photoactuators are still limited to the laboratory, and there is an urgent need to develop high-performance photoactuators for practical applications in terms of maneuverability, controlling the degrees of freedom, and movement efficiency. The efficiency of photoactuators is one of the critical issues, and the actuation speed is not comparable with electrical or magnetic actuators. Furthermore, some soft robotic systems based on pneumatic and electrical actuators have been commercialized, which could inspire the development of advanced artificial photoactuators toward practical and untethered soft robotics. It is anticipated that the united efforts and meaningful cooperation of engineers from different backgrounds and scientists from multidisciplinary fields in the future can give birth to multifunctional programmable and reconfigurable artificial soft robotics and machines that exhibit increased flexibility and adaptability as well as improved safety when working around humans.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51973155 and 51773147), State Key Program of National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51633007), and National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2016YFA0202302).
References

Intelligent Stimuli Responsive Materials: From Well-defined Nanostructures to Applications, ed. Q. Li, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, NJ,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. Tang, L. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 100702 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, C. Laschi and B. Trimmer, Trends Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 287–294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, W. Wang and H. Yu, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2019, 1, 1900050 CrossRef .
H. N. Kim, A. Jiao, N. S. Hwang, M. S. Kim, D. H. Kang, D. H. Kim and K. Y. Suh, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 536–558 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Mirvakili and I. W. Hunter, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704407 CrossRef .
F. Lancia, A. Ryabchun and N. Katsonis, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 536–551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lv, Y. Liu, J. Wei, E. Chen, L. Qin and Y. Yu, Nature, 2016, 537, 179–184 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Rich, R. J. Wood and C. Majidi, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 102–112 CrossRef .
T. Ikeda, J. I. Mamiya and Y. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 506–528 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ilievski, A. D. Mazzeo, R. F. Shepherd, X. Chen and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1890–1895 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2–18 CrossRef .
H. Zeng, P. Wasylczyk, D. S. Wiersma and A. Priimagi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1870174 CrossRef .
L. Hines, K. Petersen, G. Z. Lum and M. Sitti, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603483 CrossRef .
A. I. Egunov, J. G. Korvink and V. A. Luchnikov, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 45–52 RSC .
Z. L. Wu, M. Moshe, J. Greener, H. Therien-Aubin, Z. Nie, E. Sharon and E. Kumacheva, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
T. J. White and D. J. Broer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1087–1098 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, A. M. Urbas and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801335 Search PubMed .
L. Wang, D. Chen, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Fan, R. S. Zola, G. Li, T. J. Bunning, D. A. Weitz and Q. Li, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 1190–1195 RSC .
L. Wang and Q. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 10–28 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhai, Y. Feng, K. Zhou, L. Wang, Z. Zheng and W. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 2146–2171 RSC .
M. Zeng, D. King, D. Huang, C. Do, L. Wang, M. Chen, S. Lei, P. Lin, Y. Chen and Z. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 18322–18327 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agrawal, T. H. Yun, S. L. Pesek, W. G. Chapman and R. Verduzco, Soft Matter, 2014, 10, 1411–1415 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Guo and J. Liu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800549 Search PubMed .
H. Zeng, O. M. Wani, P. Wasylczyk, R. Kaczmarek and A. Priimagi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701814 CrossRef .
S. Palagi, A. G. Mark, S. Y. Reigh, K. Melde, T. Qiu, H. Zeng, C. Parmeggiani, D. Martella, A. Sanchez-Castillo, N. Kapernaum, F. Giesselmann, D. S. Wiersma, E. Lauga and P. Fischer, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 647–653 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Sim, J. Chen, H. Kim, Z. Rao, Y. Li, W. Chen, J. Song, R. Verduzco and C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706695 CrossRef .
W. Hu, G. Z. Lum, M. Mastrangeli and M. Sitti, Nature, 2018, 554, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shin, J. Ha, M. Lee, K. Park, G. H. Park, T. H. Choi, K.-J. Cho and H.-Y. Kim, Sci. Robot., 2018, 3, aar2629 CrossRef .
S. A. Morin, R. F. Shepherd, S. W. Kwok, A. A. Stokes, A. Nemiroski and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 2012, 337, 828–832 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Hawkes, L. H. Blumenschein, J. D. Greer and A. M. Okamura, Sci. Robot., 2017, 2, eaan3028 CrossRef .
M. Wehner, R. L. Truby, D. J. Fitzgerald, B. Mosadegh, G. M. Whitesides, J. A. Lewis and R. J. Wood, Nature, 2016, 536, 451–455 CrossRef CAS .
T. Patino, R. Mestre and S. Sanchez, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 3626–3630 RSC .
A. H. Gelebart, D. J. Mulder, M. Varga, A. Konya, G. Vantomme, E. W. Meijer, R. L. B. Selinger and D. J. Broer, Nature, 2017, 546, 632–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amjadi and M. Sitti, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10202–10210 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang and Q. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1044–1097 RSC .

Smart light-responsive materials: azobenzene-containing polymers and liquid crystals, ed. Y. Zhao and T. Ikeda, John Wiley & Sons,  2009 Search PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Y. Li, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Nature, 2016, 531, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, W. Ding, M. Nieto-Vesperinas, X. Ding, M. Rahman, T. Zhang, C. Lim and C. Qiu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e17039 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, Y. Zhao, Y. Alsaid, X. Wang, M. Hua, T. Galy, H. Gopalakrishna, Y. Yang, J. Cui, N. Liu, M. Marszewski, L. Pilon and X. He, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, Y. Tan, X. Wang, W. An, S. Xu, W. Liao and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7688–7692 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Zhang, L. Mou, M. J. d. Andrade, X. Hu, K. Yu, J. Sun, T. Jia, Y. Dou, H. Chen, S. Fang, D. Qian and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808995 CrossRef .
R. C. Verpaalen, T. Engels, A. P. Schenning and M. G. Debije, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 38829–38844 CrossRef CAS .
T. van Manen, S. Janbaz and A. A. Zadpoor, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 144–163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kanik, S. Orguc, G. Varnavides, J. Kim, T. Benavides, D. Gonzalez, T. Akintilo, C. C. Tasan, A. P. Chandrakasan, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Science, 2019, 365, 145–150 CAS .
M. P. Cunha, Y. Foelen, T. A. P. Engels, K. Papamichou, M. Hagenbeek, M. G. Debije and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801604 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, J. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Xu and A. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6727–6735 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ma, X. Zhang, R. Cui, F. Liu, M. Wang, C. Huang, J. Hou, G. Wang, Y. Wei, K. Jiang, L. Pan and K. Liu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11158–11164 RSC .
J. Deng, J. Li, P. Chen, X. Fang, X. Sun, Y. Jiang, W. Weng, B. Wang and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 225–230 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chang, M. Huang, K. Qi, Z. Jing, L. Yang, P. Lu, Y. Hu and Y. Wu, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2019, 304, 1800688 CrossRef .
Y. Naka, J. Mamiya, A. Shishido, M. Washio and T. Lkeda, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1681–1683 RSC .
A. Kotikian, C. McMahan, E. C. Davidson, J. M. Muhammad, R. D. Weeks1, C. Daraio and J. A. Lewis, Sci. Robot., 2019, 4, eaax7044 CrossRef .
J. M. Boothby and T. H. Ware, Soft Matter, 2017, 13, 4349–4356 RSC .
Z. Tian, B. Xu, B. Hsu, L. Stan, Z. Yang and Y. Mei, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3017–3023 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C. Cheng, J. Suh, R. Tang-Kong, D. Fu, S. Lee, J. Zhou, L. O. Chua and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1746–1750 CrossRef CAS .
S. Timoshenko, J. Opt. Soc. Am. Rev. Sci. Instrum., 1925, 11, 233–255 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Feng, F. Yang, R. Aleisa, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 9376–9382 CrossRef .
M. Weng, P. Zhou, L. Chen, L. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Huang, C. Liu and S. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 7244–7253 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Han, L. Guo, B. Lin and H. Yang, Liq. Cryst., 2019, 46, 1231–1240 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, D. Niu, W. Jiang, T. Zhao, B. Lei, L. Yin, Y. Shi, B. Chen and B. Lu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2016, 239, 45–53 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, N. Jiao, S. Tung and L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30290–30299 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Liu and Y. Shen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, Z. Yuan, J. Liu, Z. Fang, L. Fang, D. Yu and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900069 CrossRef .
L. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, Z. Zheng, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, G. Singh, S. Kumar, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 230–237 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 179, 10–40 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Wang, Y. Li, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2571–2601 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 1223–1230 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, B. Liu, L. Wang, X. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Qi, G. Cui, H. Xie, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6443–6451 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bisoyi, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800458 CrossRef .
J. Zeng, D. Goldfeld and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 4263–4267 CrossRef .
K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, L. Wang, C. Xue, S. Gautam, S. Kumar, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9845–9848 RSC .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, H. K. Bisoyi, J. Xiang, G. Singh, R. S. Zola, S. Kumar, O. D. Lavrentovich, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15039–15042 RSC .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Q. Wang, R. Zou, X. Liu, K. Xu, W. Li and J. Hu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3274–3282 RSC .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, L. Zhang, L. Shi and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3752–3759 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Gao, S. Jia, F. Wang and Y. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600437 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Zhao, S. J. Yoon, S. S. Gambhir and S. Emelianov, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 465–472 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, A. Urbas and Q. Li, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 247–251 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, J. Xiang, H. Nemati, H. K. Bisoyi, K. G. Gutierrez-Cuevas, L. Wang, M. Gao, S. Zhou, D. K. Yang, O. D. Lavrentovich, A. Urbas and Q. Li, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1852–1856 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, C. Fang, X. Zhu, Q. Ruan, Y. J. Wang and J. Wang, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7418–7426 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Nguyen, R. Tabassian, S. Oh, S. Nam, M. Mahato, P. Thangasamy, A. Rajabi-Abhari, W.-J. Hwang, A. K. Taseer and I. K. Oh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 1909504 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, W. Feng, Y. Jiang, C. Ma, Z. Zhou, M. Ma, Y. Chen and F. Chen, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1057–1065 RSC .
G. Cai, J. H. Ciou, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang and P. S. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7956 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ji, N. Jiang, J. Chang and J. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5412–5419 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Wu, B. Xu and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807716 CrossRef .
Q. Tian, F. Jiang, R. Zou, Q. Liu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu, S. Yang, J. Wang, J. Wang and J. Hu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9761–9771 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Y. Li, L. Deng, N. Wei, Y. Weng, S. Dong, D. Qi, J. Qiu and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603730 CrossRef .

Photochromism: Molecules and Systems, ed. H. Durr and H. B. Laurent, Elsevier Science Publishers B.V., Amsterdam,  1990 Search PubMed .
R. Klajn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 148–184 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, R. Liu, Y. F. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2065–2069 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Dong, Y. Feng, L. Wang and W. Feng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7339–7368 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. Li, C. Xue, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4480–4483 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Wang, C. Li, J. Xiao, H. Ding, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10097–10099 RSC .
H. Wang, H. K. Bisoyi, L. Wang, A. M. Urbas, T. J. Bunning and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1627–1631 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Li, G. Hou, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. He and H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 691–694 RSC .
X. Li, S. Ma, J. Hu, Y. Ni, Z. Lin and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 622–629 RSC .
T. Ube, K. Kawasaki and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2016, 37, 8212–8217 CrossRef .
H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3047–3054 RSC .
X. Lu, S. Guo, X. Tong, H. Xia and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606467 CrossRef .
W. Bao, F. Miao, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Jang, C. Dames and C. N. Lau, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 462–566 CrossRef .
L. Li, J. Meng, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Yu and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15122–15128 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Z. Liang, P. Gonnet, Y.-H. Liao, B. Wang and C. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, D. Niu, H. Liu, C. Wang, T. Zhao, L. Yin, Y. Shi, B. Chen, Y. Ding and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7598–7604 CrossRef CAS .
Leeladhar and J. P. Singh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 33956–33965 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lim, T. Park, J. Na, C. Park, B. Kim and E. Kim, NPG Asia Mater., 2017, 9, e399 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Aliev, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, A. A. Kuznetsov, S. Fang, A. F. Fonseca, R. Ovalle and M. Zhang, Science, 2009, 323, 1575–1578 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, C. Zhang, J. W. Su, Y. Xie, C. Zhang and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 34, 5415–5423 RSC .
Y. Maniwa, R. Fujiwara, H. Kira, H. Tou, H. Kataura, S. Suzuki, Y. Achiba, E. Nishibori, M. Takata, M. Sakata, A. Fujiwara and H. Suematsu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 241402 CrossRef .
W. Bao, F. Miao, Z. Chen, H. Zhang, W. Jang, W. Jang, C. Dames and C. N. Lau, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 562–566 CrossRef CAS .
O. Sul, S. Jang and E.-H. Yang, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 985–990 Search PubMed .
Y. Kuru, M. Wohlschlögel, U. Welzel and E. J. Mittemeijer, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2008, 202, 2306–2309 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tai, G. Lubineau and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4660–4670 CrossRef .
L. Yang, L. Chang, Y. Hu, M. Huang, Q. Ji, P. Lu, J. Liu, W. Chen and Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908842 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, T. Ding, T. Li, S. Achavananthadith, S. Ahmet, J. S. Ho and G. W. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000351 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, J. Liu, L. Chang, L. Yang, A. Xu, K. Qi, P. Lu, G. Wu, W. Chen and Y. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704388 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Z. Yu, C. Wang, D. Zarrouk, J.-W. T. Seo, J. C. Cheng, A. D. Buchan, K. Takei, Y. Zhao, J. W. Ager, J. Zhang, M. Hettick, M. C. Hersam, A. P. Pisano, R. S. Fearing and A. Javey, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Hu, Z. Li, T. Lan and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10548–10556 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Y. Gao, A. Wei, P. Xiao, Y. Liang, W. Lu, C. Chen, C. Zhang, G. Yang, H. Yao and T. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4359 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, G. Wu, T. Lan, J. Zhao, Y. Liu and W. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7867–7873 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kauranen and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 737–748 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. Zhang, L. Zhu, Y. Li, Z. Ma, Y. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Cao, Q. Chen, C. Qiu and H. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806386 Search PubMed .
C. M. Kolodziej and H. D. Maynard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12386–12389 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xia, R. Xie, X. Ju, W. Wang, Q. Chen and L. Chu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1–11 Search PubMed .
D. L. Thomsen, P. Keller, J. Naciri, R. Pink, H. Jeon, D. Shenoy and B. R. Ratna, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 5868–5875 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buchsteiner, A. Lerf and J. Pieper, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 22328–22338 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, C. M. Andres, J. Xu, A. Ramamoorthy, T. Tsotsis and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8357–8365 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, J. Wang, X. Guo, S. Yang, M. O. Ozen, P. Chen, X. Liu, W. i. Du, F. Xiao, U. Demirci and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Ma, S. Liu, D. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Chen, J. Mao and H. Sun, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104302 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. Xiang, Q. Zhu, W. Zhong, M. Li, M. Li, K. Yan and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27215–27223 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gao, M. Lin, J. Xiong, S. Li, S. N. Lou, Y. Liu, J. Ciou, X. Zhou and P. S. Lee, Nanoscale Horiz., 2020, 5, 730–738 RSC .
H. Li and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10218–10225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, K. Qi, L. Chang, J. Liu, L. Yang, M. Huang, G. Wu, P. Lu, W. Chen and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6879–6888 RSC .
P. Zhou, L. Chen, L. Yao, M. Weng and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8422–8427 RSC .
Y. Hu, K. Qi, L. Chang, J. Liu, L. Yang, M. Huang, G. Wu, P. Lu, W. Chen and Y. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6879–6888 RSC .
Y. Tu, J. Yuan, D. Lei, H. Tan, J. Wei, W. Huang and L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8238–8243 RSC .
L. Zhang, X. Qiu, Y. Yuan and T. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41599–41606 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, D. Torres, F. E. Fernández, A. J. Green, C. Wang and N. Sepúlveda, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4371–4378 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Q. Gu, B. S. Guiton, N. P. D. Leon, L. Ouyang and H. Park, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2313–2317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, E. Ertekin, V. Srinivasan, W. Fan, S. Huang, H. Zheng, J. W. L. Yim, D. R. Khanal, D. F. Ogletree, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 732–737 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, C. Cheng, Z. Cheng, K. Wang, R. Ramesh and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6302–6308 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, C. Cheng, E. Cardona, J. Guan, K. Liu and J. Wu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2266–2272 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cabrera, E. Merced, N. Sepúlveda and F. E. Fernández, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 094510 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, J. Hwan Lee, Y. Zhu, M. Nazari, C. Chen, H. Wang, A. Bernussi1, M. Holtz and Z. Fan, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 053533 CrossRef .
N. R. Mlyuka, G. A. Niklasson and C. G. Granqvist, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 171909 CrossRef .
T. Wang, D. Torres, F. E. Fernández, C. Wang and N. Sepúlveda, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602697 CrossRef .
H. Ma, J. Hou, X. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Yuan, L. Xiao, Y. Wei, S. Fan, K. Jiang and K. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 421–428 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, R. Shi, N. Shen, Z. Zhang, Y. Liang, T. Li, J. Wang, D. Kong, Y. Gan, A. Amini, N. Wang and C. Cheng, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2000051 CrossRef .
M. K. Jaiswal, R. Banerjee, P. Pradhan and D. Bahadura, Colloids Surf., B, 2010, 81, 185–194 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mu, C. Hou, B. Zhu, H. Wang, Y. Li and Q. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
D. Kim, H. S. Lee and J. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef .
J. N. Tiwari, K. Mahesh, N. H. Le, K. C. Kemp, R. Timilsina, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Carbon, 2013, 56, 173–182 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shi, H. Xia, P. Li, Y. Wang, L. Wang, S. Li, G. Wang, C. Lv, L. Niu and H. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700442 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, R. Cao, S. Ye, Y. Ge, Y. Tu and X. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 2971–2978 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Na, A. A. Evans, J. Bae, M. C. Chiappelli, C. D. Santangelo, R. J. Lang, T. C. Hull and R. C. Hayward, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Silverberg, J.-H. Na, A. A. Evans, B. Liu, T. C. Hull, C. D. Santangelo, R. J. Lang, R. C. Hayward and I. Cohen, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 389–393 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhu, E. Senses, P. Akcora and S. A. Sukhishvili, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3152–3162 CrossRef CAS .
E. Wang, M. S. Desai and S.-W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2826–2830 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, D. Kim, H. Kim and J. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15124 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, L. Chu, D. Xu, J. Zhang, X. Ju and R. Xie, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2008, 19, 937–943 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lee, H. Lee, S. I. Yoo and J. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16949–16955 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fan, Z. Fan, F. Huang, J. Yang, F. Chen, Z. Fei and M. Zhong, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58(9), 3893–3901 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zhang, T. Wang, W. Hong, W. Sun, X. Liu and Z. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15633–15639 RSC .
Q. Zhao, Y. Liang, L. Ren, Z. Yu, Z. Zhang, F. Qiu and L. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 6, 1260–1271 RSC .
X. Wang, H. Huang, H. Liu, F. Rehfeldt, X. Wang and K. Zhang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2019, 220, 1800562 CrossRef .
M. Moua, R. R. Kohlmeyer and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 9234–9237 CrossRef .
L. Wang, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 2062–2078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Wang, L. Wang, D. Yang, H. Yu and H. Yang, Liq. Cryst., 2016, 43, 750–757 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lan, J. Sun, C. Shen, R. Huang, Z. Zhang, C. Ma, J. Bao, L. Zhang, L. Wang, D. Yang and H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000252 CrossRef CAS .
J. Naciri, A. Srinivasan, H. Jeon, N. Nikolov, P. Keller and B. R. Ratna, Macromolecules, 2003, 36, 8499–8505 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, A. Buguin, J.-M. Taulemesse, K. Kaneko, S. Méry, A. Bergeret and P. Keller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15000–15004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ji, Y. Y. Huang, R. Rungsawan and E. M. Terentjev, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3436–3440 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Marshall, Y. Ji, N. Torras, K. Zinoviev and E. M. Terentjev, Soft Matter, 2012, 8, 1570–1574 RSC .
L. Yang, K. Setyowati, A. Li, S. Gong and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2271–2275 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banisadr and J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, B. C. King, J. Loomis, E. M. Campo, J. Hegseth, R. W. Cohn, E. Terentjev and B. Panchapakesan, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 355501 CrossRef .
L. Yu, Z. Cheng, Z. Dong, Y. Zhang and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8501–8506 RSC .
Z. Cheng, T. Wang, X. Li, Y. Zhang and H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27494–27501 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, J. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Guo, P. Keller, B. Lin, Y. Sun and X. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12126–12129 RSC .
A. W. Hauser, D. Liu, K. C. Bryson, R. C. Hayward and D. J. Broer, Macromolecules, 2016, 49, 1575–1581 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong and Y. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1932–1943 RSC .
H. Tian, Z. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Shao, T. Gao and S. Cai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8307–8316 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, X. Tong, H. Zhang, M. Chen and Y. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 1383–1388 RSC .
R. Lan, J. Sun, C. Shen, R. Huang, Z. Zhang, L. Wang and H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906319 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zuo, M. Wang, B. Lin and H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schwartz and D. Koller, Plant Physiol., 1978, 61, 924–928 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. M. Dicker, J. M. Rossiter, I. P. Bon and P. M. Weaver, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2014, 9, 036015 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, A. Iscen, H. Sai, K. Sato, N. A. Sather, S. M. Chin, Z. Álvarez, L. C. Palmer, G. C. Schatz and S. I. Stupp, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 900–909 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mamiya, A. Kuriyama, N. Yokota, M. Yamada and T. Ikeda, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 3174–3177 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Xu, S. Sun, J. Wei, L. Wu and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604792 CrossRef .
H. Yu and T. Ikeda, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2149–2180 CrossRef CAS .
F. Weigert, Verh. Dtsch. Phys. Ges., 1919, 21, 479–491 CAS .
W. Wu, J. Yang, J. Hua, J. Tang, L. Zhang, Y. Long and H. Tian, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1772–1779 RSC .
P. Weis, W. Tian and S. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 6494–6505 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, J. Lv, C. Zhu, L. Qin and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamada, M. Kondo, J. Mamiya, Y. Yu, M. Kinoshita, C. J. Barrett and T. Ikeda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4986–4988 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tang, Z. Liu, D. Xu, J. Liu, L. Yu and H. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 8393–8397 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cheng, S. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Huang, Y. Chen and H. Yu, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 8317–8324 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Hagaman, S. Leist, J. Zhou and H. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 27308–27315 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ma, X. Li, S. Huang, J. Hu and H. Yu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 2681–2685 CrossRef .
J. Hu, X. Li, Y. Ni, S. Ma and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10815–10821 RSC .
Z. Jiang, Y. Xiao, L. Yin, L. Han and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 4955–4961 CrossRef .
R. C. P. Verpaalen, M. P. Cunha, T. A. P. Engels, M. G. Debije and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4532–4536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, M. Xu, F. Li and Y. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16446–16453 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zeng, M. Lahikainen, O. M. Wani, A. Berdin and A. Priimagi, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 2000886 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Q. Liu, X. Lv, L. Gao, S. Fang and H. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9993–9997 RSC .
X. Lu, H. Zhang, G. Fei, B. Yu, X. Tong, H. Xia and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706597 CrossRef .
M. Wang, B. Lin and H. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. A. Morin, R. F. Shepherd, S. W. Kwok, A. A. Stokes, A. Nemiroski and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 2012, 337, 828–832 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mao, J. Chang, H. Pu, G. Lu, Q. He, H. Zhang and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6872–6904 RSC .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Mun, S. Y. Kwon, S. Park, Z. Bao and S. Park, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904765 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Wallin, J. Pikul and R. F. Shepherd, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 84–100 CrossRef .
L. Sun, Y. Yu, Z. Chen, F. Bian, F. Ye, L. Sun and Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4043–4069 RSC .
M. Pilz da Cunha, M. G. Debije and A. P. H. J. Schenning, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 6568–6578 RSC .
D. Shah, B. Yang, S. Kriegman, M. Levin, J. Bongard and R. Kramer-Bottiglio, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2002882 CrossRef .
Y. Xia, Y. He, F. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Leng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000713 CrossRef .
Y. Xiao, Z. Jiang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2020, 2000148 CrossRef .
H. Kim, S. Ahn, D. M. Mackie, J. Kwon, S. H. Kim, C. Choi, Y. H. Moon, H. B. Lee and S. H. Ko, Mater. Today, 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2020.06.005 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Yuanhao Chen
	Yuanhao Chen is currently a graduate student at the School of Materials Science and Engineering of Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Ling Wang. He obtained his bachelor's degree in Materials Science and Engineering from Tianjin Polytechnic University in July 2018. His current research focuses on the design, synthesis, and properties of photoactive soft materials and their promising applications in bioinspired soft robotics.

Ling Wang
	Ling Wang is a Full Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He received his PhD in Materials Science from the University of Science and Technology Beijing in 2013. Prior to joining Tianjin University, he worked as a Postdoctoral Research Fellow at the Advanced Materials and Liquid Crystal Institute of Kent State University (USA) and Senior Research Fellow at the Artie McFerrin Department of Chemical Engineering of Texas A&M University (USA). His research interests focus on the design, synthesis, and properties of smart soft materials, bioinspired materials, and functional nanomaterials, as well as their emerging applications in diverse fields ranging from soft robotics, adaptive camouflage, and additive manufacturing to energy and safety issues.

Wei Feng
	Wei Feng is a Professor at the School of Materials Science and Engineering in Tianjin University. He obtained his PhD from the Xi’an Jiaotong University in 2000. He worked as a JSPS Fellow and Postdoctoral Researcher at Osaka University (Japan) and Tsinghua University (China), respectively. In 2004, he became a Full Professor in Tianjin University, and he received the support of National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars in China. His research interests include photoresponsive organic molecules and their derivatives, thermal-conductive and high-strength carbon-based composites, and two-dimensional fluorinated carbon materials and polymers.

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of light-driven bimorph soft actuators and emerging applications.	 

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustrations showing the (a) homogenous structure, gradient structure, and bimorph structure; (b) bending mechanism of bimorph soft actuators; and (c) programmable deformation of bimorph soft actuators.	 

 		 

Poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)	300–310	
77

Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)	127	
114

Biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP)	137	
58

Low-density polyethylene (LDPE)	>200	
103

Polycarbonates (PC)	65	
118

Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)	40	
42

Polyimides (PI)	28	
49

Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)	60	
123

Paper	10	
58

Graphene	−1	
102

Single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs)	−1.5	
104

Reduced graphene oxide (RGO)	−20	
50


 	Fig. 2  Light-driven bimorph soft actuators with programmable shape deformations by applying a coat of paraffin wax doped with aligned CNTs on a PI substrate. (a) Phototropic and apheliotropic bending of bimorph soft actuators along different CNT alignment directions. (b) Schematic of the mechanism of apheliotropic bending and phototropic bending. (c) Photographs of a light-driven mechanical arm based on bimorph soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bioinspired light-driven PVDF/LIG/PI soft actuators with laser-tailored graphene structures. (a) Mechanism of reversible opening and closing states of a pinecone. (b) Schematic of the alignment of LIG using the DLW method and light-driven dynamic function of soft actuators. (c) Photographs of PVDF/LIG/PI soft actuators under light exposure with different distances. (d and e) Photographs of a flower-shaped soft actuator with different LIG alignment angles. (f) A light-driven five-legged crawling soft robot. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright© 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Light-driven PC/SWCNTs bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic for fabricating PC/SWCNTs bilayer structure and light-driven actuation. (b and c) Smart curtains based on bimorph soft actuators. (d) Schematic of the working mechanism of PC/SWCNTs bimorph macroscale motors. (e) Optical image of a light-driven forward-moving motor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright© 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Light-driven SGA/PE bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic illustration of fabricating SGA/PE bimorph films and thermal-induced shape morphing. (b) Programmed different configurations obtained by customizing SGA or PE, and the corresponding stress distribution. (c) Light-driven shape morphing of programmed bimorph soft actuators. (d) Lateral IR-light-driven rolling locomotion of an SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator. (d) Vertical IR-light-driven unfolding of SGA/PE bimorph soft actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright© 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  Laser-printed holistic artificial muscle based on PMMA and AuNRs@GO bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process. (b) IR images of AuNRs@GO and AuNRs@RGO bimorph films under different levels of irradiation from a filament lamp. (c) COMSOL simulation and internal stress distribution of a bimorph soft actuator consisting of a PMMA layer and a composite layer of AuNRs@GO. Light-driven (d) artificial hand, (e) artificial Venus flytrap, and (f) artificial spider. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright© 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Bimorph soft actuators with bidirectional bending actuations. (a) Schematic fabrication process of Nano-G@PVDF/GO bimorph film. (b) Schematic of the actuation mechanism of Nano-G@PVDF/GO soft actuators. (c) Bidirectional walking robot that can move along different directions in response to environmental humidity and external light irradiation. (d) Soft robot walking along the X-axis direction upon changing the environmental humidity. (e) Soft robot walking along the Y-axis direction upon switching the light irradiation on and off. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright© 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Light-driven complex origamis based on GO/EC bimorph soft actuators. (a) Schematic of the fabrication process. (b) Triangular ring encoded with positive and negative curvatures. (c) Annulus ring encoded with central symmetry. (d and e) Mechanical metamaterials encoded with positive and negative Poisson's ratios, respectively. (f) Natural buds and flowers of gold climber (Tristellateia australasiae A. Rich.). (g) Light-driven dynamic bloom of bioinspired artificial origami flower. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright© 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Leaf-inspired MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators. (a and b) A natural leaf and its sophisticated nanoarchitecture, respectively. (c and d) Schematic of the structure and the actuating mechanism of MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators, respectively. (e) The simulated actuation of MXene–cellulose/PC bimorph soft actuators via a finite element model. Light-driven shape-programmable bimorph soft actuators: (f) U-shaped curvature and (g) self-folding box. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright© 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  VO2-based bimorph soft actuators. (a) Resistance change of VO2 as a function of temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic of SWCNTs/VO2-based soft microactuator and COMSOL simulation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright© 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators at different temperatures: (c) 25 °C and (d) 70 °C. (e) Schematic of fabricating VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators by a laser beam with an adjusted cutting angle (θ). (f) Helical twisting of VO2 NA/CNT bimorph soft actuators at θ = 45° under strong light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Hydrogel-based bimorph soft actuators. (a) Linear swelling ratio, λf, of PNIPAm–rGO and PAAm as a function of light irradiation time. (b) Light-driven bidirectional bending of bimorph hydrogel actuators. (c) Selective light control of bimorph hydrogel actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright© 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d and e) Wavelength-selective light-driven deformation of PNIPAm-based soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) ELP/rGO bimorph hydrogel actuators for light-driven soft crawler and “joint” bending of fingers on an artificial hand. Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Light-driven SWCNTs–LCE/silicone bimorph soft actuator. (a) Schematic of the deformation of SWCNTs–LCE/silicone bimorph soft actuator upon IR-light irradiation. (b) Photograph showing the deformation of a bimorph soft actuator when the IR light is turned on and off. (c and e) Photographs showing light-driven LCEs-based soft crawler on (d) a ratcheted substrate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright© 2013, Wiley-VCH.	 

Photothermal volume expansion	PI/paraffin wax/CNT	33	100 (Vis)	0.87	20	0.74	
49

PDMS/PDMS–GNPs	130	2950 (NIR)	5	60	0.4	
105

PDMS/RGO–CNTs	120	250 (Vis)	3.6	80	0.35	
121

PC/CNTs	11	100 (Vis)	0.87	25	0.63	
118

PMMA/AuNRs–RGO	25	50 (NIR)	0.5	35	2.0	
123



Photothermal volume contraction	Photothermal desorption	BOPP/graphite/paper	67	300 (NIR)	10	41.4	1.9	
58

PC/MXene–cellulose	20	80 (NIR)	6.6	54.5	0.84	
84

PDA–rGO/NOA-63	10	22 (NIR)	2	—	0.96	
85

GO/EC	40	140 (NIR)	10.3	25	2.0	
132

Metal–insulator transition	VO2/SWCNTs	0.92	38000 (Vis)	0.008	68	2.2	
139

W–VO2/CNTs	1.68	800 (Vis)	0.029	34	4.4	
148

Hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition	PNIPAm–AuNPs/PAAm	235	150 (Vis)	24	—	4.28	
154

g-PNIPAm–MNP/PAAm	50	41.8 (Vis)	60	—	75	
160

GO/GO–PNIPAm	—	200 W (NIR)	90	25	2.2	
155

Nematic–isotropic transition	LCE–SWCNTs/silicone	400	1160 (NIR)	10	68	2.8	
167

LCE–dyes/LCE	500	180 (NIR)	32	47	3.2	
186

LCE/SWCNTs	275	4500 (NIR)	15	55	2.8	
176


 	Fig. 13  Light-driven moving wheels based on bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. Schematic showing the mechanism of (a) rolling away from the light source or (b) rolling toward the light source. Photographs showing the continuous light-driven forward rolling wheels with the LCE film set as the outer layer (c) and backward rolling wheel with LCE film set as the inner layer (d). Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright© 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  Light-driven artificial swimmers based on bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Schematic of photoinduced bending based on LCPs/PI bimorph soft actuators. (b and c) Schematic showing the swimming mechanism and images of bioinspired artificial swimmer propelled by UV irradiation, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201. Copyright© 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 15  Reprogramming light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Light-driven spiral actuators with an LCP layer on the inside and outside of the helix. (b) Light-driven dual-mode soft actuators composed of two sections with an LCN on the outside and inside. (c) Shape programming and light-driven complex shape morphing in a single soft actuator. Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright© 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Red-light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators based on upconversion technology. (a) Schematic mechanism of upconversion-based light-driven bimorph soft actuators. (b) Illustration of PtTPBP (sensitizer), BDPPA (annihilator), and upconversion emission upon 635 nm excitation, LC monomer, and crosslinker. (c) Schematic of the fabrication of upconversion-based bimorph soft actuators. (d) Photograph of red-light-driven actuation of bimorph soft actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators through synergistic application of photochemical azobenzene and photothermal AuNRs. (a) Schematic showing the photothermal and photochemical mechanisms for different shape-bending behaviors driven by NIR and UV-vis light. (b) Schematic of light-driven bending downward and upward with the AuNRs–ALCN layer set as bottom layer or top layer, respectively. (c) Images of light-driven plastic “athletes” that could do push-ups and sit-ups. (d) Schematic of light-driven artificial “crane” that can execute a series of robot-like motion tasks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright© 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  UV- and NIR-light-driven polysiloxane-based bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (a) Bending and chiral twisting in plant tendril of cucumbers. (b) Chemical compositions of the top layer (formula 1) and bottom layer (formula 2) of bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. (c) Schematic for fabricating light-driven bimorph liquid crystalline actuators. Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright© 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

Photochemical	LCN/PI	22.1	150 (UV)	2.4	55	23	
201

LCE/PE	65	240 (UV)	60	130	—	
197

LCN/PET	16	170 (UV) & 300 (blue)	15	—	18	
204

PLAZ/LDPE	25	270 (UV)	5	180.1	—	
202

LCP/PI	20	100 (UV)	5	72	—	
98


Photochemical and photothermal	GO/ALCN	120	700 (NIR)	15	54	1.35	
47

70 (UV)	15	47.6	0.74
AuNR–ALCNs/BOPP	150	6700 (NIR)	40	150	3	
209

20	100 (UV)	30	—	8
20	20 (Vis)	30	—	0



	Expansion of active layer in response to light	• High curvature	• Susceptible actuation performance due to heat exchange with external environment	• Soft gripper	
42 and 49

• Fast actuation speed	• Soft crawler	
42, 109, 120 and 123

• Versatility in selection of material	• Soft swimmer	
105

• Easy programming	• Soft jumper	
117


	• Light-driven motor	
118 and 120


	• Smart curtain	
118


	• Artificial iris	
120


	• Metamaterials	
77 and 84


	• Power generation	
115 and 185





	Desorption of water molecules	• High curvature	• Relatively low stability	• Smart curtain	
58

• Versatility in selection of material	• Irreversible actuation in dry environment	• Soft crawler	
84, 85 and 130

• Easy programming	
	• Soft gripper	
135


	
	• Wearable sensor	
136

Metal–insulator transition	• Fast actuation speed	• High actuation energy	• Soft lifter	
149

• Excellent stability	• Limited programming	• Soft crawler	
149

• High volumetric work density	
	
	

• Superior energy conversion efficiency	
	
	

Hydrophilicity–hydrophobicity transition	• High curvature	• Low mechanical properties	• Artificial hands	
154 and 159

• Tissue-like softness	• Sluggish actuation speed	• Soft crawler	
159

• Superior biocompatibility	• Risk of dehydration in the ambient condition	
	

Nematic–isotropic phase transition	• Superior mechanical properties	• Relatively sluggish actuation speed	• Soft crawler	
167, 176 and 184

• Excellent stability	• Limited curvature
• Inherent anisotropy	





	Light-driven configuration change of molecular photoswitch in liquid crystalline matrix	• High adaptability in different environment	• Sluggish actuation speed	• Soft gripper	
209

• Excellent stability	• Limited curvature	• Soft crawler	
203

• Superior mechanical properties	
	• Soft swimmer	
201

• Inherent anisotropy	
	• Light-driven motor	
101, 197 and 203


	
	• Power generation	
198


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
