Integrating anaerobic digestion, hydrothermal liquefaction, and biomethanation within a power-to-gas framework for dairy waste management and grid dec ...  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00608D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00608D
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 4644-4661Integrating anaerobic digestion, hydrothermal liquefaction, and biomethanation within a power-to-gas framework for dairy waste management and grid decarbonization: a techno-economic assessment†

        
          
            Nazih 
            Kassem
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            James 
            Hockey
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Camilo 
            Lopez
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Laurent 
            Lardon
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Largus T. 
            Angenent
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Jefferson W. 
            Tester
          
        
      bc
aDepartment of Biological and Environmental Engineering, Riley Robb Hall, Cornell University, 2154 Snee Hall, Ithaca, NY 14853, USA. E-mail: nk644@cornell.edu
bCornell Energy Systems Institute, Cornell University, NY, USA
cSchool of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Cornell University, Olin Hall, Ithaca, NY, USA
dElectrochaea GmbH, Semmelweisstraße 3, 82152 Planegg, Germany
eCentrum for Applied Geosciences, University of Tübingen, Schnarrenbergstraße 94-96, 72076 Tübingen, Germany
Received 
      20th April 2020
    , Accepted 3rd July 2020First published on 3rd July 2020AbstractThis study highlights the potential of combining energy and dairy waste management systems to maximize resource recovery and reduce dairy farming environmental impacts. A combined anaerobic digestion, hydrothermal liquefaction, and a biomethanation process system was used to generate Renewable Natural Gas (RNG). The biomethanation step is part of a Power-to-Gas (PtG) system incorporating an electrolyzer that generates hydrogen to react with carbon dioxide to produce additional RNG. A distributed system of biorefineries was utilized to evaluate the economic feasibility of producing renewable biomethane for gas pipeline injection in an effort to decarbonize New York's natural gas grid and lower environmental impacts. Considering the waste produced by 397000 dairy cows in NY State, this distributed biorefinery system was shown to generate 22 million MJ of RNG per year. The RNG selling price, as defined by carbon credit pricing mechanisms, was found to be the most critical factor in determining economic viability. For example, using the Low Carbon Fuel Standard (LCFS) and the Renewable Fuel Standard (RFS) result in a $7 billion 20 year NPV and a competitive effective Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOEe) of $10 per GJ.
1. Introduction
During the last decade, the proportion of New York State's (NYS)' electricity provided by renewable sources has increased from 17% to 28% (ref. 1) as a result of incentives for solar PV and wind power deployment and increasing capacity of hydroelectric power. The rest is supplied by natural gas (40%) and nuclear (30%).2 The largest proportion of renewable electricity comes from hydroelectric power, with around 80% of the state's total renewable electric generation.2 Wind is the second largest contributor with around 12% of net renewable electricity generation.2 The rest is generated mainly by biomass with about one-third of the state's non-hydroelectric renewable power generation, followed by solar PV.2 In comparison, primary biomass resources, such as wood, agricultural products, solid waste, and landfill gas, currently provides nearly 10% of the world's total primary energy providing energy services for transport, heating, and electricity generation.3 As part of the newly signed Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act (CLCPA), the New York Clean Energy Standard (CES), originally adopted in 2016 and amended in 2019, requires 100% carbon free electricity by 2040 and net zero carbon emissions (85% in-state reduction) by 2050.4 In order to achieve these aggressive climate and energy goals, NYS needs to increase its share of renewable energy sources.
With approximately 397000 dairy cows that live in Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO) farms, New York is the third largest dairy state in the U.S. It is also the nation's largest producer of yogurt and sour cream, and the 4th largest producer of cheese. The waste generated by the dairy industry is, therefore, considerable.5 A typical cow produces 68 kg of wet manure per day (8.9 kg dry), equating to near 17 million tonnes of waste each year.6 When untreated and unrecovered, this underutilized waste resource is contributing to methane emissions in the atmosphere that will increase the effects of climate change.7 This waste should instead be viewed as a resource for energy and nutrient (nitrogen, phosphorous, potassium) recovery and can be harnessed through a combination of Anaerobic Digestion (AD) and Hydrothermal Liquefaction (HTL) processes.8
AD is a biological process that uses methanogenesis to convert organic matter to biogas (CH4 and CO2), which can be combusted using combined heat and power or upgraded to biomethane.9,10 This process seeks to reduce methane emissions and odor produced from manure storage and handling.11 The liquid digestate, a by-product of the AD process, can be spread across fields as a soil amendment.9 The digestate, which is composed of the remaining organic fraction with slow or null anaerobic biodegradability,12 can also be used as a feedstock to the HTL system. Currently, on-farm AD used in NYS is limited: out of the 418 CAFO farms in NYS, only 33 are processing the waste produced from their dairy cows. In the current economic climate in NYS and the US in general, the profitability of centralized AD projects is minimal.9,13,14
Unlike AD, HTL is a thermochemical process for treating organic wastes using supercritical water for fast hydrolysis.15 This is followed by dehydration and condensation of sugars, lipids, and proteins to produce the main products; hydrochar, biocrude oil, an aqueous phase, and CO2. All products from HTL can be utilized in some form; hydrochar can be used as soil amendment, biocrude oil as a fuel alternative, the aqueous phase can be further treated for nutrient recovery, while CO2 can be used in carbon capture and utilization (CCU) systems.
Power-to-Gas (PtG) is one such CCU system, where electricity is converted into valuable products including hydrogen,16,17 methane,18,19 liquid fuels and other industrial chemicals (methanol, ethylene, propylene, formic acid).20–22 As the share of renewables in the electric power sector increases,23–25 the storage of excess renewable and intermittent energy in chemical bonds, such as CH4, will become more attractive due to its long term storability,20,26–30 improved dispatchability of power systems,31 and inherent grid balancing services.32–34 Furthermore, the versatility of methane (used in heating, electric, and transportation sectors) and the existing natural gas infrastructure justifies the use of power-to-methane (PtM) system.19 The PtG system evaluated in this study consists of an electrolyzer and a methanation unit. Water electrolysis produces H2, which reacts with CO2 (sourced form AD and HTL) in the methanation reactor to produce methane (Fig. 1). The carbon intensity of the methane produced is determined by the carbon intensity of the electrical power used to produce the hydrogen (i.e. renewable vs. electric grid average fuel mix) and by the carbon burden or carbon credit attached to the CO2 used during the methanation process. Thus, in New York state, where around 40% of the carbon footprint comes from consuming natural gas for heating purposes (including space and water heating in the residential and commercial sectors and low-temperature industrial heating),35–39 PtG systems can be seen as an opportunity to satisfy gas demand while decreasing the greenhouse gas emissions of the current fossil-based natural gas system.40
 Fig. 1  Process flow diagram of a novel integrated anaerobic digestion, hydrothermal liquefaction and biomethanation resource recovery biorefinery. 
In an earlier study, we showed that the economics of converting biomethane into electricity at the biorefinery site and selling it to the grid would only be profitable with considerable government support.41 Furthermore, the current average commercial selling price for natural gas in New York State is very low, at $7.1 per GJ.42 In part, this explains the lack of investment from farmers and the industry in agricultural and food waste conversion activities in the state. Renewable credit programs, such as the federal renewable fuel standard (RFS) and the California low carbon fuel standard (LCFS), could be used to increase the value of the methane produced. The valuation is attributed to the monetization of the fuel's environmental benefits, and, as such, depends on the carbon intensity of the pathway used to produce the fuel. By direct injection of RNG into the pipeline, the value is realized with the price incentive for RNG compared to conventional natural gas. Currently this represents a huge gain as price for RNG can, in California, under certain conditions, reach up to $83 per GJ (see ESI Section 4 for calculations†). Such price incentives could result in substantial economic advantages, which would increase farmers income and catalyze the deployment of manure conversion projects, helping New York State reach its 2050 carbon neutrality goals43,44 by decarbonizing the natural gas grid.
Numerous studies have examined the techno-economic feasibility of PtG systems integrated with AD of organic wastes such as sewage sludge,45 grass silage46 and municipal organic wastes.47 However, none of these evaluate digestate processing. Parra et al.48 compare PtG systems using CO2 supply from direct atmospheric capture and biogas upgrading, but do not explicitly include the latter in their model. In another paper, Parra et al.49 analyze PtG systems with a focus on electrolyzer rating and technology, regardless of CO2 source. Finally, Michailos et al.50 assessed the feasibility of an integrated AD, gasification and biomethanation system within a wastewater treatment plant context. The novelty of our study lies in the coupling of the PtG system with a dairy waste processing system, the use of HTL as a post AD processing step and in the use of carbon credit mechanisms to improve economic profitability. In that respect, this study highlights the potential for maximizing resource recovery within a waste-to-energy circular economy. The primary goal of this investigation was to evaluate the economic and environmental feasibility of implementing a spatially resolved system of biorefineries in NYS, coupling AD and HTL within a PtG framework to convert dairy manure (Fig. 1). We start this study by defining the mass balance and cost assumptions of the different process components, followed by a presentation of the spatial analysis model. Finally, we investigate the economic implications of using carbon credit systems such as the RFS and LCFS. The NYS-wide system evaluated consists of 26 distributed biorefineries throughout the state.
2. Methods and processes
2.1 Boundaries and scope of study
The scope of the project considered 418 NYS Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation (CAFO) farms and current AD sites, with a total of 397000 cows (based on available data). Existing AD sites were modelled as the locations of distributed biorefineries throughout the state, to enable a more economical process, while aiming to reduce net carbon dioxide emissions resulting from manure management. To establish the methodology, we analyzed the process components of a distributed biorefinery system with dairy waste from multiple farms. The electricity costs, RNG pricing, manure and biogas transportation, and renewable energy credit schemes were considered and analyzed. In addition, the economic remuneration from hydrochar and biocrude oil were considered as part of additional revenue streams.
2.2 Operating conditions and assumptions

2.2.1 AD and HTL components. 
Our study utilized current anaerobic digester (AD) sites in NYS and evaluated the possibility of enlarging the AD site with the addition of HTL and PtG technology. The digesters were considered to be Continuously Stirred Tank Reactors (CSTR) operating at a temperature of 35 °C, with a hydraulic residence time (HRT) of 20 days. The temperature selected was the optimal temperature for mesophilic bacteria to operate.51 In this analysis, the operating conditions of the HTL reactor were 300 °C, with an average residence time of 60 min. Further details concerning the AD and HTL processes used in this study are described in an earlier paper.41


2.2.2 Electrolyzer and bio-methanation components. 
Our earlier discussion of the processes outlined two steps: (1) producing hydrogen (H2) from renewable energy; and (2) utilizing H2 to convert CO2 into methane in a bio-methanation reactor. There are several methods used to produce hydrogen from renewables, such as alkaline (AEL), proton membrane (PEM), and solid oxide (SOEC) electrolysis. AEL is the incumbent water electrolysis technology, and is characterized by high durability and relatively low capital costs.52,53 Because of its technological maturity,54 alkaline electrolysis has been more prevalent in commercial-scale applications.55–57 PEM technology is less mature and is, up to date, mainly used for small-scale applications.58 PEM electrolysis exhibits higher efficiencies and more flexible operations at the expense of shorter lifespans and expensive catalyst materials.55 Solid oxide technology is the most efficient, but is still in its early stages of development and only demonstrated at pilot lab scales.55 Although PEM and SOEC electrolyzers have higher reported efficiencies,59,60 in this study, we opted to use alkaline electrolysis because of its lower capital costs and higher nameplate capacities,18 making it the most cost-effective option. The efficiency (HHV-based) of conventional alkaline electrolysis ranges between 60 and 80%55,61–63 and varies with operational conditions of the electrolyzer. To be conservative, we assumed a 70% (HHV-based) electrolyzer efficiency, based on Electrochaea's commercial BioCat system in Denmark.64 The water required for electrolysis was assumed to be sourced from local New York State water boards. Two electricity sources were considered in this study as part of a sensitivity analysis: the New York electric grid and renewable electricity from a power purchase agreement (PPA) with the NY Power Authority (NYPA).
The methanation can either proceed biologically or catalytically.57,61,65,66 In this study, we assumed biological ex situ methanation67 using Electrochaea's BioCat system,64 with methanogenic archaea serving as biocatalysts in the conversion of hydrogen and CO2 (sourced from AD and HTL). Using a biocatalyst reduces the capital and operating costs considerably compared to conventional thermochemical processes due to its lower temperatures of operation and no requirement for expensive metal catalysts.18,68 The details of Electrochaea's BioCat process are proprietary and are not presented in this paper. The methanation reaction uses all CO2 produced from AD and HTL and reacts with the renewable hydrogen to produce methane and water according to the below overall stoichiometric reaction (eqn (1)) with a reported 100% conversion efficiency.64 CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O(1)
The sizing of the PtG system depends on the amount of CO2 produced. Using a 70% (HHV based) electrolyzer efficiency, we determine that a 1 MWe PtG system converts 50 N m3 h−1 of CO2 into CH4 (see ESI Section 3 for details†). The amount of hydrogen required for methanation, and thus the electrical energy needed for electrolysis can be determined to estimate the PtG system capacity (MWelectric = MWe): PtG (MWe) = x/50(2)where x is the total flow rate of CO2 (N m3 h−1) entering the methanation plant, and PtG (MWe), the PtG system size in Megawatts (electric).

2.3 AD and HTL mass balance modelling
MATLAB was used to model the AD and HTL processes and compute the different product streams that would be generated. Methane production is mainly a function of digested organic matter (also measured as volatile solids – VS) consisting of soluble volatile fatty acids (VFA) and complex particulate organic matter, typically lignocellulose, that are found in manure. The typical characteristics of a dairy cow were assumed using Table 1. Methane generation (L/d) is calculated using an experimental methane yield factor for dairy manure AD of 0.264 L CH4 per g VS fed, obtained from the literature.69,70 Details of the AD model and the calculation of the biogas CO2/CH4 ratio can be found in Sections 1 and 2 of the ESI.†
Table 1 Characteristics of manure produced daily by a lactating dairy cow6




Parameter description
Value
Unit




Total (wet/liquefied) manure
68
kg ≈ 1 L


Volatile solids (VS)
7.5
kg


COD
8.1
kg


BOD
1.3
kg


Total solids (TS)
8.9
kg


Moisture content
87
%




The HTL model computes biocrude oil, hydrochar, CO2, and aqueous phase production based on the influent carbon mass flow rate and carbon conversion yield data obtained from Posmanik et al., 2018.71 The HTL influent consists of the undigested organic compounds found in the AD digestate. Details on the HTL mass balance calculations can be found in Section 2 of the ESI.† The carbon mass balance for AD and HTL processes are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 AD and HTL carbon balances




AD Input (kg carbon)
AD outputs (kg carbon)


Volatile solids
CH4
CO2
Digestate




1000
294
232
474






HTL input (kg carbon)
HTL outputs (kg carbon)


Digestate
Biocrude oil
Hydrochar
CO2
Aqueous phase




1000
380
240
190
190




2.4 Spatial analysis
To assess the viability of the distributed biorefineries, geospatial data was sourced to determine the relative location of farms, digesters, gas transmission lines, and injection points. In the analysis, only CAFO farms were considered. Farm, AD, and natural gas infrastructure data were obtained from the New York Department of Environmental Conservation (NYDEC), the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) AgStar Database,72 and the Energy Information Administration (EIA), respectively. ArcGIS was used to model this data, define the PtG system boundaries, and evaluate manure transport and natural gas piping logistics. The system boundary was defined as a group of farms around a centralized biorefinery, referred to in this study as a ‘cluster’. Farms were grouped according to their nearest AD site. As such, the clusters are distributed throughout the state and centralized locally with respect to nearby farms. The capacity of each centralized biorefinery was determined by its cluster size. More details on spatial analysis methodology could be found at Kassem et al.41
2.5 Economic analysis

2.5.1 Capital and operating costs of AD, HTL and PtG components. 
Since none of the currently installed digesters in NYS have sufficient capacity to handle the increased daily manure inflows due to centralization, all 26 ADs considered in this study were upgraded. The capital costs for AD have been estimated using the USDA's Anaerobic Digester Budget Calculator software.73 The software also considers the biogas infrastructure (gas separation, H2S scrubbing etc.) and compressed natural gas (CNG) unit required to process the biogas from the AD unit. The AD capital costs are mainly a function of the herd size. Using the manure inlet flow rate, the subsequent digester volume and construction costs were determined. Pre-digester separation, freights, mechanical building, reactor, H2S scrubbing, among other costs were considered in the software.
HTL is at an early stage of its development with only small-scale systems built and tested. It has not been deployed at commercial scales, which leads to considerable uncertainty in scaling costs to larger plant sizes. The HTL system consists of the reactor, heat exchangers, product separation, and pumping systems. The annual operational and maintenance costs for the HTL system consist of electricity import, external heat import, labor costs, as well as equipment maintenance. The capital (CC) and operating and maintenance (OM) costs were estimated using non-linear cost functions that account for economies of scale with a 0.6 scaling factor (eqn (3) and (4)). (3) (4)where x is the dry flow rate (kg h−1) entering the HTL reactor, CC(HTL)x and OM(HTL)x, the capital and operating and maintenance costs ($) of the HTL reactor at a dry flow rate x (kg h−1), respectively. CC(HTL)200 and OM(HTL)200 are the total capital and annual operating and maintenance costs, at a flow rate of 200 (kg h−1) and are equal to $3692000 and $611550, respectively.8
The electrolyzer unit and the methanation plant capital costs for each centralized facility were estimated using data provided by Electrochaea, based on their BioCat system and proprietary biocatalyst. The costs were computed using Electrochaea's cost curve estimates (Fig. 2), which are within range of published literature values and learning curve predictions, for AEL electrolysis.55,57,65 As for biomethanation, the costs provided by Electrochaea are slightly below current values57,61,65 but well within predicted estimates for the near future.57 Electrochaea's cost estimates do not include outside the battery limit costs (e.g. interconnection, civil works etc.) and can vary depending on site specifics. The operating costs of the electrolyzer and methanation plants have been set at 3% of their respective capital costs by Electrochaea. The capital costs per unit capacity decreases with higher PtG system size, reflecting economies of scale, Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Electrolysis and methanation plant cost curves (data source: Electrochaea, 2019 (ref. 64)). 


2.5.2 Transportation costs and emissions. 
Both manure haulage and RNG piping were examined in this paper. The spatial analysis conducted determined the distances between CAFO farms and their centralized Anaerobic Digesters, respectively. Using a NY local contracted trucking fleet, the manure can be transported at $82 per hour.108 This report considers loading, unloading, and driving time, as well as a 40 min leeway assumed for parking the truck and setting up the pumping equipment. The number of truck trips per year was determined by dividing the annual manure inflow rate (m3 per year) by the size (m3) of a single truck. The driving time is calculated by dividing the roundtrip driving distance between farm and centralized AD facility by average truck speed (assumed to be 100 km h−1). The annual transportation costs (eqn (5)) have been computed for each farm individually and then summed to compute the total. (5)
The emissions from transportation were assumed as a function of distance travelled, truck fuel efficiency, and fuel carbon density. In this study, class 7 & 8 trucks with average fuel efficiencies of 5.82 mpg (ref. 74) running on gasoline, were assumed. A gasoline carbon dioxide emission factor (EFfuel) of 8.89 kg gal−1 was assumed.75 The transportation carbon emissions were calculated using: (6)
The trucking distance represents the total round-trip distance travelled to haul manure from farm to centralized AD facility and back, per year. This is computed by multiplying the trips per year (eqn (5)), by the two-way distance from farm to AD. Using (eqn (6)) for each farm in the system, the yearly emissions were calculated.
The cost of piping the produced RNG into the compression stations (NG grid injection point) were computed using the USDA's ADBC calculator,73 and are embedded within the CNG infrastructure costs as defined in Section 2.5.1. The distances between each centralized biorefineries and their nearest NG compressor station were determined using ArcGIS.


2.5.3 Electricity pricing. 
Two electricity sources are considered in this study: the average New York electric grid and renewable electricity. The average wholesale price of grid electricity can vary considerably throughout the day and at different times of the year. The incurred cost of purchased electricity is dependent on the capacity factor of the electrolyzer and the time of day pricing. In this study, we used regulated wholesale electricity prices following the average Locational Based Marginal Pricing (LBMP), which are subject to utility and regulatory approvals. Grid electricity pricing data was sourced from the New York Independent System Operator's (NYISO) real-time, 15 min resolution zonal LBMP database.76 Zone C – central New York – was assumed for simplicity. An average time of day pricing curve was generated by calculating the average hourly LBMP for each year in the 2016–2018 period. The composite average LMBP curve for the years 2016–2018, as indicated by the dotted line in Fig. 3, was used to price grid electricity. Note that we assumed a capacity factor of 100% for the electrolyzer, such that it will be run continuously to convert all CO2 into methane without requiring any CO2 storage infrastructure. Time of day pricing was, therefore, not used to distinguish the lowest cost times of day to run the electrolyzer.
 Fig. 3  Average electricity commercial Locational Base Marginal Pricing (LBMP) for NYS-Zone C. 
The renewable electricity is assumed to be sourced under a Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) contract with the New York Power Authority's (NYPA) Niagara Power Project. The project includes two large-scale hydroelectric plants with a generating capacity of up to 2.6 GW electric77 (2018 average). Due to the lack of publicly disclosed hydro PPA prices, we estimated a fixed renewable electricity price of $0.05 per kWh based on average large-scale hydropower plant generation costs in the US, North America and globally.78–80


2.5.4 Carbon credits and renewable fuel pricing. 
New York currently has very limited government incentives for renewable bioenergy. However, as mentioned previously, renewable fuels can be credited using the RFS and, in California, using the LCFS. Both credits are stackable,81–83 which could, in some cases, result in a substantial premium. Under the RFS, renewable fuels are assigned a D-code based on pre-approved pathways84 used to produce the fuels. The D-code represents the type of Renewable Identification Number (RIN), or credit, the fuel is eligible for. For example, biomethane from cellulosic feedstocks, such as dairy manure, processed using agricultural digesters falls into the D3 RIN category (cellulosic biofuels). The e-methane produced from the PtG process, however, does not fall under any of the approved pathways, and as such cannot be credited using the RFS. Bio crude oil, on the other hand, falls under the D4 RIN category (biomass-based diesel). Credits generated under the LCFS are based on the carbon intensity (CI, in g CO2 per MJ) of the fuel production pathway. Credits are generated when the CI of the renewable fuel pathway is lower than that of the conventional fuel it replaces. The greater the difference (i.e., the lower the CI of the renewable fuel), the more credits can be generated. Compared to the RFS, the LCFS enables the creation of a competitive carbon market where fuel producers strive to reduce their carbon footprint. In fact, the LCFS was originally adopted in 2009 to reduce the CI of transportation fuels consumed in California by at least 20% by 2030 from a 2010 baseline.85 As such, CARB sets yearly carbon intensity benchmarks for gasoline and diesel fuel. The 2019 compliance year benchmarks for gasoline (CARBOB) and diesel (ULSD) were 93.23 g CO2 per MJ and 94.17 g CO2 per MJ respectively. To be eligible for LCFS credits, the renewable fuels produced by our proposed system are therefore sold and used as transportation fuels in California. In this study, we assumed RNG produced in the dairy farms will be converted into compressed natural gas (CNG) for use in CNG vehicles, as a replacement to conventional gasoline while biocrude oil will be sold as a substitute for diesel. We recognize that this allocation is somewhat arbitrary in that many trucks are diesel-powered and could use CNG as a fuel. Because the CI of conventional gasoline and diesel fuel are similar, this allocation will not have a large impact.
The CI of the produced fuels depends on the assumed system boundary. Three cases were evaluated in this study: (A) AD with biogas upgrading, (B) case A + PtG, and (C) case B + HTL (Fig. 4). Due to the complexity of the integrated system, a lumped-process approach will be used to calculate the CI of the produced fuels, where AD biogas upgrading, PtG and HTL are lumped within a single process with biogas and electric power as inputs to the system. The carbon benefits of biogas (methane emissions avoidance from manure treatment) and carbon burden of electric power (carbon emissions if NY-grid sourced, no emissions if renewably sourced) are allocated to the renewable fuel products (biomethane, e-methane and bio crude oil) on an energy basis. We also consider a subcase where the carbon burden of using grid electricity is allocated to e-methane only. The different configurations evaluated along with the resulting fuel CIs are summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 4  The three cases evaluated along with their defined system boundaries for CI calculations. PtG consists of the electrolyzer and biomethanation units. 
Table 3 Carbon intensity of the produced fuels for cases A, B and C. Value in parenthesis represent the CI values for the subcase where the carbon burden of using grid electricity for electrolysis is only allocated to e-methane




Carbon intensity (g CO2 per MJ)
Bio-methane
E-Methane
Biocrude oil





Case A

−276
N/A
N/A












Case B









NY-grid power
−104 (−154)
−104 (−41)
N/A


Renewable power
−154
−154
N/A












Case C









NY grid power
−61 (−112)
−61 (2)
−61 (−112)


Renewable power
−112
−112
−112




The CI of shipping the produced fuels to California (by pipeline and rail, for methane and bio oil respectively) is added to the values in Table 3 to get the final CI of the delivered fuels, which is used to calculate the LCFS credit. Details on RFS and LCFS credits calculations can be found in Section 4 of the ESI.† Note that the assumed system boundaries and carbon allocation methods were used to estimate LCFS credits for fuel pricing, and not for a system full life cycle analysis, which was considered beyond the scope of this study. The resulting biomethane, e-methane and biocrude oil selling prices for the evaluated cases, accounting for both LCFS and RFS credits, are summarized in Table 4. In this study we did not include the time-dependence of the LCFS carbon credit prices and CI benchmarks.
Table 4 Renewable fuels selling prices. The selling price is composed of the LCFS credit, RFS credit (if applicable) and the fuel spot price. Values in parenthesis are premiums based on the subcases of cases B and C, where the carbon burden of grid electricity is only allocated to e-methane




Selling price ($ per GJ)
Bio-methane
E-Methane
Biocrude oil





Case A

83
N/A
N/A












Case B









NY-grid power
50 (59)
39 (26)
N/A


Renewable power
59
49
N/A












Case C









NY grid power
41 (51)
30 (18)
51 (61)


Renewable power
51
40
61




As a non-transportation fuel, hydrochar cannot be credited using the LCFS. Due to a lack of pricing data, hydrochar selling price was estimated using average biochar market prices86 ($2.87 per kg−1).


2.5.6 Discounted cash flow analysis. 
Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) analysis will be used to evaluate the financial feasibility of the project. The DCF was employed to determine indicators, such as the Net Present Value (NPV), the Levelized Cost of Energy (LCOE), and Internal Rate of Return (IRR). After the cost and revenue streams associated with the bioenergy system have been determined, a cash flow diagram (Fig. 5) showing all capital flows throughout the project lifetime was constructed. A discounted cash flow model was developed in Excel to compute the NPV of the project by: (7)where Pt, I0 and n represent the present value of the net cash flow in year t, the initial capital cost at year 0, and the project lifetime, respectively. In calculating the present values, we assumed a reasonably low base case discount rate of 4%, aimed at dairy farmers to provide a steady and short-term source of income. The discount rate was varied as part of the sensitivity analysis to reflect a wider range of economic conditions that account for technological and market risks for biomass technologies.87
 Fig. 5  Cash flow diagram for proposed scenarios, accounting for two years of construction with no cash flows. 
The IRR is the discount rate at which the project breaks even at the end of its lifetime and is calculated using Excel Solver, by setting the NPV at year 20 to zero and solving for the discount rate. Whereas, the LCOE is defined as the system infrastructure and operation costs required to produce a unit of energy output ($ per GJ). Because of the versatility of RNG (used for heating, generating electricity or as transportation fuel), we are defining the LCOE as the levelized cost per unit of chemical energy embedded in the RNG. The LCOE is computed by dividing the total lifetime costs (including the annualized capital costs) of the project over the total methane produced by: (8)where It, Mt and Et represent the investment expenditure, operation & maintenance costs and methane energy generation in year t, respectively. The investment expenditure consists of the annualized initial capital cost during the project lifetime n. r represents the discount rate. The numerator represents the present value of the total costs of building and operating the system throughout its assumed lifetime. The denominator consists of the total methane energy generated throughout the assumed lifetime, which is discounted to the present. Since taxes depend on profits, which are a function of assumed methane selling price, we decided not to include taxes in (eqn (8)) to keep the estimated LCOE independent of methane pricing. Any changes in methane pricing would result in different taxation amounts. A separate tax-adjusted LCOE was calculated by including taxes in the cost components of (eqn (8)) in the numerator (It + Mt).
Revenues generated were included separately to get a better representation of economic performance. An effective LCOE (LCOEe) was defined by accounting for the system's co-product sales: LCOEe = LCOE − Rh − Rb(9)where Rh, and Rb are the annual hydro-char and biocrude oil revenues respectively normalized to the total annual methane output. The LCOEe equals the minimum methane selling price in $ per GJ required to recover the “fixed” infrastructure investment costs for the entire process. In this case, the methane selling price includes contributions from dairy-produced biomethane from AD and PtG e-methane. Similarly, the tax-adjusted LCOEe was calculated by substituting the tax-adjusted LCOE into (eqn (9)).

3. Results and discussion
3.1 Spatial assessment
The centralized biorefineries were sited using existing on-farm AD locations, taking advantage of existing AD infrastructure and dairy fleet. However, all ADs were upgraded to accommodate the increased capacity resulting from farm clustering. In our spatial assessment, dairy farms were clustered around their nearest AD facility such that the minimum dairy cows per cluster exceeded 4800 (17 million liters of biogas), as stated by Electrochaea for economies of scale reasons pertaining to their biomethanation system. This spatially resolved model resulted in the creation of 26 clusters distributed across NYS with herd sizes ranging from 5870 cows in low farm density areas to 43300 cows in regions situated along the farm belt in central and western New York (Fig. 6). Profitability of the clusters were determined from the distances and relevant sizing data. Referring to Fig. 6, the small circles located around the digesters are the CAFO farms, where each farm cluster has its own color.
 Fig. 6  Geospatial analysis of all CAFO farms, anaerobic digester sites, natural gas pipelines and compressor stations. Clusters are in excess of 4800 cows each, where the multicolored sets of dots represent individual farms within a single cluster. 
The minimum distance between a farm and its digester can be as small as 1 km, whereas, some farms are as far away as 168 km. The costs for manure haulage are considerably higher in more remote areas of New York, where farms are sparsely located. Using the ArcGIS, “Near Tool”, the required manure haulage distance and the pipeline infrastructure costs can be calculated.41 The EIA has provided data to establish the location of the current natural gas pipelines and compressor stations in the state. However, this report has not detailed any negotiations that would be required between the natural gas grid supplier and the farm owners themselves, to transport the biomethane within the regulated guidelines.
The geospatial analysis highlighted that the potential for resource recovery from the state is extensive and a future project could include co-digestion with food wastes from yogurt plants, supermarkets, breweries and other food processors to increase the potential return from methane generation and reducing tipping fees to local companies.88 Biorefineries of this magnitude would boost local economy and provide jobs for local areas, supermarkets, and creameries. However, in our analysis we have not included co-digestion (just dairy manure).
3.2 Resource recovery and carbon intensity
Using a calculated volumetric ratio of 56%/44% CH4/CO2 for AD biogas, it was estimated that the NYS bioenergy system can potentially generate around 1.65 billion liters (case C) of methane per day, which is equivalent to 22 billion MJ (21 million MMBtu) per year, representing roughly 1.7% of New York State's natural gas consumption in 2017.89 Around 52% of this methane is produced by PtG biomethanation (e-methane), while the rest is obtained through anaerobic digestion of dairy manure (dairy biomethane). In addition, the system generates around 395000 liters (11 million MJ) of biocrude oil, and 238000 kg (3.1 million MJ) of hydrochar per day. Biocrude oil can be sold to refineries for further refinement into more valuable fuels such as diesel, while hydrochar, if shown to have similar properties as biochar, can be sold as a soil amendment product90–92 and water retention agent.93 The two products contributed to the revenues of the project, and in turn affect the economic feasibility. The aqueous phase could be further processed using an Upflow Anaerobic Sludge Blanket (UASB),41,94 however, this was not considered in this study.
As discussed earlier, the system boundaries evaluated in cases A, B and C (Fig. 4) were defined with two inputs: biogas and electricity. The carbon benefit/burden associated with the digestate is included in the biogas fraction. The digestate was therefore not included as an input for CI calculations. The carbon intensity associated with the AD process (and carried by biogas) was assumed to be −276 g CO2 per MJ, while that of the electric power was estimated at 58.6 g CO2 per MJ for the NY State electric grid fuel mix (0 g CO2 per MJ for renewable electricity). Table 3 shows that the CI of the produced fuels increases with additional unit processes. In case A, the biomethane gets all the carbon benefit (−276 g CO2 per MJ) (Table 3). By adding the PtG system to recover carbon dioxide (case B), that carbon benefit is now shared between biomethane and e-methane. The carbon burden of using grid electricity is also shared between the two fuels, resulting in overall higher CIs (−104 g CO2 per MJ) compared to case A. Finally, the addition of the HTL system to treat the digestate increases the CI's of each produced fuel to −61 g CO2 per MJ as the carbon benefit and burden are now shared between three products. Furthermore, the electricity required to process the additional CO2 produced by HTL increases the total carbon burden. On the other hand, using renewable electricity eliminates the carbon burden associated with the electric input, resulting in lower CI's for cases B and C (Table 3). The CIs of the produced fuels have strong implications on project economics as they directly influence the selling prices of the renewable fuels (Table 4). An integrated AD-HTL-PtG distributed system in NYS (case C) using renewable electricity would result in an estimated 2.9 million metric tonnes (MT) of CO2 per year of net emissions reduction, equivalent to around 4.3% of total NG-related CO2 emissions in NYS in 2017.95 Using the NY grid would reduce that number to 1.6 million MT CO2 per year. Similarly, cases A and B (using renewable electricity) both result in an estimated 2.9 million MT of CO2 emissions reduction per year, implying that the increase in products CI (g CO2 per MJ) from carbon allocation is balanced with increased energy production from the added co-products. However, using the NY electric grid would result in a net emission reduction of 1.9 million MT CO2 per year for case B, slightly higher than that of case C (with grid electricity). This difference is due to the higher electric carbon burden associated with processing additional CO2 from HTL.
3.3 Techno-economic analysis (TEA)
In this study, the techno-economic analysis and sensitivity analysis were only evaluated for case C (AD-HTL-PtG). All values reported in the Sections 3.3 and 3.4 pertain to case C.

3.3.1 Capital and operating costs. 
Through the models and mass balances, the capital and operating costs for AD and HTL for each biorefinery were estimated. Individual capital and operating costs for the five-stage process have been shown in Fig. 7, where the operating costs for CNG have been calculated and are included in the operating costs for AD. The highest expense to the project was the capital cost for the electrolysis units, accounting for 25% (Fig. 7a) of the total capital investment. Assuming continuous electrolyzer operations (24 hours per day) to convert all the CO2 generated by AD and HTL into CH4, the total PtG electrolyzer capacity required was estimated at 715 MWe in 26 biorefinery sites throughout NYS, totaling $497 million. The highest individual electrolyzer capacity at a biorefinery calculated was 78 MWe, based on the herd size of the largest cluster, with 43000 cows. Increases in R&D funding, learning curves and advances in electrolyzer manufacturing processes could reduce capital costs by up to 75%.55,57 Such developments can considerably reduce investment costs in the future. The sensitivity of electrolyzer costs to such factors, however, was not evaluated, and considered outside the scope of this study.
 Fig. 7  The total capital (a) and operating costs (b) required for the centralized biorefineries of the PtG system. 
The expense of the electricity required for electrolysis is considerable, representing almost 50% (Fig. 7b) or 65% (not shown) of the total annual costs using NY grid or renewable electricity, respectively. As the technology matures, the trend will move towards more efficient PEM electrolyzers,55 which can greatly reduce electricity costs. With such a high share in total annual costs, the price of electricity can greatly affect the profitability of the project. HTL account for 23% (Fig. 7b) of the total O&M costs. This is primarily because of the high temperature and pressure operating conditions and run time. The associated capital costs for the RNG pipeline infrastructure, designated as CNG on Fig. 7a, represent 21% of the total capital costs. This is a considerable cost and would require a complex permitting process, which has not been covered in this report.96 The total capital cost accounting for all equipment and reactors amounted to almost $2 billion. As previously discussed, the transportation costs of the PtG system are two-fold: transportation of raw manure in trucks from farms to the centralized biorefineries, and pumping RNG through piping infrastructure from the biorefineries to natural gas injection points (compressor stations). The sum of all individual farm transportation costs represents the total annual manure transportation costs for the NYS system and is estimated at $53 million annually. According to the analysis, the average transportation cost per km travelled is around $2.2 per km.


3.3.2 Revenues. 
The revenue model of the project consists of the profits generated by hydrochar, biocrude oil, and methane. The annual hydrochar revenues using an average biochar selling price of $2.87 per kg−1 was estimated at about $250 million per year. The revenue from biocrude oil was estimated at $203 million per year, based on the calculated premium selling price of $51 per GJ ($1.41 per L). Using our estimated selling prices for biomethane ($41 per GJ) and e-methane ($30 per GJ) under average NY grid power, the total annual revenues generated from methane amounts to $786 million, representing around 63% of total revenues. The LCFS credit ($28 per GJ) represents around 68% and 93% of the total selling premiums for biomethane and e-methane respectively. The LCFS credit increases to $38 per GJ when renewable electricity is used for electrolysis. In comparison, the market premium for biogas used in the transport sector in Denmark ranges from €1.34 to €5.23 per GJ ($1.5 to $5.9 per GJ), while biomethane in Estonia is subsidized at €100 per MWhth ($31 per GJ).97 The lower biogas premium in Denmark compared to that of biomethane in Estonia or to our calculated LCFS credits might be explained by the presence of CO2 in biogas, which lowers its energy content (GJ per m3). Because of its higher selling price compared to e-methane, biomethane generates 55% of the methane revenues although it represents 48% (by volume) of the total methane produced. Compared to the NY commercial natural gas price of $7.1 per GJ, substantial profits can be realized when carbon credits systems, such as the LCFS and RFS, are used to price RNG. Furthermore, as the electric grid becomes more decarbonized with higher renewables penetration, more credits could be earned, as shown in Table 4. The project has highlighted the advantages of coupling AD and HTL, drawing comparison with Angenent et al.98 The NYS PtG system has other benefits that, if quantified, could increase the revenue streams. These include ancillary services for grid stability63 or reduction of nutrient runoff and water eutrophication associated with manure land spreading. However, these benefits were not quantified and were considered to be beyond the scope of this study.


3.3.3 Discounted cash flow analysis. 
To effectively model the sensitivity analysis, a set of financial parameters representing current economic conditions and our estimated selling premium (using both LCFS and RFS credits under current NY grid fuel mix) have been established and indicated in Table 5.
Table 5 Base case financial parameters





a Locational based marginal pricing.





Tax rate
20%


Discount rate
4%


Bio-methane selling price
$41 per GJ


E-methane selling price
$30 per GJ


Biocrude oil selling price
$51 per GJ


Project lifetime
20 years


Electricity price (NY grid)
0.027$ per kWh (3 year average LBMPa, 2016–2018)




The tax rate, discount rate and costs were assumed to be constant over the course of the 20 year project lifetime. Using the base case parameters in Table 5, the project would break-even at year 4 (Fig. 8, B).
 Fig. 8  NPV curves for varying fuels pricing mechanisms and electricity prices. With ‘NoCredits’, RNG and biocrude oil were assumed to be sold using their commercial ($7.1 per GJ) and NY harbor spot price ($15 per GJ), respectively. 
The NPV at the end of the project lifetime for the base case was estimated at $7 billion. A positive NPV at the end of the project lifetime provides a financially attractive plan. The IRR in this case was calculated to be 28%, which is 7 times higher than the base case discount rate, indicating the project is financially attractive. In general, the higher the IRR the more attractive the project is ref. 99. If we were to follow NYS state's 100% renewable electricity by 2040 target and assume a zero-carbon intensity electric grid, the increased renewable fuels selling prices (Table 4) would result in a 20 year NPV of $8.3 billion (Fig. 8, A), representing a 19% increase from the base case value.
The LCOE calculated for the NYS system under the base case conditions amounted to $23 per GJ of RNG produced ($31 per GJ tax-adjusted LCOE) (Table 6, B). When we include the bio-oil and hydrochar co-products revenues, the LCOE is lowered to $2 per GJ (=LCOEe) which is equivalent to the effective cost of producing one unit of RNG. The tax-adjusted LCOEe for the assumed base case RNG selling prices was higher at $10 per GJ (Table 6, B), corresponding to the effective RNG selling price required to recover all costs, including taxes. The tax adjusted LCOEe in this case is lower than the base case weighted average RNG selling price of $35 per GJ, suggesting a post-tax net profit of $25 for every GJ of RNG sold at base case prices. In their study of an integrated PtG system, Michailos et al.50 calculate an LCOE of $44 per GJ. By adjusting the discount and tax rates to the values used in that study, (10% and 30% respectively), we obtain a comparable, but slightly lower tax adjusted LCOE value ($39 per GJ). This might be explained by their different system configuration, which includes the use of more expensive PEM electrolyzers and the use of gasification as a post AD processing step to produce additional H2 for biomethanation. Furthermore, Michailos et al. suggest up to a 42% reduction in minimum RNG selling price with the addition of by-products revenues (compared to a 67% reduction in tax adjusted LCOEe using the base case hydrochar and biocrude oil pricing).
Table 6 LCOE variation with different pricing scenarios




Scenario
Economic conditions (renewable fuel and electricity pricing)
Tax-adjusted LCOE ($ per GJ)
Tax-adjusted LCOEe ($ per GJ)
Normalized co-products revenues ($ per GJ)





a Different due to rounding.





A
RFS + LCFS + 100% renewable electricity
38
16
22


B
RFS + LCFS + NYgrid (wholesale)
31
10
21a


C
RFS + LCFS + NYgrid (commercial)
56
36
20a


D
RFS + NYgrid (wholesale)
25
10
15


E
RFS + NYgrid (commercial)
50
35
15


F
NoCredits + NYgrid (wholesale)
24
10
14


G
NoCredits + NYgrid (commercial)
49
35
14




In their review of power to methane (PtM) systems in the EU, Blanco et al.40 found that for PtM systems to be more attractive than natural gas, the climate impact of electricity used in electrolysis should be less than 123–181 g CO2 per kWh (34–50 g CO2 per MJ) when the CO2 comes from biogenic sources. In this study, the system shows profitability using the NY electric grid with carbon intensity of around 59 g CO2 per MJ.100 This is primarily attributed to the carbon credit systems (LCFS and RFS) used to monetize the carbon impacts of the AD and HTL co-products. If biocrude oil is sold at the NY harbor price ($15 per GJ), then the LCOEe and tax-adjusted LCOEe would increase to $9 per GJ and $16 per GJ respectively, reducing profit margins by about 24% (assuming RNG still sold at base case prices). In addition, if biomethane and e-methane are sold at the NG commercial price ($7.1 per GJ), the tax adjusted LCOEe would decrease to $10 per GJ (due to less tax burden) (Table 6, F), implying the project would incur net losses of around $3 per GJ of RNG sold, resulting in a 20 year NPV of −$800 million (Fig. 8, F). This highlights the importance of carbon credit systems and financial incentives on the economic feasibility of such large-scale projects.

3.4 Economic sensitivity analysis
The sensitivities of the NPV and LCOEe to RNG (biomethane and e-methane), electricity and biocrude oil selling prices, as well as project lifetime, discount rate and tax rate are shown in Fig. 9 and 10. Sensitivities were measured with respect to the base case parameters. Purchased electricity pricing has been varied from the average LBMP time of day pricing of the base case ($0.027 per kWh), to the average NY commercial electricity price ($0.14 per kWh),101 reflecting price volatility attributed to increased grid penetration of intermittent renewable resources.102 Factors affecting price volatility were not covered in this study. The methane and biocrude oil selling prices were varied between their LCFS and RFS premiums (Table 4), and their respective NG commercial price ($7.1 per GJ) and NY harbor ultra-low sulfur diesel (ULSD) spot price ($15 per GJ).
 Fig. 9  Tornado chart showing the NPV sensitivity analysis. 
The LCFS credit program, which directly influences RNG selling prices, is an important factor impacting the profitability of the project (Fig. 8 and 9). In fact, the 20 year NPV for the LCFS/RFS case with wholesale NY grid power (Fig. 8, B) is around 73 times higher compared to the RFS-only scenario (Fig. 8, D). The NPV sensitivity to RNG selling price is $220 million per unit change in RNG price ($ per GJ) (Fig. 9). In comparison, purchased electricity price has a much lesser effect on the NPV of the project considering the range of prices evaluated, with an NPV sensitivity of $65 million per unit change in electricity price ($ per MWh) (Fig. 9). Hydropower, the cheapest source of renewable energy is widely abundant in NYS, as such, other renewable sources with higher generation costs, such as solar PV or onshore wind were not evaluated in the sensitivity. As for biocrude oil, the NPV sensitivity is $41 million per unit change in biocrude price ($ per GJ) (Fig. 9). The NPV is highly sensitive to the discount rate, with around $690 million increase per percentage decrease in discount rate. This becomes especially important when RNG and biocrude oil are sold at their commercial prices. Biomass is a relatively mature and medium-risk technology with reported discount rates between 5 and 11%.45–48 Using the average discount rate in OECD countries of 7.5% (ref. 78) without any credit incentives to price RNG and biocrude oil results in a negative NPV of $1.1 billion. Government support through increased regulations and economic policies tend to decrease the perceived risk of renewable energy technologies, and thus, reduce the discount rate, incentivizing statewide deployment of biorefineries. Besides California's LCFS, which applies to transportation fuels only, and the RFS, which currently does not credit e-methane, NYS could develop policies and incentives similar to those being currently implemented in EU countries, such as Feed in Tarifs (FIT) and Feed in Premiums (FIP) for RNG used in the heating and cooling sectors in Denmark and Lithuania,97 a “flexibility” premium reflecting RNG storage in Germany,103,104 or an increase in biomethane injection purchase price allowing its dual use through injection and electricity production in France.105
For the same electricity prices, RNG credit incentives increase the tax-adjusted LCOE, as taxes resulting from selling fuels at higher premiums increases (Table 6). However, the tax-adjusted effective LCOE (LCOEe) remains almost constant with increased RNG credits (given fixed electricity prices) (Table 6) since the increase in taxes associated with higher RNG premiums is balanced by the addition of co-product revenues (bio crude oil and hydrochar), as defined by (eqn (9)). Compared to the ‘No Credits’ scenario, the total co-products normalized revenues increase by $1 per GJ with the addition of RFS credits (Table 6, D and E), and by $6 per GJ with the addition of LCFS credits (Table 6, B and C). Those incremental increases, associated with the biocrude oil premiums, contribute in balancing the increase in taxes. Using renewable electricity lowers the carbon intensity of the biocrude oil, increasing its premium (Table 6, A). Furthermore, given a fixed credit pricing, higher electricity prices increase the tax adjusted LCOE and LCOEe, as electricity contributes to the total operational costs of the system. Increasing electricity prices from wholesale (average LBMP of $0.027 per kWh) to commercial prices ($0.14 per kWh) increases the LCOE and LCOEe by around $25 per GJ (Table 6). Finally, the sensitivities of tax-adjusted LCOE and LCOEe to discount rates, tax rates and project lifetime are illustrated in Fig. 10.
 Fig. 10  Tornado chart showing the tax-adjusted LCOE (A) and tax-adjusted LCOEe (effective) (B) sensitivity analysis. 
Economic policies favoring low discount and tax rates, coupled with reduced time of day electricity pricing from higher renewables penetration levels would enable lower LCOEe values (Fig. 10B) comparable to those of utility-scale solar ($40 per MWh = $11 per GJ) and on-shore wind ($45 per MWh = $12.5 per GJ).106 Furthermore, increased renewable penetration could increase the LCFS credit prices, resulting in higher financial returns.
4. Conclusions
The economic and environmental feasibility of treating dairy manure via the method outlined in this study is dependent on many different factors, including transportations costs, purchased electricity pricing, project lifetime, financing (discount, interest, equity and tax rates), methane and co-product selling prices and most importantly, the availability of carbon credit incentives. The RNG premium obtained under the LCFS program was found to be the most critical factor in determining economic viability. Under today's economic conditions with average time-of-day electricity pricing coupled with carbon credit incentives, the hybrid AD-HTL-PtG system would be economically feasible. The favorable economics strongly depend on having in place carbon credit mechanisms that monetize and quantify the value of carbon negative processes and fuels. New York State's Reforming the Energy Vision (REV) initiative was introduced to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions and decrease reliance on fossil fuels. It calls for an 85% reduction in GHG emissions by 2050 and 100% renewable electricity by 2040.43 With NG heating representing a considerable portion of the state's energy consumption, New York could greatly benefit from the PtG system, which could contribute towards decarbonizing the NG grid. In fact, as the share of renewables in the electric grid fuel mix increases, the power to gas system would get even more attractive as a long term chemical storage fuel, which in turn, could increase its market value and have a large impact on the economics of the dairy farming industry, which is currently suffering from historically low milk prices.5 Finally, co-digestion with other types of food wastes might be considered as on option to even improve the attractiveness of the system107 all while tackling environmental management problems. The additional methane from food waste during co-digestion would be eligible for the LCFS credit under the organic waste to biomethane pathway.
Nomenclature

ADAnaerobic digestion
AELAlkaline electrolysis
BODBiological oxygen demand
CAFOConcentrated animal feeding operation
CARBCalifornia air resources board
CCCapital cost
CCSCarbon capture and storage
CICarbon intensity
CNGCompressed natural gas
CODChemical oxygen demand
CSTRContinuously stirred tank reactor
DCFDiscounted cash flow
EIAEnergy information administration
EPAEnvironmental protection agency
GHGGreenhouse gas
GISGeographic information system
HHVHigh heating value
HRTHydraulic retention time
HTLHydrothermal liquefaction
IRRInternal rate of return
LBMPLocational based marginal pricing
LCFSLow carbon fuel standard
LCOELevelized cost of energy
LCOEeEffective levelized cost of energy
NGNatural gas
NPVNet present value
NYDECNew York department of environmental conservation
NYISONew York independent system operator
NYMEXNew York mercantile exchange
NYSNew York state
O&MOperating and maintenance
PEMProton electrolyte membrane
PVPresent value
PtGPower-to-gas
PtMPower-to-methane
REVReforming the energy vision
RFSRenewable fuel standard
RINRenewable identification number
RNGRenewable natural gas
SOECSolid oxide electrolyzer cell
TSTotal solids
UASBUpflow anaerobic sludge blanket
USDAUnited States department of agriculture
VFAVolatile fatty acids
VSVolatile solids

Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge partial support provided by Cornell's Atkinson Center for a Sustainable Future, the Cornell Energy Systems Institute, and BARD, the US-Israel Binational Agricultural Research and Development fund (US-5051-17). We also thank Mich Hein (Electrochaea, Munich, Germany) for his valuable contribution on carbon credits. Largus T. Angenent acknowledges support from the Alexander von Humboldt Foundation in the framework of the Alexander von Humboldt Professorship endowed by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research in Germany.
References

          New York State Office of Information Technology Services, Electric Generation by Fuel Type, GWh: Beginning 1960: Open Data NY 2017, https://data.ny.gov/Energy-Environment/Electric-Generation-By-Fuel-Type-GWh-Beginning-196/h4gs-8qnu/data, accessed  10 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration - Independent Statistics and Analysis, New York State Profile and Energy Estimates, https://www.eia.gov/state/analysis.php?sid=NY#29, accessed  5 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          International Energy Agency, Technology Roadmaps 2017, https://www.iea.org/topics/renewables/technologyroadmaps/, accessed  4 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act, Governor Cuomo Executes the Nation's Largest Offshore Wind Agreement and Signs Historic Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act, https://www.governor.ny.gov/news/governor-cuomo-executes-nations-largest-offshore-wind-agreement-and-signs-historic-climate, accessed  12 April 2020 Search PubMed .

          New York State Department of Agriculture and Markets Division of Milk Control and Dairy Services, New York State Dairy Statistics Annual Summary,  2018 Search PubMed .

          ASAE, ASAE D384.2 MAR2005 Manure Production and Characteristics, American Society of Agricultural Engineers,  2005, vol. 2005 Search PubMed .
E. C. Adair, L. Barbieri, K. Schiavone and H. M. Darby, Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J., 2019, 83, 163–172 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gerber Van Doren, R. Posmanik, F. A. Bicalho, J. W. Tester and D. L. Sills, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 225, 67–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Usack, L. G. Van Doren, R. Posmanik, J. W. Tester and L. T. Angenent, J. Dairy Sci., 2019, 102, 3630–3645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ullah Khan, M. Hafiz Dzarfan Othman, H. Hashim, T. Matsuura, A. F. Ismail, M. Rezaei-DashtArzhandi and I. Wan Azelee, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 277–294 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Ebner, R. A. Labatut, M. J. Rankin, J. L. Pronto, C. A. Gooch, A. A. Williamson and T. A. Trabold, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 11199–11208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Santi, S. Proietti, S. Moscatello, W. Stefanoni and A. Battistelli, Biomass Bioenergy, 2015, 83, 17–22 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Gebrezgabher, M. P. M. Meuwissen, B. A. M. Prins and A. G. J. M. O. Lansink, NJAS - Wageningen J. Life Sci., 2010, 57, 109–115 CrossRef .
D. Sanscartier, H. L. MacLean and B. Saville, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 1233–1242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Posmanik, D. A. Cantero, A. Malkani, D. L. Sills and J. W. Tester, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2017, 119, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gahleitner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 2039–2061 CrossRef CAS .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. McDaniel Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
K. Ghaib and F. Z. Ben-Fares, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 433–446 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bailera, P. Lisbona, L. M. Romeo and S. Espatolero, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 292–312 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Quadrelli, G. Centi, J. L. Duplan and S. Perathoner, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1194–1215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 RSC .
B. J. Alqahtani and D. Patiño-Echeverri, Energy Policy, 2019, 134, 110936 CrossRef .
M. Arbabzadeh, R. Sioshansi, J. X. Johnson and G. A. Keoleian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3413 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Johlas, S. Witherby and J. R. Doyle, Renewable Energy, 2020, 146, 1315–1324 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Turner, G. Sverdrup, M. K. Mann, P.-C. Maness, B. Kroposki, M. Ghirardi, R. J. Evans and D. Blake, Int. J. Energy Res., 2008, 32, 379–407 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Pellow, C. J. M. Emmott, C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1938–1952 RSC .
J. O. M. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 2579–2588 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guandalini, S. Campanari and M. C. Romano, Appl. Energy, 2015, 147, 117–130 CrossRef .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qadrdan, M. Abeysekera, M. Chaudry, J. Wu and N. Jenkins, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5763–5775 CrossRef CAS .
B. Simonis and M. Newborough, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 21635–21647 CrossRef CAS .

          New York State Energy Planning Board, The Energy to Lead - End-use Energy,  2015, vol. 1 Search PubMed .
K. McCabe, M. Gleason, T. Reber and K. R. Young, Trans. - Geotherm. Resour. Counc., 2016, 40, 721–734 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, Commercial Buildings Energy Consumption Survey, https://www.eia.gov/consumption/commercial/data/2012, accessed  4 May 2019 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, Residential Energy Consumption Survey, https://www.eia.gov/consumption/residential/data/2015/, accessed  4 May 2019 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, State Energy Data System (SEDS): 1960-2016 (complete), https://www.eia.gov/state/seds/seds-data-complete.php?sid=US#Consumption, accessed  11 February 2020 Search PubMed .
H. Blanco, V. Codina, A. Laurent, W. Nijs, F. Maréchal and A. Faaij, Appl. Energy, 2020, 259, 114160 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kassem, D. Sills, R. Posmanik, C. Blair and J. W. Tester, Waste Manag., 2020, 103, 228–239 CrossRef PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, Natural Gas Prices, https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/ng_pri_sum_dcu_SNY_a.htm, accessed  16 February 2020 Search PubMed .

          Reforming the energy Vision, REV Initiatives, https://rev.ny.gov/, accessed  4 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          NY Senate Bill S6599, Climate Leadership and Community Protection Act,  2019 Search PubMed .
P. Collet, E. Flottes, A. Favre, L. Raynal, H. Pierre, S. Capela and C. Peregrina, Appl. Energy, 2017, 192, 282–295 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Q. Vo, D. M. Wall, D. Ring, K. Rajendran and J. D. Murphy, Appl. Energy, 2018, 212, 1191–1202 CrossRef CAS .
M. Van Dael, S. Kreps, A. Virag, K. Kessels, K. Remans, D. Thomas and F. De Wilde, Appl. Energy, 2018, 215, 416–425 CrossRef .
D. Parra, X. Zhang, C. Bauer and M. K. Patel, Appl. Energy, 2017, 193, 440–454 CrossRef .
D. Parra and M. K. Patel, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 3748–3761 CrossRef CAS .
S. Michailos, M. Walker, A. Moody, D. Poggio and M. Pourkashanian, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 209, 112663 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Rittmann and P. L. McCarty, Environmental Biotechnology: Principles and Applications, McGraw-Hill Education, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .
K. Zeng and D. Zhang, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36, 307–326 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carmo, D. L. Fritz, J. Mergel and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 4901–4934 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wulf, J. Linßen and P. Zapp, Energy Procedia, 2018, 155, 367–378 CrossRef .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. H. Chan, H. K. Ho, S.-C. Tan, M. Li, G. Li, J. Li and Z. Feng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 6866–6919 CrossRef CAS .
M. Thema, F. Bauer and M. Sterner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 112, 775–787 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Lehner, R. Tichler, H. Steinmuller and M. Koppe, Power-to-Gas: Technology and Business Models, Springer International,  2014 Search PubMed .
H. Blanco, W. Nijs, J. Ruf and A. Faaij, Appl. Energy, 2018, 232, 617–639 CrossRef .
S. M. Saba, M. Müller, M. Robinius and D. Stolten, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 1209–1223 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ajanovic and R. Haas, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2019, 8, e318 Search PubMed .
A. Buttler and H. Spliethoff, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2440–2454 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, F. Wen and Y. Xue, J. Mod. Power Syst. Clean Energy, 2017, 5, 439–450 CrossRef .

          Electrochaea GmbH, Electrochaea GmbH Power to Gas Energy Storage, http://www.electrochaea.com/, accessed  1 March 2019 Search PubMed .
C. Schnuelle, J. Thoeming, T. Wassermann, P. Thier, A. von Gleich and S. Goessling-Reisemann, Energy Res. Soc. Sci., 2019, 51, 187–197 CrossRef .
T. T. Q. Vo, A. Xia, D. M. Wall and J. D. Murphy, Renewable Energy, 2017, 105, 495–504 CrossRef CAS .
T. Schaaf, J. Grünig, M. R. Schuster, T. Rothenfluh and A. Orth, Energy. Sustain. Soc., 2014, 4, 2 CrossRef .

          F. Graf, M. Götz and A. M. Koch, in International Gas Union Research Conference, Copenhagen,  2014 Search PubMed .
F. Vedrenne, F. Béline, P. Dabert and N. Bernet, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 146–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Moody, R. T. Burns, G. Bishop, S. T. Sell and R. Spajic, Appl. Eng. Agric., 2011, 27, 433–439 Search PubMed .
R. Posmanik, C. M. Martinez, B. Cantero-Tubilla, D. A. Cantero, D. L. Sills, M. J. Cocero and J. W. Tester, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2724–2732 CrossRef CAS .

          Environmental Protection Agency, Livestock Anaerobic Digester Database, https://www.epa.gov/agstar/livestock-anaerobic-digester-database, accessed  12 March 2019 Search PubMed .

          G. M. Astill, R. C. Shumway and C. Frear, Anaerobic Digester System Enterprise Budget Calculator, http://csanr.wsu.edu/anaerobic-digestion-systems/enterprise-budget-calculator/, accessed 6 July  2020 Search PubMed.

          Geotab, The State of Fuel Economy in Trucking 2019, https://www.geotab.com/truck-mpg-benchmark/, accessed  15 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration - Independent Statistics and Analysis, Carbon Dioxide Emissions Coefficients, https://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/co2_vol_mass.php, accessed  9 April 2020 Search PubMed .

          New York Independent System Operator, Energy Market & Operational Data Custom Reports, https://www.nyiso.com/custom-reports, accessed  10 February 2020 Search PubMed .

          New York Power Authority, The Niagara Power Project: Clean Energy for NY, https://www.nypa.gov/power/generation/niagara-power-project, accessed  9 April 2020 Search PubMed .

          International Renewable Energy Agency, Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2018, Abu Dhabi,  2019 Search PubMed .

          International Renewable Energy Agency, Hydropower, https://www.irena.org/costs/Power-Generation-Costs/Hydropower, accessed  9 April 2020 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration - Independent Statistics and Analysis, Levelized Cost and Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Resources in the Annual Energy Outlook 2019,  2019 Search PubMed .

          J. Lane, LCFS vs. RFS: As two contend for the Renewables Heavyweight Championship, who is the Greatest?, https://www.biofuelsdigest.com/bdigest/2017/05/10/lcfs-vs-rfs-as-two-contend-for-the-renewables-heavyweight-championship-who-is-the-greatest/, accessed  15 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          C. Coker, Pipeline Injection of Biomethane in California, https://www.biocycle.net/2018/03/12/pipeline-injection-biomethane-california/, accessed  15 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          B. Pleima, Biogas to RNG Projects: What, Why and How, https://www.biocycle.net/2019/03/11/biogas-rng-projects/, accessed  15 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          Environmental Protection Agency, Approved Pathways for Renewable Fuel, https://www.epa.gov/renewable-fuel-standard-program/approved-pathways-renewable-fuel, accessed  11 February 2020 Search PubMed .

          California Air Resources Board, LCFS Basics, https://www.arb.ca.gov/fuels/lcfs/background/basics.htm, accessed  25 March 2020 Search PubMed .

          US Biochar Initiative, Manufacturers & Retailers, http://biochar-us.org/manufacturers-retailers, accessed  9 June 2019 Search PubMed .

          Oxera Consulting Ltd, Discount rates for low-carbon and renewable generation technologies,  2011 Search PubMed .

          S. Pongthornpruek and S. Watmuang, in URU International Conference on Science and Technology 2016, Trans Tech Publications Ltd,  2017, vol. 855, pp. 103–107 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, Natural Gas Consumption by End Use, https://www.eia.gov/dnav/ng/NG_CONS_SUM_DCU_SNY_A.htm, accessed  12 February 2020 Search PubMed .
J. Fang, L. Zhan, Y. S. Ok and B. Gao, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2018, 57, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bargmann, M. C. Rillig, A. Kruse, J.-M. Greef and M. Kücke, J. Plant Nutr. Soil Sci., 2014, 177, 48–58 CrossRef .
S. Schimmelpfennig, C. Kammann, G. Moser, L. Grünhage and C. Müller, Grass Forage Sci., 2015, 70, 582–599 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abel, A. Peters, S. Trinks, H. Schonsky, M. Facklam and G. Wessolek, Geoderma, 2013, 202–203, 183–191 CrossRef .
M. K. Daud, H. Rizvi, M. F. Akram, S. Ali, M. Rizwan, M. Nafees and Z. S. Jin, J. Chem., 2018, 2018, 1596319 Search PubMed .

          Energy Information Administration, State Carbon Dioxide Emissions Data, https://www.eia.gov/environment/emissions/state/, accessed  10 February 2020 Search PubMed .
B. C. Murray, C. S. Galik and T. Vegh, Mitig. Adapt. Strateg.
Glob. Chang., 2017, 22, 485–501 CrossRef .
M. Banja, R. Sikkema, M. Jégard, V. Motola and J.-F. Dallemand, Energy Policy, 2019, 131, 215–228 CrossRef .
L. T. Angenent, J. G. Usack, J. Xu, D. Hafenbradl, R. Posmanik and J. W. Tester, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 247, 1085–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pradhan, P. Gadkari, S. M. Mahajani and A. Arora, Appl. Energy, 2019, 249, 1–13 CrossRef .

          Energy Information Administration - Independent Statistics and Analysis, New York Electricity Profile 2018, https://www.eia.gov/electricity/state/newyork/index.php/, accessed  12 February 2020 Search PubMed .

          New York State Energy Research and Development Authority, Monthly Average Retail Price of Electricity - Commercial, https://www.nyserda.ny.gov/Researchers-and-Policymakers/Energy-Prices/Electricity/Monthly-Avg-Electricity-Commercial, accessed  25 May 2020 Search PubMed .
E. Cardella, B. T. Ewing and R. B. Williams, Energy Econ., 2017, 62, 428–437 CrossRef .
M. Banja, M. Jégard, V. Motola and R. Sikkema, Biomass Bioenergy, 2019, 128, 105313 CrossRef .

          Federal Republic of Germany, Federal Republic of Germany National Renewable Energy Action Plan in accordance with Directive 2009/28/EC on the promotion of the use of energy from renewable sources,  2009 Search PubMed .

          Ministry of Ecology Sustainable Development and Energy (France), Progress report on the promotion and use of the energy from renewable sources,  2015 Search PubMed .

          Lazard, Levelized Cost of Energy and Levelized Cost of Storage 2018, https://www.lazard.com/perspective/levelized-cost-of-energy-and-levelized-cost-of-storage-2018/, accessed  12 February 2020 Search PubMed .
J. G. Usack, L. Gerber Van Doren, R. Posmanik, R. A. Labatut, J. W. Tester and L. T. Angenent, Appl. Energy, 2018, 211, 28–40 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Gooch, J. Pronto, B. Gloy, N. Scott, S. McGlynn and C. Bentley, Feasibility Study of Anaerobic Digestion and Biogas Utilization Options for the Proposed Lewis County Community Digester, http://northeast.manuremanagement.cornell.edu/Pages/Funded_Projects/Past_Funded_ Projects.html, (accessed 12 June  2018) Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00608dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Process flow diagram of a novel integrated anaerobic digestion, hydrothermal liquefaction and biomethanation resource recovery biorefinery.	 
CO2 + 4H2 → CH4 + 2H2O	(1)
PtG (MWe) = x/50	(2)

Total (wet/liquefied) manure	68	kg ≈ 1 L
Volatile solids (VS)	7.5	kg
COD	8.1	kg
BOD	1.3	kg
Total solids (TS)	8.9	kg
Moisture content	87	%


1000	294	232	474


1000	380	240	190	190
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Electrolysis and methanation plant cost curves (data source: Electrochaea, 2019 (ref. 64)).	 
	(5)
	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Average electricity commercial Locational Base Marginal Pricing (LBMP) for NYS-Zone C.	 

 	Fig. 4  The three cases evaluated along with their defined system boundaries for CI calculations. PtG consists of the electrolyzer and biomethanation units.	 


Case A
	−276	N/A	N/A
	
	
	


Case B
	
	
	

NY-grid power	−104 (−154)	−104 (−41)	N/A
Renewable power	−154	−154	N/A
	
	
	


Case C
	
	
	

NY grid power	−61 (−112)	−61 (2)	−61 (−112)
Renewable power	−112	−112	−112


Case A
	83	N/A	N/A
	
	
	


Case B
	
	
	

NY-grid power	50 (59)	39 (26)	N/A
Renewable power	59	49	N/A
	
	
	


Case C
	
	
	

NY grid power	41 (51)	30 (18)	51 (61)
Renewable power	51	40	61
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  Cash flow diagram for proposed scenarios, accounting for two years of construction with no cash flows.	 
	(8)
LCOEe = LCOE − Rh − Rb	(9)

 	Fig. 6  Geospatial analysis of all CAFO farms, anaerobic digester sites, natural gas pipelines and compressor stations. Clusters are in excess of 4800 cows each, where the multicolored sets of dots represent individual farms within a single cluster.	 

 	Fig. 7  The total capital (a) and operating costs (b) required for the centralized biorefineries of the PtG system.	 

Tax rate	20%
Discount rate	4%
Bio-methane selling price	$41 per GJ
E-methane selling price	$30 per GJ
Biocrude oil selling price	$51 per GJ
Project lifetime	20 years
Electricity price (NY grid)	0.027$ per kWh (3 year average LBMPa, 2016–2018)

 	Fig. 8  NPV curves for varying fuels pricing mechanisms and electricity prices. With ‘NoCredits’, RNG and biocrude oil were assumed to be sold using their commercial ($7.1 per GJ) and NY harbor spot price ($15 per GJ), respectively.	 


A	RFS + LCFS + 100% renewable electricity	38	16	22
B	RFS + LCFS + NYgrid (wholesale)	31	10	21a
C	RFS + LCFS + NYgrid (commercial)	56	36	20a
D	RFS + NYgrid (wholesale)	25	10	15
E	RFS + NYgrid (commercial)	50	35	15
F	NoCredits + NYgrid (wholesale)	24	10	14
G	NoCredits + NYgrid (commercial)	49	35	14

 	Fig. 9  Tornado chart showing the NPV sensitivity analysis.	 

 	Fig. 10  Tornado chart showing the tax-adjusted LCOE (A) and tax-adjusted LCOEe (effective) (B) sensitivity analysis.	 
AD	Anaerobic digestion
AEL	Alkaline electrolysis
BOD	Biological oxygen demand
CAFO	Concentrated animal feeding operation
CARB	California air resources board
CC	Capital cost
CCS	Carbon capture and storage
CI	Carbon intensity
CNG	Compressed natural gas
COD	Chemical oxygen demand
CSTR	Continuously stirred tank reactor
DCF	Discounted cash flow
EIA	Energy information administration
EPA	Environmental protection agency
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GIS	Geographic information system
HHV	High heating value
HRT	Hydraulic retention time
HTL	Hydrothermal liquefaction
IRR	Internal rate of return
LBMP	Locational based marginal pricing
LCFS	Low carbon fuel standard
LCOE	Levelized cost of energy
LCOEe	Effective levelized cost of energy
NG	Natural gas
NPV	Net present value
NYDEC	New York department of environmental conservation
NYISO	New York independent system operator
NYMEX	New York mercantile exchange
NYS	New York state
O&M	Operating and maintenance
PEM	Proton electrolyte membrane
PV	Present value
PtG	Power-to-gas
PtM	Power-to-methane
REV	Reforming the energy vision
RFS	Renewable fuel standard
RIN	Renewable identification number
RNG	Renewable natural gas
SOEC	Solid oxide electrolyzer cell
TS	Total solids
UASB	Upflow anaerobic sludge blanket
USDA	United States department of agriculture
VFA	Volatile fatty acids
VS	Volatile solids
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0se00608d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
