Efficiency-improved organic solar cells based on plasticizer assisted soft embossed PEDOT:PSS layers   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP42918G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP42918G
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 15088-15098Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsEfficiency-improved organic solar cells based on plasticizer assisted soft embossed PEDOT:PSS layers†

        
          
            Robert 
            Meier
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Christopher 
            Birkenstock
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Claudia M. 
            Palumbiny
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Peter 
            Müller-Buschbaum
          
        
      *
      Technische Universität München, Physik-Department, Lehrstuhl für Funktionelle Materialien, James-Franck-Str. 1, 85748 Garching, Germany. E-mail: muellerb@ph.tum.de;  Fax: +49 89 28912473;   Tel: +49 89 28912451
Received 
      20th August 2012
    , Accepted 19th September 2012First published on 20th September 2012AbstractOrganic solar cells (OSCs) have attracted extensive attention as a promising approach for cost-effective photovoltaic devices. This study demonstrates a novel imprinting approach based on additional plasticizing, which is suited for thin polyethylenedioxythiophene:polystyrenesulphonate (PEDOT:PSS) layers. Such films are widely used as electron blocking and hole collecting intermediate layers in OSCs. Master molds with nano-scale channels are used for the temperature and pressure assisted imprinting routine and the shape of the imprinted structures is easily tunable via the plasticizer concentration. Depending on the surface topology of the PEDOT:PSS films structured poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) bulk heterojunction solar cells have improved power conversion efficiencies in comparison to their planar references. This effect results from enhanced optical absorption due to the resulting textured aluminum electrode and improved charge carrier extraction at the artificially structured electrodes. In addition, OSCs based on low aspect ratio PEDOT:PSS imprints show increased relative performance under oblique light incidence.
Introduction
The sun is the largest carbon-neutral energy source available on earth with 89000 TW of sunlight reaching the earth surface. Different photovoltaic technologies based on inorganic semiconductors are available in the market to generate electricity from sunlight. However, the standard approaches are mechanically rigid and inflexible as well as expensive. Therefore, organic photovoltaics (OPV) have the great advantage of being cheap, if produced on a large scale, and still allowing a flexible design. The most promising approach for efficient organic solar cells (OSC) is based on solution-processed bulk heterojunctions made of an electron-donating semiconducting polymer and an electron-withdrawing fullerene.1 A very well studied system consists of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).2,3 This blend has been used already to fabricate single junction devices with efficiencies of up to 5% under completely optimized fabrication conditions.4 Also for hybrid and fully solution processed tandem organic solar cells P3HT:PCBM films play an important role.5 In order to reach higher power conversion efficiencies, additional chemical modifications on the photoactive and the electrode materials allow for optimized electronic and electrical device properties6 leading to solar cell performances of over 8%.7 In general, this chemical variety makes conducting polymers also interesting for other electronic applications such as organic thin film transistors8 or organic light emitting diodes.9,10 Nevertheless, more novel ideas have to be found to further improve the efficiencies of OSCs in order to be competitive with the already existing technologies. One common approach is to combine conducting polymers with inorganic semiconducting materials in hybrid solar cells.11 An alternative idea is to focus on the ability of polymer films to be mechanically patterned. The same idea has also been already followed up for dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC), where it led to improved device physics.12 Therefore, different structuring routines have been developed in the past such as the temperature assisted nano-imprint technology (NIL)13,14 and the solution based micro-molding in capillaries approach (MIMIC).15 For the NIL routine the softening of polymer films upon thermal annealing is utilized and the structure of the stamp is transferred by applying an external pressure. Since only short imprinting times are necessary, this structuring technique is appropriate for large scale roll-to-roll processes. In contrast, the MIMIC approach requires prolonged imprinting times due to the retarded evaporation of the solvent. However, this method has the advantage that it can be performed under ambient conditions. Recently, we have introduced a modified MIMIC routine which also allows for thickness controllable homogeneous polymer layers below the polymer surface structures.16
The nano-imprint approach has already been applied for photoactive polymer films.17,18 For example, He et al. have used an advanced double nano-imprinting process to fabricate nanostructured polymer heterojunctions with a controllable morphology.19,20 Among other materials, they used P3HT in combination with a fluorinated copolymer (F8TBT) and achieved an efficiency of 2.3%, which is higher than the value of the corresponding bulk heterojunction device. A similar technique was also applied by Na et al. in order to structure the surface of blended photoactive films.21 They introduced periodic sub-micrometer structures as an efficient light-trapping scheme, which led to improved power conversion efficiencies. Since the improved performance was mainly due to an increased short-circuit current density, they attributed this effect to an enhanced photon absorption induced by the periodic structures. However, a drawback of the applied imprinting approach is that it relies on elevated temperatures, which are necessary during the imprint to soften the polymer film. In contrast, similar independently carried-out post-production thermal annealing steps turned out to be essential to improve the performance of bulk heterojunction solar cells.22,23 It yielded an enhanced molecular ordering of the conducting polymers,24 which was probed using different X-ray scattering techniques.25 In addition, McNeill and coworkers reported that a thermal annealing of the complete device (including the finally evaporated metal electrodes) is most efficient.26 For their OSCs a thermal annealing prior to the electrode deposition lowered the open-circuit voltage due to an increased resistance between the photoactive polymer film and the electrode.
Hence, a novel approach is favorable, which can be applied under ambient conditions. In this article we present a method which is based on the controlled structuring of the intermediate PEDOT:PSS (polyethylene dioxythiophene:polystyrene sulphonate) layer. Commonly, these functionalized and transparent layers are sandwiched between the conducting ITO-substrate (indium tin oxide) and the photoactive layer and enhance the electron blocking and the hole-collecting behavior of the bottom electrode.27 In addition, the PEDOT:PSS layer also reduces the surface roughness of the ITO substrate. This is especially important for very thin devices in order to reduce the probability of short-circuit faults. Our approach is based on a pre-structuring of the PEDOT:PSS layer, on which the active material is cast in a subsequent step. In the case of polymer light emitting diodes, Ziebarth et al. have already shown that the idea of nanostructuring PEDOT:PSS leads to an increased forward-directed light emission for devices based on Bragg gratings made of PEDOT:PSS.28
The article is divided into the following sections: after introducing the sample preparation routine – including the imprinting method – the experimental techniques are explained. Next, the results of the imprinting process and its influence on the efficiency of the OSCs are discussed. The article ends with a short summary and outlook.
Experimental
Device fabrication based on plasticizer assisted soft embossing of PEDOT:PSS
Since PEDOT:PSS is known to have no specific glass transition temperature, thermally induced imprinting approaches (e.g. NIL) cannot be applied to such films. However, micro-patterned electrodes made of PEDOT:PSS could have been fabricated by the micro-contact printing method.16,29,30 This method, which was firstly introduced by Kumar and Whitesides,31 is not well suited for application in OPV. For solar cells a homogeneous substrate coverage with PEDOT:PSS is necessary in order to avoid possible shunt defects and to utilize the hole collecting properties over the whole device area. In the case of micro-contact printing, the fabricated structures (e.g. channels) are generally isolated on the bare substrate (electrode) and not connected with each other. Better suited for OPV would be high-energy-ion irradiation with chlorine ions, which was used to fabricate PEDOT:PSS nano-islands on homogeneous PEDOT:PSS films.32 This approach is not appropriate regarding a future large scale production at minimum fabrication costs. Hence, this study focuses on an alternative approach, which is based on plasticizer softened PEDOT:PSS films. PEDOT:PSS films doped with glycerol (denoted G-PEDOT:PSS) not only have a sheet resistance two magnitudes smaller than the pure PEDOT:PSS films,33 they are also mechanically softened. Fig. 1 shows the fabrication routine of OSCs based on plasticizer assisted soft embossed PEDOT:PSS films. In the article this imprinting method is abbreviated as PASE.
 Fig. 1  Schematic overview of solar cell preparation: (1) the plasticized PEDOT:PSS is spin-coated on a pre-cleaned ITO substrate. (2) Afterwards the surface is structured with a PDMS stamp under a homogeneous pressure. (3) Depending on the plasticizer content the shape of the surface structure can be varied. (4) The structured PEDOT:PSS layer is coated with the active polymer layer and (5) finally the aluminum electrode is evaporated on top. 
PEDOT:PSS was purchased from Sigma Aldrich and it consists of 0.5 wt% PEDOT and 0.8 wt% PSS dispersed in H2O.
Before adding the tertiary alcohol glycerol as a plasticizer, the aqueous PEDOT:PSS solution is put in an ultrasonic bath for 15 min at room temperature and filtered using 5 μm PTFE filters. Later on, the polymer solution is doped with glycerol at different concentrations varying between 10 and 50 mg ml−1. After constant stirring for 20 min the G-PEDOT:PSS solution is directly spin-coated. The mentioned processing conditions and times are important to guarantee homogeneous solutions and to prevent aggregation of the PEDOT:PSS. The spin-coating is performed on a Süss MicroTec Delta6RC spin-coater under ambient conditions at 1500 rpm for 30 s and results in homogeneous films with a final thickness of 100–120 nm, depending on the glycerol concentration (see Fig. 1: step 1). Due to the low vapor pressure of the glycerol at room temperature, it remains in the film for several hours making the film processible for imprinting. For optical absorption and X-ray scattering measurements standard glass substrates and for conductivity measurements ITO substrates (solems S. A. ITOSOL) are used. Before spin-coating the glass substrates are pre-cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of acetone and isopropanol for 20 min and blow dried with nitrogen. For the ITO substrates additional cleaning in an ultrasonic bath of Alconox and ethanol are introduced beforehand. For the structuring routine the coated substrate is put on a hot plate at room temperature (a pre-heated hot plate would result in an immediate stiffening of the G-PEDOT:PSS layer) and the master structure is impressed at a constant pressure of 30 kPa (see Fig. 1: step 2). The imprinting is performed for three hours at 80 °C on a hot plate with an additional heating ramp of 15 min at the beginning. It has to be noted that the applied imprinting conditions have not been optimized concerning a high sample through-put. Recent in-house experiments have shown that shorter imprinting times are achievable for higher applied pressures in combination with reduced plasticizer concentrations. Higher imprinting temperatures also have the potential to additionally speed-up the structuring process, which favors a future large scale and cost-effective device production. After imprinting all PEDOT:PSS films undergo an additional thermal annealing step at 140 °C for 10 min, which is known to completely remove residual glycerol molecules. The applied master molds are made of polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) and the channels have a height of 150 nm, a width of 0.7 μm, and a periodicity of 1.7 μm. The PDMS stamps are developed from the two component product Sylgard 184 (Downcorning). To establish a more hydrophilic surface the stamps are exposed to oxygen plasma (200 W, 0.4 mbar) for 30 s directly before imprinting.34 Due to their flexibility the PDMS master molds are easily removed after imprinting by bending. Similar molds have already been successfully applied to fabricate structures in the sub-100 nm region.35 The PDMS stamps can be reused many times, but have to be cleaned in an ultrasonic bath of water for one hour and fully dried at 100 °C for 10 min. Depending on the initial glycerol content, the obtained PEDOT:PSS surface structures vary in height and a shape evolution from rectangular to wavy channels is observed (see Fig. 1: step 3). In a following step the fabricated structured PEDOT:PSS films are homogeneously coated with a photoactive polymer layer based on a P3HT:PCBM blend via spin-coating. The p-type P3HT has an averaged molecular weight of 50 kg mol−1 and a regioregularity larger than 98%. The P3HT is purchased from Rieke Metals Inc. and the PCBM from Nano-C Inc. For preparation of the polymer solution first P3HT is dissolved at a concentration of 33 mg ml−1 in dichlorobenzene (DCB) before PCBM is added at a concentration of 27 mg ml−1. Afterwards the solutions are shaken for 15 hours before spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 30 s (see Fig. 1: step 4). Depending on the underlying PEDOT:PSS structure, also the functional layers adapt a structured surface. For electrical characterization aluminum electrodes with a thickness of approximately 100 nm are finally thermally evaporated on top (see Fig. 1: step 5).36 The active area of the solar cell is limited by the size of the rectangular aluminum electrode (Aact = 5 × 3 mm2). The final devices are annealed on a hot plate at 140 °C for 10 min in a nitrogen atmosphere. In order to prevent oxidation of the photoactive layer, which is known to decrease the performance,37 the solar cells are encapsulated by a glued top-glass.
Topography
The sample surface was analyzed using non-contact atomic force microscopy (AFM), which allows a resolution on the nano-scale. In this work all AFM measurements were performed with a Joel JSPM-5200 AFM under atmospheric pressure and at room temperature. The area size of the measurements was set to 5 × 5 μm2 with a resolution of 256 × 256 pixels. Images were taken at multiple sample positions and analyzed with the Gwyddion AFM software (v2.24). For height and lateral information line cuts were taken perpendicular to the channel structures and averaged over a width of 128 pixels.
Spectroscopic characterization
The optical absorptions of the full devices based on the photoactive P3HT:PCBM layers coated on structured and planar PEDOT:PSS films were measured using a Lambda 900 spectrometer (PerkinElmer), which was equipped with an integrating sphere with a diameter of 60 mm. According to Burkhard et al. the measurements were carried out in reflection geometry using the aluminum electrodes as reflecting material.38 For the pure PEDOT:PSS films (see Section S1, ESI†) the spectral absorption characterization was performed using an UV/Vis spectrometer from PerkinElmer (Lambda35) in transmission geometry. In order to illustrate the grating efficiency these measurements were carried out without an integrating sphere. For these experiments a blank glass substrate was used as reference.

J–V characterization
According to the standard reporting conditions (SRC) the photovoltaic devices were characterized under ambient conditions under the AM 1.5 global reference spectrum and 100 mW cm−2 irradiance. The current–voltage measurements were recorded using a source meter (Keithley 2400) and were corrected for spectral mismatch. For the angular measurements the solar cells were mounted on a sample holder, which allowed for rotation with an angular accuracy of <1°.
External quantum efficiency
The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were recorded using an automated LabView computer program, which controlled the Keithley 2400 source meter. For the spectrally resolved measurements a xenon white light source was focused into a grating monochromator, which was equipped with a set of necessary edge pass filters. The measurements were performed with monochromatic light in the steady-state (no continuous white light background). The reference spectrum was recorded with a silicon diode (certified by Fraunhofer Institute Freiburg, Germany) and the light intensity was set to 10 mW cm−2.
Photoluminescence measurements
The photoluminescence of the photoactive P3HT:PCBM blend films was studied using a LS 55 fluorescence spectrometer from Perkin Elmer (Waltham, USA) equipped with a xenon discharge lamp and the excitation wavelength was set to 485 nm.
Results and discussion
PASE imprinted PEDOT:PSS films
In Fig. 2 atomic force microscopy (AFM) data of an as-spun PEDOT:PSS film and of different imprinted PEDOT:PSS films with varying initial glycerol concentrations are shown. The surface of the as-spun film (Fig. 2(a)) appears smooth with isolated imperfections with an average height of roughly 8 nm and a diameter of 0.2 to 0.4 μm. Since PEDOT:PSS is known to agglomerate in solution the observed structures can be attributed to such polymer grains.39 The AFM images from Fig. 2(b) to (f) show the channel structures for the following initial glycerol concentrations cP: 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1. It has to be emphasized that only the amount of plasticizer is changed, whereas the other experimental conditions are kept constant. From the two-dimensional topography images it can be seen that for small initial glycerol concentrations (cP = 10 mg ml−1) the channel structure is only slightly visible. However, it becomes more prominent for dopant concentrations of up to 30 mg ml−1. For higher initial glycerol concentrations the channel shape vanishes again and continuously adapts a wavy surface morphology. The corresponding mean peak-to-valley distances of the channels in Fig. 2(b) to (f) are 4, 42, 40, 17, and 9 nm. In order to investigate the full dependence of imprint shape and height on initial glycerol concentration profile cuts are taken perpendicular to the channel structures for dopant concentrations between 10 and 50 mg ml−1 in 5 mg ml−1 steps. In Fig. 3 these profiles are shifted along the y-axis for better comparison. An initial glycerol concentration of 10 mg ml−1 leads to only poor channel structures with an averaged height of 4 nm. For such small amounts of plasticizer the PEDOT:PSS film is still mechanically rigid and a defined penetration of the soft PDMS mold into the target film is not possible. However, for an increased glycerol concentration of 15 mg ml−1 the channel heights are increased to 26 nm. For even higher concentrations (cP = 20–30 mg ml−1) the channels reach an almost constant height of 40 nm and the channel shape and hence the aspect ratio are improved. For such glycerol concentrations the channel structure is most pronounced and it has a constant channel width of 1.0 μm at a periodicity of 1.7 μm, which is in good agreement with the master mold. This improvement in shape is due to an enhanced softening of the PEDOT:PSS film. For softer films the PDMS mold is further impressed in the polymer film, which additionally adapts the master structure more precisely. However, by further increasing the glycerol concentration a turning point is reached and the quality of the channel shape changes from rectangular to sinusoidal. For a glycerol concentration of 35 mg ml−1 the channel height is already reduced to 34 nm and the sidewalls of the channel structure appear inclined. For glycerol concentrations of 40 and 50 mg ml−1 the channel height is further decreased to 17 and 9 nm. For the highest plasticizer content the structured film has an almost perfect sinusoidal topology. This shape evolution is due to glycerol residuals, which are still present in the films after imprinting. Hence, the PEDOT:PSS layer is still soft after the lift-off of the PDMS mold and the channel structures converge. However, a final thermal annealing step at 140 °C for 10 min completely removes the residual glycerol molecules and prevents ongoing shape changes.
 Fig. 2  AFM topography data of (a) a pristine spin coated PEDOT:PSS film and structured polymer films with varying glycerin content (b) to (f). The glycerin content in the polymer solution has been increased in 10 g l−1 steps from 10 g l−1 (b) to 50 g l−1 (f). 
 Fig. 3  Topographic profile cuts for different glycerol concentrations varying between 10 and 50 g l−1. The profiles are extracted perpendicular to the channel structure from the corresponding topographic AFM data. For clarity of presentation the profile cuts are shifted along the y-axis. 
For application in OSCs the light refraction and the light harvesting properties of such structures are most interesting. It was shown that the diffraction efficiency of linearly aligned structures depends strongly on the height and the shape of the objects.40 Marikkar et al. investigated conducting polymer diffraction gratings made of PEDOT on gold surfaces and they found that their efficiencies increase with increasing grating depth.41 More information on the optical properties of the uncoated PEDOT:PSS structures is given in Section S1 (ESI†).
Coated PASE imprinted PEDOT:PSS gratings

Fig. 4 shows the AFM data of P3HT:PCBM films spin-cast on a planar and on structured PEDOT:PSS films with different initial glycerol concentrations (cP = 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1). For comparison, the corresponding uncoated PEDOT:PSS films are presented in Fig. 2. All PEDOT:PSS supports are coated with the same P3HT:PCBM solution, which results in a film thickness of 165 nm if spin-cast on pre-cleaned glass substrates. For the P3HT:PCBM film on planar PEDOT:PSS (Fig. 4(a)) a surface roughness (rms-value) of 1.2 nm is extracted. Such roughness values are generally considered as a signature of an annealing enhanced crystallinity in blend films.42 For the investigated P3HT:PCBM films the surface roughness varies only slightly. Hence, no influence of the PEDOT:PSS structures on the molecular ordering in the near-surface region of the as-spun films is observed. However, for all glycerol concentrations surface structures at the P3HT:PCBM layer are found due to the structures of the PEDOT:PSS underneath. As it is expected, the higher PEDOT:PSS channels also lead to higher surface modulations in the active layer. Whereas for small PEDOT:PSS imprints (cP = 10 and 50 mg ml−1) only minor surface modifications of the active layer are visible, clear channel structures are found for films spin-cast on PEDOT:PSS structures with higher aspect ratios (cP = 20, 30, and 40 mg ml−1). In addition, Fig. 5 shows the corresponding averaged profile cuts of the AFM data from Fig. 4, which are taken perpendicular to the channel structures. In comparison to the profile cuts from the uncoated PEDOT:PSS films (Fig. 3), the P3HT:PCBM layers have a wavy, almost sinusoidal, surface. It is seen that also the photoactive films have the highest peak-to-valley values for medium initial glycerol concentrations and reduced structure heights for small and high dopant concentrations. For the different plasticizer concentrations of 10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1 the medium channel heights are 6, 13, 14, 17, and 8 nm, which are smaller than the channel heights of the corresponding uncoated channels. The profile cuts of the films, which were cast on PEDOT:PSS structures with the lowest and highest glycerol concentration, also imply a rough and not well defined surface. In contrast, films based on structures from medium glycerol concentrations are smoothed. However, all P3HT:PCBM films mimic the surface topology of the PEDOT:PSS layer underneath. In Fig. 6 two photographs of an uncoated and a coated PASE structured PEDOT:PSS film are shown. Both films are prepared with an initial glycerol concentration of 30 mg ml−1 and silicon was used as a substrate in order to highlight the optical grating effect. Since the P3HT:PCBM surface structures are smoothed and suppressed in comparison to the plain PEDOT:PSS structures, the reflected intensity from the coated grating appears to be dampened.
 Fig. 4  AFM topography data of spin coated P3HT:PCBM blend films on (a) a planar PEDOT:PSS film and (b) to (f) on structured films with increasing initial glycerin concentrations (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1). 
 Fig. 5  Topographic profile cuts of P3HT:PCBM films spin coated on PASE structured PEDOT:PSS films: for the imprints different initial glycerol concentrations have been used (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1). The profiles were extracted perpendicular to the channel structure and for clarity of presentation the profile cuts are shifted along the y-axis. 
 Fig. 6  Photographs showing the optical grating effect of (a) an as-prepared structured PEDOT:PSS layer and (b) coated with a photoactive P3HT:PCBM layer. Both PEDOT:PSS channel structures have been prepared with a glycerin concentration of 30 g l−1 and the grating effect is reduced due to the additional polymer coating. 
Structured organic solar cells
For application of structured polymer films Na et al. have shown that the power conversion efficiency η of P3HT:PCBM solar cells is increased by 14% due to a similar additional surface structuring of the active layer.21,43 In their studies, solar cells based on only 80 nm thin active layers were investigated and their surfaces were patterned with different periodic gratings via NIL. They attributed this effect to diffracted light, which is beneficial for application in OSCs. In comparison to light, which propagates parallel to the sample normal, diffracted light has a longer optical path length in the photoactive film. Also other approaches based on optical diffraction and light trapping due to plasmonic effects44 were already introduced to OPV45 and organic light emitting diodes.46
To prove that our structuring approach leads to an increase in efficiency, OSCs are fabricated based on micro-structured and flat PEDOT:PSS layers. Since this study focuses on the impact of the electrode structure on the device performance, a simple P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction structure is applied as the active layer and the cells are not fully optimized with respect to highest possible efficiencies (e.g. no spacing layers, no top blocking layer). In order to mimic the experimental conditions of the PASE imprinted PEDOT:PSS layers the planar reference films are prepared according to the presented structuring routine. Therefore, the corresponding plasticizer concentrations are added to the planar PEDOT:PSS films and the same thermal treatment is applied as described in the Experimental section.

Fig. 7(a) shows the photocurrent-density–voltage (J–V) curves of a planar (dashed line) and a structured (solid line) organic solar cell under illumination with an AM 1.5G spectrum. For both types an initial glycerol concentration of 20 mg ml−1 is chosen. It is clearly seen that the structured PEDOT:PSS leads to an increased photocurrent density. An open-circuit voltage Voc of −0.57 V, a short-circuit current Jsc of 9.73 mA cm−2, a fill factor FF of 0.49, and an efficiency η of 2.74% are obtained for the planar reference cell. In contrast, the performance characteristics of the structured cells are enhanced to a Voc of −0.59 V, a Jsc of 12.42 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.46, and an efficiency η of 3.35%. Thus, for this chosen solar cell the efficiency could be increased by 22% due to a structuring of the PEDOT:PSS. Although the devices are not fully optimized, the observed efficiency values are well competitive to the average performance of P3HT:PCBM solar cells.47 It is already clear from the J–V curves that the increase in energy conversion efficiency, which directly correlates to the product of Voc, Jsc, and FF,48 is mainly originated from the increased short-circuit current Jsc.
 Fig. 7  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PCBM solar cells show improved performance if they are prepared on a PASE imprinted instead of a planar PEDOT:PSS layer. Both PEDOT:PSS films have an initial glycerol concentration of 20 mg ml−1. (b) Structured OSCs based on high aspect ratio imprints (cP = 15–35 mg ml−1) have enhanced efficiencies under normal illumination. Solid lines are based on polynomial fits of second order and act as guide to the eyes. 
As it was already shown in Fig. 2 and 3, a big benefit of the presented structuring routine is that different surface topologies can be fabricated by simply varying the plasticizer concentration. Fig. 7(b) shows the cell efficiencies η of different solar cells based on structured (open symbols) and planar (filled symbols) PEDOT:PSS films with initial glycerol concentrations of 10, 15, 20, 25, 30, and 35 mg ml−1. In this plot all efficiencies are averaged values of multiple single solar cells (error bars show standard deviation). It is seen that for small channel structures (e.g. cP = 10 mg ml−1 and cP > 35 mg ml−1) only minor differences in cell efficiency are found, whereas for higher aspect ratio imprints the mean efficiencies are improved by over 18%.
In order to prove the physical origin of the increase in efficiency the impact of the structured PEDOT:PSS electrodes on the light harvesting in the active layer is investigated. For this purpose, solar cells fabricated with a plasticizer concentration of 20 mg ml−1 are chosen, which yield the best overall efficiencies (see Fig. 7(b)). In Fig. 8 the complete optical absorption in the UV/Vis regime for P3HT:PCBM solar cells cast on a structured (cp = 20 mg ml−1) and a planar PEDOT:PSS film is shown. These measurements were performed in reflection geometry using the aluminum electrodes as reflecting material. According to recent results from Burkhard et al., an integrating sphere was used in order to guarantee correct measurements at short wavelengths and in regions where the polymer based absorption is weak (λ > 650 nm).38 Similar to already published results on P3HT:PCBM blends,3,22 the investigated films show a maximum absorption at 495 nm which is attributed to P3HT. For wavelengths below 350 nm the absorption of the ITO substrate dominates the spectrum and hence the contribution of the PCBM at 330 nm cannot be observed. Besides a slight increase in optical absorption for small wavelengths (λ < 400 nm), a prominent broadening of the absorption spectrum is seen for photons with wavelengths larger than 500 nm for the structured devices. Taking into account the optical absorption of P3HT:PCBM films measured in transmission geometry (see Section S2, ESI†), the probed broadening is due to absorption of light reflected at the structured aluminum electrode. For wavelengths above 650 nm the total optical absorption is dominated by parasitic effects within the cell.38
 Fig. 8  Optical absorption measurements of P3HT:PCBM blend cast on structured (solid line) and planar (dashed line) PEDOT:PSS film (cp = 20 mg ml−1). 
Nevertheless, a simple enhancement in absorption, and hence also in charge carrier generation, does not prove an increase in photocurrent alone. It has been shown that conjugated polymer:PCBM solar cells have almost constant power conversion efficiencies for active layer thicknesses above a certain threshold value (typically around 100 nm).49,50 Typically, thick OSCs have decreased charge carrier efficiencies due to an increased charge carrier recombination rate. This effect is also often indicated by a reduced fill factor. For the investigated samples a primary active layer thickness of 165 nm is chosen and additional J–V curves have shown that a variation in film thickness of ±55 nm has only a slight influence on the device efficiencies (see Section S3, ESI†). Hence, the presented approach allows for an improved optical absorption due to light diffraction without requiring thicker active layers.51
Associated with this discussion, it was also shown that modifications in the PEDOT:PSS layer thickness can have an influence on the performance of organic electronics.52 However for the investigated material system OSCs with different planar: PEDOT:PSS film thicknesses between 50 and 150 nm have constant efficiencies of around 2.8% (see Section S4, ESI†).
External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements are performed to address the influence of the charge carrier extraction efficiency on the increase in Jsc. Fig. 9 shows the EQE spectra of high-efficient OSCs fabricated on structured (solid line, cp = 20 mg ml−1) and planar (dashed line) PEDOT:PSS layers. The shown EQE spectra are mean values of multiple devices. In accordance with the increase in Isc, also the measured EQE spectra reveal higher values for the structured than for the planar solar cells. In the case of the structured device a slight flattening is observed approaching shorter wavelengths. In general, similar high EQE values have also been already reported by other groups.53,54 However, in the case of the investigated devices the high currents drop in forward bias and therefore these promising values cannot be converted to power conversion efficiency without further device optimization. Comparing the results of the EQE and the current–voltage measurements, the increase in EQE could also imply an enhanced fill factor. Most likely due to an increased charge carrier recombination rate the high current is reduced in forward bias and hence the fill factor is not ideal. Thus, at first sight the higher Isc-values are more likely to be a result of an improved optical absorption than an increase in charge carrier collection efficiency. Due to differences in light intensity for the EQE and the J–V measurements (see Experimental section) a direct comparison of both methods is not fully possible. This is due to the fact that different charge carrier densities result in modified recombination rates and charge collection efficiencies. However, the EQE-data can be used to theoretically calculate the corresponding short-circuit values. The mean value for the theoretical Isc is 11.0 mA cm−2 in the case of the planar devices and 11.9 mA cm−2 for the structured solar cells. This enhancement of over 8% is also in good agreement with the increase in the average device performance (see Fig. 7(b)). Again, this observation is a good indication for a mainly current- and, hence, absorption-driven increase in the device performance.
 Fig. 9  Wavelength dependent external quantum efficiency (EQE) of structured (solid line) and planar (dashed line) solar cells fabricated with an initial glycerol concentration of 20 mg ml−1. The inset shows the corresponding internal quantum efficiency (IQE). 
In order to fully address the aspect of an improved charge carrier collection efficiency, the corresponding internal quantum efficiency (IQE) is calculated based on the measured EQE data and the corresponding total optical absorption of the full device measured in reflection geometry (see the inset in Fig. 9).
In general, the extracted IQE values for the planar and the structured device appear similar and indicate an only slightly increased charge carrier extraction in the case of the structured solar cell. The IQE data are shown for wavelengths between 350 and 650 nm since only in this regime the assumption holds that the active layer is responsible for the majority of the absorption.38 In addition photoluminescence (PL) measurements are performed to further characterize the P3HT:PCBM bulk heterojunction films. The PL measurements were performed under an inclination and detection angle of 45° at which the devices show increased efficiency compared to perpendicular illumination (see Fig. 12) and in reflection geometry which mirrors the case of a solar cell device. In Fig. 10 the PL signals of structured films are shown as dark lines and of planar films as bright lines. For the as-spun P3HT:PCBM films (dashed lines) the PL spectra reveal a more pronounced quenching of the PL signal if the active film is cast on a structured PEDOT:PSS electrode. Ziebarth et al. have shown that the light emission in organic light emitting diodes can be improved in forward direction and hence could be reduced for angles of observation differing from the sample normal due to structuring.28 Indeed a decreased PL signal is observed for the textured devices. In general, the reduced PL yield for the P3HT:PCBM blend films on the structured PEDOT:PSS layers is a hint for an enhanced charge carrier separation as it is desired in organic photovoltaic devices. Furthermore, it is clearly seen that the PL yield is increased due to the post-production heat treatment (solid lines). Such an enhancement in PL yield can be due to an enhanced crystallization of the polymer upon annealing.55
 Fig. 10  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of as-spun (dashed lines) and annealed (solid lines) P3HT:PCBM blend films on PASE structured (dark lines) and planar (bright lines) PEDOT:PSS films. 
Taking into account all results, it can be concluded that PASE structured electrodes lead to an enhanced optical absorption in the complete device due to reflections at the structured aluminum electrodes. This effect is mainly observed for incident light with wavelengths above 500 nm. However, the IQE data from Fig. 9 indicate a slight enhancement in charge carrier collection due to structured PEDOT:PSS and aluminum electrodes as well. Fig. 11 illustrates a model, which includes shortened pathways for the charge carriers to the structured electrodes. Due to the elevated PEDOT:PSS electrodes short percolation paths for the photo-generated holes to the sidewalls of the PEDOT:PSS channels might be possible. Also the distance of the electrons to the aluminum electrodes appears to be reduced because of the introduced surface structure.
 Fig. 11  Model for improved charge carrier extraction in organic solar cells based on PASE imprinted PEDOT:PSS films. For impinging photons with wavelengths below 550 nm shorter pathways for the charge carriers to both electrodes result in an improved EQE. 
Up to now, the possibility of an incomplete filling of the PEDOT:PSS channels with P3HT:PCBM has been neglected. But the high efficiencies of the actual devices and the rather large channel structures make the presence of e.g. air inclusions unlikely. Additional grazing incident small angle X-ray scattering (GISAXS) measurements, which are suited to probe the inner film morphology, also imply a full filling of the channels (see Section S5, ESI†).56–58 The measured high power conversion efficiencies for the structured solar cells also imply a full coating of the PEDOT:PSS channels on the side walls.
Angular response of structured solar cells
An additional interesting application possibility of such structured organic solar cells lies in their performance under oblique light incidence. Cheyns et al. have already theoretically shown that the angle dependent response is highly relevant for the outdoor performance of solar cells.59 Based on their assumptions, an underestimation of up to 40% would occur if this effect is not considered. Higher angles of incidence of the sun light effect the optical thin film interferences within the layer structure of the solar cell, which are known to strongly affect the efficiency. The transfer matrix formalism60 has been extensively used to theoretically determine the absorption, the reflection, the transmission, and the amplitude of the electromagnetic field within the framework of OSCs.61,62 According to this method, Meyer et al. have shown that the interference pattern expands for non-normally incident light and therefore results in larger distances between nodes and antinodes.63 Dennler et al. have shown that the internal quantum efficiency is independent of the angle of incidence and thus organic solar cells perform relatively better as their inorganic counterparts.64 However, for the structured photovoltaic devices similar theoretical approaches cannot be easily conducted due to the complex topologies of the PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM and the P3HT:PCBM/Al interface. Therefore, Fig. 12 shows the measured relative efficiencies of three solar cells based on structured PEDOT:PSS layers with different initial glycerol concentrations (cP = 10, 20 and 40 mg ml−1) for different incident angles. In order to focus on the influence of the structuring the efficiencies η are normalized to the efficiency under normal incident light η0 and they are corrected for the effective geometric area according to Lambert's cosine law. All solar cells have been encapsulated for this measurement to minimize aging effects during the angular scan. It is seen that for shallow PEDOT:PSS channel structures (cP = 10 mg ml−1) the solar cells perform best for higher incident angles, whereas for higher aspect ratio PEDOT:PSS imprints no obvious improvement in corrected efficiency is obtained (cP = 20 mg ml−1). For PEDOT:PSS electrodes with a wavy surface (e.g. cP = 40 mg ml−1) the normalized efficiency is again enhanced for increasing illumination angles. Taking into account also the surface modifications of the active film (Fig. 4), it can be concluded that only slightly modified aluminum top electrodes lead to a larger improvement in performance. Electrodes with a more prominent surface structure do not have a strong influence on the corrected efficiency for higher incident angles of illumination. However, it has to be considered that for the structured solar cells under normal illumination an increased absorption due to non-normal reflected light leads to an enhanced efficiency η0.
 Fig. 12  Relative performance of structured solar cells for oblique illumination angles. P3HT:PCBM solar cells based on small PEDOT:PSS structures (cP = 10 and 40 mg ml−1) have an improved relative performance for inclined illumination in comparison to the higher imprints (cP = 20 mg ml−1). All efficiencies are corrected for the effective area and the dashed lines guide the eye. 
Conclusions
We introduced a new imprinting routine, which is suitable for PEDOT:PSS films as they are widely used in organic electronics. Therefore, the films are doped with glycerol as a plasticizing component (plasticizer assisted soft embossing, PASE) and common PDMS stamps are used for the temperature and pressure assisted imprinting. It was shown that the height and the shape of the structures are tunable via the initial glycerol concentration. For small plasticizer amounts the PEDOT:PSS films remain hard and only small imprints are possible. By increasing the glycerol content defined surface structures are obtained, which show good replication qualities. However, for further increased glycerol concentrations smoothed surface structures were observed due to an ongoing softening-effect of the films, which is still present after the lift-off. This behavior is advantageous since multiple surface structures can be produced involving always the same master mold, which are often time-consuming and cost-intensive in production.
For P3HT:PCBM solar cells based on PASE structured PEDOT:PSS layers the averaged overall power efficiency is improved by up to 18%. External quantum efficiency and optical absorption measurements have shown that the increase in efficiency is attributed to an enhanced optical absorption in combination with an indicated improved charge carrier collection efficiency. For oblique illumination it was observed that smaller PEDOT:PSS structures lead to a better relative performance in comparison to higher aspect ratio imprints.
In summary, we have demonstrated an easy structuring routine, which allows the fabrication of homogeneous PEDOT:PSS films with versatile surface structures leading to an improved efficiency of organic solar cells. The idea of sub-structuring the PEDOT:PSS layer is highly promising for further improvements in the device efficiency of OSCs, which are still required for the marketability of this technology. Future work will now concentrate on optimizing the applied surface structures and increasing the fabrication speed, to fully exploit the potential of this methodology.
Acknowledgements
The research was supported by the Bundesministerium für Bildung und Forschung (BMBF project 05KS7W01). The authors thank V. Körstgens, S. V. Roth, and A. Buffet for their support during the GISAXS measurements. The advice of F. Auras from the group of T. Bein (LMU München) and of S. Niesar from the group of M. Stutzmann (TU München) for the UV/Vis measurements is gratefully acknowledged. For their support during the AFM measurements the help of B. Balzar from the group of T. Hugel (TU München) is gratefully acknowledged. The EQE measurements were performed in the group of L. Schmidt-Mende (LMU München).
References
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer, S. Guo, R. Meier, H.-Y. Chiang, V. Körstgens, J. Wiedersich, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3382–3391 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Lungenschmied and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 347–363 CAS .
H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5994–6011 CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa and W. Warta, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 84–92 CrossRef CAS .
H. Koezuka, A. Tsumura and T. Ando, Synth. Met., 1987, 18, 699–704 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Homes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539–541 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Tedde, J. Kern, T. Sterzl, J. Fürst, P. Lugli and O. Hayden, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 980–983 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2700–2720 CAS .
N. Tétreault and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8506–8516 Search PubMed .

          W. M. Moreau, Semiconductor Lithography: Principles and Materials, Plenum Press, New York,  1988 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chou, P. R. Krauss and P. J. Renstrom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 67, 3114–3116 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kim, Y. Xia and G. M. Whitesides, Nature, 1995, 376, 581–584 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meier, F. Markl, C. Birkenstock and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 192–198 RSC .
J. Weickert, R. B. Dunbar, H. C. Hesse, W. Wiedemann and L. Schmidt-Mende, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1810–1828 CrossRef CAS .
G. Scarpa, A. Abdellah, A. Exner, S. Harrer, G. P. Blanco, W. Wiedemann, L. Schmidt-Mende and P. Lugli, IEEE Trans. Nanotechnol., 2011, 10, 482–488 CrossRef .
X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. Hasko, S. Hüttner, U. Steiner, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS .
X. He, F. Gao, G. Tu, D. G. Hasko, S. Hüttner, N. C. Greenham, U. Steiner, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, J. Jo, S.-H. Oh, J. Kim and D.-Y. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3956–3963 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mihailetchi, H. Xie, B. de Boer, L. J. A. Koster and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheun, J. D. Berrigan, Y. Zhou, M. Fenoll, J. Shim, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, K. H. Sandhage and B. Kippelen, Energy Environ. Sci. 10.1039/c1ee01316e .
M. A. Ruderer, S. M. Prams, M. Rawolle, Q. Zhong, J. Perlich, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 15451–15458 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ruderer and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Soft Matter, 2011, 7, 5482–5493 RSC .
C. R. McNeill, J. J. M. Halls, R. Wilson, G. L. Whiting, S. Berkebile, M. G. Ramsey, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2309–2321 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hoppe and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1924–1945 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ziebarth, A. K. Saafir, S. Fan and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takakuwa, M. Ikawa, M. Fujita and K. Yase, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46, 5960–5963 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li and L. J. Guo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 063513 CrossRef .
A. Kumar and G. M. Whitesides, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1993, 63, 2002–2004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Joo, S.-K. Park, D.-S. Seo, S.-J. Lee, H.-S. Kim, K.-S. Ryu, T.-J. Lee, S.-H. Seo and C.-J. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1465–1470 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, M. Johansson, M. R. Andersson, J. C. Hummelen and O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 662–665 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Eddington, J. P. Puccinelli and D. J. Beebe, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 114, 170–172 CrossRef .
T. W. Odom, J. C. Love, D. B. Wolfe, K. E. Paul and G. M. Whitesides, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 5314–5320 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kaune, E. Metwalli, R. Meier, V. Körstgens, K. Schlage, S. Couet, R. Röhlsberger, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1055–1062 CAS .
M. Jorgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686–714 CrossRef .
G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3293–3297 CrossRef CAS .
U. Lang, E. Müller, N. Naujoks and J. Dual, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1215–1220 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Moharam and T. K. Gaylord, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1982, 72, 1385–1392 CrossRef .
F. S. Marikkar, C. Carter, K. Kieltyka, J. W. F. Robertson, C. Williamson, A. Simmonds, R. Zangmeister, T. Fritz and N. R. Armstrong, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 10395–10402 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shroriya, Y. Yao, J. Huang and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem, 2007, 17, 3126–3140 RSC .
S.-I. Na, S.-S. Kim, S.-S. Kwon, J. Jo, J. Kim, T. Lee and D.-Y. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 173509 CrossRef .
R. B. Dunbar, H. C. Hesse, D. S. Lembke and L. Schmidt-Mende, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 035301 CrossRef .
C. Cocoyer, L. Rocha, L. Sicot, B. Geffroy, R. de Bettignies, C. Sentein, C. Fiorini-Debuisschert and P. Raimond, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 133108 CrossRef .
L. S. Roman, O. Inganäs, T. Granlund, T. Nyberg, M. Svensson, M. R. Andersson and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Dang, L. Hirsch and G. Wantz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3597–3602 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kippelen and J.-L. Bredas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 251–261 CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, Y. Yao and Y. Yang, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 043704 CrossRef .
K. M. Coackley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533–4542 CrossRef .
R. Meier, M. A. Ruderer, A. Diethert, G. Kaune, V. Körstgens, S. V. Roth and P. Müller-Buschbaum, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 2899–2909 CrossRef CAS .
B. Friedel, P. E. Keivanidis, T. J. K. Brenner, A. Abrusci, C. R. McNeill, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 6741–6747 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gadisa, W. D. Oosterbaan, K. Vandewal, J.-C. Bolsée, S. Bertho, J. D’Haen, L. Lutsen, D. Vanderzande and J. V. Manca, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3300–3306 CrossRef CAS .
P. Schilinsky, C. Waldauf and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 81, 3885–3887 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. van Bavel, M. Bärenklau, G. de With, H. Hoppe and J. Loos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1458–1463 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wiedemann, L. Sims, A. Abdellah, A. Exner, R. Meier, K. P. Musselmann, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, P. Müller-Buschbaum, G. Scarpa, P. Lugli and L. Schmidt-Mende, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 263109 CrossRef .
P. Müller-Buschbaum, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2003, 376, 3–10 Search PubMed .
M.-Y. Chiu, U.-S. Jeng, C.-H. Su, K. S. Liang and K.-H. Wie, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2573–2578 CrossRef CAS .
D. Cheyns, B. P. Rand, B. Verreet, J. Genoe, J. Poortmans and P. Heremans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243310 CrossRef .

          Z. Knittl, Optics of Thin Films, Wiley, London,  1976 Search PubMed .
H. Hoppe, N. Arnold, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Thin Solid Films, 2004, 451, 589–592 CrossRef .
A. J. Moulé, J. B. Bonekamp and K. Meerholz, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 094503 CrossRef .
A. Meyer and H. Ade, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 113101 CrossRef .
G. Dennler, K. Forberich, M. C. Scharber, C. J. Brabec, I. Tomis, K. Hingerl and T. Fromherz, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 102, 054516 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42918gThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic overview of solar cell preparation: (1) the plasticized PEDOT:PSS is spin-coated on a pre-cleaned ITO substrate. (2) Afterwards the surface is structured with a PDMS stamp under a homogeneous pressure. (3) Depending on the plasticizer content the shape of the surface structure can be varied. (4) The structured PEDOT:PSS layer is coated with the active polymer layer and (5) finally the aluminum electrode is evaporated on top.	 

 	Fig. 2  AFM topography data of (a) a pristine spin coated PEDOT:PSS film and structured polymer films with varying glycerin content (b) to (f). The glycerin content in the polymer solution has been increased in 10 g l−1 steps from 10 g l−1 (b) to 50 g l−1 (f).	 

 	Fig. 3  Topographic profile cuts for different glycerol concentrations varying between 10 and 50 g l−1. The profiles are extracted perpendicular to the channel structure from the corresponding topographic AFM data. For clarity of presentation the profile cuts are shifted along the y-axis.	 

 	Fig. 4  AFM topography data of spin coated P3HT:PCBM blend films on (a) a planar PEDOT:PSS film and (b) to (f) on structured films with increasing initial glycerin concentrations (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1).	 

 	Fig. 5  Topographic profile cuts of P3HT:PCBM films spin coated on PASE structured PEDOT:PSS films: for the imprints different initial glycerol concentrations have been used (10, 20, 30, 40, and 50 mg ml−1). The profiles were extracted perpendicular to the channel structure and for clarity of presentation the profile cuts are shifted along the y-axis.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photographs showing the optical grating effect of (a) an as-prepared structured PEDOT:PSS layer and (b) coated with a photoactive P3HT:PCBM layer. Both PEDOT:PSS channel structures have been prepared with a glycerin concentration of 30 g l−1 and the grating effect is reduced due to the additional polymer coating.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Current–voltage characteristics of P3HT:PCBM solar cells show improved performance if they are prepared on a PASE imprinted instead of a planar PEDOT:PSS layer. Both PEDOT:PSS films have an initial glycerol concentration of 20 mg ml−1. (b) Structured OSCs based on high aspect ratio imprints (cP = 15–35 mg ml−1) have enhanced efficiencies under normal illumination. Solid lines are based on polynomial fits of second order and act as guide to the eyes.	 

 	Fig. 8  Optical absorption measurements of P3HT:PCBM blend cast on structured (solid line) and planar (dashed line) PEDOT:PSS film (cp = 20 mg ml−1).	 

 	Fig. 9  Wavelength dependent external quantum efficiency (EQE) of structured (solid line) and planar (dashed line) solar cells fabricated with an initial glycerol concentration of 20 mg ml−1. The inset shows the corresponding internal quantum efficiency (IQE).	 

 	Fig. 10  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of as-spun (dashed lines) and annealed (solid lines) P3HT:PCBM blend films on PASE structured (dark lines) and planar (bright lines) PEDOT:PSS films.	 

 	Fig. 11  Model for improved charge carrier extraction in organic solar cells based on PASE imprinted PEDOT:PSS films. For impinging photons with wavelengths below 550 nm shorter pathways for the charge carriers to both electrodes result in an improved EQE.	 

 	Fig. 12  Relative performance of structured solar cells for oblique illumination angles. P3HT:PCBM solar cells based on small PEDOT:PSS structures (cP = 10 and 40 mg ml−1) have an improved relative performance for inclined illumination in comparison to the higher imprints (cP = 20 mg ml−1). All efficiencies are corrected for the effective area and the dashed lines guide the eye.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp42918g

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
