 Carbon nanotubes : a multi-functional material for organic optoelectronics  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B713527K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B713527K
(Application)
J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1183-1192Show CompoundsShow Chemical Terms
Carbon nanotubes: a multi-functional material for organic optoelectronics

        
          
            Ross A. 
            Hatton
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Anthony J. 
            Miller
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            S. R. P. 
            Silva
          
          
        
      
Nanoelectronics Centre, Advanced Technology Institute, University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey, UK., GU2 7XH. E-mail: r.hatton@surrey.ac.uk
Received 
      3rd September 2007
    , Accepted 15th November 2007First published on 11th January 2008AbstractIn recent years carbon nanotubes have emerged as a versatile material suitable for hybrid macro-electronic devices employing organic semiconductors, with the potential to address many of the barriers to the widespread exploitation of organic semiconductors as the basis for low cost, large area, flexible optoelectronics. This paper focuses on the applications of carbon nanotubes in organic light-emitting diodes and photovoltaics. These related devices are currently being pursued with much anticipation as energy efficient solid state lighting and a scalable means of harvesting electrical energy from sunlight. In this paper particular emphasis is placed on the utility of multi-wall carbon nanotubes which have received much less attention than single wall carbon nanotubes for these applications despite offering a number of key advantages.Ross A. HattonRoss Hatton is a Royal Academy of Engineering/EPSRC Research Fellow at the University of Surrey Advanced Technology Institute, researching nano-structured electrodes for organic photovoltaics. Ross obtained his first degree in Chemistry and Molecular Physics from the University of Nottingham in 1999 and subsequently undertook a doctorate at the same institution pertaining to control of hole injection in organic light-emitting diodes.Anthony Miller is currently a Post-doctoral Research Fellow at the University of Surrey Advanced Technology Institute exploring carbon nanotube materials for organic light-emitting diodes. He received his first degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from the University of Surrey in 2002 and subsequently undertook a doctorate at the same institution focusing on the utility of carbon nanotubes in organic photovoltaics.S. R. P. Silva is a Professor of Solid State Electronics and Director of the Advanced Technology Institute at the University of Surrey, where he leads the activity in nano-electronics. He received his BA and PhD degrees from the University of Cambridge. His research interests encompass a wide range of activities in the areas of nano-electronics and large-area electronics.
1. Introduction
The semiconducting properties of conjugated organic molecules, including polymers (i.e. organic semiconductors) are now beginning to be exploited in niche macro-electronic device applications in place of conventional inorganic semiconductors such as silicon.1 Organic semiconductors can be processed from solution onto flexible substrates at ambient pressure and temperature and so the principle driver for their commercial exploitation is the cost advantage over conventional semiconductors, rather than enhanced device performance.2 These advantages are particularly attractive for large area applications such as photovoltaics and light-emitting diodes, at a time when there is clear need for both renewable electricity generation technologies and energy efficient solid state lighting. The main obstacles to realising widespread applicability of organic semiconductors for these applications are the low charge carrier mobility and susceptibility to degradation, which adversely impact device efficiency and lifetime. As a possible path to circumventing these drawbacks researchers have begun to explore integrating organic semiconductors with inorganic nanoparticles such as quantum dots,3,4 metal nanoparticles5 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs),6 to realise hybrid materials with enhanced functionality, whilst preserving the advantage of facile processing from solution. The advantages of CNTs over other nanomaterials derive from their very high and controllable aspect ratio, structural robustness and chemical stability, combined with the natural abundance of carbon. This paper focuses on the organic photovoltaic (OPV) and organic light-emitting diode (OLED) application opportunities, with particular emphasis on the utility of multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs), which offer a number of advantages over single-wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) for these applications.
2. 
        Carbon nanotubes (CNT)
2.1 Overview
Single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) are structurally the simplest class of CNT, comprising a single graphene cylinder, ideally capped at either end by half a fullerene cage, and with typical diameters in the range 0.4–3 nm. Multi-wall carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) comprise several co-axially arranged SWCNTs of different radii with an inter-tube separation close to the inter-plane separation in graphite (0.34–0.35 nm).7–9 Whilst the inter-tube interaction in MWCNTs is expected to be weak, owing to the relatively large van der Waals separation, it cannot be assumed that the electronic structure is simply the superposition of a set of isolated SWCNTs (Section 2.2). MWCNTs can be synthesised with diameters as large as 100 nm. However, for OPV and OLED applications diameters of <20 nm are most suitable since the organic layer thickness in these thin film device structures is typically <200 nm. Importantly, the dimensions of both classes of CNT can be controlled during the growth process to produce CNTs with well-defined diameters up to several centimetres in length.10 The cylindrical, covalently bonded structure of CNTs renders them extremely strong with a tensile strength 10–100 times that of steel (11–63 GPa)11 with only a fraction of the density. The extended conjugation enables efficient charge transport along their length, which for highly graphitic arc-discharge produced CNTs, is reported to be ballistic.12,13 These properties enable CNTs to carry current densities 2–3 orders of magnitude larger than copper before failure (109 A cm−2)14 and so it is invariably the contacts that limit the current flow in practical devices. Furthermore, the heat transmission capacity of individual CNTs at room temperature has been shown to exceed 3000 W mK−115 which is greater than natural diamond and bodes well for thermal management in devices incorporating CNTs.
2.2 Semiconducting and metallic carbon nanotubes
The utilisation of SWCNTs in macro-electronic device applications is complicated by the presence of both semi-conducting and metallic SWCNTs in bulk samples, regardless of the method of synthesis.9,16 Whether a SWCNT exhibits metallic or semi-conducting behaviour depends on its chiral vector, which describes the relationship between the tube axis and the helicity of the hexagonal lattice walls. Assuming equal probability of all chiral vectors, two thirds of SWCNTs are semi-conducting and the remaining one third metallic. For semiconducting SWCNTs the band gap is direct and inversely proportional to the nanotube diameter,17 making them particularly attractive for optoelectronic applications. Unfortunately, it is not yet possible to control the chiral vector during synthesis or separate semi-conducting SWCNTs from metallic ones post-synthesis in practical quantities. Dielectrophoresis may offer a path to achieving high percentages of separation, but has yet to be scaled up.18
Conversely, as a result of their larger diameter and more complex multi-layered structure, MWCNTs are essentially metallic in nature having a small but finite density of states at the Fermi level, much like graphite.19 Recent scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy studies by our group, of individual double wall CNTs—the simplest MWCNT—show that regardless of whether one or both of the constituent co-axial tubes are semi-conducting, double wall nanotubes are essentially metallic in nature (Fig. 1).20,21 These results highlight the importance of inter-tube interactions in determining the ground state properties of MWCNTs and are consistent with the electrical measurements of Collins et al.22 who have reported compelling evidence that many shells contribute to the conductance of MWCNTs even when it is only the outermost shell that is in direct contact with the metal electrodes. It is as a consequence of their metallic nature that MWCNTs are equally capable of conducting electrons and holes and so offer predictable functionality for device applications as reliable nanometre-sized wires.
 Fig. 1  (Top) Atomically-resolved STM image of a double-walled carbon nanotube. (Bottom) Normalised conductance curves recorded at the location indicated by the star and the diamond on the STM image. The finite density of states next to the Fermi edge highlights the metallic behaviour of the double-walled carbon nanotube whereas the positions of the Van-Hove singularities (indicated by the black dashed lines for the outer shell and the grey dashed lines for the inner shell) show the semi-conducting nature of both shells. 
2.3 Synthesis and purification
The properties of CNTs depend to a large extent on the density of defects, which can be introduced during synthesis and purification. Of the three established methods of carbon nanotube growth: (i) electric arc discharge; (ii) laser ablation; (iii) chemical vapour deposition (CVD), electric arc discharge yields the most highly graphitised CNTs, although the raw product needs extensive purification to remove the large proportion of carbonaceous by-products. CVD grown CNTs offer the best prospect for large volume, high purity production, with the added advantage that they can be grown directly at specified locations on applied substrates.23 The CVD method also affords a high degree of control over CNT diameter, via the catalyst particle size and growth conditions.24 In all cases the raw product contains amorphous carbon, fullerenes and catalytic metal particles which can be removed via thermal oxidation in air followed by oxidative treatment with acid to dissolve the metal oxide. For electronic device applications it is essential that these residual impurities are kept to a minimum because organic semiconductors are easily unintentionally doped.
2.4 Work function
An important material property for OPV and OLED applications of CNTs is the work function, which is defined as the energy required to take an electron from the Fermi level to the vacuum level just outside the surface.25 When CNTs are contacted with metals or semi-conductors as part of an electronic device, the relative values of their work functions play an important role in determining the interfacial interaction. Although work functions can be estimated from the analysis of field emission experiments the most direct and reliable measurement technique is ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS). For MWCNTs the work function measured using UPS is close to that of graphite (4.3–4.4 eV)19 reflecting the similarity of their electronic structure. The work function of SWCNTs is fractionally higher at ∼4.8–4.9 eV19,26 owing to the higher radius of curvature which alters the extent of orbital overlap and the electronic density of states.27
Ago et al.19 have shown that oxidative surface treatments of MWCNTs including heating in air, oxygen plasma treatment and acid oxidation, can have a significant effect on the work function of MWCNTs, owing to the incorporation of electronegative oxygen containing moieties at the MWCNT surface. This sensitivity to oxidative surface treatments, which are invariably employed for CNT purification, may account for the spread of values for the work functions of MWCNTs reported in the literature. Crucially, since only the outer layers are decorated with oxygen containing moieties the high electrical conductivity of the inner nanotube shells is preserved (Fig. 2). Conversely, it is not possible to modify the work function of SWCNTs via surface oxidation, or covalent functionalisation of any kind without drastically modifying the nanotube properties. This is because covalent functionalisation results in a change in the carbon hybridisation from sp2 to sp3 which undermines the integrity of the nanotube conjugated structure thereby altering its optical, electronic and mechanical properties.28,29
 Fig. 2  
Transmission electron microscope image of an oxidised MWCNT (o-MWCNT) showing that damage due to acid oxidation is largely confined to the outer walls. The inner diameter of the nanotube is indicted by the white double headed arrow and the outer diameter by black arrows. The undamaged inner walls appear as continuous lines, in contrast to the damaged outermost walls which are fragmented lines. 
2.5 Optical properties
The photo-physical properties of SWCNTs have received growing attention, not only as potential infra-red light-emitters30 but also as electron acceptors for OPV applications.31–33 The latter results from the stability of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), which is delocalised across the carbon cage and is characteristic of all fullerenes. Consequently CNTs can efficiently quench photoluminescence in organic semi-conductors either by electron transfer or energy transfer to the nanotube.31,34 Guldi et al.31 have shown that when CNT–porphyrin composites are illuminated, rapid electron transfer from the photo-excited porphyrin to the CNT is followed by slow charge recombination. The extended lifetime of the charge separated species is in part attributed to the tubular structure of CNTs which is capable of transporting the charge away from the dissociation site at the nanotube surface, thereby reducing the probability of back transfer and recombination. Since charge transport is most efficient along metallic CNTs the recombination lifetime is longest in systems utilising MWCNTs as the electron acceptor. These properties make CNTs excellent candidates for OPV applications where efficient charge separation and long lived radical pairs are a prerequisite. The main advantage of CNTs over conventional electron acceptors such as C60 is the tubular structure, which enables a very low percolation threshold for the acceptor phase and efficient charge transport to the external circuit. The effect of chemical functionalisation on the electron acceptor strength of CNTs is yet to be explored, although Guldi et al. have shown that physisorbed anchor groups need not impede charge transfer.31
Visible photoluminescence (PL) from CNTs has been observed by a number of research groups.35 Indeed Brennan et al.35a,b and Zhang et al.35e have independently reported visible PL from MWCNTs using infra-red excitation, compelling evidence for efficient multi-photon absorption by MWCNTs. MWCNTs are essentially metallic and in semi-conducting SWCNTs recombination across the band gap cannot account for visible emission, except for very narrow tubes (<0.5 nm diameter). Consequently the origin of visible PL in both classes of CNT is not well understood, but is believed to be mediated by surface defects, the density of which can be greatly increased as a result of covalent functionalisation.35c,f,g
As with pristine SWCNTs, non-functionalised MWCNTs invariably quench visible photoluminescence in adjacent organic chromophores.31,34,36 However, this is not always the case with chemically functionalised CNTs,37 indeed we have recently reported the observation of a 100 fold increase in visible PL from fluorescent impurities in nylon 10,10 upon incorporation of acid oxidised MWCNTs (Fig. 3).38 Visible PL from nylon upon excitation with ultra-violet or visible light is well documented and originates from a range of emissive centres formed as by-products of synthesis in very small quantities.39 (For example, Allen and Harrison obtained only 5 mg of fluorescent chromophores after processing 2 kg of nylon 6,6 chips.)39b Since the dramatic enhancement in PL was not observed using untreated MWCNTs it is believed to be mediated by surface defects formed on the surface of the MWCNTs as a result of acid oxidation, since acid treatment of CNTs is known to disrupt the conjugation and introduce oxygen containing surface moieties (e.g. carboxylic acids).19 In order to rationalise the greatly enhanced PL signal from emissive impurities in the polymer host, we propose that MWCNTs with surface defects are capable of absorbing incident photons and, rather than re-radiating at a different energy as previously reported,35c,f–h transferring the excitation energy to chromophores in an adjacent organic matrix.38 Since the efficiency of the proposed energy transfer processes is likely to depend on a number of criteria, including suitable alignment of the frontier molecular orbitals of the emissive species with the ground and excited states of the defective MWCNT it is much less likely to occur than exciton quenching.
 Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectrum of nylon–o-MWCNT composites for 488 nm excitation for loadings of 0 wt%, 5 wt%, 10 wt% and 30 wt%. 
The observation of dramatically enhanced visible PL from emissive centres in an organic host upon incorporation of defective MWCNTs,38 combined with those reports of strong visible PL from chemically functionalised CNTs35c,f–h and cases where CNTs have been shown not to quench visible PL in organic chromophores tethered directly to them,37 collectively raise the possibility that these somewhat unexpected optical properties could be harnessed in organic optoelectronic devices of the future. Furthermore, the important role played by surface defects introduced as a result of chemical treatment on the optical properties of CNTs is another example of how surface derivatization is a powerful tool for manipulating the properties of CNTs.
2.6 Processability
One of the primary obstacles to the incorporation of CNTs into organic electronic devices is their poor solubility in common organic solvents, which hinders miscibility with conjugated polymers and processing into thin films. One means of circumventing this problem is to chemically graft solubilising functionality onto the outer surface and ends of CNTs. SWCNTs are most readily covalently functionalised because of the high radius of curvature of the graphite wall.40,41 However, covalent functionalisation results in the conversion of sp2 into sp3 hybridised carbon, disrupting the extent of conjugation and adversely impacting charge carrier mobility in SWCNTs.28,29 Consequently, non-covalent means of functionalising SWCNTs, such as those which exploit van der Waals forces, are preferable.31,36 Non-covalent methods are typically much less effective than covalent functionalisation, limiting the SWCNT loading to a few weight percent. MWCNTs are less prone to bundle than SWCNT and because it is possible to functionalise only the surface layers the conductivity need not be significantly reduced.
3. Applications
Research interest in the applications of CNTs in organic electronics is rapidly gathering momentum, particularly in the area of OPVs and OLEDs. It is evident from the following key examples that CNTs are truly multi-functional material. Emphasis is placed on the utility of MWCNTs, which is an area of particular interest to our group.
3.1 
          Carbon nanotube networks: a viable alternative to ITO glass

          Indium-tin oxide (ITO) coated glass is invariably employed as the transparent electrode for OPV and OLED applications, largely because of the absence of a viable alternative. In spite of its widespread use ITO glass is far from ideal for these applications since it has a number of undesirable properties that impact adversely on device performance and reproducibility.42,43 The variability of the work function of ITO glass with the preparative method and post deposition processing is a well-documented problem and results in a variable barrier to charge carrier injection. The chemically ill-defined nature of this ternary oxide also results in metal ion and oxygen contamination of the active organic layers, seriously degrading device performance. It is also predicted that the global supply of indium is likely to fall well short of the projected demand for photovoltaics for large scale electricity generation.
In response to the need for an alternative to ITO glass a number of groups have demonstrated the viability of semi-transparent films of SWCNTs and MWCNTs supported on glass or plastic substrates for OPV and OLED applications.44 A number of processing methods have been reported, all but one of which involve an initial step of dispersing CNTs in solution with the aid of a surfactant, or via surface derivatization with solubilizing moieties. The resulting CNT inks can then be filtered, spin cast, drop cast or sprayed to form continuous network electrodes which can be used as is, or separated from the supporting substrate either using a transfer printing method or simply dissolution of the supporting substrate.44,45 An alternative method for network formation involves dry-state spinning of MWCNT yarns from MWCNT forests grown by CVD, followed by dipping in alcohol to induce densification of the film.46 Electrically conductive patterns of CNTs have also been deposited directly onto plastic substrates using inkjet printing from aqueous solutions of surface oxidised MWCNTs, although their viability as the transparent electrode for OPV and OLED applications is yet to be demonstrated.47 It was evident from the first reported use of carbon nanotubes as an electrode in organic electronic devices by Romero et al.48, who formed opaque MWCNT films by filtration, that a major obstacle to their utilisation as an electrode material is the propensity for short-circuits caused by protruding CNTs. Whilst it is possible to circumvent this problem by increasing the thickness of the organic layer, the increase is invariably well above optimal layer thickness, compromising device efficiency.44a The filtration and transfer printing method reported by Zhou et al.,49 and the densification of MWCNT yarns method pioneered by Zhang et al.44g has made it possible to realise compact, scalable CNT network electrodes sufficiently smooth for incorporation into both OPVs44b,d and OLEDs,44f,g having optimal organic layer thicknesses ≤200 nm. Whilst the electrical conductivity of said films is far below the axial conductivity of individual nanotubes it is now comparable to that of commercial ITO glass for comparable transparency (i.e. <100 Ω sq−1 at >80% transparency).44,50 The conductivity is a complex function of the network density, the number of resistive inter-tube contacts and the CNT alignment, dimensions and defect density. The situation is particularly complex for networks of SWCNTs since there is a high abundance of semi-conducting SWCNTs which form resistive interfaces with other semi-conducting SWCNTs and Schottky contacts with the minority metallic SWCNTs. This drawback can, to a large extent, be compensated for by doping the semiconducting SWCNT with electronegative (p-type) or electropositive (n-type) small molecules to increase the free carrier concentration.51,52 It is also evident that highly graphitised CNTs yield the best network electrodes because of their high conductivity. For optimal performance the CNT electrodes must, like ITO glass, be coated with a thin layer of the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) doped with poly(styrenesulfonate) (PSS),44a–d,f,g which reduces the resistance44b further and helps to planarize44b,f,g the CNT films.
These novel electrodes offer superior mechanical properties at reduced cost, which are increasingly relevant properties with the growing tendency towards fully conformable devices on flexible substrates. The comparable transparency and sheet conductivity of CNT films with ITO on plastic substrates combined with the demonstrated performance of the devices reported to date, places CNT network electrodes in a strong position to compete in the commercial arena for flexible macro-electronic optoelectronics. Notably, CNT electrodes are almost exclusively utilised as electrodes for hole-injection/extraction in OLEDs/OPVs owing to their relatively high work function (≥4.3 eV).
3.2 Hybrid electrodes
CNT electrodes are intrinsically 3-dimensional on the tens of nanometres scale, which is believed to facilitate charge carrier extraction in OPVs and injection in OLEDs owing to the larger surface area. Supporting ultra-thin CNT networks on ITO glass is a composite approach to realising 3-dimensional, highly conductive electrodes,53,54 although the cost advantage over wholly CNT electrodes is lost. As an extension of this approach we have grown MWCNTs directly onto ITO coated aluminosilicate glass viaCVD (Fig. 4).55
 Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscope image of MWCNTs grown directly on ITO glass. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the hybrid electrode shown in (a). (c) Transmission spectra of ITO glass and hybrid electrode. 
The primary advantage of the latter approach is that it ensures that all MWCNTs are in direct electrical contact with the underlying ITO, thereby minimising the contact resistance. The rate of CNT growth on this complex ternary oxide is greatly reduced as compared to that on silicon dioxide and glass substrates enabling the necessary degree of control over nanotube height. Despite a large reduction in the transparency of the hybrid electrode as compared to ITO (Fig. 4c), the short circuit current density (Jsc) in OPVs utilizing the electrode for hole extraction remained comparable to those using ITO glass. This result is compelling evidence that the loss in efficiency due to the reduction in light entering the cell is compensated by efficient hole-extraction. This improvement is attributed to the 50–60% increase in the area of the hybrid electrode, as compared to planar ITO glass, reducing the average distance positive charge carriers (holes) need to travel before extraction to the external circuit, thereby improving the hole-extraction efficiency. As such, this report points the way to improved charge extraction efficiencies in future OPVs.
3.3. Organic–CNT composites
Combining CNTs with the optical properties of conjugated organic compounds is a promising path to realizing functional hybrid materials, introducing new electronic properties based on electronic interaction between the two components and/or morphological modification. The function of the CNT component depends, to a large extent, on whether the CNTs are isolated within the organic host matrix, form a continuous percolating network, or are in contact with one of the electrodes.

3.3.1 Enhancing charge transport. 
In 1998 Curran et al.36 reported the interaction between the poly(phenylene vinylene) derivative poly(m-phenylenevinylene-co-2,5-dioctoxy-p-phenylenevinylene) (PmPV) and arc discharge grown MWCNTs in which the helical PmPV molecules wrap around the MWCNTs keeping them suspended in solution indefinitely. Incorporation of MWCNTs increased the conductivity of the sample by as much as eight orders of magnitude with increasing MWCNT loading, by introducing highly conducting MWCNT pathways through the PmPV host. As with CNT network electrodes, the high aspect ratio enables percolation at very low volume fractions where conductivity is low but conduction lengths are large.36,50
We have exploited this development in bi-layer OPVs, having a PmPV donor layer and a C60 acceptor layer, to reduce cell series resistance (Fig. 5 (inset)).56 To maximise the power conversion efficiency in OPVs the short circuit current density (Jsc), open circuit voltage (Voc) and fill factor (F.F.) must all be maximized. The latter is maximized when the shunt resistance is maximized and the series resistance is minimized. Since the series resistance is simply the sum of contributions from bulk transport within the organic layers, carrier extraction at the electrodes, and transport through the contacts, enhanced conduction in the PmPV layer upon incorporation of MWCNTs translates to a beneficial reduction in series resistance. Concentrations of MWCNTs as low as ∼1 wt% uniformly distributed within the PmPV layer were found to be an effective means of greatly reducing cell series resistance. Crucially, the MWCNTs were confined within the PmPV layer, ensuring that cell shunt resistance was not compromised by filamentary short circuits, translating the reduction in series resistance into a 50–60% increase in F.F. (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Summary of Voc and F.F. under one sun simulated solar illumination of the bi-layer OPV, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PmPV/C60/Al, as a function of wt% MWCNT within the PmPV layer. The lines connecting data points are used to guide the eye and have no physical meaning. 
The current–voltage characteristics of single layer diodes comprising a layer of PmPV with and without MWCNTs showed that many of the MWCNTs were in direct electrical contact with the underlying ITO electrode, rather than isolated within the PmPV matrix. This was consistent with the strong dependence of Voc on the MWCNT work function, which was manipulated via chemical functionalisation with polar surface moieties. Further corroborating evidence for direct contact between the electrode and the MWCNTs was provided by the saturation of Voc with increasing MWCNT loading. Since the MWCNTs used were typically 10 nm thick and a micron long, it is likely that they would contact the underlying ITO electrode at some point along their length when confined within a PmPV layer only 50 nm in thickness. The reduction in the series resistance was attributed to a reduction in the average distance over which holes formed at the heterojunction must transverse before extraction at the anode. Whilst it is unlikely that all of the holes formed at the organic heterojunction are extracted by MWCNTs, owing to their low concentration, we suggest that geometric electric field enhancement57 at the CNT sidewalls and ends greatly increases the range over which holes can be efficiently extracted by each MWCNT. The electric field enhancement factor in this configuration is estimated to be as great as five fold.
Building on this work we extended the approach to a composite of acid oxidised MWCNTs (o-MWCNT) and the polythiophene derivative, sodium poly[2-(3-thienyl)ethoxy-4-butylsulfonate] (PTEBS).58 Treatment of MWCNTs with concentrated HNO3–H2SO4 prior to blending with PTEBS is an effective means of partially oxidising the outermost graphene layers of MWCNTs whilst the inner graphene layers remain unreacted (Fig. 2), retaining the essential electronic structure. The primary advantage of this system over MWCNT–PmPV is that both components are water soluble, thereby negating the need for chlorinated solvent. An additional advantage is the higher work function of o-MWCNTs (5.0–5.1 eV). Notably there was no evidence for a ground state interaction between o-MWCNT and PTEBS, and the composite solutions were stable toward MWCNT flocculation. Discrete heterojunction photovoltaic cells utilising this composite material as the donor layer exhibit a ∼20% increase in fill factor and commensurate increase in power conversion efficiency as compared to cells without o-MWCNTs (Fig. 6 and Table 1).
 Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics under one sun simulated solar illumination of bi-layer OPV, ITO/PTEBS/C60/Al, with and without 7 wt% o-MWCNT in the PTEBS layer. 
Table 1 Summary of device characteristics under 1 sun simulated solar illumination as a function of o-MWCNT loading within the PTEBS layer





                      o-MWCNT (wt%)

V
oc/V

J
sc/mA cm−2

                      FF
                    
PCE (%)




0
0.65
1.40
0.51
0.46


1
0.62
1.49
0.61
0.56


3.5
0.60
1.49
0.59
0.52


7.5
0.57
1.52
0.62
0.55




In this instance the series resistance was reduced without a large change in Voc. The reduction in series resistance is attributed to energy level alignment between the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of the PTEBS (5.0–5.3 eV) and the Fermi level of o-MWCNT (5.0–5.1 eV) facilitating hole transport through the PTEBS layer to the ITO electrode. Crucially o-MWCNTs are incorporated into the cell structure using an environmentally compatible solvent without complicating the process of device fabrication.
In a further study we have investigated the potential utilisation of o-MWCNTs and the soluble small-molecule organic semiconductor, 3,4,4,4-tetrasulfonic acid tetrasodium salt copper phthalocyanine (TS-CuPc) in OPVs.59 Concentrated dispersions of o-MWCNTs in aqueous solutions of TS-CuPc were stable towards nanotube flocculation for many months. In addition to hydrogen bonding interactions the compatibility between the two components was shown to result from a ground state charge transfer interaction with partial charge transfer from o-MWCNTs to TS-CuPc molecules orientated such that the plane of the macrocycle is parallel to the nanotube surface. Upon spin casting to form uniform thin films the experimental evidence was consistent with a o-MWCNT scaffold decorated with phthalocyanine molecules self-assembled into extended aggregates reminiscent of 1-D linearly stacked phthalocyanine polymers (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of a spin cast nanocomposite film of o-MWCNT (2 mg ml−1):TS-CuPc (3.6 mg ml−1) and pictorial representation of co-facially extended TS-CuPc aggregates adsorbed onto the outer wall of an o-MWCNT. (b) Schematic energy level diagram at zero internal bias for the bulk heterojunction organic solar cell: ITO/o-MWCNT:TS-CuPc/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al. The positive vacuum level shift at the o-MWCNT:TS-CuPc interface—which improves alignment between the o-MWCNT Fermi level and TS-CuPc HOMO—is not depicted. 
To demonstrate the application of this hybrid nanostructured material, it was incorporated into a model OPV at the interface between a poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):[6,6]-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) bulk-heterojunction layer and an ITO coated glass electrode. A bulk heterojunction is distinct from a bi-layer structure because it comprises a complex interpenetrating network of donor and acceptor phases, the primary advantage of which is the much larger donor–acceptor interfacial area for the dissociation of excitons. The resulting increase in power conversion efficiency was attributed to the improved light harvesting capability of the device owing to absorption by TS-CuPc and enhanced hole-extraction along the highly conductive o-MWCNTs. Importantly, this work draws attention to the possible formation of abrupt vacuum level shifts at the interface between organic semiconductors and MWCNTs, resulting from charge transfer interactions, the push-back effect and/or polarization of the organic semiconductor in the electric field at the nanotube surface. Abrupt vacuum level shifts are common at metal–organic interfaces and have important implications for device design.25 In this instance the vacuum level shift is such that the HOMO of TS-CuPc is between that of P3HT and the Fermi level of MWCNTs, facilitating the transport of holes to the ITO electrode. The experimental evidence indicates that the TS-CuPc phase enhances light absorption, whilst the o-MWCNT facilitates conduction of holes to the underlying ITO electrode owing to close alignment of the relevant valance states.
Choi et al. have successfully incorporated SWCNTs into polyvinylcarbazole (PVK)60 and poly[2-methoxy-5-(2-ethylhexyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MEH-PPV)61 hole-transport layers of OLEDs, employing a tri-(8-hydroxyquinolinolato) aluminium (Alq3) emissive layer. From an analysis of the radial breathing modes, probed using Raman spectroscopy, the SWCNTs used were believed to be 1.22 nm in diameter and predominantly metallic.60 In the case where MEH-PPV was employed as the hole-transport layer, close alignment between the HOMO of MEH-PPV (∼4.9 eV) and the Fermi level of the metallic SWCNTs (4.8–4.9 eV),19,26 combined with the highly conductive and percolative nature of SWCNTs offers a plausible explanation for the observed improvement in hole-injection upon incorporation of SWCNTs. Indeed, it is possible that some of the metallic SWCNTs simply function as an extension of the underlying PEDOT:PSS coated ITO electrode. In the case where PVK is utilized as the hole-transport layer the function of the SWCNTs is less clear since the HOMO of PVK (5.8 eV) is poorly aligned with the Fermi level of the SWCNTs, or the HOMO of the semi-conducting SWCNTs also present (∼5.1-5.2 eV).62 In the absence of current–voltage data pertaining to hole-only diodes it is difficult to say whether the injected hole current was increased or decreased upon incorporation of SWCNTs into the PVK layer.
In addition to facilitating charge transport in organic semiconductors, CNTs can be used to impede or block transport by trapping charge carriers. Woo et al.63 have demonstrated this application in OLEDs comprising a PmPV hole-transport layer and dye doped tri-(8-hydroxyquinolinolato) aluminium layer (Alq3) emissive layer. Upon incorporation of very low loadings of SWCNTs (∼0.1 wt%) into the PmPV layer, the emissive region is shifted from the dye doped Alq3 layer into the PmPV layer as a result of hole-trapping by SWCNTs isolated within the PmPV layer. It is useful to be able to tune the electron and hole transport properties in organic semiconductors for OLED applications to achieve balanced charge carrier injection. The primary advantage of CNT dopants is that the concentrations can be sufficiently low not to adversely impact the luminescent properties of the organic semiconductor. It may also prove possible to manipulate the trap depth via chemical functionalisation.
CNTs can also be combined with molecularly doped conjugated polymers, such as PEDOT:PSS64 and polyaniline doped with poly(2-methoxyaniline-5-sulfonic acid)65 which behave like metals. Since the CNT conductivity is invariably much greater than the conducting polymer the conductivity of the sample increases upon introduction of CNTs. As with CNT films (Section 3.1 of this article) the conductivity of the composite is ultimately limited by the resistance of the inter-tube contacts and so the nature of the polymer–CNT interaction and conductivity of the pristine polymer play pivotal roles in determining the electrical properties of the bulk sample.66 The electrical and optical properties of these composite conductors are currently inferior to those of solution processed CNT films and so the advantage over the latter as alternatives to ITO glass in organic optoelectronic device applications has yet to be demonstrated. However, Wang et al.67 have shown that when a composite of PEDOT:PSS and o-MWCNTs is utilised in conjunction with ITO glass in single layer OLEDs employing an Alq3 emissive layer, enhanced hole injection is achieved. Interestingly, OLED performance improves up to 0.6 wt% o-MWCNTs in the PEDOT:PSS layer before dramatically deteriorating.


3.3.2 CNT electron acceptors. 
Much of the research effort in carbon nanotube composite materials for OPV has focused on SWCNT–conjugated polymer composites.32,33 In these binary systems the SWCNTs function as the electron acceptor and the conjugated polymer as the electron donor. The primary mechanism of free carrier generation is the dissociation of photo-induced excitons formed on the conjugated polymer at the extended interface with SWCNTs. The resulting free electrons and holes are conducted to the external circuit via the SWCNTs and conjugated polymer respectively. In these systems the differing roles, if any, of the semi-conducting and metallic SWCNTs are not clear.
Extending this approach, sensitization of CNTs with organic dyes32c or inorganic semiconductor nanoparticles68 prior to combining with a conjugated polymer, to form a ternary composite, is an effective means of increasing the light harvesting capability of the cell. By sensitizing SWCNTs with napthalocyanine prior to blending with poly(3-octylthiophene), Kaymakis and Amaratunga32c have achieved large increases in Jsc as compared to cells without napthalocyanine sensitization. However, to date the power conversion efficiency in these devices (≪1%) remains well below those achieved using Buckminster fullerene and its derivatives as the electron acceptor (4–5%). This poor device performance seems to be inconsistent with the work of Guldi et al.31 who have clearly demonstrated that SWCNTs and MWCNTs are capable of efficient exciton dissociation and long lived radical pair formation when combined with a porphyrin—an important class of organic semiconductor—as the photoexcitable electron donor. Guldi et al.69 have also shown that photo-electrochemical cells utilising SWCNT electron acceptors have achieved monochromatic power conversion efficiencies of up to 8.5%. When SWCNT–polymer blends are processed into thin films it is likely that a significant proportion of the nanotubes are isolated within the polymer host, rather than forming direct contacts with, or percolating pathways to, the relevant electrode. Consequently, photo-generated charge carriers become trapped on isolated nanotubes and eventually recombine, offering a possible explanation for the poor device performance in solid state OPV utilising SWCNTs as electron acceptors. Conversely, in photo-electrochemical cells the SWCNT are supported on one of the electrodes and so photo-generated charge carriers have a continuous path to the external circuit.
In a further adaptation of this approach Liet al.70 have decorated SWCNTs with C60 molecules via microwave induced functionalisation, prior to blending with poly(3-hexylthiophene) and C60 to form a 3-dimensional interpenetrating network of donor and acceptor phases in which the C60 functionalised SWCNTs are dispersed. In this context the SWCNTs function as highly conductive pathways facilitating transport of photo-generated electrons to the external circuit. Since the SWCNT loading was very low (∼0.1 wt%) to avoid short-circuiting the diode, it is unlikely that the SWCNTs formed a percolating network. However, the reduction in cell series resistance was sufficient to significantly increase both the F.F. and Jsc resulting in an increase in power conversion efficiency from 0.42% to 0.57% under one sun simulated solar irradiance. Whilst it is not clear what differing roles semi-conducting and metallic SWCNTs may play in these devices, the improvement in cell performance clearly demonstrates the potential of this approach, which utilises CNT as both a scaffold to support C60 molecules and a molecular wire.
Although not yet demonstrated, it is plausible that semi-conducting SWCNTs might also find application as donor materials in OPVs if combined with an organic semiconductor having a sufficiently large electron affinity to function as the acceptor. Since SWCNT electrodes have been successfully exploited as hole-collecting electrodes in OPV (Section 3.1) their capacity to donate electrons and conduct holes is already known.


3.3.3 Retarding photo-bleaching of organic chromophores. 
One of the primary obstacles to realising widespread utility of organic semiconductors is the susceptibility to thermal and light-induced degradation (bleaching). Curran et al.36 observed that the rate of photo-bleaching of PmPV by intense laser light was drastically reduced upon incorporation of MWCNTs even at low loadings. Similarly we have observed that photo-bleaching of emissive impurities in nylon is significantly retarded upon combination with MWCNTs.38 These results indicate that MWCNTs may offer a path to retarding photo-bleaching of organic semiconductors. Whilst the mechanism responsible for this effect is not yet understood, CNTs are known to improve the heat transmission capacity of organic solids, thereby helping to distribute heat.71

4. Conclusions
It is clear from the progress made to date that CNTs are a truly multi-functional material for organic optoelectronic applications, with potential utility as supporting substrates, electrodes, dopants, light-emitters, electron acceptors and even nanometric heat sinks. Engineering chemical functionalisation of CNTs to impart optical and electronic functionality, in addition to improving processability, is key to enabling the realisation of this potential. Whilst it seems likely that SWCNT network electrodes will be the first CNT technology to feature in commercial organic optoelectronic devices, MWCNTs are rapidly emerging as a more versatile platform for further progress in conjunction with advances in their chemical derivatisation.
Acknowledgements
The authors are supported by the United Kingdom Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council. Dr Hatton is also supported by The Royal Academy of Engineering via a Research Fellowship. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr Cristina Giusca, Dr Yann Tison and Dr Maxim Shkunov for their helpful discussions.
References
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Shaheen, D. S. Ginley and G. E. Jabbour, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 10 CAS .
W. U. Huynh, J. J. Dittmer and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2002, 295, 2425 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maria, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klern, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213112 CrossRef .
S. Sivaramakrishnan, P. J. Chia, Y. C. Yeo, L. L. Chua and P. K. H. Ho, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123115 CrossRef .
P. M. F. J. Costa, S. Friedrichs, J. Sloan and M. L. H. Green, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2527 CrossRef CAS .

          P. J. F. Harris, Carbon Nanotubes and Related Structures, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1999p. 83 Search PubMed .

          M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. Avouris, Carbon Nanotubes Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Applications, Springer-Verlag, Berlin and Heidelberg,  2001, pp. 338–339 Search PubMed .
H. W. Zhu, C. L. Xu, D. H. Wu, B. Q. Wei, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Science, 2002, 296, 884 CrossRef CAS .
M.-F. Yu, O. Lourie, M. J. Dyer, K. Moloni, T. F. Kelly and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2000, 287, 637 CrossRef CAS .
S. Frank, P. Poncharal, Z. L. Wang and W. A. de Heer, Science, 1998, 280, 1744 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Dai, Nature, 2003, 424, 654 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yao, C. L. Kane and C. Dekker, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2941 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kim, L. Shi, A. Majumdar and P. L. McEuen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 215502 CrossRef CAS .
P. Avouris, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1026 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. G. Wildoer, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. Smalley and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 391, 59 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mureau, E. Mendoza, S. R. P. Silva, K. F. Hoettges and M. P. Hughes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 243109 CrossRef .
H. Ago, T. Kugler, F. Cacialli, W. R. Salaneck, M. S. P. Shaffer, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8116 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Giusca, Y. Tison, V. Stolojan, E. Borowiak-Palen, S. Ravi and P. Silva, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
Yann Tison, E. Giusca Cristina, Vlad Stolojan, Y. Hayashi, S. Ravi and P. Silva, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 189 CrossRef .
P. G. Collins, M. Hersam, M. Arnold, R. Martel and Ph. Avouris, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 3128 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. K. Teo, M. Chhowalla, G. A. J. Amaratunga, W. I. Milne, D. G. Hasko, G. Pirio, P. Legagneux, F. Wyczisk and D. Pribat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 1534 CrossRef CAS  , and section 3.2 of this paper.

  (a) C. L. Cheung, A. Kurtz, H. Park and C. M. Lieber, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2429 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Lu and J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20254 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) G.-H. Jeong, S. Suzuki, Y. Kobayashi, A. Yamazaki, H. Yoshimura and Y. Homma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 043108 CrossRef .
H. Ishii, K. Sugiyama, E. Ito and K. Seki, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 605 CrossRef CAS .
J. van de Lagemaat, T. M. Barnes, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen, T. J. Coutts, C. Weeks, I. Levitsky, J. Peltola and P. Glatkowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233503 CrossRef .
B. Shan and K. Cho, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 236602 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, H. Park, J. Han and J. P. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 4227 CrossRef CAS .
M. Burghard, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2005, 58, 1 CAS ; A. G. Rinzler, J. Liu, H. Dai, P. Nikolaev, C. B. Huffman, F. J. Rodríguez-Macías, P. J. Boul, A. H. Lu, D. Heymann, D. T. Colbert, R. S. Lee, J. E. Fischer, A. M. Rao, P. C. Eklund and R. E. Smalley, Appl. Phys. A, 1998, 67, 29 CrossRef ; E. Bekyarova, M. E. Itkis, N. Cabrera, B. Zhao, A. P. Yu, J. B. Gao and R. C. Haddon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5990 CrossRef .
S. Kazaoui, N. Minami, B. Nalini, Y. Kim, N. Takada and K. Hara, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 211914 CrossRef .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2038 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Zerbetto and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2005, 38, 871 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 112 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Kymakis, I. Alexandrou and G. A. J. Amaratunga, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 93, 1764 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) E. Kymakis and G. A. J. Amaratunga, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 80, 465 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, R. P. Raffaelle, S. L. Castro and S. G. Bailey, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2005, 13, 165 CAS .
A. Hiroki, M. S. P. Shaffer, D. S. Ginger, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B, 2000, 61, 2286 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. E. Brennan, J. N. Coleman, M. Panhuis, L. Marty and W. J. Blau, Synth. Met., 2001, 119, 641 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. E. Brennan, J. N. Coleman, A. Drury, B. Lahr, T. Kobayashi and W. J. Blau, Opt. Lett., 2003, 28, 266 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. M. Guldi, M. Holzinger, A. Hirsch, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2003, 1130 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Guo, C. Yang, Z. M. Li, M. Bai, H. J. Liu, G. D. Li, E. G. Wang, C. T. Chan, Z. K. Tang, W. J. Ge and X. Xiao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 017402 CrossRef ; 
  (e) Y. Zhang, T. Gong, W. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Chang, K. Wang and D. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 173114 CrossRef ; 
  (f) Y. Lin, B. Zhou, R. B. Martin, K. B. Henbest, B. A. Harruff, J. E. Riggs, Z. X. Guo, L. F. Allart and Y. P. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 14779 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J. E. Riggs, Z. Guo, D. L. Carroll and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 5879 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, K. Henbest, K. Fu, W. Huang, Y. Lin, S. Taylor and D. L. Carroll, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 351, 349 CrossRef CAS .
S. Curran, P. M. Ajayan, W. J. Blau, D. L. Carroll, J. N. Coleman, A. B. Daltan, A. P. Davey, A. Drury, B. McCarthy, S. Maier and A. Strevens, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 1091 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Li, R. B. Martin, B. A. Harruff, R. A. Carino, L. F. Allard and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 896 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Campidelli, C. Sooamber, E. L. Diz, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12544 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Henley, R. A. Hatton, G. Y. Chen, C. Cao, H. L. Zeng, H. W. Kroto and S. R. P. Silva, Small, 2007, 3, 1927 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. R. Brasington and F. Gadala-Maria, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1995, 55, 687 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) N. S. Allen and M. J. Harrison, Eur. Polym. J., 1985, 21, 517 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. R. Brasington and F. Gadala-Maria, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1994, 53, 747 CrossRef CAS .
K. Balasubramanian and M. Burghard, Small, 2005, 1, 180 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brukh and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 619 RSC .
H. Antoniadis, J. N. Miller, D. B. Roitman and I. H. Cambell, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1997, 44, 1287 .
M. P. de Jong, L. J. van IJzendoorn and M. J. A. de Voigt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2255 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. W. Rowell, M. A. Topinka, M. D. McGehee, H. J. Prall, G. Dennler, N. S. Sariciftci, L. B. Hu and G. Gruner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233506 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. van de Lagemaat, T. M. Barnes, G. Rumbles, S. E. Shaheen, T. J. Coutts, C. Weeks, I. Levitsky, J. Peltola and P. Glatkowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 233503 CrossRef ; 
  (c) R. Ulbricht, S. B. Lee, X. Jiang, K. Inoue, M. Zhang, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman and A. A. Zakhidov, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 416 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) C. M. Aguirre, S. Auvray, S. Pigeon, R. Izquierdo, P. Desjardins and R. Martel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 183104 CrossRef ; 
  (e) J. Li, L. Hu, L. Wang, Y. Zhou, G. Grüner and T. J. Marks, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2472 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, Z. Chen, X. Du, J. M. Logan, J. Sippel, M. Nikolou, K. Kamaras, J. R. Reynolds, D. B. Tanner, A. F. Hebard and A. G. Rinzler, Science, 2004, 305, 1273 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kordás, T. Mustonen, G. Tóth, H. Jantunen, M. Lajunen, C. Soldano, S. Talapatra, S. Kar, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Small, 2006, 2, 1021 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Romero, M. Carrard, W. de Heer and L. Zuppiroli, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 899 CAS .
Y. Zhou, L. Hu and G. Grüner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 123109 CrossRef .
G. Gruner, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3533 RSC .
D. Zhang, K. Ryu, X. Liu, E. Polikarpov, J. Ly, M. E. Tompson and C. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1880 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bradley, J. C. Gabriel, M. Briman, A. Star and G. Gruner, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 218301 CrossRef .
H. Ago, K. Petritsch, M. S. P. Shaffer, A. H. Windle and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 1281 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ulbricht, S. B. Lee, X. Jiang, K. Inoue, M. Zhang, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman and A. A. Zakhidov, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 416 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton, G. Y. Chen and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 89, 023105 CrossRef .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 133117 CrossRef .
R. C. Smith, D. C. Cox and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 103112 CrossRef .
A. J. Miller, R. A. Hatton and S. R. P. Silva, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 123115 CrossRef .
R. A. Hatton, N. P. Blanchard, V. Stolojan, A. J. Miller and S. R. P. Silva, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6424 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Kim, M. Kim, H. M. Kim, J. Joo and J.-H. Choi, Opt. Mater., 2002, 21, 147 .
Y.-G. Ha, E.-A. You, B.-J. Kim and J.-H. Choi, Synth. Met., 2005, 153, 205 CrossRef CAS .
The band gap of a 1.22 nm diameter SWCNT is ∼0.63 eV [  J. W. G. Widloer, L. C. Venema, A. G. Rinzler, R. E. Smalley and C. Dekker, Nature, 1998, 391, 59 Search PubMed  ]. Assuming a work function of 4.8–4.9 eV19,26 and that the Fermi level lies in the middle of the band gap, the valance band edge is ∼5.1–5.2 eV below the vacuum level.
H. S. Woo, R. Czerw, S. Webster, D. L. Carroll, J. Ballato, A. E. Strevens, D. O'Brien and W. J. Blau, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 1393 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kymakis, G. Klapsis, E. Koudoumas, E. Stratakis, N. Kornilios, N. Vidakis and Y. Franghiadakis, Eur. Phys. J.: Appl. Phys., 2006, 36, 257 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) W. R. Small and M. in het Panhuis, Small, 2007, 3, 1500 CrossRef ; 
  (b) W. R. Small, F. Masdarolomoor, G. G. Wallace and M. in het Panhuis, J. Mater. Chem., 2007 10.1039/b712940h .
M. in het Panhuis, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3598 RSC  , and references therein..
G.-F. Wang, X.-M. Tao, W. Chen, R.-X. Wang and A. Yang, J. Lumin., 2007, 126, 602 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, S. L. Castro, H. J. Ruf, C. M. Evans, S. G. Bailey and R. P. Raffaelle, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 733 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Prato, N. Jux, S. Qin and W. Ford, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2015 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Iqbal, M. Chhowalla and S. Mitra, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2406 RSC .
M. J. Biercuk, M. C. Liaguno, M. Radosavljevic, J. K. Hyun, A. T. Johnson and J. E. Fischer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2767 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:
Ross A. Hatton	Ross Hatton is a Royal Academy of Engineering/EPSRC Research Fellow at the University of Surrey Advanced Technology Institute, researching nano-structured electrodes for organic photovoltaics. Ross obtained his first degree in Chemistry and Molecular Physics from the University of Nottingham in 1999 and subsequently undertook a doctorate at the same institution pertaining to control of hole injection in organic light-emitting diodes.
	Anthony Miller is currently a Post-doctoral Research Fellow at the University of Surrey Advanced Technology Institute exploring carbon nanotube materials for organic light-emitting diodes. He received his first degree in Electrical and Electronic Engineering from the University of Surrey in 2002 and subsequently undertook a doctorate at the same institution focusing on the utility of carbon nanotubes in organic photovoltaics.
	S. R. P. Silva is a Professor of Solid State Electronics and Director of the Advanced Technology Institute at the University of Surrey, where he leads the activity in nano-electronics. He received his BA and PhD degrees from the University of Cambridge. His research interests encompass a wide range of activities in the areas of nano-electronics and large-area electronics.

 	Fig. 1  (Top) Atomically-resolved STM image of a double-walled carbon nanotube. (Bottom) Normalised conductance curves recorded at the location indicated by the star and the diamond on the STM image. The finite density of states next to the Fermi edge highlights the metallic behaviour of the double-walled carbon nanotube whereas the positions of the Van-Hove singularities (indicated by the black dashed lines for the outer shell and the grey dashed lines for the inner shell) show the semi-conducting nature of both shells.	 

 	Fig. 2  
Transmission electron microscope image of an oxidised MWCNT (o-MWCNT) showing that damage due to acid oxidation is largely confined to the outer walls. The inner diameter of the nanotube is indicted by the white double headed arrow and the outer diameter by black arrows. The undamaged inner walls appear as continuous lines, in contrast to the damaged outermost walls which are fragmented lines.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectrum of nylon–o-MWCNT composites for 488 nm excitation for loadings of 0 wt%, 5 wt%, 10 wt% and 30 wt%.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscope image of MWCNTs grown directly on ITO glass. (b) Cross-sectional SEM image of the hybrid electrode shown in (a). (c) Transmission spectra of ITO glass and hybrid electrode.	 

 	Fig. 5  Summary of Voc and F.F. under one sun simulated solar illumination of the bi-layer OPV, ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PmPV/C60/Al, as a function of wt% MWCNT within the PmPV layer. The lines connecting data points are used to guide the eye and have no physical meaning.	 

 	Fig. 6  Current–voltage characteristics under one sun simulated solar illumination of bi-layer OPV, ITO/PTEBS/C60/Al, with and without 7 wt% o-MWCNT in the PTEBS layer.	 

0	0.65	1.40	0.51	0.46
1	0.62	1.49	0.61	0.56
3.5	0.60	1.49	0.59	0.52
7.5	0.57	1.52	0.62	0.55

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of a spin cast nanocomposite film of o-MWCNT (2 mg ml−1):TS-CuPc (3.6 mg ml−1) and pictorial representation of co-facially extended TS-CuPc aggregates adsorbed onto the outer wall of an o-MWCNT. (b) Schematic energy level diagram at zero internal bias for the bulk heterojunction organic solar cell: ITO/o-MWCNT:TS-CuPc/P3HT:PCBM/LiF/Al. The positive vacuum level shift at the o-MWCNT:TS-CuPc interface—which improves alignment between the o-MWCNT Fermi level and TS-CuPc HOMO—is not depicted.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
