Electrical tension-triggered conversion of anaerobic to aerobic respiration of Shewanella putrefaciens CN32 cells while promoting biofilm growth in mi ...  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CC01605E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CC01605E
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 6050-6053Electrical tension-triggered conversion of anaerobic to aerobic respiration of Shewanella putrefaciens CN32 cells while promoting biofilm growth in microbial fuel cells†

        
          
            Xiu 
            He
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoshuai 
            Wu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yan 
            Qiao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Tianbao 
            Hu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Deng 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Han
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Chang Ming 
            Li
          
        
      *abcd
aInstitute for Clean Energy & Advanced Materials, Faculty of Materials & Energy, Southwest University, No. 2 Tiansheng Road, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China. E-mail: yanqiao@swu.edu.cn; ecmli@swu.edu.cn
bInstitute of Materials Science and Devices, Suzhou University of Science and Technology, Suzhou 215011, P. R. China
cChongqing Engineering Research Center for Rapid Diagnosis of Dread Disease, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, P. R. China
dInstitute of Advanced Crossfield Science, Qingdao University, Qingdao 266071, P. R. China
Received 
      1st March 2020
    , Accepted 20th April 2020First published on 23rd April 2020AbstractA global gene expression analysis of Shewanella putrefaciens CN32 cells nearby a nanostructured microbial anode reveals an electrical tension-triggered conversion of anaerobic respiration to aerobic respiration with increased excretion of flavin electron shuttles and cytochrome C proteins, which sheds light on the role of electric tension in cell organisms.

Shewanella species are typical exoelectrogens1 that enable energy conversion to harvest electricity in microbial fuel cells (MFCs), and they hold great promise to clean wastewater and remediate the environment while offering sustainable energy resources. MFC performance relies on the microbial biofilm adhered to the anode. Studies of strains of exoelectrogens such as Geobacter2 and Shewanella oneidensis (S. oneidensis) MR-13 have revealed that highly concentrated microbial biofilms on the MFC anode could secrete higher electron mediators to promote direct electrochemistry and significantly enhance anode bioelectrocatalytic performance. It has been disclosed that a uniquely designed nanostructured anode could greatly enhance the flavin based interfacial electron transfer by offering a large specific surface area for a large current and also promote biofilm adhesion.4 However, this mechanism is still not clear as it is difficult to know the details of biofilm formation under electrical tension.
It has been reported that the anode potential could affect the diversity of the biofilm community and regulate the pathways of bacterial respiration toward maximal energy efficiency and minimal extracellular potential loss.5 Nevertheless, it is not clear yet whether and how the anode could affect the motile cells in electrolyte adjacent to the anode. Recently, it has been discovered that bacterial cells in the biofilm community can not only control the biocatalytic behaviour of cells on the film, but also exhibit effects on catalytic functions of adjacent bacterial cells in electrolyte through remote electrical signals.6–8 Furthermore, the floating cells in the electrolyte adjacent to the anode surface can also mediate electron transfer,9 which is also an important role of electroactive biofilm formation in MFCs.10 Therefore, we could argue that bacterial cells adjacent to the anode may possess quite different behaviors from those of anaerobically cultured cells, and investigations could possibly disclose the mechanism of biofilm formation while offering scientific insights into the bioelectrocatalytic process of microbes.
According to our previous results, Shewanella putrefaciens CN32 (S. putrefaciens CN32) cells demonstrated superior power generation performance in batch type MFCs.11 More evidence is required to explain the detailed mechanism behind the efficient extracellular electron transfer. Herein, a whole-genome-scale gene expression analysis was conducted using RNA sequencing (RNA-seq) for S. putrefaciens CN32 cells in electrolyte adjacent to an anode to investigate the change of respiration and movement profiles of microorganisms in a MFC anode. The electrical tension-treated S. putrefaciens CN32 cells were collected from three identical MFC anodic half-cells using a saturated calomel electrode (SCE), a nanostructured anode (poised at 0.2 V vs. SCE for 12 hours every day),12 a titanium sheet counter electrode and S. putrefaciens CN32 cell suspension in M9 buffer (containing 18 mM lactate) as the electrolyte. For the control group, the CN32 cells were cultured in the same half-cells with an open-circuit set up (Fig. 1a and b). Considering that the nanostructured anode is able to nest more microbes offering more active sites and a larger surface area for higher catalytic current, the anode used in this work was nickel oxide@carbon nanowire network decorated carbon cloth, which was prepared using in situ electrodeposition. (Fig. 1c). The cyclic voltammograms (CVs) show that the nanowire network modified carbon cloth possesses a larger active surface area, a higher catalytic current and also a lower interfacial charge transfer resistance than that of the carbon cloth anode (Fig. S1a and b, ESI†). Before sample collection, the electrochemical behaviours of the anodes in half-cells were investigated after 24 h, 48 h and 72 h by voltammetry at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1, during which the electrochemical reaction could achieve the steady state.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the MFC half-cells for electrical tension (a) and open circuit (b). (c) FESEM image of the anode; (d) illustration of sample collection. 
Voltammograms in Fig. 2a display two catalytic waves at around −0.45 V and 0 V (vs. SCE) that correspond to the indirect electron transfer (IET) via flavins and the direct electron transfer (DET) via outer membrane cytochromes, respectively.13,14 The height of the IET waves increases from 0 h to 72 h, clearly indicating the increased concentrations of the excreted flavins. Furthermore, it is also clear that the current becomes less when it reaches the diffusion control limit after 72 h of electrical tension; in contrast, the steady-state curve obtained at the beginning of electrical tension (0 hour) has no diffusion control limit even at large positive potentials. This result indisputably proves that the electrical tension indeed does greatly improve the electrode biocatalytic kinetics, which makes the reaction rate faster with increased electrical tension time to reach the diffusion control limit state. In addition, the diffusion current limit increases with the increase of electrical tension time (Fig. 2a), indicating that the concentrations of the redox species of flavins and cytochromes increase with the electrical tension time. This is very likely to result from the biofilm growth on the anode with tension time and more excreted flavins and cytochromes at a higher diffusion limiting current. The CV of the control anode also exhibits two catalytic waves after 48 h of anaerobic culture, but the current is much lower than that of the electrical tension-treated anodes (Fig. 2c and d). It is apparent that a biofilm could grow with time in an electrolyte. The di/dv plot (Fig. 2b) for the steady-state CV measurement can derive the onset potentials of both redox species, of which the electrical tension one has a more negative potential than the control, further confirming that electrical tension can obviously improve the bioelectrochemical catalytic activities. The anode possesses the best catalytic performance at around 48 h of electrical tension. The FESEM images of the anodes after 48 h of electrical tension in Fig. S2a and b (ESI†) clearly show a well-formed biofilm. The biofilm thickness can be controlled by the operation time.15 The biofilm on the electrical tension anode after 48 h of discharging (Fig. S2a, ESI†) forms a single layer of cells with a thickness of approximately 200–300 nanometers (diameter of a single Shewanella putrefaciens CN32 cell), while only a few cells are adhered to the control anode after immersing the cells for 48 hours, solidly confirming that electrical tension promotes the growth of CN32 cells onto the anode to obtain a much better biofilm.
 Fig. 2  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (1 mV s−1) of the electrical tension anode at different times, (b) corresponding steady state current at different times of the electrical tension anode at 0.2 V (1 mV s−1), (c) CVs (1 mV s−1) and the first derivative (d) of the electrical tension anode and open circuit anode. 
Gene ontology (GO) is an international standardized gene functional classification system that offers a strictly defined concept to comprehensively describe the properties of genes and their products. The differentially expressed gene numbers in different GO terms for electrical tension cells are shown in Fig. 3. It is noted that the most abundant GO categories in the cellular component domain were cellular component and membrane. The up-regulated genes in the cellular component and membrane terms include outer membrane, mitochondrial inner membrane, mitochondrial respiratory chain and other membrane. For Fe(III) reduction bacteria, the extracellular electron transfer process16,17 could be closely related to the inner membrane, outer membrane and respiratory chain. This suggests that the bacterial cell respiration is strengthened, and the permeability is improved for the secretion of electron mediators. The pilus genes belonging to the cellular component term are also up-regulated. Pili are called bacterial nanowires, which can mediate long distance DET processes.18,19 The up-regulation of pilus genes indicates that the DET ability of the adjacent bacteria20 might be enhanced, which is preparing for the anode based extracellular electron transfer.
 Fig. 3  GO functional classification of differentially expressed genes in electrical tension cells vs. open circuit cells. The GO terms in magenta, green and orange color belong to cellular component, biological process and molecular function domains, respectively. 
For the ‘biological process’ domain, most genes enrich transport, metabolic process and localization categories, which are closely related to cellular respiration and electron transfer. The up-regulated genes of these GO terms (transport, metabolic process, and localization) were TonB, ATP-binding cassette transporter (ABC transporter), heme, and other related gene families. In this work, all of the TonB system genes are up-regulated, representing that the TonB system has a significant effect on the response of S. putrefaciens CN32 to the MFC anode. The TonB system energizes active transport across a largely energized outer membrane by harnessing the proton motive force of the cytoplasmic membrane21 that is believed to be responsible for the energy transduction component in the import of ferric iron complexes, heme and vitamin B12 across the outer membrane.22 Fe2+ ions are part of hemes, which are precursors of cytochrome synthesis. The multi-heme cytochromes containing at least four heme binding motifs23 are essential to enable a direct electron transport pathway in the Shewanella species.24 It has been reported that the cytochrome pool of a single S. oneidensis MR-1 cell consists of ca. 700000 hemes.25 The up-regulation of heme genes is beneficial to the expression of cytochromes that are important components of the respiratory chain, which are conducive to the DET process.26,27 Transport enzymes like FeoA, ABC transporter, and TonB are required in iron ion acquisition and transport and are critical for cytochrome biosynthesis. From Fig. 2c, it can be observed that the direct electron transfer process in the electrode of the electrical tension group is obviously enhanced, indicating that anode-adjacent bacteria tend to synthesize cytochrome C and other related proteins. It is further explained that the bacteria in the vicinity of the electrode are affected by the electric field of the electrode biofilm.
In the ‘molecular function’ domain, the genes are distributed among 9 categories including catalytic activity, oxidoreductase activity, receptor activity, metal ion binding, transition metal ion binding, etc. The most intriguing pathway is oxidative phosphorylation, which is highly induced in the electrical-tensed group, including FrdA, FrdD, CoxA, and Beta genes. Overexpression of oxidative phosphorylation-related genes suggests that bacteria near the anode in electrolyte are mainly undergoing aerobic-like respiration, unlike the cells in the control group. It is revealed that the anode-respiring bacteria use the anode as an electron acceptor under electrical tension. However, the adjacent cells cannot transfer electrons to the anode directly. There must be some pathways for these cells to achieve electron transfer between the cells and the anode. The overexpression of the fumarate reductase, flavoprotein subunit, and FrdA genes indicates enhanced flavin excretion. At the same time, the overexpression of flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD), a FMN binding related gene, is also consistent with the findings. It is well known that the flavins including flavin mononucleotide (FMN) and riboflavin are endogenous electron mediators for extracellular electron transfer. This result indicates that these anode-adjacent bacterial cells may generate large amounts of flavins to achieve electron transfer with the anode. Further study of the FMN genes will help us to understand the mechanism of CN32 cells to produce electricity with a high-yield.
In addition, a scatter plot of the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) enrichment results was generated (Fig. S5, ESI†). Rich factor is the ratio of the differentially expressed gene numbers annotated in this pathway term to all gene numbers annotated in this pathway term. The lower Q value represents greater intensiveness. One can see that most of the up-regulated genes are enriched in various metabolic-related pathways, including pyruvate metabolism, microbial metabolism in diverse environments, carbon metabolism, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites and so on. Overexpression of these metabolically related genes indicates that the metabolic activity of S. putrefaciens CN32 cells surrounding the anode is strong. Pyruvate metabolism and carbon metabolism are important pathways for bacterial respiration and energy metabolism. The overexpression of these genes indicates that the respiration of bacteria near the anode is strengthened over time. In previous studies, it was found that NADH is a key coenzyme28 participating in a number of metabolic reactions, and it was up-regulated in our study.

Fig. 4 schematically shows the enhancement mechanism of the bioelectrocatalytic activity after electrical tension in comparison to that without electrical tension (open circuit). It reveals by the global transcriptome analysis of CN32 cells adjacent to the anode that electrical tension of the microbial cells triggers the conversion of anaerobic respiration to aerobic respiration to activate a series of charge transport, production of receptor proteins and rise of the metabolic level, which could increase excretion of flavin electron shuttles and cytochrome C proteins for facilitating long distance electron transfer to the anode, promoting biofilm formation and direct electron transfer for higher bioelectrocatalytic activity. It is apparent that the genomic and/or proteomic analysis of the biofilm firmly attached on the anode is very difficult since the microbial cells are basically impossible to separate or isolate from the solid electrode surface. However, fundamentally, in a layer of microbial cells adjacent to the electrode with a thickness less than the diffusion layer, the anodic electrochemical reaction can be considered as following a surface-controlled reaction kinetics without a diffusion limit. Therefore, we argue that the results of the global transcriptome analysis from the cells adjacent to the anode could represent the biological process occurring during electrocatalysis. Our work could offer universal significance and guide us in the investigation of the biological nature of microbial bioelectrocatalysis by genomes and/or proteomes.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the electron transport in S. putrefaciens CN32 cells adjacent to the electrical tension anode and open circuit anode. 
In summary, a global gene expression analysis of S. putrefaciens CN32 cells adjacent to a microbial anode revealed an electrical tension-triggered conversion of anaerobic respiration to aerobic respiration to activate a series of charge transport, receptor protein production and rise of the metabolic level, which increase excretion of flavin electron shuttles and synthesis of cytochrome C proteins for not only facilitating the long distance electron transfer to the anode but also promoting the biofilm formation and direct electron transfer for higher bioelectrocatalytic activity behaviors. We propose that behaviors of the microbial cells adjacent to the biofilm within the diffusion layer are attributed to a surface-controlled reaction and thus represent the nature of the biofilm. This work not only discloses that electrical tension can lead to the conversion of anaerobic respiration to aerobic respiration to greatly promote the microbial bioelectrochemical behaviors, but also more importantly demonstrates a universal approach to study the biological nature of microbial biofilms in bioelectrocatalysis for scientific insight.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references
Y. Yang, M. Xu, J. Guo and G. Sun, Process Biochem., 2012, 47, 1707 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, A. Wang, S. Cheng, M. Yates and B. E. Logan, Int. J. Syst. Evol. Microbiol., 2014, 64, 3485 CrossRef .
S. Pirbadian, S. E. Barchinger, K. M. Leung, H. S. Byun, Y. Jangir, R. A. Bouhenni, S. B. Reed, M. F. Romine, D. A. Saffarini and L. Shi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 12883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zou, Y. Qiao, X.-S. Wu, C.-X. Ma, X. Li and C. M. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 276, 208 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Du, Q. Mu, T. Cheng, N. Li and X. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 8939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Brameyer, H. B. Bode and R. Heermann, Trends Microbiol., 2015, 23, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, A. Prindle, J. Humphries, M. Gabalda-Sagarra, M. Asally, D. L. Dong-yeon, S. Ly, J. Garcia-Ojalvo and G. M. Süel, Nature, 2015, 523, 550 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Fernandes, T. C. Nunes, C. M. Paquete and C. A. Salgueiro, Biochem. J., 2017, 474, 797 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Biffinger, R. Ray, B. J. Little, L. A. Fitzgerald, M. Ribbens, S. E. Finkel and B. R. Ringeisen, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 103, 524 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, L. Zhou, Y. Qian, L. Wan, Q. Du, N. Li and X. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2017, 198, 261 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Zou, Y. Huang, Y. Qiao, Z. E. Long, H. Liu and C. M. Li, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2018, 115, 23–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Siggins, K. Katuri, T. Mahony, V. O’Flaherty, P. Lens and D. Leech, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 230, 532 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zou, Y. Qiao, Z. Y. Wu, X. S. Wu, J. L. Xie, S. H. Yu, J. Guo and C. M. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501535 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Z. Shi, L. Zou, C. M. Li and Y. Qiao, J. Power Sources, 2018, 378, 119 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sun, S. Cheng, A. Wang, F. Li, B. E. Logan and K. Cen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2015, 49, 5227–5235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, H. Dong, G. Reguera, H. Beyenal, A. Lu, J. Liu, H.-Q. Yu and J. K. Fredrickson, Nat. Rev. Microbiol., 2016, 14, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. D. Shikhare, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 3968 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Malvankar and D. R. Lovley, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2014, 27, 88 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Venkidusamy, M. Megharaj, M. Marzorati, R. Lockington and R. Naidu, Sci. Total Environ, 2016, 539, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Humphries, L. Xiong, J. Liu, A. Prindle, F. Yuan, H. A. Arjes, L. Tsimring and G. M. Süel, Cell, 2017, 168, 200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Gresock, K. A. Kastead and K. Postle, J. Bacteriol., 2015, 197, 3433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Morton, R. J. Hempel, T. W. Seale, P. W. Whitby and T. L. Stull, BMC Res. Notes, 2012, 5, 327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Chu, R. S. Peacock and H. J. Vogel, Biometals, 2007, 20, 467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Deng, N. Dohmae, K. H. Nealson, K. Hashimoto and A. Okamoto, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao5682 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Dong, S. Guo, H. Fu and H. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Sturm, K. Richter, A. Doetsch, H. Heide, R. O. Louro and J. Gescher, ISME J., 2015, 9, 1802 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, M. Song, F. Li, C. Li, X. Lin and H. Song, Front. Microbiol., 2019, 10, 410 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lian, Y. Yang, J. Guo, Y. Wang, X. Li, Y. Fang, L. Gan and M. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cc01605eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the MFC half-cells for electrical tension (a) and open circuit (b). (c) FESEM image of the anode; (d) illustration of sample collection.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cyclic voltammograms (1 mV s−1) of the electrical tension anode at different times, (b) corresponding steady state current at different times of the electrical tension anode at 0.2 V (1 mV s−1), (c) CVs (1 mV s−1) and the first derivative (d) of the electrical tension anode and open circuit anode.	 

 	Fig. 3  GO functional classification of differentially expressed genes in electrical tension cells vs. open circuit cells. The GO terms in magenta, green and orange color belong to cellular component, biological process and molecular function domains, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of the electron transport in S. putrefaciens CN32 cells adjacent to the electrical tension anode and open circuit anode.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cc01605e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
