Facile solvothermal approach to pristine tetrahedrite nanostructures with unique multiply-voided morphology   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR07652E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR07652E
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17865-17876Facile solvothermal approach to pristine tetrahedrite nanostructures with unique multiply-voided morphology†

        
          
            Michelle D. 
            Regulacio
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Si Yin 
            Tee
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Suo Hon 
            Lim
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Choon Peng 
            Teng
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Leng-Duei 
            Koh
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shuhua 
            Liu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Ming-Yong 
            Han
          
        
      *
      Institute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR, 2 Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, Singapore 138634. E-mail: regulaciomdc@imre.a-star.edu.sg; my-han@imre.a-star.edu.sg
Received 
      14th October 2017
    , Accepted 3rd November 2017First published on 3rd November 2017AbstractTetrahedrite (Cu12Sb4S13) is a highly promising environmentally friendly material for energy conversion applications but its synthesis generally requires several days of heating at high temperature conditions. To fabricate tetrahedrite in a more rapid way and under milder conditions, solvothermal synthesis has been recently explored. However, a common problem faced when using this technique is the formation of significant amounts of other ternary Cu–Sb–S phases along with the desired tetrahedrite phase. Here, we present an optimized solvothermal procedure for synthesizing high-purity samples of tetrahedrite at moderate temperatures and reasonable heating times. The as-prepared samples are single-crystalline nanometer-sized structures having multiple voids or pores. By modifying certain experimental parameters such as the reaction temperature and heating time, we have shown that we can alter the nanocrystal architecture. The formation mechanism was investigated and it was found that these porous tetrahedrite nanostructures are a product of the non-classical oriented aggregation growth process. Porosity in nanomaterials is known to improve material properties and is desirable in many important applications so the construction of void-containing tetrahedrite nanostructures will potentially extend the utility of tetrahedrite to a wider range of applications. In this work, we explore its possible use as a photothermal-responsive drug delivery vehicle.
1. Introduction
For several decades now, scientists have been in constant, tireless pursuit of nontoxic and commercially viable materials that possess excellent functional properties for use in important and evolving technologies. One class of materials that have been receiving a high level of interest in recent years are the multinary derivatives of copper sulfides, which include Cu-III–S (e.g. CuInS2), Cu-IV–S (e.g. Cu2SnS3), Cu–V–S (e.g. CuSbS2), and Cu-II–IV–S (e.g. Cu2ZnSnS4). The known applications of this large family of materials is wide-ranging owing to their remarkable intrinsic properties, which can be tuned conveniently due to their compositional and structural versatility.1,2 An added advantage is that these materials do not have the toxicity issues that are associated with the more popular cadmium- and lead-based chalcogenide materials. Although a long list of copper-based multinary sulfide materials is known, extensive research has focused largely on members of the Cu-III–S and Cu-II–IV–S subgroups, particularly CuInS2 and Cu2ZnSnS4, which show considerable promise in the areas of photovoltaics, photocatalysis, optoelectronics, and thermoelectrics. Meanwhile, members of the Cu–V–S (V = Sb, Bi) subclass are some of the least-explored, but recent discoveries about their enormous technological potential are now inspiring scientists to conduct thorough investigation on these materials.
Tetrahedrite, a naturally occurring Cu–Sb–S mineral, has been recently put on the spotlight when its potential for energy conversion applications has been uncovered.3–5 Owing to unique features in its crystal structure, tetrahedrite has an intrinsically low lattice thermal conductivity that renders it highly suitable as a thermoelectric material. Moreover, it displays strong absorption in a wide spectral range making it an attractive candidate for solar absorber materials. Pristine (or unsubstituted) tetrahedrite is generally represented by the chemical formula Cu12Sb4S13. In preparing samples of pristine tetrahedrite, the traditional solid-state approach has been the go-to method. This is done by heating the starting elements in evacuated quartz ampoules at 450–700 °C for extended periods of time, which is usually followed by slow-cooling, regrinding, and post-annealing to obtain phase-pure samples.6–8 Post-annealing treatments also require prolonged heating at high temperatures that may take as long as 3 weeks to complete.
With the aim of developing milder and faster ways of preparing tetrahedrite, scientists have recently turned to wet chemical or solution-phase methods. When produced in solution, tetrahedrite is usually in the form of nanosized particles, which exhibit properties that are significantly different from those observed in the bulk form. For instance, Weller et al. have prepared tetrahedrite nanoparticles that are 50–200 nm in size using a polyol process.9 They have seen an increase in thermopower and a decrease in thermal conductivity relative to bulk samples as a result of nanostructuring. Meanwhile, Chen et al. have demonstrated the size-tunable synthesis of spherical tetrahedrite nanocrystals through the colloidal chemical method.10 By controlling the crystallite size from 2 to 16 nm, they were able to tune the band gap from 620 to 780 nm. Aside from the size, the shape or morphology is another critical parameter that can be tailored to modify material properties at the nanoscale. In many cases, the nanocrystal morphology can help provide specific functions for particular applications. It is therefore of great interest to develop a facile solution-phase route to preparing tetrahedrite nanostructures having novel morphologies.
Solvothermal synthesis is one of the most common means of preparing inorganic nanostructures in solution. In this method, the precursor solution (consisting of precursors and solvent/s) is sealed in a steel autoclave and heated in an oven at moderate temperatures (≤200 °C) for a reasonable amount of time (usually less than a day). The first solvothermal approach to preparing pristine tetrahedrite nanostructures was reported by An and co-workers.11 Their synthesis, which yielded flake-like nanostructures that are 50–70 nm in size, involves the reaction of thiourea with metal chloride salts (CuCl and SbCl3) in ethanol at 155 °C for 20 h. However, a more recent work by James et al. noted that this procedure yields impurity phases.12 Moreover, energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) analysis revealed the presence of significant amounts of chlorine in the chemical composition of tetrahedrite samples prepared using chloride salt precursors. To avoid the inclusion of chlorine, James et al. developed a new procedure where they made use of non-chloride salts, Cu2(OH)3(NO3) and Sb2(SO4)3, as starting materials. From X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis, it was found that their as-synthesized samples consisted largely of tetrahedrite but other Cu–Sb–S compounds such as chalcostibite (CuSbS2) and famatinite (Cu3SbS4) were also present as impurity phases. The existence of other stable Cu–Sb–S compounds unfortunately makes the synthesis of pristine tetrahedrite a very challenging task.
The colloidal hot-injection method has been more successful than the solvothermal approach in producing high-purity Cu–Sb–S nanocrystals. In fact, a number of groups have established protocols for phase-selective synthesis of Cu–Sb–S nanostructures using this technique.13–16 The appropriate choice of coordinating solvents (or capping ligands) and precursors is often the key to the successful production of single-phase Cu–Sb–S compounds. However, the two-step hot-injection method is not very convenient and faces reproducibility issues especially when the synthesis process is scaled up.
In this paper, we apply the strategy of proper solvent and precursor selection to the one-pot solvothermal preparation of high-quality samples of tetrahedrite nanostructures. The solvothermal reaction can be carried out at mild to moderate temperatures (80–200 °C) for relatively shorter periods of time (1–16 h), and is reproducible when scaled up. With our synthetic approach, we have obtained tetrahedrite nanostructures with fascinating multiply-voided tetrahedron morphologies. Our studies on the morphological evolution revealed an interesting formation pathway that involves oriented aggregation of smaller primary particles. We also show that the morphology of our tetrahedrite nanostructures can be conveniently tuned by varying the reaction time and temperature. The unique multiply-voided tetrahedron architecture that we report here has never been observed in previously reported tetrahedrite nanostructures or other copper-based multinary sulfide nanomaterials. A porous morphology is favorable in various fields, and would likely expand the usefulness of tetrahedrite to a broader range of applications. Here, we demonstrate the significant potential of our porous tetrahedrite nanostructures as a photothermally active drug nanocarrier system.
2. Experimental methods
Materials
Copper(II) chloride dihydrate (CuCl2·2H2O, 99.99%), antimony(III) chloride (SbCl3, 99%), sodium diethyldithiocarbamate trihydrate (Na(dedtc)·3H2O, 98%), diethylammonium diethyldithiocarbamate (NH2Et2(dedtc), 98%), 1-dodecanethiol (DDT, ≥98%), oleylamine (OM, 70%), 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, ≥99%) and doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX, 98%) were purchased from commercial sources and were used as received without further purification. Copper(II) diethyldithiocarbamate (Cu(dedtc)2) and antimony(III) diethyldithiocarbamate (Sb(dedtc)3) were synthesized based on previously published procedures with slight modifications.17,18
Synthesis of Cu(dedtc)2
CuCl2·2H2O (15 mmol) and Na(dedtc)·3H2O (30 mmol) were separately dissolved using adequate amounts of H2O. The two aqueous solutions were mixed and the resulting mixture was kept stirring for 1 h. The dark brown product was isolated through vacuum filtration, washed with H2O, and allowed to dry in an oven at 60 °C. Experimental yield is usually very close to the theoretical yield of 5.40 g. The as-synthesized complex was characterized using infrared (IR) spectroscopy and the spectrum showed bands at 997 and 1505 cm−1, corresponding to the C–S and C–N stretching vibrations, respectively.
Synthesis of Sb(dedtc)3
SbCl3 (10 mmol) and NH2Et2(dedtc) (30 mmol) were separately dissolved using adequate amounts of ethanol. The two solutions were mixed and the resulting mixture was kept stirring for 1 h. The pale yellow solid was isolated through vacuum filtration, washed with ethanol, and allowed to dry at 60 °C. Typical experimental yield is about 5.50 g, which is close to the theoretical yield of 5.67 g. The as-prepared compound exhibits IR bands at 988 and 1492 cm−1, which are attributed to the C–S and C–N stretching frequencies, respectively.
Synthesis of tetrahedrite (Cu12Sb4S13) nanostructures
Cu(dedtc)2 (0.3 mmol) and Sb(dedtc)3 (0.1 mmol) were placed in a 25 mL polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) vessel. OM (5 mL) and DDT (5 mL) were added, and the mixture was stirred at room temperature for 20–30 min, during which the color of the mixture turned from dark brown to pale yellow. After stirring, the vessel was sealed in a stainless steel autoclave, which was then placed in a pre-heated convection oven for solvothermal synthesis at 200 °C. The reaction temperature was maintained at 200 °C for 16 h, after which the vessel was left to cool naturally in the oven to room temperature. The dark brown product was then isolated by centrifugation and washed several times with hexane and ethanol. Lowering the reaction temperature to 160, 120 and 80 °C also yielded the desired ternary sulfide material. Synthesis can be scaled up using a bigger PTFE vessel and parallel runs can be carried out by heating multiple vessels at the same time. Typical yield is 0.2 g per vessel when 1.5 mmol of Cu(dedtc)2 and 0.5 mmol of Sb(dedtc)3 are used.
Characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were collected on a Bruker D8 Advance X-ray diffractometer using Cu Kα radiation (1.5418 Å). Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images were mainly taken through a Philips EM300 electron microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 300 kV. Additional imaging was performed using a JEOL JEM2100 electron microscope operated at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. Elemental mapping was performed in scanning TEM (STEM) mode. In preparing the specimens for TEM measurements, a drop of the material dispersed in hexane was placed on the surface of a lacey formvar/carbon 300-mesh Cu grid or onto holey carbon 300-mesh Au grid. Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images were taken using a JEOL FEG-SEM JSM-7600F electron microscope. This instrument is equipped with an energy-dispersive X-ray (EDX) detector, which was used for elemental analysis. Samples dispersed in hexane were deposited and dried on silicon wafers, mounted on a specimen holder using carbon tape, and subsequently sputter-coated with gold under vacuum before being examined under the FESEM. For EDX analysis, powdered samples were directly fixed on the carbon tape. Infrared spectra were measured in the range 400–4000 cm−1 as pressed pellets in KBr on a PerkinElmer Spectrum 2000 FTIR spectrometer. Thermal analysis was performed using a thermogravimetric analyzer (TGA Q500, TA Instruments). Samples were loaded in an alumina pan and heated up to 800 °C in a N2 flow of 40.0 mL min−1 at a heating rate of 20 °C min−1. The N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area were acquired using a Micromeritics ASAP2020M apparatus. The sample was degassed at 100 °C for 2 h prior to measurement. Room-temperature absorption spectra were recorded using a Shimadzu UV-1800 double-beam UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer. Samples were dispersed in water and loaded into a quartz cuvette.
Ligand exchange with MPA
To make the as-prepared nanostructures water-dispersible, the organic capping ligands were replaced with MPA following a previously published ligand exchange procedure.19 First, 80 mg of tetrahedrite nanostructures were dispersed in 30 mL hexane. A solution consisting of 2 mL MPA and 20 mL methanol was then added to the dispersion, and the resulting two-layered mixture was stirred overnight. After stirring, the upper hexane layer (colorless) was discarded while the bottom methanol layer (dark brown) was centrifuged (8000 rpm, 5 min). The supernatant was discarded and the dark brown solid was washed with isopropanol before drying in vacuo at 100 °C for 4 h.
Photothermal effect measurements
Aqueous dispersions of the MPA-capped tetrahedrite nanostructures were prepared in different concentrations and the photothermal effect is evaluated for each concentration. Briefly, 1.0 mL of an aqueous dispersion were placed in a quartz cuvette and exposed to 808 nm light at a power density of 0.88 W cm−2 for 10 min. The light source was a fiber-coupled 808 nm diode laser system with adjustable power (Beijing Viasho Technology Co. Ltd VA-I-DC-808 4W). An optical power meter (Coherent FieldMaxII-TO) was used in the calibration of the output power, while an IR thermal imaging system (FLIR A65) was used to monitor the temperature change at specified time intervals. Heating curves were obtained with the use of FLIR R&D Software 3.3. The photothermal effect of pure water was also measured for comparison.
Drug loading capacity using DOX
For drug loading experiments, 10 mg of the MPA-capped tetrahedrite nanostructures were dispersed in an aqueous solution of DOX (20 mL, 0.1 mg mL−1). The mixture was allowed to stir in the dark at room temperature for 48 h to ensure an adsorption–desorption equilibrium. The DOX-loaded tetrahedrite nanostructures were then isolated by centrifugation at 8000 rpm for 10 min. To determine the loading capacity and encapsulation efficiency, the amount of DOX that remained in the supernatant was analyzed at 482 nm using UV-Vis spectroscopy. The loading capacity was calculated using the equation: loading capacity = mass of loaded DOX/mass of tetrahedrite nanostructures. Meanwhile, the encapsulation efficiency was determined from this equation: encapsulation efficiency = (mass of loaded DOX/initial mass of DOX) × 100%.
DOX release experiments
The pH-dependent release of DOX was studied in vitro at room temperature using two buffers: (a) phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) with pH 7.4, and (b) citrate buffer with pH 4.8. First, 5 mg of the DOX-loaded tetrahedrite nanostructures were dispersed in 5 mL of buffer in a glass vial. The dispersion was left in the dark for 1 h, and then centrifuged at 8000 rpm for 3 min. After centrifugation, the supernatant was withdrawn for analysis, and 5 mL of fresh buffer were added to the solid. The DOX release experiment was repeated at 1 h interval until a drug release profile over a period of 10 h was obtained for each pH. The amount of DOX in the supernatant was quantified by measuring the absorbance at 482 nm using a UV-Vis spectrophotometer. For the photothermal-triggered release experiments, 2 mg of the DOX-loaded tetrahedrite nanostructures were dispersed in 2.5 mL citrate buffer with pH 4.8. The dispersion was left in the dark for 50 min, and was later exposed to 808 nm laser at a power density of 0.88 W cm−2 for 10 min. Centrifugation was done before and after irradiation, and the amount of DOX released was measured from the supernatant. This process was repeated until a drug release profile over a period of 5 h was obtained.
3. Results and discussion
In our solvothermal synthesis of tetrahedrite, we have explored the use of metal dithiocarbamate complexes as precursors for the desired ternary sulfide material. In particular, the complexes Cu(dedtc)2 and Sb(dedtc)3 (where dedtc = diethyldithiocarbamate or S2CNEt2−) were used as the Cu, Sb and S sources. Metal dithiocarbamate complexes are convenient precursors for metal sulfides because they are air- and moisture-stable, and they can be readily synthesized in large scale.20–22 In these complexes, the dithiocarbamate ligands are bound to the central metal ion through their sulfur atoms. Because metal–sulfur bonding already exists in these compounds, heating them up easily leads to the corresponding metal sulfides. Thermogravimetric analysis (Fig. S1 in ESI†) shows that in the solid state, thermolysis of Cu(dedtc)2 and Sb(dedtc)3 occurs at a temperature range of 220–330 °C and 250–350 °C, respectively. In the presence of suitable coordinating solvents or ligands, the decomposition temperature of these inorganic complexes can be considerably lowered. Earlier studies have shown that oleylamine (OM), a Lewis base, can interact with metal dithiocarbamates and promote their thermolysis at lower temperatures.23–25 For this reason, we first tried to use OM as the solvent for our solvothermal synthesis, where we heated up 0.3 mmol Cu(dedtc)2 and 0.1 mmol Sb(dedtc)3 in 10 mL OM at 200 °C for 16 h. This procedure yielded nanometer-sized structures as shown in Fig. S2 (in ESI†) but XRD analysis identified the product as famatinite (Fig. 1a). Next, we replaced OM with dodecanethiol (DDT), another well-known solvent in metal sulfide synthesis. It has been previously noted that DDT can strongly coordinate to the metal center and influence the decomposition pathway of metal dithiocarbamates.26 The XRD pattern in Fig. 1b shows that while the product obtained using DDT contains significant quantities of tetrahedrite, the major phase present is skinnerite (Cu3SbS3).
 Fig. 1  XRD pattern of the product obtained when a mixture of 0.3 mmol Cu(dedtc)2 and 0.1 mmol Sb(dedtc)3 were solvothermally decomposed at 200 °C for 16 h using (a) 10 mL OM, (b) 10 mL DDT, and (c) 5 mL OM + 5 mL DDT. Note: Red lines are from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for cubic Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite). Blue lines are from standard JCPDS file [01-082-0851] for monoclinic Cu3SbS3 (skinnerite). Purple lines are from standard JCPDS file [35-0581] for tetragonal Cu3SbS4 (famatinite). 
After our unsuccessful attempts at producing high-purity samples of tetrahedrite with individual use of OM and DDT, we tried employing a mixture of these two solvents and this proved to be fruitful. A solvent mixture of OM and DDT in appropriate ratio (Table S1 in ESI†) successfully yielded pristine tetrahedrite as evidenced by the XRD pattern in Fig. 1c. Rietveld refinement of the experimental pattern is provided in Fig. S3 (in ESI†). All the observed diffraction peaks can be clearly indexed to cubic-phase tetrahedrite according to JCPDS #42-0561. It is worth noting that the OM/DDT ratio is critical to the production of pristine tetrahedrite of high purity. In our experiments, where we used 0.3 and 0.1 mmol of Cu and Sb precursors, respectively, we find that using a solvent mixture that contains 5 mL each of OM and DDT (i.e., OM/DDT molar ratio = 0.73/1) is optimal to obtain a single-phase product. Increasing the OM/DDT molar ratio to 2.18/1 yielded traces of famatinite (Fig. S4a in ESI†), whereas reducing the ratio to 0.24/1 produced substantial amounts of skinnerite along with the desired material (Fig. S4b in ESI†).
To test the scalability of our synthetic method, we have scaled up the synthesis with the use of bigger solvothermal vessels to accommodate larger volumes of solvents. Presented in Fig. S5 (in ESI†) are the XRD patterns of the samples prepared using 2, 3, 4 and 5 times of the original amount of precursors and solvents. All four patterns correspond well to that of pristine tetrahedrite, with no distinct peaks from impurity phases. This shows that our synthetic approach can be easily scaled up when larger amounts of samples are needed. An added advantage of this technique is that it is possible to perform several runs concurrently by simply heating up multiple vessels at once in a large oven.
Scanning and transmission electron microscopy were utilized to examine the size and morphology of the as-prepared tetrahedrite samples. Representative SEM and TEM images are displayed in Fig. 2a and b, respectively. The particles are in the nanometer-size range, with an estimated average size of 37 ± 6 nm. Also apparent in the images is that the nanostructures are terahedral in shape (i.e., in the shape of a tetrahedron). The name tetrahedrite was in fact derived from the word tetrahedral because this is the predominant crystal habit or form of tetrahedrite.27 It is therefore not very surprising that this is the morphology exhibited by our tetrahedrite nanocrystals. Interestingly, each nanotetrahedron is dotted with multiple cavities or voids, which are more noticeable in higher resolution images such as the one displayed in Fig. 2c. The size of these voids is not uniform at various locations within the same particle, with pore widths ranging from 3 to 20 nm. The high-resolution TEM (HRTEM) image and corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern in Fig. 2d shows that despite the presence of multiple voids, the nanostructures are single-crystalline. Lattice fringes were examined and an interplanar lattice spacing of 0.516 nm was determined. This corresponds to the (200) planes of cubic-phase tetrahedrite. EDX analysis (Fig. 2e) confirms the presence of Cu, Sb and S near the expected ratio. These three elements are homogeneously distributed throughout the particles as seen in the elemental maps in Fig. S6 (in ESI†).
 Fig. 2  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c–d) HRTEM images, and (e) SEM-EDX spectrum of the as-prepared tetrahedrite nanostructures. Red lines in (b) are used to outline the tetrahedral shape. Yellow arrows in (c) are used to mark some of the voids (lighter contrast regions). Inset in (d) shows the FFT pattern. 
The influence of the reaction temperature on the formation of tetrahedrite nanostructures was studied by carrying out the solvothermal synthesis at different temperatures (80, 120, 160, and 200 °C) with the reaction time fixed at 16 h. From the results of our experiments (Fig. 3), we find that pristine tetrahedrite can be obtained at temperatures as low as 80 °C. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that tetrahedrite has been successfully synthesized at a temperature below 100 °C. However, it should be noted that to get tetrahedrite as the sole product at 80 °C, it is necessary to heat the reaction mixture for an adequate amount of time, in this case 16 h. When the synthesis was performed at 80 °C for only 8 h, binary copper sulfide was obtained alongside tetrahedrite. On the other hand, we find that it is possible to obtain phase-pure tetrahedrite at a much shorter heating time when the reaction temperature is sufficiently high. As an example, we were able to produce pristine tetrahedrite after heating for only 1 h when the synthesis was carried out at 200 °C (Fig. S7a in ESI†).
 Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at (a) 80, (b) 120, (c) 160, and (d) 200 °C for 16 h. Red stick pattern at the bottom is from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for cubic-phase Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite). 
TEM measurements (Fig. 4) revealed that although the tetrahedrite nanostructures prepared at different temperatures have the same overall tetrahedral geometry, there are marked variations in appearance, density and texture. When the synthesis was conducted at a low temperature of 80 °C, the resulting nanotetrahedrons appear to be a three-dimensional aggregate of smaller particles as seen in Fig. 4a. In these grape-like aggregates, the outlines of some of the individual component particles are still distinct and there are observable empty spaces in between some of the coalescing particles. Their texture, which can be described as botryoidal, is different from the fairly smooth exterior exhibited by the nanotetrahedrons prepared at 200 °C (Fig. 2). When the reaction temperature was raised to 120 °C, the resulting nanotetrahedrons look more compact (Fig. 4b), denoting that the merging of particles is more solidified at higher temperatures. However, the surface texture is still highly uneven as suggested by the notable curvature along the edges. Moreover, multiple cavities are seen within the nanotetrahedrons. These voids arise from the empty spaces between component particles that have not fused entirely. Heating at a temperature of 160 °C yielded nanotetrahedrons (Fig. 4c) that are very similar to those prepared at 200 °C. The constituent particles are no longer discernible, which indicates better fusion of particles, and the surface roughness is substantially reduced. Because of the higher degree of compression, the size of the resulting nanotetrahedrons is significantly smaller than those obtained at 120 °C. However, several voids still exist, implying that complete merging is not reached even at this reaction temperature. Examination of higher-resolution images (Fig. S8 in ESI†) reveals that the void morphology varies with temperature. In the grape-like nanotetrahedrons obtained at 80 °C, the voids are seemingly interconnected forming undefined shapes. As the nanotetrahedrons become more compressed at higher temperatures, the degree of interconnection between voids is reduced and sphere-like voids are eventually created. On the basis of the TEM results discussed above, we hypothesize that our void-containing tetrahedrite nanotetrahedrons are formed through coalescence of smaller particles. Higher temperatures promote the melding of particles and lead to more compact, less porous nanotetrahedrons with smoother surface.
 Fig. 4  TEM images of the tetrahedrite nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at (a) 80, (b) 120, and (c) 160 °C for 16 h. 
In order to gain more insight on the growth process of our tetrahedrite nanostructures, we have conducted time-dependent experiments by performing the solvothermal synthesis repeatedly at 80 °C but with different heating durations. As mentioned earlier, pristine tetrahedrite can already be obtained with only 1 h of heating when the reaction temperature is 200 °C, implying that the reaction progresses quickly at this temperature. Meanwhile, when the reaction temperature is set to 80 °C, the reaction proceeds at a much slower rate so it would be easier to monitor the early stages of reaction at this temperature (Fig. 5). After 1 h of heating at 80 °C, we obtained a heterogeneous mixture of solids consisting largely of brown solid with small quantities of pale orange solid. The product is not very crystalline based on the XRD pattern displayed in Fig. 5a. From the few weak peaks that are visible in the XRD pattern, the partially crystalline material that is present appears to be roxbyite, a binary copper sulfide phase with the chemical formula Cu29S16 or Cu1.81S. This suggests to us that the Cu precursor decomposes more readily to its resultant sulfide than the Sb precursor. To confirm this, we have heated the Cu and Sb precursors separately under similar conditions. A brown product was obtained when Cu(dedtc)2 was heated on its own at 80 °C for 1 h, and this has been characterized as Cu1.81S as shown in Fig. S9 in ESI.† On the other hand, heating Sb(dedtc)3 alone under the same reaction conditions only gave us a clear, orange solution. A small amount of pale orange solid was obtained when we extended the heating time but the material is amorphous and did not give noticeable diffraction peaks. From these results, we gather that the brown solid in the solid mixture produced when Cu(dedtc)2 and Sb(dedtc)3 are heated together is Cu1.81S, while the pale orange solid is an amorphous Sb compound that comes from the Sb precursor. EDX analysis revealed the presence of Cu, Sb and S in the solid mixture (Fig. S10a in ESI†). As expected, Cu and S are present in substantial amounts due to Cu1.81S, but the percentage of Sb is surprisingly high considering that there's not much of the amorphous orange solid in the product. It is possible that aside from Cu1.81S, tetrahedrite also exists in the brown solid but it is still amorphous at this stage of the reaction. When we increased the reaction time to 4 h, we still see the diffraction peaks from Cu1.81S but aside from these, we also see a new set of diffraction peaks that can be ascribed to tetrahedrite (Fig. 5b). This indicates that crystalline tetrahedrite is already present at this point. Extending the heating time to 8 h increased the amount of tetrahedrite produced as evidenced by the more intense diffraction peaks from tetrahedrite and the much weaker peaks from Cu1.81S (Fig. 5c). The EDX spectrum in Fig. S10b† is consistent with these results as we see that the Cu/Sb and Cu/S ratios have decreased with prolonged heating. When the reaction time was set to 16 and 24 h, the diffraction peaks from Cu1.81S is no longer observable (Fig. 5d and e), and the elemental ratios approach the expected ratio for tetrahedrite (Fig. S10c†). This denotes that with extended heating, the reaction is completed and tetrahedrite is obtained as the sole product.
 Fig. 5  XRD patterns of the products obtained when the synthesis was performed at 80 °C for (a) 1 h, (b) 4 h, (c) 8 h, (d) 16 h and (e) 24 h. Red stick pattern on top is from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite). Red dashed lines are used to clearly monitor the evolution of some of the characteristic tetrahedrite diffraction peaks as a function of time. Blue stick pattern at the bottom is from standard JCPDS file [01-081-8819] for Cu29S16 or Cu1.81S (roxbyite). Blue dashed lines are used to clearly see the disappearance of the characteristic roxbyite diffraction peaks with prolonged heating. 
Because Cu1.81S is the first material to nucleate in the reaction mixture and Sb2S3 does not easily form at mild solvothermal conditions, we believe that Cu1.81S serves as the starting point or seed for the subsequent growth of our tetrahedrite nanostructures. This manner of growth is analogous to what has been observed previously by Kamble et al. in the formation of Cu2SnS3 nanocrystals, where the initial nucleation of a copper sulfide phase, Cu1.94S in their case, is followed by diffusion of Sn4+ ions into the pre-formed nuclei.28 The copper sulfide-seeded growth pathway has also been reported in the formation of other copper-based ternary sulfide nanocrystals (e.g. CuInS2 nanorods and CuGaS2 nanotadpoles).29,30 It is well recognized that binary copper sulfides have several stable phases and compositions (i.e., Cu2−xS, where x = 1–2) and their formation in solution can be strongly influenced by the coordinating solvents used in the synthesis.31,32 In their phase-selective synthesis of Cu2−xS, Freymeyer and co-workers have noted that the Cu/S ratio increases (i.e., from CuS to Cu1.8S to Cu1.96S to Cu2S) with increasing amount of DDT due to the strong reducing ability of this solvent.33 In our synthesis, we obtained Cu1.81S when we used a solvent mixture of DDT and OM. When we heated our Cu precursor in the absence of DDT, the Cu2−xS generated is covellite or CuS (Fig. S11 in ESI†), which is consistent with the results of Freymeyer et al. The variation in the Cu2−xS material produced when different solvents are used can then lead to different Cu–Sb–S compounds. We find that the composition of the Cu2−xS seed plays a crucial role, such that a higher Cu/S ratio in the pre-formed Cu2−xS leads to a higher Cu/S ratio in the resulting Cu–Sb–S. In particular, Cu1.81S leads to the eventual formation of Cu12Sb4S13, whereas CuS leads to Cu3SbS4. Similar observations have been reported by Liang et al. in their phase-selective synthesis of Cu–Sb–S nanostructures.16
To confirm our earlier hypothesis that our multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures are formed via particle aggregation, the morphological evolution as a function of time was examined through analysis of the TEM images of the samples produced at 80 °C at different reaction times (Fig. 6). With 1 h of heating, 20 nm oval-shaped particles as well as clumps of smaller particles are obtained as shown in Fig. 6a. Because they are largely amorphous, we are not able to see clear lattice fringes in high-resolution images that can possibly identify these particles. From our XRD data (Fig. 5a), we have learned that the partially crystalline material that is present at this reaction stage is Cu1.81S. When heating time was increased to 4 h, larger oval-shaped nanoparticles are produced and we can see some of these particles coalescing to form grape-like aggregates (Fig. 6b). From the HRTEM image of an oval-shaped nanoparticle (Fig. S12a in ESI†), an interplanar lattice spacing of 0.302 nm was determined. The measured lattice spacing corresponds to the (222) planes of cubic-phase tetrahedrite, implying that the primary crystallites that aggregate to create the grape-like clusters are those of tetrahedrite. This finding correlates with XRD data (Fig. 5b), which indicated that crystalline tetrahedrite already exists at this phase of the reaction. The HRTEM image of a representative grape-like aggregate in Fig. S12b (in ESI†) shows that the lattice fringes of most of the coalescing tetrahedrite particles are nearly aligned, and the corresponding FFT pattern tells us that the aggregate is close to becoming a single crystal. These observations are consistent with an oriented aggregation (or oriented attachment) growth mechanism.34–36 In this particle-mediated crystal growth process, neighboring particles that are brought together by collision first form loosely bound clusters or aggregates. The randomly oriented primary particles that make up the aggregates subsequently rearrange and firmly attach to one another when crystallographic alignment is achieved. After attachment, atoms diffuse to fill the interface regions, thereby eliminating the interparticle boundaries. This eventually leads to larger secondary structures that are single-crystalline and with often complex morphologies. Although complete understanding of the underlying factors involved in this non-classical crystal growth mechanism has yet to be realized, it is generally acknowledged that particle coalescence occurs because the formation of larger crystalline structures from small crystallites can substantially minimize the overall surface free energy. The coordinating solvents, which can adsorb onto the particle surface, may also play a role in the growth process and in dictating the morphology of the secondary structure.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of the tetrahedrite nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at 80 °C and heated for (a) 1, (b) 4, (c) 8, (d) 16, (e) 24, and (f) 32 h. Red triangles in (b) are used to highlight the loosely-packed nanotetrahedrons. Red arrow in (d) points to a nanocube. Red circles in (e) are used to show the transitional structures. Red arrows in (f) highlight some higher-order polyhedral nanostructures. 
When heating time was prolonged to 8 h, it becomes more obvious that the grape-like aggregates possess an overall tetrahedral shape, which is the known crystal habit of tetrahedrite (Fig. 6c). At this point, there are less of the initial oval-shaped nanoparticles that remain unmerged. Heating for 16 h gave us mostly grape-like nanotetrahedrons that we see in Fig. 4a. The size of these tetrahedrons is markedly reduced as a consequence of better fusion due to continued heating. HRTEM and FFT (Fig. S12c in ESI†) revealed that the nanotetrahedrons produced at this stage of the reaction are already single-crystalline despite the presence of multiple voids. Interplanar lattice spacings of 0.731 and 0.516 nm were measured and these can be ascribed to tetrahedrite's (110) and (200) planes, respectively. The existence of voids may be attributed to steric hindrance effects stemming from residual OM and DDT molecules that cap the primary crystallite surface. The long aliphatic chain present in both OM and DDT can limit close contact between coalescing primary particles and increase the energy barrier for atom diffusion. This results in incomplete merging, consequently generating empty spaces in between the particles that are not able to fuse entirely.
Additional imaging performed on the sample produced after 16 h of heating shows that aside from the grape-like nanotetrahedrons, some well-defined cube-shaped nanostructures also exist (Fig. 6d). With further heating, we see that more of these nanocubes are produced (Fig. 6e). Unlike the rounded protrusions seen on the surface of the grape-like nanotetrahedrons, the nanocubes have nearly flat faces. They also appear denser although upon closer inspection, one can see that voids are still present particularly near the center of the cubes. These porous nanocubes seem to have evolved from the grape-like nanotetrahedrons as suggested by the presence of some transitional structures (highlighted in Fig. 6e), whose appearance is in between a grape-like tetrahedron and a cube. Another interesting observation is that although many of the tetrahedrons have transitioned to cubic and nearly cubic geometries after 24 h of heating, there are some that have grown larger in size (possibly through further particle attachment) and yet retained the grape-like tetrahedron morphology. Fig. 6f shows that extending the heating time to 32 h yielded some higher-order polyhedral nanostructures (highlighted by arrows) aside from the nanocubes that have been observed previously, implying that the remaining grape-like tetrahedrons can grow into other polyhedral shapes with prolonged heating. In addition, the nanostructures obtained after 32 h are more solid, with evidently fewer and smaller voids. The restructuring of grape-like tetrahedrons with botryoidal surface texture into more compact polyhedrons with smoother surface texture is presumed to be driven by the decrease in total energy resulting from reduction of interfacial energy and crystal defects. Note that oriented particle attachment alone cannot result in well-developed facets. The smoothing or flattening of the initially rough or curvy surface is a result of mass redistribution or atomic rearrangement that occurs in conjunction with oriented aggregation. In a similar case, Liao et al. has reported that mass redistribution has been responsible for the straightening of the curvy surface of their Pt3Fe nanorods, which were initially formed via oriented aggregation of spherical nanoparticle building blocks.37
The temporal evolution of the tetrahedrite morphology at 200 °C was also investigated. Fig. S13a (in ESI†) shows that when the reaction is conducted at 200 °C, well-defined multiply-voided nanotetrahedrons with fairly smooth surface texture are readily obtained even with only 1 h of heating. These nanostructures are virtually identical to those produced after 16 h of heating (Fig. 2). The rapid formation of tetrahedrite nanostructures with distinct tetrahedral morphology at sufficiently high temperatures can be ascribed to three contributing factors. First, it is well known that the likelihood of particle collision is increased at higher temperatures. Because the early stage of formation of the nanotetrahedrons involves spontaneous self-organization of adjacent primary tetrahedrite nanoparticles, an increase in the frequency of particle collision leads to faster rate of tetrahedron formation. Second, the adsorption–desorption equilibrium of coordinating solvents can be affected by temperature.38 It has been reported that elevated temperatures can induce surface desorption of L-type ligands, such as OM and DDT.39 Thus, at higher temperatures, the primary particle surface is less densely capped so particle attachment becomes more probable. Lastly, atom diffusion and rearrangement can be promoted at higher temperatures. Note that after particle attachment, atoms diffuse and rearrange to eliminate interface regions and defects, and because these occur at a much faster rate at elevated temperatures, single-crystalline nanotetrahedrons with well-defined facets are formed more quickly at 200 °C.
We see in Fig. S13b (in ESI†) that at 200 °C, the tetrahedral geometry is stable even when heating was prolonged to 32 h. This is in contrast with the observed morphological transformations at 80 °C, where the initial grape-like tetrahedrons evolved into well-defined cubes and other polyhedral shapes with extended heating. The reason for this is the more rapid tetrahedron formation at 200 °C. Even with short heating times, the tetrahedrons formed at 200 °C already have well-developed faces, and this is structurally stable. By contrast, the tetrahedrons formed at 80 °C are rough-textured grape-like aggregates, where the coalescing primary particles are still distinct. Because the merging of particles is much slower at 80 °C, further addition of primary particles and restructuring can take place before the eventual formation of more defined structures. Consequently, the initial tetrahedron geometry evolves into cubes and other higher-order polyhedrons when the reaction is allowed to proceed longer.
Porosity in nanomaterials is advantageous in a variety of fields, including catalysis, thermoelectrics, sensing, and drug delivery. To test if our multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures possess useful properties that are characteristic of porous nanomaterials, we investigated their utility as a drug vehicle using the nanotetrahedrons produced at 200 °C. First, N2 adsorption–desorption experiment was conducted for the determination of the specific surface area. The obtained isotherm in Fig. 7a shows a hysteresis loop characteristic of a Type IV isotherm, and this is indicative of the mesoporous structure of our nanotetrahedrons. The specific surface area, which was calculated based on the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) theory, is 17.1 m2 g−1. This value is significantly higher than those observed for singly-voided Cu3BiS3 (10.2 m2 g−1) and Cu2GeS3 (10.5 m2 g−1) nanostructures.40,41
 Fig. 7  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures. (b) Absorption spectra of the initial DOX (black) and the unbound DOX after adsorption–desorption equilibrium (red). (c) pH-Dependent release of DOX from the MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures. 
Doxorubicin hydrochloride (DOX), a known anti-cancer drug, was used in the drug loading experiments. Prior to drug loading, the tetrahedrite nanostructures were made water-dispersible by replacing the organic capping ligands with 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA) through a previously published ligand exchange protocol.19 DOX loading was carried out by dispersing the MPA-capped nanotetrahedrons in an aqueous solution of DOX for 48 h to ensure an adsorption–desorption equilibrium. The DOX-loaded tetrahedrite nanotetrahedrons were then isolated by centrifugation and the amount of DOX that remained in the supernatant (i.e., unbound DOX) was quantified using UV-Vis spectroscopy. The substantially reduced absorbance of DOX in the supernatant (shown in Fig. 7b) indicates that DOX can be successfully incorporated into our MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures. With an encapsulation efficiency of 60.4% and a loading capacity of 120.8 μg mg−1, we find that our multiply-hollowed tetrahedrite nanostructures exhibit a drug loading capability that is not too different from that of the previously reported Cu9S5@mSiO2-PEG core–shell nanocomposites (encapsulation efficiency = 63.8%; loading capacity = 160 μg mg−1) despite having a much smaller BET surface area than the mesoporous SiO2-coated Cu9S5 (221 m2 g−1).42
Aside from having a high drug loading capacity, an efficient anti-cancer drug carrier should also possess sustained and pH-sensitive drug release behavior. To evaluate the drug release behavior of our MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures, DOX release experiments were performed in vitro at different pH values. The cumulative DOX release profiles at pH 4.8 (acidic) and pH 7.4 (healthy blood pH) are displayed in Fig. 7c. At pH 4.8 (red curve), our mesoporous drug carrier system exhibits sustained-release behavior, which starts with rapid drug release action during the first 3 h followed by a relatively slower release rate in the succeeding hours. Around 16% of DOX is released within 10 h. In comparison, the release of DOX at pH 7.4 (black curve) occurs at a much more sluggish pace with only 1.5% of DOX released over a period of 10 h. The pH-dependent and sustained DOX release properties of our system is useful for cancer therapy, where targeted and controlled drug delivery are desirable. Because active release of DOX would preferably occur in the acidic microenvironments of cancer cells, potential damage to healthy cells is prevented.
The room-temperature absorption spectra in Fig. 8a show that our porous tetrahedrite nanostructures exhibit significant absorption in the near-infrared (NIR) spectral window. In their study of the optical properties of tetrahedrite nanocrystals, Van Embden and co-workers have attributed this non-zero NIR absorption of tetrahedrite to the presence of Cu2+ ions in the crystal lattice.14 At 808 nm, we see that the absorbance linearly increases with concentration (inset of Fig. 8a), which is indicative of the good dispersibility of our MPA-capped nanostructures in water. The NIR-absorbing property of our tetrahedrite nanotetrahedrons has led us to investigate their potential in photothermal (i.e., light-to-heat) energy conversion. To assess the photothermal effect, we monitored the temperature elevation in aqueous dispersions of tetrahedrite nanostructures upon exposure to NIR light using an 808 nm laser at a power density of 0.88 W cm−2. As seen in Fig. 8b, NIR irradiation has induced a concentration-dependent increase in temperature of the aqueous dispersions of our tetrahedrite nanostructures. After 10 min of irradiation, the temperature of an aqueous dispersion with a concentration of 0.4 mg mL−1 increased by 18.2 °C. By contrast, the temperature of pure water increased only by 2.4 °C. With their ability to absorb and convert NIR photons to heat, our porous tetrahedrite nanostructures show promise in photothermal therapy, where the NIR-triggered increase in temperature is used to destroy diseased cells. Furthermore, their photothermal responsiveness can be utilized to control drug release. The curve in Fig. 8c shows that the DOX release rate increases every time the dispersion of DOX-loaded tetrahedrite nanostructures is exposed to 808 nm light while it slows down whenever the light is switched off. These results demonstrate that our photothermally active multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures are capable of regulating the release of loaded drug via NIR-induced heating.
 Fig. 8  (a) Absorption spectra of aqueous dispersions of MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures with different concentrations. Inset shows the Beer's Law plot at 808 nm. (b) Temperature elevation of aqueous dispersions of MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures with different concentrations under 808 nm laser irradiation. (c) NIR-induced release of DOX from the MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures at pH 4.8. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, we have presented a convenient way of preparing high-purity samples of tetrahedrite, Cu12Sb4S13, an environmentally benign and low-cost material that has been receiving increasing interest in the scientific community, particularly in the field of energy conversion. Unlike the traditional solid-state method, which necessitates several days of heating at temperatures not less than 450 °C, our solvothermal approach can yield crystalline samples of pristine tetrahedrite in less than a day at temperatures as low as 80 °C. The synthesis can be easily scaled up using larger vessels, and several batches can be run simultaneously by heating up multiple vessels at once. TEM analysis revealed that our as-synthesized tetrahedrite samples are tetrahedral-shaped nanostructures (i.e., nanotetrahedrons) containing multiple voids or pores. These unique multiply-voided nanotetrahedrons are formed through the non-classical oriented particle aggregation mechanism, where the voids arise from empty spaces between particles that are not able to fuse entirely. By modifying experimental conditions such as reaction time and temperature, we were able to alter the nanostructure shape, texture and porosity. A porous morphology is expected to enhance tetrahedrite's useful properties and expand its utility to numerous applications. We have shown here that our porous tetrahedrite nanostructures can be efficiently used for drug loading. Moreover, they show a sustained and pH-sensitive drug release behaviour, which can be further controlled with NIR-light irradiation. This is the first time that the possible use of tetrahedrite for biomedical applications has been explored.
In many cases, porous nanostructures are obtained through a multistep synthesis, which often involves the preparation of pore-free intermediates followed by a pore-generating process. With our synthetic methodology, we were able to create porous tetrahedrite nanostructures in a single step. We believe that our simple one-pot strategy for fabricating multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures could be extended to the synthesis of similar nanoarchitectures of other promising copper-based multinary sulfide materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by A*STAR SERC Pharos Programme (Grant Number: 1527200023).
Notes and references
C. Coughlan, M. Ibáñez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio and M. Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 511–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heo, R. Ravichandran, C. F. Reidy, J. Tate, J. F. Wager and D. A. Keszler, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401506 CrossRef .
C. Tablero, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15122–15127 CAS .
R. Chetty, A. Bali and R. C. Mallik, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 12364–12378 RSC .
J. Heo, G. Laurita, S. Muir, M. A. Subramanian and D. A. Keszler, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2047–2051 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chetty, A. Bali, M. H. Naik, G. Rogl, P. Rogl, M. Jain, S. Suwas and R. C. Mallik, Acta Mater., 2015, 100, 266–274 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, D. T. Morelli, Y. Xia and V. Ozolins, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 408–413 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Weller, D. L. Stevens, G. E. Kunkel, A. M. Ochs, C. F. Holder, D. T. Morelli and M. E. Anderson, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1656–1664 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, J. Zhou, W. Chen, P. Zhou, F. He and Y. Liu, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2015, 32, 999–1005 CrossRef CAS .
C. An, Y. Jin, K. Tang and Y. Qian, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 13, 301–303 RSC .
D. J. James, X. Lu, D. T. Morelli and S. L. Brock, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23623–23632 CAS .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2891–2899 CrossRef CAS .
J. van Embden, K. Latham, N. W. Duffy and Y. Tachibana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11562–11571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ikeda, S. Sogawa, Y. Tokai, W. Septina, T. Harada and M. Matsumura, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40969–40972 RSC .
Q. Liang, K. Huang, X. Ren, W. Zhang, R. Xie and S. Feng, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 3703–3710 RSC .
C. G. Sceney, J. O. Hill and R. J. Magee, Thermochim. Acta, 1975, 11, 301–306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, S. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Gu and Q. Wang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 12958–12962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ye, K. Y. Win, H. R. Tan, M. Lin, C. P. Teng, A. Mlayah and M. Y. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8506–8509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. J. Plante, T. W. Zeid, P. Yang and T. Mokari, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6612–6617 RSC .
M. D. Regulacio, N. Tomson and S. L. Stoll, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3114–3121 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deng, S. Shen, Y. Zhang, H. Xu and Q. Wang, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 77–83 RSC .
N. Pradhan, B. Katz and S. Efrima, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13843–13854 CrossRef CAS .
A. Roffey, N. Hollingsworth, H. Islam, M. Mercy, G. Sankar, C. R. A. Catlow, G. Hogarth and N. H. de Leeuw, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11067–11075 RSC .
Y. K. Jung, J. I. Kim and J. K. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 178–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Fan, M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, Y. Zheng, Q. H. Xu, A. W. Xu and M. Y. Han, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7128–7131 RSC .

          C. S. Hurlbut and W. E. Sharp, Dana's Minerals and How to Study Them, Wiley, New York, 4th edn,  1998, p. 158 Search PubMed .
A. Kamble, B. Sinha, S. Vanalakar, G. Agawane, M. G. Gang, J. Y. Kim, P. Patil and J. H. Kim, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 2885–2893 RSC .
J. Li, M. Bloemen, J. Parisi and J. Kolny-Olesiak, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20535–20543 CAS .
S. D. Adhikari, A. Dutta, G. Prusty, P. Sahu and N. Pradhan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5384–5393 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, M. Bosman, L. Polavarapu, W. L. Koh, J. Zhang, Q. H. Xu and M. Y. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2052–2055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Lim, C. T. Wong, S. L. Ang, H. Y. Low and W. S. Chin, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6170–6177 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Freymeyer, P. D. Cunningham, E. C. Jones, B. J. Golden, A. M. Wiltrout and K. E. Plass, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 4059–4065 CAS .
X. Xue, R. L. Penn, E. R. Leite, F. Huang and Z. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1419–1429 RSC .
R. L. Penn and J. A. Soltis, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 1409–1418 RSC .
J. Zhang, F. Huang and Z. Lin, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 18–34 RSC .
H. Liao, L. Cui, S. Whitelam and H. Zheng, Science, 2012, 336, 1011–1014 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Zhuang, F. Huang and Z. Lin, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 4963–4969 RSC .
R. Dierick, F. Van den Broeck, K. De Nolf, Q. Zhao, A. Vantomme, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 5950–5957 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Zhou, D. K. Ma, S. H. Zhang, W. Wang, W. Chen, S. M. Huang and K. Yu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 1374–1382 RSC .
C. Dong, D. Yao, J. Feng, T. Huang, X. Hu, Z. Wu, Y. Liu, B. Yang and H. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 9139–9149 CrossRef CAS .
G. Song, Q. Wang, Y. Wang, G. Lv, C. Li, R. Zou, Z. Chen, Z. Qin, K. Huo, R. Hu and J. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4281–4292 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TGA of precursors, XRD patterns, elemental mapping and TEM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07652eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  XRD pattern of the product obtained when a mixture of 0.3 mmol Cu(dedtc)2 and 0.1 mmol Sb(dedtc)3 were solvothermally decomposed at 200 °C for 16 h using (a) 10 mL OM, (b) 10 mL DDT, and (c) 5 mL OM + 5 mL DDT. Note: Red lines are from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for cubic Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite). Blue lines are from standard JCPDS file [01-082-0851] for monoclinic Cu3SbS3 (skinnerite). Purple lines are from standard JCPDS file [35-0581] for tetragonal Cu3SbS4 (famatinite).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) SEM image, (b) TEM image, (c–d) HRTEM images, and (e) SEM-EDX spectrum of the as-prepared tetrahedrite nanostructures. Red lines in (b) are used to outline the tetrahedral shape. Yellow arrows in (c) are used to mark some of the voids (lighter contrast regions). Inset in (d) shows the FFT pattern.	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD patterns of the nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at (a) 80, (b) 120, (c) 160, and (d) 200 °C for 16 h. Red stick pattern at the bottom is from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for cubic-phase Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite).	 

 	Fig. 4  TEM images of the tetrahedrite nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at (a) 80, (b) 120, and (c) 160 °C for 16 h.	 

 	Fig. 5  XRD patterns of the products obtained when the synthesis was performed at 80 °C for (a) 1 h, (b) 4 h, (c) 8 h, (d) 16 h and (e) 24 h. Red stick pattern on top is from standard JCPDS file [42-0561] for Cu12Sb4S13 (tetrahedrite). Red dashed lines are used to clearly monitor the evolution of some of the characteristic tetrahedrite diffraction peaks as a function of time. Blue stick pattern at the bottom is from standard JCPDS file [01-081-8819] for Cu29S16 or Cu1.81S (roxbyite). Blue dashed lines are used to clearly see the disappearance of the characteristic roxbyite diffraction peaks with prolonged heating.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of the tetrahedrite nanostructures obtained when the synthesis was performed at 80 °C and heated for (a) 1, (b) 4, (c) 8, (d) 16, (e) 24, and (f) 32 h. Red triangles in (b) are used to highlight the loosely-packed nanotetrahedrons. Red arrow in (d) points to a nanocube. Red circles in (e) are used to show the transitional structures. Red arrows in (f) highlight some higher-order polyhedral nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of multiply-voided tetrahedrite nanostructures. (b) Absorption spectra of the initial DOX (black) and the unbound DOX after adsorption–desorption equilibrium (red). (c) pH-Dependent release of DOX from the MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Absorption spectra of aqueous dispersions of MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures with different concentrations. Inset shows the Beer's Law plot at 808 nm. (b) Temperature elevation of aqueous dispersions of MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures with different concentrations under 808 nm laser irradiation. (c) NIR-induced release of DOX from the MPA-capped porous tetrahedrite nanostructures at pH 4.8.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: TGA of precursors, XRD patterns, elemental mapping and TEM images. See DOI: 10.1039/c7nr07652e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
