Supramolecular approach towards light-harvesting materials based on porphyrins and chlorophylls  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TA11274B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TA11274B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 6710-6753Supramolecular approach towards light-harvesting materials based on porphyrins and chlorophylls

        
          
            J. 
            Otsuki
          
          
        
      
College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, 1-8-14 Kanda Surugadai, Chiyoda, Tokyo 101-8308, Japan. E-mail: otsuki.joe@nihon-u.ac.jp
Received 
      26th December 2017
    , Accepted 21st March 2018First published on 11th April 2018AbstractPhotosynthesis is one of the most important processes that supplies the energy required for the survival of all living things. The initial process is the absorption of sunlight by a supramolecular organization called a light-harvesting antenna. Sophisticated natural energy-conversion devices have inspired chemists to produce artificial counterparts. This review presents the status quo of research on artificial light-harvesting antenna based on noncovalent supramolecular assemblies of porphyrin and chlorophyll derivatives. The electronic structures of chlorophylls and porphyrins can be understood qualitatively on the basis of the four-orbital model. The electronic energy transfer (EET) processes are described by the Förster and Dexter theories and beyond. The light-harvesting antennas found in nature are sophisticated supramolecular organizations of chlorophyll molecules that achieve efficient light collection via EET processes. To artificially reproduce the antenna function, supramolecular self-assembled porphyrin/chlorophyll organizations have been constructed and studied, both for discrete assemblies and extended assemblies. Porphyrin and chlorophyll molecules have also been organized on biological and nonbiological scaffolds, such as peptides and clay, respectively. Proof-of-principle demonstrations of enhancing the performance of solar cells have also been made by incorporating light-harvesting antenna systems. This research enriches our understanding on the organization of molecules and the correlation with the photophysical processes therein, possibly leading to the realization of new types of solar power conversion devices incorporating an antenna function.J. OtsukiProf. Joe Otsuki earned a Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of Tokyo in 1991. He then worked as a research associate at the Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo until 1999. In 1993, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Université Louis Pasteur (presently, Université de Strasbourg) in the group of Jean-Marie Lehn. He then moved to the College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, where he currently works as a professor. His research focuses on photo/electroactive (supra)molecular devices and materials. He is one of those guys who dreams of realizing artificial photosynthesis. More information at http://www.chem.cst.nihon-u.ac.jp/%7Eotsuki/otsuki.html.
1. Introduction
The sun is an ideal source of energy, from which abundant radiation energy arrives to the Earth.1–3 The sun is also an eternal source of energy, at least as far as the Earth remains a habitable place, so scientists and engineers around the world have been trying to make devices which convert this solar energy to electricity, i.e. solar cells, as efficiently as possible. Chemists are tackling the challenges of capturing solar energy and converting it to either electricity or chemical energy, via a variety of approaches, mainly from a molecular engineering standpoint.
The process of photosynthesis in the modern biosphere is a culmination of evolutionary attempts by living organisms to harvest solar energy over the last 3.5 billion years. It provides tremendous inspiration about how solar light can be harvested with molecule-based devices. Photosynthesis starts with the absorption of light by a chromophore molecule or a set of chromophore molecules in a light-harvesting antenna. A light-harvesting antenna consists of many chromophores collecting light energy and delivering it to a reaction center where charge separation occurs, leading to the storage of chemical energy. Hundreds of light-absorbing molecules in light-harvesting antennas are associated with a single reaction center in higher plant species.
Why are the light-harvesting antennas needed in the first place? One of the reasons may be that an antenna is more economical than the equivalent numbers of reaction centers.4 Antennas consists of arrays of mostly the same chromophores and, relatively speaking, are simple in structure, while a reaction center consists of sequential arrays of different chromophores with a redox gradient. Having two hundred and ninety nine antenna molecules and one reaction center is much better than having three hundred sets of reaction centers. Perhaps a more important reason is, however, related to the flux of photons from the sun. The frequency of a chromophore molecule with a large absorption coefficient (i.e., porphyrins and chlorophylls: 106 M−1 cm−1) to absorb a photon under low light conditions (0.5 mW cm−2 at 400 nm; 1 × 1015 photons cm−2 s−1) is estimated to be 1.6 photons per second.5 This means, if a photocatalytic cycle is to be driven by a single reaction center, that the catalytic site has to wait for several seconds until the full redox equivalents are accumulated in order to drive the reaction, e.g. four holes for water oxidation. This is a long time for a generally unstable oxidized or reduced species to stay intact without reacting or degrading. Light-harvesting antenna can enhance the frequency of the electron/hole supply significantly.
For efficient light collection, a high-density array of chromophores is necessary. However, random aggregates of chromophores cannot be used because the excited state would be quickly quenched by trap sites formed everywhere in the disordered aggregates by a processes called concentration quenching.6,7 To avoid concentration quenching, the molecular organization has be carefully constructed to prevent the formation of low energy trap sites at undesirable positions. More preferably, an energy gradient may be incorporated into the chromophore assembly and the lowest energy site may be placed at the exit of the antenna system through which the excitation energy is transferred to the reaction center.
To understand the structure–function correlations for the light-harvesting processes and to create biomimetic energy transduction devices, various attempts have been made to construct artificial light-harvesting antennas.8–12 A light-harvesting antenna must be composed of many chromophores by definition, but this makes the system intrinsically large and complex. To prepare such large, complex molecule-based systems, noncovalent, supramolecular approaches may be suitable rather than synthesizing the whole covalently-constructed macromolecule. For the noncovalent approach, information for self-assembly should be built into the structure of the building-block molecules.13–15 In photosynthesis, chlorophylls or bacteriochlorophylls are the most important chromophores engaged in light-harvesting. Chlorophylls are aptly called ‘the pigments of life’. Porphyrins, the structural analogues of chlorophylls, are a class of chromophores that have been employed in attempts to make artificial versions of light-harvesting antennas. It is understandable then that construction of light-harvesting antennas based on self-assembled porphyrins and chlorophylls is a large research area that has produced, and will produce, a large body of work.
In this review, a comprehensive overview will be given on attempts to make artificial antennas based on noncovalently assembled porphyrin and chlorophyll derivatives, as shown in Fig. 1. First, after the photophysics of porphyrins and chlorophylls is reviewed (Chapter 2), the electronic energy transfer (EET) process is concisely summarized (Chapter 3), before introducing the structures and EET processes in natural photosynthesis (Chapter 4). Attempts to construct artificial light-harvesting systems by using noncovalent interactions are then presented. Fully synthetic, discrete noncovalent assemblies (Chapter 5) and extended noncovalent assemblies (Chapter 6) are then covered. Subsequently, attempts to use scaffolds for organizing chromophores are discussed, such as biomolecules making use of their ability to make highly-ordered self-assembled structures, and other nonbiological materials (Chapter 7). Attempts to incorporate the antenna function into working devices, such as solar cells, are also described (Chapter 8). Finally, brief conclusions and an outlook are given (Chapter 9).
 Fig. 1  The topics covered in this review. Light-harvesting antenna composed of porphyrins/chlorophylls, which are organized via noncovalent interactions, collect solar radiation energy via EET processes to deliver it to a reaction center for chemical energy storage or to an electrode for electrical power generation. 
2. Porphyrins and chlorophylls
The classes of chromophores most widely used for light-harvesting in nature are chlorophylls and bacteriochlorophylls, which are macrocyclic tetrapyrrole compounds.16 These synthetic analogues are porphyrins, which are also one of the most widely used chromophores in artificial settings.17
The basic skeleton of porphyrin derivatives is porphine, which is shown in Fig. 2. The π system of porphine has 26π electrons in total (counting two for each amine nitrogen and one for each imine nitrogen), but it is considered as an 18-electron system when counting along the cyclic path between the alternating double and single bonds. As a cyclic polyene, the molecular orbitals are approximately like cosnθ and sinnθ, where θ is the polar angle and n = 0, 1, 2, … on going up from the lowest energy orbital. The orbitals except n = 0 are roughly doubly degenerate. In this way, the nearly degenerate highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and the second highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO−1) are approximately shaped like cos4θ and sin4θ and the nearly degenerate lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and the second lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO+1) are approximately shaped like cos5θ and sin5θ. For metalated porphine, the LUMO and the LUMO+1 orbitals are exactly degenerate. Fig. 3 shows these molecular orbitals, which are the basis of Gouterman's four-orbital model.18–20 The four-orbital model is very helpful for understanding the photophysical properties of porphyrins and chlorophylls in a qualitative way. The HOMO and HOMO−1 span the irreducible representations A2u and A1u (which depend on the substituents) and the degenerate LUMO and LUMO+1 span Eg in point group D4h (the point group of a metal porphyrin). The associated transitions and their polarizations are also shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 2  The structures of porphine, chlorin and bacteriochlorin. 
 Fig. 3  The frontier molecular orbitals of porphyrins and the electronic transitions between the orbitals. The labels used are those devised by Gouterman.18 
As the excited states formed from the transitions between the molecular orbitals A2u → Eg (ψ1) and A1u → Eg (ψ2) both span Eu in point group D4h, they mix via a configuration interaction. The resulting excited states (ψ±) after the configuration interaction may be represented as a linear combination of these states by eqn (1): ψ± = γ1ψ1 ± γ2ψ2(1)
The transition dipole moments from the ground state ψg to these states are in the form of (x-polarization as an example) eqn (2):μx± = 〈ψg|ex|ψ±〉 = γ1〈ψg|ex|ψ1〉 ± γ2〈ψg|ex|ψ2〉(2)where e is the elementary charge. The associated transition energies are given by eqn (3): (3)where Hij are the matrix elements for the Hamiltonian. If the orbitals A2u and A1u are degenerate, γ1 = γ2 and H11 = H22, then the transition dipole moments for the plus and minus combinations, respectively, become μx+ = 2γ1〈ψg|ex|ψ1〉 for E+ = H11 + |H12|(4) μx− = 0 for E− = H11 − |H12|(5)

Eqn (4) represents the constructive interference leading to a strong absorption at a higher energy, which corresponds to a Soret transition (B band). Eqn (5) represents the destructive interference leading to a weak absorption at a lower energy, which corresponds to a Q band.
On going from porphine to chlorin, one of the peripheral double bonds is reduced, which lowers the symmetry of the molecule, see Fig. 2. The degeneracy of c1 and c2 is lifted and the energy level of the orbital c1, which has a larger density at the reduced bond, is raised, while that of the orbital c2 is lowered. Likewise, the energy level of orbital b1 is lowered and that of orbital b2 is raised. As a result, the y-polarized higher energy absorption is further blue-shifted and the y-polarized lower energy absorption is further red-shifted. The destructive interference is now incomplete and the transition moment for the lower energy Qy transition becomes significantly large. On the other hand, the x-polarized transitions remain nearly degenerate as can be grasped from the energy diagram. Further reduction of the double bond at the diagonal position in chlorin gives bacteriochlorin (Fig. 2). The trend in the orbital energy changes on going from chlorin to bacteriochlorin is qualitatively the same as that from porphine to chlorin. Thus, the Qy band is further red-shifted and the By band is further blue-shifted, while the x-polarized absorptions are hardly affected. The absorption spectra for porphyrin, chlorin, and bacteriochlorin are shown in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of porphyrin, chlorin, and bacteriochlorin. Reprinted from ref. 16. 
3. Electronic energy transfer
Electronic energy transfer (EET) occurs if an energy acceptor (A) is present within a certain distance from an excited donor (D*).21 The initial state D* + A (Ψi) turns into a final state D + A* (Ψf) through an energy transfer process (eqn (6)). D* + A → D + A*(6)
The cause of this process is the electrical interaction between the electrons (i) and nuclei (I) of D with the electrons (j) and nuclei (J) of A, which may be treated as a perturbation, Ĥ1, to the Hamiltonian for the isolated D and A, as shown in eqn (7): (7)here, ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, riJ is the distance between the ith electron of D and the Jth nucleus of A with a charge of ZJ, etc. The energy transfer process is a nonradiative process, the rate kEET of which is represented by the Fermi golden rule in the first-order time-dependent perturbation treatment, as shown in eqn (8): (8)where ℏ is the Planck constant divided by 2π and ωi and ωf are the angular frequencies associated with the initial and final states, respectively, which are proportional to the energies. The Dirac delta function δ ensures the energy conservation between the initial and final states. The matrix element Hif1 is a measure of the interaction between the initial and the final states which is given by eqn (9): Hif1 = 〈Ψi|Ĥ1|Ψf〉(9)
In reality, ωi and ωf are blurred due to the presence of multiple rotational and vibrational levels, as well as solvent and environmental effects at a certain temperature. In these circumstances, the rate is represented by the integral of all of the isoenergetic combinations of the initial and final states as in eqn (10): (10)where gi(ω) and gf(ω) are the lineshape functions of ω representing the distribution of the initial and final states, respectively, and are assumed to be normalized as in eqn (11): (11)
3.1. Coulomb mechanism versus exchange mechanism
Let us first consider the singlet-to-singlet energy transfer. The initial and final singlet states in the spin-adapted configuration may be expressed in terms of spin orbitals using eqn (12) and (13): (12) (13)here, a is an occupied spin orbital and r is the unoccupied spin orbital of D. The orbitals of A are indicated by primes: a′ and r′. The absence and the presence of the bar on the symbols corresponds to the α and β orbitals, respectively. , for example, is the excited-state determinant, in which an electron in the β spin orbital ā is excited into the β spin orbital  of D. In the determinants on the right-hand side of these equations, the spin orbitals of D and those of A are arranged in the former half and the latter half, respectively. The matrix element is then given by eqn (14): (14)which can be simplified to integrals over two electrons as in eqn (15):22 (15)here, the parenthesis 〈ab||cd〉 is defined by eqn (16): 〈ab||cd〉 = 〈ab|cd〉 − 〈ab|dc〉(16)where 〈ab|cd〉 denotes a two-electron integral for electrons 1 and 2, as defined by eqn (17): (17)where r represents the coordinates of an electron, ω is a spin variable, ψ is a spatial orbital, and σ is a spin (either α or β). In this expression, the asterisk designates the complex conjugate. By integrating out the spin variables, ω1 and ω2, one obtains the matrix element expressed by eqn (18) in terms of the spatial orbitals:23 Hif1 = 2(ra|a′r′) − (rr′|a′a)(18)where    
The first term of the matrix element represents a process in which an electron in the ψr of D decays into the ψa of D and, at the same time, an electron in the ψa′ of A is excited into the ψr′ of A, as schematically depicted in Fig. 5a. This is the Coulomb mechanism of energy transfer. The transition densities can be defined using eqn (19): (19)and the Coulomb term can be written as in eqn (20): (20)
 Fig. 5  Singlet-to-singlet energy transfer and triplet-to-triplet energy transfer. 
Thus, the Coulomb term can be regarded as the electrostatic interaction between the transition densities. As eqn (20) suggests, there is no need for the overlap between the donor and acceptor orbitals for EET to occur via the Coulomb term. In this sense, EET due to the Coulomb term is also called through-space EET.
The second term of the matrix element represents a process in which an electron in the ψr of D is transferred to the ψr′ of A, and at the same time, an electron in the ψa′ of A is transferred to the ψa of D. As the electrons are exchanged between A and B, the mechanism of the energy transfer driven by this term is called the exchange mechanism (also called the Dexter mechanism).24 Because the exchange term involves the integral over the product of a donor orbital ψr and an acceptor orbital ψr′ for electron 1, etc., the donor orbital and the acceptor orbital must overlap well for the exchange term to be significant. Hence, the exchange mechanism works only when the donor and acceptor are in contact and their orbitals overlap. In this sense, EET due to the exchange term is also called through-bond EET.
Thus, the Coulomb mechanism and the exchange mechanism correspond to two different mathematical terms of the rate equation for an energy transfer process.
Let us next consider the triplet-to-triplet energy transfer. There are three states in the triplet manifold depending on the magnetic quantum number MS = +1, −1, or 0, which are degenerate in the absence of a magnetic field. The initial and final states in the triplet-to-triplet energy transfer are given by eqn (21)–(28).

M
S = +1: (21) (22)

M
S = −1: (23) (24)

M
S = 0: (25) (26) (27) (28)
The same line of argument as in the case of the singlet-to-singlet energy transfer for any of these triplet states leads to the final results of the matrix element in terms of spatial orbitals, which is given by eqn (29): Hif1 = −(rr′|a′a)(29)
Thus, only the exchange term remains (Fig. 5b). We can conclude that the triple-to-triplet energy transfer occurs only through the exchange mechanism and not through the Coulomb mechanism.
3.2. Dipole–dipole approximation of the Coulomb interaction: the Förster mechanism
The perturbation Hamiltonian is an electrostatic interaction between D and A. When the center-to-center distance RDA (RDA is the vector joining D and A) between D and A is large compared to the sizes of D and A, this interaction may be approximated by the dipole–dipole interaction, as in eqn (30): (30)where the electric dipole operators are defined by eqn (31) and (32): (31) (32)
The matrix element for this Hamiltonian is given by eqn (33): (33)where n is the refractive index of the medium. The orientation factor κ is given by eqn (34): κ = ntrD·ntrA − 3(nR·ntrD)(nR·ntrA) = sinθDsinθAcosϕDA − 2cosθDcosθA(34)where ntrD and ntrA are unit vectors oriented along the transition dipole moments and nR is a unit vector along the line joining the centers of D and A. The angles are defined as shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Parameters of a dipole–dipole interaction. 
The matrix element in eqn (30) is in the form of the dipole–dipole interaction energy, but the associated dipole moments are not classical dipole moments but rather transition dipole moments:  and . Substituting eqn (33) into eqn (10), eqn (35) is obtained: (35)
Transition dipole moments are quantities that are directly related to absorption and fluorescence spectra. The relationships between the transition dipole moments and these experimentally accessible properties for each individual D and A are given by eqn (36) and (37): (36) (37)where Φf is the fluorescence quantum yield of D, c is the speed of light, τD is the lifetime of D*, εA(ω) is the molar absorption coefficient of A at an angular frequency of ω, and NA is the Avogadro constant. Plugging these values into eqn (35) and converting the integral over the angular frequency to a more commonly used integral over the wavelength, and finally, replacing the line-shape function of the initial state by the normalized fluorescence spectrum of D  in terms of the number of photons emitted per unit wavelength interval, we obtain the commonly used formula for the Förster energy transfer as expressed by eqn (38):25–28 (38)
From this equation it is seen that the overlap of fluorescence of D and the absorption of A is necessary for energy transfer to occur and that the rate is proportional to the inverse sixth power of the center-to-center distance between D and A. This point dipole approximation to the Coulomb term is called the Förster mechanism or FRET as an abbreviation of Förster resonance energy transfer. The Förster mechanism is valid for noncoherent hopping of excited energy (an exciton), because the derivation of the Förster formula assumes that D and A are in thermal equilibrium with the surroundings (the bath) before the EET occurs.
3.3. Notes on through-bond mechanisms: superexchange mechanism and through-configuration mechanism

3.3.1. EET via superexchange. 
Even if the direct orbital overlap of D and A is small, the exchange interaction may be mediated by the intervening bridge between D and A.29,30 In such a case, the interaction is termed as a superexchange. In a simple case where D and A are connected by a bridge containing n identical sites, bi (where i = 1, …, n), as shown in Fig. 7, the matrix element for the superexchange, Hse1, is given by eqn (39): (39)where each H on the right-hand side of the equation is the matrix element between the components designated by the subscript, and ΔE is the energy gap between D* (or equivalently, A*) and . This mechanism is to be distinguished from sequential hopping, D → b1 → … → bn → A. The exciton moves directly from D to A borrowing the coupling strength from the bridge components in the superexchange mechanism.
 Fig. 7  Energy diagram for the superexchange mechanism in a case in which D and A are bridged by n identical units bi. 


3.3.2. EET through a configuration interaction. 
The above discussion on EET is made concerning the configuration space spanned by the initial and final states, Ψi = Ψ1 = |ΨD*ΨA〉 and Ψf = Ψ4 = |ΨDΨA*〉 (eqn (12) and (13). If we allow these states to mix with ionic configurations, Ψ2 = |ΨD+ΨA−〉 and Ψ3 = |ΨD−ΨA+〉 as shown in Fig. 8, it has been shown that the matrix elements responsible for the energy transfer are given by eqn (40):31 (40)here, Tij = Hij − SijH11, where Sij is the overlap integral. This formula can be applied when D and A are identical molecules. The first term T14 represents direct energy transfer from Ψ1 to Ψ4, while the second term represents energy transfer through the charge-transfer states Ψ2 and Ψ3. This might appear similar to Dexter's exchange mechanism (2nd term of eqn (18) and (29)) because electron transfer in both directions is involved but the origin is different. In this treatment of singlet–singlet energy transfer, Tif turns out to contain the term 2(ra|a′r′), which is the same Coulomb term as above. However, the Dexter's exchange term makes only a minor contribution and is absorbed into the second term.
 Fig. 8  Direct and through-configuration energy transfer. 

3.4. Exciton coupling
When the electronic interaction between two or more chromophores becomes stronger, the question of which chromophore is excited begins to not make sense. In such a case, the excited state or exciton can be treated as a superposition of excited states of the individual chromophores.32 When two parallel transition dipole moments are aligned in a line (J aggregates), the absorption is red-shifted. On the other hand, when two parallel transition dipoles are aligned side by side (H aggregates), the absorption is blue-shifted. These phenomena can be understood qualitatively in terms of the dipole–dipole interaction. Suppose we have two molecules A and B and assume that A and B are the same molecule (but the position and orientation are different). When each of them is isolated, the transition from the ground state to the excited state occurs upon light absorption individually: |A〉 → |A*〉; |B〉 → |B*〉(41)with E0 and E1 as the energies for the ground and excited states, respectively. However, when there is an interaction Ĥ1 between A and B, the excited state may be better represented by a linear combination of the respective excited states according to perturbation theory: (42)
The transition energy is split, which is given by eqn (43): (43)where H11 = 〈A*B|Ĥ1|A*B〉 = 〈AB*|Ĥ1|AB*〉 and H01 = 〈AB|Ĥ1|AB〉 are the intermolecular van der Waals interactions between A and B when either one of them is excited and both of them are in the ground state, respectively. The last term H21 = A*B|Ĥ1|AB*〉 is the off-diagonal element of the intermolecular interactions when one of the two molecules is excited and is given by eqn (44) under the dipole–dipole approximation: (44)here, RAB is a vector connecting A and B, RAB is the intermolecular distance, and μtrA and μtrB are the transition dipole moments, of which the magnitude is the same from our assumption. We note that this expression would represent the dipole–dipole interaction if μtrA and μtrB were classical dipole moments. Therefore, we can immediately know by inspection of the geometry whether a particular combination of transition dipole moments leads to positive or negative H21 and, in turn, if the absorption is blue-shifted or red-shifted, using eqn (43), aside from corrections for the van der Waals interactions in the excited and ground states. The same perturbation theory leads to the magnitude of absorption of the interacting system, which is given by eqn (45): Absorption ∝ |μtrψ,±|2 = |μtrA|2(1 ± cosθ)(45)where θ is the angle made by the transition dipole moments of A and B.
We consider two different parallel alignments (θ = 0) of the transition dipole moments, as shown in Fig. 9. As θ = 0, the transition  is allowed and  is forbidden, from eqn (45). If the transition dipole moments are aligned in a line, we immediately know that H21 < 0 from the analogy of the classical dipole moments (Fig. 9a). Therefore, only red-shifted absorption is allowed. If the transition moments are aligned side by side, we immediately know that H21 > 0 (Fig. 9b). Therefore, only blue-shifted absorption is allowed. The same conclusion is made if we start with antiparallel alignments (θ = π).
 Fig. 9  Interaction of transition dipole moments and allowed transitions. (a) J-Aggregate. (b) H-Aggregate. 
In a case where more than two molecules form an aggregate and interact electronically, the ground and the singly excited states are represented, respectively, by |ψg〉 = |ABCD…〉(46) |ψ*〉 = c1|A*BCD…〉 + c2|AB*CD…〉 + c3|ABC*D…〉 + c4|ABCD*…〉 + …(47)
The argument for the transition dipole moment and the transition energy for the dimer also applies for larger aggregates. The excited state is represented by the superposition of locally excited states. In other words, the excitation is delocalized to become an exciton. This delocalization has a great impact on the energy transfer process. In the case of weakly interacting chromophores, the excitation energy may be transferred by a hopping mechanism, which is appropriately expressed by the Förster equation (Fig. 10a). However, in the case that the chromophores are strongly interacting, the question of which one of them is the excited molecule does not make sense and the associated process is not a spatial energy transfer but rather an energetic relaxation, as shown in Fig. 10b. The superposition states are examples of quantum coherence.33–35 The term coherence generally indicates a situation in which there is a correlation between the phases of waves. The excited state, or the corresponding wavefunction, of every molecule is correlated in a superposition state.
 Fig. 10  Two limiting cases of energy transfer. (a) Incoherent hopping in the limit of weak interchromophore coupling. (b) Coherent relaxation in the limit of strong interchromophore coupling. 
3.5. Generalized Förster theory
The Förster formula is widely used, but not without a limit. The dipole–dipole approximation should be valid only when the distance between D and A is appreciably larger than the sizes of D and A. It is often the case that the intermolecular distance is not much larger than the size of the chromophores, particularly for porphyrins and chlorophylls, which are large aromatic molecules. In such a case, the dipole–dipole approximation will break down. The situation is schematically depicted in Fig. 11, where we can see that some parts of the D and A molecules are close to one another. Another situation for which the Förster formula cannot be applied is when excited D and/or A molecules form superposition states, as in eqn (47) and Fig. 12. These situations are addressed by the generalized Förster theory as described in this subsection.
 Fig. 11  Approximations to the coulombic interactions with increasing accuracy. The blue and red dots represent atoms and the connected polygons represent the chromophore molecules. (a) The point transition dipole approximation (Förster theory). (b) The transition monopole approximation. (c) The transition density cube approximation. 
 Fig. 12  Multichromophoric donors and acceptors. Each polygon represents a chromophore molecule. The center-to-center distances RDA and DDiAj represent the multichromophoric assemblies and individual donor and acceptor molecules, respectively. 

3.5.1. Transition monopole approximation. 
In a case in which the distance between D and A are not much larger than the sizes of D and A, in order to justify the use of a dipole–dipole approximation (Förster theory) for the coulombic interaction, the transition monopole approximation may be used. In this approximation, the interactions for all combinations of every atom in D and every atom in A are summed together (Fig. 11b). Supposing that the relevant transition is the HOMO (H) to LUMO (L) transition and these orbitals of D and A are expressed as (48) (49)where χi and χj are atomic orbitals, then the matrix element in the transition monopole approximation is expressed by eqn (50): (50)where Rij is the distance between the ith atom of D and the jth atom of A. Here,  and  are called transition monopoles.36 In a case in which the excited state is represented by multiple determinants, an appropriate sum is taken.23


3.5.2. Transition density cube method. 
A more accurate approximation than the transition monopole approximation is the transition density cube method (Fig. 11c).37 In general, the transition density for an N-electron system can be defined by eqn (51): (51)where Ψe and Ψg are the N-electron wavefunctions of the excited and ground states, respectively. By implementing the calculation of the transition densities, the space is divided into grids in the transition density cube method. The electronic coupling is represented by eqn (52):21 (52)where  for the ith grid.


3.5.3. Multichromophore effects. 
Suppose it is not appropriate to treat individual D and A molecules as independent entities, but that either one or both of them consist of a number of chromophore molecules which are exciton coupled, as shown in Fig. 12. In such a case, applying the Förster treatment is problematic. Applying the Förster formula to each DA pair and taking the sum is not valid in general because this does not take the exciton coupling into account.38 The exciton coupling of the chromophore molecules means that they behave like a one large molecule, i.e. a supermolecule. Applying the Förster formula for energy transfer from the supermolecule consisting of D's to the supermolecule consisting of A's is also problematic because of the intermolecular distance, which is the distance RDA between the center of the D's and the center of the A's and may not be much larger than the size of the supermolecule of D's and that of A's, even if RDA is much larger than the size of the individual molecules.39
In such a situation, the exciton states are constructed to derive the energies first. In general, n chromophores give rise to n eigen energies including the effect of the interchromophore interactions. The final form of the energy transfer rate for a system with M D's and N A's is given by eqn (53):40 (53)here, LD and IA are M × M and N × N matrices corresponding to the exciton densities of the states of D and A, respectively, WAD is a N × M matrix representing the interaction between D and A with WtAD as its transpose, and Tr(D) represents taking a trace of the resulting M × M matrix. The (i, j) element of WAD represents the dipole–dipole interaction between the ith A and jth D molecules. Thus, the proper treatment for a multichromophoric DA system is that the energies are taken for the delocalized exciton states while interactions are taken for pair-wise localized transition dipoles.

3.6. Redfield theory
The Förster theory, including the generalized Förster theory, assumes that both D and A are separate entities and each is in equilibrium with the environment. In other words, the coupling between the system (D and A) and the bath (environment such as solvents, proteins, and other matrices) is much larger than the coupling within the system (between D and A). In a situation where the interchromophore interaction is much larger than the coupling between the system and the bath, the prerequisite for the Förster treatment is not fulfilled. In such a case, the Redfield equation is used to describe the evolution of the system. Since the Redfield equation treats the time evolution of a coherent state, the EET in terms of the spatial migration of an exciton loses its significance. Instead, the Redfield treatment considers the relaxation of one exciton state to another.
An exciton can be represented by a superposition of states in which the nth chromophore is excited, |n〉, in an N-chromophoric system. (54)
The system density operator is then defined as: (55)
The state vector |ψ〉 and the density operator are equivalent in describing a state. The total Hamiltonian is expressed as: Ĥ = ĤS + ĤB + ĤSB(56)where ĤS is the Hamiltonian for the system including chromophores and interchromophore interactions, ĤB is the Hamiltonian for the bath, and ĤSB is the Hamiltonian for the interaction between the system and the bath.
The Redfield equation describes the time evolution of the density operator of the system. While various forms are found in the literature, a typical Redfield equation is given by eqn (57): (57)here eqB is the density operator for the bath at the thermal equilibrium, which may be written as in eqn (58): (58)where |ψBi〉 is the ith state of the bath, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the temperature, and Z is the partition function. Thus, the trace over the states of the bath (TrB) gives the thermal average. The first term of the Redfield equation is for the coherent part and the second term represents the dissipative dynamics due to interactions between the system and the bath.
4. Natural light-harvesting antennas
In 1932, Emerson and Arnold found that the number of chlorophyll molecules present per molecule of reduced carbon dioxide per single flash of light was about 2480.41 Their experiments showing that a large number of chlorophyll molecules are associated with a single reaction led to a concept of a photosynthetic unit in which chlorophyll aggregates act as antennas, “harvesting the energy of light quanta and delivering this energy to the reaction center”.42
The main chromophore groups are (bacterio)chlorophylls, carotenoids, and phycobilins. These chromophores are spatially arranged specifically for highly efficient energy transfer processes. Nature provides us with tremendous inspiration about the approaches we can take to work towards realizing supramolecular systems which function as efficient light-harvesting antennas.4,43–45
In this section, three types of natural light-harvesting antennas are described, limited to those employing (bacterio)chlorophyll derivatives as major light absorbing molecules as in the following: (i) the chlorosome and the Fenna–Matthews–Olson (FMO) complex in green sulfur bacteria; (ii) the light-harvesting complexes, LH1 and LH2, in purple bacteria; and (iii) the light-harvesting complexes, LHCI and LHCII, in cyanobacteria and higher plants.
4.1. Chlorosomes and FMO complexes of green sulfur bacteria
The photosynthetic apparatus of green sulfur bacteria are made to work efficiently under extremely low photon flux conditions. Green sulfur bacteria are even found at around 100 m below the surface of the Black Sea, where the light intensity is only 1–2 × 1015 photons cm−2 s−1 (ref. 46) as well as 2200 m below the surface of the Pacific Ocean.47
The light-harvesting system of green sulfur bacteria consists of chlorosomes (including baseplate proteins) and FMO proteins, through which excited energy flows before reaching the reaction center in the cytoplasmic membrane (Fig. 13).47–49 Typical numbers for the components of the light-harvesting system for a purple sulfur bacterium are as follows.47 Each bacterium contains 200–250 chlorosomes. Each chlorosome contains 200000 bacteriochlorophyll molecules (BChl c in the case of Chlorobium tepidum) in a lipid sac and 2000 1:1 complexes of BChl a and CsmA protein at the baseplate. Each chlorosome is associated with 150–200 FMO trimers, with each monomeric unit of the FMO protein containing 7 or 8 BChl a molecules, and 25–40 reaction centers.
 Fig. 13  Antenna–reaction center complexes of green sulfur bacteria. The chlorosome which is enclosed in a single-layer membrane is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the cytoplasmic membrane via the FMO complexes. Reprinted from ref. 50. 

4.1.1. Chlorosome. 
Unlike common antenna systems in other organisms, the bacteriochlorophylls assemble themselves into supramolecular structures without the involvement of proteins. The chlorosome contains thousands of BChl c, d, or e, depending on the species, that are responsible for the absorption of light and energy transfer. The chemical structures of these bacteriochlorophylls are shown in Fig. 14.51 Note that these chromophores are based not on a bacteriochlorin ring, in which the bond between C7 and C8 is a single bond, as the name would imply, but on a chlorin ring, in which the corresponding bond is a double bond. The maxima of the Qy absorption bands for these bacteriochlorophylls are 670 nm, 657 nm, and 660 nm for BChl c, BChl d, and BChl e respectively, in pyridine solutions.52 The transition dipole moment for the Qy transition is approximately oriented along the N21–N23 axis.53 BChl a is based on the bacteriochlorin framework and shows its absorption maximum at 781 nm in pyridine.52
 Fig. 14  Chemical structures of BChl c, d, e, and a.51 
Since X-ray crystallography is not suitable for the characterization of these systems, due to the naturally occurring heterogeneity within and among chlorosomes, various spectroscopic and computational techniques have been applied in an attempt to reveal the structure of the chlorosome. A proposed model, which is consistent with the solid-state NMR and cryo-electron microscopy data of chlorosomes from a mutant green sulfur bacterium, is the syn–anti monomer stack model,54 which is shown in Fig. 15a.55 In the assembly, the 31 OH oxygen coordinates to the Mg ion of the adjacent chlorin ring, while the 31 OH hydrogen is hydrogen bonded to the 131 carbonyl oxygen of another molecule. These intermolecular interactions, combined with ππ-stacking interactions, stabilize the extended molecular organization. On the other hand, there still seems to be no clear-cut agreement on how bacteriochlorophylls are associated at the molecular level for wild-type chlorosomes.56 One of the models proposed is shown in Fig. 15b as an example. In this example, dimer units are assembled without an extensive hydrogen bonding network.
 Fig. 15  Selected models of the molecular level association of bacteriochlorophyll molecules in chlorosomes. (a) The syn–anti model: syn (OH coordination to Mg from the same face as the propionate residue) and anti (OH coordination to Mg from the face opposite to the propionate residue).55 (b) The dimer-based model.56 
Molecular level structures aside, the bacteriochlorophyll molecules form multi-lamellar tubular structures that amount to 100–200 nm in length and 20–30 nm in diameter.57 A number of tubular assemblies of bacteriochlorophylls are enclosed in a sac composed of a monolayer of lipids and proteins, making up a chlorosome.
In the chlorosome, the absorption maxima of bacteriochlorophylls are significantly red-shifted by as much as 50–80 nm from the monomer values. The large red-shifts are primarily due to the J-type exciton interactions among the transition dipole moments of the bacteriochlorophylls.32 The absorption maxima for chlorosomes containing BChl c, d and e are found, respectively, at 740–750, 725 and 712 nm.49


4.1.2. Baseplate. 
The proteins in the chlorosomes are bound to the lipid monolayer sac.48 The most abundant and important among them is the 59-residue CsmA protein. The CsmA protein binds to a BChl a molecule, which accepts excitation energy from the chlorosome and passes it over to the next energy acceptor, the FMO protein. The structure of the CsmA–BChl a complex was elucidated by combining solid-state NMR, cryo-electron microscopy, isotropic and anisotropic circular dichroism and linear dichroism studies (Fig. 16).50 The baseplate is composed of rods of repeated dimers of the CsmA proteins with BChl a molecules sandwiched within the dimer. The Qy absorption of BChl a is red-shifted by ∼20 nm to ∼800 nm upon binding to the CsmA protein.58
 Fig. 16  Structure of the complexes of CsmA and BChl a (PDB ID: 5LCB).50 


4.1.3. FMO complex. 
The energy acceptor from the baseplate proteins is the FMO complex, which is a water-soluble, membrane-associated protein. The crystal structure of the FMO complex was solved for Prosthecochloris aestuarii at a resolution of 2.8 Å (Fig. 17a)59,60 and for Chlorobium tepidum at a resolution of 2.2 Å.61,62 The FMO complex consists of a trimer of three identical subunits. Seven BChl a molecules were identified in each subunit in the earlier crystallographic analyses. Later, an eighth BChl a molecule was found.63
 Fig. 17  FMO proteins. (a) FMO protein trimer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (1997) of Academic Press. (b) Eight BChl a molecules in the monomer unit of the FMO protein. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society. 


4.1.4. Energy transfer. 
The excitation energy flows from the chlorosome (e.g., BChl c, 742 nm) sequentially through the baseplate (BChl a, 792 nm) and the FMO protein (BChl a, 805 nm) to the reaction center (BChl a, 865 nm).65 As can be seen from these wavelengths, the antenna system is made to be a funnel with a downhill energy gradient, improving the light-collection efficiency.49 The eighth BChl a molecule in the FMO proteins, which was missed in earlier X-ray crystallography studies, is situated close to the baseplate and is thought to mediate energy transfer from the baseplate to the FMO protein (Fig. 17b).64 The overall energy transfer efficiencies from BChl c to the reaction center are highly temperature dependent, increasing with temperature from 60% at 10 °C to 100% at >40 °C,66 while the energy transfer efficiency from the FMO to the reaction center is always close to 100%.67
Two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy revealed the presence of coherence at 77 K in chlorosome68 and in FMO.69 The coherence in the excitons is detected at a more physiologically relevant 277 K for FMO.70 Recently, the energy flow through the entire photosynthetic apparatus was analyzed for intact bacterial cells at 77 K.71 A diagram of the obtained energy flow dynamics is shown in Fig. 18.
 Fig. 18  Energy flow dynamics through the photosynthetic apparatus of green sulfur bacterium Chlorobium tepidum at 77 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2016) of Springer Nature. 


4.1.5. Photoprotection. 
Each chlorosome contains about 20000 carotenoids and 20000 quinones, each representing up to 10% of the chromophores in the chlorosome.49
Quinones are thought to play a role in switching the energy transfer.72,73 The green sulfur bacterium is an anaerobic organism and lives in an environment without oxygen. In the presence of oxygen, the Fe–S-type reaction center would produce activated oxygen species, such as O2˙−, which harm the organism. Experimentally, the fluorescence from the quinone-containing chlorosome is largely quenched in the presence of oxygen, which recovers upon addition of a reductant, such as sodium dithionite (Na2S2O4).74
Carotenoids can serve either as an energy donor to or acceptor from the surrounding bacteriochlorophyll molecules. As a donor, carotenoids contribute to widen the spectral range of light absorption. The excited energy transfer occurs from the S2 state, among other states, of the carotenoids to the bacteriochlorophylls.43,75 As an acceptor, carotenoids quench the triplet excited state of the bacteriochlorophylls: 3BChl + Car → BChl + 3Car(59)to prevent the formation of harmful singlet oxygen: 3BChl + 3O2 → BChl + 1O2(60)
In the meantime, it was pointed out that the aggregated bacteriochlorophylls form triplet excitons with energies lower than singlet oxygen, thus providing them with their own protection.76,77 Carotenoids are also able to scavenge 1O2 directly:43 1O2 + Car → 3O2 + 3Car(61)

4.2. LH2 and LH1 of purple bacteria
The photosynthetic apparatus of purple bacteria mainly consists of two protein complexes, LH2 and RC–LH1, as shown in Fig. 19a. The LH2 is a peripheral light-harvesting complex and passes excitation energy among other LH2 proteins or LH1. LH1, which surrounds the reaction center (RC), passes the energy accepted from the LH2 over to the special pair (a dimer of bacteriochlorophylls) at the reaction center, from which the charge separation occurs. Atomic force microscopy images of the photosynthetic membranes suggest how the LH2 and RC–LH1 complexes are arranged in the membrane (Fig. 19b).78
 Fig. 19  Photosynthetic apparatus of purple bacteria. (a) Simplified overall structure and processes. The orange arrows indicate energy transfer and the blue arrows indicate electron transfer. (b) Atomic force microscopy images of the LH2 and RC–LH1 complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2005) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 

4.2.1. Structure of LH2. 
The crystal structure of the LH2 complex was first solved for the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas acidophila at a 2.5 Å resolution in 1995 (ref. 79) and is now available at a 2.0 Å resolution (Fig. 20).80 The crystal structure of the LH2 of Rhodospirillum molischianum has also been determined.81 The building unit consists of a heterodimer of transmembrane helices (α and β apoproteins), three bacteriochlorophylls (BChl a) and one carotenoid. The complex contains nine (Rhodopseudomonas acidophila) or eight (Rhodospirillum molischianum) of the building units forming a double ring, with α-apoproteins inside and β-apoproteins outside. The immobilized BChl a molecules are categorized into two groups depending on the absorption features of the peaks at 800 nm (B800) or 850 nm (B850). The nine or eight BChl a molecules of the B800 are located between the outer β-apoprotein helices, with an aromatic face parallel to the membrane surface. The center-to-center (Mg to Mg) distance between the neighboring BChl a molecules of the B800 is as large as 21.3 Å (Rhodopseudomonas acidophila) or 22.0 Å (Rhodospirillum molischianum). The Mg atom of the BChl a molecule of the B800 is ligated by the carboxyl modification of the methionine residue at the N-terminal of the α-protein (Rhodopseudomonas acidophila) or carboxylate of the 6th aspartic acid residue of the α-protein (Rhodospirillum molischianum). The remaining 18 or 16 BChl a molecules belong to B850, which are alternately associated with the α-apoprotein helices and β-apoprotein helices through histidine coordination, also forming a ring. The face of the BChl a molecule of B850 is oriented in parallel to the membrane normal. The center-to-center distances are 9.5 Å within a dimer or 8.8 Å between the dimers for Rhodopseudomonas acidophila and the corresponding distances for Rhodospirillum molischianum are 9.2 Å and 8.9 Å, respectively. The close association of the BChl a molecules in B850 accounts for the red-shift in the absorption band. Finally, the distance between the BChl a molecule of B800 and the nearest BChl a molecule of B850 is 18.4 Å for Rhodopseudomonas acidophila.
 Fig. 20  BChl a molecules and carotenoids in LH2: BChl a molecules of B850 (red and green), BChl a molecules of B800 (blue), and carotenoids (yellow). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2003) of Elsevier Science. (a) View from the periplasmic side along the membrane normal. (b) View along the membrane surface. The periplasmic surface is at the top and the cytoplasmic surface is at the bottom. 


4.2.2. Structures of LH1 and the reaction center. 
The X-ray crystal structure of the RC–LH1 complex of the purple bacterium Rhodopseudomonas palustris at a 4.8 Å resolution obtained in 2003 revealed that the reaction center is surrounded by LH1 as shown in Fig. 21a.82 The 15 α-apoproteins and 15 β-apoproteins are circularly arranged to form the inner and outer rings, respectively. BChl a molecules are fixed by the coordination to the central Mg ion by histidine residues and form a ring in between the α- and β-apoproteins. The rings are incomplete, however, with a gap near the quinone QB of the reaction center. Another polypeptide (protein W) is assigned to account for the electron densities near the gap. This gap is proposed to be a gate through which the reduced ubiquinone (QB) migrates out of the RC–LH1 complex in a photosynthetic electron transfer process.
 Fig. 21  X-ray crystal structures of the RC–LH1 complex of purple bacteria, viewed perpendicular to the membrane plane. The middle part (L, H, M and QB) constitutes the reaction center. (a) RC–LH1 complex from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The α-apoproteins (blue) and β-apoproteins (green) form the inner and outer rings, respectively, fixing BChl a molecules (red). Protein W is placed at the gap of the rings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2003) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) RC–LH1 complex from Thermochromatium tepidum: showing the reaction center (grey), BChl a molecules (purple), α-apoproteins (green, inner ring), β-apoproteins (green, outer ring), and Spx (orange). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) of Springer Nature. 
More recently, a higher-resolution (3.0 Å) X-ray crystal structure of the RC–LH1 complex from another purple bacterium, Thermochromatium tepidum, was reported (Fig. 21b).83 In this structure, 16α- and β-apoproteins form complete rings and the number of associated BChl a molecules is 32. Sixteen carotenoid molecules (spirilloxanthin, Spx) are also immobilized.


4.2.3. Light harvesting in purple bacteria. 
The beautiful circularly-symmetrical arrangement of the BChl a molecules in the LH2 of purple bacteria has facilitated the development of energy transfer theories for such strongly interacting multichromophore systems and deepened our understanding on how light is harvested by the purple bacteria in particular, and by photosynthetic organisms in general. The most salient feature of LH2 is the two sets of absorption maxima, B800 and B850.84 The BChl a molecules of B800 are relatively isolated, while those of B850 are strongly, electronically coupled.85Fig. 22 depicts the two limiting cases of the interchromophore interactions in B850: the weak coupling limit (a) and the strong coupling limit (b). Experimental data, in combination with models, suggests that the exciton length is about 2–6 bacteriochlorophyll molecules.86–89 Reduction in the exciton length from the entire ring to a fraction of the ring can be expected from the disorder inherent in the protein pigment assemblies.43
 Fig. 22  Limiting cases of energy transfer in the B850 of the LH2 of purple bacteria. The real-life situation lies in between the two cases. (a) The weak interchromophore interaction limit. Hopping model among the individual bacteriochlorophyll molecules. (b) The strong interchromophore interaction limit. A completely delocalized exciton model. 
Theories incorporating multichromophore effects were employed to understand the energy transfer from B800 to B850, for which the B850 supermolecule is much too large to justify the use of conventional Förster treatment.90,91 Furthermore, to account for disorder among the LH2 complexes, an ensemble average was incorporated in the calculation.92 A well-defined structure of the strongly interacting chromophore assembly and accumulated photophysical data on the EET processes of LH2 have helped to develop a generalized Förster theory.

Fig. 23 summarizes the time constants for energy transfer steps in terms of the site basis.43 The intraring energy transfer in LH1 and the B850 of LH2 is fastest with time constants in the hundreds of femtoseconds, due to the strong coupling among the bacteriochlorophyll molecules. The intraring energy transfer in the B800 of LH2 is slower, in which the BChl a molecules are relatively isolated. Interring energy transfer from B800 to B850 and B850 to LH1 occurs in a few picoseconds. The slowest step is the final step from LH1 to the reaction center, which takes about 35 ps. The energy transfer efficiency is still very high because the excited-state lifetime of LH1 is fairly long (1–2 ns).43 Two-dimensional spectroscopy revealed the presence of coherence for the LH1 complex at 77 K.93
 Fig. 23  EET time constants in the LH2 and RC–LH1 complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43 (Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society) and from ref. 94 (Copyright (1997) of Current Biology). 

4.3. The LHCI and LHCII complexes of oxygenic photosynthesis
Cyanobacteria, algae, and plants use water as an electron source to reduce carbon dioxide to produce organic compounds, releasing oxygen as a byproduct. Such a photosynthesis is called oxygenic photosynthesis. The photosynthetic machinery is located on the thylakoid membrane, as shown in Fig. 24. In oxygenic photosynthesis, two reaction centers pumped by photons work in tandem to drive the reactions. Accordingly, there are two types of reaction centers, PSI and PSII. Each of these reaction centers is supplemented by light-harvesting complexes (LHC), forming the PSI–LHCI and PSII–LHCII supercomplexes, respectively.
 Fig. 24  Simplified drawing of the oxygenic photosynthetic apparatus in cyanobacteria, algae, and plants. cytb6f: plastoquinol plastocyanin oxido-reductase; PC: plastocyanin; FD: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin-NADP-reductase. 
The chlorophylls involved in the light-harvesting complexes are Chl a and Chl b, the chemical structures of which are shown in Fig. 25a. A vinyl group is attached to the C3 position in both chlorophylls. The carboxylaldehyde group at the C7 position of Chl b renders its absorption spectrum blue-shifted by 30 nm from that of Chl a, in which the C7 substituent is a methyl group.95 The monomeric Qy absorption peaks are 660 nm and 640 nm for Chl a and Chl b, respectively, see Fig. 25b.96
 Fig. 25  Chl a and Chl b. (a) The chemical structures. (b) The absorption spectra of Chl a and Chl b. The absorption spectrum of the LHCII is also shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) of Elsevier. 

4.3.1. The PSII–LHCII supercomplex. 
Following electron crystallography studies,97,98 the X-ray crystal structure of PSII was reported in 2001 at a resolution of 3.8 Å. The resolution has been progressively improved99–102 to a resolution of 1.9 Å.103,104 The PSII monomer contains 19 protein subunits and 35 chlorophylls, and other cofactors including the Mn4Ca cluster for water oxidation and the electron transport chain.
The crystal structure of LHCII was solved by X-ray crystallography for spinach in 2004 (ref. 105) and for peas in 2005.106 LHCII is a trimeric assembly and each LHCII monomer contains eight Chl a and six Chl b molecules. The crystal structure of another protein, CP29, from spinach was also solved.107 The CP29 monomer contains 13 chlorophyll molecules with eight or nine Chl a molecules and five or four Chl b molecules.108 These chlorophyll molecules are immobilized on the proteins through Mg coordination and hydrogen bonds. These proteins also contain carotenoids. Cryo-electron microscopy,109–112 together with the aforementioned X-ray results, has given a detailed picture of how the overall supercomplex is organized. The PSII–LHCII supercomplex is indeed a complex, multi-protein/pigment supramolecular assembly. The basic unit is C2S2M2, composed of a dimeric PSII core (C2) and two strongly-associated (S2) and two moderately-associated (M2) LHCII trimers,113 see Fig. 26. In addition to these major light-harvesting complexes, there are two sets of minor chlorophyll-binding proteins, CP24, CP26 and CP29.
 Fig. 26  A schematic representation of the PSII–LHCII supercomplex (C2S2M2) as viewed along an axis normal to the plane of the thylakoid membrane. The PSII core dimer is shown in red, the minor antennas (CP24, CP26 and CP29) are shown in grey, and the strongly (S) and moderately (M) bound LHCII trimers are shown in white. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2013) of Owner Societies. 


4.3.2. The PSI–LHCI supercomplex. 
The structure of the higher plant PSI-LHCI supercomplex was solved at a 4.4 Å resolution, initially from Pisum sativum var. Alaska (a type of pea),114 and the resolution has been successively improved down to 2.8 Å.115–117Fig. 27 shows the cofactors, including Chl a and Chl b. The LHCI complex contains four subunits (Lhca1 to Lhca4) arranged in the form of a crescent shape on one side (at the bottom of Fig. 27) of the PSI. The LHCI contains 45 Chl a, 12 Chl b, 13 carotenoids and 5 lipids.
 Fig. 27  Pigments in the PSI-LHCI supercomplex. View along the membrane normal to the stromal side. In the lower crescent part there are the four subunits of the LHCI. The remaining upper part is the PSI. Cofactors: the Chl a molecules of the PSI core complex (green), the Chl a molecules of the LHCI (yellow), the Chl b molecules of the LHCI (magenta), the carotenoids (blue), lipids (black), and cofactors of the electron transfer chain (Chl a, phylloquinones, and Fe4S4 clusters) (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


4.3.3. EET in LHCII. 
Eight chlorophyll molecules in each monomeric unit of the LHCII are located near the stromal side and the remaining six are located near the lumenal side. Based on detailed structural information and the results of linear spectroscopy (absorption, linear dichroism, circular dichroism and fluorescence) and transient absorption kinetics, combined with Redfield and Förster modeling, the energy transfer landscape of LHCII has been revealed.118Fig. 28 shows the dynamics of energy transfer in the LHCII trimer. Each set of three dots represents a chlorophyll molecule, in which only atoms on the diagonal pyrrole-N(21), Mg, and pyrrole-N(23) are shown, approximating the orientations of the transition dipole moments. In the stromal-side layer (Fig. 28a), the three nearby Chl b molecules (blue; two in the same monomer protein and one in another) are closely associated to form exciton states. Similarly, the three Chl a molecules (red) and the two Chl a molecules (pink) respectively strongly interact to form exciton states. In the lumenal-side layer (Fig. 28b), four chlorophyll molecules (blue and green; three Chl b and one Chl a molecules) and two Chl a molecules (orange) respectively form exciton states.
 Fig. 28  Chlorophyll dispositions and energy transfer rates in LHCII. The chlorophyll molecules are represented by three atoms, pyrrole-N(21) (black), Mg, and pyrrole-N(23) (black) of which the orientation of the transition dipole moment is approximated. Energy transfer time constants are indicated. See ref. 118 for the labeling of the chlorophyll molecules (a) stromal-side layer. (b) Lumenal-side layer. (c) Interlayer energy transfer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2011) of Owner Societies. 
The content of the light-harvesting system is highly adaptive.113 The amount of LHCII is reduced in high light and increased in low light. The efficiency of energy transfer is, however, compromised somewhat. It was reported that the quantum efficiency of 91% in high light conditions decreases to 84% in low light conditions.119


4.3.4. Photoprotection. 
Each monomeric subunit of LHCII binds four carotenoids.95 Carotenoids have roles in light-harvesting,120 as well as photoprotection, as described in the section on Chlorosomes. Studied particularly concerning the LHCII is the nonphotochemical quenching. The photosynthetic units of plants are switched into a state in which the excitation energy is safely dissipated as heat under intense light conditions. In this quenched state, the excited states of chlorophylls are quickly quenched so as to lower the light-harvesting efficiency. There have been many studies concerning how it works. Various mutually related factors have been proposed to effect the nonphotochemical quenching, such as conformational changes in carotenoids and proteins,121,122 the formation of a charge transfer state,123,124 changes in the chemical structure of the carotenoids,125 and energy transfer from Chl a to a carotenoid.126,127

5. Discrete noncovalent assemblies of porphyrins and chlorophylls
In attempts to develop artificial light-harvesting antennas, discrete supramolecular assemblies play important roles both in understanding the EET process through noncovalent interactions and in developing well-defined antenna assemblies with predictable EET properties. The EET from a Zn porphyrin to a free-base porphyrin is the most frequently chosen combination, because of reasonably separated absorption features and the overlapped fluorescence of the former with the absorption of the latter. Coordination and hydrogen bonding are particularly suitable intermolecular interactions for the construction of well-defined supramolecular assemblies in general owing to the directionality and tunable strength of the interactions. In the case of assemblies of Zn-metalated porphyrins and chlorophylls, use of axial coordination to the Zn ion is convenient.128 The Zn porphyrins/chlorophylls accept one, and only one, axial ligand and afford a well-defined structure in which the axial ligand is perpendicular to the macrocycle plane. The problem is, that the binding constants are not large enough. With pyridine ligands, for example, the binding constants are in the order of 103 to 104 M−1 in nonpolar solvents. Multiple coordination interactions are used to solve the problem and obtain stable assemblies. In this section, supramolecular assemblies constructed via multiple axial coordination modes are reviewed, followed by other motifs of assemblies including those involving peripheral coordination, hydrogen bonding, and combinations of these interactions.129–132
5.1. Assemblies via multiple axial coordination modes

5.1.1. Assemblies of planar Zn porphyrin oligomers and free-base pyridylporphyrins. 
Various relative positions and orientations are possible in the design for the Zn porphyrin oligomers. First, planar oligomers, in which the Zn atoms and bridges are on the same plane, are discussed. Early studies focused on a 1:1 complex of a covalent linear dimer of Zn porphyrins bridged by a para-phenylene linker and cis-dipyridylporphyrins133 and a 2:1 complex of the covalent dimer with tetrapyridylporphyrins (Fig. 29a).134 The quenching of fluorescence from the Zn porphyrin and concomitant sensitization of the free-base porphyrin were observed.
 Fig. 29  Assemblies of planar Zn porphyrin or chlorin oligomers and free-base pyridylporphyrins (except for (c)) via axial coordination. (a) Ref. 133 and 134. (b) EET occurs from Zn to the free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2008) of Wiley-VCH. (c) EET occurs among Zn porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2008) of the American Chemical Society. (d) Ref. 137. 
A planar trisporphyrin prepared by Flamigni et al. and three trans-dipyridylporphyrin molecules forming a trigonal prismatic structure are shown in Fig. 29b.135 Photoinduced EET occurs from the trisporphyrin units to the pyridylporphyrin side walls with a time constant of 71 ps and a quantum efficiency of 96%.
Due to the torsion of the porphyrin–phenylene bond, the Zn porphyrin chromophores in these oligomers are not fully π-conjugated. In contrast, meso–meso butadiynylene-bridged bisporphyrin and bischlorin derivatives have extended π-conjugated systems and have new electronic transitions polarized along the long axes of the dimers.136 The porphyrin and chlorin dimers form prismatic structures with three-fold symmetric Y-shaped trispyridine derivatives of different sizes, as shown in Fig. 29c. This system does not contain a free-base porphyrin. Instead, singlet–singlet annihilation experiments revealed that the energy migration time constants between the Zn porphyrin dimer units are 6.2 ps (chlorin) and 4.8 ps (porphyrin) for the smaller prisms and 14.6 ps (chlorin) and 18.4 ps (porphyrin) for the larger prisms.
Scandola et al. prepared a Zn porphyrin dimer by doubly bridging Zn porphyrin units using trans,cis,cis-RuCl2(CO)2 fragments (Fig. 29d).137 In the assembly of this Zn porphyrin dimer with free-base trans-dipyridylporphyrins, EET occurs from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrins with a time constant of 32 ps and a quantum efficiency of 50%. This less than expected efficiency is tentatively attributed to the competing electron transfer from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin.


5.1.2. Assemblies of gable-type Zn porphyrin dimers and free-base pyridylporphyrins. 
“Gable”-type porphyrin dimers have been prepared in which two Zn porphyrins are fixed at an angle such that a dipyridylporphyrin fits snugly into the space between the Zn centers through double axial coordination, as illustrated in Fig. 30. In the bisporphyrin joined by the amide-type linker shown in Fig. 30a, the conformation of the linker is fixed by intramolecular hydrogen bonds.138 Similarly, the orientations of the pyridyl groups in the free-base porphyrin guest are also fixed by intramolecular hydrogen bonds. In the resulting 2:1 assembly, the free base porphyrin is encapsulated in an array of four Zn porphyrins. EET from the Zn porphyrin to the free base porphyrin was observed with a time constant of 0.5 ns and a quantum yield of 73%.
 Fig. 30  Assemblies of “gable”-type Zn porphyrin dimers and pyridine-appended free-base porphyrins. (a) EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2000) of Wiley-VCH. (b) EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2012) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) EET occurs from free-base to Zn porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2002) of the Royal Society of Chemistry and Owner Societies. GUEST = free-base trans-dipypyridylporphyrin. (d) Ref. 142. (e) Ref. 143. 
Osuka et al. prepared a diporphyrin β-to-β doubly bridged by a pyrene linker utilizing an Ir(I)-catalyzed β-borylation porphyrin reaction that they have developed (Fig. 30b).139 Two molecules of this U-shaped Zn porphyrin dimer encapsulate a tetrakis(meta-pyridyl)porphyrin. Upon complex formation, the fluorescence of the Zn porphyrins was quenched, as expected, but no fluorescence from the free-base porphyrin was observed. They attributed this result to electron transfer from the singlet excited state of the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin (ΔG = −0.46 eV).
Flamigni et al. prepared a series of gable-type Zn bisporphyrins. The bis-porphyrinic clamp shown in Fig. 30c has a rigid structure with a Zn–Zn distance of 2.2 nm, which is complementary to the trans-dipyridylporphyrin for double axial coordination.140 Within the complex, EET was observed to occur from the free-base porphyrin to the Zn porphyrin. The reversal of the EET process, which commonly occurs from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin, is due to the low excited energy particular to the π-extended Zn porphyrin unit of this gable Zn porphyrin. In the combination of a Zn porphyrin and free-base porphyrin shown in Fig. 30d,141,142 EET occurs from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin with a time constant of 50 ps and an efficiency of 98%. In the case of the assembly of the gable porphyrin dimer with tetrapyridylporphyrin, a 2:1 complex forms, as shown in Fig. 30e, with a high binding constant in the order of 1014 M−2.143 EET does occur from the singlet excited-state of the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin within the complex but the fluorescence from the free-base porphyrin was somewhat quenched in the assembly. The quenching was confirmed to be due to electron transfer from the Zn porphyrin to the singlet excited state of the free-base porphyrin in this case: ZnP + 1H2P* → ZnP˙+ + H2P˙−.


5.1.3. Self-assembling porphyrin rings. 
The most remarkable self-assembled artificial light-harvesting model to date has been prepared by Kobuke et al.144,145 They joined two Zn imidazolylporphyrins together using a meta-phenylene spacer, resulting in a 120° angle between the two porphyrin planes. This building unit self-assembles via axial coordination of the appended imidazolyl moiety to the Zn ion into a hexameric or pentameric ring, as shown in Fig. 31. The high stability of the assembly was made possible by the dimerization of the Zn imidazolylporphyrin unit via double complementary coordination giving rise to a slipped cofacial configuration.146 The center-to-center distance of the coordinating dimer is 6.1 Å and that between the intramolecular porphyrins across the meta-phenylene spacer is 11.0 Å, which are similar to the distances between the bacteriochlorophylls in the LH2 in purple bacteria (8.7 Å and 9.7 Å).79 The UV-vis absorption spectrum shows a large splitting of the Soret band (2073 cm−1), indicating strong electronic interactions among the porphyrin molecules, to which the major contribution is from the closer slipped cofacial dimer. Ring-closing metathesis reactions between the vinyl moieties appended to the rim of porphyrin macrocycles turn the noncovalent assembly into a covalent assembly, thus reinforcing the ring structure.147 The EET times of the pentamer and hexamer were found to be 8.0 ps and 5.3 ps, respectively, by means of anisotropy depolarization and exciton–exciton annihilation experiments.148
 Fig. 31  The self-assembling light-harvesting antenna designed by Kobuke et al. EET occurs from one axially-coordinated dimer to another. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright (2003) of the American Chemical Society. 
Kobuke et al. further prepared a tris(Zn porphyrin) bearing imidazole units at both ends, leaving the central Zn ion available for guest binding after the self-assembly into a ring.149 The self-assembled ring was used to accommodate a tripodal trispyridine guest molecule with an electron accepting C60 unit as well as a relay Zn porphyrin unit, as shown in Fig. 32.150,151 The efficient EET from the antenna ring to the relay porphyrin occurs with a ∼90% quantum yield, followed by efficient electron transfer to the C60 moiety (>90%).
 Fig. 32  The antenna–reaction center model designed by Kobuke et al. EET occurs from an axially-coordinated dimer in the ring to the Zn porphyrin of the encapsulated guest, followed by electron transfer to the C60. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Chemical structures of the antenna and the reaction center. (b) The antenna–reaction center complex. 
They further immobilized their antenna–reaction center complex into a lipid bilayer, closely mimicking the photosynthetic units in nature, as shown in Fig. 33.152 Quenching experiments suggested that EET occurs not only within an antenna ring but among adjacent antennas, which mimics the EET processes among the LH2 antennas or from LH2 to the LH1 antenna, as in purple bacteria.
 Fig. 33  The supercomplex of photosynthetic units designed by Kobuke et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2009) of the American Chemical Society. 


5.1.4. Self-assembled porphyrin boxes. 
Osuka et al. serendipitously discovered a Ag(I)-promoted oxidative meso–meso coupling of a Zn porphyrin.153 The resulting meso–meso linked porphyrin shows significantly split Soret bands, one at the original energy and the other at a lower energy by 2100 cm−1. This splitting was explained by the transition–dipole interactions, as shown in Fig. 34. The degeneracy of the Bx and By transitions of the porphyrin is lifted due to the reduced symmetry of the meso–meso linked structure, resulting in Bx, By, and Bz transitions at different energies. While the Bx and By transitions do not mix due to their orthogonality, the Bz transitions in the two porphyrin units undergo a J-type coupling giving rise to a red-shifted absorption.
 Fig. 34  Transition dipole coupling in a meso–meso linked bisporphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2012) of the Royal Society. 
Following their discovery of the Ag(I)-promoted oxidative meso–meso coupling reaction, Osuka et al. have produced a number of unprecedented porphyrin oligomers and polymers based on the meso–meso linked porphyrin motif.155 In the context of self-assembled light-harvesting antennas, four molecules of the meso–meso linked Zn porphyrin dimer with additional pyridine moieties cis to the meso–meso linked axis form a box-like assembly, as shown in Fig. 35.154–156 The boxes are very stable and exhibit association constants of >1024 M−3 owing to the cooperative eight pyridine–Zn coordination interactions.157 The incoherent energy hopping times among the dimer units were found to decrease (48 ps, 98 ps, and 361 ps) upon an increase in the size of the boxes, which is in accordance with the Förster theory.157 As an extension of the studies, Osuka et al. prepared a number of porphyrin boxes: boxes from di- and tetraalkynylene-bridged porphyrin dimers,158 a dodecameric porphyrin box from a meso–meso linked triporphyrin,159 boxes from cinchomeronimide appended meso–meso linked Zn diporphyrins,160 and a large porphyrin square from a triazole-appended L-shaped meso–meso linked Zn triporphyrin.161
 Fig. 35  Self-assembled porphyrin boxes designed by Osuka et al. Ar = 3,5-dioctyloxyphenyl. EET occurs from one meso–meso linked dimer to another. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2004) of the American Chemical Society. 


5.1.5. Cyclic oligomers of porphyrins and chlorophylls via axial coordination. 
A Zn complex of mono-pyridylporphyrins self-assembles into a cyclic tetrameric structure, in which the Zn ions are axially coordinated by the pyridyl moiety of adjacent porphyrin molecules, in nonpolar solvents, as shown in Fig. 36a.162 The Soret band is slightly split due to an excitonic interaction in the S2-state. The fluorescence anisotropy decay measurements revealed that the EET times between the nearest neighbor and the next nearest neighbor porphyrins are 26 ps and 190 ps, respectively, which are in agreement with the Förster energy transfer mechanism.163 The porphyrin substituted by the ethynylpyridyl group likewise forms a tetrameric cyclic structure, as shown in Fig. 36b.164 The femtosecond transient absorption (singlet–singlet annihilation) and anisotropy measurements indicated that the EET occurs between adjacent units with a time constant of 3.8 ps. It is interesting to note that this rate is 7 times faster than that within the tetrameric pyridylporphyrin unit, shown in Fig. 36a, despite the longer center-to-center distance between the adjacent porphyrin molecules (13.6 Å versus 10 Å). This is attributed to the enhanced transition dipole moment and reduced symmetry, owing to the extended conjugation, giving rise to a larger overlap of the absorption and emission spectra.
 Fig. 36  Cyclic tetramer of mono-pyridylporphyrins. EET occurs among Zn porphyrins in the tetramer. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2001) of the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright (2008) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Similar cyclic tetrameric structures were also prepared from chlorophyll derivatives. Wasielewski et al. prepared chlorophyll derivatives substituted with a pyridyl moiety at the C-20 position (Fig. 37a). The EET time within the tetramer is 1.3 ps, which is 20 times faster than the corresponding porphyrin tetramer shown in Fig. 36a.165 Since the center-to-center distance between the adjacent chlorophyll units (9.4 Å) is comparable to that for the porphyrin tetramer, the larger transition dipole moment for the lowest energy electronic transition of chlorophylls compared to that of porphyrins should favor faster EET processes. A chlorophyll derivative in which the pyridyl moiety is tethered via an ethynylphenylene spacer forms a cyclic trimer is shown in Fig. 37b.166 In this assembly, the EET time was measured to be 11 ps, which is 8.5 times slower than that of the pyridyl derivative shown in Fig. 37a. This is in line with the distance dependence of the Förster energy transfer rate, which is proportional to the inverse sixth power of the interchromophore distance.
 Fig. 37  Pyridyl-appended porphyrins and their cyclic oligomers. EET occurs among the Zn chlorins in the tetramer or the trimer. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2007) of the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2013) of Elsevier. 
We have prepared a series of chlorophyll derivatives substituted with a coordinatable moiety, such as a pyridyl group at the C-3 position (Fig. 38). The pyridylethenyl substituted Zn chlorophyll derivative forms cyclic tetramers similar to those described above in benzene solution. However, when deposited as single crystals, the molecules arrange into linear chains via coordination. Interestingly, each chain is twisted and two of them wrap around one another to form a double helix reminiscent of that of DNA. It seems common for this class of molecules to form cyclic oligomers in solution, but linear polymer structures when deposited as crystals.167–169
 Fig. 38  A pyridine-appended Zn chlorin derivative and its X-ray crystal structure.171 
We have also prepared chlorophyll derivatives substituted by a pyridylethynyl moiety at the C-3 position with (ZnPyC60) and without (ZnPy) a fullerene unit (Fig. 39a).170 These pyridyl substituted chlorophylls likewise form cyclic tetramers in benzene. The laser power dependent transient absorption decay for a solution containing the ZnPy tetramer showed the occurrence of singlet–singlet annihilation, from which the EET time constant was determined to be 3.8 ps. In the case of ZnPyC60, the fluorescence is nearly completely quenched. Transient absorption clearly shows an absorption band at 1000 nm due to the C60˙− species, which provides evidence for electron transfer from the singlet excited state of the chlorin unit to the C60 unit, with an electron transfer time constant of 3.8 ps. In a (1 − χ):χ mixture of ZnPy and ZnPyC60, various cyclic tetrameric assemblies are expected to form in a statistical manner. If the energy transfer efficiency among the chlorin units in the tetramer is 100%, the presence of at least one ZnPyC60 in the tetramer ensures near complete quenching of the fluorescence via an energy transfer process and subsequent electron transfer; fluorescence should only be observed from the tetramer (ZnPy)4, of which the fraction is (1 − χ)4. The relative fluorescence intensity indeed follows the (1 − χ)4 curve, as shown in Fig. 39b, which indicates that the energy transfer occurs with a near unity efficiency. Since the excited-state lifetime of ZnPy is 4.3 ns, which is a thousand times slower than the energy transfer and electron transfer processes, the 100% efficiency is also consistent with the time-resolved measurements.
 Fig. 39  A semisynthetic chlorophyll-based antenna–reaction center system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2016) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Mixed cyclic tetramer formation of a chlorophyll derivative with (ZnPyC60) and without (ZnPy) a C60 unit. EET occurs among the chlorin molecules, followed by electron transfer C60. Aryl = 2,4,6-tridodecyloxyphenyl. (b) Fluorescence intensity dependence on the fraction of ZnPyC60 (χ). 


5.1.6. Noncovalent assemblies of covalent nanorings. 
With the development of template assisted synthetic protocols, it has become possible to synthesize remarkable π-conjugated porphyrin nanorings.172,173 While such nanorings are interesting models of light-harvesting antenna themselves, these nanorings have also been used as building blocks for supramolecular assemblies.
Lindsey et al. prepared a covalent nanoring containing Zn porphyrins all connected together by π-conjugated bridges, as shown in Fig. 40.174,175 The ring accommodates a dipyridyl-substituted free-base porphyrin with a two-point axial coordination interaction with a very high affinity of >3 × 108 M−1 in toluene. Photoexcitation of the Zn porphyrin in the ring leads to essentially quantitative energy transfer from an uncoordinated Zn porphyrin to a pyridyl-coordinated Zn porphyrin, which is followed by slower energy transfer to the free-base porphyrin in the center. The energy transfer from the coordinated Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin over 17.3 Å distance occurs with a time constant of 1.1 ns in a 65% efficiency, which is consistent with the Förster mechanism.
 Fig. 40  A wheel and spoke structure. EET occurs from uncoordinated to coordinated porphyrins in the ring followed by EET to the central free-base porphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2006) of the American Chemical Society. 
Herz et al. investigated EET within coordination supramolecules containing porphyrin dimers and nanorings, as shown in Fig. 41.176 One system involves six free-base porphyrin dimers coordinating to a single nanoring of Zn porphyrins. Another system involves six free-base porphyrin dimers coordinating to two nanorings of Zn porphyrins. In these assemblies, EET occurs from the free-base dimers (λmax = 730 nm) to the Zn complex of the nanoring (λmax = 830 nm). The EET times were found to be 1.25 ps and 0.65 ps, respectively. The two-fold increase in the rate for the latter complex is attributed to the two-fold energy pathways. Subsequently, Herz et al. studied the dependence of the EET rate on the ring size and found that the rates are independent of the ring size.177 On the basis of the measured rates and comparison with possible energy transfer models, they propose that the exciton on the ring is partially localized over six porphyrin units, which is caused by the strain associated with the donor (free-base porphyrin dimer) binding.
 Fig. 41  Self-assembled porphyrin nanoring antenna models. EET occurs from a free-base porphyrin dimer to the nanoring. (a) Six donor porphyrin dimers and an acceptor ring. Ar = 3,5-bis(trihexylsilyl)phenyl, R = trihexylsilyl, R′ = dodecyl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. (b) Six donor porphyrin dimers and two acceptor rings. 

5.2. Assemblies via peripheral metal coordination
Kobuke et al. prepared a free-base porphyrin trimer joined by an octahedral Ga(III) complex (Fig. 42a).178 The center-to-center distances were estimated by molecular mechanics calculations to be 15–18.5 Å. Femtosecond fluorescence anisotropy decay measurements gave an EET time constant of ∼10 ps, which is consistent with the Förster mechanism. Hupp et al. prepared porphyrin dimers doubly connected through Re complexes (Fig. 42b).179 EET occurs from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin within the dimer and the time constants for this system were found to be 77 ps and 103 ps for R = OMe and R = CO2Me, respectively.
 Fig. 42  Porphyrin assemblies via peripheral metal coordination. (a) Ref. 178. (b) Ref. 179. 
EET through bridges, including a metal atom, and organometallic and Werner-type coordination bonds, has been studied by Harvey et al. and they found that the electronic contribution of the metal atom to the frontier orbitals plays a major role in mediating EET. The EET time constant for a Zn and free-base porphyrin dimer bridged by a Pd complex with N-heterocyclic carbene units, which is shown in Fig. 43a, is 160 ps at 298 K.180 This value is much less than that predicted by the Förster theory, which is ∼0.2 ps. For one thing, DFT calculations revealed that the Pd metal makes little contribution to the frontier molecular orbitals, which excludes the involvement of the through-bond contribution of the metal atom to the EET. Furthermore, Harvey et al. proposed that the presence of electrons between the donor and acceptor chromophores exerts an electronic screening effect against the electronic transition dipoles, which accounts for the diminished EET rate compared to that predicted by the Förster theory.
 Fig. 43  Metal-bridged Zn and free-base porphyrin dimers. (a) A dimer bridged by a Pd N-heterocyclic carbene complex unit.180 (b) A dimer bridged by a chelate complex unit. M = Pd, X = O;181 M = Pt, X = O;182 M = Pt, X = S.183 
On the other hand, the chelate complex of Pd (M = Pd, X = O), which is shown in Fig. 43b, shows a fast EET with a time constant of 646 fs.181 This fast EET process is ascribed to a significant contribution of the Pd atomic orbitals to the frontier molecular orbitals. Thus, the EET is considered to occur not only through the Förster mechanism, but also via the through-bond mechanism. The EET rate is faster if the Pd is replaced by Pt (M = Pt, X = O), with a time constant of 105 fs.182 The faster rate is ascribed to the larger molecular orbital coupling with the 5d metal Pt than with the 4d metal Pd. The EET rate can be further enhanced by replacing the ketone ligands with thioketone ligands (M = Pt, X = S).183 The rate is faster than the experimental time resolution, which places an upper limit on the time constant of <49 fs. The enhancement in the rate of the EET is again ascribed to the further enhancement of metal orbital contributions to the frontier molecular orbitals.
5.3. Assemblies via hydrogen bonding
In the early 1990s, Sessler et al. reported dyads and triads consisting of Zn and free-base porphyrins formed via hydrogen bonding on the basis of the base pairing found in DNA by appending nucleobase moieties to porphyrins.184–186 An example is shown in Fig. 44. The binding constant for the base-paring is 2 × 104 M−1 in dichloromethane. The center-to-center distance is 22.5 Å. The singlet EET time constant is 1 ns and is quantitatively consistent with the Förster energy transfer mechanism.
 Fig. 44  Assembly of Zn and free-base porphyrins via base-pairing.186 
We prepared porphyrin assemblies via an amidinium–carboxylate salt bridge (Fig. 45).187 The interaction responsible for the salt bridge is hydrogen bonding augmented by electrostatic attraction.188 The binding constant for the pair formation was found to be 2.2 × 106 M−1 in toluene containing 1% dimethylsulfoxide. With the Zn porphyrin decorated with an amidinium moiety, monocarboxyphenylporphyrin forms a porphyrin dyad, ZnPA·FbPC, and the tetracarboxyphenylporphyrin forms a pentad, (ZnPA)4·FbPC4. The pentad is an antenna in which the peripheral excitation is efficiently transferred to the central free-base porphyrin with 96% efficiency. The experimentally observed EET times for the pentad and the dyad were 83 ps and 250 ps, respectively, which are an order of magnitude faster than those calculated on the basis of the Förster mechanism (1.5 ns and 2.0 ns, respectively). This fast EET rate is suggestive of the involvement of through-bond mechanisms.
 Fig. 45  Assembly of porphyrins via amidinium carboxylate salt bridges.187,193 
Insightful preceding works by Lindsey and Osuka on EET within covalent dyads shed light on the issue of the involvement of the through-bond mechanism. The EET time constants within the Lindsey dimer and the Osuka dimer, which are shown in Fig. 46, are 24 ps (ref. 189) and 417 ps,190 respectively. The large difference in the time constants, regardless of the use of the same bridge, is attributed to the difference between the electronic structures. Specifically, the HOMO of the meso-tetraphenylporphyrin is of an A2u type symmetry, which has a significant electron density on the meso carbon adjacent to the bridge, while that of the β-octaalkylporphyrin is of an A1u type, in which the meso carbon is on the node. Thus, the difference in the through-bond communication may account for the difference in the energy transfer rate in these dyads.191,192
 Fig. 46  The Lindsey dimer (top)189 and the Osuka dimer (bottom).190 Circles superimposed on the molecular structures represent the HOMO levels of the Zn porphyrins. 
Inspired by these works, we prepared the dyad ZnPA-2·FbPC-2 using the same salt bridge but with β-octaalkyl substituents, shown in Fig. 45.193 The EET time for this dyad was found to be 790 ps (Förster estimate: 3.0 ns), which is slower than that within ZnPA·FbPC. This result, from the analogy of the covalent dyads, suggests the involvement of the salt bridge in mediating the EET. These results demonstrate that the bridge structure, covalent or noncovalent, is important not only in a structure-directing role but also as a conduit for EET.194 We further applied the dyad ZnPA·FbPC to a molecular switch for EET.195
5.4. Assemblies via coordination and hydrogen bonding
Kuroda et al. combined hydrogen bonding and coordination interactions to assemble remarkable Zn porphyrin assemblies containing a free-base porphyrin at the center and up to 16 Zn porphyrins on the periphery, as shown in Fig. 47. Multiple pyrazine units are tethered to the central free-base porphyrin. The Zn complex of the tetrakis(ortho-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin forms a face-to-face dimer via quadruple carboxy dimer formation. The dimer has a space between the porphyrin planes into which a pyrazine unit fits to form a double axial coordination with the Zn ions of the porphyrin walls. These intermolecular interactions result in 8:1 (ref. 196) or 16:1 (ref. 197) ratios of Zn to free-base porphyrin assemblies, depending on the number of pyrazine units that the central free-base porphyrin has. The distance dependence of the EET rates has been systematically investigated in derivatives with a varying number of methylene units between the porphyrin core and the pyrazine moieties.198 The observed rates were in good agreement with those calculated from the Förster theory. However, it was noted that some of the Zn porphyrins in the supramolecules are inactive for EET, suggesting the inhomogeneity in the environment of the Zn porphyrins in the assemblies.
 Fig. 47  Self-assembled light-harvesting antenna via cooperative hydrogen bonding and coordination interactions. EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196 and 197. Copyright (2000, 2002) of the American Chemical Society. 
6. Extended noncovalent assemblies of porphyrins and chlorophylls
Closed interactions between a limited number of component molecules lead to discrete supramolecular assemblies, as we saw in Section 5. In contrast, repeating outward interactions result in polymeric extended assemblies, formed through supramolecular sequential polymerization,131,199,200 which are covered in this section. The J-aggregate of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin is a classical example. Extended assemblies of chlorosome model compounds have been extensively studied. Also, specifically designed porphyrin/chlorophyll derivatives have been investigated in the formation of extended assemblies, including metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), and their photophysical and energy transfer properties have been studied.
6.1. J-Aggregates of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin (TSPP)
Relatively simple anionic porphyrins can form extended ordered assemblies. One of the classical examples, and the most studied, is the J-aggregate of 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-sulfonatophenyl)porphyrin (TSPP). In 1971, Fleischer et al. noticed that TSPP aggregated in acidic conditions.201 In the course of many subsequent works, it turned out that the aggregate is the J aggregate of TSPP, in which the pyrrolic nitrogen atoms are doubly protonated. The positive charge at the core (pKa ∼ 4.8)201 and the negative charge of the sulfonate groups drive the association in an offset stacking manner, as shown in Fig. 48.202 The formation of the J-aggregate depends on concentration, ionic strength, pH and other additives. The aggregates can form rod-like ordered assemblies that extend over the micrometer scale, as shown by the atomic force microscopy image in Fig. 49.203 While the intermolecular interaction at the molecular level, shown in Fig. 48, and the micrometer-scale rod structures are established without dispute, how the molecular level association leads to the micrometer-scale rod structure is still not clearly understood. Fig. 50 shows two models that have been separately proposed. One is a model in which a two-dimensional sheet of porphyrin molecules is rolled up to form a tube (Fig. 50a).204–206 The other is a hierarchical model in which the porphyrin molecules form LH2-like rings and the rings then stack to form a rod (Fig. 50b).207 This is based on high-resolution scanning tunneling microscopy images showing disk-like structures, which could correspond to the LH2-like rings.208
 Fig. 48  Protonation of TSPP and the association between TSPP molecules that leads to the formation of a J-aggregate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2000) of the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 49  Atomic force microscopy image of a J-aggregate of TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright (2003) of the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 50  Structural models of rods of TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society. (a) A multihelical nanotube model. The arrows indicate monomer transition dipole moment components contributing to H (blue) and J (red) bands. (b) A hierarchical helical nanotube model. 
The J aggregate of TSPP shows a characteristic Soret band red-shifted from 435 nm for the monomeric species to 492 nm (J band), as well as a peak at 705 nm (Qx band), as shown in Fig. 51. The red-shift is typical for a J-aggregate, in which the transition dipole moment of each component aligns side-by-side.32 Recently, transient absorption microscopy has directly captured the time-resolved propagation of excitons along the nanorods, affording diffusion coefficients values in the range of 3–6 cm2 s−1.210
 Fig. 51  Absorption spectrum of the J aggregate of TSPP in 0.3 M HCl (A). (B) and (C) are spectra under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2000) of the American Chemical Society. 
6.2. Chlorosome models
Tamiaki et al. found that the Zn chlorin derivative shown in Fig. 52a is a good model for chlorosome bacteriochlorophylls in the sense that the absorption spectrum exhibits a large red-shift in the Qy peak from the monomeric species at 652 nm to 740 nm in nonpolar organic solvents.211 Comparisons made with a variety of derivatives indicated that the 31-hydroxy group, the 131-carbonyl group and the Zn atom are all necessary elements for the red-shifted absorption feature to appear. Tamiaki et al. then succeeded in measuring the excitation energy by mixing the dyad, in which a Zn chlorin unit is covalently bonded to a free-base bacteriochlorin unit as shown in Fig. 52b, with the Zn chlorin in a 1:50 ratio.212,213 The EET process was revealed through a 50% decrease in the Zn chlorin fluorescence and sensitization of the low energy emission from the bacteriochlorin unit in nonpolar solvents. An even more efficient EET was observed for the mixed assembly solubilized by a surfactant in an aqueous environment. Tamiaki et al. later demonstrated that a covalent dyad is not required for efficient EET in the surfactant system by using the bacteriochlorin derivative shown in Fig. 52c,214 although the EET efficiencies were higher for the dyad acceptor than for the monomer acceptor.215
 Fig. 52  Chlorosome model compounds. (a) A Zn chlorin derivative.211 (b) A chlorin–bacteriochlorin dyad.212 (c) A Zn bacteriochlorin derivative.212 (d) A dyad of bacteriochlorin and C60.216 
A fullerene appended free-base bacteriochlorin (Fig. 52d) was incorporated into the antenna assembly of the Zn chlorin compound shown in Fig. 52a to complete the light-harvesting and charge separation model system, although in this system, direct evidence for the charge-separated state (e.g. spectroscopic evidence for C60˙−) was not provided.216
On the basis of the bacteriochlorophyll model compounds developed by Tamiaki et al., Würthner et al. appended multiple long hydrocarbon chains via ester bonds on the propionate residue, as shown in Fig. 53a.217 The hydrocarbon decorated compounds have good solubility in nonpolar solvents, which enables the examination of the properties of the aggregates in detail. These compounds form rod-like assemblies, which was confirmed by atomic force microscopy.
 Fig. 53  Chlorosome models with a widened spectral response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright (2008) of the American Chemical Society. (a) A chlorin molecule with hydrocarbon chains.217 (b) A chlorin–naphthalene bisimide dyad.218 (c) A chlorin–naphthalene bisimide–naphthalene bisimide triad.219 (d) Assembly of the triad shown in (c) using the same color coding.219 
Würthner et al. attached a second chromophore to the self-assembling bacteriochlorophyll, as shown in Fig. 53b, to widen the coverage of the visible spectra. The additional chromophore used was a naphthalene bisimide, which has a maximum absorbance at 611 nm in the middle of the “green gap” of bacteriochlorophylls.218 Rod-like assemblies were formed from this dyad as well, which was confirmed by atomic force microscopy. UV-vis and circular dichroism spectroscopy results indicated that the Zn chlorin chromophores are excitonically coupled, while the naphthalene bisimide chromophores are isolated. Very efficient EET from the naphthalene bisimide to the Zn chlorin chromophores was observed with a time constant of 5 ps and a quantum yield of >99%. The increased coverage of the solar spectrum corresponds to a calculated 26% increase in the light-harvesting efficiency. Würthner et al. extended the concept further and prepared the triad shown in Fig. 53c by appending two different naphthalene bisimides.219 A schematic drawing of the triad assembly is shown in Fig. 53d. The absorption bands of these naphthalene bisimide chromophores peak at 619 nm and 551 nm, respectively. EET occurs from both of the naphthalene bisimide chromophores directly to the Zn chlorin chromophores, with high efficiency (>99%). The further extension in the absorption corresponds to a 63% increase in the solar light-harvesting efficiency from that of the chlorin assembly.
Newer approaches toward the controllable manipulation of the structures of molecular assemblies are being developed, not only by relying on thermodynamic self-assembly but by introducing kinetic factors in producing the resulting structures.
Amphiphilic poly(ethylene oxide)–block–poly(butadiene) forms micelle-like structures when a solution of the polymer in tetrahydrofuran is slowly diluted with an aqueous solution.220,221 If the stock solution of the polymer in tetrahydrofuran contains bacteriochlorophyll molecules, they assemble into aggregates similar to those in chlorosomes. The polymer micelles encapsulate the bacteriochlorophyll assemblies forming polymer–chlorosome nanocomposites. The structure of the composites is similar to that of the chlorosomes, in which the lipid sac is replaced by the polymer sac. A mixture of BChl c, d, e, and f can be incorporated into the composites. In such assemblies, a time evolution of the fluorescence spectra towards the lower energy side during the initial hundreds of picoseconds after laser excitation was demonstrated, which indicates that EET processes are occurring in the assembly. Interestingly, BChl a, which cannot form extended assemblies like those with other bacteriochlorophylls, can also be incorporated. The BChl a molecules are believed to be situated on the micellar walls, so they also mimic the chlorosome base plate without the proteins being involved (Fig. 54).
 Fig. 54  Polymer–chlorosome nanocomposite as a chlorosome model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society. 
Another method uses the evaporation of an oil component (organic solvent) from oil-in-water emulsions. Tamiaki et al. found that upon evaporation of dichloroethane from spherical emulsions stabilized by an amphiphilic chlorin derivative, multi-walled tube-like assemblies of the chlorin derivative are obtained (Fig. 55). The diameters of the tube-like assemblies are tens of nanometers and the lengths are a few hundreds of nanometers, depending on the preparation conditions.222 With specific preparation conditions, the distribution of sizes and shapes can be made quite uniform.
 Fig. 55  Chlorin rods assembled in droplets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright (2012) of Wiley-VCH. 
6.3. Extended assemblies of porphyrins modified with structure-directing moieties

6.3.1. Porphyrin-based chlorosome models. 
Balaban et al. have developed chlorosome-type assemblies from completely synthetic porphyrin derivatives. The essential functional groups involved in the chlorosome-type assemblies are introduced onto the porphyrin framework, i.e. a hydroxymethyl group at the 3 or 5 position and a carbonyl group at the 13, 15, or 17 positions, as shown in Fig. 56a.223–226 Perhaps due to the simpler structures of these porphyrin-based models compared with those of chlorophyll-base model compounds, some X-ray crystal structures have been successfully determined and an example is shown in Fig. 56b.224 The hydroxy groups coordinate to the Zn atom in the adjacent porphyrin molecules. The carbonyl groups are twisted such that the carbonyl oxygen is oriented towards the Mg atom in the adjacent porphyrin molecules. It is noted that no extended hydrogen bonding involving the hydroxy group exists, in contrast to an assumption made in some of the structural models for chlorosome, such as the one shown in Fig. 15a. On the basis of these crystal structures, Balaban et al. suggested a possibility that the type of intermolecular association observed in their porphyrin-based models without the extended hydrogen bonding could also explain the molecular assemblies in the chlorosomes.
 Fig. 56  Porphyrin-based chlorosome model compounds. (a) Chemical structures. (b) X-ray crystal structure of the chlorosome-type assembly of the porphyrin (R1 (5) = CHOHCH3, R2 (15) = COCH3, M = Zn). The O atoms joined to the Zn atom by solid lines are alcohol O atoms, while those with dotted lines are ketone O atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2005) of Wiley-VCH. 


6.3.2. Extended assemblies of peptide-modified porphyrins. 
The propensity of peptides to self-assemble into organized structures has been used to organize porphyrins.227 One method is to covalently modify the porphyrin framework with peptide substituents. The other is to use interactions of self-assembled peptide structures with porphyrins. Here the former approaches are discussed. The latter approach will be presented in Section 7.
Appending a L-glutamide moiety onto the porphyrin core helps assemble the porphyrins into J-aggregate-like polymeric species in nonpolar solvents (Fig. 57).228 For this assembly, highly efficient fluorescence quenching by a fullerene derivative appended with a pyridyl moiety was observed. Only an order of magnitude less of concentrated pyridylfullerene was necessary to quench the fluorescence of the J-aggregated porphyrins than that of nonaggregated Zn tetraphenylporphyrin.
 Fig. 57  Assembly of glutamate-decorated Zn porphyrin and its high-affinity complexation with pyridyl-C60. (a) Chemical structure of the components. (b) Schematic drawing of the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright (2010) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Cyclodipeptide moieties are a powerful motif because they provide multiple hydrogen bonding sites with C2 symmetry.229 Jian et al. prepared cyclodipeptide-bridged porphyrin dimers (Fig. 58) and showed that they form toroidal and fibrous structures. The fluorescence properties, such as the lifetime and peak maxima of the monomeric porphyrin, are maintained in the assembly.
 Fig. 58  Cyclodipeptide-modified porphyrin.229 
Gazit et al. prepared a porphyrin tethered phenylalanine dimer (Fig. 59).230 This molecule readily aggregates into nanofiber-based multiporous microspheres. The microspheres can be spattered with colloidal Pt to catalyze the reduction of NAD+. The photocatalytic system based on this diphenylalanine-modified porphyrin is much more efficient than a system based on a porphyrin without the dipeptide unit.
 Fig. 59  A porphyrin tethering a phenylalanine dimer.230 


6.3.3. Assemblies of lipid-modified porphyrins. 
The phospholipid modified porphyrins shown in Fig. 60 form unilamellar vesicles with a diameter of 100–150 nm in aqueous solution.231 The fluorescence of a vesicle solution containing a 1:1 ratio of Zn and free-base porphyrins is dominated by that of the latter, which indicates that these porphyrins form mixed vesicles and that the EET process within the vesicle is efficient. The EET time constant was obtained as 320 ps.
 Fig. 60  Phospholipid modified porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright (2003) of Wiley-VCH. 


6.3.4. Extended assemblies of dendritic porphyrins. 
Jang et al. prepared a dendrimer in which a core free-base porphyrin is surrounded by eight (Fig. 61, PZnPFB) or sixteen Zn–porphyrins.232 An efficient EET was confirmed to occur from the peripheral Zn porphyrin to the core free-base porphyrin (94% for the 8 Zn porphyrin dendrimer and 88% for the 16 Zn porphyrin dendrimer). Two free-base tetrapyridylporphyrin molecules are bound to PZnPFBvia axial coordination. In the resulting 2:1 complex, the excited-state process that occurs is the electron transfer to give a charge-separated state containing the Zn porphyrin radical cation and free-base porphyrin radical anion.233 On the other hand, addition of the free-base porphyrin PyPFB bearing eight pyridyl moieties leads to the formation of a coordination polymer, as shown in Fig. 61.234 In this complex, the excited-state process is the EET from a Zn porphyrin in PZnPFB to the free-base porphyrin in PyPFB.
 Fig. 61  Coordination polymer made up of a dendritic Zn porphyrin and a free-base porphyrin bearing multiple pyridyl moieties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society. 

6.4. EET within metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) involving porphyrins
MOFs are attractive scaffolds for EET for several reasons.235–240 MOFs are often highly tunable owing to the large variety of combinations of the organic linkers and metal-based nodes used in their formation. Their structures are crystalline and are therefore highly organized. Chromophores can be isolated from one another without undue aggregation if the chromophore is used as the organic linker. Guest molecules can be incorporated, making use of the nanoporous framework.
Hupp et al. prepared MOFs using porphyrins as an organic bidentate linker.241 The porphyrins employed were trans-bis(pyridylethynyl)porphyrin (DA-H2P) and trans-dipyridylporphyrin (F-H2P) derivatives (Fig. 62a). The MOFs form multilayer structures, in which the porphyrins align in parallel in each layer. Adding a ferrocene derivative bearing a coordinatable pyridine moiety as an electron donor quenches the fluorescence from more than one porphyrin molecule per donor. This is attributed to EET among the porphyrin molecules (Fig. 62b). The analysis of the fluorescence intensities versus the amount of the quencher indicated that the unimolecular exciton migrates over ∼45 porphyrin molecules in the case of DA-H2P and ∼3 molecules in the case of F-H2P. The large difference in the migration distance is mainly attributed to the Förster overlap integral, which is much larger for DA-H2P than for F-H2P due to the π-extended and asymmetrical structure of DA-H2P. One of the limiting factors of porphyrin systems is the relatively narrow spectral range of absorption. Porphyrins are almost transparent in part of the UV region (350–400 nm) and in the middle of the visible range between the Soret and Q bands (450–500 nm). Hupp et al. have addressed this issue by cosensitization with CdSe/ZnS quantum dots, which are bound to the exterior surfaces of the MOFs.242 The quantum dots are attractive sensitizers due to their broad absorption and the tunability of the absorption spectra by the size of the dots used.
 Fig. 62  MOFs containing porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright (2013) of the American Chemical Society. (a) Construction of the MOFs. (b) EET within the MOFs. 
The MOF has a porous structure in which the struts (linkers) are well separated from one another. Although this is often an advantage, e.g. for guest penetration, etc., the electronic coupling between the struts, when the struts are made of chromophores, is small and the EET rates are thus diminished. Increasing the number of chromophores over which an exciton can migrate is an important issue for the application to light-harvesting materials. A method to increase the number of chromophores, or the number of layers when directional EET is considered across layers of MOFs, has been proposed.243 Firstly, a common MOF structure is prepared using an automated layer-by-layer deposition method (liquid-phase epitaxy) with the number of layers controlled. The thus prepared three-dimensional MOF that has 4,4′-bipyridine as the pillar component is then immersed in pyridine. The pyridine molecules replace the pillars leading to a collapsed MOF, in which the interlayer (interporphyrin) distances is diminished. Quenching experiments showed that the excitons can travel through about 9–11 porphyrin layers in the collapsed MOF films compared to 6–8 layers in three dimensional MOFs. The increase in the number of layers over which the excitons can migrate is less than desired, which is attributed to the lateral shift in the position of the porphyrins accompanying the collapse, as shown in Fig. 63.
 Fig. 63  Collapse of three-dimensional MOFs to two-dimensional films. 3-APTMS = 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright (2016) of the American Chemical Society. 
7. Light-harvesting antenna assemblies on scaffolds
We have seen a variety of attempts to noncovalently organize porphyrin and chlorophyll molecules. The structural program instructing how the molecules assemble themselves is built into the molecular structure. In contrast, most of the chromophores for natural photosynthetic antenna are organized on protein scaffolds, with the exception of the chlorosomes of green sulfur bacteria. Natural chlorophylls are made in such a way that they bind to proteins in a specific fashion, such as in the coordination of the Mg ion, hydrogen bonding of some of the peripheral substituents and hydrophobic interactions, etc. How they are assembled into a higher order organization depends on the protein to which they are bound.
Thus, an alternative strategy for chromophore organization is to employ scaffolds that have an organized structure or propensity to assemble themselves into an organized structure. In this approach, the design of the antenna system can be modular; we may separately optimize chromophores with regard to photophysics and scaffolds for the structure being organized. In this section, we discuss the scaffold-directed assemblies of porphyrins and chlorophylls for light-harvesting purposes. The scaffolds can be biomolecules such as peptides, proteins, viruses, DNAs, and lipids,244 or inorganic materials such as clay.237
7.1. Assemblies on designer peptides
Polypeptides can be made to assemble themselves into well-defined three-dimensional structures. Polypeptides with desired sequences of hydrophilic/hydrophobic residues, helix-forming residues, cofactor binding residues, etc. can be prepared at will either by solid-phase synthesis or by genetic engineering. The higher-order structures and the properties of polypeptides can therefore be finely tuned. Thus, it seems promising to construct artificial peptides/chromophore assemblies based on peptides for efficient light harvesting and for the incorporation of further functions, including charge separation and catalysis. Small peptides, large peptides, proteins, and viruses have been utilized as structural building blocks.

7.1.1. Porphyrin assemblies on nanostructures from dipeptides. 
In 2003, Gazit et al. discovered that a simple dipeptide, a phenylalanine dimer (NH2–Phe–Phe–COOH; FF), forms nanotubes upon dispersion in water.245 The FF sequence contained in the amyloid β peptides is a key sequence of peptide assembly forming fibrils involved in Alzheimer's disease. Several porphyrin–FF conjugates, both covalent and noncovalent, have been studied to make use of the organized structures formed from the FF assembly as a scaffold for porphyrins for light-harvesting purposes (see 6.3.2.).
Park et al. observed that FF nanotubes serve as a template for the self-assembly of tetra(para-hydroxyphenyl)porphyrin (THPP).246,247 They further constructed a photocatalytic system containing triethanolamine as an electron donor, Pt nanoparticles (nPt) on the surface of the FF/porphyrin nanotubes, [Cp*Rh(bpy)H2O]2+ (Cp* = C5Me5, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine) as an electron mediator, NAD+, α-ketoglutarate, ammonium sulfate, and glutamate dehydrogenase. Light irradiation led to the reduction of NAD+, which ultimately led to the formation of L-glutamate. The turnover frequency of the FF/THPP/nPt system (∼1.7 h−1) was the highest among model reactions including FF/THPP, THPP + nPt, THPP, and FF alone.
Park et al. also investigated the generation of oxygen from the oxidation of water using hydrogel formed from Fmoc-protected FF (Fmoc–FF) and Sn tetrapyridylporphyrin (SnTPyP).248 SnTPyP was chosen for its high oxidation potential (1.1 V vs. NHE), as required for water oxidation (0.82 V vs. NHE). They constructed a system using sodium persulfate (Na2S2O8) as an electron acceptor and IrO2 in addition to Fmoc–FF and SnTPyP. The amount of oxygen generated was higher with the Fmoc–FF/SnTPyP assemblies than with SnTPyP alone, which may be attributed to EET among the porphyrin chromophores in the assembly.
Mann et al. found that a stoichiometric mixture of FF and TSPP produced porous microspheres composed of an interconnected network of peptide–porphyrin nanorods (Fig. 64).249 The nanorods consist of J-aggregates of TSPP, which is manifested by the appearance of the 490 nm J-band. They investigated the photodriven reduction of K2PtCl4 leading to the production of Pt nanoparticles and the reduction of nitrophenol to produce aminophenol in the presence of ascorbic acid as an electron donor.
 Fig. 64  Photochemically active porous microspheres based on FF and TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright (2014) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Optical image. (b) Possible mechanism of the microsphere formation. 
Yan et al. observed the immediate appearance of green aggregates as TSPP was mixed with dilysine (KK) at a pH value of less than 2.250 The resulting assembly by the negatively charged porphyrin and the positively charged dipeptide was in the form of bundled fibers, in which the TSPP molecules form J-aggregates. The aggregates are active in the photooxidation of iodide into triiodide and the photoreduction of K2PtCl4 by ascorbic acid into Pt nanoparticles. TiO2 nanoparticle formation and photochemical hydrogen evolution have also been demonstrated in this system.251 A protected amino acid as simple as Fmoc–K can likewise produce organized assemblies with TSPP, with an urchin-like appearance, and works similarly in the self-mineralization of Pt nanoparticles on the surface and photochemical hydrogen evolution.252


7.1.2. Porphyrin assemblies on coiled coils of peptides. 
Fairman et al. have developed a polypeptide termed Cp3k, of which the sequence is: Ac-IQQLKNQ IKQLLKQ AA IQQLQNQ IQQLLQQ-CONH2.253 In terms of the single-letter amino acid codes, the seven residue sequence (heptad) is for the α-helix formation. The three lysine (K) residues, which are incorporated in the half of the helices, bind to TSPP molecules via electrostatic interactions. The leucine (L) zipper sequence (the 4th L in the heptads) promotes the association of the polypeptides via hydrophobic interactions. These interactions between the porphyrins and the polypeptides and those between the polypeptides themselves combined make a polymeric porphyrin peptide conjugate. A weak electronic interaction is suggested between the porphyrin chromophores from small shifts observed in the absorption bands at pH 7.6. On the other hand, in more acidic conditions, such as pH 3.5, a band appears at 490 nm indicating the formation of J-aggregates.254 Models accounting for these spectral changes have been proposed and are shown in Fig. 65.
 Fig. 65  A supramolecular polymer of noncovalent porphyrin polypeptide conjugates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society. (a) Weak porphyrin–porphyrin interaction under neutral conditions. (b) A J-type interaction at pH 3.5. 
Kuciauskas et al. prepared a 22-residue polypeptide which takes a random-coil conformation in acidic solutions and a partial α-helical conformation in neutral solutions.255 When it takes an α-helical conformation, it is designed to have nine lysine residues aligned on one side of the helix. The peptide binds three TSPP molecules under both conditions via electrostatic interactions involving the positively charged protonated lysine residues. Under acidic conditions, the J-type excitonic coupling is apparent in the sharp J-band at 490 nm, whereas little coupling is seen under neutral conditions. Singlet–singlet annihilation experiments and fluorescence depolarization measurements afford EET times of 9 ps and 279 ps for acidic and neutral conditions, respectively.256 Thus, one can control the structure of the assembly, interporphyrin coupling, and energy transfer kinetics by adjusting the pH for the supramolecular peptide–porphyrin conjugate, as shown in Fig. 66.
 Fig. 66  pH switching of porphyrin assemblies and the EET processes of a porphyrin/peptide assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright (2010) of the American Chemical Society. 


7.1.3. Porphyrin/chlorophyll assemblies by maquettes. 
“Maquettes” are artificial proteins designed for specific purposes, which fold to give certain higher-order structures and binding cofactors. Moser et al. designed protein maquettes which bind Zn porphyrin derivatives, as shown in Fig. 67.257 The design principles of the maquettes are that (i) it has four segments forming α-helices connected by loops; (ii) one side of each α-helix is hydrophobic and the opposite side is hydrophilic so that the four helices assemble to form a bundle with a hydrophobic core and a hydrophilic exterior; and (iii) each α-helix has a histidine residue as a binding site for a Zn porphyrin in the hydrophobic core. Porphyrin and chlorin derivatives with various polarities were tested for the binding and it was found that the pattern and the balance of hydrophobic and hydrophilic substituents is crucial for effective binding. EET was observed for a maquette that binds two different tetrapyrroles.
 Fig. 67  A maquette. The maquette peptides self-organize into a four-bundled structure with binding sites for porphyrins/chlorophylls at specific sites (brown). Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright (2017) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


7.1.4. Porphyrin assemblies on a peptide β-sheet. 
Fry et al. have developed a peptide amphiphile whose structure is denoted as c16–AHL3K3–CO2H, where c16 represents palmitate (A: alanine, H: histidine, L: leucine and K: lysine).258 The three lysine residues are used as a hydrophilic head group, the three leucine residues are used for the β-sheet formation, the histidine residue is used as a coordination site for a Zn porphyrin and the alanine is used as a spacer. The N-terminus is decorated with a C16 hydrocarbon chain. This amphiphile forms nanofibers with a diameter of ∼8 nm, resulting in fibrous mesoscopic structures which can be observed by scanning electron microscopy and atomic force microscopy. Zn protoporphyrin IX can make arrays along the fibers due to coordination with the histidine moieties (Fig. 68). The porphyrin moieties in the array are weakly coupled, as manifested by slight shifts in the absorption bands. Time-resolved fluorescence and absorption measurements together with single-singlet annihilation experiments revealed that excitons can diffuse along the stacks but are trapped by local excimer formation, the energy of which lies below the monomer or the low energy band of the exciton-coupled porphyrins.259 The analysis of the porphyrin occupancies on the peptide fiber showed that the excitons can travel over 60 nm under optimum conditions.
 Fig. 68  Assemblies of Zn protoporphyrin IX and a peptide amphiphile. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society. 
TiO2 nanoparticles were deposited on the nanofibers made of a peptide amphiphile composed of c16–AHL3K3–CO2H or lysine-rich c16–AHL3K9–CO2H, making use of the properties of Ti(IV) bis-ammonium lactato dihydroxy that result in it being converted to TiO2 in the presence of peptides rich in lysine.260 This organic–inorganic hybrid fiber was further decorated with Zn trans-diphenylporphyrin. Irradiation of this hybrid results in charge separation between the Zn porphyrin and TiO2.


7.1.5. Porphyrin assemblies on dendritic peptides. 
Dendrimers are repetitively branched polymers, which are monodispersed discrete macromolecular entities that have a distinct number of branches at specified positions. Since a large number of chromophores can be incorporated into the core, branches, and periphery, it is not surprising that a number of porphyrin containing dendrimers have been prepared with the expectation that they may work as light-harvesting antennas. Because dendrimers themselves are covalent entities, porphyrin dendrimers in general are out of the scope of this review and the discussion herein is limited to studies in which noncovalent assembly is involved.
Mihara et al. prepared polyamideamine (PAMAM)-based dendrimers decorated by α-helix forming polypeptides.261,262 Each peptide includes a histidine residue in the middle as a porphyrin binding site. These dendrimers bind Zn mesoporphyrin to form complexes, which can contain 4, 8, 16, 32, and 64 porphyrin molecules depending on the generation of the PAMAM dendrimer (Fig. 69). The quenching by external quenchers is more effective as the generation of the dendrimer increases, whether the quencher is anionic naphthalene sulfonate or cationic methyl viologen. These results suggest the involvement of energy migration preceding the electron transfer. With triethanolamine as an electron donor and hydrogenase as a catalyst, hydrogen production was also achieved. They found that positively charged peptides are more suited for the production of hydrogen than negatively charged peptides because the positive surface of the dendrimer prevents static association with the positively-charged methyl viologen and hinders undesired back electron transfer.
 Fig. 69  Complex of a PAMAM-peptide dendrimer and Zn mesoporphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright (2000) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

7.2. Porphyrin/chlorophyll assemblies on natural proteins

7.2.1. Additional porphyrin/chlorophyll attachment to LH1 and LH2. 
Lindsey et al. prepared hybrids of a truncated 31mer analogue of the LH1 β-polypeptide of purple bacteria, in which a cysteine residue was incorporated.263 Additional chromophores, such as synthetic bacteriochlorins, can be covalently attached to these peptides through the use of cysteine maleimide chemistry. These polypeptides assemble into dimers in the presence of BChl a, as in the antenna complexes of purple bacteria. In this complex, efficient EET with an efficiency of 90% was attained from the attached bacteriochlorin to BChl a. A wide variety of chromophores with varied absorption bands can be incorporated by this method. Thus, this methodology should be useful in widening the spectral range that light-harvesting antenna can collect.
The protein subunits of the LH2 from purple bacteria have also been used for covalent derivatization by additional chromophores.264 In another approach, just mixing additional chromophores with LH1-like cyclic assemblies also works for the EET from the chromophores to BChl a, provided that the chromophores and the proteins are solubilized in a micellar milieu.265
In yet another interesting approach, Hayashi et al. replaced the intrinsic heme molecules of the hexameric tyrosine-coordinated heme protein with Zn protoporphyrin IX or Zn chlorin e6 molecules and evaluated their function as light-harvesting antenna.266 Among the six empty pockets in the heme, one or six porphyrin (or chlorin) molecules were introduced. Quenching by externally added methyl viologen was more efficient when all of the six pockets were occupied by the porphyrin molecules than when only one porphyrin molecule was present, which suggests that energy migration occurs among the porphyrins (or chlorins) immobilized in the protein.


7.2.2. Porphyrin assemblies on viruses. 
Viruses are attractive scaffolds for assembling small molecules such as porphyrins because of their regular repetition patterns formed from the self-assembly of relatively small proteins.267–269 The M13 bacteriophage, a virus ∼880 nm long and ∼6.5 nm in diameter, is composed of ∼2700 copies of coat proteins symmetrically arranged around a DNA strand. The wild type M13 and genetically modified strains that have additional tryptophan residues can be decorated with cationic trans-bis(N-methylpyridinium-4-yl)diphenylporphyrin (t-H2Pagg) via electrostatic interactions.270 The excitation spectra indicate that EET occurs from the tryptophan residues to the electrostatically attached porphyrins. More controlled decoration by porphyrins has been achieved by Belcher et al. by covalent attachment via the peptide bond formation utilizing the amino groups at the N-terminal and a lysine residue of the coat proteins.271
Belcher et al. have used the genetically engineered M13 virus for the co-assembly of Zn porphyrins as photosensitizers and IrO2 as catalysts to demonstrate photodriven water oxidation.272 They identified an octameric peptide, AGETQQAM, as an IrO2 binding sequence and successfully deposited IrO2 hydrosol clusters using the sequence as a template. A Zn deuteroporphyrin IX derivative was covalently attached via a carbodiimide reaction. The hybrid system is able to perform the light-driven oxidation of water and generation of oxygen.
The tobacco mosaic virus is a rod-shaped virus with a length of 300 nm and a diameter of 18 nm. The structure is formed by the self-assembly of 2130 copies of identical coat proteins helically wrapping around a core RNA strand.269 Endo et al. investigated EET among porphyrins by codecorating free-base and Zn porphyrins onto tobacco mosaic viruses (Fig. 70a).273 The attachment was achieved through a maleimido–thiol coupling reaction. For this purpose, the position of the cysteine residue was changed genetically. The EET time constants from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin were determined to be 160–320 ps. These values agreed with the estimation on the basis of the Förster theory and the intermolecular distances between the porphyrins of 1.7–2.0 nm. This in turn indicated that the porphyrins are attached at the right positions in which they were designed to be.
 Fig. 70  Porphyrin assemblies on viruses. (a) The tobacco mosaic virus decorated with Zn porphyrins (blue) and free-base porphyrins (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright (2007) of Wiley-VCH. (b) Bacteriophage MS2 (gray) decorated with organic door dyes (green) inside and porphyrins (purple) outside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH. 
The bacteriophage MS2 contains 180 copies of proteins arranged in a hollow shell with a diameter of 27 nm. Francis et al. have decorated the inside wall of the protein shell using organic dyes and the exterior using porphyrins (Fig. 70b).274 EET from the organic dyes to the porphyrins across the 2 nm thick protein shell was observed. Reduction of methyl viologen was demonstrated upon illumination in the presence of sacrificial electron donors.

7.3. Porphyrin assemblies on DNA
DNA is a very attractive scaffolds for assembling functional moieties due to a number of advantages: (i) DNA, in a double helix configuration, has a well-defined three-dimensional structure; (ii) automated solid-state synthesis can be applied; (iii) the sequence can be designed and programmed at will if chromophores are appended to the nucleotides; (iv) interconversion between the single strand and the double strand can be easily switched by temperature variation; and (v) recent developments have enabled the construction of three-dimensional objects by molecular precision (e.g. DNA origami). Thus, porphyrins have been assembled using DNA as a scaffold and the EET processes therein have been investigated.275–277
The simplest approach may be in taking advantage of the polyanionic nature of DNA for assembling cationic porphyrins. Tetrakis(N-methylpyridinium-4-yl)porphyrin and its Zn complex were mixed with double stranded poly(dA-dT).278 Both cationic porphyrins were adsorbed onto the DNA template, probably in a statistical manner. The time constant of the EET from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin was found to be 0.56 ns, with an efficiency of 75%.
Stulz et al. prepared nucleotides covalently conjugated with porphyrins and DNA polymers containing nucleotides.279 Examples of the complementary sequences are
5′-CATCGTAGUAUAUAUAUAUCCGTACTC-3′
3′-GTAGCATCAAAAAAGGCATGAG-5′
in which the U in bold and the underlined  indicates the uracil modified with a free-base porphyrin and a Zn porphyrin, respectively, of which the structures are shown in Fig. 71a.280 In the duplex, the free-base porphyrin and the Zn complex are stacked in zipper arrays alternately in a zigzag fashion within the major groove of DNA, as shown in Fig. 71b. Fluorescence spectra indicated that efficient EET occurs from the Zn porphyrin to the free-base porphyrin in the duplex at 20 °C, but not when the DNA is denatured at 80 °C.
 Fig. 71  Zipper array of porphyrins covalently bound to a nucleotide. (a) The chemical structure. (b) A structural model of the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH. 
Another motif of the self-assembly of DNA that has been used to assemble porphyrin/chlorophyll derivatives is the quadruplex. A G-rich oligonucleotide tethering pyropheophorbide a at the 5′-end has been found to assemble into a G-quadruplex, affording a four-chromophore assembly.281 An energy hopping time constant among these chromophores of 630 fs was determined.
7.4. Porphyrin assemblies in lipid membranes
Lipid bilayer membranes offer environments in which many biological transformations take place including the EET and electron transfer in photosynthesis. The membrane interior is hydrophobic and can be used to concentrate hydrophobic substances in the small volume of the membrane interior in aqueous media. It is rather surprising that only a few attempts to use lipid bilayer membranes for the matrix of EET have been reported. We have already seen Kobuke's antenna immobilized in lipid membranes (see 5.1.3.) and Tsuchida's lipid-modified porphyrins (see 6.3.3.).
An attempt to make a light-harvesting antenna by simply dissolving multiple chromophores in the lipid membranes was only recently reported by Lindsey et al. (Fig. 72).282 According to their estimate, an overall concentration of about 1 μM corresponds to more than 10 mM in terms of local concentration in the lipid compartment. As an example, the EET rate in a binary system with a chlorin donor and a chlorin or bacteriochlorin acceptor reached ∼85%.
 Fig. 72  Light-harvesting antenna in a lipid membrane. The green circles and the purple triangles represent energy donors (e.g. chlorin molecules) and energy acceptors (e.g. bacteriochlorin molecules), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society. 
7.5. Porphyrin assemblies on clay
Clay is an inorganic multilayered negatively-charged material which can incorporate positive ions between the layers. Takagi et al. have extensively used a synthetic clay, Sumecton SA, for organizing porphyrins and have investigated the EET between the porphyrins immobilized on the clay.283 Sumecton SA has the composition [(Si7.20Al0.80)(Mg5.97Al0.03)O20(OH)4]−0.77(Na0.49Mg0.14)+0.77. The anionic oxygen sites on the surface of the layers are regularly arranged and are separated by 1.1 nm. The distance between the positively charged nitrogen atoms of the adjacent (cis related) pyridyl groups of meso-tetrapyridiniumylporphyrin is also ∼1.1 nm. Thus, the positively charged porphyrin sites match the negatively charged sites on the surface of the clay. Thanks to this “size-matching effect”, these porphyrins can be immobilized on the surface of the clay in a high density up until the charges on the clay are neutralized, without forming porphyrin aggregates.284 EET occurs among the porphyrins attached on the surface. The combination of meso-tetrakis(N-methyl-4-pyridiniumyl)porphyrin (p-TMPyP) and meso-tetrakis(N-methyl-3-pyridiniumyl)porphyrin (m-TMPyP), randomly coadsorbed on the clay, as shown schematically in Fig. 73, result in very efficient EET from m-TMPyP to p-TMPyP, with efficiencies up to ca. 100%.285 It is interesting to note that the absorption and fluorescence spectra are red-shifted upon adsorption on the clay, owing to the planarization of the meso-substituents. The magnitude of the red-shift is larger for p-TMPyP than for m-TMPyP, making the EET process preferential from the latter to the former.
 Fig. 73  EET on clay. The blue molecules represent m-TMPyP and the red molecules represent p-TMPyP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society. 
8. Towards solar cells with an antenna function
Some attempts have been made to convert collected photons into electricity using antenna assemblies. On the one hand, exciton transport through films of porphyrins has been studied.286–288 No particular structure-directing element is incorporated into the molecular structure and the precise molecular arrangements in the films are not necessarily apparent, but these films might find use in practical devices of present technology. On the other hand, attempts have also been made to apply specifically designed supramolecular assemblies in photon-to-electron conversion devices and solar cells.
8.1. Exciton diffusion through porphyrin films
For applications in solid-state devices, exemplified by solar cells, chromophores may be used in the formation of films deposited on substrate surfaces (e.g. spin-coating, ink-jet printing, etc.). For any device, photoexcitation of the chromophore molecules, in the form of either excitons or charge must travel to reach the interface before deactivating to the ground state. Therefore, long-range exciton migration via an EET process is an important issue. The key parameter, the exciton diffusion length LD is given by (62)where D is the exciton diffusion coefficient and τ is the exciton lifetime.
EET processes were analyzed for spin-coated films of various Zn and free-base porphyrin derivatives and the reported values are listed in Table 1. Generally, the diffusion lengths are more or less around 10 nm. A notable exception is the simple tetraphenylporphyrin (TPP) molecule with a LD value of 0.7 nm.289 The extremely short diffusion length for TPP is attributed to its tendency to form H-aggregates in a film. The lowest exciton state of the H-aggregates is optically forbidden and hence the efficiency of EET by the Förster mechanism is low, which leads to the short diffusion distance. On the other hand, long exciton diffusion lengths can be achieved by porphyrins modified with hydrocarbon chains (e.g. TnBuPP, TCH4PP, etc.). These molecules tend to have a nematic molecular organization. The introduction of heavy atoms decreases the exciton diffusion length due to increased intersystem crossing, for example, see studies on TCM4PP, TBCM3PP, and TCM3IPP.290
Table 1 Exciton diffusion lengths (LD) of porphyrins in spin-coated films




Compounds
Ra
M
Substrates

L
D/nm
Ref.





a 


b PTCDI = perylenetetracarboxyldiimide.





ZnTOPP
4-C8H17
Zn
PTCDIb
7 ± 3

291



Quartz
8 ± 3

291



9 ± 3

292



TPP
H
2H
TiO2
0.7

289



TEPP
4-C2H5
2H
TiO2
7.5

289



TnBuPP
4-C4H9
2H
TiO2
22 ± 3

293



ZnOP
3,5-Di(ethoxymethyl)
Zn
TiO2
15 ± 1

294



ZnBuP
3,5-Di(t-Bu)
Zn
TiO2
3 ± 1

294



TCM4PP
4-CH3OCO
2H
Glass
15 ± 3.2

290



15.4 ± 4.5

295



TBCM3PP
4-CH3OCO (×3), 4-Br (×1)
2H
Glass
9.4 ± 0.6

290



TCM3IPP
4-CH3OCO (×3), 4-I (×1)
2H
Glass
4.4 ± 1.1

290



TCB4PP
4-C4H9OCO
2H
Glass
16.0 ± 1.2

295



TCH4PP
4-C6H13OCO
2H
Glass
21.3 ± 3.4

295



TCEH4PP
4-(2-Ethylhexyl)OCO
2H
Glass
13.8 ± 2.7

295



TCO4PP
4-C8H17
2H
Glass
18.7 ± 4.8

295





8.2. Implementation of antenna functions in solar cells
Kobuke et al. developed a photocurrent generation system incorporating an antenna function using derivatives of their stable dimer motif Zn imidazolylporphyrin (see 5.1.3.).296 The first layer on the gold substrate is a thiol-modified imidazolyl porphyrin (Fig. 74). The porphyrin compound used for the second layer up is a meso–meso linked covalent dimer of the imidazolylporphyrin unit. The porphyrin chains are grown by consecutive dimerization via complementary coordination. An increase in the photocurrent was demonstrated in line with an increase in the absorption, which indicates that an effective EET process is at work that delivers excitons or charges generated away from the substrate surface and delivered to the first layer, where electrons are injected into the gold electrode.
 Fig. 74  Coordination-directed self-assembled porphyrin multilayers grown on Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright (2002) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A further elaborate system is shown in Fig. 75.297 In this photocurrent generation system, the Zn porphyrin chains are covalently reinforced by a ring-closing olefin metathesis reaction using Grubbs' catalyst. Furthermore, electron accepting C60 units were attached to the terminal points of the chains. The increase in the photocurrent in accordance with the increased absorption was again observed, demonstrating the antenna effect.
 Fig. 75  Photocurrent generation system with antenna function. (a) Component porphyrin compounds. (b) Photocurrent through the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright (2005) of Wiley-VCH. 
The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) is one of the next generation solar cells that is being actively researched. In this cell, molecule-based chromophores are used as the sensitizer to inject electrons into the TiO2 electrode. To increase the light collecting capacity, nanoparticles of TiO2 are used to increase the surface area, on which the sensitizer is immobilized. In this configuration, an excited electron in the sensitizer molecule is directly injected into the electrode and hence there is no need for light-harvesting chromophore systems. An alternative approach would be to use molecule-based light-harvesting antenna.298,299 As an advantage of this approach, a planar semiconductor electrode may be used, simplifying the device structure, and a wider range of the solar spectrum may be used through the appropriate combination of antenna chromophores.
Balaban et al. made an attempt to use one of their self-assembled chlorosome model compounds (Fig. 56a) as a sensitizer for DSSCs.300 The wavelength dependent photocurrent spectra, however, indicated that a monomeric porphyrin species is much more efficient than the aggregates for the injection of electrons into the TiO2 electrode. They ascribed the results to the nonoptimized interaction of the aggregates with the semiconductor, combined with the presence of monomers at the semiconductor surface and the energetically uphill exciton transfer from the aggregates to the monomer.
Coutsolelos et al. applied their self-assembling diphenylalanine-modified porphyrins to DSSCs (Fig. 76).301 The first layer component, FF–H2P–COOH, which is a diphenylalanine-modified free-base porphyrin bearing a carboxyl moiety, was used as an anchoring group to adsorb to the surface of TiO2. From the second layer on, the Zn porphyrin, FF–ZnP, is used as the assembly-forming component. The DSSC devices were fabricated employing a solid-state hole-transport layer, which was prepared following a careful protocol so as not to destroy the supramolecular assemblies. The cell performance was significantly improved as compared to standard cells without aggregates, although the efficiency values were very low: 0.19% (FF–H2P–COOH and FF–ZnP) versus 0.11% (FF–H2P–COOH only).
 Fig. 76  A DSSC with antennas made of diphenylalanine-functionalized porphyrins. (a) The molecular structures. (b) A schematic illustration of the antennas on the TiO2 surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 301. Copyright (2017) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Spoerke et al. have demonstrated that MOFs work as a sensitizer in a DSSC configuration (Fig. 77).302 One of the MOFs, classified as a pillared porphyrin framework (PPF-4),303 was drop-casted onto a planar TiO2 substrate to see if a MOF layer enhances the photocurrent. The photon-to-current conversion efficiency increased from 0.0011% in the absence of the MOF to 0.0023% in the presence of the MOF. The low efficiencies are due to the use of planar TiO2 substrates instead of TiO2 nanoparticles, which is common for practical DSSCs. Nevertheless, the substantial increase in the efficiency indicates that MOFs work as sensitizers.
 Fig. 77  A MOF-sensitized DSSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society. 
These proof-of-principle attempts to incorporate an antenna function into working devices is still in its infancy. This research reveals the prospects and challenges ahead.
Conclusions
Photosynthesis supplies the energy that all living things on the earth depend upon. It starts when light meets the molecules of a light-harvesting antenna. Photon energy is absorbed and transformed into excitons. The excitons migrate and are funnelled into a reaction center. The key component is a class of molecules called chlorophylls, which are analogues of porphyrins, but with lower symmetries. The key process is the EET. The basic photophysical properties of porphyrins and chlorophylls and the mechanisms of EET processes have been presented, alongside an overview of natural light-harvesting antennas for three cases, i.e., the chlorosomes and the FMO complex in green sulfur bacteria, the LH2 and LH1 of purple bacteria, and the LHCII and LHCI of cyanobacteria and higher plants. For the latter two cases, X-ray crystal structures and advanced time-resolved spectroscopies have advanced our understanding on the structure–function correlations. It seems ironic that it is the most difficult task to reveal the structure of chlorosome, which consists only of bacteriochlorophyll molecules (with carotenoids and quinones) without an intricate protein matrix.
Artificial discrete supramolecular porphyrin/chlorophyll assemblies within which EET processes were probed were then summarized. Directional interactions, such as coordination interactions and hydrogen bonding are used to assemble molecularly organized structures. Some remarkable multiporphyrin assemblies have been made, which mimic the structure and function of natural light-harvesting antennas. Extended molecular organization is another motif of porphyrin/chlorophyll assemblies. The J-aggregates of porphyrins, particularly those from TSPP, show a significant spectral feature indicating the delocalized nature of the electronic states. It is again difficult to determine the molecular organization in the deceptively simple J-aggregate rods. Various extended porphyrin/chlorophyll assemblies have been prepared either through modification of the chromophore structure or through the employment of scaffolds, such as peptides, proteins, and even viruses. Preliminary attempts have also been made to apply the antenna systems to solar cells.
Remarkable progress has been made over the last few decades in the research on supramolecular artificial light-harvesting systems. Particularly, very efficient energy transfer systems have been achieved. However, artificial antenna systems lag far behind their natural counterparts in some important points. The incorporation of a photoprotection mechanism is rare in artificial light-harvesting systems (carotenoid/chlorophyll coassemblies have been reported recently304). More importantly, conjugation of a light-harvesting antenna system with a reaction center and a catalytic system has been rarely explored.
On the one hand, artificial antenna systems and photosynthetic apparatus are free from the constraints imposed upon biological organisms, which originate from their particular paths of evolution and their own survival. On the other hand, however, the self-replication, growth, and self-repair processes that biological systems undergo are not easy to implement in an artificial setting, which is a common issue for all biomimetic materials, not limited to light-harvesting antenna systems. The application of light-harvesting antennas to solar cells is also at an early stage of proof-of-principle demonstrations. As such, the efficiencies of prototypical solar cells with antenna functions are low. Antenna-incorporated solar cells can only become competitive when their efficiencies surpass the already high efficiencies of state-of-the-art solar cells.
That there is a long way to go before realizing competitive artificial light-harvesting antenna systems and their conjugation with energy-storing or electricity-producing devices means that many important challenges lie ahead. While implementation of elaborate artificial antenna systems into widely used commercial devices in the near future cannot be foreseen, the research along the way will enrich the knowledge of chemistry of molecule-based materials and associated photo/electronic processes, thereby preparing scientists in the field for the next leap towards molecule-based devices and materials, including artificial light-harvesting antenna systems. While it took 3.5 billion years for biological evolution to shape the photosynthetic apparatus of today, in comparison we have spent only a few decades trying, after all.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was partly supported by the Strategic Research Foundation at Private Universities (the MEXT, Japan and College of Science and Technology, Nihon University), the Grant-in-aid “KAKENHI” (JSPS, no. 15K05486), and the Iketani Science and Technology Foundation.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Croce and H. van Amerongen, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2014, 10, 492–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Inoue, T. Shimada, Y. Kou, Y. Nabetani, D. Masui, S. Takagi and H. Tachibana, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 173–179 CAS .
W. F. Watson and R. Livingston, J. Chem. Phys., 1950, 18, 802–809 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Beddard and G. Porter, Nature, 1976, 260, 366–367 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, J. Chen, T. Yu, G. Yang and Y. Li, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 357–363 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kundu and A. Patra, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 712–757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, R. Yan, D. Zhang and T. Fan, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 9870–9885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-Q. Peng, L.-Y. Niu, Y.-Z. Chen, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and Q.-Z. Yang, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 7502–7542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Wurthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847–1870 RSC .

          J.-M. Lehn, Supramolecular Chemistry: Concept and Perspectives, VCH, Weinheim,  1995 Search PubMed .
J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1988, 27, 89–112 CrossRef .
J.-M. Lehn, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1990, 29, 1304–1319 CrossRef .
M. O. Senge, A. A. Ryan, K. A. Letchford, S. A. MacGowan and T. Mielke, Symmetry, 2014, 6, 781–843 CrossRef CAS .

          J. P. Hill, F. D'Souza and K. Ariga, in Supramolecular Chemistry: From Molecules to Nanomaterials, ed. P. Gale and J. Steed, Wiley,  2012, pp. 1713–1730 Search PubMed .
M. Gouterman, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1961, 6, 138–163 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gouterman, J. Chem. Phys., 1959, 30, 1139–1161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gouterman and G. H. Wagnière, J. Mol. Spectrosc., 1963, 11, 108–127 CrossRef CAS .
C. Curutchet and B. Mennucci, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 294–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Szabo and N. S. Ostlund, Modern Quantum Chemistry. Introduction to Advanced Electronic Structure Theory, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .
K. F. Wong, B. Bagchi and P. J. Rossky, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 5752–5763 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Dexter, J. Chem. Phys., 1953, 21, 836–850 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Naturwiss., 1946, 33, 166–175 CrossRef .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 437, 55–75 CrossRef .
T. Förster, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1959, 27, 7–17 RSC .

          J. T. Yardley, Introduction to Molecular Energy Transfer, Academic Press, New York,  1980 Search PubMed .
H. M. McConnell, J. Chem. Phys., 1961, 35, 508–515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Speiser, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 1953–1976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. D. Harcourt, G. D. Scholes and K. P. Ghiggino, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 10521–10525 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, H. R. Rawls and M. A. El-Bayoumi, Pure Appl. Chem., 1965, 11, 371–392 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, L. X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, A. Buchleitner, D. F. Coker, G. S. Engel, R. van Grondelle, A. Ishizaki, D. M. Jonas, J. S. Lundeen, J. K. McCusker, S. Mukamel, J. P. Ogilvie, A. Olaya-Castro, M. A. Ratner, F. C. Spano, K. B. Whaley and X. Zhu, Nature, 2017, 543, 647–656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Brédas, E. H. Sargent and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 35–44 CrossRef PubMed .
A. l. Chenu and G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2015, 66, 69–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Chang, J. Chem. Phys., 1977, 67, 3901–3909 CrossRef CAS .
B. P. Krueger, G. D. Scholes and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 5378–5386 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, M. D. Newton and R. J. Silbey, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 218301 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Sumi, Chem. Rec., 2001, 1, 480–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 252–260 CrossRef CAS .
R. Emerson and W. Arnold, J. Gen. Physiol., 1932, 16, 191–205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Clayton, Science, 1965, 149, 1346–1354 CAS .
T. Mirkovic, E. E. Ostroumov, J. M. Anna, R. van Grondelle, Govindjee and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 249–293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Ruban, J. Exp. Bot., 2015, 66, 7–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Fleming, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, K. Amarnath and J. Zaks, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 27–41 RSC .
A. K. Manske, J. Glaeser, M. M. M. Kuypers and J. Overmann, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2005, 71, 8049–8060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-U. Frigaard, A. G. M. Chew, H. Li, J. A. Maresca and D. A. Bryant, Photosynth. Res., 2003, 78, 93–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Orf and R. E. Blankenship, Photosynth. Res., 2013, 116, 315–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Oostergetel, H. van Amerongen and E. J. Boekema, Photosynth. Res., 2010, 104, 245–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Nielsen, N. V. Kulminskaya, M. Bjerring, J. M. Linnanto, M. Rätsep, M. Ø. Pedersen, P. H. Lambrev, M. Dorogi, G. Garab, K. Thomsen, C. Jegerschöld, N.-U. Frigaard, M. Lindahl and N. C. Nielsen, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Smith, Photosynth. Res., 1994, 41, 23–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Niedzwiedzki and R. E. Blankenship, Photosynth. Res., 2010, 106, 227–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Linke, A. Lauer, T. von Haimberger, A. Zacarias and K. Heyne, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14904–14905 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ganapathy, G. T. Oostergetel, P. K. Wawrzyniak, M. Reus, A. G. M. Chew, F. Buda, E. J. Boekema, D. A. Bryant, A. R. Holzwarth and H. J. M. de Groot, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 8525–8530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganapathy, G. T. Oostergetel, M. Reus, Y. Tsukatani, A. G. M. Chew, F. Buda, D. A. Bryant, A. R. Holzwarth and H. J. M. de Groot, Biochemistry, 2012, 51, 4488–4498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-C. Luo, Y. Khin, S.-J. Huang, Y. Yang, T.-y. Hou, Y.-C. Cheng, H. M. Chen, Y.-Y. Chin, C.-T. Chen, H.-J. Lin, J. K.-H. Tang and J. C. C. Chan, Biochemistry, 2014, 53, 5515–5525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. Oostergetel, M. Reus, A. G. M. Chew, D. A. Bryant, E. J. Boekema and A. R. Holzwarth, FEBS Lett., 2007, 581, 5435–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ø. Pedersen, L. Pham, D. B. Steensgaard and M. Miller, Biochemistry, 2008, 47, 1435–1441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Fenna and B. W. Matthews, Nature, 1975, 258, 573–577 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Matthews, R. E. Fenna, M. C. Bolognesi and M. F. Schmid, J. Mol. Biol., 1979, 131, 259–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-F. Li, W. Zhou, R. E. Blankenship and J. P. Allen, J. Mol. Biol., 1997, 271, 456–471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Camara-Artigas, R. E. Blankenship and J. P. Allen, Photosynth. Res., 2003, 75, 49–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ben-Shem, F. Frolow and N. Nelson, FEBS Lett., 2004, 564, 274–280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. a. Busch, F. Müh, M. E.-A. Madjet and T. Renger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 93–98 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Betti, R. E. Blankenship, L. V. Natarajan, L. C. Dickinson and R. C. Fuller, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1982, 680, 194–201 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. V. Dorssen and J. Amesz, Photosynth. Res., 1988, 15, 177–189 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Vasmel, R. J. van Dorssen, G. J. de Vos and J. Amesz, Photosynth. Res., 1986, 7, 281–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jun, C. Yang, M. Isaji, H. Tamiaki, J. Kim and H. Ihee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1386–1392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mančal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Panitchayangkoon, D. Hayes, K. A. Fransted, J. R. Caram, E. Harel, J. Wen, R. E. Blankenship and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12766–12770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dostál, J. Pšenčík and D. Zigmantas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 8, 705–711 Search PubMed .
R. J. van Dorssen, P. D. Gerola, J. M. Olson and J. Amesz, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1986, 848, 77–82 CrossRef CAS .
N.-U. Frigaard and K. Matsuura, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1999, 1412, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
N.-U. Frigaard, S. Takaichi, M. Hirota, K. Shimada and K. Matsuura, Arch. Microbiol., 1997, 167, 343–349 CrossRef CAS .
J. Alster, T. Polívka, J. B. Arellano, P. Chábera, F. Vácha and J. Pšenčík, Chem. Phys., 2010, 373, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, H. Li, J. A. Maresca, D. A. Bryant and S. Savikhin, Biophys. J., 2007, 93, 192–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Arellano, T. B. Melø, C. M. Borrego and K. R. Naqvi, Photochem. Photobiol., 2002, 76, 373–380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schuring and J. N. Sturgis, Science, 2005, 309, 484–487 CrossRef PubMed .
G. McDermott, S. M. Prince, A. A. Freer, A. M. Hawthornthwaite-Lawless, M. Z. Papiz, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, Nature, 1995, 374, 517–521 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Papiz, S. M. Prince, T. Howard, R. J. Cogdell and N. W. Isaacs, J. Mol. Biol., 2003, 326, 1523–1538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Koepke, X. Hu, C. Muenke, K. Schulten and H. Michel, Structure, 1996, 4, 581–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Roszak, T. D. Howard, J. Southall, A. T. Gardiner, C. J. Law, N. W. Isaacs and R. J. Cogdell, Science, 2003, 302, 1969–1972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niwa, L.-J. Yu, K. Takeda, Y. Hirano, T. Kawakami, Z.-Y. Wang-Otomo and K. Miki, Nature, 2014, 508, 228–232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Cogdell and J. P. Thornber, FEBS Lett., 1980, 122, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. van Oijen, M. Ketelaars, J. Köhler, T. J. Aartsma and J. Schmidt, Science, 1999, 285, 400–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jimenez, S. N. Dikshit, S. E. Bradforth and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6825–6834 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pullerits, M. Chachisvilis and V. Sundström, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 10787–10792 CrossRef CAS .
R. Monshouwer, M. Abrahamsson, F. van Mourik and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7241–7248 CrossRef CAS .
V. Novoderezhkin, R. Monshouwer and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 10540–10548 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukai, S. Abe and H. Sumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6096–6102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jang, M. D. Newton and R. J. Silbey, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6807–6814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1854–1868 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, L.-J. Yu, R. Hendrikx, Z.-Y. Wang-Otomo and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 2751–2756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Fleming and R. van Grondelle, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 1997, 7, 738–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. J. Krüger and R. van Grondelle, Phys. B, 2016, 480, 7–13 CrossRef .
S. Aronoff, Chem. Rev., 1950, 47, 175–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Rhee, E. P. Morris, J. Barber and W. Kühlbrandt, Nature, 1998, 396, 283–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hankamer, E. P. Morris and J. Barber, Nat. Struct. Biol., 1999, 6, 560–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kamiya and J.-R. Shen, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 98–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guskov, J. Kern, A. Gabdulkhakov, M. Broser, A. Zouni and W. Saenger, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 2009, 16, 334–342 CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J.-R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suga, F. Akita, K. Hirata, G. Ueno, H. Murakami, Y. Nakajima, T. Shimizu, K. Yamashita, M. Yamamoto, H. Ago and J.-R. Shen, Nature, 2015, 517, 99–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kühlbrandt, D. N. Wang and Y. Fujiyoshi, Nature, 1994, 367, 614–621 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Standfuss, A. C. T. van Scheltinga, M. Lamborghini and W. Kühlbrandt, EMBO J., 2005, 24, 919–928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Pan, M. Li, T. Wan, L. Wang, C. Jia, Z. Hou, X. Zhao, J. Zhang and W. Chang, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 2011, 18, 309–316 CAS .
X. Pan, Z. Liu, M. Li and W. Chang, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2013, 23, 515–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nield and J. Barber, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2006, 1757, 353–361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Caffarri, R. Kouřil, S. Kereïche, E. J. Boekema and R. Croce, EMBO J., 2009, 28, 3052–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kouřil, G. T. Oostergetel and E. J. Boekema, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2011, 1807, 368–374 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Drop, M. Webber-Birungi, S. K. N. Yadav, A. Filipowicz-Szymanska, F. Fusetti, E. J. Boekema and R. Croce, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2014, 1837, 63–72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. P. Duffy, L. Valkunas and A. V. Ruban, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18752–18770 RSC .
A. Ben-Shem, F. Frolow and N. Nelson, Nature, 2003, 426, 630–635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amunts, O. Drory and N. Nelson, Nature, 2007, 447, 58–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Amunts, H. Toporik, A. Borovikova and N. Nelson, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 3478–3484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qin, M. Suga, T. Kuang and J.-R. Shen, Science, 2015, 348, 989–995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Novoderezhkin, A. Marin and R. van Grondelle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17093–17103 RSC .
E. Wientjes, H. van Amerongen and R. Croce, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 11200–11208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. G. Peterman, R. Monshouwer, I. H. M. van Stokkum, R. van Grondelle and H. van Amerongen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 264, 279–284 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Pascal, Z. Liu, K. Broess, B. van Oort, H. van Amerongen, C. Wang, P. Horton, B. Robert, W. Chang and A. Ruban, Nature, 2005, 436, 134–137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Ruban, R. Berera, C. Ilioaia, I. H. M. van Stokkum, J. T. M. Kennis, A. A. Pascal, H. van Amerongen, B. Robert, P. Horton and R. van Grondelle, Nature, 2007, 450, 575–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Miloslavina, A. Wehner, P. H. Lambrev, E. Wientjes, M. Reus, G. Garab, R. Croce and A. R. Holzwarth, FEBS Lett., 2008, 582, 3625–3631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wahadoszamen, R. Berera, A. M. Ara, E. Romero and R. van Grondelle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 759–766 RSC .
H. A. Frank, A. Cua, V. Chynwat, A. Young, D. Gosztola and M. R. Wasielewski, Photosynth. Res., 1994, 41, 389–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Staleva, J. Komenda, M. K. Shukla, V. Šlouf, R. Kaňa, T. Polívka and R. Sobotka, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2015, 11, 287–292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. G. Peterman, F. M. Dukker, R. van Grondelle and H. van Amerongen, Biophys. J., 1995, 69, 2670–2678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Otsuki, Trends Phys. Chem., 2001, 8, 61–72 CAS .
S. Durot, J. Taesch and V. Heitz, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 8542–8578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. d. l. Torre, G. Bottari, M. Sekita, A. Hausmann, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8049–8105 RSC .
M. K. Panda, K. Ladomenou and A. G. Coutsolelos, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2601–2627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, M.-C. Yoon, H. Yoo, P. Kim and D. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4808–4826 RSC .
A. V. Chernook, A. M. Shulga, E. I. Zenkevich, U. Rempel and C. von Borczyskowski, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 1918–1926 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Chernook, U. Rempel, C. von Borczyskowski, A. M. Shulga and E. I. Zenkevich, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 254, 229–241 CrossRef CAS .
L. Flamigni, B. Ventura, A. I. Oliva and P. Ballester, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 4214–4224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Kelley, S. J. Lee, T. M. Wilson, Y. Nakamura, D. M. Tiede, A. Osuka, J. T. Hupp and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4277–4284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Prodi, C. Chiorboli, F. Scandola, E. Iengo and E. Alessio, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 1514–1519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Haycock, A. Yartsev, U. Michelsen, V. Sundström and C. A. Hunter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3616–3619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ikeda, N. Aratani and A. Osuka, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4317–4319 RSC .
L. Flamigni, A. M. Talarico, F. Barigelletti and M. R. Johnston, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2002, 1, 190–197 CAS .
M. Beyler, L. Flamigni, V. Heitz, J.-P. Sauvage and B. Ventura, Photochem. Photobiol., 2014, 90, 275–286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Iengo, E. Zangrando, E. Alessio, J.-C. Chambron, V. Heitz, L. Flamigni and J.-P. Sauvage, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 5879–5887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Beyler, V. Heitz, J.-P. Sauvage, B. Ventura, L. Flamigni and K. Rissanen, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 8263–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2007, 5, 1679–1691 CAS .
R. Takahashi and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 2372–2373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobuke and H. Miyaji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1994, 116, 4111–4112 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ikeda, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Org. Lett., 2003, 5, 4935–4938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-W. Hwang, M. Park, T. K. Ahn, Z. S. Yoon, D. M. Ko, D. Kim, F. Ito, Y. Ishibashi, S. R. Khan, Y. Nagasawa, H. Miyasaka, C. Ikeda, R. Takahashi, K. Ogawa, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3753–3761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuramochi, A. Satake and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8668–8669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuramochi, A. Satake, M. Itou, K. Ogawa, Y. Araki, O. Ito and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 2827–2841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuramochi, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, A. Satake, Y. Araki, K. Ogawa, O. Ito and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2317–2327 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nagata, Y. Kuramochi and Y. Kobuke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Osuka and H. Shimidzu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1997, 36, 135–137 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and D. Kim, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2012, 370, 3802–3818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Osuka, Chem. Rec., 2015, 15, 143–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tsuda, T. Nakamura, S. Sakamoto, K. Yamaguchi and A. Osuka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2817–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-W. Hwang, T. Kamada, T. K. Ahn, D. M. Ko, T. Nakamura, A. Tsuda, A. Osuka and D. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 16187–16198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kim, J. M. Lim, M.-C. Yoon, J. Aimi, T. Aida, A. Tsuda and D. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 9157–9164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-W. Hwang, Z. S. Yoon, J. Kim, T. Kamada, T. K. Ahn, N. Aratani, A. Osuka and D. Kim, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 178, 130–139 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kamada, N. Aratani, T. Ikeda, N. Shibata, Y. Higuchi, A. Wakamiya, S. Yamaguchi, K. S. Kim, Z. S. Yoon, D. Kim and A. Osuka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7670–7678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Maeda, P. Kim, S. Cho, J. K. Park, J. M. Lim, D. Kim, J. Vura-Weis, M. R. Wasielewski, H. Shinokubo and A. Osuka, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 5052–5061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Yatskou, R. B. M. Koehorst, H. Donker and T. J. Schaafsma, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 11425–11431 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Yatskou, R. B. M. Koehorst, A. van Hoek, H. Donker, T. J. Schaafsma, B. Gobets, I. van Stokkum and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 11432–11440 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Jensen, R. F. Kelley, S. Joong Lee, M. R. Wasielewski, J. T. Hupp and D. M. Tiede, Chem. Commun., 2008, 1886–1888 RSC .
R. F. Kelley, R. H. Goldsmith and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6384–6385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Gunderson and M. R. Wasielewski, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 556, 303–307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shinozaki, I. Yoshikawa, K. Araki, K. Sugawa and J. Otsuki, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 9155–9157 RSC .
Y. Shinozaki, I. Yoshikawa, K. Araki, K. Ohara, K. Yamaguchi, S.-i. Kawano, K. Tanaka, Y. Araki, T. Wada and J. Otsuki, Chem. Lett., 2014, 43, 862–864 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shinozaki, T. Tsubomura, K. Sugawa and J. Otsuki, Tetrahedron Lett., 2016, 57, 48–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shinozaki, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi, K. Sugawa and J. Otsuki, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1165–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shinozaki, G. Richards, K. Ogawa, A. Yamano, K. Ohara, K. Yamaguchi, S.-i. Kawano, K. Tanaka, Y. Araki, T. Wada and J. Otsuki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5262–5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-P. Wang, Y.-F. Shen, B.-Y. Zhu, J. Wu and S. Li, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 10205–10216 RSC .
M. Hoffmann, J. Kärnbratt, M.-H. Chang, L. M. Herz, B. Albinsson and H. L. Anderson, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4993–4996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambroise, J. Li, L. Yu and J. S. Lindsey, Org. Lett., 2000, 2, 2563–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-e. Song, C. Kirmaier, J. K. Schwartz, E. Hindin, L. Yu, D. F. Bocian, J. S. Lindsey and D. Holten, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 19121–19130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Parkinson, C. E. I. Knappke, N. Kamonsutthipaijit, K. Sirithip, J. D. Matichak, H. L. Anderson and L. M. Herz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8217–8220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Parkinson, N. Kamonsutthipaijit, H. L. Anderson and L. M. Herz, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5933–5940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Rubtsov, Y. Kobuke, H. Miyaji and K. Yoshihara, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 308, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Splan, M. H. Keefe, A. M. Massari, K. A. Walters and J. T. Hupp, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 619–621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdelhameed, P.-L. Karsenti, A. Langlois, J.-F. Lefebvre, S. Richeter, R. Ruppert and P. D. Harvey, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 12988–13001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Abdelhameed, A. Langlois, P.-L. Karsenti, S. Richeter, R. Ruppert and P. D. Harvey, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14609–14612 RSC .
H. Dekkiche, A. Buisson, A. Langlois, P.-L. Karsenti, L. Ruhlmann, R. Ruppert and P. Harvey, Chem.–Eur. J., 2016, 22, 10484–10493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dekkiche, A. Buisson, A. Langlois, P.-L. Karsenti, L. Ruhlmann, P. D. Harvey and R. Ruppert, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 10329–10336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Harriman, D. J. Magda and J. L. Sessler, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1991, 345–348 RSC .
A. Harriman, D. J. Magda and J. L. Sessler, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 1530–1532 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Sessler, B. Wang and A. Harriman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 704–714 CrossRef CAS .
J. Otsuki, K. Iwasaki, Y. Nakano, M. Itou, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 3461–3466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Kirby, J. A. Roberts and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 9230–9236 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Hsiao, B. P. Krueger, R. W. Wagner, T. E. Johnson, J. K. Delaney, D. C. Mauzerall, G. R. Fleming, J. S. Lindsey, D. F. Bocian and R. J. Donohoe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 11181–11193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Osuka, N. Tanabe, S. Kawabata, I. Yamazaki and Y. Nishimural, J. Org. Chem., 1995, 60, 7177–7185 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Strachan, S. Gentemann, J. Seth, W. A. Kalsbeck, J. S. Lindsey, D. Holten and D. F. Bocian, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 11191–11201 CrossRef CAS .
H.-H. G. Tsai and M. C. Simpson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 353, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Otsuki, Y. Kanazawa, A. Kaito, D.-M. S. Islam, Y. Araki and O. Ito, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 3776–3784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Otsuki, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 1069–1081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Otsuki, Y. Kato, T. Sasahara, K. Iwasaki and A. Yasuda, Chem. Lett., 2005, 34, 1684–1685 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuroda, K. Sugou and K. Sasaki, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 7833–7834 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sugou, K. Sasaki, K. Kitajima, T. Iwaki and Y. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 1182–1183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sasaki, K. Sugou, K. Miyamoto, J.-i. Hirai, S. Tsubouchi, H. Miyasaka, A. Itaya and Y. Kuroda, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2, 2852–2860 CAS .
S. Sengupta and F. Würthner, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2498–2512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Würthner, T. E. Kaiser and C. R. Saha-Möller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3376–3410 CrossRef PubMed .
E. B. Fleischer, J. M. Palmer, T. S. Srivastava and A. Chatterjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1971, 93, 3162–3167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Micali, A. Romeo, R. Lauceri, R. Purrello, F. Mallamace and L. M. Scolaro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 9416–9420 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Schwab, D. E. Smith, C. S. Rich, E. R. Young, W. F. Smith and J. C. d. Paula, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 2003, 11339–11345 CrossRef .
S. M. Vlaming, R. Augulis, M. C. A. Stuart, J. Knoester and P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 2273–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Short, J. A. Berriman, C. Kübel, Z. El-Hachemi, J.-V. Naubron and T. S. Balaban, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 3209–3214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. El-Hachemi, C. Escudero, F. Acosta-Reyes, M. T. Casas, V. Altoe, S. Aloni, G. O. A. Sorrenti, J. Crusats, J. L. Campos and J. M. Ribó, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3337–3346 RSC .
J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 587–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Friesen, K. R. A. Nishida, J. L. McHale and U. Mazur, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1709–1718 CAS .
C. W. Leishman and J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28167–28181 CAS .
Y. Wan, A. Stradomska, J. Knoester and L. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 7287–7293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 1992, 15, 355–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tamiaki, T. Miyatake, R. Tanikaga, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1996, 35, 772–774 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyatake, H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Photochem. Photobiol., 1999, 69, 448–456 CrossRef CAS .
T. Miyatake, H. Tamiaki, A. R. Holzwarth and K. Schaffner, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1999, 82, 797–810 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Prokhorenko, A. R. Holzwarth, M. G. Müller, K. Schaffner, T. Miyatake and H. Tamiaki, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5761–5768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Katterle, V. I. Prokhorenko, A. R. Holzwarth and A. Jesorka, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 447, 284–288 CrossRef CAS .
V. Huber, M. Katterle, M. Lysetska and F. Würthner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3147–3151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Röger, M. G. Müller, M. Lysetska, Y. Miloslavina, A. R. Holzwarth and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6542–6543 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Röger, Y. Miloslavina, D. Brunner, A. R. Holzwarth and F. Würthner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5929–5939 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Collins, J. A. Timlin, S. M. Anthony and G. A. Montaño, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15056–15063 RSC .
G. S. Orf, A. M. Collins, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, M. Tank, V. Thiel, A. Kell, D. A. Bryant, G. A. Montaño and R. E. Blankenship, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 6427–6438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Numata, D. Kinoshita, N. Taniguchi, H. Tamiaki and A. Ohta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1844–1848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Balaban, M. Linke-Schaetzel, A. D. Bhise, N. Vanthuyne and C. Roussel, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2004, 3919–3930 CrossRef CAS .
T. S. Balaban, M. Linke-Schaetzel, A. D. Bhise, N. Vanthuyne, C. Roussel, C. E. Anson, G. Buth, A. Eichhöfer, K. Foster, G. Garab, H. Gliemann, R. Goddard, T. Javorfi, A. K. Powell, H. Rösner and T. Schimmel, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 2267–2275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jochum, C. M. Reddy, A. Eichhöfer, G. Buth, J. Szmytkowski, H. Kalt, D. Moss and T. S. Balaban, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 12736–12741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Szmytkowski, J. Conradt, H. Kuhn, C. M. Reddy, M. C. Balaban, T. S. Balaban and H. Kalt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8832–8839 CAS .
Q. Zou, K. Liu, M. Abbas and X. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1031–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jintoku, T. Sagawa, K. Miyamoto, M. Takafuji and H. Ihara, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7208–7210 RSC .
D. Kim, J. Heo, S. Ham, H. Yoo, C.-H. Lee, H. Yoon, D. Ryu, D. Kim and W.-D. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2405–2407 RSC .
K. Tao, B. Xue, S. Frere, I. Slutsky, Y. Cao, W. Wang and E. Gazit, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4454–4460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Komatsu, M. Moritake and E. Tsuchida, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 4626–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-D. Jang, C.-H. Lee, M.-S. Choi and M. Osada, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2009, 13, 787–793 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Jeong, M. Son, H. Yoon, P. Kim, D.-H. Lee, D. Kim and W.-D. Jang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6925–6928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, Y.-H. Jeong, J.-H. Kim, I. Kim, E. Lee and W.-D. Jang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12394–12399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Wang, Z. Hu, G. Wang and K. Uvdal, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 284, 206–235 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
K. V. Rao, A. Jain and S. J. George, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3055–3064 RSC .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
D. E. Williams and N. B. Shustova, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 15474–15479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo and B. Chen, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 14574–14583 RSC .
H.-J. Son, S. Jin, S. Patwardhan, S. J. Wezenberg, N. C. Jeong, M. So, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, G. C. Schatz, R. Q. Snurr, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 862–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, H.-J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, L. Ma, A. B. F. Martinson, M. R. Wasielewski, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30863–30870 CAS .
C. M. Spillmann and I. L. Medintz, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2015, 23, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
M. Reches and E. Gazit, Science, 2003, 300, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. H. Kim, J. S. Lee and C. B. Park, Small, 2015, 11, 3623–3640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, M. Lee, J. S. Lee and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 517–520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, D. H. Nam, Y. W. Lee, Y. S. Nam and C. B. Park, Small, 2014, 10, 1272–1277 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zou, L. Zhang, X. Yan, A. Wang, G. Ma, J. Li, H. Möhwald and S. Mann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2366–2370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, R. Xing, C. Chen, G. Shen, L. Yan, Q. Zou, G. Ma, H. Möhwald and X. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 500–505 CAS .
K. Liu, R. Xing, Y. Li, Q. Zou, H. Möhwald and X. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12503–12507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, M. Abass, Q. Zou and X. Yan, Green Energy Environ., 2017, 2, 58–63 CrossRef .
B. Kokona, A. M. Kim, R. C. Roden, J. P. Daniels, B. J. Pepe-Mooney, B. C. Kovaric, J. C. de Paula, K. A. Johnson and R. Fairman, Biomacromolecules, 2009, 10, 1454–1459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Pepe-Mooney, B. Kokona and R. Fairman, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 4196–4203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuciauskas and G. A. Caputo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 14439–14447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kuciauskas, J. Kiskis, G. A. Caputo and V. Gulbinas, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 16029–16035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kodali, J. A. Mancini, L. A. Solomon, T. V. Episova, N. Roach, C. J. Hobbs, P. Wagner, O. A. Mass, K. Aravindu, J. E. Barnsley, K. C. Gordon, D. L. Officer, P. L. Dutton and C. C. Moser, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 316–324 RSC .
H. C. Fry, J. M. Garcia, M. J. Medina, U. M. Ricoy, D. J. Gosztola, M. P. Nikiforov, L. C. Palmer and S. I. Stupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14646–14649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Solomon, M. E. Sykes, Y. A. Wu, R. D. Schaller, G. P. Wiederrecht and H. C. Fry, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9112–9118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Fry, Y. Liu, N. M. Dimitrijevic and T. Rajh, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4606 CAS .
M. Sakamoto, A. Ueno and H. Mihara, Chem. Commun., 2000, 18, 1741–1742 RSC .
M. Sakamoto, A. Ueno and H. Mihara, Chem.–Eur. J., 2001, 7, 2449–2458 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Springer, P. S. Parkes-Loach, K. R. Reddy, M. Krayer, J. Jiao, G. M. Lee, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, M. A. Harris, C. Kirmaier, D. F. Bocian, J. S. Lindsey, D. Holten and P. A. Loach, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4589–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoneda, T. Noji, T. Katayama, N. Mizutani, D. Komori, M. Nango, H. Miyasaka, S. Itoh, Y. Nagasawa and T. Dewa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13121–13129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Harris, T. Sahin, J. Jiang, P. Vairaprakash, P. S. Parkes-Loach, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, C. Kirmaier, P. A. Loach, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, Photochem. Photobiol., 2014, 90, 1264–1276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Oohora, T. Mashima, K. Ohkubo, S. Fukuzumi and T. Hayashi, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11138–11140 RSC .
K. Mohan and G. A. Weiss, ACS Chem. Biol., 2016, 11, 1167–1179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Wen and N. F. Steinmetz, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4074–4126 RSC .
D. Vilona, R. D. Lorenzo, M. Carraro, G. Licini, L. Trainotti and M. Bonchio, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 6718–6730 RSC .
L. M. Scolaro, M. A. Castriciano, A. Romeo, N. Micali, N. Angelini, C. L. Passo and F. Felici, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7446–7447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Nam, T. Shin, H. Park, A. P. Magyar, K. Choi, G. Fantner, K. A. Nelson and A. M. Belcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 1462–1463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Nam, A. P. Magyar, D. Lee, J.-W. Kim, D. S. Yun, H. Park, T. S. Pollom Jr, D. A. Weitz and A. M. Belcher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 340–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Endo, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 8660–8666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Stephanopoulos, Z. M. Carrico and M. B. Francis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9498–9502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Stulz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 823–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ensslen and H.-A. Wagenknecht, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 2724–2733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Teo and E. T. Kool, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4221–4245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D'Souza, L. M. Rogers, D.-M. S. Islam, Y. Araki, O. Ito and T. Wada, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 460–461 CrossRef .
L.-A. Fendt, I. Bouamaied, S. Thöni, N. Amiot and E. Stulz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15319–15329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nguyen, A. Brewer and E. Stulz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1974–1977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, H. A. Frank and A. D. Hamilton, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 544–546 RSC .
T. Sahin, M. A. Harris, P. Vairaprakash, D. M. Niedzwiedzki, V. Subramanian, A. P. Shreve, D. F. Bocian, D. Holten and J. S. Lindsey, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 10231–10243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ishida, Pure Appl. Chem., 2015, 87, 3–15 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takagi, T. Shimada, T. Yui and H. Inoue, Chem. Lett., 2001, 30, 128–129 CrossRef .
Y. Ishida, T. Shimada, D. Masui, H. Tachibana, H. Inoue and S. Takagi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14280–14286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Hedley, A. Ruseckas and I. D. W. Samuel, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 796–837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. V. Mikhnenko, P. W. M. Blom and T.-Q. Nguyen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1867–1888 Search PubMed .
S. M. Menke and R. J. Holmes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 499–512 CAS .
A. Huijser, T. J. Savenije, J. E. Kroeze and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20166–20173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Ortiz, G. S. Collier, D. M. Marin, J. A. Kassel, R. J. Ivins, N. G. Grubich and M. G. Walter, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1243–1249 RSC .
H. R. Kerp, H. Donker, R. B. M. Koehorst, T. J. Schaafsma and E. E. van Faassen, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 298, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
H. Donker, A. van Hoek, W. van Schaik, R. B. M. Koehorst, M. M. Yatskou and T. J. Schaafsma, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17038–17046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Huijser, T. J. Savenije, S. C. J. Meskers, M. J. W. Vermeulen and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 12496–12500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Huijser, B. M. J. M. Suijkerbuijk, R. J. M. K. Gebbink, T. J. Savenije and L. D. A. Siebbeles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2485–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaushal, A. L. Ortiz, J. A. Kassel, N. Hall, T. D. Lee, G. Singh and M. G. Walter, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 5602–5609 RSC .
A. Nomoto and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1104–1105 RSC .
M. Morisue, S. Yamatsu, N. Haruta and Y. Kobuke, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 5563–5574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Odobel, Y. Pellegrin and J. Warnan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2041–2052 CAS .
S. Verma and H. N. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1877–1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Huijser, P. L. Marek, T. J. Savenije, L. D. A. Siebbeles, T. Scherer, R. Hauschild, J. Szmytkowski, H. Kalt, H. Hahn and T. S. Balaban, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11726–11733 CAS .
G. Charalambidis, K. Karikis, E. Georgilis, B. L. M'Sabah, Y. Pellegrin, A. Planchat, B. Lucas, A. Mitraki, J. Bouclé, F. Odobel and A. G. Coutsolelos, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 387–395 CAS .
E. D. Spoerke, L. J. Small, M. E. Foster, J. Wheeler, A. M. Ullman, V. Stavila, M. Rodriguez and M. D. Allendorf, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4816–4824 CAS .
E.-Y. Choi, P. M. Barron, R. W. Novotny, H.-T. So, C. Hu and W. Choe, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 426–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Guo, T. Zuo, J. Hua and G. Diao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
J. Otsuki	Prof. Joe Otsuki earned a Ph.D. in chemistry from the University of Tokyo in 1991. He then worked as a research associate at the Institute of Industrial Science, University of Tokyo until 1999. In 1993, he worked as a postdoctoral research fellow at Université Louis Pasteur (presently, Université de Strasbourg) in the group of Jean-Marie Lehn. He then moved to the College of Science and Technology, Nihon University, where he currently works as a professor. His research focuses on photo/electroactive (supra)molecular devices and materials. He is one of those guys who dreams of realizing artificial photosynthesis. More information at http://www.chem.cst.nihon-u.ac.jp/%7Eotsuki/otsuki.html.

 	Fig. 1  The topics covered in this review. Light-harvesting antenna composed of porphyrins/chlorophylls, which are organized via noncovalent interactions, collect solar radiation energy via EET processes to deliver it to a reaction center for chemical energy storage or to an electrode for electrical power generation.	 

 	Fig. 2  The structures of porphine, chlorin and bacteriochlorin.	 

 	Fig. 3  The frontier molecular orbitals of porphyrins and the electronic transitions between the orbitals. The labels used are those devised by Gouterman.18	 
ψ± = γ1ψ1 ± γ2ψ2	(1)
μx± = 〈ψg|ex|ψ±〉
= γ1〈ψg|ex|ψ1〉 ± γ2〈ψg|ex|ψ2〉	(2)
	(3)
μx+ = 2γ1〈ψg|ex|ψ1〉 for E+ = H11 + |H12|	(4)
μx− = 0 for E− = H11 − |H12|	(5)

 	Fig. 4  Absorption spectra of porphyrin, chlorin, and bacteriochlorin. Reprinted from ref. 16.	 
D* + A → D + A*	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
Hif1 = 〈Ψi|Ĥ1|Ψf〉	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
〈ab||cd〉 = 〈ab|cd〉 − 〈ab|dc〉	(16)
	(17)
Hif1 = 2(ra|a′r′) − (rr′|a′a)	(18)

 		 

 		 
	(19)
	(20)

 	Fig. 5  Singlet-to-singlet energy transfer and triplet-to-triplet energy transfer.	 
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
Hif1 = −(rr′|a′a)	(29)
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)
	(33)
κ = ntrD·ntrA − 3(nR·ntrD)(nR·ntrA) = sinθDsinθAcosϕDA − 2cosθDcosθA	(34)

 	Fig. 6  Parameters of a dipole–dipole interaction.	 
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)

 	Fig. 7  Energy diagram for the superexchange mechanism in a case in which D and A are bridged by n identical units bi.	 
	(40)

 	Fig. 8  Direct and through-configuration energy transfer.	 
|A〉 → |A*〉; |B〉 → |B*〉	(41)
	(42)
	(43)
	(44)
Absorption ∝ |μtrψ,±|2 = |μtrA|2(1 ± cosθ)	(45)

 	Fig. 9  Interaction of transition dipole moments and allowed transitions. (a) J-Aggregate. (b) H-Aggregate.	 
|ψg〉 = |ABCD…〉	(46)
|ψ*〉 = c1|A*BCD…〉 + c2|AB*CD…〉 + c3|ABC*D…〉 + c4|ABCD*…〉 + …	(47)

 	Fig. 10  Two limiting cases of energy transfer. (a) Incoherent hopping in the limit of weak interchromophore coupling. (b) Coherent relaxation in the limit of strong interchromophore coupling.	 

 	Fig. 11  Approximations to the coulombic interactions with increasing accuracy. The blue and red dots represent atoms and the connected polygons represent the chromophore molecules. (a) The point transition dipole approximation (Förster theory). (b) The transition monopole approximation. (c) The transition density cube approximation.	 

 	Fig. 12  Multichromophoric donors and acceptors. Each polygon represents a chromophore molecule. The center-to-center distances RDA and DDiAj represent the multichromophoric assemblies and individual donor and acceptor molecules, respectively.	 
	(48)
	(49)
	(50)
	(51)
	(52)

 		 
	(53)
	(54)
	(55)
Ĥ = ĤS + ĤB + ĤSB	(56)
	(57)
	(58)

 	Fig. 13  Antenna–reaction center complexes of green sulfur bacteria. The chlorosome which is enclosed in a single-layer membrane is attached to the cytoplasmic side of the cytoplasmic membrane via the FMO complexes. Reprinted from ref. 50.	 

 	Fig. 14  Chemical structures of BChl c, d, e, and a.51	 

 	Fig. 15  Selected models of the molecular level association of bacteriochlorophyll molecules in chlorosomes. (a) The syn–anti model: syn (OH coordination to Mg from the same face as the propionate residue) and anti (OH coordination to Mg from the face opposite to the propionate residue).55 (b) The dimer-based model.56	 

 	Fig. 16  Structure of the complexes of CsmA and BChl a (PDB ID: 5LCB).50	 

 	Fig. 17  FMO proteins. (a) FMO protein trimer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright (1997) of Academic Press. (b) Eight BChl a molecules in the monomer unit of the FMO protein. Reprinted with permission from ref. 64. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Energy flow dynamics through the photosynthetic apparatus of green sulfur bacterium Chlorobium tepidum at 77 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright (2016) of Springer Nature.	 
3BChl + Car → BChl + 3Car	(59)
3BChl + 3O2 → BChl + 1O2	(60)
1O2 + Car → 3O2 + 3Car	(61)

 	Fig. 19  Photosynthetic apparatus of purple bacteria. (a) Simplified overall structure and processes. The orange arrows indicate energy transfer and the blue arrows indicate electron transfer. (b) Atomic force microscopy images of the LH2 and RC–LH1 complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright (2005) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 20  BChl a molecules and carotenoids in LH2: BChl a molecules of B850 (red and green), BChl a molecules of B800 (blue), and carotenoids (yellow). Reprinted with permission from ref. 80. Copyright (2003) of Elsevier Science. (a) View from the periplasmic side along the membrane normal. (b) View along the membrane surface. The periplasmic surface is at the top and the cytoplasmic surface is at the bottom.	 

 	Fig. 21  X-ray crystal structures of the RC–LH1 complex of purple bacteria, viewed perpendicular to the membrane plane. The middle part (L, H, M and QB) constitutes the reaction center. (a) RC–LH1 complex from Rhodopseudomonas palustris. The α-apoproteins (blue) and β-apoproteins (green) form the inner and outer rings, respectively, fixing BChl a molecules (red). Protein W is placed at the gap of the rings. Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright (2003) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) RC–LH1 complex from Thermochromatium tepidum: showing the reaction center (grey), BChl a molecules (purple), α-apoproteins (green, inner ring), β-apoproteins (green, outer ring), and Spx (orange). Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright (2014) of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  Limiting cases of energy transfer in the B850 of the LH2 of purple bacteria. The real-life situation lies in between the two cases. (a) The weak interchromophore interaction limit. Hopping model among the individual bacteriochlorophyll molecules. (b) The strong interchromophore interaction limit. A completely delocalized exciton model.	 

 	Fig. 23  EET time constants in the LH2 and RC–LH1 complexes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43 (Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society) and from ref. 94 (Copyright (1997) of Current Biology).	 

 	Fig. 24  Simplified drawing of the oxygenic photosynthetic apparatus in cyanobacteria, algae, and plants. cytb6f: plastoquinol plastocyanin oxido-reductase; PC: plastocyanin; FD: ferredoxin; FNR: ferredoxin-NADP-reductase.	 

 	Fig. 25  Chl a and Chl b. (a) The chemical structures. (b) The absorption spectra of Chl a and Chl b. The absorption spectrum of the LHCII is also shown. Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright (2016) of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  A schematic representation of the PSII–LHCII supercomplex (C2S2M2) as viewed along an axis normal to the plane of the thylakoid membrane. The PSII core dimer is shown in red, the minor antennas (CP24, CP26 and CP29) are shown in grey, and the strongly (S) and moderately (M) bound LHCII trimers are shown in white. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright (2013) of Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 27  Pigments in the PSI-LHCI supercomplex. View along the membrane normal to the stromal side. In the lower crescent part there are the four subunits of the LHCI. The remaining upper part is the PSI. Cofactors: the Chl a molecules of the PSI core complex (green), the Chl a molecules of the LHCI (yellow), the Chl b molecules of the LHCI (magenta), the carotenoids (blue), lipids (black), and cofactors of the electron transfer chain (Chl a, phylloquinones, and Fe4S4 clusters) (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright (2015) of the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 28  Chlorophyll dispositions and energy transfer rates in LHCII. The chlorophyll molecules are represented by three atoms, pyrrole-N(21) (black), Mg, and pyrrole-N(23) (black) of which the orientation of the transition dipole moment is approximated. Energy transfer time constants are indicated. See ref. 118 for the labeling of the chlorophyll molecules (a) stromal-side layer. (b) Lumenal-side layer. (c) Interlayer energy transfer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright (2011) of Owner Societies.	 

 	Fig. 29  Assemblies of planar Zn porphyrin or chlorin oligomers and free-base pyridylporphyrins (except for (c)) via axial coordination. (a) Ref. 133 and 134. (b) EET occurs from Zn to the free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright (2008) of Wiley-VCH. (c) EET occurs among Zn porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright (2008) of the American Chemical Society. (d) Ref. 137.	 

 	Fig. 30  Assemblies of “gable”-type Zn porphyrin dimers and pyridine-appended free-base porphyrins. (a) EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 138. Copyright (2000) of Wiley-VCH. (b) EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 139. Copyright (2012) of the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) EET occurs from free-base to Zn porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright (2002) of the Royal Society of Chemistry and Owner Societies. GUEST = free-base trans-dipypyridylporphyrin. (d) Ref. 142. (e) Ref. 143.	 

 	Fig. 31  The self-assembling light-harvesting antenna designed by Kobuke et al. EET occurs from one axially-coordinated dimer to another. Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright (2003) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 32  The antenna–reaction center model designed by Kobuke et al. EET occurs from an axially-coordinated dimer in the ring to the Zn porphyrin of the encapsulated guest, followed by electron transfer to the C60. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Chemical structures of the antenna and the reaction center. (b) The antenna–reaction center complex.	 

 	Fig. 33  The supercomplex of photosynthetic units designed by Kobuke et al. Reprinted with permission from ref. 152. Copyright (2009) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 34  Transition dipole coupling in a meso–meso linked bisporphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright (2012) of the Royal Society.	 

 	Fig. 35  Self-assembled porphyrin boxes designed by Osuka et al. Ar = 3,5-dioctyloxyphenyl. EET occurs from one meso–meso linked dimer to another. Reprinted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright (2004) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Cyclic tetramer of mono-pyridylporphyrins. EET occurs among Zn porphyrins in the tetramer. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 162. Copyright (2001) of the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright (2008) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 37  Pyridyl-appended porphyrins and their cyclic oligomers. EET occurs among the Zn chlorins in the tetramer or the trimer. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2007) of the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 166. Copyright (2013) of Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 38  A pyridine-appended Zn chlorin derivative and its X-ray crystal structure.171	 

 	Fig. 39  A semisynthetic chlorophyll-based antenna–reaction center system. Reprinted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright (2016) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Mixed cyclic tetramer formation of a chlorophyll derivative with (ZnPyC60) and without (ZnPy) a C60 unit. EET occurs among the chlorin molecules, followed by electron transfer C60. Aryl = 2,4,6-tridodecyloxyphenyl. (b) Fluorescence intensity dependence on the fraction of ZnPyC60 (χ).	 

 	Fig. 40  A wheel and spoke structure. EET occurs from uncoordinated to coordinated porphyrins in the ring followed by EET to the central free-base porphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175. Copyright (2006) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 41  Self-assembled porphyrin nanoring antenna models. EET occurs from a free-base porphyrin dimer to the nanoring. (a) Six donor porphyrin dimers and an acceptor ring. Ar = 3,5-bis(trihexylsilyl)phenyl, R = trihexylsilyl, R′ = dodecyl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 176. Further permissions related to the material excerpted should be directed to the ACS. (b) Six donor porphyrin dimers and two acceptor rings.	 

 	Fig. 42  Porphyrin assemblies via peripheral metal coordination. (a) Ref. 178. (b) Ref. 179.	 

 	Fig. 43  Metal-bridged Zn and free-base porphyrin dimers. (a) A dimer bridged by a Pd N-heterocyclic carbene complex unit.180 (b) A dimer bridged by a chelate complex unit. M = Pd, X = O;181 M = Pt, X = O;182 M = Pt, X = S.183	 

 	Fig. 44  Assembly of Zn and free-base porphyrins via base-pairing.186	 

 	Fig. 45  Assembly of porphyrins via amidinium carboxylate salt bridges.187,193	 

 	Fig. 46  The Lindsey dimer (top)189 and the Osuka dimer (bottom).190 Circles superimposed on the molecular structures represent the HOMO levels of the Zn porphyrins.	 

 	Fig. 47  Self-assembled light-harvesting antenna via cooperative hydrogen bonding and coordination interactions. EET occurs from Zn to free-base porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196 and 197. Copyright (2000, 2002) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 48  Protonation of TSPP and the association between TSPP molecules that leads to the formation of a J-aggregate. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2000) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 49  Atomic force microscopy image of a J-aggregate of TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright (2003) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 50  Structural models of rods of TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society. (a) A multihelical nanotube model. The arrows indicate monomer transition dipole moment components contributing to H (blue) and J (red) bands. (b) A hierarchical helical nanotube model.	 

 	Fig. 51  Absorption spectrum of the J aggregate of TSPP in 0.3 M HCl (A). (B) and (C) are spectra under different conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202. Copyright (2000) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 52  Chlorosome model compounds. (a) A Zn chlorin derivative.211 (b) A chlorin–bacteriochlorin dyad.212 (c) A Zn bacteriochlorin derivative.212 (d) A dyad of bacteriochlorin and C60.216	 

 	Fig. 53  Chlorosome models with a widened spectral response. Reprinted with permission from ref. 219. Copyright (2008) of the American Chemical Society. (a) A chlorin molecule with hydrocarbon chains.217 (b) A chlorin–naphthalene bisimide dyad.218 (c) A chlorin–naphthalene bisimide–naphthalene bisimide triad.219 (d) Assembly of the triad shown in (c) using the same color coding.219	 

 	Fig. 54  Polymer–chlorosome nanocomposite as a chlorosome model. Reprinted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 55  Chlorin rods assembled in droplets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. Copyright (2012) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 56  Porphyrin-based chlorosome model compounds. (a) Chemical structures. (b) X-ray crystal structure of the chlorosome-type assembly of the porphyrin (R1 (5) = CHOHCH3, R2 (15) = COCH3, M = Zn). The O atoms joined to the Zn atom by solid lines are alcohol O atoms, while those with dotted lines are ketone O atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 224. Copyright (2005) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 57  Assembly of glutamate-decorated Zn porphyrin and its high-affinity complexation with pyridyl-C60. (a) Chemical structure of the components. (b) Schematic drawing of the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright (2010) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 58  Cyclodipeptide-modified porphyrin.229	 

 	Fig. 59  A porphyrin tethering a phenylalanine dimer.230	 

 	Fig. 60  Phospholipid modified porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright (2003) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 61  Coordination polymer made up of a dendritic Zn porphyrin and a free-base porphyrin bearing multiple pyridyl moieties. Reprinted with permission from ref. 234. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 62  MOFs containing porphyrins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright (2013) of the American Chemical Society. (a) Construction of the MOFs. (b) EET within the MOFs.	 

 	Fig. 63  Collapse of three-dimensional MOFs to two-dimensional films. 3-APTMS = 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane. Reprinted with permission from ref. 243. Copyright (2016) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 64  Photochemically active porous microspheres based on FF and TSPP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 249. Copyright (2014) of Wiley-VCH. (a) Optical image. (b) Possible mechanism of the microsphere formation.	 

 	Fig. 65  A supramolecular polymer of noncovalent porphyrin polypeptide conjugates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 254. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society. (a) Weak porphyrin–porphyrin interaction under neutral conditions. (b) A J-type interaction at pH 3.5.	 

 	Fig. 66  pH switching of porphyrin assemblies and the EET processes of a porphyrin/peptide assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 256. Copyright (2010) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 67  A maquette. The maquette peptides self-organize into a four-bundled structure with binding sites for porphyrins/chlorophylls at specific sites (brown). Reprinted with permission from ref. 257. Copyright (2017) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 68  Assemblies of Zn protoporphyrin IX and a peptide amphiphile. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 69  Complex of a PAMAM-peptide dendrimer and Zn mesoporphyrin. Reprinted with permission from ref. 261. Copyright (2000) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 70  Porphyrin assemblies on viruses. (a) The tobacco mosaic virus decorated with Zn porphyrins (blue) and free-base porphyrins (red). Reprinted with permission from ref. 273. Copyright (2007) of Wiley-VCH. (b) Bacteriophage MS2 (gray) decorated with organic door dyes (green) inside and porphyrins (purple) outside. Reprinted with permission from ref. 274. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 71  Zipper array of porphyrins covalently bound to a nucleotide. (a) The chemical structure. (b) A structural model of the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 280. Copyright (2009) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 72  Light-harvesting antenna in a lipid membrane. The green circles and the purple triangles represent energy donors (e.g. chlorin molecules) and energy acceptors (e.g. bacteriochlorin molecules), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 282. Copyright (2015) of the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 73  EET on clay. The blue molecules represent m-TMPyP and the red molecules represent p-TMPyP. Reprinted with permission from ref. 285. Copyright (2011) of the American Chemical Society.	 
	(62)


ZnTOPP	4-C8H17	Zn	PTCDIb	7 ± 3	
291

Quartz	8 ± 3	
291

9 ± 3	
292

TPP	H	2H	TiO2	0.7	
289

TEPP	4-C2H5	2H	TiO2	7.5	
289

TnBuPP	4-C4H9	2H	TiO2	22 ± 3	
293

ZnOP	3,5-Di(ethoxymethyl)	Zn	TiO2	15 ± 1	
294

ZnBuP	3,5-Di(t-Bu)	Zn	TiO2	3 ± 1	
294

TCM4PP	4-CH3OCO	2H	Glass	15 ± 3.2	
290

15.4 ± 4.5	
295

TBCM3PP	4-CH3OCO (×3), 4-Br (×1)	2H	Glass	9.4 ± 0.6	
290

TCM3IPP	4-CH3OCO (×3), 4-I (×1)	2H	Glass	4.4 ± 1.1	
290

TCB4PP	4-C4H9OCO	2H	Glass	16.0 ± 1.2	
295

TCH4PP	4-C6H13OCO	2H	Glass	21.3 ± 3.4	
295

TCEH4PP	4-(2-Ethylhexyl)OCO	2H	Glass	13.8 ± 2.7	
295

TCO4PP	4-C8H17	2H	Glass	18.7 ± 4.8	
295


 	Fig. 74  Coordination-directed self-assembled porphyrin multilayers grown on Au. Reprinted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright (2002) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 75  Photocurrent generation system with antenna function. (a) Component porphyrin compounds. (b) Photocurrent through the assembly. Reprinted with permission from ref. 297. Copyright (2005) of Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 76  A DSSC with antennas made of diphenylalanine-functionalized porphyrins. (a) The molecular structures. (b) A schematic illustration of the antennas on the TiO2 surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 301. Copyright (2017) of the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 77  A MOF-sensitized DSSC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright (2017) of the American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
