Recent development in graphdiyne and its derivative materials for novel biomedical applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry B (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TB01794B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TB01794B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 9461-9484Recent development in graphdiyne and its derivative materials for novel biomedical applications

        
          
            Karim 
            Khan†
*ab, 
      
        
          
            Ayesha Khan 
            Tareen†
bci, 
      
        
          
            Muhammad 
            Iqbal†
d, 
      
        
          
            Asif 
            Mahmood
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Nasir 
            Mahmood
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Zhe 
            Shi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jinde 
            Yin
          
        
      gh, 
      
        
          
            Duan 
            Qing
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Chunyang 
            Ma
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Electrical Engineering & Intelligentization, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, 523808, China. E-mail: karim_khan_niazi@yahoo.com
bShenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, Institute of Microscale Optoelectronics, Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen, 518060, China. E-mail: zhanghanchn@hotmail.com
cCollege of Materials Science and Engineering, Guangdong Research Center for Interfacial Engineering of Functional Materials, Shenzhen University, 3688 Nanhai Ave, Shenzhen, 518060, P. R. China
dDepartment of Bio-Chemistry, Abdul Wali Khan University Mardan, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (K.P.K.), 23200, Islamic Republic of Pakistan
eSchool of Chemical and Bio-molecular Engineering, The University of Sydney, 2006, Sydney, Australia
fSchool of Engineering, The Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology (RMIT) University, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia
gShenzhen Nuoan Environmental & Safety Inc., Shenzhen 518107, P. R. China
hCollege of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, P. R. China
iSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Dongguan University of Technology, Dongguan, 523808, P. R. China
Received 
      18th August 2021
    , Accepted 21st October 2021First published on 25th October 2021AbstractGraphdiyne (GDY), which possess sp- and sp2-hybridized carbon and Dirac cones, offers unique physical and chemical properties, including an adjustable intrinsic bandgap, excellent charge carrier transfer efficiency, and superior conductivity compared to other carbon allotropes. These exceptional qualities of GDY and its derivatives have been successfully used in a variety of fields, including catalysis, energy, environmental protection, and biological applications. Herein, we focus on the potential application of GDY and its derivatives in the biomedical domain, including biosensing, biological protection, cancer therapy, and antibacterial agents, demonstrating how the biomimetic behavior of these materials can be a step forward in bridging the gap between nature and applications. Considering the excellent biocompatibility, solubility and selectivity of GDY and its derived materials, they have shown great potential as biosensing and bio-imaging materials. The unusual combination of properties in GDY has been used in biological applications such as “OFF–ON” DNA detection and enzymatic sensing, where GDY has a greater adsorption capacity than graphene and other 2D materials, resulting in increased sensitivity. GDY and its derivatives have also been used in cancer treatment due to their high doxorubicin (DOX) loading capacity (using-stacking) and photothermal conversion ability, and radiation protection since their initial biological use. The poor biodegradation rate of graphene demands the search for new nanomaterials. Accordingly, GDY has better biocompatibility and bio-safety than other 2D nanomaterials, especially graphene and its oxide, due to its absence of aggregation in the physiological environment. Thus, GDY-based nanomaterials have become promising candidates as bio-delivery carriers. Besides, GDY and GDY-based materials have also shown interesting applications in the fields of cell-culture, cell-growth and tissue engineering. Herein, we present a comprehensive review on the applications of GDY and its derivatives as biomedical materials, followed by their future perspectives. This review will provide an outlook for the application of graphene and its derivatives and may open up new horizons to inspire broader interests across various disciplines. Finally, the future prospects for GDY-based materials are examined for their potential biological use.
Karim Khan
Dr Karim Khan was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He earned his BSc degree from Gomal University in 2005, his MSc in Physics from University of Peshawar in 2009, and his MPhil in Solid State Physics from University of the Punjab in 2012. He also completed research at Quaid-e-Azim University's “National Centre for Physics.” He got his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016 and worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher at Shenzhen University in China (2017–2019) and Dongguan University of Technology (2019–2021). He has over 89 scientific articles and two patents to his credit. His articles have been cited over 1800 times, and he has an h-index of 19. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy generation, storage, and storage devices, as well as developing biological sensors.
Ayesha Khan Tareen
Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen is currently a Post-Doctoral fellow in Shenzhen University. She earned her PhD (Physical Chemistry/Materials) from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” in 2015, and BSc (Honors) in Chemistry from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan, in 2012. Her research interests include in the production of 2D materials and transition metal nitride materials, as well as their applications in many fields, such as 2D materials, photo (electro)-catalysts, fuel cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, and biosensors.
Han Zhang
Prof. Dr Han Zhang received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is the director of Shenzhen University's Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, as well as the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics. His present study focuses the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of two-dimensional materials. In 2018 and 2019, he was included in Clarivate Analytics’ list of Highly Cited Researchers. In 2019, he was named a Fellow of the Optical Society of America. Prof. Han Zhang's group has produced over 600 publications in the last ten years, in Physics Reports, PNAS, Chem. Soc. Rev., Nat. Commun., Adv. Funct. Mater., Adv. Mater., etc. His articles have been cited over 59000 times, and he has an h-index of 119.
1. Introduction
Carbon and its compounds are some of the most ubiquitous elements on Earth, which are found in both minerals and organic substances.1–6 Carbon, being a unique element with four valence electrons, has a variety of methods to create carbon–carbon bonds, allowing it to form a variety of allotropes with various structures.1,7–20 There are three hybrid states for carbon atoms, i.e., sp, sp2, and sp3. Carbon networks with sp2- or sp3-hybridized carbon atoms make up natural and manufactured carbon compounds. The benefit of sp-hybridized carbon atoms with a triple bond is that they have a linear and conjugated structure; hence, they can form new carbon allotropes.7,9,11,13,16,21–33 In the last decade, numerous carbon-based nanomaterials, including zero-dimensional (0D), i.e., fullerene,34 one-dimensional (1D), i.e., carbon nanotubes,17 and two-dimensional (2D), i.e., graphene7,35 have been investigated due to the advances in science and technology (Fig. 1(a)). Therefore, there has been a significant increase in the number of reports published on carbon-based materials for different applications, e.g., small molecule delivery, gene therapy, chemotherapy, phototherapy, biosensing, and regenerative medicine.17
 Fig. 1  (a) Most important carbon-based nanomaterials explored in the last decades and (b) potential of GDY for it application. Adapted with permission from ref. 36. 
Currently, the most important members of the carbon family in the nanotechnological world are in the 2D form, especially since the discovery of graphene.32 Recently, 2D nanomaterials have been discovered to have unique functional features, which are related to their shape, surface area to mass ratio, and improved physicochemical qualities (electrochemical, mechanical, and physical properties).7–9,14,17,31,34,35,37–42 Therefore, 2D materials have attracted significant attention for their potential use, ranging from basic to present/future nanotechnology applications,42i.e., electronics, energy storage/conversion, electro(opto-)-catalysis,43 and biological application (i.e., biosensors, chemotherapy, radiation protection, and germicidal agent).17,34,44
Over the years, researchers have been focused on the search for new carbon allotrope materials considering the enormous application potential of 2D all-carbon materials. Regarding carbon-based 2D materials, Baughman et al.45 presented a planar carbon material including sp2- and sp-hybridized carbon atoms in 1987. Later, in 2004, the discovery of a material combining the features of 2D materials with carbon compounds, namely graphene, was reported, which has attracted significant nano-technological interest on both an industrial and laboratory level.31 Further study was performed on the members of the graphene family, such as graphyne, graphdiyne (GDY), graphone, and graphene, which have recently been proposed as novel 2D graphene derivatives. Graphene has been employed in biomedical applications such as biosensors, bioimaging, antimicrobial agents, cancer treatment, biological protection, antibacterial agents and tissue engineering; however, there are some limitations in its application.46 Therefore carbon-based 2D materials, e.g., graphene, have been functionalized via chemical and physical processes to modify the characteristics of graphene to achieve novel industrial applications. The effect of functionalization of the size, shape, band gap, doping level, chemical functional groups, etc. on graphene has been studied, but the required properties for particular applications were not achieved.34 Therefore, a new carbon derivative, GDY, was further discovered and studied regarding its science and application. GDY, an allotrope of graphene with a honeycomb structure, is a 2D carbon allotrope.
GDY was discovered by Li et al. in 2010 using hexa-ethynyl-benzene in a homo-coupling process.47 GDY is a graphene derivative that has been hydrogenated. Cross-coupling on copper foil was used to create GDY, a novel 2D graphitic carbon material.48 GDY is the first synthetic carbon-based nanomaterial composed of benzene rings with sp2-hybridized carbon atoms and acetenyl groups with sp-hybridized carbon atoms. GDY is made up of benzene rings and carbon–carbon triple bonds, together with sp- and sp2-hybridized carbon allotrope assembly layers, which form its large-conjugation architecture. The uniformly distributed pores, massive conjugation, and rich surface chemistry of the GDY are due to its linear sp-carbon atoms and planar sp2-carbon atoms (Fig. 1(b)). GDY has showed tremendous potential as a photoelectric material in nano-electrics, catalysis, and energy storage since its initial synthesis. GDY has been reported to have potential use in a variety of fields, including energy,44 catalysis,49 and the environment, due to its unusual features.50 Furthermore, GDY and its derivatives have been used in biosensing, bioimaging, chemotherapy, and radiation protection since its initial biological use in 2016.51
Recent needs in biomedical applications have been addressed thanks to the rapid growth of nanotechnology, which is an efficient solution to unresolved difficulties. Regarding the basic biological reactions of the superior 2D nanomaterials, a comprehensive assessment in terms of toxicity.17,35,52–63 In fact, for biological applications such as drug administration, PTT, biomarker monitoring, and tissue engineering, graphene has been investigated as a nanomaterial.64 However, due to the poor biodegradation rate of graphene, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs), carbon nitride, boron nitride, and black phosphorous (BP) have been used for biological applications instead.65 Furthermore, preliminary bio-safety evaluations suggest that these new materials are less hazardous than graphene.66 Consequently, the carbon allotrope GDY was investigated for numerous biological applications. Although, GDY is similar to graphene, more cautious and rigorous research is needed to determine its potential for biomedical applications. GDY-based 2D nanomaterials outperform other carbon-based materials in many biological applications in terms of activity and durability. The unusual combination of properties in GDY has been used in biological applications such as “OFF–ON” DNA detection and enzymatic glucose sensing, where GDY has a greater adsorption capacity than graphene and other 2D materials, resulting in increased sensitivity.34 Furthermore, GDY-based materials have been manufactured and used in numerous property-related biomedical applications due to the outstanding success of graphene. For cancer therapy, GDY also has a high doxorubicin (DOX) loading capacity (via stacking) and photo-thermal conversion ability. Clearly, while designing GDY and its derivatives for drug delivery, tissue engineering, and bio-molecular sensing, its long-term negative health effects must be considered (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  Current research progress of GDY in the biomedical field, adapted with permission from ref. 36. 
A recent study found that GDY has better biocompatibility and bio-safety than other 2D nanomaterials, notably graphene and its oxide, due to the absence of aggregation in the physiological environment.43 In this review, we offer an updated comprehensive overview of the current accomplishments and benefits of the use of GDY for biological applications and future opportunities in related disciplines. The properties and synthesis of GDY are not included in this review because we already reviewed it in our recently published review article.1 We anticipate that our recent review paper will serve as more complete resource for researchers working on GDY-based biological materials.36
2. Toxicity and biocompatibility of GDY and GDY-based materials
To optimize the biological applications of GDY with the lowest hazards to the environment and human safety, complete material characterization and mechanical toxic impact studies are required for its safe design and manufacture. Due to the advantage of having a high degree of tunability, GDY and its derivatives are envisioned to be feasible to achieve the required features for particular applications.7,67 However, there are no reports on the use of GDY and its derivatives as antibacterial agents to date. In general, the theranostic use of any nanomaterial requires extreme caution to ensure that its toxicities are thoroughly investigated. Currently, GDY is being researched for use in drug administration, as a material for the fabrication of biosensors, and as a possible antibacterial agent. The toxicity and biocompatibility of GDY have attracted increasing interest in its future applications given that the number of biomedical uses of GDY has increased. However, only a few studies have investigated the toxicity of GDY in vitro and in vivo. Unfortunately, there are even less investigations on GDY and its composites in the literature. Considering that GDY materials have a large surface area, they can be predicted to be effective sorbents for a range of small molecule solutes in physiological fluids. In the case of molecules with poor solubility, partial hydrophobicity, or positive charge (for the usual case of negatively charged GDY-based materials), molecules with conjugated bonds, which impart planarity and allow interactions with graphenic carbon surfaces, are preferable for adsorption on carbon surfaces. Thus, this may result in micronutrient deficiency as one of the biological repercussions of GDY-based materials. Consequently, we sought to summarize the knowledge on the toxicity of GDY to provide basic knowledge on the biocompatibility of GDY-based materials. GDY-oxide (GDYO) and GO, which have comparable sizes and shapes, were examined in terms of physicochemical characteristics and cytotoxicity by Zheng et al.68 In H2O, GO was quite stable, but in saline solution, it rapidly aggregated. Conversely, GDY oxide (GDYO) was substantially more stable in H2O and other saline solutions, which may be due to its intermolecular hydrogen bonding and acetylenic bonds linking carboxyl groups in the GDYO. The findings revealed that GO prefers to stick on the cell membrane, causing membrane ruffles and the generation of reactive oxygen species (ROS), which eventually led to cytotoxicity and death. In contrast, GDYO no effect on cell viability and produced less apoptosis. When utilized in a bio-system, GDYO appears to be safer and more biocompatible than GO. GDYO has been shown to produce in vivo mutagenesis in mice when administered intravenously at a dosage of 4 mg kg−1 day−1 for 5 days. The toxicity and biocompatibility of modified GDY nanoparticles (NPs) have been examined in several studies. When the concentration of GDY was less than 100 g mL−169 or 40 g mL−1, the cells treated with PEG- or BSA-modified GDY maintained more than 90% viability.70 After GDY was given intravenously at a dosage of 10 mg GDY per kg body weight, the main tissues of the mice exhibited no evident damage. Meanwhile, the adsorbed proteins on the GDY sheets exhibited minimal structural alterations at the molecular level, which may most likely be related to the heterogeneous energy distribution on the surface of GDY, which is made up of different types of carbon atoms. The unique shape of GDY causes proteins to be adsorbed point-to-point on its surface rather than face-to-face, which has a significant impact on the structure of proteins.
Compared to other 2D materials, recent findings show that GDY has bio-safety advantages. However, computer modeling projected that membrane insertion and phospholipid extraction cause cytotoxicity in graphyne, a carbon-based polymer of the GDY family with just one carbon triple bond between nearby benzene rings.44 This finding highlights the potential cytotoxicity of GDY and its family. Consequently, numerous type of toxicity and the bio-compatibility of GDY, such as its bio-distribution, hemolysis effect, cell membrane interface and protein interaction, should be further researched. GDY, like other pure carbon-based compounds, is difficult to track in vivo, although this may be overcome utilizing a variety of approaches.71 However, the potential of GDY to disrupt membranes makes it likely a candidate for antibacterial action. The above-mentioned findings highlight the critical importance of the surface physicochemical properties of the GDY and GDY-based materials in their interactions with bio-molecules and cells (Fig. 3). This review will provide an in-depth overview of GDY, while also encouraging the development and implementation of this innovative carbon material.72
 Fig. 3  Surface chemistry, physicochemical qualities, number of layers, size, and cell type interaction are some of the common elements that determine the cytotoxicity of GDY-based materials, adapted with permission from ref. 71. 
3. Biomedical applications of GDY and GDY-based materials
Considering its numerous unique properties, GDY materials have recently attracted significant attention and have been used as highly sensitive and selective platform for the detection of a variety of targets. Consequently, the following sections highlight the application of GDY-based sensors in a variety of fields.
3.1. Biosensors
Targeted biomarkers necessitate the development of highly selective and sensitive biosensors in the biomedical field due to their extremely low concentrations in clinical blood samples. Biosensors are devices that provide a quantifiable signal to detect biological substances and events. Biosensors may be used to detect or sense bio-molecules, which are significant for healthcare, environmental, and security applications. A chemical sensor is a device that turns information about the presence of a chemical species into an analytically usable signal, either quantitatively or semi-quantitatively. Sensors usually include two structural elements, namely, a receptor and a transducer. Any organic or inorganic substance with a particular interaction with one analyte or a collection of analytes can be used as a receptor. A bio-molecule serves as the recognition element in biosensors. The transducer, which turns chemical information into a quantifiable signal, is the second critical component of the sensing platform. GDY-based biosensors are covered in this section (for example, field-effect transistors, electrochemical, fluorescent, and colorimetric biosensors, and gas sensors).

3.1.1. GDY for the detection of nucleic acid. 
2D materials have been employed as deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) sensors based on the distinct interaction forces between 2D materials and single-stranded DNA (ssDNA) or double-stranded DNA (dsDNA). This is due to their high surface area and great adsorption capabilities.46,65,73 These 2D materials are capable of the sensitive detection of DNA because of their excellent fluorescence quenching of dye-labeled ssDNA through the fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) process. GDY was originally employed as a DNA sensor based on a similar idea in 2016 given that it is a unique 2D carbon-based material with a large-conjugated surface.51 The probe employed was a 5-carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-labeled ssDNA, which was engineered to be complementary to the target DNA. The fluorescence intensity of FAM was effectively muted (by around 97%) when GDY or its oxide was added to the probe ssDNA-containing solution owing to the FRET caused by the strong contacts between GDY and ssDNA. The probe ssDNA was hybridized with the target DNA, forming dsDNA when the target ssDNA was introduced in the mixture, reducing its interaction with GDY. Consequently, the fluorescence of FAM was restored and could be identified. This GDY-based sensor is more sensitive and has a lower limit of detection (LOD) than other carbon-based sensors. Recently, GDY nanosheets (NSs) have been used to successfully perform the multiplexed real-time fluorescence detection of DNA.74 The GDY-based sensor was shown to be more sensitive (with an LOD of 2510–12 m) and faster (nearly immediate response) than existing carbon-based and other 2D materials. Furthermore, simulation calculations were performed to better understand the mechanism of the superior performance of the GDY-based DNA sensor compared to graphene. The benefits of GDY for the detection of DNA, such as the greater adsorption energy of FAM on GDY and its greater electron-accepting capacity are mostly owing to the existence of triple bonds in GDY according to the computational results.
MicroRNA is commonly deregulated in numerous forms of human malignancies. Thus, the ultra-sensitive and affordable detection of microRNA is of tremendous value for cancer diagnosis and treatment. Using the inherent reducibility of GDY, (NH4)2MoS4 was reduced to MoS2, generating MoS2–GDY complex, which is photoactive material, according to Xiaohua Li et al.75 The broad band-gap MoS2 and the narrow band-gap GDY were combined in MoS2–GDY. The inherently narrow band-gap of GDY increased the light absorption due to the above-mentioned combination.
Moreover, MoS2 decreased the electron–hole recombination, resulting in a robust photo-electrochemical (PEC) signal. The mass ratio of GDY to (NH4)2MoS4 affected the PEC signal of MoS2–GDY. At a ratio of 1:25 MoS2–GDY, the best PEC performance was observed. Subsequently, a PEC assay for the detection of microRNA-141 was fabricated using MoS2–GDY with a mass ratio of 1:25. A dual-modified probe linking bio-barcode Au-NPs and the hybridization chain reaction technique was created to achieve reduced background noise and a strong PEC signal. On one side, the probe was tagged with MoS2–GDY, while on the other, it was labeled with biotin. The intensity of the PEC was also influenced by the microRNA-141 concentration. The PEC assay had a linear range of 1.0 × 1017 mol L−1 to 1.0 × 10−9 mol L−1 and a low LOD of 3.3 × 10−18 mol L−1 under ideal conditions (i.e., 0.2 V and pH 7.5). This assay was used to determine microRNA-141 in complicated biological matrices with great effectiveness (Fig. 4). Jing Xiao et al.76 used surface chemistry to modify the adsorption affinity of ssDNA and dsDNA on Tremella-like GDY. The effectiveness of GDY to extinguish fluorescence at various oxidation levels was compared. The nonspecific displacement of DNA probes on GDY was investigated. GDY with a low oxidation degree had a higher adsorption affinity and capacity for both ssDNA and dsDNA at the same concentrations than GDY with a high oxidation degree. Furthermore, the DNA adsorbed on the low-oxidized GDY was more resistant to displacement by other DNAs. Protein has a significant contact with various GDY and was capable of dislodging the DNA probes from GDY. Based on these findings, an optimal GDY with the right oxidation degree was used as a scavenger of redundant ssDNA fluorescent probe in an enzyme-assisted amplification system for the sensitive detection of ochratoxin (OTA), demonstrating its strong surface affinity for ssDNA and low affinity for dsDNA. These results show good GDY-mediated DNA adsorption with fluorescence sensing in a complex system using a logical method (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 4  (A) PEC responses of method A toward microRNA-141 (from a to j: 0, 1.0 × 10−17, 1.0 × 10−16, 1.0 × 10−15, 1.0 × 10−14, 1.0 × 10−13, 1.0 × 10−12, 1.0 × 10−11, 1.0 × 10−10, and 1.0 × 10−9 M, respectively). (B) Plot of absorbance vs. microRNA-141 concentration. (C) Photocurrent changes of the designed assay at 1.0 × 10−15 mol L−1 microRNA-141 and 1.0 × 10−14 mol L−1 of the other microRNA containing miR-7, miR-21 and miR-221. (D) Stability of this PEC assay for six consecutive measurements. (E) Stability of this PEC assay after 12 days of storage, 0; 3rd; 6th; 9th; and 12th day. (F) Reproducibility of designed PEC assay. The concentration of microRNA-141 was 1.0 × 10−15 mol L−1 in 0.1 mol L−1 phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM AAP. Adapted with permission from ref. 75. 
 Fig. 5  (a) Fluorescence spectra of the sensing system with different amounts of OTA. The amounts of OTA (from bottom to top) are 0, 2, 12, 25, 50, 100, 500, and 1500 pM, respectively; (b) linear relationship between fluorescence (at 524 nm) and OTA amount; (c) selectivity of the sensor toward 500 pM OTA against 50 nM potential interferents. Error bars were estimated from three replicate measurements, adapted with permission from ref. 77. 
Fan Chang et al.78 reported a simple method for the controllable synthesis of a novel few layered 2D GDY NS with a thickness of ∼0.9 nm via an electrochemical lithium intercalation strategy, which had a prominent fluorescence quenching effect. The precise and early detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis is of great significance for clinical diagnosis and cure of tuberculosis. Accordingly, the few-layered GDY NS with strong adsorptivity for ssDNA as a fluorescent sensing platform has excellent specificity, multiplicity, and very high sensitivity (LOD as low as 25 pM). Thus, this sensing platform can be further applied for the detection of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in clinical samples and the recognition of drug-resistant mutants with a low signal to noise ratio.


3.1.2. GDY for the detection of small molecules. 
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a key mediator in many biological processes. Thus, its detection is critical for physiological system monitoring. The electrochemical method79 and color method80 are examples of the traditional methods for the detection of H2O2. For the first time, Zhuang et al.81 employed GDYO as a substrate for the in situ production of Prussian-Blue (PB) nanoparticles, which were utilized to detect H2O2. After 50 continuous cycles of cyclic voltammetry (CV), the PB/GDYO composite showed substantially greater stability than PB on GO. PB/GDYO had sensitivity to H2O2 roughly 3.3-times that of PB/GO. The heterogeneous electron distribution is thought to play a role in the stability of PB throughout the electrochemical cycles. Another important metric for evaluating the human body is glucose concentration, which must be measured quantitatively in the case of disorders such as diabetes mellitus. Enzyme-based color approaches,82 fluorescence approaches,83 and electrochemical detection are the most extensively used methods for glucose measurement.84 In a comprehensive glucose detection procedure, traditional enzymatic techniques involve two phases. The first involves the generation of H2O2, where glucose is first oxidized by oxygen with the aid of glucose oxidases. Secondly, with the aid of peroxidase, a chromogenic agent is oxidized by H2O2 to produce a visible and observable color response. Therefore, a GDY-based glucose sensor was created, which merged these two procedures into a single-step glucose detection process.85 This glucose sensor underwent two stages of development. Initially, ferrous ions (Fe2+) were adsorbed on GDY sheets to create an Fe–GDY composite. The enhanced peroxidase activity of Fe–GDY was attributed to the catalytic activity of the adsorbed Fe2+ ions. To make the final product, glucose oxidase was adsorbed on the Fe–GDY. The composite was created by combining the peroxidase activity of Fe2+ with the enzymatic activity of glucose oxidase, which could be utilized to detect glucose quickly. Three components of the function of GDY were examined in this study. Firstly, compared to graphene, GDY has a higher adsorption capacity for Fe2+, which was supported by both experimental data and computational simulation. Secondly, GDY preserved the adsorbed Fe2+ in its original form, which may have been easily oxidized by dissolved oxygen without protection. Thirdly, the secondary structure of the adsorbed protein was unaffected by GDY. Specifically, for the adsorption of enzymes or proteins, the heterogeneous electron and energy distribution and pore structure of GDY likely caused the protein to have “point contact” rather than “entire contact” on its surface. The acetylenic linkages, which can bind strongly with metal ions and have a low reduction potential, are most likely responsible for the benefits of GDY. However, to date, GDY has not been reported as a platform for immobilizing metal ions or enzymes. By immobilizing ferrous ions and glucose oxidase on GDY sheets, Jiaming Liu et al.86 reported a GDY-based composite having dual-enzyme activity. GDY had a high adsorption capacity and maintained the strong catalytic activity of the ferrous ions. Compared to graphene, the ferrous ions chose to bind between the surrounding two C–C triple bonds of GDY with a lower adsorption energy (−5.64 eV and −1.69 eV, respectively). Meanwhile, GDY could adsorb glucose oxidase while having no discernible effect on the structure or catalytic function of the enzyme. The as-prepared composite was successful in detecting blood glucose in a single step. This research sheds light on the immobilization of ions and enzymes by 2D materials. Lingxia Wu et al.87 investigated as-prepared GDY as a very appealing matrix for the immobilization of tyrosinase (a model enzyme) to develop a mediator-free GDY-based biosensor for the fast detection of bisphenol (Fig. 6). The GDY-based tyrosinase biosensor exhibited a linear response in the range of 1.0 × 10−7 to 3.5 × 10−6 mol L−1, with a high sensitivity of 2990.8 mA cm−2 M−1 and a low detection limit of 24 nmol L−1. The reported GDY-based tyrosinase biosensor outperformed the CNT- and graphene-based biosensors in terms of analytical performance for the detection of BPA. The remarkable performance of this biosensor can be attributed to the strong chemical interactions between GDY and BPA, which can enrich the available BPA concentration on the electrode for reaction with tyrosinase. The reliable GDY-based tyrosinase biosensor was successfully employed to detect BPA in drinking bottles and tap water. GDY has been shown to be a potent electrochemical enzyme biosensor platform for the immobilization of bio-molecules (as recognition elements) and biosensor manufacturing, and it has a wide range of applications in biomedical detection and environmental analysis.
 Fig. 6  (a) Nyquist plots of bare GC and Tyr-GDY-Chi/GC biosensor. (b) CVs of the Tyr-GDY-Chi/GC biosensor in the absence of BPA. (c) Typical amperometric response curves of Tyr-GDY-Chi. (d) Corresponding calibration curves of steady-state current versus concentration of BPA. Adapted with permission from ref. 87. 
Solid-state ion-selective electrodes (ISEs) are powerful tools for monitoring the dynamic change of ions at physiological concentration ranges. However, the unintentional accumulation of an aqueous layer at the ion selective membrane/solid contact interface compromises the potential stability of ISEs, limiting their in vivo application. Lijun Zhao et al.88 used model solid contacts and ISEs such as MnO2 and potassium ISE (K+-ISE), respectively, to show for the first time that GDYO can improve the potential stability of solid contact-based ISEs. These findings implied that the intrinsic structural and hydrophobic properties of GDYO are important in preventing and stabilizing the establishment of a water layer. The K+-ISE, which used GDYO–MnO2 as the solid contact, had high short-term potential stability and selectivity, allowing reliable K+ sensing at the animal level. The GDYO-based technique may be used for a variety of the ISEs and does not require any complex processing steps, opening up new possibilities for in vivo ion detection and sensing. Qiang Bai et al.89 investigated a unique sensing technique based on the synergistic impact of an inner filter and photo-induced electron transfer. They developed a new nano-sensor based on a newly synthesized nanomaterial and exhibited sensitive and selective detection of both Fe3+ ions and AA in real clinical samples. For the first time, fluorescent GDYO-QDs were synthesized using a simple ultrasonic approach and characterized using a variety of methods, revealing a strong blue-green emission with a quantum yield of 14.6%. Fe3+ effectively quenches the emission, which is then recovered by AA. Based on this unique characteristic, we created off/on fluorescent nanosensors. These nanosensors could detect Fe3+ at concentrations as low as 95 nmol L−1 and has a dynamic range of 0.25 to 200 mol L−1. In the range of 10–500 mol L−1, the LOD of AA was 2.5 mol L−1. Furthermore, it demonstrated promising Fe3+ and AA detection capabilities in serum samples. Fig. 7 shows a schematic of the synthesis of GDYO-QDs and fluorescent detection of Fe3+ and AA.
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of GDYO-QDs and fluorescent detection of Fe3+ and AA, adapted with permission from ref. 89. 

3.2. GDY as humidity/damp sensors
Humidity is a critical indication in the biomedical field regarding the medical environment and respiratory monitoring. Carbon-based compounds outperform other materials as humidity sensors due to their hydrophobic structure and the water-adsorbing capability of their hydrophilic functional groups.90 The humidity sensing in carbon-based materials is based on measuring the change in conductivity caused by water adsorption, which is attributed to the hydrogen bonds generated between water and hydrophilic functional groups on the carbon-based materials. Due to its distinctive 2D flakes, GO has been shown to have a quick response time to humidity.91,92 Recently. GDYO has been proven to work effectively for ultrafast humidity sensing.93 GDYO had an ultrafast humidity response with an extraordinary response speed (7 ms), which was three-times faster than that of GO with the same thickness and O/C ratio, according to Hailong Yan et al.87 For the first time, they evaluated the rapid humidity response of GDYO, which is thought to be due to its unusual carbon hybridization, featuring acetylenic bonds with stronger electron-withdrawing capability than ethylenic bonds in GO, resulting in a faster water binding rate. This unique structure-based trait enables the development of novel GDO-based humidity sensors with ultrafast response times, great selectivity against other gas molecules, and high sensitivity. These characteristics substantiate the ability of the sensor to properly track changes in human and hypoxic rat respiration rates. This study not only exhibits the unrivaled humidity sensing capabilities of GDYO, but it also sheds light on the structure–property relationship of 2D carbon materials. In a humid environment, GDYO was shown to be more responsive than GO, with a bigger change in conductivity and a shorter reaction time (12 ms for the GDYO and 34 ms for GO). A pH titration technique was used to test the acid dissociation constant (pKa) of GO and GDYO to better understand the underlying cause for the superior performance of GDYO. GDYO has a lower pKa value for each functional group than GO, resulting in improved water solubility and a lower water saturation vapor pressure. The hydrophilic functional groups of GDYO (e.g., phenylpropiolic acid or Ph-C-C-COOH) formed hydrogen bonds with water much easier than that of GO (e.g., benzoic acid or Ph-COOH) due to the high electron-withdrawing characteristics of the sp-hybridized carbon atoms in GDY. Thus, GDYO was shown to be practical for sensitive respiratory monitoring based on these good features.
3.3. GDY as ROS for biotherapeutics
The production of mitochondrial ROS occurs both in physiological and pathological conditions. The bimodal actions of ROS have both beneficial and negative effects. The beneficial aspects of ROS are related to their effects on the redox state of cells and the important role that some ROS play in signaling cascades. The negative effects of ROS are related their excess chemical moieties, which are caused by the excessive production or insufficient actions of endogenous antioxidants. There are three major modes of action for antioxidants as follows: (i) antioxidants that directly scavenge ROS already formed; (ii) antioxidants that inhibit the formation of ROS from their cellular sources; and (iii) antioxidants that remove or repair the damage or modifications caused by ROS. However, excessive levels of ROS production become pathological and may lead to mitochondrial and cell apoptosis through the activation of the apoptosome protein complex. An increase in ROS oxidative stress acts as a bactericide, which damages bacterial DNA, RNA and proteins.

3.3.1. GDY photothermal ROS oxidative stress as a bactericide. 
Antibiotic resistance is becoming a great threat, necessitating the discovery of new antibacterial agents. Bacterial infections are posing an unprecedented threat to the public health worldwide, particularly with the advent of antibiotic-resistant bacteria resulting from drug overuse or misuse. The advent and global spread of antibiotic-resistant bacterial strains has sparked interest from academic labs to clinical trials. Thus, finding novel antibacterial medicines that work differently than standard antibiotics to address pathogen-associated disorders is imperative. Antibacterial nanomaterials, unlike regular antibiotics, do not promote bacterial resistance given that they not only work through many antibacterial pathways simultaneously but also have high membrane penetration due to their tiny size. To date, a variety of sophisticated nanomaterials, such as metals and metal oxides (MoS2, MXenes, and carbon nanomaterials) have shown tremendous promise in the treatment of bacterial infections. Carbon NPs (e.g., carbon nanotubes, graphene, and GO) are capable of regulating and battling bacterial infections, and this have become some of the most prominent antibacterial nanomaterials to successfully destroy pathogenic bacteria. However, a systematic and comprehensive review of the literature showed that these carbon nanomaterials cannot create enough ROS to combat dangerous bacteria because the required electron–hole pairs are insufficient during the photo-catalytic sterilization process. The interaction of GDY-based nanomaterials with living creatures is unavoidable and vital from their point of synthesis until their disposal. However, the cytotoxic characteristics of these unique carbon nanomaterials have seldom been studied, and thus the processes behind their cytotoxicity remain unclear. Furthermore, the application of GDY and its derivatives in antimicrobial research has not been investigated or verified to date. Because GDY possesses a natural semiconductor band gap and outstanding electrical characteristics, it can be used as a potential photocatalytic disinfectant to kill bacteria, resulting in a new class of antibacterial nanomaterials. However, the hydrophobic and chemically inert surface of GDY limits its contact with bacteria in an aqueous solution, lowering its antibacterial activity. Yana Zhang et al. suggested a new technique for modifying the surface of GDY to boost its hydrophilicity and increase its antibacterial activity based on the fact that surface oxidation makes 2D nanomaterials more hydrophilic. They disclosed for the first time the application and assessment of GDY and GDYO as antibacterial agents, as well as the antibacterial mechanisms of the GDY-based nanomaterials. GDYO was produced by oxidizing the surface of GDY, and its antibacterial activity was compared to that of GDY in a number of antibacterial assays. Surprisingly, surface oxidation conferred greater antibacterial activity to the inert GDY against two typical bacterial models, i.e., E. coli and Staphylococcus aureus, when the dispersed GDYO solution came into direct contact with the bacteria, especially under visible light irradiation. The antibacterial effect of GDYO is attributed to reactive oxygen species-dependent oxidative stress according to the antibacterial mechanism investigations. Furthermore, good dispersion in the bacterial solution is necessary for antibacterial agents that require touch to be effective. Consequently, we looked at how GDY and GDYO were dispersed in water. Fig. 8(A) shows representative photos of the GDY and GDYO dispersions (concentration: 1.0 mg mL−1). Due to their structural and physicochemical differences, GDY and GDYO have unique appearances. After sonication, the GDY dispersion appeared as a dark suspension, and most of the GDY precipitated after 12 h of standing. In contrast, the GDYO dispersion produced by sonication treatment was opaque yellow, and it remained stable as a homogenous yellow dispersion after standing for 36 h, with just a small amount of GDYO precipitating. Subsequently, the turbidity and light scattering of the GDY and GDYO dispersions were measured. The turbidity of GDY and GDYO as a function of aging time is shown in Fig. 8(B). The turbidity of GDYO was obviously higher than that of GDY, indicating that GDYO is more stable in water than GDY. The superior water dispersion of GDYO was attributed to the abundance of hydrophilic functional groups on the surface of the GDYO NSs, such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, and epoxy groups, as shown by FTIR and XPS spectra. The improved antibacterial effectiveness of GDYO compared to GDY is consistent with its greater dispersion, implying that the greater its dispersion, the more active it will be. Furthermore, light scattering was employed to better understand the dispersion stability of GDY and GDYO (Fig. 8(C)). GDY and GDYO have a high transmission level compared to other carbon compounds, indicating that neither GDY nor GDYO are stable in static water. Next, performed an inhibitory zone test with GDY a material for comparison to further establish the dispersion-dependent antibacterial effect of GDYO when it exists in a dispersed state. Both GDY and GDYO showed inhibition zones with average diameters of 32.1 and 41.7 mm under visible light irradiation, respectively, as shown in Fig. 8(D). However they showed no bacteriostatic regions in the dark. This is further strong demonstration of the necessity of visible light irradiation for the antibacterial activity of GDY and GDYO. The formation of inhibitory zones surrounding GDY and GDYO, in terms of the antibacterial mechanism, suggests that at least part of the active components were released from the specimen disk and extended outward, adding to their antibacterial action. Under visible light irradiation, the opaque yellow ring surrounding the GDYO sample demonstrated its release-based antibacterial effect. When comparing GDY with GDYO, the latter showed a bigger inhibition zone, which may be due to the superior dispersion of GDYO. Significantly, while exhibiting essentially low antibacterial action in the colony-counting assay, GDY demonstrated a clear inhibitory effect when exposed to visible light (Fig. 8(D)). This may be because GDY was more easily exposed to visible light during the inhibitory zone test than during the colony-counting test, enhancing its antibacterial activity. GDYO contains three antibacterial mechanisms, according to the aforementioned study, as follows:
 Fig. 8  Antibacterial mechanism validation. (A) Photographs of GDY and GDYO dispersions at a concentration of 2.0 mg mL−1 after 0, 12, and 36 h of standing, respectively. (B) GDY and GDYO dispersion turbidity as a function of aging time. (C) Transmission intensity vs. GDY and GDYO height in water at various periods. (D) Photographs of GDY and GDYO inhibitory zone tests against E. coli in the dark and with visible light. (E) Suggested mechanism for the antibacterial effect of the GDYO suspension when exposed to visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 94. 
(1) Good dispersion in the bacterial system,
(2) Direct interaction with bacteria, and
(3) Oxidative stress caused by the ROS.
A schematic of these putative processes is shown in the Fig. 8(E). According to the step-by-step verification of the antibacterial processes, ROS-dependent oxidative stress (particularly under visible light irradiation) was the most damaging, although the ROS mechanism requires good dispersion and direct contact with the bacteria. The suspected single antibacterial mechanism may not be enough for GDYO to be a bactericidal substance, and thus the three variables interact. GDYO was more powerful against the two bacterial studied than GDY due to its better antibacterial activity caused by these various pathways, implying that surface oxidation offers inert GDY higher antibacterial power. For decades, titanium implants have been frequently employed in bone tissue creation. However, infections associated with orthopedic implants increase the chance of implant failure, and in extreme cases, amputation. Although, TiO2 may form ROS via photocatalysis, the recombination of produced electrons and holes restricts its antibacterial efficacy. Consequently, Rui Wang et al. presented a GDY composite with TiO2 nanofibers, which fights implant infections by enhancing photocatalysis and providing long-term antibacterial protection. Furthermore, the GDY-modified TiO2 nanofibers exhibited enhanced biocompatibility and osteo-inductive properties for cell adhesion and differentiation, aiding bone tissue regeneration in drug-resistant bacteria-induced implant infection. In the implant-associated infection models, femurs were implanted with the UV-irradiated TiO2/GDY, where the bone tissue successfully healed and showed no local necrotic infection region (Fig. 9(b)). Although the photocatalytic antibacterial activity of TiO2/GDY was not significantly better than that of the TiO2 nanofibers in vitro, the combined properties of TiO2/GDY made it much more effective for in vivo therapy. The TiO2/GDY + UV group also exhibited the largest region of new bone regeneration (blue dotted lines, Fig. 9(b)).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrating the dual function of TiO2/GDY in orthopedic implant infection. (b) H&E staining and immunohistochemistry staining of infected tissues after 5 days. (c) After 4 weeks, Masson staining showed bone growth. Adapted with permission from ref. 95. 
In the TiO2/GDY-implanted femurs, immunohistochemical studies on the expression of the osteogenesis marker osteopontin (OPN) indicated numerous OPN-positive cells. Especially, the data showed that TiO2/GDY offered a favorable osteoinductive microenvironment in vivo. In the absence of UV irradiation, the femurs scarcely formed new bone and were packed with infected tissue, demonstrating the importance of the antibacterial process during bone infections. Masson staining was used four weeks following surgery to assess the state of bone regeneration. Fig. 9(c) shows that the PBS group still had an unhealed hole and a persistent infection with necrotic tissue in the bone marrow. In contrast, the TiO2/GDY-implanted bone defect was totally repaired, with considerable volumes of new bone generated (blue staining in dashed boxes). The antibacterial activity of GDY and GDYO was described by Zhiling Zhu et al. GDY inhibits broad-spectrum bacterial growth, while having a modest cytotoxic effect on mammalian cells. Conversely, GDYO has a weaker antibacterial activity than GDY. Then, a changeable, synergistic antibacterial mechanism of GDY is established, including bacterial membrane wrapping, membrane insertion and rupture, and ROS formation. However, the differential gene expression study suggested that GDY may only marginally modify bacterial metabolism, and that the oxidative stress pathway may be a minor bactericidal component. Thus, exploration of the antibacterial properties of GDY-based nanomaterials may give valuable guidance for the future creation and implementation of this unique molecular allotrope of carbon.
The antibacterial activity of the GDY-based nanomaterials is attributed to a combination of physical and chemical actions, as shown in Fig. 10(a). When bacteria come into close contact with GDY, physical adsorption can cause bacterial membrane wrapping. Moreover, the very sharp edges of the GDY NSs can pierce bacterial membranes, causing leakage of the intracellular contents (e.g., proteins and K+). Furthermore, these bactericidal characteristics are tunable and may be amplified by altering the treatment circumstances, such as treatment time, GDY concentration, and shaking speed. In general, physical effects play a significant part in the antibacterial process. In contrast, GDY may chemically trigger the creation of ROS, disrupting particular microbial functions. Furthermore, chemical effects have little impact on bacterial metabolism, showing that GDY-induced oxidative stress is a modest bactericidal agent. There was no discernible change in the skin lesion area between the GDYO and control groups in the in vivo test of uninfected lesions in mice (Fig. 10(b and c)). In comparison, the lesion area treated with GDY became 15% bigger from day 2 to day 6 after treatment with GDY. In general, GDY has greater cytotoxicity than GDYO, which is consistent with our findings regarding their bactericidal action.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the antibacterial mechanisms of GDY-based materials. In vivo cytotoxicity testing of GDY and GDYO. (b) Mice wounds on days 0, 2, 4, and 6. (c) Location of the lesion (%). Each group had six mice. Adapted with permission from ref. 96. 


3.3.2. GDY for chemotherapy. 
Cancer is one the most challenging diseases to treat globally. Many factors contribute to the significant rise in cancer death rates, including an aging population, smoking, stress, and lack of physical activity. Furthermore, due to variables such as inadequate bioavailability and inadequate targeting of chemotherapeutics, achieving adequate anticancer therapy remains difficult. This leads to inadequate treatment results, significant recurrence risks, and unpleasant side effects, and traditional therapies such as surgery, radiation, and chemotherapy are unable to satisfy the clinical need. Thus, new combination therapies with great efficiency are required to increase the survival rate of cancer patients. Accordingly, nanostructure materials are getting significant attention as cancer theranostic agents due to the advancement of nano-biotechnology. In anticancer therapy, GDY and GDYO have been intensively investigated as drug carriers, biomolecule sensors, and cellular imaging agents. In recent years, 2D material-based cancer detection and therapy have received great interest. Many 2D materials have achieved success in applications such as in vivo tumor imaging, drug administration, and photo-thermal treatment (PTT) due to their unique 2D planar structure and physicochemical features.65 PTT involves the use of a light-absorbing therapeutic chemicals to create heat in the tumor location in the presence of light irradiation, causing permanent damage to tumor cells.
GDY is very hydrophobic, but GDYO has oxygen-containing hydrophilic groups on its surface. This special surface chemistry allows for stacking interactions and electrostatic interactions with other surrounding molecules. Drugs can be physically and chemically bound to the surface of GDY and GDY-based materials, allowing drug delivery applications. The superior light absorption property of photo-thermal agents allows them to efficiently convert light irradiation into thermal energy using a low power density laser, minimizing the negative side effect of injuring normal tissue in the irradiation region. Thus, GDY has recently been employed as a photothermal and contrast agent in PTT and in vivo tumor imaging due to its high photothermal conversion efficiency.97 GDY was PEGylated before use to increase its biocompatibility. GDY–PEG exhibited extensive optical absorption from the UV to NIR bands, similar to other 2D materials. GDY–PEG exhibited a mass extinction coefficient of ∼10.1 L g−1 cm−1 under 808 nm laser irradiation, which was around three-times that of GO.98 GDY–PEG exhibited a photothermal conversion efficiency of 42%, which was greater than other traditional PTT agents.99 GDY–PEG was used for both in vitro and in vivo PTT, producing an effective antitumor impact at the cellular level and in a xenograft model due to its superior qualities. GDY–PEG was also employed as a contrast agent for in vivo tumor tissue imaging using photoacoustic imaging (PAI).97 Due to their large surface area, 2D materials make excellent drug carriers, allowing a wide range of medications to be loaded on their surface.100 Graphene and its derivatives have been widely employed for very effective drug loading and delivery due to their sp2-hybridized carbon atoms and huge conjugated surface.46 GDY, a 2D carbon-based material with sp- and sp2-hybridized carbon atoms, may be much more effective for drug delivery. Our team recently developed a GDY-based drug delivery platform, which was employed in cancer treatment combining PTT and chemotherapy.44 GDY was used in this study to treat cancer in two ways, as a photothermal agent and as an anticancer medication carrier. Briefly, ultrasonication and stirring were used to load DOX, a typical chemotherapeutic medication with an aromatic structure, on GDY NSs, where stacking and electrostatic interactions were the primary interactions between GDY and DOX. The loading capacity of GDY NSs was around 38%, which was higher than the virgin graphene NSs.101 Under acidic circumstances, more DOX was released from GDY/DOX, especially under NIR irradiation, according to the drug-release experiment. GDY/DOX showed a high antitumor efficacy under NIR irradiation both in vitro and in vivo by combining the high photothermal conversion efficiency of GDY with the cytotoxicity of DOX.
In comparison to biological enzymes, nanocatalysts have raised several concerns in the biomedical field given that their catalytic activity is durable and efficient even under extreme conditions. However, during biological applications, the key problems are the stability of both their physical form and catalytic activity. Jiaming liu et al.102 developed a method for fabricating a stable nanocatalyst, in which GDY was used as a template for immobilizing catalytic palladium NPs (Pd-NPs) on the surface of GDY. They developed a high-activity, stable GDY-immobilized and Pd-NP-based oxygen generator, which successfully attenuated tumor hypoxia and delayed tumor development. GDY, in contrast to other carbon-based nanomaterials, absorbs metal atoms primarily through its oxygen-containing functional groups and structural defects,103,104 and can easily attach and distribute a huge quantity of ultra-small metal atoms due to its sp-hybridized carbon atoms and heterogeneous electron distribution on its surface.105 The as-prepared Pd-NPs/GDY demonstrated significant catalytic activity in degrading H2O2 to H2O and O2 compared to the commercial Pd/C. Furthermore, during the catalytic reactions, Pd-NPs/GDY had substantially greater stability. This nanocomposite, which has greater dispersibility and chemical stability, retained more than 80% of its initial activity even after 50 reaction cycles, outperforming Pd-NPs, Pd-NPs/GO, and commercial Pd/C. Thus, the XAS and ESR methods were applied to dynamically capture the catalyst and H2O2 intermediates in the liquid phase, which demonstrated why this nanocomposite of GDY-immobilized ultra-small Pd-NPs was such a strong catalyst with so many benefits. In a long-term treatment procedure in vivo, Pd-NPs/GDY also worked as an oxygen generator to reduce tumor hypoxia. In both a 4T1 tumor xenograft model and PDX model, Pd-NPs/GDY successfully suppressed tumor development by controlling tumor proliferation, angiogenesis, and tumor development by blocking HIF-1. Furthermore, a chemo-catalytic combination treatment combining Pd-NPs/GDY and DOX resulted in substantially better anti-tumoral effectiveness of 82.9%. Overall, they developed a unique approach for converting H2O2 to O2 at the tumor location by combining sp-hybridization carbon atoms with noble catalysts for a stable catalytic process. This nano-platform effectively serves as a long-term oxygen nanoreactor for cancer therapy using hypoxia. The vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is an important regulator of vascularization and increases tumor tissue vascularization, which alleviates the limited nutrition and oxygen delivery to tumor cells.106 HIF−1 is important because it regulates the production of VEGF, which is important for angiogenesis.106 Thus, given that Pd-NPs/GDY can effectively reduce hypoxia in tumor cells, we hypothesized that Pd-NPs/GDY may limit tumor development in vivo by inhibiting HIF−1 and HIF−1-related carcinogenesis and tumor progression, such as tumor proliferation and angiogenesis (Fig. 11(a)). The antitumoral effectiveness of Pd-NPs/GDY was tested in a 4T1 tumor xenograft cancer model to determine this was true. GDY or Pd-NPs/GDY was delivered to mice through iv injection every four days at a rate of 5 mg kg−1. Surprisingly, tumor development was strongly suppressed in the mice treated with Pd-NPs/GDY, with an inhibition effectiveness of 39.6%. Then, in a 4T1 tumor xenograft animal model, coupled catalytic therapy by correcting hypoxia with DOX chemotherapeutic therapy was proven to result in increased antitumoral efficiency. Before evaluating cancer therapy, we looked at the biodistribution of Pd-NPs/GDY to learn more about their in vivo behavior. After iv administration of Pd-NPs/GDY for 24 h, the relative Pd concentration in the tumors was 2.47% of the injection, which was attributed to the increased permeability and retention (EPR) effect. We used laser ablation inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry to further investigate the distribution of Pd-NPs/GDY in the tumors (LA-ICP-MS). The distribution of various components in a sample tumor slice is shown in Fig. 11(b). P and Zn are prevalent in cells and tissue, Fe is plentiful in the blood, and Pd indicates Pd-NPs/GDY in the slice. The Pd-element signal overlapped with that of the Fe element, indicating that Pd-NPs/GDY reached the tumor tissues via the circulation and was mostly distributed near the blood vessels. The Pd distribution along the straight lines was estimated to quantitatively corroborate the presence of Pd in the tumor tissue. On the two lines, the Pd concentration varied from 2 to 18 ppm. It is worth noting that the Pd content in locations far from the blood vessels was still up to 2 ppm. Consequently, Pd-NPs/GDY can be supplied to tumor tissue via blood arteries and infiltrate solid tumor tissues. The nano-formulation was then coupled with DOX in a 4T1 tumor xenograft animal model to test chemo-catalytic combination treatment.
 Fig. 11  (a) Pd-NPs/GDY attenuated hypoxia in tumors, resulting in tumor catalytic treatment. (b) Optical and quantitative LA-ICP-MS pictures of tumor slices. (c) Schematic illustration of the creation of the 4T1 model and the therapy. (d) Photographs of tumors collected from the different groups of mice after treatment. (e) Tumor growth curves after the indicated treatments (n = 5), where ***p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY-treatment group compared with the control group and ##p < 0.01, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX-treatment group compared with the DOX-treatment group. (f) Weight of the dissected tumors from each group, where ***p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY-treatment group compared with the control group and ###p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX-treatment group compared with DOX-treatment group. (g) Survival rates of tumor-bearing mice with indicated treatment (n = 6). Adapted with permission from ref. 107. 

Fig. 11(c) depicts the administration technique. Specifically, the 4T1 tumor-bearing Balb/c mice were randomly separated into six groups and injected with 100 L PBS, DOX, GDY, Pd-NPs/GDY, GDY and DOX, and Pd-NPs/GDY and DOX, respectively. DOX, GDY, and Pd-NPs/GDY were given at doses of 3, 5, and 5 mg kg−1 body weight, respectively, every four days. The tumor development curves and pictures in the Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX group revealed a significant reduction in tumor size compared to the control group or the DOX only treatment group (Fig. 11(d and e)). The antitumoral effectiveness in each group was assessed using tumor weight (Fig. 11(f)). Pd-NPs/GDY alone elicited an antitumoral efficiency of 40.4%, which is consistent with earlier animal experimental results, whereas Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX elicited an antitumoral efficiency of 82.9%. Consequently, the therapy combining the antitumoral effects of a chemotherapeutic medication and Pd-NPs/GDY had much better tumor suppressive effectiveness. The survival rate of each group was also calculated (Fig. 11(g)). The Pd-NPs/GDY therapy extended the median lifespan of the mice by roughly 8 days compared to the control group, indicating the advantages of Pd-NPs/GDY in vivo. Notably, the mice treated with the Pd-NP/GDY + DOX combination formulation survived for more than 20 days, suggesting the excellent efficacy of chemo-catalytic antitumor treatment.
Shengliang Li et al.108 demonstrated the application of GDY as a photo-thermo-acoustic wave nano-transducer for simultaneous photoacoustic imaging (PAI) and PTT in living mice for the first time. GDY not only exhibited a stable photothermal performance with a high photothermal conversion efficiency of 42% when irradiated by an 808 nm laser, but also provided an excellent photoacoustic response with a large extinction coefficient in the NIR region. GDY may be employed as a PAI probe and PTT agent simultaneously due to its good biocompatibility upon modification with PEGylation, and it demonstrates excellent photothermal ablation of cancer cells in living mice. This research paves the way for the creation of 2D GDYs as a unique theranostic platform for cancer therapy. GDY-PEG PTT treatment was studied in vivo. After the tumor growth reached 60 mm3, the 4T1 tumor-bearing mice were separated into four groups, each with six animals. The mice were injected intratumorally with GDY-PEG (0.4 mg mL−1, 50 L), and subsequently irradiated for 5 min at a power density of 1 W cm−2 in the treatment groups. The mice treated with saline, mice supplied with GDY–PEG without laser irradiation, and mice irradiated with laser alone were included in the control groups (Fig. 12(b)). The tumors in the treatment groups were fully eradicated after the PTT treatment, and no recurrence was observed for the next 14 days (Fig. 12(c)). In contrast, the three control groups had comparable tumor growth ratios, which were much higher than the treatment groups, indicating that neither the GDY–PEG injection nor laser irradiation alone could slow tumor development. Furthermore, the PTT therapy could extend the lifespan of the mice by up to 30 days, whereas the control animals only lived for 14 to 25 days on average (Fig. 12(d)).
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic showing the production of GDY–PEG. (b) Mice with various treatments. (c) Tumor volume following various treatments. (d) Mouse survival curves following various treatments. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. 
Thus, GDY–PEG can be employed as a potent photothermal agent for in vivo PTT therapy according to these findings. The presence of sp-hybridization-based carbon also implies that GDY has an inherent aptitude for radicals, which supports its use as a biomedicine in photo-dynamic or thermodynamic therapy. Recently, Shengliang Li et al.109 investigated GDY NSs coated via PEGylation (GDY–PEG), which were successfully used as photo-thermo-acoustic wave nano-transducers for cancer therapy. PEG was chosen for surface modification to achieve biocompatibility and biodegradability in GDY NSs because of its hydrophobic feature and strong electrostatic interaction. GDY–PEG demonstrated a very high photothermal conversion efficiency of 42% in PTT and effectively restrained the tumor growth ratio in the mice thanks to its excellent extinction coefficient in the NIR region. In the PTT group, the lifespan of the mice was also extended by more than 5 days compared to the control groups. These studies revealed that GDY has a high probability of being used in in vivo PTT. Due to the strong electrostatic interaction between drug molecules and GDY (Fig. 13(a)), the GDY NSs were used as a drug carrier for cancer therapy. Furthermore, unlike DOX, which was chosen as the model drug, the GDY-based delivery system may respond to both UV irradiation and changes in ambient pH, which were assessed as part of the PTT/chemotherapy system. Fig. 13(b) shows that after 300 s of irradiation, the target environment temperature increased rapidly to >50 °C, a significantly high value compared to the control group. In addition, fluorescence examination revealed that the medication DOX was released from the GDY delivery system in acidic media (Fig. 13(c)). GDY is expected to have excellent free radioprotection ability due to its unique conjugated structure, which includes an acetylenic group in addition to six carbon cyclic rings. In an in vivo counting cell system, a technique was developed using GDY NPs and a composite of bovine serum albumin (BSA) for radiation protection.110 For both enzymatic and non-enzymatic processes, the BSA-modified GDY NPs showed improved O2−˙ and ˙OH scavenging effects. Furthermore, both the in vivo and in vitro studies revealed that the presence of the GDY–BSA NPs could effectively prevent the negative effects of radiation on the cells and restore their viability, demonstrating that GDY is a unique material to safeguard common tissues during radiation therapy.
 Fig. 13  (a) GDY NSs in cancer drug delivery of PTT and chemotherapy. (b) PTT effect compared to GDY/doxorubicin method, irradiated by laser of λ = 808 nm. (c) Fluorescence confocal study for changing MDA-MB-231 cells versus time after modification using GDY/doxorubicin. Adapted with permission from ref. 111. 
Peilong Xu et al.112 used first-principles calculations to investigate the electrical characteristics of virgin GDY and boron-doped GDY (B-GDY). The proclivity of the temozolomide (TMZ) drug for both sheets was investigated. The clean GDY showed little affinity to TMZ drug. Similarly, TMZ adsorption had a minor effect on the GDY band gap energy, with a reported fluctuation of only 12.54%. In gas and water solvent media, the adsorption energy values of TMZ on B-GDY were calculated to be around −21.92 and −45.44 kcal mol−1, respectively. The solvation energy of TMZ was found to be moderate, indicating that it is partially water soluble. Furthermore, significantly stronger charge transfer between TMZ and B-GDY NSs was found, resulting in B having a positive charge, which is strictly required to adsorb the TMZ molecule with suitable tendency. Because the electrical conductivity of B-GDY increased by 40.04%, it is more susceptible to TMZ adsorption than GDY.


3.3.3. GDY free radical scavenging activity for radiation protection. 
ROS, such as H2O2, superoxide anion (˙O2−), singlet oxygen (1O2), and hydroxyl radical (˙OH), are unstable chemicals, which can damage biomolecules and cause cellular necrosis and apoptosis. Thus, many efforts have been made to use these compounds in cancer treatment.113,114 In fact, much effort has focused on the exploitation of ROS-mediated cancer treatment techniques (e.g., radio-, sonodynamic, and photodynamic therapy), which offer various benefits over traditional surgical and chemotherapeutic techniques, such as noninvasiveness, high selectivity, and minimal side effects. However, the insufficient oxygen supply in the hypoxic tumor tissues substantially limits the therapeutic efficacy of these treatments in solid tumors.115 Consequently, the development of oxygen-independent, ROS-mediated oncotherapy is critical. Unlike other carbon-based materials, GDY has a unique sp-hybridized carbon atom-containing structure, which allows significant reduction. GDY was shown to have a low reduction potential and be capable of reducing palladium ions in situ to generate Pd NPs, indicating that it may act as both a carrier and a reductant.116 Xie et al.70 devised a bovine serum albumin (BSA)-modified GDY for scavenging the free radicals created during X-ray irradiation based on the reducibility of GDY. The extremely active ˙O2− and ˙OH were cleared by the GDY–BSA NPs, demonstrating their great free radical scavenging capabilities. GDY–BSA NPs in cells could minimize DNA damage caused by X-ray radiation and remove intracellular ROS, while the in vivo experiments indicated that GDY–BSA NPs could protect key organs from X-ray-induced damage. The latter was validated by measuring the DNA damage in the bone marrow and two critical biomarkers of radiation-induced harm in key organs (superoxide dismutase and malondialdehyde levels). For effective cancer therapy, Fenton reaction-mediated oncotherapy employs iron ions to catalytically transform endogenous H2O2 into hydroxyl radicals, the most reactive oxygen species known in biology. Due to the higher amounts of H2O2 (0.1–1 × 10−3 m) in the tumor microenvironment compared to normal tissue, Fenton chemistry provides the benefits of excellent selectivity and fewer adverse effects compared to other ROS-mediated cancer therapies. A tumor-targeting iron sponge (TTIS) nanocomposite based on GDYO, which has a high affinity for iron, was explored by Huan Min et al.117 To enable tumor photoacoustic and magnetic resonance imaging, TTIS can be decorated with a tumor-targeting polymer and allowed to accumulate in tumor tissue. TTIS is an effective PTT agent because of its high photothermal conversion efficiency (37.5%). Furthermore, the heat generated during the PTT process can speed up the release of iron ions from TTIS, while also increasing the efficiency of the Fenton reaction, allowing a combination PTT and Fenton reaction-mediated cancer treatment. This study offers a GDYO-based iron sponge with improved anticancer properties thanks to PTT and Fenton chemistry. Fig. 14(a) depicts the putative anticancer mechanism of TTIS. We investigated the hemolytic activity of TTIS and TNIS to determine their biocompatibility before examining their anticancer effects in vivo. After 4 h of exposure to TNIS or TTIS, hemolysis increased slowly and dose dependently. Below 100 μg mL−1 TNIS and TTIS caused negligible hemolysis. Therefore, 10 mg kg−1 was chosen as the dosage for the subsequent experiments in mice. 4T1 xenografted mice were randomly divided into 6 treatment groups (saline, TNIS, TTIS, saline + laser, TNIS + laser, and TTIS + laser), which were injected every other day for 3 treatments (Fig. 14(b)). The temperatures of the tumor tissue of the mice that were exposed to laser irradiation were monitored 6 h after each injection. Fig. 14(c and d) show that the mice given TNIS + laser irradiation had significantly higher temperatures (T = 15.8 °C) than the mice given saline injection (T = 8.6 °C). Under the same intensity of laser irradiation, the mice injected with TTIS demonstrated an even larger rise in tumor temperature (T = 19.8 °C). The body weights of the mice were monitored every other day during therapy to explore potentially unfavorable side effects of the treatment with TTIS or TNIS. No significant changes in body weight were observed throughout the course of the therapy (Fig. 14(e)), indicating that the therapy was generally safe. Critically, the tumor volume was measured to assess the therapeutic benefits of the various formulations (Fig. 14(f)). Tumor development was rather quick in both the saline and saline + laser groups, but tumor development was somewhat slowed in the TTIS alone group, confirming the Fenton reaction-mediated cancer therapy effects. In the mice treated with TTIS + laser, tumor inhibition significantly increased (80%), showing a combination anticancer impact of PTT and the Fenton reaction. The mice treated with TTIS + laser had greater tumor suppression than those treated with TNIS laser, which can be ascribed to the improved tumor targeting of TTIS. The mice were euthanized at the conclusion of the therapy, and the tumors were removed and weighed (Fig. 14(g and h)). The average tumor weights matched the in vivo volume measurements, with the TTIS + laser group being lighter than the TTIS and TNIS + laser groups. Most of the tumor cells in the TTIS + laser group were destroyed according to the H&E staining of the tumor sections obtained from the mice at the conclusion of therapy (Fig. 14(i)). The tumors from the mice treated with TTIS, TNIS, or TNIS + laser showed some cell damage, whereas that from the mice treated with saline or saline + laser showed no evident cell damage. The TUNEL staining results were consistent with the H&E test findings, demonstrating the improved anticancer impact of TTIS, which is based on a combination of PTT and Fenton reactions.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of TTIS-mediated tumor therapy via a photothermally enhanced Fenton reaction. PTT and Fenton reaction-mediated antitumor effect of TTIS in vivo. (b) Schematic illustration of the timeline for the therapeutic experiment. (c) Thermal images of tumor-bearing mice intravenously injected with saline, TNIS or TTIS under 808 nm laser irradiation at the indicated time points. (d) Temperature profiles of the tumor sites in mice treated with saline, TNIS or TTIS and exposure to laser irradiation. (e) Body weights of mice during the treatment. (f) Tumor growth curves for the indicated treatments. (g) Photos of tumor tissues collected from mice post treatment. (h) Average weight of the post treatment tumors. (i) H&E staining of tumor tissues post treatment. The data are shown as the mean ± SD (n = 5). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Adapted with permission from ref. 117. 

4. Conclusions and perspectives
GDY and its derivatives have shown considerable potential in the biological field in recent years due to their unique structures and remarkable performances. The properties and benefits of GDY are at the forefront of materials design for a wide range of biological applications, including cell proliferation, differentiation/maturation, drug delivery, and anticancer therapy. Various survivability experiments on human cells in vitro and on mice in vivo have yielded extremely encouraging results, indicating that GDY-based materials are appropriate for real-world applications. For a number of applications, GDY has been shown to be a suitable substrate for loading medicines, metal ions, proteins, and nanocatalysts. The excellent photothermal conversion efficiency of GDY broadens its usefulness in tumor eradication by producing hyperthermia. The capacity of GDY to scavenge ROS and monitor humidity is enhanced by its sp-hybridized carbon atoms. However, the application of GDY in the biological field is still uncommon. The essential features of GDY are crucial to its anticipated medicinal applications. GDY is a promising substrate and carrier with a wide range of applications. The triple carbon bonds of GDY are possible active sites, which may interact with other ligands covalently or non-covalently. For its biological use, GDY may covalently bond with targeted molecules, tracking molecules, and biocompatible molecules. One-bond and two-bonds make up the acetylenic bond, with the electron pair of each bond acting as an electron donor to coordinate with transition metal atoms with vacant orbitals. Simulation calculations showed that GDY, a carbon-based material with a high fraction of acetylenic linkages and natural nanopores, has substantial capacity for the adsorption of metal atom. The ion carrying and in situ catalytic properties of GDY have been tested in the lab. Consequently, we believe that GDY will be a suitable substrate for immobilizing a large number of metal atoms and the in situ creation of nanocatalysts, which can be employed as stable and high-performance biosensors. Meanwhile, because of its capacity to adsorb metal ions, GDY can be used as a drug carrier for loading platinum medicines. In addition, GDY can be utilized to detect and eliminate heavy metal ions. Secondly, GDY can be covalently functionalized through addition reactions between its acetylenic bonds and unsaturated ligand groups, a process known as click chemistry. The addition of azides and alkynes is a prototypical click chemistry reaction. Thirdly, the hydrophobic and conjugated surface of GDY, like many other 2D materials, may non-covalently load numerous functional molecules for disease diagnostics and therapy, such as drug and gene loading via hydrophobic interaction and stacking. The inherent nanopores of GDY make it a suitable device for biological applications. DNA sequencing is one of its possible uses. Simulation computing was also used to investigate the binding force between a nucleobase and GDY. The results of the calculations indicated that the distinct nucleobase binding strengths on GDY follow the order of G > A > C > T > U. Thus, GDY can be a potential choice for DNA sequencing based on its outstanding qualities indicated above and other computational predictions. Furthermore, GDY can be developed as a nanopore-based electrochemical device for single-molecule detection based on a similar idea. However, the biological application of GDY is still uncommon in many domains compared to other carbon-based nanomaterials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes. There are still several obstacles to overcome, which restrict the future applicability of GDY. Firstly, single layers of GDY NSs are challenging to maintain in solution because of the high contact between them. Multilayered GDY NSs cover a portion of the acetylenic bonds, lowering the fraction of sp-hybridized carbon atoms accessible and limiting the benefits of GDY. Secondly, the large-scale manufacture of GDY is a difficulty that must be solved. To achieve the large-scale manufacture and wider use of GDY, its present synthetic techniques need to be enhanced. Thirdly, techniques for identifying the acetylenic bonds of GDY, particularly for distinguishing GDY from other carbon-based compounds in biological systems, are currently scarce. GDY, like other carbon-based nanomaterials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes, is grappling with the problem of translating laboratory discoveries into therapeutic application. The therapeutic uses of GDY-based nanomaterials are limited by two major limitations. The biotoxicity and metabolism of GDY in vivo are the first considerations for its clinical use. Despite the fact that certain research suggests that GDY and its derivatives are safer than other carbon-based materials, the long-term biotoxicity of GDY is still unknown. Furthermore, the bio-distribution, metabolism, and excretion of GDY-based materials are critical in their practical use. The buildup of GDY in different organs and its excretion time, like other 2D carbon-based nanomaterials such as graphene, are likely connected to its long-term biotoxicity. Consequently, rigorous research on the biotoxicity and metabolism of GDY is critical. Secondly, the large-scale clinical use of GDY-based materials requires the mass manufacturing of homogenous GDY-based materials. Specifically, the production of both pristine GDY and its reprocessed derivatives on a large scale is required for their clinical application. Meanwhile, GDY-based products should have similar physicochemical properties in different batches, such as shape and solubility. Consequently, developing large-scale and robust manufacturing procedures is critical. In conclusion, GDY and its derivatives appear to be great materials for biomedical applications; however, several issues have to be resolved. We believe that GDY has a lot of promise for future applications because of its unique performances and features.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
National Natural Science Foundation of China, No. 61905148; the Shenzhen Science and Technology Project, No. JCYJ20190808174201658.
References
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Iqbal, Z. Shi, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Novel emerging graphdiyne based two dimensional materials: Synthesis, properties and renewable energy applications, Nano Today, 2021, 39, 101207,  DOI:10.1016/j.nantod.2021.101207 .
H. Bu, M. Zhao, H. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Xi and Z. Wang, Isoelectronic doping of graphdiyne with boron and nitrogen: Stable configurations and band gap modification, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116(15), 3934–3939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. Li and X.-L. Sheng, Graphdiyne nanoribbons with open hexagonal rings: Existence of topological unprotected edge states, Phys. Lett. A, 2017, 381(38), 3337–3341 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Liu and Y. Li, Progress and prospect of two dimensional carbon graphdiyne, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2016, 61(26), 2901–2912 CrossRef .
X. Dai and D. Ge, Numerical investigation on the field emission properties of n-doped graphdiyne-c60 nanostructures, AIP Adv., 2018, 8(1), 015320 CrossRef .
N. M. Galdino, G. S. Brehm, R. Bussamara, W. D. G. Gonçalves, G. A. Abarca Anjari and J. D. Scholten, Sputtering deposition of gold nanoparticles onto graphene oxide functionalized with ionic liquids: Biosensor materials for cholesterol detection, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 9482–9486,  10.1039/C1037TB02582C .
H. Hu, Z. Shi, K. Khan, R. Cao, W. Liang, A. K. Tareen, Y. Zhang, W. Huang, Z. Guo and X. Luo, Recent advances in doping engineering of black phosphorus, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(11), 5421–5441 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, M. F. Khan, Z. Shi, C. Ma, S. S. Shams, R. Khatoon and H. Zhang, Guo Z. Synthesis, properties and novel electrocatalytic applications of the 2d-borophene xenes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 100283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. U. R. Sagar, B. Zhang, W. Huang, A. Mahmood, N. Mahmood, K. Khan and H. Zhang, Recent progress, challenges, and prospects in two-dimensional photo-catalyst materials and environmental remediation, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 1–77 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(2), 387–440 RSC .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, L. Wang, M. Aslam, C. Ma, N. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Sensing applications of atomically thin group iv carbon siblings xenes: Progress, challenges, and prospects, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(3), 2005957,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202005957 .
D. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, Recent progress of two-dimensional thermoelectric materials, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, P. Yin, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, R. Huang, J. Du, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, R. Cao and S. Wei, Broadband nonlinear photonics in few-layer borophene, Small, 2021, 17(7), 2006891,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202006891 .
Z. Shi, R. Cao, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, X. Liu, W. Liang, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, Z. Guo and X. Luo, Two-dimensional tellurium: Progress, challenges, and prospects, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–34 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Tareen, K. Khan, M. Aslam, X. Liu and H. Zhang, Confinement in two-dimensional materials: Major advances and challenges in the emerging renewable energy conversion and other applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2021, 61(11), 100294,  DOI:10.1016/j.progsolidstchem.2020.100294 .
A. K. Tareen, K. Khan, M. Aslam, H. Zhang and X. Liu, Recent progress, challenges, and prospects in emerging group-via xenes: Synthesis, properties and novel applications, Nanoscale, 2021, 13(2), 510–552 RSC .
L. Zhang, K. Khan, J. Zou, H. Zhang and Y. Li, Recent advances in emerging 2d material-based gas sensors: Potential in disease diagnosis, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6(22), 1901329 CrossRef .
H. Du, H. Yang, C. Huang, J. He, H. Liu and Y. Li, Graphdiyne applied for lithium-ion capacitors displaying high power and energy densities, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, J. Zhou, R. Du, Z. Xie, S. Deng, R. Liu, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Robust superhydrophobic foam: A graphdiyne-based hierarchical architecture for oil/water separation, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(1), 168–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, Y. Zhu, D. Yi, J. Zhou, S. Zhang, C. Yin, F. Ding, S. Zhang, X. Yi and J. Wang, Ultrathin graphdiyne film on graphene through solution-phase van der Waals epitaxy, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(7), eaat6378 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Q. Khan, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, A. S. Saleemi, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Guo, Novel two-dimensional carbon–chromium nitride-based composite as an electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, H. Zhang, K. Khan and R. Cao, Two-dimensional selenium and its composites for device applications, Nano Res., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s12274-021-3493-x .
W. Ahmad, Y. Gong, G. Abbas, K. Khan, M. Khan, G. Ali, A. Shuja, A. K. Tareen, Q. Khan and D. Li, Evolution of low-dimensional material-based field-effect transistors, Nanoscale, 2021, 13(10), 5162–5186 RSC .
X. Xia, C. Ma, H. Chen, K. Khan, A. K. Tateen and Q. Xiao, Nonlinear optical properties and ultrafast photonics of 2d bp/ti3c2 heterostructures, Opt. Mater., 2021, 112, 110809 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, R. U. R. Sagar, M. Luo, S. Aslam, Y. Liu, K. Khan, M. F. Khan, C. Liu, T. Liang and M. Zhang, Graphene foam–polymer based electronic skin for flexible tactile sensor, Sens. Actuators, A, 2021, 327, 112697 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, Q. Khan, M. Iqbal, H. Zhang and Z. Gou, Novel synthesis, properties and applications of emerging group-va two-dimensional monoelemental materials (2d-xenes), Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 6333–6391,  10.1039/d1qm00629k .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, M. F. Khan, Z. Shi, C. Ma, S. S. Shams, R. Khatoon, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Synthesis, properties and novel electrocatalytic applications of the 2d-borophene xenes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 59, 100283 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, M. Saeed, A. S. Saleemi, M. Kiani, Z. Ouyang and H. Zhang, Fe-doped mayenite electride composite with 2d reduced graphene oxide: As a non-platinum based, highly durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, A comprehensive review on synthesis of pristine and doped inorganic room temperature stable mayenite electride, [Ca24Al28O64]4+(e−)4 and its applications as a catalyst, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2019, 54, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shi, R. Cao, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, X. Liu, W. Liang, Y. Zhang, C. Ma, Z. Guo and X. Luo, Two-dimensional tellurium: Progress, challenges, and prospects, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 1–34 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Chen, L. Gao, Z. Qin, Y. Ge, K. Khan, Y. Song, G. Xie, S. Xu and H. Zhang, Recent advances of low-dimensional materials in mid-and far-infrared photonics, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 21, 100800 CrossRef .
A. K. Tareen, K. Khan, M. Aslam, X. Liu and H. Zhang, Confinement in two-dimensional materials: Major advances and challenges in the emerging renewable energy conversion and other applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2021, 61, 100294 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, S. Y. Ma, P. Zhou, C. X. Zhang, C. He and L. Z. Sun, Magnetic properties of single transition-metal atom absorbed graphdiyne and graphyne sheet from DFT+U calculations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(50), 26313–26321 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, L. Wang, M. Aslam, C. Ma, N. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Sensing applications of atomically thin group iv carbon siblings xenes: Progress, challenges, and prospects, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2005957 Search PubMed .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Mahmood, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Recent developments in emerging two-dimensional materials and their applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 387–440,  10.1039/c9tc04187g .
J. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Zhao, Progress and prospects of graphdiyne-based materials in biomedical applications, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(42), 1804386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dai, C. Huo, Q. Zhang, K. Khan, X. Zhang and C. Shen, Electrochemical mechanism and structure simulation of 2d lithium-ion battery, Adv. Theory Simul., 2018, 1(10), 1800023 CrossRef .
K. N. Dinh, Q. Liang, C.-F. Du, J. Zhao, A. I. Y. Tok, H. Mao and Q. Yan, Nanostructured metallic transition metal carbides, nitrides, phosphides, and borides for energy storage and conversion, Nano Today, 2019, 25, 99–121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, C. Zheng, K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam and B. Wang, Two dimensional nanomaterials-enabled smart light regulation technologies: Recent advances and developments, Optik, 2020, 220, 165191 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Khan, E. P. Randviir, D. A. Brownson, X. Ji, G. C. Smith and C. E. Banks, 2d hexagonal boron nitride (2d-hbn) explored as a potential electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, Electroanalysis, 2017, 29(2), 622–634 CrossRef CAS .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Going green with batteries and supercapacitor: Two dimensional materials and their nanocomposites based energy storage applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2019, 100254 Search PubMed .
A. K. Tareen, K. Khan, M. Aslam, X. Liu and H. Zhang, Confinement in two-dimensional materials: Major advances and challenges in the emerging renewable energy conversion and other applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 100294 Search PubMed .
H. Tang, C. M. Hessel, J. Wang, N. Yang, R. Yu, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Two-dimensional carbon leading to new photoconversion processes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(13), 4281 RSC .
D. W. Ehrenfeld, Sea turtle conservation strategy, action plan, and action projects, Int. J. Distrib. Sens. Netw., 2014, 2014(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. H. Baughman, H. Eckhardt and M. Kertesz, Structure-property predictions for new planar forms of carbon: Layered phases containing sp2 and sp atoms, J. Chem. Phys., 1987, 87(11), 6687–6699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, A. M. Asiri, Z. Tang, D. Dan and Y. Lin, Graphene based materials for biomedical applications – sciencedirect, Mater. Today, 2013, 16(10), 365–373 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, E. Berta, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Micro/nanorobots for biomedicine: delivery, surgery, sensing, and detoxification, Sci. Robot., 2017, 2(4), eaam6431 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. María, M. María, C. Luis, L. Adelaida and B. Raquel, Donohue syndrome. Extreme insulin resistance in the neonatal period, Endocrinol. Nutr., 2016, 63(1), 45–46 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, Q. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Mao, H. Li, H. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Li, Graphdiyne:Zno nanocomposites for high-performance UV photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(19), 3697–3702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, J. Zhou, R. Du, Z. Xie and S. Deng, Robust superhydrophobic foam: A graphdiyne-based hierarchical architecture for oil/water separation, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(1), 168–173,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201504407 .
Z. Fan, X. Huang, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Thin metal nanostructures: Synthesis, properties and applications, Cheminform, 2015, 6, 95–111,  10.1039/C4SC02571G .
L. Wang, C. Dai, L. Jiang, G. Tong, Y. Xiong, K. Khan, Z. Tang, X. Chen and H. Zeng, Advanced devices for tumor diagnosis and therapy, Small., 2021, 17(28), 2100003,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202100003 .
K. Khan, A. Khan Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. K. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of cationic doped [Ca24Al28O64]4+(4e−) composite via rapid citrate sol-gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(11), 3819–3830,  10.1039/C7DT04543C .
K. Khan, A. Khan Tareen, J. Li, U. Khan, A. Nairan, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang, M. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of tin-doped mayenite electride composite as a non-noble metal durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction (orr), Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(38), 13498–13506,  10.1039/c8dt02548g .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, S. Ali Khan, Q. khan, Q. U. Khan, M. Saeed, A. Siddique Saleemi, M. Kiani, Z. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Fe-doped mayenite electride composite with 2d reduced graphene
oxide: As a non-platinum based, highly durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 19809,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-019-55207-6 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, M. F. Khan, Z. Shi, C. Ma, S. S. Shams, R. Khatoon, N. mahmood, H. Zhang and Z. Guo, Synthesis, properties and novel electrocatalytic applications of the 2d-borophene xenes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 100283,  DOI:10.1016/j.progsolidstchem.2020.100283 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Q. Khan, S. A. Khan, Q. U. Khan, A. S. Saleemi, R. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Guo, H. Zhang and Z. Ouyang, Novel two-dimensional carbon–chromium nitride-based composite as an electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 738,  DOI:10.3389/fchem.2019.00738 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, A. Mahmood, Q. khan, Y. Zhang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Guo and H. Zhang, Going green with batteries and supercapacitor: Two dimensional materials and their nanocomposites based energy storage applications, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2020, 58, 100254,  DOI:10.1016/j.progsolidstchem.2019.100254 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, K. H. Thebo, U. Khan, R. Wang, S. S. Shams, Z. Han and Z. Ouyang, A comprehensive review on synthesis of pristine and doped inorganic room temperature stable mayenite electride, [Ca24Al28O64]4+(e−)4 and its applications as a catalyst, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2018, 54, 1–19,  DOI:10.1016/j.progsolidstchem.2018.12.001 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, M. Aslam, Y. Zhang, R. Wang, Z. Ouyang, Z. Gou and H. Zhang, Recent advances in two-dimensional materials and their nanocomposites in sustainable energy conversion applications, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(45), 21622–21678,  10.1039/c9nr05919a .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, S. Elshahat, A. Yadav, U. Khan, M. Yang, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of a cationic-doped [ca24al28o64] 4 + (4e−) composite via a rapid citrate sol-gel method, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(11), 3819–3830,  10.1039/C7DT04543C .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, U. Khan, A. Nairan, S. Elshahat, N. Muhammad, M. Saeed, A. Yadav, L. Bibbò and Z. Ouyang, Single step synthesis of highly conductive room-temperature stable cation-substituted mayenite electride target and thin film, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 4967,  DOI:10.1038/s41598-019-41512-7 .
K. Khan, A. K. Tareen, J. Li, U. Khan, A. Nairan, Y. Yuan, X. Zhang, M. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Facile synthesis of tin-doped mayenite electride composite as a non-noble metal durable electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction reaction (orr), Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(38), 13498–13506,  10.1039/C8DT02548G .
Z. Tu, H. Qiao, Y. Yan, G. Guy, W. Chen, A. Mohsen and H. Rainer, Directed graphene-based nanoplatforms for hyperthermia: Overcoming multiple drug resistance, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57(35), 11198–11202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Tan, H. Zhang and L. Wang, Two-dimensional graphene analogues for biomedical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2681–2701 RSC .
L. Niu, K. Li, H. Zhen, Y. S. Chui, W. Zhang, F. Yan and Z. Zheng, Salt-assisted high-throughput synthesis of single- and few-layer transition metal dichalcogenides and their application in organic solar cells, Small, 2015, 10(22), 4651–4657 CrossRef PubMed .
K. N. Dinh, P. Zheng, Z. Dai, Y. Zhang, R. Dangol, Y. Zheng, B. Li, Y. Zong and Q. Yan, Ultrathin porous nifev ternary layer hydroxide nanosheets as a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting, Small, 2018, 14(8), 1703257 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Wu, H. Gong, P. Liu, X. L. He, S. B. Luo, X. M. Zheng, C. Y. Zhang, X. M. He and J. Luo, Large-scale development of est-ssr markers in sponge gourd via transcriptome sequencing, Mol. Breed., 2014, 34(4), 1903–1915 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Gholami, D. Lauser, K. Ludwig, J. Storm, B. Ziem, N. Severin, C. Böttcher, J. P. Rabe, A. Herrmann, M. Adeli and R. Haag, Functionalized graphene as extracellular matrix mimics: Toward well-defined 2D nanomaterials for multivalent virus interactions, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606477 CrossRef .
N. N. Du, X. Li, Y. P. Wang, L. Fei, Y. X. Liu, C. X. Li, Z. G. Peng, L. M. Gao, J. D. Jiang and D. Q. Song, Synthesis, structure–activity relationship and biological evaluation of novel n-substituted matrinic acid derivatives as host heat-stress cognate 70 (hsc70) down-regulators, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2011, 21(16), 4732–4735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, M. Wang, L. Li, D. Wu, Y. Wang, L. Yan, S. Morrisnatschke, Y. Liu, Y. Zhao and C. Wang, Design, synthesis, cytotoxic activity and molecular docking studies of new 20(s)-sulfonylamidine camptothecin derivatives, Eur. J. Med. Chem., 2016, 115, 109–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, C. Lai, M. Zhang, G. Zeng and L. Chen, Graphdiyne: A rising star of electrocatalyst support for energy conversion. Advanced Energy, Materials, 2020, 10(16), 2000177 CAS .

          H. Zreiqat, C. R. Dunstan and V. Rosen, Bone-biomimetic biomaterial and cell fate determination, Springer International Publishing,  2015 Search PubMed .
N. Parvin, J. Quan, Y. Wei, R. Yu, Z. Bing, H. Ling, Z. Ying, L. Wang, Z. Hua and M. Gao, Few-layer graphdiyne nanosheets applied for multiplexed real-time DNA detection, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(18), 1606755 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Meng, X. Yu, X. Wang and X. Hun, Molybdenum disulfide/graphdiyne-based photoactive material derived photoelectrochemical strategy for highly sensitive microrna assay, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 297, 126808 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, Z. Liu, C. Li, J. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Yi, K. Deng and X. Li, Tunable graphdiyne for DNA surface adsorption: Affinities, displacement, and applications for fluorescence sensing, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2021, 1–13 Search PubMed .
J. Xiao, Z. Liu, C. Li, J. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Yi, K. Deng and X. Li, Tunable graphdiyne for DNA surface adsorption: Affinities, displacement, and applications for fluorescence sensing, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2021, 413(15), 3847–3859,  DOI:10.1007/s00216-021-03355-y .
F. Chang, L. Huang, C. Guo, G. Xie, J. Li and Q. Diao, Graphdiyne-based one-step DNA fluorescent sensing platform for the detection of mycobacterium tuberculosis and its drug-resistant genes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(39), 35622–35629,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b15248 .
S. Chen, R. Yuan and Y. Chai, F. Electrochemical sensing of hydrogen peroxide using metal nanoparticles: A review, Mikrochim. Acta, 2013, 180, 15–32 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Q. Liu, A. M. Asiri, A. H. Qusti, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Ultrathin graphitic carbon nitride nanosheets: A novel peroxidase mimetic, fe doping-mediated catalytic performance enhancement and application to rapid, highly sensitive optical detection of glucose, Nanoscale, 2013, 5(23), 11604–11609 RSC .
Y. Yan, Q. Liu, H. Mao and K. Wang, The immobilization of graphene quantum dots by one-step electrodeposition and its application in peroxydisulfate electrochemiluminescence, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 775, 1–7,  DOI:10.1016/j.jelechem.2016.05.010 .
F. Jing, S. Y. Song, Y. Xing, H. J. Zhang, Z. F. Li, L. N. Sun, X. M. Guo and W. Q. Fan, Synthesis, characterization, and near-infrared luminescent properties of the ternary thulium complex covalently bonded to mesoporous mcm-41, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 182(3), 435–441 CrossRef .
E. A. Moschou, B. V. Sharma, S. K. Deo and S. Daunert, Fluorescence glucose detection: Advances toward the ideal in vivo biosensor, J. Fluoresc., 2004, 14(5), 535–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Villalonga, P. Díez, P. Yáñez-Sedeño and J. Pingarrón, Wiring horseradish peroxidase on gold nanoparticles-based nanostructured polymeric network for the construction of mediatorless hydrogen peroxide biosensor, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56(12), 4672–4677 CrossRef CAS .
A.-H. Liu, D.-Q. Liu, T.-J. Liang, X.-Q. Yu, M.-T. Feng, L.-G. Yao, Y. Fang, B. Wang, L.-H. Feng, M.-X. Zhang and S.-C. Mao, Caulerprenylols a and b, two rare antifungal prenylated para-xylenes from the green alga caulerpa racemosa, Bioorg. Med. Chem. Lett., 2013, 23(9), 2491–2494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, X. Shen, D. Baimanov, L. Wang, Y. Xiao, H. Liu, Y. Li, X. Gao, Y. Zhao and C. Chen, Immobilized ferrous ion and glucose oxidase on graphdiyne and its application on one-step glucose detection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(3), 2647–2654,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.8b03118 .
L. Wu, J. Gao, X. Lu, C. Huang and J. Chen, Graphdiyne: A new promising member of 2d all-carbon nanomaterial as robust electrochemical enzyme biosensor platform, Carbon, 2020, 156, 568–575 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, Y. Jiang, J. Hao, H. Wei, W. Zheng and L. Mao, Graphdiyne oxide enhances the stability of solid contact-based ionselective electrodes for excellent in vivo analysis. Science China, Chemistry, 2019, 62(10), 1414–1420 CAS .
Q. Bai, C. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Zhu, L. Wang, F. Jiang, M. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Y. William and F. Du, Subsequent monitoring of ferric ion and ascorbic acid using graphdiyne quantum dots-based optical sensors, Microchim. Acta, 2020, 187(12), 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yan, L. Zhang, P. Yu and L. Mao, Sensitive and fast humidity sensor based on a redox conducting supramolecular ionic material for respiration monitoring, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89(1), 996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, Z. Xiong, Z. Liu and T. Zhang, Exfoliation at the liquid/air interface to assemble reduced graphene oxide ultrathin films for a flexible noncontact sensing device, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(8), 1370–1375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Borini, R. White, D. Wei, M. Astley, S. Haque, E. Spigone, N. Harris, J. Kivioja and T. Ryhänen, Ultrafast graphene oxide humidity sensors, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(12), 11166–11173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mao, H. Yan, S. Guo, W. Fei and Y. Li, Carbon atom hybridization matters: Ultrafast
humidity response of graphdiyne oxides, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130(15), 3922–3926 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, W. Liu, Y. Li, Y.-W. Yang, A. Dong and Y. Li, 2d graphdiyne oxide serves as a superior new generation of antibacterial agents, iScience, 2019, 19, 662–675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, M. Shi, F. Xu, Y. Qiu, P. Zhang, K. Shen, Q. Zhao, J. Yu and Y. Zhang, Graphdiyne-modified tio2 nanofibers with osteoinductive and enhanced photocatalytic antibacterial activities to prevent implant infection, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 4465,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-18267-1 .
Z. Zhu, Q. Bai, S. Li, S. Li, M. Liu, F. Du, N. Sui and W. W. Yu, Small, 2020, 16(34), 2001440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Wang, G. Y. Zhao, Y. Li, X. L. Chen, B. B. Xie, H. N. Su, Y. H. Lv, H. L. He, H. Liu and J. Hu, Mechanistic insight into the function of the c-terminal pkd domain of the collagenolytic serine protease deseasin mcp-01 from deep sea pseudoalteromonas sp. Sm9913: Binding of the pkd domain to collagen results in collagen swelling but does not unwind the, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285(19), 14285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Reshma, S. Syama and P. V. Mohanan, Nano-biointeractions of pegylated and bare reduced graphene oxide on lung alveolar epithelial cells: A comparative in vitro study, Colloids Surf., B, 2016, 140, 104–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Hessel, V. P. Pattani, M. Rasch, M. G. Panthani, B. Koo, J. W. Tunnell and B. A. Korgel, Copper selenide nanocrystals for photothermal therapy, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(6), 2560–2566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kurapati, K. Kostarelos, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Biomedical uses for 2d materials beyond graphene: Current advances and challenges ahead, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(29), 6052–6074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tyagi, N. F. Attia and K. E. Geckeler, Exfoliated graphene nanosheets: Ph-sensitive drug carrier and anti-cancer activity, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 498, 364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Shen, X. Gao and C. Chen, Graphdiyne-templated palladium-nanoparticle assembly as a robust oxygen generator to attenuate tumor hypoxia, Nano Today, 2020, 34, 100907 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, H. Cheng, Y. Hong, Y. Lin, T. Yao, C. Wang, J. Li, S. Wei and J. Lu, Single-atom pd1/graphene catalyst achieved by atomic layer deposition: Remarkable performance in selective hydrogenation of 1,3-butadiene, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(33), 10484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Guan, C. Liu, H. Huang, F. Xue, X. Dong, S. J. Pennycook and M. F. Chisholm, Catalytically active single-atom niobium in graphitic layers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4(5), 1924 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, S. Li, P. Lv, C. He, D. Ma and Z. Yang, First principles study on the interfacial properties of nm/graphdiyne (nm = pd, pt, rh and ir): The implications for nm growing, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 360(part A), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .

          K. A. Vincent and R. A. Kelly, Integrative pro-angiogenic activation: Hif-α, Therapeutic Neovascularization–Quo Vadis?,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Shen, X. Gao, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Yin, Y. Liu, W. Xu, R. Cai, M. You, M. Guo, Y. Wang, J. Li, Y. Li and C. Chen, Graphdiyne-templated palladium-nanoparticle assembly as a robust oxygen generator to attenuate tumor hypoxia, Nano Today, 2020, 34, 100907,  DOI:10.1016/j.nantod.2020.100907 .
S. Li, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Li and S. Wang, Graphdiyne materials as nanotransducer for in vivo photoacoustic imaging and photothermal therapy of tumor, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 6087–6094,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b01965 .
S. Li, Y. Chen, H. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Liu, F. Lv, Y. Li and S. Wang, Graphdiyne materials as nanotransducer for in vivo photoacoustic imaging and photothermal therapy of tumor, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 6087–6094,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b01965 .
J. Xie, N. Wang, X. Dong, C. Wang, Z. Du, L. Mei, Y. Yong, C. Huang, Y. Li and Z. Gu, Graphdiyne nanoparticles with high free radical scavenging activity for radiation protection, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11(3), 2579–2590 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jin, M. Guo, J. Liu, J. Liu, H. Zhou, J. Li, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Li and Y. Zhao, Graphdiyne nanosheet-based drug delivery platform for photothermal/chemotherapy combination treatment of cancer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(10), 8436–8442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, N. Na and A. Mohamadi, Investigation the application of pristine graphdiyne (gdy) and boron-doped graphdiyne (bgdy) as an electronic sensor for detection of anticancer drug, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2020, 1190, 112996 CrossRef CAS .
B. D'Autréaux and M. B. Toledano, ROS as signalling molecules: Mechanisms that generate specificity in ros homeostasis, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol., 2007, 8(10), 813–824 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Trachootham, J. Alexandre and P. Huang, Targeting cancer cells by ros-mediated mechanisms: A radical therapeutic approach?, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2009, 8(7), 579–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, J. Song, L. Nie and X. Chen, Reactive oxygen species generating systems meeting challenges of photodynamic cancer therapy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 6597–6626 RSC .
H. Qi, Y. Ping, Y. Wang, G. Han, H. Liu, Y. Yi, Y. Li and L. Mao, Graphdiyne oxides as excellent substrate for electroless deposition of pd clusters with high catalytic activity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(16), 5260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Min, Y. Qi, Y. Zhang, X. Han and Y. Li, A graphdiyne oxide based iron sponge with photothermally enhanced tumor specific Fenton chemistry, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2000038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Karim Khan
	Dr Karim Khan was born in Paharpur, Dera-Ismail-Khan, K.P.K., Pakistan. He earned his BSc degree from Gomal University in 2005, his MSc in Physics from University of Peshawar in 2009, and his MPhil in Solid State Physics from University of the Punjab in 2012. He also completed research at Quaid-e-Azim University's “National Centre for Physics.” He got his PhD from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2016 and worked as a Postdoctoral Researcher at Shenzhen University in China (2017–2019) and Dongguan University of Technology (2019–2021). He has over 89 scientific articles and two patents to his credit. His articles have been cited over 1800 times, and he has an h-index of 19. His current research focuses on 2D electrocatalyst materials and their applications in energy generation, storage, and storage devices, as well as developing biological sensors.

Ayesha Khan Tareen
	Dr Ayesha Khan Tareen is currently a Post-Doctoral fellow in Shenzhen University. She earned her PhD (Physical Chemistry/Materials) from Ningbo Institute of Material Technology and Engineering (NIMTE), Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), MPhil (Analytical Chemistry) from “The Islamia University of Bahawalpur” in 2015, and BSc (Honors) in Chemistry from Government College University Lahore, Pakistan, in 2012. Her research interests include in the production of 2D materials and transition metal nitride materials, as well as their applications in many fields, such as 2D materials, photo (electro)-catalysts, fuel cells, dye-sensitized solar cells, and biosensors.

Han Zhang
	Prof. Dr Han Zhang received his BS degree from Wuhan University in 2006 and PhD from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in 2010. He is the director of Shenzhen University's Shenzhen Key Laboratory of 2D-materials and Devices, as well as the Shenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics. His present study focuses the ultrafast and nonlinear photonics of two-dimensional materials. In 2018 and 2019, he was included in Clarivate Analytics’ list of Highly Cited Researchers. In 2019, he was named a Fellow of the Optical Society of America. Prof. Han Zhang's group has produced over 600 publications in the last ten years, in Physics Reports, PNAS, Chem. Soc. Rev., Nat. Commun., Adv. Funct. Mater., Adv. Mater., etc. His articles have been cited over 59000 times, and he has an h-index of 119.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Most important carbon-based nanomaterials explored in the last decades and (b) potential of GDY for it application. Adapted with permission from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 2  Current research progress of GDY in the biomedical field, adapted with permission from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 3  Surface chemistry, physicochemical qualities, number of layers, size, and cell type interaction are some of the common elements that determine the cytotoxicity of GDY-based materials, adapted with permission from ref. 71.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) PEC responses of method A toward microRNA-141 (from a to j: 0, 1.0 × 10−17, 1.0 × 10−16, 1.0 × 10−15, 1.0 × 10−14, 1.0 × 10−13, 1.0 × 10−12, 1.0 × 10−11, 1.0 × 10−10, and 1.0 × 10−9 M, respectively). (B) Plot of absorbance vs. microRNA-141 concentration. (C) Photocurrent changes of the designed assay at 1.0 × 10−15 mol L−1 microRNA-141 and 1.0 × 10−14 mol L−1 of the other microRNA containing miR-7, miR-21 and miR-221. (D) Stability of this PEC assay for six consecutive measurements. (E) Stability of this PEC assay after 12 days of storage, 0; 3rd; 6th; 9th; and 12th day. (F) Reproducibility of designed PEC assay. The concentration of microRNA-141 was 1.0 × 10−15 mol L−1 in 0.1 mol L−1 phosphate buffer (pH 7.4) containing 10 mM AAP. Adapted with permission from ref. 75.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Fluorescence spectra of the sensing system with different amounts of OTA. The amounts of OTA (from bottom to top) are 0, 2, 12, 25, 50, 100, 500, and 1500 pM, respectively; (b) linear relationship between fluorescence (at 524 nm) and OTA amount; (c) selectivity of the sensor toward 500 pM OTA against 50 nM potential interferents. Error bars were estimated from three replicate measurements, adapted with permission from ref. 77.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Nyquist plots of bare GC and Tyr-GDY-Chi/GC biosensor. (b) CVs of the Tyr-GDY-Chi/GC biosensor in the absence of BPA. (c) Typical amperometric response curves of Tyr-GDY-Chi. (d) Corresponding calibration curves of steady-state current versus concentration of BPA. Adapted with permission from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of GDYO-QDs and fluorescent detection of Fe3+ and AA, adapted with permission from ref. 89.	 

 	Fig. 8  Antibacterial mechanism validation. (A) Photographs of GDY and GDYO dispersions at a concentration of 2.0 mg mL−1 after 0, 12, and 36 h of standing, respectively. (B) GDY and GDYO dispersion turbidity as a function of aging time. (C) Transmission intensity vs. GDY and GDYO height in water at various periods. (D) Photographs of GDY and GDYO inhibitory zone tests against E. coli in the dark and with visible light. (E) Suggested mechanism for the antibacterial effect of the GDYO suspension when exposed to visible light. Adapted with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustrating the dual function of TiO2/GDY in orthopedic implant infection. (b) H&E staining and immunohistochemistry staining of infected tissues after 5 days. (c) After 4 weeks, Masson staining showed bone growth. Adapted with permission from ref. 95.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the antibacterial mechanisms of GDY-based materials. In vivo cytotoxicity testing of GDY and GDYO. (b) Mice wounds on days 0, 2, 4, and 6. (c) Location of the lesion (%). Each group had six mice. Adapted with permission from ref. 96.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Pd-NPs/GDY attenuated hypoxia in tumors, resulting in tumor catalytic treatment. (b) Optical and quantitative LA-ICP-MS pictures of tumor slices. (c) Schematic illustration of the creation of the 4T1 model and the therapy. (d) Photographs of tumors collected from the different groups of mice after treatment. (e) Tumor growth curves after the indicated treatments (n = 5), where ***p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY-treatment group compared with the control group and ##p < 0.01, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX-treatment group compared with the DOX-treatment group. (f) Weight of the dissected tumors from each group, where ***p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY-treatment group compared with the control group and ###p < 0.001, significant difference of Pd-NPs/GDY + DOX-treatment group compared with DOX-treatment group. (g) Survival rates of tumor-bearing mice with indicated treatment (n = 6). Adapted with permission from ref. 107.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic showing the production of GDY–PEG. (b) Mice with various treatments. (c) Tumor volume following various treatments. (d) Mouse survival curves following various treatments. Adapted with permission from ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) GDY NSs in cancer drug delivery of PTT and chemotherapy. (b) PTT effect compared to GDY/doxorubicin method, irradiated by laser of λ = 808 nm. (c) Fluorescence confocal study for changing MDA-MB-231 cells versus time after modification using GDY/doxorubicin. Adapted with permission from ref. 111.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of TTIS-mediated tumor therapy via a photothermally enhanced Fenton reaction. PTT and Fenton reaction-mediated antitumor effect of TTIS in vivo. (b) Schematic illustration of the timeline for the therapeutic experiment. (c) Thermal images of tumor-bearing mice intravenously injected with saline, TNIS or TTIS under 808 nm laser irradiation at the indicated time points. (d) Temperature profiles of the tumor sites in mice treated with saline, TNIS or TTIS and exposure to laser irradiation. (e) Body weights of mice during the treatment. (f) Tumor growth curves for the indicated treatments. (g) Photos of tumor tissues collected from mice post treatment. (h) Average weight of the post treatment tumors. (i) H&E staining of tumor tissues post treatment. The data are shown as the mean ± SD (n = 5). *p < 0.05, **p < 0.01, ***p < 0.001. Adapted with permission from ref. 117.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
