Covalent fixing of sulfur in metal–sulfur batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9EE03408K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9EE03408K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 432-471Covalent fixing of sulfur in metal–sulfur batteries

        
          
            Ruopian 
            Fang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jiangtao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Da-Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *ac
aSchool of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2052, Australia. E-mail: da-wei.wang@unsw.edu.au
bCentre for Advanced Macromolecular Design, School of Chemical Engineering, The University of New South Wales, Sydney, 2052, Australia
cUNSW Digital Grid Futures Institute, The University of New South Wales, Sydney 2052, Australia
Received 
      22nd October 2019
    , Accepted 3rd January 2020First published on 8th January 2020AbstractWith its earth abundance and two-electron-transfer reaction mechanism, sulfur has been driving the rapid growth of metal–sulfur batteries. The practical performance of metal–sulfur batteries, however, is restricted by the notorious electrode processes of sulfur (such as low conductivity, intermediate loss, mass crossover, etc.). Sulfur conversion reactions can be stabilized and promoted through a surface immobilization strategy via physical confinement and chemical adsorption effects. As an emerging method in the field, covalent-bonding sulfur materials have demonstrated promise for metal–sulfur batteries. The covalent fixing of sulfur reinforces the molecular interactions between sulfur and the cathode matrix at the bulk level. In this review, we attempt to address the covalent fixing concept on the basis of the emerging studies related to covalent sulfur-containing compounds and composites in various rechargeable metal–sulfur batteries. Firstly, we briefly discuss the classification of sulfur fixing strategies and identify the uniqueness of covalently stabilized sulfur for metal–sulfur batteries. Secondly, we summarize the state-of-the-art covalent sulfur-based materials as well as their synthetic chemistry. Thirdly, we focus on lithium–sulfur batteries that feature cathodes with covalent sulfur active materials, including reaction mechanisms and material innovations. Advances in alternative alkaline metal–sulfur battery systems (sodium–sulfur and potassium–sulfur) involving covalent fixing of sulfur are also discussed. Finally, the prospective opportunities of applying the covalent fixing strategy to optimize the sulfur redox process are commented on. This contribution is anticipated to place the covalent fixing of sulfur into the spotlight and to encourage more efforts in this challenging cross-disciplinary area of organic/polymer chemistry, materials science, electrochemistry and energy technologies.
Ruopian Fang
Dr Ruopian Fang is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the University of New South Wales, Sydney. She received her PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2018. Her research activities focus on rational material design for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Jiangtao Xu
Dr Jiangtao Xu is an ARC Future Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW Sydney. He is currently leading a research group in the Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD), with a focus on green and precision polymer synthesis using state-of-the-art polymerization techniques and organic chemistry tools. Dr Xu received his BS and PhD degrees from Fudan University. He has 90 peer-reviewed publications in high-impact journals, attracting over 5000 citations and an H-index of 41. His areas of research interest are green chemistry and sustainable polymer synthesis, precision polymer synthesis, and advanced polymer materials for energy and bioengineering applications.
Da-Wei Wang
Dr Da-Wei Wang is an Associate Professor, an ARC Future Fellow and a UNSW Scientia Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney. His research interest spreads from the fundamentals of two-dimensional energy materials, to the development of advanced electrochemical energy devices. He has contributed >100 journal publications which received >19000 citations with an H-index of 45. Da-Wei has won some prestigious awards including the 2018 and 2019 Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher Awards, Finalist of 2018 AMP Tomorrow Maker, and the 2013 Scopus Young Researcher Award in Engineering and Technology.

Broader context
The exploration of more efficient and economic battery technologies has been propelled by the ever-increasing demand for mobile and stationary energy storage. Elemental sulfur, endowed with a two-electron-transfer reaction mechanism, has been under intense scrutiny as a promising cathode material due to its overwhelming high-energy-density and low-cost advantages. However, practical applicability of metal–sulfur batteries has been hindered by their poor cycle life. To date, a variety of physical confinement and chemical adsorption strategies have been developed to address the stable immobilization of sulfur for long-life uses. Recently, covalently fixed sulfur in various materials and composites has emerged as a new class of cathode materials because of the strong bonding that could effectively immobilize sulfur at the molecular level. This review attempts to summarise and propose the concept of covalent fixing as a new research strategy for sulfur electrochemistry in metal–sulfur batteries. We hope that this review could open a new avenue for fundamental chemistry and material innovations in advanced metal–sulfur batteries.

1. Introduction
The development of advanced energy storage technologies has been triggered by the drastically increasing demand for energy and the finite availability of fossil fuels.1–3 Electrochemical energy storage systems are exhibiting increasing significance in a wide range of applications, ranging from portable electronic devices and emerging electric vehicles to the efficient integration of intermittent renewable energy sources (solar, wind, etc.) into smart grids.4–6 Lithium-ion (Li-ion) batteries, based on lithium intercalation electrochemistry, have transformed portable electronics since their successful launch in 1991.4,7,8 However, the number of active crystallographic sites for storing charge-carrier ions in intercalation-based electrode materials places an upper limit on the energy content of Li-ion batteries. After continuous optimization of nearly 30 years, the energy density of Li-ion batteries is reaching their theoretical limit but is still not satisfactory for the demands of future key markets, such as the widespread electrification of vehicles and the reliable power supply of stationary grid energy storage.9–11 Besides energy density, economic cost is another sensitive factor for markets and end-users. In this regard, the relatively high fabrication cost of Li-ion batteries arising from the use of lithium transition metal oxides also hinders their implementation for large scale energy storage.12,13 Therefore, the exploration of alternative battery technologies featuring new chemistries for charge-carrier storage as well as economic advantages has become a necessity to satisfy the growing demands for more efficient and economic energy storage.
Sulfur, one of the most abundant elements in the Earth's crust, is produced in quantity as a by-product during the hydrodesulfurization process in the petroleum refining industry. When used as a cathode material in battery systems, sulfur theoretically undergoes a two-electron-transfer process, which corresponds to a high specific capacity of 1675 mA h g−1.14 When pairing a sulfur cathode with a lithium or sodium anode, the resultant lithium–sulfur (Li–S) and sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries show high theoretical energy densities of 2600 W h kg−1 and 1270 W h kg−1, respectively, which are much higher than the theoretical value of Li-ion batteries (387 W h kg−1 for LiCoO2/graphite batteries).9,14–16 Therefore, the multi-electron conversion chemistry and natural abundance of sulfur have triggered a strong desire for the development of sulfur-based battery technologies, which are particularly appealing for large-scale energy storage applications.
Indeed, sulfur was originally investigated as an electrode material in electric dry cells and storage batteries by Danuta and Juliusz in 1962.17 Although high-temperature Na–S batteries have been commercialized in stationary storage in the 1990s, the liquid sodium and sulfur as active materials at high temperatures (over 300 °C) are highly corrosive and lead to safety issues.18 Besides, the unavailability in mobile situations and high cost to achieve the high operating temperature further prevent the widespread application of high-temperature Na–S batteries.19,20 Progress in room-temperature metal–sulfur batteries has been slow owing to the intrinsic problematic issues in sulfur redox processes. On the other hand, the enormous popularity of Li-ion batteries since 1991 has been another reason for the cooling down of metal–sulfur batteries in those early years. Nevertheless, owing to the ever-increasing high energy demands in recent years, sulfur has been revitalized as one of the most promising cathode active materials for next generation rechargeable batteries. Li–S batteries have been under intense scrutiny, attributed to their overwhelming high-energy-density advantage.9,16 Other alkaline metal–sulfur batteries, including Na–SNa–S21 and potassium–sulfur (K–S),22 have also received much attention because of the high abundance and cost effectiveness of these metals in comparison with lithium, and they are considered as alternative choices beyond Li–S batteries.
However, the development of metal–sulfur batteries has been limited by several inherent problems associated with sulfur conversion chemistry. Firstly, sulfur is insulating for both electrons and ions, leading to limited reaction kinetics during the redox processes. This issue results in low utilization of sulfur, which limits the practical specific capacity.23–25 Secondly, sulfur undergoes stepwise compositional and structural changes as reflected by the formation of various polysulfide intermediates (Sn2−, n = 3–8). These intermediates are often soluble in the ether-based electrolytes in metal–sulfur batteries. The polysulfide shuttling between the cathode and the anode leads to fast capacity fading, low coulombic efficiency and a high self-discharge rate.26–29 Thirdly, conversion reactions involve severe volume variation during cycling. For example, the conversion of S to Li2S and Na2S causes 80% and 260% volume expansion, respectively.21,30,31 This causes cathode pulverization and sulfur detachment, leading to an irreversible loss of capacity.
Addressing the above fundamental challenges is crucial for promotion and stabilization of sulfur conversion reactions, and the revitalization of metal–sulfur batteries. Extensive efforts have been devoted to the development of various sulfur-based composites by incorporating porous carbons,32–34 functionalized carbons,35–37 polymers,38–41 metal compounds,42–48 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),49–52 and so on. These have proven effective to improve the electrochemical activity of sulfur and suppress the migration of soluble polysulfide intermediates during cycling. The core design principles of the existing mainstream approaches can be classified into two categories: physical confinement and chemical adsorption, both of which focus on interfacial immobilization of sulfur species.53 Nevertheless, it should be noted that it is technically infeasible to completely eliminate the migration and loss of polysulfides.54 It is thus always worth exploring alternative strategies for sulfur immobilization which can work in concert with interfacial/surface immobilization in batteries.
In this regard, the covalent fixing strategy has recently been considered as one promising approach for improving sulfur cathodes. Covalent fixing reinforces the interactions between sulfur and the matrix from the surface to the bulk by covalently bonding sulfur atoms/chains with host molecules. It is known that there are various sulfur-containing materials including inorganic sulfides, organosulfur compounds and polysulfides where the S–S bonds are electrochemically active to participate in sulfur redox reactions.55 Moreover, cyclic ring-structured elemental sulfur transforms into chain-structured polymeric sulfur radicals above 159 °C, which can readily bind covalently to many organic moieties such as unsaturated carbon–carbon bonds in alkenes/alkynes, thiol groups and nitrile groups.56,57 The covalently-fixed sulfur not only benefits the spatial distribution of electroactive sites, but also enables strong interactions between polysulfide intermediates and the cathode framework. In this context, covalent fixing of sulfur broadens the scope of material design and synthesis for sulfur cathodes and provides new avenues for achieving high sulfur utilization and excellent cycling stabilities of sulfur-based batteries.
We are aware of the recent reviews on relevant topics.36,43,58–61 However, to our best knowledge, none of the topical reviews put forward explicitly the concept of covalent fixing and its significance in guiding the design of novel sulfur-containing materials for batteries. First, we will provide a succinct introduction to the evolution of sulfur immobilization strategies based on the fundamental chemistry and practical requirements of metal–sulfur batteries, highlighting the advantages of covalently fixed sulfur. The state-of-the-art covalent sulfur-containing materials with potential uses for metal–sulfur batteries will be discussed subsequently. Then the recent advances of applying covalent sulfur active materials in various metal–sulfur batteries will be discussed from the aspects of material design, performance improvement, and reaction mechanisms. Finally, the challenges and prospects of the covalent fixing principle for future metal–sulfur batteries will be outlined.
2. Fundamental properties of sulfur redox reactions
2.1 Basic structural characteristics of sulfur
There are over 30 solid allotropes of elemental sulfur. The most common and stable form is cyclic orthorhombic sulfur (S8), which is also known as α-sulfur. The melting temperature of α-sulfur is 115.2 °C and the boiling temperature is 444.6 °C.62 The structure transformation of elemental sulfur at different temperatures is illustrated in Fig. 1. In the molten state, the viscosity of the sulfur melt gradually decreases upon heating, followed by a drastic increase at 159 °C as a result of the ring-opening polymerization of the cyclic S8 rings.63,64 Therefore, molten sulfur has a minimum viscosity near and below 159 °C, which is desirable for sulfur impregnation into a matrix material. Generally, a temperature of 155 °C is adopted for the preparation of sulfur composites.65 Upon heating over 159 °C, the cyclic S8 rings start to break, resulting in the formation of a linear polysulfane with diradical chain ends, which subsequently tend to polymerize to generate polymeric sulfur chains with high molecular weight.66 The polymeric sulfur form is chemically unstable and tends to depolymerize to form cyclic S8. Nevertheless, these diradical polymeric sulfur chains are highly reactive and can be stabilized via copolymerization with many functional groups. In this way the equilibrium melt polymerization of sulfur can be quenched, resulting in the preservation of the polymeric form of sulfur and the formation of various sulfur-rich copolymers with embedded –Sn– moieties.57,67 A temperature of 185 °C is often used in the sulfur copolymerization process to promote efficient ring-opening polymerization and ensure a sufficient concentration of polymeric sulfur diradicals.66 Further heating to the boiling temperature of sulfur over 444.6 °C leads to the dissociation of sulfur into short chains (S2–S6).62
 Fig. 1  Structure transformation of elemental sulfur at various temperatures. 
From the electrochemical aspect, sulfur shows a typical electrophilic feature, which eliminates the use of nucleophilic electrolytes. For most non-nucleophilic electrolytes used in metal–sulfur batteries, elemental sulfur has very low solubility. In contrast, polysulfide anions (Sn2−, n = 3–8) often show high solubility in organic electrolytes.68 The Gibbs free energies of all polysulfide anions are very close so that they could coexist in a series of chemical equilibria.14 This feature has inspired using polysulfides as the active materials dissolved in organic electrolytes.27,69,70
2.2 Electrochemistry of sulfur conversion reactions
Metal–sulfur batteries typically consist of a metal anode, a sulfur composite cathode, a separator and an organic electrolyte. In the process of discharge, the metal anode is oxidized to produce metal cations, which then migrate through the electrolyte and the separator to the sulfur cathode, while electrons transport via an external electrical circuit and arrive at the cathode. The metal cations and electrons reach the electroactive sulfur materials simultaneously to trigger sulfur reduction.
It is worth noting that sulfur conversion reactions in metal–sulfur batteries exhibit different mechanisms based on the different initial states of sulfur in the cathode, which generally contains two categories: cyclo-octasulfur (S8)/polymeric sulfur and short-chain sulfur. Taking Li–S batteries as an example, typical charge/discharge curves of these two existing forms of sulfur in Li–S batteries are illustrated in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Typical charge/discharge curves illustrating the sulfur conversion reactions of a Li–S battery with the sulfur existing in forms of (a) cyclo-octasulfur (S8) and (b) short-chain sulfur (S2–4). 
For S8 and polymeric sulfur with a high S–S bond rank, their electrochemical reduction progresses stepwise with the formation of a series of polysulfide intermediates (Fig. 2a). Sulfur is firstly reduced to long-chain polysulfides (Li2S8–Li2S4), corresponding to a solid–liquid reaction process; then the long-chain polysulfides are further reduced to short-chain polysulfides and lithium sulfides (Li2S4–Li2S), corresponding to a liquid–solid reaction process. During charging, solid lithium sulfides undergo multi-step solid–liquid–solid reaction processes with the formation of polysulfide intermediates to convert back to elemental sulfur.
On the other hand, when a microporous carbon matrix with a pore size of <0.5 nm is used for sulfur impregnation, small sulfur molecules with a chain-like structure (S2–4) form, since cyclo-sulfur molecules (S5–8) that are >0.5 nm along at least two dimensions cannot be accommodated in such small micropores.71,72 Different from those molecules with a high S–S bond rank, small sulfur molecules undergo a direct solid–solid phase transition from S to the Li2S phase without the formation of intermediate polysulfides (Fig. 2b). In this case, the polysulfide shuttle effect can be essentially inhibited, leading to high coulombic efficiency and good cycling stability. However, due to the limited pore volume of microporous carbons, a sulfur cathode with small sulfur molecules usually has a low sulfur content of less than 50 wt%, which leads to decreased practical specific capacity. In addition, short sulfur chains can also be covalently bound to the surface of a carbon matrix in sulfurized carbon, which will be discussed in detail in the following sections.
2.3 Polysulfide dissolution issue
The dissolution of polysulfides in the organic electrolyte is the primary cause of the existing issues of metal–sulfur batteries, including low coulombic efficiency, short cycle life, and high self-discharge rate. The dissolved polysulfides tend to diffuse from the cathode to the anode due to the driving force of the concentration gradients, where the polysulfides can be reduced both chemically and electrochemically by the metal anode.14 For instance, lithium polysulfides in Li–S batteries can be reduced by the lithium anode as follows:(n − 1)Li2Sn + 2Li → nLi2Sn−1(n − 1)Li2Sn + 2Li+ + 2e− → nLi2Sn−1These parasitic reactions lead to the following problems: first, part of the active material is irreversibly consumed and can no longer participate in the subsequent conversion reactions, resulting in drastic capacity decay. Second, the migrating polysulfides are reduced to shorter chain polysulfides by the lithium anode, which could diffuse back to the cathode. These polysulfides could continuously shuttle between the cathode and the anode, leading to low coulombic efficiency with excessive consumption of the lithium anode. Third, the lithium could be passivated by the insoluble lithium sulfides deposited on its surface, which impedes the charge transfer kinetics on the anode and builds up cell polarization.73
On the other hand, although the dissolution of polysulfides would cause severe problems, it is a requisite for achieving high sulfur utilization. Sulfur is known to be both electronically and ionically insulating. The sulfur conversion reaction can only take place on the surfaces where a both electron and ion conductive matrix is available. In this regard, uninterrupted polysulfide dissolution in the electrolyte during the redox reactions guarantees the continuous exposure of the remaining sulfur to the conductive matrix, which facilitates the reaction kinetics and enables more sulfur to participate in the redox reactions. Therefore, polysulfide dissolution possesses both advantages and disadvantages, which must be optimized from a performance perspective.
3. Practical requirements for metal–sulfur batteries
Considerable efforts have been made in order to solve the fundamental challenges in metal–sulfur batteries. Nevertheless, it is known that an intrinsic gap often exists between fundamental research and practical applications, making it difficult to translate most metal–sulfur battery studies into real high-energy-density cell designs. Therefore, it is essential to understand the determining factors for the practical reliability of metal sulfur batteries with high energy density and low costs. With respect to the development of sulfur cathodes, the following evaluation criteria need to be considered:
(1) Sulfur utilization
Due to its insulating nature, sulfur needs to be assembled with both electron- and ion-conducting phases to facilitate the reaction kinetics. The electron and ion transport process consists of two steps during the sulfur conversion reactions: electrons and ions diffuse through the assembled electron- and ion-conducting phases to the surface of electroactive sulfur, followed by their transport within sulfur for the implementation of the sulfur reduction process. Therefore, high sulfur utilization is correspondingly determined by two influencing factors: high efficiency of the electron- and ion-conducting phases and high dispersibility of sulfur within the assembled conducting matrix.
(2) Cycling stability
Long cycle life is an essential requirement for large-scale applications of rechargeable batteries, which is also one of the main obstacles for metal–sulfur batteries. As discussed above, the severe solubility of polysulfide intermediates in organic electrolytes is the main cause of the deterioration of cycling stability as it leads to a continuous irreversible loss of electroactive materials. Therefore, exploring strategies for effective polysulfide immobilization within the cathode framework is the key point to achieve long-term cycling stabilities of metal–sulfur batteries.
(3) Sulfur content
Although integration of electron and ion-conducting phases shows significant effectiveness in improving both the sulfur utilization and cycling stability, it is worth noting that all components except sulfur in the cathode are electrochemically inactive, which leads to a direct decrease of specific capacity based on the whole cathode. Therefore, high sulfur content is a key parameter that needs to be taken care of in the design of cathode materials since low sulfur content greatly offsets the high-capacity advantage of sulfur cathodes. For commercial Li-ion batteries, the active material content in the electrode is often as high as 90 wt%;74 sulfur cathodes with low sulfur content show low energy density, which is not practical.
(4) Areal sulfur loading
For commercial batteries, areal capacity is an important parameter for performance assessment. For example, a typical areal capacity of 4 mA h cm−2 is required for Li-ion batteries used in electric vehicles. The areal capacity is determined by both the active material utilization and areal active material loading. For a sulfur cathode material with a specific sulfur content, the areal sulfur loading corresponds to the thickness of the electrode. A thick sulfur cathode with high sulfur loading is essential for achieving a high areal capacity. However, electron and ion diffusion within a thick electrode are kinetically unfavorable owing to the insulating nature of sulfur. Although high capacities can often be obtained with the use of low sulfur-loading electrodes, the corresponding low areal capacity eliminates their applicability in practical conditions.
(5) Economic cost
Beyond performance assessments, the economic cost of sulfur cathodes is also an important aspect in practical reliability. Note that one of the intriguing advantages of metal–sulfur cathodes is the low cost of sulfur; sophisticated preparation processes with the use of expensive raw materials may offset this economical advantage and are not applicable for scale-up applications. Therefore, it is desirable to explore sulfur cathodes with the use of low-cost and commercially available raw materials as well as simple electrode fabrication processes.
4. Classification of sulfur immobilization strategies
Based on the above evaluation criteria for practically reliable metal–sulfur batteries, it is essential to tackle the intrinsic issues in sulfur conversion chemistry that cause low sulfur utilization and fast capacity decay. Incorporation of a conducting matrix is often a requisite, as it not only provides electron and ion pathways for enhanced reaction kinetics, but also alleviates the migration of polysulfides, which thus results in improved sulfur utilization as well as cycling stabilities. In this section, the historical evolution of design principles for sulfur cathode materials is discussed in three aspects: (1) physical confinement, (2) chemical adsorption, and (3) covalent fixing (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Illustration of the evolution of design principles for sulfur fixing strategies, showing increased binding strength from physical confinement and chemical adsorption to covalent fixing. 
4.1 Physical confinement
Physical confinement was the primary attempt to improve the sulfur utilization and alleviate the polysulfide shuttle problems.75,76 This strategy focuses on minimizing the dissolution and diffusion of the polysulfides by either the physical adsorption effect of porous matrices or by an external coating as a physical barrier.77–79 In this respect, carbon materials with tunable pore structures and high conductivities have received tremendous attention due to their advantages in the following aspects: (1) loading active materials and guaranteeing essential electrical contact; (2) trapping dissolved polysulfides within the pore structures and mitigating their free diffusion to the anode; (3) buffering the volume variation of the active materials and ensuring the integrity of the cathode; and (4) channeling the electrolytes and facilitating lithium ion transport.33,80–84 In 2009, Nazar et al.65 reported using highly ordered mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) for sulfur nanofiller growth within its channels, which not only generates essential electrical contact with insulating sulfur, but also aids in trapping polysulfides by kinetic inhibition of diffusion within the porous framework. Since then, various carbon-based sulfur cathodes, with macro/meso/microporous carbons,85–90 hollow carbon spheres,91–95 carbon nanotubes,96–101 graphene,102–107 carbon fibers,28,108–113 or carbon hybrids,114–118 have been developed. They show effectiveness in increasing the conductivity of sulfur cathodes and alleviating the migration of polysulfides, resulting in significantly improved active material utilization and cycle life.
4.2 Chemical adsorption
Although the physical confinement strategy shows advantages in polysulfide interception, it is worth noting that the nonpolar C–C bonds provide most carbon materials with a non-polar surface, which leads to weak interactions between the surface and polar polysulfides.53,70,119 The polysulfides dissolved in the electrolyte tend to detach from the carbon scaffold and migrate to the anode, resulting in an irreversible loss of active materials. Yao et al.54 investigated the deposition process of solid sulfur species on a carbon/tin-doped indium tin oxide (ITO) composite substrate, and found that these solid species deposit preferentially onto the ITO surface rather than carbon during electrochemical charge/discharge of soluble polysulfides, showing that the non-polar carbon surface has lower affinity for polysulfides in comparison with the polar ITO surface. Therefore, physical confinement is somehow insufficient to harness the polysulfides due to the lack of strong polysulfide-anchoring capability.
This has triggered the rise of the chemical adsorption concept, which adopts polar surface chemistry to enhance the interaction with polar polysulfides. The corresponding approaches contain two aspects: surface modification of carbon materials and introduction of materials with inherent polar surfaces. Functionalizing carbon materials is an effective way to create polar anchoring sites for polysulfides, and various carbon materials doped with heteroatoms (N, O, S, P, and B) and/or functional groups (e.g. hydroxyl and amine groups) have been explored.36,120–122 For instance, electron-donating nitrogen heteroatoms on the conjugate carbon planes that inhibit polysulfide shuttling could form strong interactions between N and Li cations.52,123–125 Hou et al.126 explained the Li–N complexation by Lewis acid–base chemistry. Graphene oxide, with abundant carboxylate and hydroxyl functionalities on the surface, could also immobilize polysulfides.105,127–129 Nevertheless, the number of doped heteroatoms and functional groups is often limited; otherwise, it may exert a negative influence on the conductivity of carbon materials. In this respect, metal-based compounds (e.g. oxides, sulfides, carbides and nitrides)43,45,46 as well as metal–organic-frameworks52 and conductive polymers (e.g. polypyrrole,130 polyaniline131 and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)132) have been studied owing to their polar surfaces. Zhang et al.42 simulated the anchoring of polysulfides on V2O5, MoO3, TiS2, ZrS2, VS2, NbS2, MoO3, TiCl2, and ZrCl2, and postulated that the charge transfer between S atoms in Li2Sn molecules and the anchoring materials is responsible for the interfacial binding strength. These theories were cross-checked by Sun et al.48 on conductive vanadium nitride.
4.3 Covalent fixing
The core concept of physical confinement and chemical adsorption is interfacial immobilization via the interactions between sulfur/polysulfides and the surfaces of host materials, which are often interpreted to be van der Waals forces, electrostatic adsorption, and Lewis acid/base interactions.33,133 In this respect, covalently fixed sulfur is anticipated to enable high molecular affinity of active sulfur species in the bulk. The advantages of the emerging covalent fixing principle are concluded as follows:
(1) Distinct from the physical incorporation of sulfur into the host materials, covalently fixed sulfur is embedded throughout the matrix via covalent bonds, which enables high dispersibility of active sulfur sites and is desirable for achieving high sulfur utilization.
(2) The strong covalent bonds between sulfur and the matrix tend to retain active sulfur species within the cathode region and thus effectively suppress the migration of polysulfides to the anode, which ensures improved cycling stability.
(3) Polymeric sulfur diradicals can readily be covalently bonded with various functional groups, which provide new avenues for synthesizing high-sulfur content cathode materials that are desirable for realization of high energy densities.
(4) Covalent sulfur fixed by organic moieties or heteroatoms offers new insights to improve the compatibility between the electrochemically active sulfur-containing domains and charge-transfer pathways during redox reactions and provides new possibilities for mechanism studies of fundamental electrochemistry in metal–sulfur batteries.
It is worth noting that the covalent fixing principle is considered as an alternative approach, rather than a substitution of the physical confinement and chemical adsorption principles, for the development of sulfur cathodes. Indeed, incorporation of the covalent fixing concept into the previous optimization strategies is anticipated to provide new possibilities for the construction of advanced sulfur cathodes, which will be discussed in detail in Sections 7 and 8. In most cases, the concepts towards sulfur immobilization are delivered through the design of sulfur cathode materials. Therefore, in the following sections, we will begin with a review of the state-of-the-art covalent sulfur-based materials as well as their synthetic chemistry, followed by advances of their applications in metal–sulfur battery systems ranging from fundamental reaction mechanisms and electrochemical behaviors to material innovations.
5. Sulfur compounds
Sulfur compounds contain inorganic sulfur and organosulfur compounds, both of which can be defined as well-defined molecular structures and chemical compositions. There are plenty of sulfur compounds that bear S–S covalent bonds.134 It is worth noting that not all of those materials are suitable for sulfur electrode applications, as either the S–S bonds in the materials may not show electrochemical activity or the content of sulfide linkages is too low for use as an electrode material. Only electroactive sulfur-containing bonds are capable of energy storage by reversible cleavage of the covalent bonds. For example, sulfur atoms in a polysulfide chain are often electrochemically active, whereas the activity of those connected to carbon atoms will depend on their chemical bonds. Sulfur in the form of double bonds (>CS) is electrochemically inactive, while the activity of a single S–C bond is determined by the stability of the carbanion and carbon radical generated from the cleavage of the S–C bond.135 Sulfur is inactive when bound to an sp3 carbon in a single S–C bond, which is unable to stabilize the carbanion and radical, while it becomes electrochemically active when bound to a conjugated sp2 carbon in a single S–C bond because of its capability to delocalize the carbanion and carbon radical. In this section, sulfur compounds that have been reported to be applicable as electroactive sulfur cathode materials are introduced, and the formation mechanisms as well as their theoretical capacity for sulfur redox reactions are discussed.
5.1 Inorganic sulfur compounds
Inorganic sulfides, where sulfur is typically bonded with selenium and phosphorus atoms, demonstrate two-electron-transfer electrochemical activity analogous to elemental sulfur. This category mainly contains two types of materials: selenium sulfides and phosphorus sulfides.

5.1.1 Selenium sulfides. 
As a congener of sulfur, selenium also shows electrochemical activity for energy storage with a theoretical specific capacity of 678 mA h g−1.136 Like sulfur, equilibria between the chain and ring structures of liquid selenium at high temperatures have been theoretically proposed by Eisenberg and Tobolsky.137 It has been recognized that selenium and sulfur are miscible in all proportions.138 Therefore, many kinds of selenium sulfides are readily available, e.g. Se5S, Se5S2, Se5S4, SeS, Se3S5, SeS2, and SeS7. Amine and co-workers139 reported the use of selenium sulfides for rechargeable lithium and sodium batteries. The high electronic conductivity and high density of selenium are expected to improve the volumetric energy density as well as the active material utilization. Therefore, selenium sulfides are expected to combine the capacity advantage of sulfur and conductivity advantage of selenium.140 The theoretical capacities of various selenium sulfide cathode materials are displayed in Table 1, ranging from 842 mA h g−1 to 1550 mA h g−1.
Table 1 Theoretical capacities of selenium sulfide cathode materials with different compositions




Material
Se5S
Se5S2
Se5S4
SeS
Se3S5
SeS2
SeS7




Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
842
961
1119
1175
1300
1342
1550




Nevertheless, the compositional dependence of the selenium sulfides conforms to structure variations in the corresponding crystalline compounds. It was found that when the atomic percentage of sulfur in selenium sulfides is lower than ∼28%, sulfur atoms are accommodated in the selenium matrix, resulting in the distortion of the selenium morphology. As the sulfur content increases to 50%, complete structural destruction of selenium takes place, which means a structural phase transition rather than some local disorder.141 In these cases, some of the sulfur atoms in the selenium sulfides are not covalently fixed. Therefore, there is a trade-off between capacity and the covalent fixing effect, i.e., high sulfur content in selenium sulfides results in high theoretical capacity, which inevitably leads to an insufficient amount of covalently fixed sulfur.


5.1.2 Phosphorus sulfides. 
Phosphorus sulfide compounds, such as P2S, P4S3, P4S5, and P4S10, have been studied and applied for nearly three hundred years. Sulfur-rich phosphorus molecules have proved feasible as electroactive materials. Qian et al. reported sulfur-rich phosphorus as cathode materials for rechargeable batteries.142 Firstly, sulfur and red phosphorus are used as starting materials to make P4S10, followed by inserting different amounts of sulfur into the P4S10 matrix to obtain P4S10+n (Fig. 4a). During the reaction, it is generally accepted that P4S10 molecules convert into P2S5 radicals during heating. The polysulfide molecules react with P2S5 radicals, resulting in the insertion of sulfur atoms into the initial P–S–P bonds to form high molecule weight phosphorus sulfides. The molecule structures of the P4S10+n analogues simulated by first-principles calculations after geometry optimization are displayed in Fig. 4b. The tetrahedral structure of phosphorus (P4) serves as the framework during the formation of P4S10, where the P–P bonds in the tetrahedron cleave, accompanying the insertion of sulfur atoms to form P–S–P bonds. Meanwhile, another four sulfur atoms are added to form four terminal PS bonds at each corner of the tetrahedral molecular structure, resulting in the molecular structure of P4S10, as shown in Fig. 4b. With more sulfur atoms integrated into the six bridging atoms of the P4S10 molecular structure, the P–S–P bonds in P4S10 are converted into P–Sm–P bonds to form P4S10+n molecules, as shown in the molecular structures of P4S16, P4S22, P4S28, P4S34, and P4S40 in Fig. 4b.
 Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis of P4S10+n molecules. (b) The predicted molecular structures of P4S10+n after geometry optimization. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In these sulfur-rich phosphorus molecules, the sulfur in the double PS bond is not electrochemically active. That in the single P–S bond involves one-electron transfer per sulfur atom. For example, in the P4S16 molecule, only the 12 sulfur atoms connected to phosphorus atoms show electrochemical activity with a one-electron transfer process, resulting in a theoretical capacity of 506 mA h g−1 (Table 2). The long-chain sulfur bridges (–Sm–) in P4S4+6m (m > 2) involve two-electron transfer per sulfur atom. Meanwhile in the sulfur-rich P4S40 molecule, both the 12 sulfur atoms in the single P–S bond and 24 sulfur atoms in the long-chain sulfur bridges are electrochemically active, contributing to a high theoretical capacity of 1142 mA h g−1 (Table 2).
Table 2 Theoretical capacities of phosphorus sulfide cathode materials with different compositions




Material
P4S16
P4S22
P4S28
P4S34
P4S40




Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
506
773
942
1058
1142





5.2 Organosulfur compounds
Organosulfur compounds are a subclass of organic substances that contain sulfur atoms bound to a cyanate group or a carbon atom in a cyclic or noncyclic configuration (Table 3). Organic disulfides, which contain S–S bonds within symmetric small organic molecules, have been investigated as cathode materials since the late 1980s.143 The redox reactions of these materials involve continuous scission and dimerization processes of the disulfide bond, which can be described as follows:R–S–S–R + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2Li–S–Rwhere R can be various organic moieties. Initially, Visco et al. proposed a model lithium/organosulfur battery using tetraethyl thiuram disulfide as the cathode and lithium metal as the anode in 1990.144 The cell was able to cycle to 10% of the available positive electrode capacity at a relatively high current density of 3.4 mA cm−2 for 135 cycles. This study demonstrated the feasibility of using organosulfur as electroactive materials in rechargeable batteries.
Table 3 Molecular structures, sulfur contents and theoretical capacities of typical organosulfur compounds of different types




Type
Molecular structure
Sulfur content (wt%)
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Ref.




Organic disulfides



11.8
181

144






13.3
223

143






14.7
245

148 and 149






20.8
348

153







Disulfide containing polymers (main-chain type)



21.6
362

154






23.5
394

146






34.8
583

146






21.1
353

146






12.5
209

155







Disulfide containing polymers (side-chain type)



13.1
220

156






13.1
220

157






17.5
293

158






20.6
246

159







Organic polysulfides



50.8
851

160






34.0
569

161






28.0
469

161






22.9
384

161






17.8
299

162






25.0
418

150






35.7
597

150





Afterwards, organic sulfur polymers containing disulfide bonds in the main chain were developed as organic sulfur cathodes, which are referred to as solid redox polymerization electrodes.145,146 These polymers undergo redox reactions in a solid polymeric way with scission and reconstruction of disulfide bonds as follows:–(S–R–S)–n + 2nLi+ + 2ne− → nLi–S–R–S–LiHowever, during discharge, these disulfide polymers are reduced to thiolate ions, which are often soluble in organic electrolytes. This leads to cleavage of the backbone chain of the polymer, resulting in rapid capacity decay. Therefore, the main-chain-type organic disulfide polymers are considered not applicable for long-term-cycling metal–sulfur batteries.
Organic sulfur polymers with disulfide bonds grafted at the side chains have been developed to maintain the structural integrity during sulfur redox reactions.55,57 Side-chain-type organic disulfide polymers have shown improved cycling stability compared to the main-chain-type ones.147 Nevertheless, it is worth noting that divalent sulfur atoms become monovalent after being connected to carbon atoms in the organic network. This means that the two-electron-transfer sulfur conversion chemistry is converted to a one-electron-transfer process (–S–S– + 2e− → 2-S−), resulting in halving of the theoretical capacity. Besides, the organic framework contributes additional weight of inactive components, which decreases the practical capacity. Organic sulfur polymers containing trisulfide and tetrasulfide linkages have been developed for high sulfur content. Although these organic polysulfides often have a theoretical capacity lower than that of pure sulfur (1675 mA h g−1), they still show advantages over the lithium storage in typical Li-ion batteries (often <250 mA h g−1). Besides, these organosulfur compounds with well-defined structures provide a platform for the exploration of sulfur conversion reaction mechanisms in various molecular structures, which is beneficial for boosting the fundamental understanding of sulfur redox chemistry. Fu et al. investigated a series of organosulfur compounds with embedded sulfur chains of various lengths for metal–sulfur batteries and indicated that they can be regarded as alternative candidates for high energy density metal–sulfur batteries,140,148–152 which will be discussed in detail in the next section.
6. Sulfur-embedded polymers
For both inorganic and organic sulfur compounds, one major issue is the relatively low level of sulfur content in these materials, which to some extent offsets the high energy density advantage of sulfur-based batteries. The low sulfur content can be ascribed to two aspects: a high amount of the electrochemically inert part and limited length of grafted sulfur chains. Therefore, incorporation of long sulfur chains in a covalent framework is considered as an effective approach to obtain covalent sulfur-based electrode materials with a high sulfur content. In contrast to sulfur compounds that demonstrate well-defined molecular structures and chemical compositions, sulfur-embedded polymers often involve grafting of sulfur chains onto organic scaffolds or copolymerization of sulfur and organic monomers, and it is often difficult to unravel their definite molecular structures and molecular weights. As discussed in Fig. 1, diradical sulfur chains, formed at high temperatures (>159 °C), are highly reactive to participate in any of radical reactions, electrophilic addition and nucleophilic substitution with the presence of various functional groups. In this way, sulfur-embedded polymers with incorporated sulfur chains can be formed, which generally contain two categories: sulfurized polymers and sulfur copolymers.
In sulfurized polymers, sulfur forms bridges between sections of polymer chains, resulting in a crosslinked molecular network. It is known that sulfur is widely employed as a vulcanization agent for curing of rubbery or elastomeric materials in the polymer industry, which contributes to increased durability and rigidity as well as modified electrical and mechanical properties of the original polymers.163 In this regard, vulcanization of polymers by elemental sulfur is considered as a facile and effective approach for covalent fixing of sulfur, and sulfurized polymers have therefore been investigated as electroactive materials for metal–sulfur batteries due to their tunable sulfur content in comparison with organic sulfides.
Sulfur copolymers can be obtained through a process named “inverse vulcanization”. Different from the traditional vulcanization process where polymers are crosslinked with a little amount of sulfur, sulfur copolymers stabilize polymeric sulfur against depolymerization by copolymerizing a large amount of sulfur with a moderate quantity of organic monomers, which results in a very high sulfur content in the corresponding copolymers.164 During the formation of sulfur copolymers, diradical sulfur chains act as a monomer to copolymerize with the other organic monomer. It is known that polymeric sulfur gradually depolymerizes upon cooling to room temperature, while the presence of organic moieties serves as crosslinkers to prevent the depolymerization of the obtained copolymer. Therefore, sulfur copolymers, with a polymeric form of sulfur embedded in the polymer matrix, have been of particular interest due to their advantages of high sulfur content. This synthetic approach provides a new avenue for the synthesis of covalent sulfur-based polymeric materials with high sulfur content as well as high theoretical electric capacities.
In this section, we will discuss sulfur-embedded polymers as well as their formation mechanisms based on the functional groups or crosslinking monomers in the polymeric organic structure. According to the roles of non-sulfur components in the polymers, three major categories are illustrated: (1) vinyl/alkynyl comonomers; (2) aromatic crosslinkers; and (3) multifunctional initiators.
6.1 Vinyl/alkynyl comonomers
Unsaturated carbon–carbon bonds (CC/CC) are reactive with sulfur. Vinyl and alkynyl are functional groups that contain CC and CC bonds, respectively. Vinyl and alkynyl monomers provide a versatile platform for preparation of sulfur copolymers in the inverse vulcanization process. Fig. 5 illustrates the formation mechanism of sulfur copolymers by copolymerization between sulfur and divinylic comonomers. When sulfur is heated above 159 °C, the S–S bonds in the S8 rings undergo continuous homolysis, and the as-formed polysulfides will polymerize. The reaction is reversible. The terminal thiyl radicals of the polysulfides tend to depolymerize to restore the thermodynamically favored S8 rings. With the presence of divinyl, the thiyl radicals can be quenched before depolymerization, resulting in the stabilization of polysulfides and branching of polymeric chains. One possible mechanism for the radical termination process is that stable polysulfide loops can be formed via intramolecular recombination of thiyl radicals. When hydrogen atoms, for example, allylic and benzylic hydrogen atoms from divinyl monomers, are available, their abstraction effect may enable the formation of thiols converting from thiyl radicals, and the attraction pathway may lead to increased branching of the divinyl monomers. By quenching the thiyl radicals in the polysulfide-embedded polymer, a stable macromolecule can be obtained and depolymerization of the polysulfides can be effectively suppressed. In this case, a relatively small amount of divinyl monomers is sufficient to branch the polymeric sulfur chains and subsequently link them together, which is desirable to obtain sulfur copolymers with a high sulfur content.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of the formation mechanism of sulfur copolymers by copolymerization between sulfur and divinylic comonomers. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Pyun and coworkers66 reported pioneering work of free-radical copolymerization of sulfur with 1,3-diisopropenylbenzene (DIB), one typical kind of divinylic monomer. Sulfur was heated to 185 °C to enable efficient ring-opening polymerization of sulfur and subsequent inverse vulcanization initiated by the unsaturated carbon–carbon double bonds in the vinyl groups of DIB, resulting in the formation of poly(sulfur-random-1,3-diisopropenylbenzene) (poly(S-r-DIB)), i.e., the sulfur copolymer. In this structure, DIB serves as cross-linkers to covalently stabilize polymeric sulfur chains in the copolymer matrix. A series of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with different composition ratios was further investigated, ranging from 10–50 wt% DIB and 90–50 wt% elemental sulfur, which corresponded to 44–10 sulfur units per DIB unit on average in the copolymer. During copolymerization, liquid sulfur is directly used as both the comonomer and the solvent, without involving additional solvents or initiators. This approach enables a high amount of sulfur embedded into processable polymeric materials by a facile copolymerization method. These sulfur copolymers could have a high theoretical capacity of 1508 mA h g−1 for poly(S-r-DIB) with 90 wt% sulfur content.
The contributions from Pyun and coworkers in preparing chemically stable and processable polymeric materials have inspired further exploration of sulfur copolymers obtained from the inverse vulcanization of elemental sulfur with various vinyl/ethynyl monomers, as listed in Table 4. Analogous to the DIB monomer, 1,4-divinylbenzene (DVB),168,169 styrene,170 and limonene171 monomers with vinyl groups have been reported to show similar copolymerization behavior with sulfur. Especially, Pyun et al.170 reported a new chain transfer mechanism of abstraction of benzylic protons for sulfur–styrene copolymers. Sulfur functions as a chain transfer agent for styrene homo-polymerization, and the primary sulfur radicals could abstract benzylic protons from poly(S-r-styrene) to generate sites for branching, which is beneficial for stabilizing high-content polysulfides against depolymerization despite the styrene monomer only having one vinyl group. Considering the economic efficiency, Gomez et al.172 explored the use of two natural dienes, diallyl sulfide (DAS) and myrcene, for copolymerization with sulfur. DAS is present in garlic and onions giving their characteristic strong odor, and myrcene is a natural terpene coming from the essential oils of plants such as thyme. Both natural dienes enable one-pot copolymerization with sulfur and a series of sulfur copolymers with varying sulfur contents between 50 and 90 wt% were obtained. Oschmann et al.173 reported the copolymerization of sulfur and allyl-terminated poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) derived from Grignard metathesis polymerization, which allows homogeneous incorporation of a well-defined semiconductive material with thiophene groups into sulfur as well as a stable crosslinking framework. Besides vinyl monomers, 1,3-diethynylbenzene (DEB)178,179 and 1,4-diphenylbutadiyne (DiPhDY)180 monomers with ethynyl groups have also proved to be able to stabilize highly crosslinked polysulfide chains. It is found that thiyl radicals of the growing polysulfides can be added to the ethynyl groups multiple times during copolymerization.
Table 4 Molecular structures of reported vinyl/ethynyl monomers for copolymerization with sulfur and the sulfur contents and theoretical capacities in the corresponding sulfur copolymers




Vinyl/ethynyl monomers
Molecular structure
Sulfur content (wt%)
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)




(DIB: diisopropenylbenzene; DVB: divinylbenzene; P3HT: poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl); P3EOT: poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl); BUMB1C6: bis(undec-10-enoyloxymethylbenzo)-18-crown-6-ether; UOEE: undecenoic acid, oxybis(2,1-ethanediyloxy-2,1-ethane-diyl)ester; TABQ: tetra(allyloxy)-1,4-benzoquinone; ANQ: 2-allyloxy-naphthoquinone; BAAQ: 2-allyloxy-naphthoquinone; TATA: triallyloxy-triazine; DEB: diethynylbenzene; DiPhDY: diphenylbutadiyne)




1,3-DIB66,166,167



50–90
838–1508


1,4-DVB168,169



60–90
1005–1508


Styrene170



50–70
838–1173


Limonene171



59
988


Diallyl sulfide172



60–90
1005–1508


Myrcene172



50–90
838–1508


Allyl-terminated P3HT173



86
1441


P3OET174



28
469


BUMB1C6175



52
871


UOEE176



47
787


TABQ177



75
1256


ANQ177



<60
<1005


BAAQ177



60
1005


TATA177



85
1424


1,3-DEB178,179



67–86
1122–1441


DiPhDY180



40–90
670–1508




Besides the vinyl/ethynyl group-based polymers, carbon allotropes that bear sufficient unsaturated carbon–carbon bonds show activity to covalently bond with sulfur, resulting in the formation of sulfurized carbon. Carbyne is one type of sp hybrid carbon allotropes in the form of cumulene and polyyne. Compared with sp2 and sp3 hybrid allotropic carbon materials, carbyne has plenty of π electrons, which enable high activity.183 Yang et al.181 reported the use of a carbyne analogue, cumulene and polyyne fragment-embedded carbon materials, for the fabrication of sulfurized polymers. As shown in Fig. 6a, the carbyne analogue was obtained through a dehydrochlorination process of polyvinylidene chloride (PVDC). When co-heated with sulfur, the CC double bonds and CC triple bonds rupture, followed by small sulfur molecules (S2–S4) linking to the conductive carbon chain, resulting in the formation of sulfurized carbyne. The sulfurized carbyne has a stable structure of a conducting hybrid carbon skeleton connected to electroactive sulfur side chains with a sulfur content of 54.1 wt%. Graphdiyne (GDY) is a kind of planar and layered carbon material with butadiyne linkages (–CC–CC–) to benzene rings, which has a lower atom density compared to graphene and is therefore endowed with natural holes. It has been revealed by first-principles calculations that GDY shows high lithium ion mobility due to its unique electronic structures and atomic arrangements, which facilitate both in-plane and out-plane lithium ion diffusion with a moderate barrier.184 Cui et al.182 reported the use of graphdiyne with uniformly distributed pores (0.542 nm) and a large interlayer distance (0.365 nm) as a reservoir for short sulfur chains (S2–S4). The carbon–carbon triple bonds in the graphdiyne show high reactivity with dissociated short-chain sulfur radicals during heating. The short sulfur chains are anchored in the triangular pores of graphdiyne by covalently bonding to the carbon–carbon triple bonds, resulting in the formation of sulfurized graphdiyne (Fig. 6b). It is worth noting that sulfur exists in the form of short sulfur chains in both of these sulfurized carbon materials, leading to relatively low sulfur content (54.1 wt% for sulfurized carbyne and 26.1 wt% for sulfurized graphdiyne) compared to sulfur copolymers with long polysulfide chains. Zhang et al.185 reported the synthesis of a sulfur-rich polysulfide polymer comprising carbon and sulfur as constitutive elements and the sulfur content is as high as 90 wt%. The carbon–sulfur polymer ((CSx)n) was obtained from the polymerization reaction of hexachlorobutadiene and the substitution reaction of polysulfides, resulting in long-chain polysulfide segments covalently bonded in the polymer backbone.
 Fig. 6  (a) Structure and synthetic route of carbyne polysulfide. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of sulfurized graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
6.2 Aromatic crosslinkers
In organic chemistry, an aromatic compound possesses a cyclic and planar molecular structure with a ring of resonance bonds. The most common aromatic compounds are derivatives of benzene. There are also many non-benzene aromatic compounds existing in nature, which follow Hückel's rule. In these non-benzene aromatic structures where at least one carbon atom is replaced by heteroatoms such as oxygen, nitrogen or sulfur, π electrons are delocalized in a conjugated system of p orbitals, usually on sp2-hybridized atoms, but sometimes sp-hybridized. The aromatic molecules must have a continuous ring of p atomic orbitals without any sp3 atoms, and the number of π electrons should equal 4n + 2 (n = 0, 1, 2, 3…) in the conjugated system. The conjugated system is often made of alternating single and double carbon–carbon bonds in a ring, and this configuration allows the π electrons in the aromatic molecule to be delocalized around the ring, contributing to the high stability of aromatic structures. Due to the stability of the π electron system, aromatic molecules often undergo substitution reactions that preserve the π electron system rather than addition reactions that would destroy it. In this regard, sulfur can be covalently grafted on aromatic groups to obtain sulfur-embedded polymers. In this section, four typical aromatic structures and the corresponding sulfur-embedded polymers are discussed: (1) polyacrylonitrile; (2) polypyrrole; (3) polyaniline; and (4) covalent triazine frameworks.

6.2.1 Polyacrylonitrile. 
It is well known that elemental sulfur is an effective dehydrogenation reagent extensively used in the plastic industry. Sulfur can dehydrogenate hydrocarbon compounds, resulting in the formation of unsaturated bonds with conjugated electrons. The reaction of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) with elemental sulfur has been widely explored for the preparation of sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN).135,186,187 Wang et al.187,188 firstly reported the reaction between sulfur and PAN at 280–300 °C in argon and the obtained SPAN was used for rechargeable Li–S batteries. Sulfur plays two roles during the sulfurization process: first, sulfur acts as a mild oxidant so that PAN polymer chains are dehydrogenated by releasing hydrogen sulfide (H2S) molecules and subsequently cyclized to form a conjugated polypyridine-like structure (Fig. 7a); and, second, the resulting dehydrogenated PAN with aromatic structures is instantly sulfurized by sulfur fragments. These two steps occur simultaneously and promote each other to finalize the formation of SPAN. Various structural characterizations using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and Raman and Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy have consistently identified the presence of C–S, S–S, CC, CN and –C(N)–NH2 groups/bonds in the resultant SPAN polymer. The sulfur in SPAN is in the form of short chains that are covalently bonded to the cyclized and dehydrogenated PAN backbones through C–S bonds.189–192 It is reported that temperature critically affects the sulfur content as well as the length and distribution of sulfur chains on the PAN backbone.190 Generally, high temperatures produce short sulfur chains, yet at the cost of low sulfur content and low specific capacities. The suitable reaction temperature is in a range of 280–550 °C, resulting in SPANs with 30–55 wt% of covalently bonded sulfur.
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of dehydrogenation and cyclization of PAN by sulfur upon heating. (b) Proposed chemical structures of SPAN with short sulfur chains covalently bonded to the PAN backbones. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2014, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
The results of elemental analyses of SPAN reported in the literature consistently reveal that the hydrogen content is in the range of 0.89–1.3%,188,189,192,194 corresponding to a C/H ratio of 2.8–2.9 regardless of the reaction time. Based on the results of elemental analyses, Zhang193 proposed chemical structures for SPAN, where the short sulfur chains are covalently bonded to the cyclized, partially dehydrogenated, and ribbon-like PAN backbones (Fig. 7b). The average sulfur chain length can be roughly estimated by thermogravimetric analysis (TGA), because the standard bond energy of the C–S bond (740 kJ mol−1) is much higher than that of the S–S bond (418 kJ mol−1). For example, Zhang193 estimated from the TGA result that ∼20 wt% sulfur is in the form of S–S bonds and 29.2 wt% sulfur is in the form of C–S bonds, corresponding to an average n value of 1.37. It is believed that the maximum length of sulfur chains is no greater than S4 (Fig. 7b). Therefore, the SPAN cathode material exhibits the electrochemical behavior of short-chain sulfur elucidated in Section 2.2, which will be further discussed in Section 7.


6.2.2 Polypyrrole. 
Polypyrrole (PPy) has been widely used as a conductive coating on sulfur cathode materials for construction of internal circuitry of the cathode.130,195–198 Moreover, the nitrogen atoms in PPy were found to interact with polysulfide intermediates and constrain their shuttling.130 Zhang et al.199 proposed that C–S bonds can be formed between sulfur atoms and the PPy backbone, resulting in sulfurized PPy (SPPy) with covalently bonded sulfur. SPPy was prepared by a two-step substitution process: first, the hydrogen atoms are substituted by chlorine atoms on the aromatic rings, followed by further substitution of chlorine atoms by sulfur atoms with the assistance of elemental sulfur and sodium sulfide (Fig. 8a). The reaction temperature was 120–130 °C and the obtained sulfur content was around 65 wt%, corresponding to a theoretical capacity of 1005 mA h g−1. The sulfur chains grafted on the PPy backbone are long sulfur chains (x > 4) as they show electrochemical behaviors similar to elemental sulfur (S8). The benefits of SPPy include three aspects: (1) the conductive PPy polymer backbone facilitates fast electron transport; (2) the hydrophilic structure of PPy enables chemical adsorption of polysulfides; and (3) the existence of covalent sulfur further contributes to polysulfide immobilization on the polymer backbone, which demonstrate an intrinsic combination of chemical adsorption and covalent fixing.
 Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of SPPy via a two-step substitution process. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (b) Possible configuration of SPANI. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Structural illustration of SPANI with sulfur existing in two forms (covalent sulfur grafted on the polymeric backbone and elemental sulfur physically restricted within the crosslinked polymer scaffold.). Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. 


6.2.3 Polyaniline. 
Polyaniline (PANI) is a conducting polymer that features high mechanical stability and high electric activity, and the amino groups of PANI contribute to improved conductivity and an enhanced polysulfide restriction effect. Zhang et al.200 reported the preparation of sulfurized polyaniline (SPANI) via a two-step substitution process similar to that for SPPy, and SPANI was obtained by substitution of chlorine atoms on the six-atom aromatic rings of PANI chloride at 120–130 °C. Sulfur chains were covalently bonded to the PANI polymeric backbones (Fig. 8b), and elemental analysis proved that there were more than seven sulfur atoms grafted on each aniline structural group, and the sulfur content is 84 wt%. Xiao et al.201 reported self-assembled PANI nanotubes for sulfur encapsulation, where the polymer was treated at 280 °C with sulfur. The resulting SPANI had a sulfur content of 62 wt%, where sulfur existed in two forms: covalently bonded on the PANI backbone and physically restricted within the crosslinked polymer structure (Fig. 8c). Liu et al.202 fabricated nanoporous coralloid SPANI with a sulfur content of 65 wt% and a similar structure to that in Fig. 8c through in situ chlorinated substitution and vulcanization reactions. The SPANI contains three parts: the main backbone chain provided electron conductivity and electrostatic attraction force to stabilize polysulfide anions, the interconnected nano-porous structures enabled high sulfur loading and fast ionic conduction and mass transportation, and the disulfide side chain functioned as a second electrochemical redox component.


6.2.4 Covalent triazine frameworks. 
Covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) are a class of porous organic polymers structurally comprised of triazine units. The aromatic CN bonds in the triazine units endow CTFs with high stability of the triazine linkages and low reversibility of the polymerization procedure.205 CTFs often feature a nitrogen-rich structure, narrow pore size distributions and extremely high specific surface areas along with moderate conductivity, which are important for high performance in metal sulfur batteries. Talapaneni et al.203 reported sulfur-mediated synthesis of CTF-1 from 1,4-dicyanobenzene and elemental sulfur at 400 °C (Fig. 9a). The ring-opening polymerization of sulfur into polymeric sulfur chains was accompanied by the trimerization of the nitrile, resulting in in situ vulcanization of CTF-1 with elemental sulfur and covalent attachment of sulfur within the polymeric framework. In this structure, covalent fixing of sulfur was realized through a radical C–H insertion reaction, and the obtained S-CTF-1 had a sulfur content of 62 wt% along with a well-shaped bipyramidal morphology. Covalent bonding of sulfur to the polymeric framework as well as the micropores of the CTF enables well-restrained polysulfides. The high ionic and electronic conductivity are desirable for high sulfur utilization. Xu et al.206 reported the synthesis of a fluorinated sulfur-rich CTF with a sulfur content of 51 wt% via one-step sulfur-assisted trimerization of perfluorinated aromatic nitriles. The fluorinated triazine-based frameworks were formed simultaneously with covalent bonding of sulfur as well as its homogeneous distribution within the CTF nanoporous structures. The incorporation of fluorine species with a polar characteristic in FCTF-S would further facilitate its strong interactions with polar polysulfides. Coskun et al.204 reported the sulfur-mediated synthesis of a perfluorinated CTF by a similar route but with a high sulfur content of 86 wt%. They proposed using the nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction (SNAr) between perfluoroaryl units and elemental sulfur to increase the sulfur content of a fully conjugated polymer backbone (Fig. 9b). SNAr is used for the direct functionalization of electron-deficient aromatic molecules substituted with electron-withdrawing groups, such as nitro, chlorine, cyano or fluorine. The electron deficiency of the aromatic core can promote the reactivity of the corresponding aromatic structures toward nucleophiles. The nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction chemistry facilitates the dehalogenation and nucleophilic addition reactions of perfluoroaryl units with nucleophilic sulfur chains, which contributes a high sulfur content in the resulting S-CTF.
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the sulfur-mediated synthesis of CTF-1 from 1,4-dicyanobenzene and elemental sulfur at 400 °C. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Synthetic scheme for the synthesis of a fluorinated sulfur-rich CTF involving elemental sulfur-assisted trimerization of perfluorinated aromatic nitriles along with the simultaneous covalent attachment of elemental sulfur via a nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction (SNAr). Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 

6.3 Multifunctional initiators
In chemistry, radical initiators are substances that, under certain conditions, generate radical species and subsequently initiate chemical reactions. Initiators generally contain one or more labile bonds with low bond dissociation energies which decompose to produce very reactive initiator-derived radicals. Once formed, initiator radicals undergo two common reactions, propagation (or polymerization) and termination reactions, which are well-known in organic and polymer chemistry. As discussed above, polysulfide radicals formed over 159 °C are highly reactive to participate in polymerization reactions. Therefore, sulfur can be covalently bonded on a polymeric backbone with the presence of multifunctional initiators. In this section, multifunctional initiator derived sulfur-embedded polymers are discussed in three aspects: (1) thiol groups; (2) benzoxazine; and (3) unsaturated sulfur bonds.

6.3.1 Thiol groups. 
Thiols are the sulfur analogue of alcohols, in which sulfur replaces oxygen in the hydroxyl group of an alcohol. The S–H bond in thiols is much weaker than the O–H bond as reflected in their bond dissociation energy, which gives rise to the generation of thiol radicals, which subsequently initiate radical ring-opening polymerization of elemental sulfur into a linear polysulfane. At elevated temperatures, the free polysulfide radicals tend to couple with thiols, resulting in homogeneously distributed sulfur in the polymer matrix. Kim et al.207 reported a large-scale synthesis of three-dimensionally interconnected sulfur-rich polymers with a thiol compound, trithiocyanuric acid (TTCA), as the initiator. Porous TTCA crystals were used as a soft template, where the ring-opening polymerization of elemental sulfur takes place at the thiol reactive sites on the surface to create interconnected sulfur-rich phases. The diradical ends of the polysulfane chains form crosslinkers between TTCA molecules (Fig. 10a). The obtained S-TTCA material had a sulfur content of 63 wt%. The sulfur in the S-TTCA showed a broad decomposition temperature window compared to elemental sulfur, which indicated the presence of sulfur chains covalently bonded in the TTCA framework.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic drawings describing the synthetic procedures of S-TTCA sulfur-rich polymers. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Copolymerization reactions for the preparation of the sulfur-poly(m-aminothiophenol) (PMAT) copolymer. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthetic scheme for the preparation of sulfur-embedded benzoxazine polymers (BOPs). Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The postulated reaction cascade for the synthesis of a long-chain solid organic polysulfide by a radical coupling reaction. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Inspired by the radical reaction between elemental sulfur and thiol groups, thiol-terminated 2-amino-1,3,5-triazaine-4,6-dithiol (ATD) was reported to initiate the radical reaction between thiol groups and diradical polymeric sulfur, forming an interconnected polymeric framework.211 Zeng et al.208 prepared conducting polymer poly(m-aminothiophenol) (PMAT) with abundant functional thiol groups, which was used for copolymerization with elemental sulfur through inverse vulcanization to form the S-PMAT copolymer (Fig. 10b). Sulfur was covalently embedded in the highly stable crosslinked polymeric scaffolds with a high content of 80 wt%. Je et al.209 adopted an orthogonal synthetic approach for the preparation of a sulfur-embedded benzoxazine polymer (SBOP). In this approach, the benzoxazine polymer can be obtained thermally via a ring-opening polymerization reaction of benzoxazine, while the covalent attachment of sulfur to the polymer can be realized by the thiol functionality of benzoxazine (Fig. 10c), enabling a sulfur content of 72 wt% along with a homogeneous distribution of sulfur within the polymer. Zeng et al.210 reported the synthesis of a long-chain solid organic polysulfide (SOPS) by a radical coupling method involving thiol groups (Fig. 10d). The capping radicals are the methylsulfonyl trithiocarbonate (MSTTC) radical and the methylsulfinyl methanethione (MSMT) radical, both of which are derived from the sodium/dimethyl sulfoxide/carbon disulfide system. The formation of SOPS originates from two aspects: (1) the electron-withdrawing sulfoxide stabilizes the radicals and adjusts the polarity of the organic polysulfides and (2) carbon disulfide creates radical species and stabilizes the radicals by extending the radical delocalization onto sp2 carbon. The number of sulfur atoms in the polysulfide chain was estimated to be 55 based on structural analysis, resulting in a sulfur content of 79 wt% and a corresponding theoretical capacity of 1323 mA h g−1.
Besides radical polymerization reactions, thiol groups can initiate condensation reactions with elemental sulfur, which provides an alternative approach for the fabrication of thiol-initiated sulfur-embedded polymers. As discussed above, the synthetic routes of vulcanization or inverse-vulcanization for obtaining sulfur-containing polymers involve temperatures greater than 180 °C, where sulfur transforms to long polymeric sulfur chains followed by reactions with an organic precursor to yield sulfur-embedded polymers. As a result, well-defined polymers with controlled sulfur chain lengths could be obtained. Manthiram et al.212 reported the preparation of polyethylene hexasulfide (PEHS) using sulfur and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) as the organic precursor at room temperature (Fig. 11a). The high acidity of thiol groups in EDT facilitated a condensation reaction with elemental sulfur while offering selectivity in the polysulfide order through simple stoichiometry. During the condensation reaction, ethylene groups were inserted between six linear sulfur atoms in a chain to obtain PEHS, and their low molecular weight contributed to a high sulfur content up to 87 wt% in the polymer. Based on a similar mechanism, Fu et al.213 introduced a class of phenyl polysulfides C6H5SxC6H5 (4 ≤ x ≤ 6) as liquid cathode materials using benzenethiol (PhSH) and elemental sulfur in appropriate stoichiometric ratios (Fig. 11b). The high acidity of the thiol group facilitated the ring-opening of the cyclo-octasulfur at 40 °C, and the instability of these high order polysulfanes resulted in intermolecular condensation and elimination of H2S gas, leading to the formation of phenyl polysulfanes (PhSxH). The sulfur content in the phenyl polysulfanes was 34–46 wt%, corresponding to theoretical capacities of 570–770 mA h g−1. Considering the flexible functionality of sulfur electrodes, Fu et al.152 further utilized the condensation reaction of 1,4-benzenedithiol with elemental sulfur to synthesize elastic polyphenylene tetrasulfide (PPTS) (Fig. 11c). The conjugated nature of the benzyl ring facilitated high reactivity of the thiol groups, which favored the elimination of the protons in a condensation reaction with elemental sulfur. Excess sulfur abets the reaction by seizing the removed protons and evolving hydrogen sulfide gas. The PPTS polymer consisted of a repeating unit of a phenyl ring with four S atoms attached linearly. The four S–S bonds in the repeating unit can accept six electrons, leading to a high theoretical specific capacity of 788 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of the condensation reaction between sulfur and thiol groups: (a) preparation of polyethylene hexasulfide (PEHS) using sulfur and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), (b) preparation of phenyl polysulfides C6H5SxC6H5 (4 ≤ x ≤ 6) as liquid cathode materials using benzenethiol (PhSH) and elemental sulfur in appropriate stoichiometric ratios, and (c) preparation of elastic polyphenylene tetrasulfide (PPTS) using 1,4-benzenedithiol with elemental sulfur. 


6.3.2 Benzoxazine. 
Benzoxazines are bicyclic heterocyclic compounds consisting of a benzene ring fused to an oxazine which contains one oxygen and one nitrogen atom in a doubly unsaturated six-membered ring. As illustrated in Fig. 12, polybenzoxazines can be formed through ring-opening polymerization of benzoxazines, resulting in a cross-linked network structure. It has been recognized that the benzoxazine moiety itself offers abundant reaction sites to facilitate covalent fixing of sulfur with a high content. Shukla et al.214 explored the use of sustainable cardanol based benzoxazines as potential comonomers to initiate copolymerization reactions with elemental sulfur. Cardanol is a renewable material derived from agricultural waste obtained from the mesocarp of cashew nuts by an industrially viable heat extraction process. As illustrated in Fig. 12, both the unsaturated carbon–carbon double bond and benzylic carbon serve as reaction sites available to react with polysulphane radicals, resulting in a high sulfur content up to 95 wt%. The presence of long alkylene chains in the cardanol benzoxazine Ca monomer and ring-opening reaction of benzoxazine may lead to formation of an amorphous region while sulfur chains lead to the formation of a crystalline region in the copolymer. Similarly, Ghosh et al.215 synthesized a sulfur copolymer derived from cardanol based benzoxazines with a high sulfur loading of 90 wt%, where the chemical attachment of organosulfur units in the copolymer can significantly improve the cathode performances without introducing nanostructures.
 Fig. 12  Pictorial depiction of the structure of the sulfur–cardanol benzoxazine copolymer where polysulfide chains were grafted onto double bonds and the benzylic position of the cardanol benzoxazine monomer (Ca). Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 


6.3.3 Unsaturated sulfur bonds. 
Unsaturated carbon–sulfur bonds have also been proved as active sites to initiate covalent sulfur-grafting reactions. Zeng et al.216 reported sulfur-embedded polymer nanosheets comprising a large amount of mesoporous textures prepared by sulfurization of thiourea aldehyde resin (TAR). The double carbon–sulfur bond in TAR dissociated to provide active binding sites for reaction with polymeric sulfur chains (Fig. 13a). The resulting S-TAR polymer consisted of abundant hyper-branched networks where the sulfur side chains served as intermolecular crosslinkers which were homogeneously distributed and covalently bonded to the polymer backbones. The sulfur content in the S-TAR polymer was 51 wt%. Application of the resultant polymer as a sulfur cathode material not only provided abundant porous channels for Li+ diffusion (Fig. 13b), but also enabled alleviation of polysulfide dissolution by chemical confinement through the covalent bonds between the sulfur-rich side chains and TAR.
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic procedure of S-thiourea aldehyde resin (TAR). (b) Schematic illustration of the chemical structure of S-thiourea aldehyde resin (TAR). Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In Sections 4 and 5, we comprehensively discussed various materials with embedded covalent sulfur that have proved applicable for sulfur cathode applications, including inorganic and organic sulfur compounds, and sulfur-embedded polymers. There are many approaches for the fabrication of those covalent sulfur cathode materials such as radical polymerization, condensation polymerization, etc. It is worth noting that, in some cases, these covalent sulfur materials integrate multiple functional groups/moieties, for example, as discussed in Fig. 12, both vinyl groups and the benzoxazine moiety serve as a reactive site to bind with polymeric sulfur diradicals. Cui et al.140 mixed sulfur with phenyl diselenide (PhSeSePh) to form phenyl selenosulfide (PhSe-S-SePh) and phenyl selenodisulfide (PhSe-SS-SePh) hybrid compounds via addition reactions, which involved both organic phenyl groups and Se–S bonds.
There are several metrics for the evaluation of these covalent sulfur materials including sulfur content, electronic and ionic conductivity, structural stability and economic cost. The sulfur content determines the theoretical capacity of the covalent sulfur material, which essentially relies on the length of the sulfur chains; the electronic and ionic conductivity determine the sulfur utilization, i.e., the practical specific capacity; and the structural stability is often related to cycling stabilities. It is difficult for one material to satisfy all the criteria as there are always trade-offs when designing sulfur cathode materials. For example, SPAN discussed in Section 6.2.1 is known to have highly stable cycling performance as the short sulfur chains grafted on the PAN backbone can completely eliminate the formation of soluble long chain polysulfides. However, the short sulfur chains, on the other hand, place an intrinsic limit on improving the sulfur content (lower than 50 wt%). For sulfur copolymers obtained via inverse vulcanization, a high sulfur content up to 90 wt% is often achievable and thus high theoretical capacities. Nevertheless, an ultrahigh sulfur content endows low electronic and ionic conductivity due to the insulating nature of sulfur, leading to low sulfur utilization and low specific capacities. In this regard, it is not reliable to evaluate a certain covalent sulfur cathode based on one-sided advantages or disadvantages. Instead, we can explore optimization strategies targeting specific requirements for the development of more reliable covalent sulfur materials for metal sulfur batteries, which will be discussed in detail in the next section.

7. Covalent sulfur materials in lithium–sulfur batteries
Due to the high theoretical capacity (3860 mA h g−1) and low electrochemical potential (−3.07 V vs. SHE) of metallic lithium among all anode candidates, Li–S batteries exhibit overwhelming advantages in terms of high energy densities. As discussed above, covalent sulfur materials upgrade the interactions between sulfur and the cathode from the surface level to the molecular level, and their applications in Li–S batteries broaden the horizon for exploration of better sulfur cathodes. In this section, we do not intend to give a research update on applications of various covalent sulfur materials in Li–S batteries, rather we wish to provide a comprehensive understanding of covalent sulfur cathode materials in Li–S batteries, ranging from fundamental mechanisms and electrochemical behaviors to innovative strategies in material design for further improvement.
7.1 Fundamental conversion mechanisms
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the electrochemical reaction mechanisms of most sulfur cathodes in Li–S batteries can be classified into two categories based on two existing forms of electroactive sulfur: cyclo-octasulfur and long sulfur chains with two discharge plateaus and short sulfur chains with single discharge plateaus. In the following, we will discuss the redox mechanisms of covalent sulfur in the form of short sulfur chains (Sx, x < 4), long sulfur chains and organic disulfides as well as their correlations with material structures and electrochemical behaviors.

7.1.1 Short sulfur chains. 
Sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) is one of the most typical covalent sulfur materials in the form of short sulfur chains. As discussed in Section 6.2.1, SPAN consists of short sulfur chains covalently bonded onto cyclized and partially dehydrogenated PAN backbones. There have been many research efforts devoted to the interpretation of the reaction mechanisms of SPAN and its corresponding electrochemical behaviors. Recently, Wang et al.217 proposed new insight into the redox mechanism of the SPAN cathode lithium storage during the (de)lithiation process through 13C solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance, electron paramagnetic resonance and quantum chemical simulations. It was found that SPAN experienced cleavage of S–S bonds, which reacts with lithium ions by accepting electrons from the external circuit to form lithiated ionic SPAN in the first discharge, resulting in the generation of thiyl radicals to form a conjugated structure (Fig. 14a). The proposed mechanism may involve two reaction pathways from pristine SPAN to lithiated ionic SPAN: in Pathway I, lithium ions are hosted at the negative sites around sulfur and pyridine N atoms respectively; in Pathway II, lithium ions are hosted at the negative sites around sulfur. It is worth noting that the discharge process begins from cleavage of the S–S bond in pristine SPAN for the first cycle while all the following discharge processes start from radical SPAN, which means that lithiated ionic SPAN can convert to radical SPAN with a conjugated structure with a thiyl radical in the charge process, rather than returning to the pristine SPAN. The electron delocalization on the SPAN structure was also interpreted by the steric configuration of radical and ionic SPAN in simulations, with a possible evolution of the SPAN structure (Fig. 14b). Starting from the pristine SPAN, the linear radical SPAN is formed after cleavage of the S–S bond and a conjugated π structure is formed due to the linear structure, which serves to stabilize the thiyl radicals. Radical SPAN can turn into ionic SPAN by accepting electrons from the external circuit, and then the linear structure converts to a “zigzag” shape due to electrostatic repulsion. This kind of molecular structure has a large space and is rich with negatively charged locations, which endows the molecules with high reactivity with lithium. The formation of an ion coordination bond between lithium ions and negatively charged locations around sulfur/nitrogen atoms in the conjugated structure is very fast through a reversible lithium coupled electron transfer process and the polymer framework can be well-maintained, which guarantees high stability and superior rate capability. In addition, the discharge voltage plateau of the SPAN cathode in the first cycle is often different from that in the second cycle and beyond, as a result of the change of the oxidation state of the materials from pristine SPAN to conjugated radical SPAN (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction pathway for SPAN to store lithium. (b) Proposed structural evolution from pristine SPAN to the intermediates of radical and ionic SPAN in the reactions, where the deeper red color represents a higher amount of active sites. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Voltage profiles and (d) cycling stability of Li/SPAN cells with different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Yang et al.218 performed ex situ solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy to analyze the structures of SPAN during the charge/discharge processes, and ex situ X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy was conducted to analyze the chemical state variation of sulfur in SPAN. It was found that, during discharge, besides the reaction between lithium and sulfur, the CN and CC groups in SPAN can also react with lithium to form Li–C–N–Li and Li–C–C–Li, which is a conjugated double-bond energy storage mechanism. This mechanism contributes additional capacity beyond the capacity derived from elemental sulfur. After the first charge, fractions of Li–C–N–Li and Li–C–C–Li do not undergo delithiation reactions, which concomitantly leads to the irreversible capacity loss of the first cycle (Fig. 14d). Nevertheless, the remaining lithium ions in these segments after the first charge are beneficial to improve the conductivity and reduce the electrode polarization. Consequently, the subsequent discharge potentials are often higher than the first discharge potential (Fig. 14c). This electrochemical reaction mechanism provides a new approach to prepare energy materials with high capacity.
Therefore, the conversion chemistry of sulfur in SPAN is fundamentally different from that of the conventional S8 active materials with multiple phase transitions, including solid–liquid–solid–liquid–solid transitions (illustrated in Fig. 2a). It is widely recognized that the carbonate-based electrolytes currently used for the state-of-the-art Li-ion batteries are incompatible for use in Li–S batteries due to the nucleophilic reaction between polysulfides and carbonate solvents. Ether-based electrolytes that show high solubility of polysulfides are established as the standard electrolyte system in conventional Li–S batteries. As SPAN undergoes a solid–solid single-phase reaction without the formation of soluble polysulfides during the redox process, a carbonate-based electrolyte is often applicable in Li-SPAN cells. Fanous et al.219 investigated the influence of both the Li-ion conducting salt and different solvents on the Li-SPAN cell performance. With the use of a carbonate-based electrolyte, two different Li-ion-conducting salts LiPF6 and LiTFSI show no significant influence on the cell performance, while a crucial difference was observed with the use of an ether-based electrolyte (Fig. 14d). This can be ascribed to the rearrangement of sulfur species in SPAN to form soluble polysulfides, which is similar to the disproportionation process. In the charge process, the ether-based electrolyte promotes the oxidation of the lithiated SPAN forming polysulfides that are readily soluble in the electrolyte. Further reduction of these soluble polysulfides leads to the formation of elemental sulfur that is no longer covalently bonded on the polymer backbone. In the subsequent discharge profile of the cell with ether-based electrolytes, a shoulder at around 2.5 V can be clearly observed (Fig. 14c), which can be correlated with the formation of elemental sulfur. Therefore, the covalently bonded sulfur on the PAN polymer backbone is a prerequisite for obtaining both high capacities and good cycling stabilities.


7.1.2 Long sulfur chains. 
Despite the superior cycling stability of short sulfur chains originating from the elimination of soluble polysulfides, there is an intrinsic difficulty in increasing the sulfur content as well as the specific capacity due to the limited sulfur chain length. Sulfur-rich polymers, with polymeric sulfur chains covalently bonded to organic cross-linkers, are considered as part of an emerging class of high-capacity sulfur cathode materials for high-energy density Li–S batteries.
As discussed in Section 6.1, the pioneering work of sulfur-rich polymers was reported by Pyun et al.66 by the synthesis of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers via inverse vulcanization. In order to explore the structure–property correlation of the copolymer composition with the electrochemical properties and redox mechanisms, Pyun et al.167 further prepared a series of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers, where the incorporation of electroactive S–S bonds was directly controlled by varying the addition amount of the DIB crosslinker from 1–50 wt%. The sulfur copolymer with 1 wt% DIB exhibited cycling performance comparable to elemental sulfur, whereas those with a 20 wt% or higher content of DIB show negligible or no improvement over elemental sulfur (Fig. 15a). Poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with a DIB content of 5, 10, and 15 wt% all demonstrated high initial capacities as well as low capacity decay rates, and the sulfur copolymer with 10 wt% DIB was found to perform optimally.
 Fig. 15  (a) Cycling performance of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with a DIB content of 0–50 wt% (the inset figure shows a plot of specific capacities with different sulfur copolymer compositions measured at the 75th cycle). (b) Normalized charge/discharge profiles of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with different DIB contents. (c) Proposed redox mechanism of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers in Li–S batteries. (d) Proposed equilibrium between low order polysulfides and organosulfide discharge products, which at higher DIB content favors the formation of soluble higher order polysulfides. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
For further insight into the origin of the enhanced performance of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers in Li–S batteries, the normalized charge/discharge profiles of sulfur copolymers with different DIB contents were compared (Fig. 15b), and it is suggested that both the S–S and organosulfur moieties in the copolymer were electroactive in both voltage regimes. The effect of the DIB content was most evident in the low voltage plateau, which shifted toward lower voltage with an increased DIB content. Combined with X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy characterization results, the mechanism of DIB-bound sulfur co-deposition within a matrix of lower order sulfide discharge products was proposed (Fig. 15c). During the high discharge voltage plateau regime, both high-order organosulfur DIB units and Li2S8 were formed, followed by reactions generating low-order organosulfur DIB and Li2S4. Further discharge to the low voltage plateau regime led to the formation of fully discharged organosulfur DIB and insoluble sulfides, both of which deposited on the cathode. It is worth noting that the organosulfur units functioned as “plasticizers” within the insoluble discharge products, which suppress irreversible deposition of these insoluble discharge products, which tend to cause capacity decay. Nevertheless, with a higher content of DIB (above 15 wt%), the organosulfur units are presumably more concentrated in the electrolyte and in equilibrium with other free polysulfides (e.g. Li2S3) to regenerate high order polysulfides that are more soluble in the electrolyte (Fig. 15d). In this case, the organosulfur units cannot efficiently co-deposit with low-order sulfide discharge products, resulting in rapid capacity decay (Fig. 15a).
Hoefling et al.220 investigated the structural evolution of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers through solid-state nuclear magnetic resonance together with electrochemical experiments and calculations. It was found that the structure of the copolymers can be tuned in terms of polysulfide chain lengths, which further determined the resulting reaction pathways during electrochemical cycling. Contrary to elemental S, which forms soluble long-chain inorganic polysulfide ions that diffuse into the electrolyte and lead to capacity decay, the copolymer with a DIB content of 10 wt% enabled immobilization of long- and medium-chain polysulfides through formation of C–S bonds, which thereby hindered polysulfide dissolution. Although the formation of polysulfides is inevitable, they tend to rebind with polymer-bound sulfides through the disproportionation reaction within a short time scale, yielding covalently anchored organic polysulfides. This re-networking mechanism of polysulfides to the polymeric matrix was found to be more specific to the copolymers with a lower DIB content due to higher insolubility of the reduction products with anchored long polysulfides of large molecular weight. Therefore, the covalently bonded organic moieties served as anchors to stabilize soluble long-chain polysulfides, leading to improved cycling performance of sulfur-rich polymers.
Pyun et al.221 further analyzed the morphological and compositional features of sulfur cathodes with poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers by employing a suite of analytical electron microscopy techniques. Correlations between the cathode structure, composition, electrical conductivity, and electrochemical performance were investigated. It was suggested that the presence of the DIB moieties in the copolymers significantly improved the compatibility between the percolated conductive carbon additives and the electrochemically active sulfur-containing domains, leading to intimate mixing of these components at a much finer length scale in the sulfur cathode. This facilitated charge transfer between the electrically conductive pathways and electrochemically active sulfur domains. Moreover, the improved compatibility and homogeneity between the components in the sulfur cathode also appeared to create a unique hierarchical cathode morphology that was electrochemically and mechanically more robust, leading to improvements of the cathode mechanical stability, which lead to reduced cracking and extended multi-scale porosity during cycling.
Various organic functional linkers have been reported to be applicable for the synthesis of sulfur-rich polymers (as listed in Table 4). It is anticipated that the intrinsic properties of the organic cross-linkers exert a significant influence on the performance of sulfur-rich polymers. Therefore, it is desirable to employ theoretical studies for predictions and evaluation of organic functional linkers in sulfur-rich polymers from a molecular perspective. Park et al.177 screened the molecular structures and electronic structures of four kinds of vinyl comonomers based on quinones and triazine: tetra(allyloxy)-1,4-benzoquinone (TABQ), 2-allyloxy-naphthoquinone (ANQ), 1,4-bis(allyloxy)-anthraquinone (BAAQ) and triallyloxy-triazine (TATA). There are noticeable differences in the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) for these comonomers (Fig. 16a–b). After copolymerization with sulfur, a remarkable reduction in the HOMO–LUMO bandgap energy was observed. The S-TABQ copolymer showed a particularly low bandgap energy of 2.27 eV. It was thus anticipated that TABQ with heteroatoms, aromatic structure, keto groups and low bandgap energy was the most promising comonomer for the preparation of sulfur-rich polymers with improved sulfur utilization and fast redox kinetics. It was also noteworthy that the bandgap energy of TATA significantly reduced from 6.97 to 3.63 eV after copolymerization. Moreover, TABQ and TATA had a higher content of vinyl moieties compared to that for ANQ and BAAQ, which was beneficial to achieve a higher sulfur content in the copolymer. The conformations of TABQ with optimized geometries highlighted the possible tuning of the charge transfer properties in sulfur-rich polymers via rational design of molecular linkers (Fig. 16c). In comparison with elemental sulfur, both poly(S-TABQ) and poly(S-TATA) cathodes exhibited higher capacities and stabilized cycling performance (Fig. 16d), which indicated well-immobilized polysulfides within the cathode framework via chemical interactions. Moreover, the poly(S-TABQ) cathode showed superior rate performance with a high capacity of 833 mA h g−1 delivered at 10C (Fig. 16e), indicating excellent redox kinetics in poly(S-TABQ). This could be ascribed to the intrinsic advantage of TABQ in the electronic structure shown in Fig. 16b. This work set up a good example of combinations of theoretical predictions and experimental studies and could pave the way for the development of better sulfur-rich polymer cathode materials.
 Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of various organic functional liners (TABQ, ANQ, BAAQ, and TATA) for sulfur-rich polymer synthesis. (b) Energy diagrams of the linkers and dimers with sulfur bridges, estimated by ab initio calculations using density functional theory (the calculation results for DIB and sulfur-linked DIB dimers are also shown for reference). (c) Conformations of TABQ and TATA dimers with optimized geometries. C, O, N, S, and H atoms are shown in grey, red, blue, yellow, and light grey, respectively. (d) Charge/discharge voltage profiles of lithium cells based on poly(S-TABQ), poly(S-TATA), and elemental sulfur at 0.1 C rate. (e) Rate performance of lithium cells based on poly(S-TABQ), poly(S-TATA), and elemental sulfur. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 


7.1.3 Organic disulfides. 
As discussed in Section 5.2, sulfur atoms in organic sulfide molecules can serve as active sites to react with lithium ions and electrons in Li–S batteries. However, organic sulfide molecules often show high solubility in organic electrolytes, which leads to an irreversible loss of active materials. On the other hand, the high solubility of sulfur-containing molecules enables these materials to be used as catholytes in Li–S batteries, where electroactive sulfur is present in liquid form in the electrolyte. Recently, Li et al.151 investigated the redox mechanisms and electrochemical properties of three lithium benzenedithiolates (LBDTs), consisting of two –S–Li groups that could donate two lithium ions and electrons in oxidation reactions, as catholytes in Li–S batteries. 1,2-, 1,3-, and 1,4-LBDTs were investigated to elucidate the relationship of their redox chemistry and the effect of the lithium thiolate position on their electrochemical behavior experimentally and theoretically. According to the calculated atomic charges, the –S–Li groups of the 1,2- and 1,4-LBDTs were more likely to show electron-donating properties (0.25 and 0.24e, respectively), which could activate the benzene ring. This conjugation effect further enabled the other sulfur radicals to hold more negative charges (−0.29e and −0.35e) than that of 1,3-LBDT (−0.20e), which thus contributed to kinetically favorable redox reactions. The liquid chromatography-quadrupole time-of-flight-mass spectrometry technique was used to characterize the charge and discharge products in the LBDTs. It was found that, during the charging process, the oxidation reaction of 1,2-LBDT occurred in two steps (Fig. 17a). The first step was the delithiation of one –S–Li group on 1,2-LBDT, where one lithium ion and one electron were extracted to form 1,2-LiSPhS˙ radicals. Two 1,2-LiSPhS˙ radicals immediately combined to form a S–S bond and concomitantly an intermediate lithium 2,2′-disulfanediyldibenzenethiolate, which was further delithiated to form another S–S bond in the second step, rendering a cyclic dimer (Fig. 16a). In the cases of the 1,3- and 1,4-LBDTs in the charge process, the two-step oxidation reactions resulted in the formation of a cyclic trimer and tetramer, respectively (Fig. 17b and c). According to the molecular dynamics simulations, the formation of the dimer complex during the oxidation of 1,2-LBDT was primarily due to the steric stabilization effect, whereas the 1,3- and 1,4-LBDTs is including but not limited by the steric stabilization, thus the sulfur radicals have more freedom to line up and form a big circle.
 Fig. 17  Proposed redox reactions of three lithium benzenedithiolates (LBDTs), (a) 1,2-LBDT, (b) 1,3-LBDT and (c) 1,4-LBDT during battery cycling. (d and e) Cycling performance of the three LBDTs at a 0.5C rate with an areal sulfur loading of (d) 0.7 mg cm−2 and (e) 2.6 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Regarding the electrochemical properties, 1,2-LBDT delivered an initial capacity of 340 mA h g−1 approaching the theoretical value and retained 84.1% of the initial capacity over 100 cycles, while the 1,3- and 1,4-LBDTs delivered much lower capacities (Fig. 17d). This indicated the fast kinetics and good reversibility of the S–S bonds in the cyclic dimer from the oxidation of 1,2-LBDT in comparison with the cyclic trimer and tetramer from the 1,3- and 1,4-LBDTs. When the areal sulfur loading was increased to 2.6 mg cm−2, the advantage of 1,2-LBDT was more significant as it showed an even higher capacity than those of the 1,3- and 1,4-LBDTs (Fig. 17e), which further implied a kinetically favorable redox process in 1,2-LBDT, in accordance with theoretical predictions. This work elucidated the redox chemistry of organic disulfides and correlated the relationships between structure and performance, which is beneficial to advance the fundamental understanding of electroactive sulfur in organic molecules.
In conclusion, short sulfur chains, long sulfur chains and organic disulfides are the typically existing forms of covalent sulfur, all of which have their own advantages and disadvantages. Covalent sulfur in the form of short sulfur chains (Sx, x < 4) can fundamentally eliminate the formation of soluble polysulfides during the redox process. Therefore, short sulfur chains are often accompanied by superior long-term cycling stability due to the elimination of the polysulfide shuttle effect, which causes irreversible active material loss. However, an intrinsic limitation exists in increasing the sulfur content of covalent sulfur in the form of short sulfur chains (often less than 50 wt%). As discussed in Section 3, the high content of electrochemically inactive polymer components leads to decreased energy density in a full cell design. Similar to short sulfur chains, organic disulfides face the challenge of limited sulfur content as the electroactive sites only exist in the form of disulfides. Nevertheless, organic disulfides are often soluble in organic electrolytes to form a catholyte, which contributes to significantly improved redox reaction kinetics compared to insulating elemental sulfur. Moreover, organic disulfides provide a good platform to investigate the correlations between organic structures and electrochemical behavior in covalent sulfur structures, contributing to the understanding of fundamental design principles of covalent sulfur materials. When covalent sulfur exists in the form of long sulfur chains, the sulfur content can be significantly increased due to reduced amounts of organic cross-linkers. Therefore, long sulfur chains are desirable for high-capacity sulfur cathodes as well as high-energy density metal–sulfur batteries. Yet the polysulfide dissolution and migration issues are unavoidable for covalent sulfur materials with long sulfur chains, which lead to capacity decay during prolonged cycles.

7.2 Strategies for performance improvement
As discussed above, covalent sulfur materials have advantages of uniform and chemically stable structures, tunable sulfur contents and an intrinsic immobilization effect for sulfur species. However, challenges still remain which preclude optimal performance for most of these covalent sulfur materials, especially for those with a high sulfur content. The extremely low conductivity of sulfur is the primary limitation in fully exploiting the merits of covalent sulfur materials. Besides, the polysulfide dissolution and diffusion issues become more severe at a high sulfur content.222 Therefore, how to achieve and balance high sulfur content, high conductivity and good polysulfide restriction simultaneously is worth exploring for the optimization of covalent sulfur cathode materials. In this section, strategies that have been reported for performance improvement of covalent sulfur cathode materials are discussed in four aspects including: (1) heteroatom doping; (2) conductive functional groups; (3) carbon-based composites; and (4) metal sulfide-based composites.

7.2.1 Heteroatom-doping. 
The low conductivity of sulfur places an inherent hurdle on the kinetics of redox conversion reactions. Incorporating conductive doping atoms within the S–S bond has been considered an effective approach to improve the conductivity of electroactive sulfur and accelerate the redox kinetics during conversion reactions. Chen et al.223 designed Se-doped SPAN (Se0.06SPAN) as the cathode material, where Se atoms were distributed within the electroactive sulfur domains at a molecular level through Se–S bonds. As discussed in Section 5.1.1, selenium is highly miscible with sulfur and has a much higher electronic conductivity, which guarantees uniform distribution of doped Se atoms with improved conductivity. The lithium ion diffusion coefficients (DLi+) for SPAN and Se0.06SPAN were quantitatively calculated by a series of cyclic voltammetry (CV) with different scan rates, and it was found that DLi+ for both the reduction and oxidation peaks of the Li/Se0.06SPAN battery were higher than those for the Li-SPAN battery (Fig. 18a), suggesting that Se-doping facilitated fast Li-ion transport within the electrode. Correspondingly, the charge/discharge curves of the Se0.06SPAN electrode exhibited a higher capacity and lower polarization than those for the SPAN electrode (Fig. 18b). The improved discharge capacity and reduced polarization indicated that Se0.06SPAN was able to boost the electrochemical reaction kinetics during the discharge/charge processes in Li–S batteries. A density functional theory model was used to investigate the lithium ion migration properties within SPAN and Se0.06SPAN. It was indicated that the migration energy barriers within SPAN and Se0.06SPAN were 1.33 and 0.39 eV, respectively, which apparently suggested that the structure of Se0.06SPAN was more beneficial for lithium migration, in agreement with the experimental results in Fig. 18a and b.
 Fig. 18  (a) Lithium ion diffusion coefficients of the reduction peak of Se0.06SPAN and SPAN cathodes. (b) Charge/discharge curves of SPAN and Se0.06SPAN electrodes. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of the solution after washing cycled SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes in an ether-based electrolyte. (d) Cycling performance of the Se0.06SPAN cathode at various current densities in an ether-based electrolyte. (e) The scheme of the proposed reaction process of the SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2019, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (f) Rate performance and (g) cycling properties of Te0.04S0.96/PAN and SPAN in an ether-based electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
The dissolution and diffusion of polysulfides during the redox process of SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes were also investigated in an ether-based electrolyte. As discussed in Fig. 14c in Section 7.1.1, SPAN cathode materials with short sulfur chains tend to form polysulfides in ether-based electrolytes, which leads to capacity decay. The cycled SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes in the ether-based electrolyte were washed and the resulting solutions were characterized by the UV-vis absorption spectra. The dissolution of polysulfides in the SPAN electrode could be clearly detected while negligible signals of polysulfides could be found in the Se0.06SPAN electrode (Fig. 18c). This suggested that Se-doping significantly enhanced the redox conversion of polysulfides and the reaction kinetics, which thus led to compatibility with the ether-based electrolyte and good cycling stabilities of the Li/Se0.06SPAN battery in the ether-based electrolyte (Fig. 18d and e).
Similarly, Jiang et al.225 introduced a small amount of Se into SPAN to serve as extra bond sites for sulfur species, not just relying on C–S bonds. Se atoms were uniformly doped in the SPAN composites, chemically bonding with sulfur atoms and successfully improving the sulfur content up to 60 wt%, which was higher than that of SPANs (less than 50 wt%). The obtained SeSPAN composite exhibited a high initial specific capacity of 1044 mA h g−1 and a high coulombic efficiency of almost 100% and significantly increased cycling stability were also observed in comparison with the pristine SPAN electrode. Yan et al.226 reported the fabrication of Se-doped poly(diallyl tetrasulfide) (PDATtSSe) with four sulfur atoms and one doped selenium atom in the confined organic structure for Li–S batteries. The Se doping could enhance the electronic conductivity and improve the lithium ion transport, and the organic framework could covalently immobilize the sulfur species. Consequently, a specific capacity of 700 mA h g−1 close to the theoretical capacity was achieved, together with a high capacity retention of 92% after 400 cycles and a coulombic efficiency of almost 100%.
Besides selenium, tellurium (Te) is another chalcogen in the periodic table but it has an even higher conductivity (2 × 102 S m−1).227 Analogous to selenium, Te can be easily distributed at the molecular level through Te–S bonds. Li et al.224 incorporated Te dopant atoms as a eutectic accelerator in SPAN materials to obtain Te0.04S0.96/PAN cathode materials for Li–S batteries. Te was uniformly doped in the short sulfur chains through Te–S bonds and served to accelerate the redox conversion and prevent polysulfide dissolution under a “dissolution–deposition” mechanism in ether-based electrolytes. The Te0.04S0.96/PAN cathode showed significantly improved rate capability and long-term cycling stability compared to the pristine SPAN electrode (Fig. 18f and g). Notably, the active material utilization of Te0.04S0.96/PAN achieved 55.6% even at a high current density of 10 A g−1, which further indicated enhanced redox kinetics with the presence of Te doping.


7.2.2 Conductive functional groups. 
Developing synthetic methods to introduce new chemical functionality into organic moieties has proved to be another effective way to enhance the electrical conductivities of the resulting sulfur-embedded polymers. Dirlam et al.228 reported the introduction of conductive polythiophene segments into the poly(S-r-DIB) copolymer via tandem inverse vulcanization and electro-polymerization. Functional styrenic comonomers with pendant 3,4-alkylenedioxythiophene groups (ProDOT-Sty) and elemental sulfur were first copolymerized to obtain a sulfur-rich copolymer with electro-polymerizable side chains, which then successively reacted with DIB to yield poly(ProDOT-Sty-random-DIB-random-sulfur) (ProDIBS). The as-formed ProDIBS was then subjected to electro-polymerization conditions to form interconnected conductive poly(ProDOT) segments in the sulfur copolymer matrix (Fig. 19a). This methodology demonstrated a facile approach to introduce new functionality into sulfur-rich polymers, resulting in functional sulfur copolymers with enhanced conductivity for performance improvement in Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of sulfur and thiophene based copolymers using tandem inverse vulcanization and electro-polymerization. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Synthetic approach for the copolymerization of allyl terminated P3HT and sulfur and proposed microstructure of the obtained sulfur copolymer. (c and d) Optical microscopy images of films obtained by drop-casting of (c) a mixture of sulfur and P3HT that were not covalently linked and (d) a mixture of sulfur and the S-P3HT copolymer. (e) Rate capabilities of sulfur electrodes with the S-P3HT copolymer and sulfur and P3HT blend. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Oschmann et al.173 reported the use of allyl-terminated poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) with conductive polythiophene segments as comonomers to copolymerize with elemental sulfur (Fig. 19b). The as-prepared S-P3HT copolymer was applied as an additive in the sulfur cathode for Li–S batteries and the use of a simple mixture of sulfur and P3HT where sulfur and P3HT were not covalently linked was investigated as a comparison. The S-P3HT copolymer could be well dispersed in sulfur at least on the sub-micrometer level, while pristine P3HT was incompatible with elemental sulfur. In the optical microscopy images of films obtained by drop-casting of a mixture of sulfur and P3HT that were not covalently linked and a mixture of sulfur and the S-P3HT copolymer, the system with a mixture of S and P3BT showed distinct phase separation on the micrometric length scale, while the mixture of S-P3HT and sulfur formed a smooth and homogeneous surface (Fig. 19c and d), which suggested miscibility between sulfur and S-P3HT copolymers. Consequently, the sulfur electrode with the S-P3HT copolymer exhibited significantly improved rate capabilities with higher capacities at all applied current densities in comparison with that with the sulfur and P3HT blend (Fig. 19e). The improved performance could be ascribed to the structural integrity of the sulfur electrode at the nano-/meso-scale by the shortened diffusion length and reduced diffusion barrier of the reactant with the incorporation of the S-P3HT copolymer. It is worth noting that, in this case, the S-P3HT copolymer was used as an additive rather than the main electroactive component in the sulfur cathode and the majority of sulfur in the electrode was elemental and not covalently bound to the P3HT polymeric backbone. With respect to the significantly improved performance, this work suggested a new kind of applications of sulfur-embedded polymers in sulfur cathodes for Li–S batteries.


7.2.3 Carbon-based composites. 
As discussed in Section 4.1, incorporation of conductive carbon materials in the sulfur cathode has been one of the most widely adopted strategies for performance improvement in Li–S batteries. On one hand, the high conductivity of carbon materials facilitates fast charge transfer, which contributes to high sulfur utilization; on the other hand, the tunable structures of carbon materials give rise to a physical confinement effect towards the issue of polysulfide dissolution and diffusion. Therefore, combination of covalent sulfur materials and carbon materials has been a promising trend to obtain sulfur cathode materials with multiple advantages.171,229–233
Yan et al.232 reported the synthesis of a graphene-based covalent sulfur composite material by radical reactions between sulfur and alkylene radicals on graphene, which enabled the covalent attachment of sulfur onto graphene nanosheets. The allylamine molecule was chosen as a crosslinker due to its amine and allyl groups, which could combine diradical polymeric sulfur with conductive graphene (Fig. 20a). Allyl moieties were grafted onto graphene oxide (GO) by nucleophilic attack on the epoxy carbon and β-carbon of –OH groups on the surface of GO. In the meantime, electrically insulating GO was reduced with the removal of oxygen-containing groups, followed by free-radical copolymerization with sulfur to obtain allyl-grafted graphene/sulfur (allyl-G/S). Compared with the reduced graphene oxide/sulfur (rGO/S) electrode, the allyl-G/S cathode was endowed with advantages of high conductivity and the covalent fixing effect, which led to obviously decreased polarization and increased specific capacities in the charge/discharge profiles (Fig. 20b). Moreover, the allyl-G/S cathode showed good rate capabilities with a high specific capacity of 702 mA h g−1 delivered at 6C and stable cycling performance with negligible capacity decay over 100 cycles (Fig. 20c). Density functional theory calculations were used to calculate the dissociation energy needed to break the S–S bond at different position in allyl-G/S (Fig. 20d). It was indicated that the S4–S5 bond in allyl-G/S had the lowest dissociation energy compared to those needed for the cleavage of other S–S bonds. This result demonstrated that the polysulfides produced during the initial discharge process were prone to be firmly anchored onto the graphene backbone (allyl-G/S4–Li), which led to well-immobilized polysulfides within the cathode. Further conversion reactions resulted in cleavage of the S–S bond in allyl-G/S4–Li and the formation of short-chain polysulfides and solid lithium sulfides. The calculations demonstrated the highly favorable aspects of covalent fixing of sulfur onto the allyl-grafted graphene.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration showing the chemical structure of allyl-grafted graphene/sulfur (allyl-G/S). (b) Charge/discharge profiles of allyl-G/S (red) and rGO/S (blue) for the 100th cycle at a current density of 0.5C. (c) The top is the rate capability and the corresponding coulombic efficiency of allyl-G/S at various current densities; the bottom is the cycling performance of allyl-G/S in comparison with rGO-S at 0.5C. (d) Density functional theory calculations showing the bond cleavage energy of S–S bonds at different positions in allyl-G/S. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of the charge/discharge process of SenS8−n/nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbons (NMC). (f) Long-term cycling performance of the Se2S6/NMC electrode. Reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Sun et al.229 reported homogeneous confinement of heteroatomic SenS8−n molecules into nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbons (NMCs) to obtain SenS8−n/NMC composite materials for Li–S batteries. The heteroatomic SenS8−n molecules exhibited highly reversible electrochemical behavior due to the high similarity of cleavage and formation processes among the S–S, S–Se, and Se–Se bonds. The NMC not only served to improve the conductivity of the sulfur cathode, but also to enhance the polysulfide immobilization effects by its porous structure and nitrogen doping (Fig. 20e). Benefiting from the combined effects of covalent fixing, physical confinement and chemical adsorption, the SenS8−n/NMC electrode exhibited good cycling stability over 200 cycles (Fig. 20f).


7.2.4 Metal sulfide-based composites. 
As discussed in Section 4.2, metal sulfides with an intrinsic polar nature are capable of anchoring polysulfides to their surface via the chemical adsorption effect. Dirlam et al.234 reported preparation and utilization of a composite sulfur cathode material with a sulfur-rich polymer and molybdenum disulfide (MoS2) particulate inclusions for Li–S batteries. The MoS2 inclusions acted as “polysulfide anchors” to mitigate the dissolution of polysulfide intermediates. MoS2 was first directly dispersed in liquid elemental sulfur with sequential polymerization of the sulfur species via thermal ring-opening polymerization and copolymerization with DIB via inverse vulcanization to obtain the MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB) composite (Fig. 21a). The MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB) cathode material was found to enable enhanced rate capabilities compared to that of elemental sulfur and the S/MoS2 composite, indicating the synergetic advantages of chemical adsorption and covalent fixing effects derived from MoS2 anchoring sites and DIB organic moieties.
 Fig. 21  (a) Scheme for the preparation of MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB) composites. (b) Rate capabilities of S/MoS2, MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB), and elemental sulfur-based cathodes. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of SPAN and NiS2-SPAN at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (d) Rate capabilities of SPAN and NiS2-SPAN from 200 mA g−1 to 2000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yang et al.235 incorporated nickel disulfide (NiS2) with a conductivity of approximately 55 S cm−1 at room temperature into SPAN to obtain the NiS2-SPAN cathode material for Li–S batteries. NiS2 nanoparticles with a size of ∼40 nm were uniformly distributed within the SPAN matrix, and the Ni content in the NiS2-SPAN composite was 1.3% according to elemental analysis results, which exerted minimized influence on the energy density of the cell. The NiS2 could not only afford affinity toward polysulfide species but also reduce the charge transfer impedance, which was thus capable of accelerating the polysulfide redox kinetics and stabilizing the electrode structure. Hence, compared to the pristine SPAN, the NiS2-SPAN cathode exhibited improved electrochemical performance with a high reversible capacity of 1533 mA h gsulfur−1 (705 mA h gcomposite−1) after 100 cycles. Notably, the rate capabilities of the NiS2–SPAN cathode were significantly better than that of the pristine SPAN cathode, which implied enhanced redox kinetics with the presence of NiS2.
Based on the above discussions, it can be concluded that strategies for performance improvement of covalent sulfur cathode materials can be classified into two basic categories: molecular structure modification and composite structure design. Modification of the molecular structures of covalent sulfur cathode materials can be realized by incorporating dopant atoms and functional groups, which serve to modify the intrinsic properties of covalent sulfur materials for better redox reactivities, while the design of composite structures focuses on the incorporation of additional materials, which often contribute to the physical confinement and/or chemical adsorption effect as well as enhanced electronic conductivities of covalent sulfur cathodes. The combination of multiple design principles for sulfur cathodes is anticipated to be more effective for the optimization of sulfur cathodes for reliable Li–S batteries.

8. Covalent sulfur materials in other metal–sulfur batteries
Despite the high energy density advantage of Li–S batteries, the relatively high cost and insufficiency of lithium resources raise concerns about the long-term sustainability of lithium-based battery technologies, especially in large-scale applications for stationary storage. In pursuit of alternatives to Li–S batteries, increasing interest is gradually transferring to alternative alkaline metal–sulfur batteries based on low cost and abundant metals including sodium and potassium. Analogous to Li–S batteries, these metal–sulfur batteries suffer from low active material utilization rates and fast capacity decay originating from the intrinsic issues of the sulfur conversion reactions discussed above. Effective material design is the primary solution that is expected to improve the performances of these metal–sulfur batteries. In this section, we will discuss advances in sodium–sulfur and potassium–sulfur batteries involving covalent sulfur cathode materials.
8.1 Sodium–sulfur (Na–S) batteries
Sodium has high natural abundance, low cost and a suitable electrochemical reduction potential (−2.71 V versus standard hydrogen electrode, only 0.3 V more positive than lithium). The overall electrochemical reaction of room-temperature Na–S batteries is 2Na + S → Na2S, which yields a high theoretical energy density of 1270 W h kg−1. Therefore, Na–S batteries appear to have good potential for meeting energy requirements especially for large-scale grid energy storage. Commercially available high-temperature Na–S batteries require high operation temperatures above 300 °C to enable interfacial sodium wetting on the beta alumina solid electrolyte, sufficient sodium ion conductivity, and sustained soluble media for sodium polysulfide species.18 The high operation cost, safety concerns and maintenance issues have limited the widespread applications of high-temperature Na–S batteries. Development of room-temperature Na–S batteries employing liquid organic electrolytes is receiving increasing attention to broaden the range of applications of Na–S battery technology.21,236–238
Notably, challenges exist in Na–S batteries compared to Li–S batteries. First, the large difference in the sizes of sodium atoms and sodium ions makes sodium more prone than lithium to form unstable electrodeposits and dendrites.239 Second, sodium is more reactive with aprotic liquid electrolytes and forms a less stable protective solid electrolyte interface in aprotic liquids, resulting in lower electrochemical conversion efficiency during cycling.240 Third, sodium ions are larger and less reducing than lithium ions, leading to sluggish transport kinetics during conversion reactions. Fourth, the volumetric expansion of the sulfur cathode is even greater during discharge (260% for a Na–S battery and 80% for a Li–S battery). Therefore, the design of sulfur cathode materials for Na–S batteries needs to overcome multiple new challenges, in addition to the already well-known ones for Li–S batteries.
Improvements of the specific capacity and cyclability of Na–S batteries require sulfur cathode materials with favorable structures and properties. SPAN cathode materials with short sulfur chains as the electroactive sites have been considered to be effective to eliminate parasitic reactions of sodium polysulfides with the reactive sodium metal anode. Short sulfur chains can reduce the diffusion pathways for electron and sodium ion transport during conversion reactions and accelerate the redox conversion kinetics to alleviate the intrinsic sluggish transport of sodium ions. Wang et al.241 first reported the use of the SPAN cathode material in Na–S batteries. With a sulfur content of 45 wt%, the specific capacity of the SPAN cathode was initially 655 mA h g−1 and remained at 500 mA h g−1 in the 18th cycle with about a 100% charge/discharge efficiency, which demonstrated the merits of SPAN cathode materials in Na–S batteries. Choi et al.242 designed one-dimensional SPAN fibers with ∼150 nm diameters via an electrospinning process. The structure turned out to be robust during repeated cycling up to 500 cycles and enabled high rate performance up to 6C, which indicated favorable redox kinetics for (de)sodiation. Yao et al.243 reported the fabrication of S0.6Se0.4/PAN electrodes for sodium storage. The covalent bonding between S0.6Se0.4 and the PAN matrix, the covalent bonding between selenium and sulfur atoms, and the interconnected conductive network provided by SPAN enabled a specific capacity of 375 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a coulombic efficiency almost reaching 100%. More recently, tellurium-doped SPAN was reported for use in Na–S batteries to enable enhanced redox reaction kinetics and improved sulfur utilization.244 Similar to the case in Li–S batteries discussed in Section 6.2.1, improved capacities and long-term cycling stabilities were demonstrated with the incorporation of tellurium heteroatoms. Ma et al.245 reported an iodine-doped SPAN cathode material for Na–S batteries, where iodine was doped in the PAN organic framework. According to the direct current polarization measurement and transit voltage response method, the electrical conductivity of iodine-doped SPAN approximately doubled compared to that of pristine SPAN, and the iodine-doped SPAN exhibited a higher sodium ion diffusion coefficient than SPAN, which indicated enhanced kinetics for charge transfer during redox reactions. A high capacity of 994 mA h g−1 was delivered at a high rate of 2C and stable cycling performance was demonstrated for 500 cycles with a low capacity decay rate of 0.029% per cycle.
Ji et al.246 proposed a novel strategy to prepare a covalent sulfur–carbon complex with a covalent-sulfur concentration of 40.1% for Na–S batteries, using –SO3H and SO42− as the sulfur source rather than the commonly used elemental sulfur (Fig. 22a). The covalent sulfur material (SC-BDSA) was prepared by thermally treating a mixture of benzenedisulfonic acid (m-C6H6O6S2, BDSA) and K2SO4 in an argon atmosphere, where K2SO4 acted as not only the sulfur precursor but also the salt template and active agent. The sulfur in the obtained SC-BDSA existed in the form of O–S/C–S bridge-bonds, which ensured sufficient interfacial contact and maintained high ionic/electronic conductivities of the sulfur–carbon cathode. Meanwhile, mesoporous structures existed in the as-obtained covalent sulfur materials, resulting from the thermally-treated salt bath, which could provide a physical confinement effect for electroactive sulfur. Consequently, the SC-BDSA electrode showed good rate performance with a reversible capacity over 500 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 8 A g−1 (Fig. 22b), and it maintained good cycling stability upon 1000 cycles with a capacity decay of 0.035% per cycle (Fig. 22c). This work demonstrated a good example of tailored covalent sulfur materials with favorable kinetic properties for improved Na–S batteries.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis processes of SC-BDSA. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of the SC-BDSA electrode at different current densities. (c) Cycling performance of the SC-BDSA electrode at 2.5 A g−1 for 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Proposed chemical structure of the sulfur copolymer by reaction of a Ca monomer with sulfur. (e) Charge/discharge profiles of the second and fifth cycles at 0.2 A g−1. (f) Comparisons of the cycling performances between the CS90 copolymer (blue) and CS90–rGO(S) (red) cathodes at 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The covalent sulfur materials for Na–S batteries discussed above contained embedded short sulfur chains, which could eliminate the formation of polysulfides via solid–solid conversion reactions with the use of carbonate-based electrolytes (as discussed in Section 7.1). In these cases, the sulfur content was often lower than 50 wt%, and the discharge voltages of the Na–S battery were often lower than 1.8 V due to the intrinsic kinetic limit for solid–solid reactions (Fig. 22b). Mitra et al. reported the fabrication of sulfur-embedded polymers with long sulfur chains for Na–S batteries, which enabled multistep solid–liquid–solid conversion reactions with the use of an ether-based electrolyte. Cardanol-based benzoxazine (Ca), with multiple reactive sites including the oxazine ring, benzylic carbon and carbon–carbon double bond, was used as a comonomer for copolymerization with sulfur diradicals to form sulfur copolymers with a high sulfur content of 90 wt% (CS90) (Fig. 22d).247 Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) was further incorporated within the obtained sulfur copolymer to create a percolation network for electron transport. Two discharge plateaus were observed in the discharge curves of the CS90–rGO electrode, corresponding to the stepwise reduction reactions of sulfur, and the discharge plateau voltage appeared at ∼2.1 V, indicating a kinetically favorable redox process through the solid–liquid–solid conversion reactions (Fig. 22e). Improved cycling stability was demonstrated by the CS90–rGO electrode over 100 cycles at a current density of 1 A g−1 with the incorporation of an rGO conductive framework (Fig. 22f).
8.2 Potassium–sulfur (K–S) batteries
Potassium, the next alkali metal after sodium in the periodic table, has a lower reduction potential than sodium (−2.93 V versus standard hydrogen electrode), which allows potassium-based batteries to operate at higher potentials. The abundance of potassium in the Earth's crust and ocean is similar to that of sodium, which offers low-cost advantages. Therefore, potassium–sulfur batteries have emerged as an alternative energy storage system. Like sodium, the even larger size of potassium ions leads to an inherent limit in the redox reaction kinetics (0.138 nm, 0.102 nm and 0.076 nm for K ions, Na ions and Li ions, respectively), and it is difficult to complete the reduction of sulfur to K2S, and the final discharge product was reported to be K3S2.248 Nevertheless, there is no thermodynamic limit for the formation of K2S in the cathode, similar to Li2S and Na2S in Li–S and Na–S batteries. Since the research and development of K–S batteries are still in an early stage, further optimization of the K–S battery performance as well as understanding of conversion reaction mechanisms can be anticipated with more research efforts devoted to this.
Wu et al.249 applied SPAN with a sulfur content of 38 wt% as the cathode material in K–S batteries with the use of a carbonate-based electrolyte. In the voltage range of 0.8–2.9 V (vs. K+/K) the SPAN electrode delivered a high reversible capacity of 710 mA h g−1, corresponding to an atomic ratio of 0.85:1 between potassium and sulfur in the discharge product (Fig. 23a). A capacity retention rate of 74% and 54% could be maintained after 50 and 100 cycles at 0.5C, and the coulombic efficiency approached ∼99% after 15 cycles (Fig. 23b). Similarly, Lu et al.250 reported covalent sulfur confined within a PAN matrix with a sulfur content of 39 wt% as the cathode material in K–S batteries. Cyclic voltammetry of the covalent sulfur electrode exhibited a reversible pair of cathodic and anodic peaks at 0.81 V and 1.84 V (Fig. 23c), corresponding to the reversible potassiation and de-potassiation processes. Good cycling stability was demonstrated with a high capacity retention of 86.3% over 300 cycles (Fig. 23d). In addition, the iodine-doped SPAN cathode materials used in Na–S batteries discussed in section 7.2 was also applied in K–S batteries.245 Notably, the I–S@pPAN electrode delivered an initial capacity of 1448 mA h g−1 and an excellent reversible capacity of 722 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles; good rate performance was also achieved with a reversible capacity of 397 mA h g−1 delivered at 2C. This indicated that there is still plenty of room to capture higher capacity of a sulfur cathode in K–S batteries through rational design of sulfur cathode materials.
 Fig. 23  (a) Charge/discharge curves and (b) cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the SPAN electrode in K–S batteries at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves and (d) cycling stability of the covalent sulfur cathode in K–S batteries. Reproduced with permission.250 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
9. Concluding remarks and prospects
The ongoing demand for safe, efficient, reliable and affordable energy storage solutions necessitates continuous efforts in research and development of new battery technologies. The high energy density and low-cost merits of sulfur make metal–sulfur batteries among the most promising next-generation energy storage technologies. Extensive effort has been devoted to addressing the intrinsic problems in sulfur conversion chemistry to realize practically viable metal–sulfur batteries. The evolution of the design principles of sulfur cathodes has witnessed steady optimization of metal–sulfur batteries. The emerging covalent fixing strategy, involving the application of sulfur compounds and sulfur-embedded polymers, upgrades the interaction between sulfur and the cathode matrix from the surface to the bulk level via advanced molecular design, and is anticipated to bring more opportunities to advance the development of metal–sulfur batteries. In this review, we provided an overview of the covalent fixing principle in metal–sulfur batteries and highlighted its contribution to promotion and stabilization of sulfur conversion reactions. The general properties, major benefits, recent strategies and general guidelines for performance improvement have been discussed. With respect to the evaluation criteria for reliable battery technologies discussed in Section 2.4, existing challenges and prospects for research are summarized as follows:
(1) Precise control of material structures
As discussed in Section 6, it is difficult to precisely determine the definite molecular structures of sulfur-embedded polymers with short or long sulfur chains covalently grafted on the organic moieties. Since the electrochemical behaviors of metal–sulfur batteries are intimately related to the structures and properties of sulfur cathode materials, it is imperative to develop advanced synthetic techniques or characterization methods for precise control and determination of the structures of sulfur-embedded polymers.
(2) Balanced content of inactive components
Covalent fixing of sulfur requires the introduction of foreign atoms or organic moieties in sulfur cathode materials. Despite their effectiveness in improving the battery performance, they belong to inactive components in the battery that lead to a decrease in energy density. Therefore, it is essential to modulate the compositions of covalent sulfur cathode materials for balanced battery performance.
(3) Development of sustainable and economical synthetic methods
The vulcanization technique is widely used in the polymer industry, resulting in a broad range of sulfur-containing polymers. It is desirable to develop sustainable and economical synthetic methods to recycle waste vulcanized polymers in industry for use in metal–sulfur batteries. For example, Goodenough et al.251 reported that crosslinked polymers could be extracted chemically from waste rubber by a simple solution-drop method to prepare a bifunctional cathode layer with electroactive C–S bonds on the cathode current collector in Li–S batteries, which provided a low-cost and sustainable way to recycle waste rubber.
(4) Target design of sulfur electrodes
Different kinds of covalent sulfur materials often show distinct intrinsic structural properties, which are correlated to their electrochemical behavior. It is essential to drive targeted design of sulfur cathodes based on different features of covalent sulfur materials. For example, SPAN cathode materials with short sulfur chains often show excellent cycling stabilities while the sulfur content is intrinsically limited below 50 wt% due to the limited sulfur chain length. In order to achieve a high practical energy density, thick SPAN electrodes with a high areal sulfur loading should be explored to reach a balance of energy density and cycling stability.
(5) Mechanistic understanding
Due to the nature of conversion reactions, covalent sulfur materials undergo continuous structural changes during repeated cycling, and the structural evolution process is often unclear, leading to a lack of fundamental understanding of the mechanisms related to the electrochemical performance. It is important to explore the fundamental mechanisms of covalent sulfur materials during sulfur conversion reactions by advanced characterization techniques, e.g. in situ and ex situ observations at different scales.
(6) Use in multi-functional applications
The polymeric backbones often endow sulfur-embedded polymers with functional properties that are suitable for functional battery applications. For example, Yang et al.166 reported the application of sulfur copolymers with well-designed periodic micro-lattices as 3D printed cathodes for Li–S batteries. Fu et al.152 investigated the elastic properties of a polyphenylene tetrasulfide sulfur cathode material and found that it could accommodate a strain of up to 334%, which was promising for use in flexible batteries.
(7) Alternative metal–sulfur batteries
Na–S and K–S batteries have advantages of high abundance and low cost of Na and K metals compared to the scarcity of lithium sources. The fundamental challenges are even greater in these non-lithium metal–sulfur batteries due to the sluggish redox reaction kinetics, which also bring more opportunities in developing advanced solutions for their optimization. In addition, Mg–S and Al–S batteries, using earth-abundant and low-cost magnesium and aluminum as the anode materials, have also shown promise in practical applications. They have high theoretical volumetric capacities of 3832 mA h cm−3 and 8046 mA h cm−3 respectively due to the divalent and trivalent nature of Mg2+ and Al3+ as well as their high physical densities. Research effort should also be devoted to these alternative metal–sulfur batteries based on covalent sulfur cathodes.
In conclusion, optimization of metal–sulfur batteries requires continuously controllable sulfur conversion reactions in the sulfur cathode. The emerging covalent fixing principle for the design of sulfur cathodes provides an alternative perspective for promotion and stabilization of sulfur conversion reactions in various metal–sulfur batteries. In combination with the existing physical confinement and chemical adsorption principles, new opportunities can be anticipated for the construction of reliable metal–sulfur batteries, with the promise of advancing metal–sulfur battery technology for practical applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by Australian Research Council Discovery Projects (DP160103244, DP190101008, and FT190100058). This research was partially supported by funding from the UNSW Digital Grid Futures Institute, UNSW, Sydney, under a cross disciplinary fund scheme; the views expressed herein are those of the authors and are not necessarily those of the institute. J. X. acknowledges the Australian Research Council for the financial support under the scheme of Future Fellowship (FT160100095).
References
M. Aneke and M. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 179, 350–377 CrossRef .
T. M. Gür, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2696–2767 RSC .
M. C. Argyrou, P. Christodoulides and S. A. Kalogirou, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 94, 804–821 CrossRef .
M. Armand and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, R. E. Usiskin, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Science, 2017, 358, 1400–1409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, H. Liu, X.-B. Cheng, C. Yan and J.-Q. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 161–175 CrossRef .
P. Albertus, S. Babinec, S. Litzelman and A. Newman, Nat. Energy, 2017, 3, 16–21 CrossRef .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .

          H. Danuta and U. Juliusz, US Pat., 3043896,  1962 Search PubMed .
K. B. Hueso, M. Armand and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 734–749 RSC .
T. Oshima, M. Kajita and A. Okuno, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2004, 1, 269–276 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, J. Cao, Z. Gu, X. Xu, F. Zhang and Z. Lin, Solid State Ionics, 2008, 179, 1697–1701 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram and X. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 2108–2114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eftekhari, Z. Jian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
J. Park, E. T. Kim, C. Kim, J. Pyun, H.-S. Jang, J. Shin, J. W. Choi, K. Char and Y.-E. Sung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700074 CrossRef .
P. P. R. M. L. Harks, C. B. Robledo, T. W. Verhallen, P. H. L. Notten and F. M. Mulder, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601635 CrossRef .
Y. V. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1969–A1976 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, Z. Sun, D.-W. Wang, R. Amal, S. Wang, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 56–61 CrossRef .
J. H. Yun, J. H. Kim, D. K. Kim and H. W. Lee, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 475–481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Pan, Z. Li, Q. He, X. Xu, L. He, J. Meng, C. Zhou, Y. Zhao and L. Mai, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 55–61 CrossRef .
Z. Wei Seh, W. Li, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell, P. C. Hsu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1331 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Waluś, G. Offer, I. Hunt, Y. Patel, T. Stockley, J. Williams and R. Purkayastha, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 233–245 CrossRef .
R. Fang, K. Chen, L. Yin, Z. Sun, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1800863 Search PubMed .
L. Borchardt, M. Oschatz and S. Kaskel, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7324–7351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, R. Li, M. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 51–73 CrossRef .
P. J. H. Kim, K. Kim and V. G. Pol, Carbon, 2018, 131, 175–183 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liang, Z. H. Sun, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 76–106 CrossRef .
J. W. Kim, J. D. Ocon, D. W. Park and J. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1265–1274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Kong, L. Sun, Y. Wu, K. Jiang, Q. Li, J. Wang and S. Fan, Carbon, 2016, 96, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Li, Q. F. Zhang, G. Y. Zheng, Z. W. Seh, H. B. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5534–5540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Cheng, H. Pan, H. Zhong, Z. B. Xiao, X. J. Li and R. H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707597 CrossRef .
S. Tu, X. Chen, X. Zhao, M. Cheng, P. Xiong, Y. He, Q. Zhang and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1804581 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang, Y. P. Wang, Z. W. Seh, Z. H. Fu, R. F. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3780–3786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601759 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok, F. Lodi-Marzano, Q. Pang, M. Cuisinier, H. Huang, C. J. Hart, D. Houtarde, K. Kaup, H. Sommer, T. Brezesinski, J. Janek and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501636 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Q. He, X. Xu, Y. Zhao, X. Liu, C. Zhou, D. Ai, L. Xia and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2016, 1804089 Search PubMed .
F. Zhou, Z. Li, X. Luo, T. Wu, B. Jiang, L. L. Lu, H. B. Yao, M. Antonietti and S. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1035–1043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ren, L. Xu, L. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Ma and D. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 11642–11651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, J. Zhang, L. Yin, G. Hu, R. Fang, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14627 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Zhong, X. M. Xu, Y. Liu, W. Wang and Z. P. Shao, Polyhedron, 2018, 155, 464–484 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, S. Zheng, L. Jin, Y. Li, P. Geng, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800716 CrossRef .
G. Xu, P. Nie, H. Dou, B. Ding, L. Li and X. Zhang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 191–209 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, Z. H. Sun, R. P. Fang, Y. Shi, H. M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707592 CrossRef .
H. J. Peng and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11018–11020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yao, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, W. Li, Z. W. Seh, M. T. McDowell, K. Yan, Z. Liang, V. K. Narasimhan and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 742–769 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Wang, N. Xu, T. Qian and C. Yan, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 53–64 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, Y. Li and W. Feng, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1800156 CrossRef .
F. Wu, S. Y. Zhao, Y. Lu, J. Li, Y. F. Su and L. Chen, Prog. Chem., 2017, 29, 593–604 Search PubMed .
H. Q. Wang, W. C. Zhang, J. Z. Xu and Z. P. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707520 CrossRef .
A. Fu, C. Z. Wang, F. Pei, J. Q. Cui, X. L. Fang and N. F. Zheng, Small, 2019, 15, 1804786 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. F. Zhu, S. Wang, Z. C. Miao, Y. Liu and S. L. Chou, Small, 2018, 14, 1801987 CrossRef PubMed .

          N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the elements, Butterworth, Heinemann, Oxford, UK, 2nd edn,  1997, pp. 645–662 Search PubMed .
R. S. Singh, J. W. Biddle, P. G. Debenedetti and M. A. Anisimov, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 3635–3640 CrossRef .
R. F. Bacon and R. Fanelli, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1943, 65, 639–648 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Chung, J. J. Griebel, E. T. Kim, H. Yoon, A. G. Simmonds, H. J. Ji, P. T. Dirlam, R. S. Glass, J. J. Wie, N. A. Nguyen, B. W. Guralnick, J. Park, A. Somogyi, P. Theato, M. E. Mackay, Y. E. Sung, K. Char and J. Pyun, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 518–524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, P. Zhu, C. Yan, X. Dong and X. Zhang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2019, 90, 118–163 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Shin, K. Kim, S. H. Oh and W. Il Cho, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 2004–2006 RSC .
Y. Fu, Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 7068–7073 CrossRef .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, S. Pei, Y. Cheng, P. Hou, M. Liu, H.-M. Cheng, C. Liu and F. Li, Carbon, 2016, 109, 719–726 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N. H. Zhao, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Zhou, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510–18513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, L. Yuan, Z. Yi, Y. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, Y. Shen, Y. Xin, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 1301473 CrossRef .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, Z. Sun, D.-W. Wang, H.-M. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 1606823 CrossRef .
M. Hagen, D. Hanselmann, K. Ahlbrecht, R. Maça, D. Gerber and J. Tübke, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401986 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, S. H. Chung and C. Zu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1980–2006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Evers and L. F. Nazar, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1135–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zheng, S. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, H. Pang and Y. Yu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4305–4317 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, J. Yang, G. Zhang, C. Liu, H. Wang, Q. Zhao, J. Hu, Y. Duan and F. Pan, Nanoscale, 2017, 10, 386–395 RSC .
D. Gueon, J. T. Hwang, S. B. Yang, E. Cho, K. Sohn, D. K. Yang and J. H. Moon, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 226–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, R. Li, M. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 51–73 CrossRef .
D. W. Wang, Q. C. Zeng, G. M. Zhou, L. C. Yin, F. Li, H. M. Cheng, I. R. Gentle and G. Q. M. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9382–9394 RSC .
X. Guo, S. Zheng, G. Zhang, X. Xiao, X. Li, Y. Xu, H. Xue and H. Pang, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 9, 150–169 CrossRef .
W. Lv, Z. Li, Y. Deng, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 2, 107–138 CrossRef .
W. Yuan, Y. Zhang, L. Cheng, H. Wu, L. Zheng and D. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8932–8951 RSC .
D. W. Wang, G. Zhou, F. Li, K. H. Wu, G. Q. Lu, H. M. Cheng and I. R. Gentle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8703–8710 RSC .
S. R. Chen, Y. P. Zhai, G. L. Xu, Y. X. Jiang, D. Y. Zhao, J. T. Li, L. Huang and S. G. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 9549–9555 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Li, Y. L. Cao, W. Qi, L. V. Saraf, J. Xiao, Z. M. Nie, J. Mietek, J. G. Zhang, B. Schwenzer and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16603–16610 RSC .
J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3591–3595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Lee, Y. Zhao, S. Thieme, H. Kim, M. Oschatz, L. Borchardt, A. Magasinski, W. I. Cho, S. Kaskel and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4573–4579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. Zhao and J. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7569–7573 RSC .
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5904–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, Y. B. Zhao and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402263 CrossRef .
W. Zhou, C. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. D. Abruña, Y. He, J. Wang, S. X. Mao and X. Xiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401752 CrossRef .
C. F. Zhang, H. B. Wu, C. Z. Yuan, Z. P. Guo and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9592–9595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Zeng, Y. Yao, L. Huang, H. Wu, B. Peng, Q. Zhang, X. Li, L. Yu, S. Liu, W. Tu, T. Lan, X. Zeng and J. Zou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1988–1997 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mi, Y. Jiang, J. Feng, Y. Qian and S. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1571–1579 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Z. Cheng, Z. Xiao, X. Li and R. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703936 CrossRef .
J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, S.-M. Zhang, X.-F. Liu, W. Zhu, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2013, 58, 99–106 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Yuan, H. P. Yuan, X. P. Qiu, L. Q. Chen and W. T. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1141–1146 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, S. M. Zhang, H. J. Peng and F. Wei, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 341–346 CrossRef CAS .
X. Geng, M. Rao, X. Li and W. Li, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 17, 987–992 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, F. Wan, X. Wang, H. Cao, X. Dai, Z. Niu, Y. Wang and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5594–5602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, C. J. Hart, X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10917–10923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fang, S. Zhao, S. Pei, X. Qian, P. X. Hou, H. M. Cheng, C. Liu and F. Li, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8676–8682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shaibani, A. Akbari, P. Sheath, C. D. Easton, P. C. Banerjee, K. Konstas, A. Fakhfouri, M. Barghamadi, M. M. Musameh, A. S. Best, T. Ruther, P. J. Mahon, M. R. Hill, A. F. Hollenkamp and M. Majumder, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7768–7779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, L. C. Yin, D. W. Wang, L. Li, S. F. Pei, I. R. Gentle, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5367–5375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Z. Sun, R. Fang, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 377–390 CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8749–8757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee, W. Kim, J. Jang and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601943 CrossRef .
R. Elazari, G. Salitra, A. Garsuch, A. Panchenko and D. Aurbach, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5641–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12886–12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. X. Miao, W. K. Wang, K. G. Yuan, Y. S. Yang and A. B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13231–13234 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Bakenov, Y. Zhao, A. Konarov, Q. Wang and P. Chen, Ionics, 2013, 20, 803–808 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, W. Wu, J. Li, Z. Xu and L. Guan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5113–5118 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cai, C. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Zhu, P. K. Shen and K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 33876–33886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, W. B. Kong, Y. Jiang, H. C. Wu, K. L. Jiang, J. P. Wang and S. S. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5305–5312 RSC .
Z. Zhang, H.-K. Jing, S. Liu, G.-R. Li and X.-P. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 6827–6834 RSC .
W. G. Chong, J.-Q. Huang, Z.-L. Xu, X. Qin, X. Wang and J.-K. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604815 CrossRef .
J. Song, M. L. Gordin, T. Xu, S. Chen, Z. Yu, H. Sohn, J. Lu, Y. Ren, Y. Duan and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4325–4329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chae, J. Kim, J. Y. Kim, S. Ji, S. S. Lee, Y. Kang, Y. Choi, J. Suk and S. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 4767–4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, H. L. Zhuang, S. Wei, K. E. Hendrickson, M. S. Kim, G. Cohn, R. G. Hennig and L. A. Archer, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1050–1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Fan, M. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Wu, B. Guan, N. Zhang and K. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18889–18896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, J. Li, X. Yan, Q. Su, Y. Lu, J. Qiu, Z. Wang, X. Lin, J. Huang, R. Liu, B. Zheng, L. Chen, R. Fu and D. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706895 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuan, W. Zhang, J.-G. Wang, G. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, J. Luo, H. Huang, Y. Gan, C. Liang, Y. Xia, J. Zhang and X. Tao, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 1–9 CrossRef .
T. Z. Hou, W. T. Xu, X. Chen, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8178–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Z. Zhuang, J. Q. Huang, H. J. Peng, L. Y. He, X. B. Cheng, C. M. Chen and Q. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 381–389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, J. Jiang, K. R. Yang, Y. Mi, P. Kumaravadivel, Y. Zhong, Q. Fan, Z. Weng, Z. Wu and J. J. Cha, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3578–3583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tan, X. Li, Z. Wang, H. Guo and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, H. Wang, P.-C. Hsu, Q. Zhang, W. Li, G. Zheng, H. Yao and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 672–676 RSC .
Z. Tang, J. Jiang, S. Liu, L. Chen, R. Liu, B. Zheng, R. Fu and D. Wu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 617–625 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Su, M. Cortie, H. Fan and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700587 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Z. Hou, W. T. Xu, X. Chen, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8178–8182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kausar, S. Zulfiqar and M. I. Sarwar, Polym. Rev., 2014, 54, 185–267 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Zhang, Front. Energy Res., 2013, 1, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. P. Fang, G. M. Zhou, S. F. Pei, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3667–3670 RSC .
A. Eisenberg and A. V. Tobolsky, J. Polym. Sci., 1960, 46, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .

          P. M. Hansen and K. Anderko, Construction of Binary Alloys, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1958, p. 1162 Search PubMed .
Y. Cui, A. Abouimrane, J. Lu, T. Bolin, Y. Ren, W. Weng, C. Sun, V. A. Maroni, S. M. Heald and K. Amine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8047–8056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. D. Ackerson, Y. Ma, A. Bhargav, J. A. Karty, W. Guo, L. Zhu and Y. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801791 CrossRef .
M. F. Kotkata, S. A. Nouh, L. Farkas and M. M. Radwan, J. Mater. Sci., 1992, 27, 1785–1794 CrossRef CAS .
X. N. Li, J. W. Liang, Y. Lu, Z. Hou, Q. S. Cheng, Y. C. Zhu and Y. T. Qian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2937–2941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. Dejonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 2570–2575 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Visco, M. Liu and L. C. Dejonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 1191–1192 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. Dejonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1896–1901 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Liu, S. J. Visco and L. C. Dejonghe, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1891–1895 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Liu, L. B. Kong, Y. H. Zhou and C. M. Zhan, J. Power Sources, 2006, 161, 1302–1306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhargav, S. V. Patil and Y. Fu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1007–1012 RSC .
D.-Y. Wang, Y. Si, J. Li and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7423–7429 RSC .
A. Bhargav, Y. Ma, K. Shashikala, Y. Cui, Y. Losovyj and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 25005–25013 RSC .
F. Li, Y. Si, B. Liu, Z. Li and Y. Fu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902223 CrossRef .
A. Bhargav, M. E. Bell, Y. Cui and Y. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 1, 5859–5864 Search PubMed .
S. J. Visco, C. C. Mailhe, L. C. Dejonghe and M. B. Armand, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 661–664 CrossRef CAS .
N. Oyama, T. Tatsuma, T. Sato and T. Sotomura, Nature, 1995, 373, 598–600 CrossRef CAS .
G. Weng, Y. Su, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, W. Dong and C. Xu, Energy, 2009, 34, 1351–1354 CrossRef CAS .
K. Naoi, K. Kawase, M. Mori and M. Komiyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L173–L175 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Su, Y.-P. Niu, Y.-Z. Xiao, M. Xiao, Z.-X. Liang and K.-C. Gong, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2004, 42, 2329–2339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, H. Zhan, L. Zhou, S. Deng, Z. Li and Y. Zhou, Electrochem. Commun., 2004, 6, 515–519 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amaike and T. Iihama, Synth. Met., 2006, 156, 239–243 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, A. Bhargav and A. Manthiram, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 88–94 CrossRef .
W. Guo, Z. D. Wawrzyniakowski, M. M. Cerda, A. Bhargav, M. D. Pluth, Y. Ma and Y. Fu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 16941–16947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, P. Xue, X. Gu and C. Lai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A3782–A3784 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Trofimov, A. G. Mal'kina, L. V. Sokolyanskaya, V. V. Nosyreva, G. F. Myachina, S. A. Korzhova, I. V. Rodionova, T. I. Vakul'skaya, L. V. Klyba, E. S. Stoyanov, T. A. Skotheim and Y. V. Mikhailik, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2002, 51, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Salman, B. Karabay, L. C. Karabay and A. Cihaner, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 43655 CrossRef .
M. J. H. Worthington, R. L. Kucera and J. M. Chalker, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 2748–2761 RSC .
K. Shen, H. Mei, B. Li, J. Ding and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701527 CrossRef .
A. G. Simmonds, J. J. Griebel, J. Park, K. R. Kim, W. J. Chung, V. P. Oleshko, J. Kim, E. T. Kim, R. S. Glass, C. L. Soles, Y.-E. Sung, K. Char and J. Pyun, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 229–232 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gracia, H. Ben Youcef, X. Judez, U. Oteo, H. Zhang, C. Li, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez and M. Armand, J. Power Sources, 2018, 390, 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
I. Gomez, D. Mecerreyes, J. A. Blazquez, O. Leonet, H. Ben Youcef, C. Li, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, O. Bondarchuk and L. Rodriguez-Martinez, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 72–78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. J. Griebel, P. T. Dirlam, N. A. Nguyen, R. S. Glass, M. E. Mackay, K. Char and J. Pyun, J. Polym. Sci., Part A: Polym. Chem., 2017, 55, 107–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, S. Chen, V. Srot, Y. Huang, S. K. Sinha, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706643 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Gomez, O. Leonet, J. A. Blazquez and D. Mecerreyes, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 3419–3425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Oschmann, J. Park, C. Kim, K. Char, Y.-E. Sung and R. Zentel, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7011–7017 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Chang, Q. S. Wu, X. Du, S. M. Chen, J. Shen, Q. Y. Song, J. D. Xie and W. T. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4525–4528 RSC .
K. Yamabuki, K. Itaoka, I. T. Kim, N. Yoshimoto and H. Tsutsumi, Polymer, 2016, 91, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itaoka, I.-T. Kim, K. Yamabuki, N. Yoshimoto and H. Tsutsumi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 297, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kang, H. Kim and M. J. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802423 CrossRef .
J. Liu, B. Campbell, R. Ye, J. Bell, Z. Mutlu, C. Li, Y. Yan, M. Ozkan and C. Ozkan, MRS Adv., 2017, 2, 3271–3276 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, M. Xiao, S. Wang, D. Han, S. Song, G. Chen and Y. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9280–9286 RSC .
P. T. Dirlam, A. G. Simmonds, T. S. Kleine, N. A. Nguyen, L. E. Anderson, A. O. Klever, A. Florian, P. J. Costanzo, P. Theato, M. E. Mackay, R. S. Glass, K. Char and J. Pyun, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 24718–24722 RSC .
B. Duan, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan, Z. Yu, H. Zhao, J. Qiu and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 13261–13267 RSC .
H. Du, Z. Zhang, J. He, Z. Cui, J. Chai, J. Ma, Z. Yang, C. Huang and G. Cui, Small, 2017, 13, 1702277 CrossRef PubMed .
I. A. Udod, V. I. Shchurik, B. M. Bulychev, S. P. Sirotinkin, M. B. Guseva, V. G. Babaev, Y. P. Kudryavtsev and S. E. Evsyukov, J. Mater. Chem., 1993, 3, 413–416 RSC .
H. Y. Zhang, M. W. Zhao, X. J. He, Z. H. Wang, X. J. Zhang and X. D. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 8845–8850 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, Y. Y. Peng, Y. H. Wang, J. Y. Li, H. Li, J. Zeng, J. Wang, B. J. Hwang and J. B. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 11386 CrossRef PubMed .
C. F. J. Kuo, M. A. Weret, H. Y. Hung, M. C. Tsai, C. J. Huang, W. N. Su and B. J. Hwang, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 670–676 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, J. Yang, C. R. Wan, K. Du, J. Y. Xie and N. X. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 487–492 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, J. Yang, J. Y. Xie and N. X. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 963–965 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fanous, M. Wegner, J. Grimminger, A. Andresen and M. R. Buchmeiser, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5024–5028 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fanous, M. Wegner, J. Grimminger, M. Rolff, M. B. M. Spera, M. Tenzer and M. R. Buchmeiser, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23240–23245 RSC .
L. Wang, X. M. He, J. J. Li, J. Gao, J. W. Guo, C. Y. Jiang and C. R. Wan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 22077–22081 RSC .
X. G. Yu, J. Y. Xie, J. Yang, H. J. Huang, K. Wang and Z. S. Wen, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 573, 121–128 CAS .
S. Zhang, Energies, 2014, 7, 4588–4600 CrossRef .
L. Wang, X. M. He, J. J. Li, M. Chen, J. Gao and C. Y. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 72, 114–119 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Du, W. L. Wei, Y. M. Dong, D. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Peng, S. W. Chen and P. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 10097–10105 RSC .
H. Tang, L. You, J. W. Liu, S. Q. Wang, P. Y. Wang, C. Q. Feng and Z. P. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18448–18455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Yuan, H. F. Jin and Y. Zhao, Int. J. Appl. Ceram. Technol., 2019, 14, 1763–1772 CAS .
F. X. Yin, J. Ren, G. Y. Wu, C. W. Zhang and Y. G. Zhang, Polymers, 2019, 11, 277 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. S. Chao, Z. Lan and J. H. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10263–10266 CrossRef .
S. C. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. K. Wang and W. J. Xue, Synth. Met., 2010, 160, 2041–2044 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Xiao, Y. L. Cao, J. Xiao, B. Schwenzer, M. H. Engelhard, L. V. Saraf, Z. M. Nie, G. J. Exarhos and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1176–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, B. Li and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Talapaneni, T. H. Hwang, S. H. Je, O. Buyukcakir, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3106–3111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Je, H. J. Kim, J. Kim, J. W. Choi and A. Coskun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703947 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang and S. Jin, Polymers, 2018, 11, 31 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu, S. H. Yang, G. S. Jiang, Q. Ye, B. Q. Wei and H. Q. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37731–37738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Lee, H. Ahn, O. Kim and M. J. Park, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, L. Li, L. Xie, D. Zhao, N. Wang and S. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3378–3386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Je, T. H. Hwang, S. N. Talapaneni, O. Buyukcakir, H. J. Kim, J.-S. Yu, S.-G. Woo, M. C. Jang, B. K. Son, A. Coskun and J. W. Choi, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 566–572 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zeng, Y. Li, K.-H. Wu, N. Huang, S. Dalapati, B.-J. Su, L.-Y. Jang, I. R. Gentle, D. Jiang and D.-W. Wang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 30–36 CrossRef .
X. Liu, N. Xu, T. Qian, J. Liu, X. Shen and C. Yan, Small, 2017, 13, 1702104 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bhargav, C. H. Chang, Y. Fu and A. Manthiram, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 6136–6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhargav, M. E. Bell, J. Karty, Y. Cui and Y. Fu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 21084–21090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shukla, A. Ghosh, P. K. Roy, S. Mitra and B. Lochab, Polymer, 2016, 99, 349–357 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ghosh, S. Shukla, G. S. Khosla, B. Lochab and S. Mitra, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, L. Li, J. Yu, N. Wang and S. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 263, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Z. Cao, G. A. Elia, Y. Wu, W. Wahyudi, E. Abou-Hamad, A.-H. Emwas, L. Cavallo, L.-J. Li and J. Ming, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2899–2907 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Jin, Y.-G. Liu, W.-K. Wang, A.-B. Wang, B.-W. Hu, M. Shen, T. Gao, P.-C. Zhao and Y.-S. Yang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 14, 272–278 CrossRef .
J. Fanous, M. Wegner, J. Grimminger, A. Andresen and M. R. Buchmeiser, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 5024–5028 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hoefling, D. T. Nguyen, P. Partovi-Azar, D. Sebastiani, P. Theato, S.-W. Song and Y. J. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 2915–2923 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Oleshko, J. Kim, J. L. Schaefer, S. D. Hudson, C. L. Soles, A. G. Simmonds, J. J. Griebel, R. S. Glass, K. Char and J. Pyun, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 353–364 CrossRef CAS .
R. P. Fang, S. Y. Zhao, P. X. Hou, M. Cheng, S. G. Wang, H. M. Cheng, C. Liu and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3374–3382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, L. Peng, L. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Hao, J. Xiang, K. Yuan, Y. Huang, B. Shan, L. Yuan and J. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1021 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Han, W. Hu, L. Peng, J. Yang, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, B. Shan and J. Xie, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jiang, K. Wang, S. Gao, R. Wang, J. Han, J. Yan, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 1365–1370 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, T. Qian, N. Xu, M. Wang, X. Ni, X. Liu, X. Shen and C. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701294 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. W. Wang, Y. H. Xu, Y. J. Zhu, D. Bigio and C. S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12201–12207 RSC .
P. T. Dirlam, A. G. Simmonds, R. C. Shallcross, K. J. Arrington, W. J. Chung, J. J. Griebel, L. J. Hill, R. S. Glass, K. Char and J. Pyun, ACS Macro Lett., 2015, 4, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, H. Cheng, J. Chen, N. Zheng, Y. Li and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8289–8298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Chang and A. Manthiram, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 3, 72–77 CrossRef .
S.-Z. Zeng, Y. Yao, X. Zeng, Q. He, X. Zheng, S. Chen, W. Tu and J. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2017, 357, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, N. Xu, T. Qian, J. Liu, X. Shen and C. Yan, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 758–764 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zeng, L. Li, L. Xie, D. Zhao, N. Zhou, N. Wang and S. Chen, Carbon, 2017, 122, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Dirlam, J. Park, A. G. Simmonds, K. Domanik, C. B. Arrington, J. L. Schaefer, V. P. Oleshko, T. S. Kleine, K. Char, R. S. Glass, C. L. Soles, C. Kim, N. Pinna, Y. E. Sung and J. Pyun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13437–13448 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, A. Wang, Z. Jin, H. Zhao and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22120–22124 RSC .
R. Carter, L. Oakes, A. Douglas, N. Muralidharan, A. P. Cohn and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1863–1869 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar, S. B. Kuhar and D. K. Kanchan, J. Energy Storage, 2018, 18, 133–148 CrossRef .
X. Xu, D. Zhou, X. Qin, K. Lin, F. Kang, B. Li, D. Shanmukaraj, T. Rojo, M. Armand and G. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3870 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Adelhelm, P. Hartmann, C. L. Bender, M. Busche, C. Eufinger and J. Janek, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 1016–1055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Sun, Y. M. Sun and Y. Cui, ACS Cent. Sci., 2015, 1, 449–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and R. Holze, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Hwang, D. S. Jung, J. S. Kim, B. G. Kim and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4532–4538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, L. Zeng, S. Hu, Y. Jiang, B. Yuan and Y. Yu, Small, 2017, 13, 1603513 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, Z. Zeng, J. Yang, Z. Han, W. Hu, L. Wang, J. Ma, B. Shan and J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 2, 2956–2964 CAS .
S. Ma, P. Zuo, H. Zhang, Z. Yu, C. Cui, M. He and G. Yin, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5267–5270 RSC .
T. Wu, M. Jing, L. Yang, G. Zou, H. Hou, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Cao and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803478 CrossRef .
A. Ghosh, S. Shukla, M. Monisha, A. Kumar, B. Lochab and S. Mitra, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2478–2485 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, Y. Hu, K. Zhang and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 9000–9005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Chen, L. Fu and Y. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 2288–2291 RSC .
R. Ma, L. Fan, J. Wang and B. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 293, 191–198 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Yu, J. W. Jung, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 86–90 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Ruopian Fang
	Dr Ruopian Fang is currently a postdoctoral research associate at the University of New South Wales, Sydney. She received her PhD degree in Materials Science from the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2018. Her research activities focus on rational material design for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.

Jiangtao Xu
	Dr Jiangtao Xu is an ARC Future Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering at UNSW Sydney. He is currently leading a research group in the Centre for Advanced Macromolecular Design (CAMD), with a focus on green and precision polymer synthesis using state-of-the-art polymerization techniques and organic chemistry tools. Dr Xu received his BS and PhD degrees from Fudan University. He has 90 peer-reviewed publications in high-impact journals, attracting over 5000 citations and an H-index of 41. His areas of research interest are green chemistry and sustainable polymer synthesis, precision polymer synthesis, and advanced polymer materials for energy and bioengineering applications.

Da-Wei Wang
	Dr Da-Wei Wang is an Associate Professor, an ARC Future Fellow and a UNSW Scientia Fellow in the School of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney. His research interest spreads from the fundamentals of two-dimensional energy materials, to the development of advanced electrochemical energy devices. He has contributed >100 journal publications which received >19000 citations with an H-index of 45. Da-Wei has won some prestigious awards including the 2018 and 2019 Clarivate Analytics Highly Cited Researcher Awards, Finalist of 2018 AMP Tomorrow Maker, and the 2013 Scopus Young Researcher Award in Engineering and Technology.

Broader context
The exploration of more efficient and economic battery technologies has been propelled by the ever-increasing demand for mobile and stationary energy storage. Elemental sulfur, endowed with a two-electron-transfer reaction mechanism, has been under intense scrutiny as a promising cathode material due to its overwhelming high-energy-density and low-cost advantages. However, practical applicability of metal–sulfur batteries has been hindered by their poor cycle life. To date, a variety of physical confinement and chemical adsorption strategies have been developed to address the stable immobilization of sulfur for long-life uses. Recently, covalently fixed sulfur in various materials and composites has emerged as a new class of cathode materials because of the strong bonding that could effectively immobilize sulfur at the molecular level. This review attempts to summarise and propose the concept of covalent fixing as a new research strategy for sulfur electrochemistry in metal–sulfur batteries. We hope that this review could open a new avenue for fundamental chemistry and material innovations in advanced metal–sulfur batteries.


 	Fig. 1  Structure transformation of elemental sulfur at various temperatures.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical charge/discharge curves illustrating the sulfur conversion reactions of a Li–S battery with the sulfur existing in forms of (a) cyclo-octasulfur (S8) and (b) short-chain sulfur (S2–4).	 
(n − 1)Li2Sn + 2Li → nLi2Sn−1
(n − 1)Li2Sn + 2Li+ + 2e− → nLi2Sn−1

 	Fig. 3  Illustration of the evolution of design principles for sulfur fixing strategies, showing increased binding strength from physical confinement and chemical adsorption to covalent fixing.	 

Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)	842	961	1119	1175	1300	1342	1550

 	Fig. 4  (a) Synthesis of P4S10+n molecules. (b) The predicted molecular structures of P4S10+n after geometry optimization. Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)	506	773	942	1058	1142
R–S–S–R + 2Li+ + 2e− → 2Li–S–R

Organic disulfides	

	11.8	181	
144



	13.3	223	
143



	14.7	245	
148 and 149



	20.8	348	
153



Disulfide containing polymers (main-chain type)	

	21.6	362	
154



	23.5	394	
146



	34.8	583	
146



	21.1	353	
146



	12.5	209	
155



Disulfide containing polymers (side-chain type)	

	13.1	220	
156



	13.1	220	
157



	17.5	293	
158



	20.6	246	
159



Organic polysulfides	

	50.8	851	
160



	34.0	569	
161



	28.0	469	
161



	22.9	384	
161



	17.8	299	
162



	25.0	418	
150



	35.7	597	
150

–(S–R–S)–n + 2nLi+ + 2ne− → nLi–S–R–S–Li

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of the formation mechanism of sulfur copolymers by copolymerization between sulfur and divinylic comonomers. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


1,3-DIB66,166,167	

	50–90	838–1508
1,4-DVB168,169	

	60–90	1005–1508
Styrene170	

	50–70	838–1173
Limonene171	

	59	988
Diallyl sulfide172	

	60–90	1005–1508
Myrcene172	

	50–90	838–1508
Allyl-terminated P3HT173	

	86	1441
P3OET174	

	28	469
BUMB1C6175	

	52	871
UOEE176	

	47	787
TABQ177	

	75	1256
ANQ177	

	<60	<1005
BAAQ177	

	60	1005
TATA177	

	85	1424
1,3-DEB178,179	

	67–86	1122–1441
DiPhDY180	

	40–90	670–1508

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structure and synthetic route of carbyne polysulfide. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2013, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of sulfurized graphdiyne. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of dehydrogenation and cyclization of PAN by sulfur upon heating. (b) Proposed chemical structures of SPAN with short sulfur chains covalently bonded to the PAN backbones. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2014, Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Preparation of SPPy via a two-step substitution process. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2011, Elsevier. (b) Possible configuration of SPANI. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2010, Elsevier. (c) Structural illustration of SPANI with sulfur existing in two forms (covalent sulfur grafted on the polymeric backbone and elemental sulfur physically restricted within the crosslinked polymer scaffold.). Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of the sulfur-mediated synthesis of CTF-1 from 1,4-dicyanobenzene and elemental sulfur at 400 °C. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Synthetic scheme for the synthesis of a fluorinated sulfur-rich CTF involving elemental sulfur-assisted trimerization of perfluorinated aromatic nitriles along with the simultaneous covalent attachment of elemental sulfur via a nucleophilic aromatic substitution reaction (SNAr). Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic drawings describing the synthetic procedures of S-TTCA sulfur-rich polymers. Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2015, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) Copolymerization reactions for the preparation of the sulfur-poly(m-aminothiophenol) (PMAT) copolymer. Reproduced with permission.208 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) Synthetic scheme for the preparation of sulfur-embedded benzoxazine polymers (BOPs). Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) The postulated reaction cascade for the synthesis of a long-chain solid organic polysulfide by a radical coupling reaction. Reproduced with permission.210 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the condensation reaction between sulfur and thiol groups: (a) preparation of polyethylene hexasulfide (PEHS) using sulfur and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), (b) preparation of phenyl polysulfides C6H5SxC6H5 (4 ≤ x ≤ 6) as liquid cathode materials using benzenethiol (PhSH) and elemental sulfur in appropriate stoichiometric ratios, and (c) preparation of elastic polyphenylene tetrasulfide (PPTS) using 1,4-benzenedithiol with elemental sulfur.	 

 	Fig. 12  Pictorial depiction of the structure of the sulfur–cardanol benzoxazine copolymer where polysulfide chains were grafted onto double bonds and the benzylic position of the cardanol benzoxazine monomer (Ca). Reproduced with permission.214 Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthetic procedure of S-thiourea aldehyde resin (TAR). (b) Schematic illustration of the chemical structure of S-thiourea aldehyde resin (TAR). Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction pathway for SPAN to store lithium. (b) Proposed structural evolution from pristine SPAN to the intermediates of radical and ionic SPAN in the reactions, where the deeper red color represents a higher amount of active sites. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Voltage profiles and (d) cycling stability of Li/SPAN cells with different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Cycling performance of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with a DIB content of 0–50 wt% (the inset figure shows a plot of specific capacities with different sulfur copolymer compositions measured at the 75th cycle). (b) Normalized charge/discharge profiles of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers with different DIB contents. (c) Proposed redox mechanism of poly(S-r-DIB) copolymers in Li–S batteries. (d) Proposed equilibrium between low order polysulfides and organosulfide discharge products, which at higher DIB content favors the formation of soluble higher order polysulfides. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Molecular structures of various organic functional liners (TABQ, ANQ, BAAQ, and TATA) for sulfur-rich polymer synthesis. (b) Energy diagrams of the linkers and dimers with sulfur bridges, estimated by ab initio calculations using density functional theory (the calculation results for DIB and sulfur-linked DIB dimers are also shown for reference). (c) Conformations of TABQ and TATA dimers with optimized geometries. C, O, N, S, and H atoms are shown in grey, red, blue, yellow, and light grey, respectively. (d) Charge/discharge voltage profiles of lithium cells based on poly(S-TABQ), poly(S-TATA), and elemental sulfur at 0.1 C rate. (e) Rate performance of lithium cells based on poly(S-TABQ), poly(S-TATA), and elemental sulfur. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Proposed redox reactions of three lithium benzenedithiolates (LBDTs), (a) 1,2-LBDT, (b) 1,3-LBDT and (c) 1,4-LBDT during battery cycling. (d and e) Cycling performance of the three LBDTs at a 0.5C rate with an areal sulfur loading of (d) 0.7 mg cm−2 and (e) 2.6 mg cm−2. Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Lithium ion diffusion coefficients of the reduction peak of Se0.06SPAN and SPAN cathodes. (b) Charge/discharge curves of SPAN and Se0.06SPAN electrodes. (c) UV-vis absorption spectra of the solution after washing cycled SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes in an ether-based electrolyte. (d) Cycling performance of the Se0.06SPAN cathode at various current densities in an ether-based electrolyte. (e) The scheme of the proposed reaction process of the SPAN and Se0.06SPAN cathodes. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2019, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (f) Rate performance and (g) cycling properties of Te0.04S0.96/PAN and SPAN in an ether-based electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Synthesis of sulfur and thiophene based copolymers using tandem inverse vulcanization and electro-polymerization. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (b) Synthetic approach for the copolymerization of allyl terminated P3HT and sulfur and proposed microstructure of the obtained sulfur copolymer. (c and d) Optical microscopy images of films obtained by drop-casting of (c) a mixture of sulfur and P3HT that were not covalently linked and (d) a mixture of sulfur and the S-P3HT copolymer. (e) Rate capabilities of sulfur electrodes with the S-P3HT copolymer and sulfur and P3HT blend. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration showing the chemical structure of allyl-grafted graphene/sulfur (allyl-G/S). (b) Charge/discharge profiles of allyl-G/S (red) and rGO/S (blue) for the 100th cycle at a current density of 0.5C. (c) The top is the rate capability and the corresponding coulombic efficiency of allyl-G/S at various current densities; the bottom is the cycling performance of allyl-G/S in comparison with rGO-S at 0.5C. (d) Density functional theory calculations showing the bond cleavage energy of S–S bonds at different positions in allyl-G/S. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of the charge/discharge process of SenS8−n/nitrogen-doped mesoporous carbons (NMC). (f) Long-term cycling performance of the Se2S6/NMC electrode. Reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Scheme for the preparation of MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB) composites. (b) Rate capabilities of S/MoS2, MoS2/poly(S-r-DIB), and elemental sulfur-based cathodes. Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of SPAN and NiS2-SPAN at a current density of 200 mA g−1. (d) Rate capabilities of SPAN and NiS2-SPAN from 200 mA g−1 to 2000 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis processes of SC-BDSA. (b) Charge/discharge profiles of the SC-BDSA electrode at different current densities. (c) Cycling performance of the SC-BDSA electrode at 2.5 A g−1 for 1000 cycles. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Proposed chemical structure of the sulfur copolymer by reaction of a Ca monomer with sulfur. (e) Charge/discharge profiles of the second and fifth cycles at 0.2 A g−1. (f) Comparisons of the cycling performances between the CS90 copolymer (blue) and CS90–rGO(S) (red) cathodes at 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Charge/discharge curves and (b) cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the SPAN electrode in K–S batteries at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission.249 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Cyclic voltammetry curves and (d) cycling stability of the covalent sulfur cathode in K–S batteries. Reproduced with permission.250 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
