Cooperative photoredox catalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00659G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00659G
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3026-3038Cooperative photoredox catalysis

        
          
            Xianjun 
            Lang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jincai 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Xiaodong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, 50 Nanyang Avenue, Singapore 639798, Singapore. E-mail: chenxd@ntu.edu.sg
bKey Laboratory of Photochemistry, Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      14th January 2016
    First published on 20th April 2016AbstractVisible-light photoredox catalysis has been experiencing a renaissance in response to topical interest in renewable energy and green chemistry. The latest progress in this area indicates that cooperation between photoredox catalysis and other domains of catalysis could provide effective results. Thus, we advance the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis for organic transformations. It is important to note that this concept can bridge the gap between visible-light photoredox catalysis and other types of redox catalysis such as transition-metal catalysis, biocatalysis or electrocatalysis. In doing so, one can take advantage of the best of both worlds in establishing organic synthesis with visible-light-induced redox reaction as a crucial step.
Xianjun Lang
Xianjun Lang obtained his PhD in 2011 under Prof. Jincai Zhao from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China). He then spent four years at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) with Prof. Xiaodong Chen as a research fellow. Currently, he is a professor of chemistry at Central China Normal University.
Jincai Zhao
Jincai Zhao obtained his PhD in 1994 from Meisei University (Japan). Currently, he is a full professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China). He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2011 and a fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) in 2014. He is a member of the editorial or advisory boards of eight international scientific journals, including Environmental Science & Technology and Energy & Environmental Science.
Xiaodong Chen
Xiaodong Chen is an Associate Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree (Honors) in chemistry from Fuzhou University (China) in 1999, MS degree (Honors) in physical chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, and PhD degree (Summa Cum Laude) in biochemistry from the University of Muenster (Germany) in 2006. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Northwestern University (USA), he started his independent research career as a Singapore National Research Foundation Fellow and Nanyang Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological University in 2009. He was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure in the September of 2013. His research interests include programmable materials for energy conversion and the integrated nano-bio interface.

Key learning points
(1) Visible light is an attractive driver for benign organic transformations.
(2) A photoredox catalyst is typically needed to carry out visible-light-induced reactions.
(3) Cooperative catalysis can overcome the limitations imposed by a photoredox catalyst.
(4) Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis with transition-metal catalysis has delivered considerable successes.
(5) Coupling biocatalysis or electrocatalysis with photoredox catalysis is very promising.

Introduction
The harvesting of solar energy is the “Holy Grail” quest for scientists all over the world. Amongst many applicable strategies, to effect organic transformations under irradiation of visible light is viewed as one of the highly desirable processes.1 However, the selective conversion of organic molecules driven by visible light has seldom been placed in the toolbox of organic chemists until quite recently. In addition to the renewable energy benefit, visible light could offer unique maneuverability for the specific laboratory scale synthesis of pharmaceutical chemicals for which low temperatures are required to achieve high enantioselectivity. However, the majority of the starting materials are organic substrates that lack absorption in the visible-light region. Therefore, the development of efficient systems for visible-light photoredox catalysis holds the key to achieving this goal. This area of research has enjoyed an upsurge with a series of exciting discoveries triggered by a seminal work involving the merger of Ru metal-complex photoredox catalysis and organocatalysis in 2008.2
In this reported scheme, a conventional Ru metal complex photoredox catalyst, [Ru(bpy)3]2+ (bpy, 2,2′-bipyridyl), works in synergy with a new chemistry process, organocatalysis, to achieve the direct asymmetric alkylation of aldehydes under mild conditions. This discovery suggests that one should embrace the advancement of new concepts or tools to undertake the elegant arrangement of photoredox catalysis with existing technologies. Inspired by this, TiO2, another conventional photoredox catalyst studied for years, was used to perform cooperatively with organocatalysis to achieve visible-light-induced selective aerobic oxidation of organic sulfides, which is otherwise impossible using only TiO2 even under UV irradiation.3 These discoveries assert that the cooperation between the existing photoredox catalysts and redox catalysts turns out to be very auspicious for performing formidable organic transformations.
Cooperative catalysis is a very hot topic in organic chemistry that explores the enormous opportunity provided by combining one area of catalysis with another to achieve unattainable reactions or better the existing ones.4 Within this background, we want to advance the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis (Fig. 1) to exemplify the recent development, aiming at pushing forward this emerging area of research. Cooperative photoredox catalysis here refers to one catalyst that is photochemically active while the other is redox active without the involvement of light. This strategy can get around single electron transfer imposed by a photoredox catalyst under photo flux at a given time and allows for multielectron photoredox catalysis with the assistance of a second redox catalyst. Under this stipulation, the cooperation of photoredox catalysis with organocatalysis should be included here. However, significant progress has taken place in this direction.5 As a result, we do not have enough space to adequately cover this topic in this tutorial review.
 Fig. 1  The general concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis for visible-light-induced organic transformations. 
The main focus that will occupy much of the space here is the cooperation between photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis. In addition, the combination of biocatalysis, which at its heart is also transition-metal catalysis, will also be discussed. Likewise, multielectron photoredox catalysis can be accomplished under constant applied bias. Therefore, several excellent cases of photoredox catalysis in synergy with electrocatalysis will also be considered. The overall intention is to illustrate the importance of crosstalk between different areas of catalysis research such as homo-, hetero- and bio-catalysis in an effort to harvest visible light for benign organic transformations. Quite interestingly, one might discover that the core concepts are akin to each other. Thus, one can start out with one's expertise armed with the best-learned practices in other areas of redox catalysis and establish efficient visible-light-induced redox organic reactions. This tutorial review is arranged according to the different scenarios for cooperative photoredox catalysis, which are listed as parallels to make the comparison as easy as possible. Thus both the similarities and differences can be examined in an effort to design novel visible-light-induced photoredox reactions.
1. Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis in two complexes
Both Ru and Ir metal complexes (Fig. 2) have been well-studied for years for their photochemical activity. As a subject of intensive research for many years, Ru and Ir complexes are well known for their photophysical and photochemical properties in a wide range of applications. However, the employment of these complexes as photoredox catalysts for organic synthesis under relatively practical conditions is a quite recent phenomenon. Because photo-induced processes are based on free radicals that are notorious for their high reactivity, these often lead to large quantities of undesirable side products. Moreover, most of the stable substrates cannot be subjected to conditions using only photoredox catalysts for further transformation which necessitates the efficient quenching of the excited state of the photoredox catalyst. Ru and Ir complexes are the most famous metal-complexes in terms of long lifetimes of their visible-light-excited states, enabling the photoredox catalyst can be efficiently quenched oxidatively or reductively to be ready to induce ensuing reactions. However, they can directly carry out organic transformations of limited scope of substrates due to the single electron transfer imposed by the photoredox catalyst under photo flux at a given time. However, the issue of metal-complex photoredox catalysis can be circumvented by coupling it with transition metal-complex catalysis that allows for multielectron transfer for either the formation of new bonds or the transformation of functional groups in the presence of an appropriate quencher. For the new bond formation, the free radicals generated by a photoredox catalyst under visible-light irradiation can be efficiently captured by a transition-metal, i.e., by oxidative addition. The transition-metal could tame the reactivity of the free radical with concerted and sequential two-electron transfer. Then, the reductive elimination step can afford the final product. Whereas in the case of transformation of functional groups, the sequential electron transfer of a photoredox catalyst is accumulated on another transition-metal center to achieve a higher oxidation state. And the release of this higher oxidation state of transition-metal enforces the turnover of functional groups.
 Fig. 2  Ru and Ir complex photoredox catalysts. 
Amongst transition-metal catalyzed reactions, Pd-complex catalysis, which is related to several named reactions, is one of the most efficient and popular for constructing carbon–carbon bonds for stable organic substrates. By matching the redox level of the photoredox catalyst with that of the Pd complex catalyst, the efficient creation of a carbon–carbon bond can be envisioned and implemented under mild reaction conditions. Thus, both photoredox catalysts and Pd catalysts can be obtained from commercially available sources to carry out existing reactions under milder conditions, offering an easy way for scientists with different backgrounds to investigate these processes. Pd metal-complex catalysis could significantly broaden the reaction scope of photoredox catalysis (Scheme 1). Importantly, photoredox catalysis opens up new pathways for Pd catalysis, which has great implications for understanding the elusive mechanisms of transition-metal catalysis.
 Scheme 1  Cooperative Ru or Ir complex visible-light photoredox catalysis and Pd complex catalysis. 
In this context, catalysis by a Pd complex with the bulky, electron-rich phosphine ligand P(t-Bu)3 of the Cu-free Sonogashira coupling reaction between aryl bromides and alkynes prompted by a Ru complex that was a visible-light photoredox catalyst was disclosed in 2007 (eqn (1)).6 In this regime, various aryl bromides could couple with different terminal alkynes (including aromatic and aliphatic alkynes) under visible-light irradiation in the presence of a large amount of Et3N. This discovery predates most of the reports on cooperative photoredox catalysis. However, the importance of this work is a quite recent development, leading to a variety of exciting advancements. Although an energy transfer mechanism was mentioned in the title of the report, it is believed that electron transfer is more likely given the similarities of more recent discoveries.
It is well known that the ligand plays a decisive role in determining the formation of the final product in Pd-complex catalysis. Thus when one substrate is an amide or aryl pyridine that can coordinate with Pd(OAc)2 as a temporary ligand, directed C–H arylation of this substrate with an aryl radical generated by the photoredox catalyst a was achieved in a satisfactory manner (eqn (2)).7 Excess amounts (4 equiv.) of aryldiazonium salts as oxidants for the oxidative quenching of visible-light excited a, resulting in the formation of an aryl radical. The aryl radical further adds to PdII to afford PdIII, which could be further oxidized by the quenched photoredox catalyst to PdIV to coordinate with amide or aryl pyridine substrates. The reductive elimination step leads to the final products. It should be mentioned that these two reports of intermolecular reaction employ large amounts of Et3N reductants or aryldiazonium salt oxidants to ensure high yields of the afforded product.
But intramolecular reactions do not require excessive amounts of one reactant. Using similar reaction regimens, the intramolecular C–H olefination of aromatic enamines for the synthesis of indoles (eqn (3))8 and decarboxylative allylation of esters (eqn (4))9 with the photoredox catalyst Ir complex b and Pd catalysts were reported. A variety of functionalized indole derivatives can be accessed with good yields under 120 °C and visible-light irradiation. For the decarboxylative allylation reaction, intermolecular allylation of amino alkanoic acid coupling with one equivalent amount of allyl methyl carbonate was also achieved with moderate yields.9 Both the reactions proceed via the PdII/Pd0 catalytic cycle and reductive quenching of excited photoredox catalyst complex b. The application of reductive quenching of the photoredox catalyst for selective organic transformations is much more common for the Ir complex (IrIII/IrII = −1.99 V vs. SCE) rather than the Ru complex (RuII/RuI = −1.33 V vs. SCE) because the Ir complex possesses a more negative reduction potential.
An Ir complex with suitable reduction potential could carry out a new reaction scope in synergy with Pd catalysis via reductive quenching. In this scenario, α-allylation of tetrahydroisoquinolines (eqn (5)) was achieved with Ir complex b′ (IrIII/IrII = −1.51 V vs. SCE) and Pd(PPh3)4 catalyst such that b′ ensures the mild reaction conditions and the PdII/Pd0 catalytic cycle controls the formation of the final product.10 In addition, secondary amine substrates like aryl and alkyl α-amino ketones could also be subjected to the same reaction conditions for successful transformations.
In parallel with the recent development of Pd-complex catalysis, there has been spectacular growth in new discoveries based on the Cu-complex catalysis of organic transformations. In response to the rising interest in this area, the achievement of cooperative photoredox catalysis of a Cu complex and either a Ru or Ir complex has also gained considerable attention (Scheme 2). As in the case of Pd-complex catalysis, either oxidative or reductive quenching of photoredox catalysts may be used to drive the catalytic cycle of Cu to deliver the formation of the final products.
 Scheme 2  Cooperative Ru or Ir complex photoredox catalysis and Cu-complex catalysis. 
Starting with CuOAc as the catalyst, the trifluoromethylation of boronic acid with CF3I was reported with Ru complex a as the visible-light photoredox catalyst (eqn (6)).11 During the reaction process, the excited Ru complex a is reductively quenched by the CuI catalyst to generate RuI and CuII. Then, the reduction of CF3I by RuI forms the ˙CF3 radical and restores Ru complex a. Free radical ˙CF3 will further add to CuII to generate CuIII. The intermediate CuIII tends to easily react with boronic acid. The final reductive elimination step releases the coupling product. Starting with Cu(OAc)2 as the catalyst, the Chan–Lam coupling reactions of anilines and aryl boronic acids were disclosed with Ir complex c as the visible-light photoredox catalyst (eqn (7)).12 In this case, the reaction begins with oxidative quenching of the excited Ir complex c by molecular oxygen to generate IrIV. The CuII, already coordinated with aniline, reacts with the nascent IrIV to form CuIII. As in the case of trifluoromethylation of boronic acid, the reductive elimination results in the Chan–Lam coupling products and CuI, which will be oxidised to CuII by IrIV.
In the above-mentioned reports, the oxidation states of the Cu catalysts include CuI, CuII and CuIII. In particular, CuIII is an enigmatic species, the role of which in redox catalysis is still hotly debated. The cooperative photoredox catalysis would provide mechanistic implications for an understanding of the CuIII species. Reaction pathways that only involve a Cu catalytic cycle between CuI and CuII can also work synergistically in photoredox catalysis. With CuI as the catalyst, photoredox catalyst Ir complex c can animate the Ullmann coupling of carbazoles (cbz) and aryl iodides under visible-light irradiation (eqn (8)).13 The reaction does not proceed via either the oxidative or the reductive quenching of the excited Ir complex c. The energy transfer from the excited Ir complex c to the Cu intermediate dominates the reaction pathway. The judicious selection of cbz rather than the more common anilines as the coupling substrates underlies the success of this report. Under strong basic conditions, two cbz coordinate with CuI to form a new complex LiCuI(cbz)2, which could accept the energy from the excited Ir complex c, leading to the excited state LiCuI(cbz)2*. LiCuI(cbz)2* is quenched by phenyl iodines to generate CuII(cbz)2 and the phenyl radical, which will react with each other to form the Ullmann coupling product and close the redox cycle of Cu to CuI(cbz).
In addition to the formation of carbon–carbon bonds, the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis functions well for selective oxygenation of organic molecules with the Ru complex a photoredox catalyst and transition-metal catalysts (Scheme 3). A two-electron transfer is usually required for the turnover of one organic molecule. However, a single-electron transfer is more common in photoredox catalysis. Therefore, one can rely on a transition-metal-complex catalyst to accumulate two oxidation events generated by a photoredox catalyst to engender a high valence state that can finish the turnover of one molecule. The Mn complex m1 in synergy with Ru-complex photoredox catalyst a can carry out several oxygenation reactions such as the epoxidation of alkenes, the hydroxylation of alkanes and the oxidation of sulfide to sulfoxide with H2O as the oxidant (eqn (9)).14 The oxidative quenching of the excited Ru complex a by [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ leads to RuIII, which can induce the oxidation of MnIII to MnIV. Accompanied by the oxidation of H2O, i.e. PCET, the MnIV is oxidized by another RuIII that leads to MnV-oxo, from which the oxygen atom transfers to the organic substrate, affording an oxidation product that occurs with nearly 100% quantum efficiency.
 Scheme 3  Cooperative Ru complex photoredox catalysis and transition-metal-complex catalysis. 
Using Na2S2O8 as the sacrificial electron acceptor, the selective oxygenation of sulfide with the Fe complex m2, which works cooperatively with Ru complex photoredox catalyst a, can be successfully achieved (eqn (10)).15 This reaction also proceeds through a transition-metal with a high valence state. Like [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+, the oxidative quenching of the excited Ru complex by Na2S2O8 leads to RuIII. However, in contrast to [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+, the Na2S2O8 can directly oxidize FeII to FeIII. Thus, the Fe complex m2 can reach the state of FeIV-oxo via the oxidation of FeIII with RuIII, requiring only one photochemical oxidation event rather than two. In this regimen, a differently-substituted phenyl sulphide can be transformed to a corresponding sulphide in which the Fe complex m2 can be partially regenerated after the consumption of the sulphide substrates. Note that for some sulphides, the reaction proceeds via energy transfer rather than an electron-transfer mechanism.
Connecting transition-metal oxidation catalysis and Ru photoredox catalysis with transition-metal reduction catalysis and Ir photoredox catalysis represents a fine quest to mimic the Z-scheme of natural photosynthesis for an organic transformation. In this context, the coupled production of H2 and oxygenation of a hydrocarbon was realized with two synergistic photoredox catalysis reactions working in concert (eqn (11)).16 The oxidation catalyst m3 to RuIV-oxo driven by RuIII, generated by the oxidative quenching of Ru complex a, implements the half-reaction of the oxygenation of the hydrocarbon; the reduction catalyst Fe(CO)5 driven by IrII formed by the reductive quenching of Ir complex b′ performs the reduction of protons. The electron exchange of the two excited photoredox catalysts balances the charge of the whole system.
2. Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis in one complex
Synergy between a photoredox catalyst and a transition-metal catalyst in two separated complexes has been achieved. New effort is needed to push this area in a new direction. In this scenario, the bridging of a photoredox catalyst and a transition-metal catalyst into one complex might give rise to higher efficiency or even unexpected new activity for selective visible-light-induced organic transformations. There are two methods that can link a photoredox catalyst and a transition-metal catalyst: (1) the photoredox catalyst and transition-metal catalyst are connected with an organic linker without which those two separated complexes can properly operate in their independent roles; (2) the central metal atom of the photoredox catalyst and the central metal atom of the transition-metal catalyst share a common bridging ligand or are directly connected.
Considering the successes discussed in the later part of Section 1, one can envision that the photoredox catalyst complex and the transition-metal catalyst complex can be conjoined with each other by a common organic linker. In this manner, when one has a good grasp of the photochemical and redox activity of both complexes, a new unimolecular system of cooperative photoredox catalysis can be conceived in a very straightforward manner. The organic linker conjoins the two units without altering the electronic properties. Thus, one can only foresee incremental discoveries in comparison with a system with two separate complexes (Scheme 4). The selective oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes with H2O mediated by the Ru–Ru complexes aa and ab was discovered with [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ as the electron acceptor (eqn (12)).17,18 The reaction pathways for these two Ru–Ru complexes are quite similar. The oxidative quenching of the excited Ru unit to RuIII, accompanied by proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET), yields RuIV-oxo in the redox catalytic unit, which executes the direct oxidation of alcohols. The visible-light-induced oxidation of benzyl alcohols and secondary aliphatic alcohols can be realized using aa complexes. However, the primary aliphatic alcohols cannot be transformed under standard conditions. Compared with aa complexes, the Ru–Ru complex ab has a much longer linking unit, making it more flexible and less crowded. As a result, two visible-light absorbing units can be added to more effectively harvest visible light.
 Scheme 4  Organic-linker-connected photoredox catalyst and transition-metal catalyst for the oxygenation of organic compounds. 
Redox catalysts based upon the first-row transition-metals are more appealing than those using precious metals such as Ru because they have already demonstrated unique redox catalytic properties. Moreover, they are much cheaper, adding a competitive economic edge. Following this path, the Ru–Fe complex ac can implement the oxygenation of triphenyl phosphine (eqn (13)).19 The oxygen atom of triphenyl phosphine oxide from H2O was obtained from an H218O labelling experiment. Unlike the report using Na2S2O8 as the electron acceptor (eqn (10)),15 the role of [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ as an electron acceptor is less ambiguous. It only results in the oxidative quenching of the excited Ru unit in the complex ac to produce RuIII. Accompanied by PCET, the consecutive oxidation of FeII with two RuIII produces FeIV-oxo, transferring the oxygen atom to triphenyl phosphine. With O2 rather than H2O as the terminal oxidant, the visible-light-induced aerobic oxidation of sulphides to sulphoxide mediated by the Ru–Cu complex ad was reported (eqn (14)).20 The Ru–Cu complex ad efficiently oxygenates sulphide, phosphine, and alkenes. The reaction proceeds via the reductive quenching of the Ru unit by triethanolamine (TEOA) to afford RuI. Electron transfer from RuI results in the regeneration of the Ru unit and the reduction of CuII to CuI. The CuI can activate O2 for the oxidation of organic substrates.
Instead of an organic linker, a shared bridging ligand can connect the two functionalities together as well. The visible-light-absorbing unit, or a photoredox catalyst, and the bridging ligand and reactive central metal atom are the three interconnected components for a successful architecture that might upgrade existing discoveries or allow us to undertake new activities. The alternation of the electronic properties of the two central metal atoms with a shared bridging ligand is significant. Very intriguingly, several reaction types that cannot be conducted with two separated complexes can be realized via this paradigm of cooperative photoredox catalysis (Scheme 5). Under visible-light irradiation, the Ru–Pd complex ae can promote the dimerization of α-methylstyrene with 90% yield (eqn (15)).21 This reaction is completely ineffective with a mixture of the Ru complex a and the Pd complex with the same ligand for Pd as in complex ae, except that the bridging ligand is replaced with 2,2′-bipyridine, suggesting a new activity connects a photoredox catalyst with a transition-metal catalyst with a shared bridging ligand. To the best of our knowledge, this is one of the first reports demonstrating the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis in executing challenging organic transformations. After that, the Ru–Pd complex af with a very similar molecular structure to complex ae was reported to realize the visible-light-induced Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of phenyl bromines and phenyl boronic acid (eqn (16)).22 The electron transfer from the excited Ru unit to the PdII unit in complex af produces an active electron-rich Pd0 unit, facilitating the oxidative addition of phenyl bromides. As in the case of the dimerization of α-methyl styrene, the individual units of the Ru complex and Pd complex mixed together do not afford any product. Taking into account the fact that so many excellent reports exist as discussed in the earlier part of Section 1, one can only imagine what superior systems will be produced in due course.
 Scheme 5  Bridging-ligand-connected photoredox catalysts and transition-metal catalysts for organic transformations. 
Some reactions, such as the selective oxygenation of sulfides, which can be performed with a mixture of a photoredox catalyst and a transition-metal catalyst, can also be performed with the Ru–Ru complex ag, in which one Ru unit performs the function of photoredox catalysis whilst the other Ru unit performs the duty of the redox catalyst (eqn (17)).23 The oxidative quenching of the excited Ru unit to RuIII is accompanied by PCET to yield RuIV-oxo in the redox catalytic unit. The RuIV-oxo species thus yielded confers the oxygen atom onto the sulphide to complete the oxidation reaction. The unimolecular system of complex ag is more efficient than the bimolecular system. As a result, this is an incremental development indicating that the one-complex strategy is better than the two-complex system previously reported.
Rather recently, a very unique system exploring the cooperative photoredox catalysis in the Fe–Cu complex ah for the borylation of a C–H bond was uncovered under UV irradiation (eqn (18)).24 The Fe part of the complex is the UV-light absorbing unit. Unlike the systems mentioned above, the bimetallic Fe and Cu centres are connected directly without the involvement of a bridging ligand. Thus, the Fe and Cu can execute the ensuing reactions synergistically. Specifically, the reaction constitutes three steps: (1) the oxidative addition of a borylating agent to the Fe–Cu complex ah; (2) UV-induced borylation of the phenyl C–H bond to afford the product; and (3) the closure of the catalytic cycle via bimetallic reduction elimination to produce H2. Quite uniquely, even though the central metal atoms get involved in both the oxidative addition and the reductive elimination steps, the complex ah is not intact during the catalytic process. The Fe and Cu centres are transiently separated in the oxidative addition step, but they are reunited in the reduction elimination step.
3. Coupling metal-free organic photoredox catalysis with transition-metal catalysis
Metal-free organic dyes (Fig. 3) are another type of molecules that could be used as photoredox catalysts to conduct visible-light-induced organic transformations. Some organic dyes are very common in everyday usage, such as food additives, suggesting that they are nontoxic. In comparison with Ru or Ir complexes, metal-free organic dyes are much cheaper and more readily available in large quantities. It would be very promising to be able to utilize this specific type of organic molecule from both the environmental and economic points of view. Importantly, the redox potentials of some metal-free organic dyes are similar to those of the Ru or Ir complexes. Hence, similar reactions can be envisaged because the matching of redox potential levels is among the most important factors considered for the design of a cooperative photoredox catalysis system.
 Fig. 3  Metal-free organic photoredox catalysts. 
Oxidation, reduction and the formation of carbon–carbon bonds, which have been achieved via metal-complex cooperative photoredox catalysis, are also achievable via the combination of metal-free organic photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis (Scheme 6). Organic dye d incorporated on mesoporous silica–alumina in synergy with Cu complex m4 can ensure the visible-light-induced oxygenation of p-xylene with O2 (eqn (19)).25 The lifetime of the excited organic dye d immobilized on mesoporous oxides lasts more than 1 s at room temperature. Once immobilized, the decay of the excited organic dye d is an intramolecular back-electron transfer, which differs from intermolecular back-electron transfer in solution. The Cu complex m4 can enhance the activity and stability of immobilized dye d by prompting the two-electron reduction of O2 to H2O2via the CuI intermediate. With Fe complex m5 as the transition-metal catalyst, oxygenation of the benzylic position of hydrocarbons can be performed with organic dye e as the photoredox catalyst (eqn (20)).26 Organic dye e can act as a direct photoredox catalyst for the oxidation of hydrocarbons with H2O2 as the side product. In this case, Fe complex m5 does not interact with redox events via the excited organic dye e. The disproportionation of H2O2 by the Fe complex m5 independently leads to FeV-oxo, also resulting in the oxidation of hydrocarbons. For the oxidation of the secondary benzylic position, the corresponding ketones were obtained; for the oxidation of the primary benzylic position, the corresponding carboxylic acids were obtained.
 Scheme 6  Cooperative metal-free organic photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis. 
With organic dye f as the visible-light photoredox catalyst and Rh complex m6 as the synergistic system, the selective reduction of aldehydes to their corresponding alcohols was discovered (eqn (21)).27 In the presence of both aldehydes and ketones, aldehydes were favourably reduced with TEOA. The reductive quenching of the excited organic dye f by TEOA creates a reduced state, the electron transfer of which further leads to the RhIII–H species. The photoredox catalytic production of RhIII–H is very slow, which could kinetically distinguish between aldehydes and ketones. The RhIII–H species could also be produced by the oxidative quenching of the excited organic dye f by Rh complex m6. The reductive quenching is oxygen-sensitive and the oxidative quenching is light intensity-sensitive.
Visible-light-induced intermolecular oxyarylation of alkenes with aryl diazonium salts with a synergistic system of organic dye g and Au complex m7 was reported (eqn (22)).28 With the assistance of MeOH, the nucleophilic addition of alkene to AuI leads to an intermediate. The oxidative quenching of the excited photoredox catalyst with an excess amount of aryl diazonium salt (4 equiv.) results in the formation of the aryl radical. The addition of this aryl radical to AuI leads to AuII, which will be oxidized by the quenched photoredox catalyst to afford AuIII. The reduction elimination step affords the end product. With RuO2 supported on graphene (G-RuO2) as a transition-metal nanocatalyst, the acceptor-free oxidative coupling reaction mediated by organic dye g photoredox catalyst (eqn (23)) can be promoted.29 Without the participation of an electron acceptor such as O2, visible-light-induced coupling of tetrahydroisoquinolines and indoles can be realized by using this protocol. The reductive quenching of the excited organic dye g results in the oxidation of tetrahydroisoquinoline, which undergoes deprotonation and nucleophilic attack by indole to form the coupling product. The recombination of protons and electrons on the G-RuO2 forms H2 and closes the catalytic cycle.
4. Coupling semiconductor photoredox catalysis with transition metal-complex catalysis
Visible-light active semiconductor photoredox catalysts are another well-studied system for organic transformations. However, issues existing for molecular photoredox catalysts still dominate the semiconductor system. One might think that semiconductor nanoparticles (NPs) can be much more stable than their molecular counterparts. However, photocorrosion of the semiconductor is very common under realistic conditions, leading to deactivation of the photoredox catalyst. One promising trend to solve this problem is the combination of semiconductor photoredox catalysis with transition metal-complex catalysis (Scheme 7).
 Scheme 7  Cooperative semiconductor photoredox catalysis and transition metal-complex catalysis. 
The visible-light-induced selective reduction of carbonyl compounds to alcohols was reported for the semiconductor photoredox catalyst CdS and Ir- or Ru-metal complexes (eqn (24)).30,31 In both systems, the CdS harvests the visible-light energy and induces the ensuing photochemical activity under visible-light irradiation. The metal complexes assist in the transfer of electrons to the carbonyl compound substrate from the reductant lactic acid. The coupling of CdS and Ir complex m8 can confer high activity and excellent selectivity on the system. When 4-phenyl-3-buten-2-one was used under standard reaction conditions, the reduction of the CC bond occurred rather than the reduction of the ketone. The system exhibits pH-dependent catalytic behaviour, which is ascribed to the phenol group in the Ir ligand. For the coupling of CdS and Ru complex m9, several Ru–carbonyl complexes were investigated with complex m9 giving the best result. It was concluded that the rigid and bulky ligand around Ru has a negative effect on the catalytic activity. Meanwhile, the electron-donating group in the bipyridyl ligand of Ru has a positive effect. RuIII–H was proposed as the active site for the reduction of the carbonyl compound.
BiVO4 is another commonly used semiconductor photoredox catalyst that is visible-light active. It can be used to construct selective oxidation systems coupled with transition-metal complex catalysts. In combination with Ru complexes m3 or m10, BiVO4 can effect the oxygenation of organic compounds with H2O as the oxidant (eqn (24)).32 With [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ as the electron acceptor, the valence band of BiVO4 can consecutively oxidize the Ru complex to the RuIV-oxo intermediate via a two-electron transfer, accompanied by PCET. The oxygen atom transfer from RuIV-oxo to organic compounds such as alcohols and sulphides restores either Ru complex m3 or m10 and releases the oxidation product. This mechanism is very similar to that of the combination of a Ru-complex oxidation catalyst and a metal-complex photoredox catalyst. With O2 as the oxidant, Cu complex m11 as the transition-metal catalyst and BiVO4 as the photoredox catalyst, the visible-light-induced oxidation of amines to alcohols or imines can be achieved (eqn (25)).33 The product depends on the choice of solvent for the assembly. Aldehydes were obtained with water as the solvent and imines were obtained in tetrahydrofuran (THF). The Cu complex m11 prompts multiple electron transfers from the conduction band of BiVO4 to O2 with H2O as the product. The visible-light-induced aerobic oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes in water can be achieved with the Cu complex m12 and BiVO4 as the photoredox catalyst (eqn (26)).34 In this reaction regimen, the addition of a surfactant, trimethylstearylammonium chloride (C18TAC), can significantly accelerate the reaction rate by bringing the alcohols to the surface of the BiVO4. A four-electron reduction of O2 to H2O was mediated by the Cu complex m12 and can also prompt the formation of an aldehyde product. It should be mentioned that for reactions in eqn (25)–(27), other photoredox catalysts can effect these reactions via sequential multielectron transfer.1 However, BiVO4 can only perform these reactions aided by a metal catalyst via concerted multielectron transfer, suggesting the transforming potentials of metal complexes for semiconductor photoredox catalysts.
5. Coupling plasmonic photoredox catalysis with transition-metal nanocatalysis
With the progress in plasmonic phenomena in nanostructures, there is a paradigm shift toward the application of precious metal NPs in photoredox catalysis. Nanostructured Au, Ag and Cu prosper at the selective organic transformation front, serving as heterogeneous photoredox catalysts under visible-light irradiation. The activity of Au NPs is one of the best demonstrations of the power of nanotechnology by transforming a bulk inert material into a highly active catalyst at nanoscale dimensions. The unique capabilities of plasmonic nanostructures in manipulating light enable them to deliver more fascinating chemical reactivity under visible-light irradiation. Quite recently, several research groups pushed this area further forward by alloying plasmonic metals with transition-metal nanocatalysts to create bimetallic nanostructures for exciting visible-light-induced selective organic transformations.
The capture of visible light to carry out selective organic transformations is not a trivial task to accomplish, especially with a single-component photoredox catalyst. However, the combination of the properties of two metals to create bimetallic nanostructures might lessen the intrinsic restriction of a single component photoredox catalyst. More interestingly, when one compares the findings of these bimetallic nanostructures with the discoveries made with homogeneous systems, one could discover their equivalent reaction very easily. Guided by the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis, a new scope of reaction with higher efficiency could be designed simply based on the knowledge of a wide range of reactions in a homogeneous system. Except for a few cases, the bimetallic nanostructures should be supported on a suitable metal oxide. The role of the metal oxide is to stabilize the nanostructures. Moreover, the properties of the metal oxide might be beneficial to the formation of the product. One should also take this into consideration for an efficient scheme design.
Plasmonic metals such as Au, Ag or Cu can prompt the selective oxidation or reduction of organic molecules under visible-light irradiation.35 However, with the introduction of another active transition-metal, the efficiency can be significantly improved (Scheme 8). For example, the visible-light-induced selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol with O2 can be significantly improved by alloying Au with Pd, compared with the Au-only system (eqn (28)).36 The bimetallic Au–Pd NPs were supported on one-dimensional TiO2 nanobelts. These are helpful in transferring the hot electrons from the excited Au NPs, facilitated by the interface between the TiO2(B) and anatase phase in the TiO2 nanobelts. With TiO2 as the support, the core shell bimetallic Au@Cu nanostructures can drive the selective oxidation of benzyl amines to their corresponding aldehydes with O2 under visible-light irradiation (eqn (29)).37 The ultrathin Cu shell can enhance the charge separation of the localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) of the excited Au/TiO2, leading to a dramatic increase in its activity for the oxidation of amines. With ZrO2 as the support, Au–Pd bimetallic NPs can enable the acceptor-free oxidation of alcohols under visible-light irradiation (eqn (30)).38 In this manner, the dehydrogenation of alcohols to aldehydes and H2 occurs on Au–Pd/ZrO2 under visible-light irradiation in benzotrifluoride (BTF). The enhanced activity is due to the increase in the surface charge heterogeneity of the Au–Pd alloy. It should be mentioned that temperature can influence the activity in a significant way. Increasing the reaction temperature leads to a significant acceleration of the reaction rates.
 Scheme 8  Cooperative plasmonic photoredox catalysis and Pd or Cu nanocatalysis for oxidation or reduction reactions. 
Without the involvement of a metal oxide support, the reduction of styrene with H2 to ethylbenzene was achieved with Ag–Pd nanocages under visible-light irradiation (eqn (31)).39 The plasmonic metal Ag harvests light energy into heat to drive the catalytic sites of Pd in the nanocages for the actual hydrogenation process. With the increase in Pd content, the Ag–Pd alloy nanostructures become hollower and more porous, which increases the number of active sites and plasmonic cross sections, therefore leading to enhanced activity. Higher reaction temperatures can prompt the reduction process as well. At this stage, it should be mentioned that for reactions in eqn (28)–(31), the advantage of cooperative photoredox catalysis cannot be argued on economic grounds. Fundamentally, they serve as probe reactions to pave the way for important complicated organic synthesis. With TiO2 as the support, core–shell Au@Pd/TiO2 can induce the reduction of chlorobenzene with isopropanol (IPA) under visible-light irradiation (eqn (32)).40 The core–shell Au@Pd bimetallic nanostructures can alter the reaction pathway. When Pd was dispersed on Au/TiO2 as the co-catalyst, the LSPR of the excited Au injects electrons to the conduction band of TiO2, then to Pd catalytic sites and ultimately to the reactants. With core–shell Au@Pd, the LSPR of the excited Au directly transfers electrons to the catalytic sites of Pd to reduce the reactants. The thickness of the Pd shell influences both the absorption of visible-light and catalytic activity. Overall, Au(0.8)@Pd(0.2)/TiO2 gave the best results.
More complex reactions such as the oxidative esterification of alcohols and Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions can be realized by the combination of plasmonic photoredox catalysis and Pd nanocatalysis (Scheme 9). Unlike the simple oxidation and reduction reactions in Scheme 8, which can be performed with plasmonic metal-only conditions, these reactions cannot proceed at all without a Pd catalyst. In this context, hydrotalcite ([Mg6Al2(OH)16]CO3·mH2O, HT) modified with phosphate (HT-PO43−) can be a support for bimetallic Au–Pd NPs for oxidative esterification of aliphatic alcohols with O2 under visible-light irradiation (eqn (33)).41 The support of HT-PO43− provides sufficient basicity for catalytic oxidative esterification. Thus, no additional base is needed. Both the intensity and wavelength of the irradiated light can remarkably change the reactivity. Temperature is another factor determining the outcome of the reaction. At low temperature, λ < 550 nm visible-light drives the reaction more efficiently than that of λ < 650 nm visible-light.
 Scheme 9  Cooperative plasmonic photoredox catalysis and Pd nanocatalysis for esterification or coupling reactions. 
The Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction was used to prove the special merits of the Au–Pd bimetallic design concept, as this reaction has never been realized with the plasmonic photoredox catalyst of Au, Ag or Cu under visible-light irradiation. Without the participation of Pd, plasmonic photoredox catalysts cannot prompt the coupling reaction even in the presence of a large amount of base; without the involvement of Au, no photochemical reaction can occur. Au–Pd bimetallic design can unequivocally illustrate the power of cooperative photoredox catalysis. However, based on their specific expertise, different bimetallic nanostructures were fabricated towards the same end. Au–Pd alloy NPs supported on porous nanorods of CeO2 can prompt the coupling of phenyl boronic acids and phenyl chlorides (eqn (34)).42 It was proposed that CeO2 with strong basicity can generate electrons to enrich the electron density of supported metals as well as holes to activate phenyl boronic acid. Furthermore, due to LSPR, the injection of hot electrons from excited Au NPs to spatially contacted Pd NPs can expedite the formation of coupling products. Note that it might be somewhat controversial to indicate that CeO2 can be directly excited by the irradiation of visible-light. The visible-light-induced Suzuki–Miyaura coupling of phenyl boronic acid and aryl iodine can be conducted by Ag–Pd bimetallic NPs without the involvement of a redox inactive metal oxide (eqn (35)).43 In this report, the mesoporous silica SBA-15 was employed as the support for bimetallic nanostructures. Due to the LSPR effect, a hot electron will be generated from Ag by visible-light irradiation. Pd with a lower Fermi level can accept these generated hot electrons. Thereafter, the activated Pd can prompt the oxidative addition of aryl iodine, which is the rate-determining step in the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction.
6. Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis with biocatalysis
The concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis is very practical in guiding the pursuit of efficient visible-light-induced organic transformation. This concept serves as a fine example to learn from the process of natural photosynthesis. Additionally, it can be further broadened by entering the realm of biocatalysis to forge a more synergistic framework to carry out more challenging reactions under even milder conditions. In this context, metal-complexes, metal-free organic dyes and semiconductors can be candidates as photoredox catalysts to conduct light-dependent processes; transition-metal catalysts can be redox mediators to biocatalysis; and the biocatalytic process induces the transformation of organic molecules. The latter two steps are light-independent but are driven by the energy from the light-dependent process.
With a RuII complex as the visible-light photoredox catalyst and P450 BM3 as the biocatalyst in which the FeIII porphyrin complex is at the core of catalysis, the hydroxylation of lauric acid is enabled (Scheme 10).44 A RuII complex is covalently attached to a non-native single cysteine (L407C) residue of the P450 BM3 haem domain. In the presence of sodium diethyldithiocarbamate (DTC), the reductive quenching of the excited Ru-complex photoredox catalyst results in the formation of RuI. The RuI species can reduce FeIII to FeII, which can activate O2, leading to the formation of FeIV-oxo. The FeIV-oxo inside of the P450 BM3 executes the hydroxylation of organic substrates in a selective manner with a very high turnover number (TON) of 935.
 Scheme 10  Cooperative RuII photoredox catalysis (X = H or OMe) and P450 BM3 biocatalysis. 
With the selection of an appropriate photoredox catalyst that can enter into the cell to employ the P450 function inside, whole-cell cooperative photoredox catalysis can be built to execute challenging reactions (Scheme 11).45 Organic dye g can enter the cytoplasm of E. coli bacteria and bind specifically to the P450 haem domain. Under visible-light irradiation, the reductive quenching of the excited organic dye g by TEOA causes the electron to transfer to FeIII in the P450 haem domain, reducing it to FeII. The FeII can activate O2, which later conducts selective organic transformations that are controlled by the catalytic cycle of P450. This system does not require expensive cofactor and redox mediators to carry out the reactions. Therefore, with E. coli as the platform, it will become a cost-effective, scalable and sustainable process.
 Scheme 11  Cooperative organic dye photoredox catalysis and whole-cell P450 biocatalysis. 
Chemically converted graphene coupled with the organic dye multianthraquinone-substituted porphyrin (CCGCMAQSP) can be an efficient visible-light photoredox catalyst for the reduction of ketones (Scheme 12).46 This scheme is very complicated. However, it is one of the best schemes to demonstrate the concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis for achieving a challenging organic transformation. The reductive quenching of visible-light-excited CCGCMAQSP by TEOA results in the oxidation of TEOA and the transfer of electrons to the Rh complex m6, which acts as an electron mediator and a hydride-transfer catalyst. Therefore, this catalytic cycle can drive nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+)/NADPH. This is important because NADPH can regenerate reductases such as alcohol dehydrogenase from Lactobacillus kefir (LKADH). With LKADH controlling the enantioselectivity, the chiral synthesis of fine chemicals can be achieved. This reaction was performed under biphasic conditions. The enzyme catalysis and photoredox catalysis occur at the buffered aqueous phase, and the chiral alcohol products thus formed were in the n-heptane.
 Scheme 12  Cooperative organic dye photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis. 
The organic dye can be replaced with an inorganic semiconductor photoredox catalyst such as silicon. Hydrogen-terminated silicon nanowires (H-SiNWs) can be efficient photoredox catalysts for asymmetry reduction in combination with enzyme catalysis (Scheme 13).47 In this system, visible-light excited H-SiNWs generate electrons and holes. The holes are then quenched by TEOA, leaving electrons in the conduction band. The electrons and protons are transferred to the Rh complex m6, which also acts as an electron mediator and a hydride transfer catalyst to drive the cycle of NAD+/NADH (NAD = nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide). NADH can regenerate L-glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) which carries out the synthesis of L-glutamate from an ammonium ion, α-ketoglutarate, and a proton.
 Scheme 13  Synergistic semiconductor photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis. 
Instead of using an organic sacrificial electron donor, water is a much superior electron donor that can be generated by photoredox catalysis, coupled to further biocatalysis to carry out enzyme-catalyzed reactions (Scheme 14).48 The protons and electrons are produced by an Au/TiO2 photoredox catalyst via the oxidation of water under UV irradiation. Then, the protons and electrons thus generated are supplied to the organic dye flavin. The visible-light photoredox catalysis of flavin can drive the catalysis of old yellow enzymes (OLE) that can asymmetrically reduce conjugated CC bonds. The oxidation of water to O2 is the rate-determining step of the overall process.
 Scheme 14  Cooperative semiconductor plus organic photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis. 
7. Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis with electrocatalysis
Based on the aforementioned discussion, cooperative photoredox catalysis is a very powerful means to implement formidable organic transformations under mild conditions. To broaden the scope of discussion, several examples of the coupling of photoredox catalysis and electrochemical catalysis will be discussed in this section. Both the selective reduction and oxidation of organic substrates can be performed in an electrochemical cell, which acts as an acceptor of electrons for oxidation reactions or supplies electrons and protons for reduction reactions (Scheme 15).
 Scheme 15  Cooperative photoredox catalysis and electrocatalysis. 
The direct photoelectrochemical conversion of toluene to methylcyclohexane was reported under visible-light irradiation (eqn (36)).49 The semiconductor Cu2ZnSnS4 with a bandgap of 1.5 eV was adopted as the photoredox catalyst. Cu2ZnSnS4 was first deposited on a Mo mesh. It was later coated with CdS and deposited with Pt. Then, the Pt/CdS/Cu2ZnSnS4/Mo mesh was immobilized on anion-type ionomer membrane assemblies, which can convert toluene to methylcyclohexane in 0.1 M Na2SO4/NaOH (pH 9.5) in aqueous solution under visible-light irradiation at an overpotential of 0.2 V (vs. RHE) with the formation of O2 as the side product. The installation of phosphate groups on the ligand of the Ru complex a leads to complex h. Tin-doped In2O3 (ITO) surface-coated with TiO2 and anchored with complex h formed Ru-complex-h-sensitized TiO2. Then, the transition-metal Ru complex m13 oxidation catalyst was also anchored on the Ru-complex-sensitized TiO2. The photoelectrodes obtained can be used for the dehydrogenation of benzyl alcohol (eqn (37)).50 Differing from the use of [CoIII(NH3)5Cl]2+ as an electron acceptor as mentioned before, this Pt electrode acts as an acceptor for electrons and protons to generate H2. The oxidative quenching of Ru complex h results in RuIII, which leads to the oxidation of Ru complex m13 to form RuIV-oxo, accompanied by PCET. RuIV-oxo implements the oxidation of benzyl alcohol.
The conversion of biomass is a very current research topic that is of great importance in identifying solutions to energy and environmental problems by chemical means. Thus, both semiconductors of BiVO4 and dye-sensitized TiO2 can be used to construct photoelectrochemical cells for the conversion of biomass (Scheme 16). The conversion of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) to produce 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) was achieved by the deployment of (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yl)oxyl (TEMPO) as the redox mediator in a photoelectrochemical cell (Scheme 16a).51 Near-quantitative yield of FDCA and 100% Faradaic efficiency was achieved with BiVO4 as the photoredox catalyst under visible-light irradiation with H2 as the other product. GeIV porphyrin as the sensitizer anchored onto TiO2 can be used to construct a photoelectrochemical cell for the conversion of alcohols and the production of photocurrent (Scheme 16b).52 In this case, no redox mediator such as TEMPO is needed, and a variety of alcohols can be converted under irradiation by 550 nm visible-light. The transfer of electrons from the GeIV porphyrin to the conduction band of TiO2 leads to the formation of GeIV-oxyl, which is a very potent oxidant that can assure the oxidation of alcohols. Then the transfer of electrons from the conduction band of TiO2 to the ITO electrode and later to the Pt counter electrode for the reduction of O2 gives rise to a photocurrent.
 Scheme 16  Cooperative photoredox catalysis and electrocatalysis for biomass conversion. (a) Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, copyright 2015; (b) reprinted from ref. 52 with permission from the Chemical Society of Japan, copyright 2015. 
Conclusions
Cooperative photoredox catalysis is a very promising concept guiding the pursuit of novel visible-light-induced selective organic transformations under mild conditions. Via combinations of metal complexes, organic dyes, plasmonic visible-light photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis, biocatalysis and electrocatalysis, more new discoveries can be expected with an ever-expanding boundary. In cooperative photoredox catalysis, redox catalysis can significantly expand the scope of photoredox catalysis; in return photoredox catalysis offers new perspectives to understand the enigmatic mechanism of redox catalysis. Brand-new visible-light-driven systems can be designed starting from a person's own expertise with photoredox catalysis or another area of redox catalysis. It should be specified that very high loading of both photoredox catalysts (TON < 100) and transition-metal redox catalysts (TON < 50) are hitherto required for most of the published protocols. In contrast, the TON is usually very high for biocatalysts as the redox catalysts. However, long reaction times are needed, which in turn results in very low turnover frequency. Therefore, there is plenty of room for improvement to be done for future research.
The overall intention of this tutorial review is to demonstrate that one can find a mirror image of one reaction in another framework with operating principles that are very similar to each other. By reaching out with well-accepted practices from other areas of research, new systems can be foreseen and developed. These new developments in chemical research should be embraced and more exciting discoveries can be expected. The newly-emerging area of radical chemistry with metal complexes, the materials science of the photochemical effects of nanostructures, new physical methods of delving into mechanisms and the understanding of the catalysis of biological systems can all bring fresh air to this burgeoning field.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from the Singapore National Research Foundation (CREATE Programme of Nanomaterials for Energy and Water Management and Singapore-Berkeley Research Initiative for Sustainable Energy (SinBeRISE)) and MOE Tier 1 (RG130/14) is gratefully acknowledged. X. L. also thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant 21503086) for its support.
Notes and references
X. J. Lang, X. D. Chen and J. C. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .
D. A. Nicewicz and D. W. C. MacMillan, Science, 2008, 322, 77–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Lang, W. Hao, W. R. Leow, S. Z. Li, J. C. Zhao and X. D. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5000–5005 RSC .
J. M. Lee, Y. Na, H. Han and S. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2004, 33, 302–312 RSC .
R. A. Angnes, Z. Li, C. R. D. Correia and G. B. Hammond, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2015, 13, 9152–9167 CAS .
M. Osawa, H. Nagai and M. Akita, Dalton Trans., 2007, 827–829 RSC .
D. Kalyani, K. B. McMurtrey, S. R. Neufeldt and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18566–18569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zoller, D. C. Fabry, M. A. Ronge and M. Rueping, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13264–13268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Lang, K. M. O'Nele and J. A. Tunge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13606–13609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xuan, T. T. Zeng, Z. J. Feng, Q. H. Deng, J. R. Chen, L. Q. Lu, W. J. Xiao and H. Alper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1625–1628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. D. Ye and M. S. Sanford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9034–9037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yoo, T. Tsukamoto and S. Kobayashi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6587–6590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yoo, T. Tsukamoto and S. Kobayashi, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3640–3642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, T. Kishi, H. Kotani, Y. M. Lee and W. Nam, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 38–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Company, G. Sabenya, M. González-Béjar, L. Gómez, M. Clémancey, G. Blondin, A. J. Jasniewski, M. Puri, W. R. Browne, J.-M. Latour, L. Que, M. Costas, J. Pérez-Prieto and J. Lloret-Fillol, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4624–4633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. Singh, D. Pegram, H. F. Duan, D. Kalita, P. Simone, G. L. Emmert and X. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1653–1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Z. Chen, F. N. Rein and R. C. Rocha, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9672–9675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Chao and W. F. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3872–3874 RSC .
C. Herrero, A. Quaranta, M. Sircoglou, K. Sénéchal-David, A. Baron, I. M. Marín, C. Buron, J.-P. Baltaze, W. Leibl, A. Aukauloo and F. Banse, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2323–2327 RSC .
W. Iali, P.-H. Lanoe, S. Torelli, D. Jouvenot, F. Loiseau, C. Lebrun, O. Hamelin and S. Ménage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8415–8419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Inagaki, S. Edure, S. Yatsuda and M. Akita, Chem. Commun., 2005, 5468–5470 RSC .
K. Mori, M. Kawashima and H. Yamashita, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14501–14503 RSC .
P. Guillo, O. Hamelin, P. Batat, G. Jonusauskas, N. D. McClenaghan and S. Ménage, Inorg. Chem., 2012, 51, 2222–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Mazzacano and N. P. Mankad, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17258–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, K. Doi, A. Itoh, T. Suenobu, K. Ohkubo, Y. Yamada and K. D. Karlin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15572–15577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mühldorf and R. Wolf, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 427–430 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Ghosh, T. Slanina and B. König, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 2027–2034 RSC .
M. N. Hopkinson, B. Sahoo and F. Glorius, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2014, 356, 2794–2800 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Y. Meng, J. J. Zhong, Q. Liu, X. W. Gao, H. H. Zhang, T. Lei, Z. J. Li, K. Feng, B. Chen, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 19052–19055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, J. H. Yang, F. Y. Wen and C. Li, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 7080–7082 RSC .
X. B. Liu, D. R. Sun, R. S. Yuan, X. Z. Fu and Z. H. Li, J. Catal., 2013, 304, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Li, X. N. Li, H. Li, Y. Wang and L. C. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 475–479 RSC .
S. Naya, T. Niwa, R. Negishi, H. Kobayashi and H. Tada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 13894–13897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Negishi, S. Naya and H. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 11771–11776 CAS .
X. J. Chen, G. Cabello, D. Y. Wu and Z. Q. Tian, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 21, 54–80 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Jiang, C. C. Jia, L. C. Zhang, S. R. He, Y. H. Sang, H. D. Li, Y. Q. Li, X. H. Xu and H. Liu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 209–217 RSC .
Y. Sato, S. Naya and H. Tada, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104502 CrossRef .
S. Sarina, S. Bai, Y. M. Huang, C. Chen, J. F. Jia, E. Jaatinen, G. A. Ayoko, Z. Bao and H. Y. Zhu, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 331–341 RSC .
X. Y. Zhao, R. Long, D. Liu, B. B. Luo and Y. J. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9390–9394 CAS .
A. Tanaka, K. Fuku, T. Nishi, K. Hashimoto and H. Kominami, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 16983–16989 CAS .
Q. Xiao, Z. Liu, A. Bo, S. Zavahir, S. Sarina, S. Bottle, J. D. Riches and H. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1956–1966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, C. R. Chang, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Y. Ma, W. Gao, J. Li and Y. Q. Qu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6481–6488 CrossRef CAS .
P. Verma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18889–18897 CAS .
N. H. Tran, D. Nguyen, S. Dwaraknath, S. Mahadevan, G. Chavez, A. Nguyen, T. Dao, S. Mullen, T. A. Nguyen and L. E. Cheruzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14484–14487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, S. H. Lee, G. S. Cha, D. S. Choi, D. H. Nam, J. H. Lee, J.-K. Lee, C.-H. Yun, K. J. Jeong and C. B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Choudhury, J.-O. Baeg, N.-J. Park and R. K. Yadav, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11624–11628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Lee, J. Ryu, J. H. Kim, S. H. Lee and C. B. Park, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 2129–2132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mifsud, S. Gargiulo, S. Iborra, I. W. C. E. Arends, F. Hollmann and A. Corma, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3145 Search PubMed .
P. Wang, T. Minegishi, G. J. Ma, K. Takanabe, Y. Satou, S. Maekawa, Y. Kobori, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2469–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Song, A. K. Vannucci, B. H. Farnum, A. M. Lapides, M. K. Brennaman, B. Kalanyan, L. Alibabaei, J. J. Concepcion, M. D. Losego, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9773–9779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Shiragami, H. Ozawa, K. Kajihara, J. Matsumoto and M. Yasuda, Chem. Lett., 2015, 44, 265–267 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Xianjun Lang
	Xianjun Lang obtained his PhD in 2011 under Prof. Jincai Zhao from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China). He then spent four years at Nanyang Technological University (Singapore) with Prof. Xiaodong Chen as a research fellow. Currently, he is a professor of chemistry at Central China Normal University.

Jincai Zhao
	Jincai Zhao obtained his PhD in 1994 from Meisei University (Japan). Currently, he is a full professor at the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences (China). He was elected as an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2011 and a fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS) in 2014. He is a member of the editorial or advisory boards of eight international scientific journals, including Environmental Science & Technology and Energy & Environmental Science.

Xiaodong Chen
	Xiaodong Chen is an Associate Professor at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He received his BS degree (Honors) in chemistry from Fuzhou University (China) in 1999, MS degree (Honors) in physical chemistry from the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, and PhD degree (Summa Cum Laude) in biochemistry from the University of Muenster (Germany) in 2006. After working as a postdoctoral fellow at Northwestern University (USA), he started his independent research career as a Singapore National Research Foundation Fellow and Nanyang Assistant Professor at Nanyang Technological University in 2009. He was promoted to Associate Professor with tenure in the September of 2013. His research interests include programmable materials for energy conversion and the integrated nano-bio interface.

Key learning points
(1) Visible light is an attractive driver for benign organic transformations.
(2) A photoredox catalyst is typically needed to carry out visible-light-induced reactions.
(3) Cooperative catalysis can overcome the limitations imposed by a photoredox catalyst.
(4) Coupling visible-light photoredox catalysis with transition-metal catalysis has delivered considerable successes.
(5) Coupling biocatalysis or electrocatalysis with photoredox catalysis is very promising.


 	Fig. 1  The general concept of cooperative photoredox catalysis for visible-light-induced organic transformations.	 

 	Fig. 2  Ru and Ir complex photoredox catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 1  Cooperative Ru or Ir complex visible-light photoredox catalysis and Pd complex catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 2  Cooperative Ru or Ir complex photoredox catalysis and Cu-complex catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 3  Cooperative Ru complex photoredox catalysis and transition-metal-complex catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 4  Organic-linker-connected photoredox catalyst and transition-metal catalyst for the oxygenation of organic compounds.	 

 	Scheme 5  Bridging-ligand-connected photoredox catalysts and transition-metal catalysts for organic transformations.	 

 	Fig. 3  Metal-free organic photoredox catalysts.	 

 	Scheme 6  Cooperative metal-free organic photoredox catalysis and transition-metal catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 7  Cooperative semiconductor photoredox catalysis and transition metal-complex catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 8  Cooperative plasmonic photoredox catalysis and Pd or Cu nanocatalysis for oxidation or reduction reactions.	 

 	Scheme 9  Cooperative plasmonic photoredox catalysis and Pd nanocatalysis for esterification or coupling reactions.	 

 	Scheme 10  Cooperative RuII photoredox catalysis (X = H or OMe) and P450 BM3 biocatalysis.	 

 	Scheme 11  Cooperative organic dye photoredox catalysis and whole-cell P450 biocatalysis.	 

 	Scheme 12  Cooperative organic dye photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 13  Synergistic semiconductor photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 14  Cooperative semiconductor plus organic photoredox catalysis and enzyme catalysis.	 

 	Scheme 15  Cooperative photoredox catalysis and electrocatalysis.	 

 	Scheme 16  Cooperative photoredox catalysis and electrocatalysis for biomass conversion. (a) Reprinted from ref. 51 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, copyright 2015; (b) reprinted from ref. 52 with permission from the Chemical Society of Japan, copyright 2015.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
