A self-preserving pitted texture enables reversible topographic evolution and cycling on Zn metal anodes   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA08400C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA08400C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 25495-25501A self-preserving pitted texture enables reversible topographic evolution and cycling on Zn metal anodes†

        
          
            Yuanlin 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Shi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Guoxing 
            Miao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Fu
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Yunhui 
            Huang
          
        
      *ad
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Tongji University, Shanghai 201804, China. E-mail: jingfu@tongji.edu.cn
bInstitute for Quantum Computing, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Waterloo, Ontario N2L 3G1, Canada
cShanghai Key Laboratory of Development & Application for Metallic Functional Materials, Shanghai 201804, P. R. China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: huangyh@hust.edu.cn
Received 
      28th September 2021
    , Accepted 25th October 2021First published on 26th October 2021AbstractWe identify that the irreversible evolution of flat to non-uniform topography on a pristine Zn anode surface during repeated stripping/plating cycles triggers fatal dendrite growth. Given this, a self-preserving pitted surface prepared by a facile anisotropic etching method is introduced for Zn metal anodes. The self-preservation of the pitted texture is realized due to the high depth-to-width ratio of the micro-pits, which not only protects them from being electropolished during stripping but also avoids Zn deposits filling the pits as the electric field and drift flux are largely shielded deep in the pits. The numerous micro-pits can serve as nucleation sites and enable Zn (101) to dominate the rugged surface to strengthen Zn affinity and nucleation, resulting in favorable electrode kinetics and homogeneous deposition. More importantly, the self-preserving pitted structure allows the electrode surface to recover its pitted topography with uniform roughness after cycles, promising excellent cyclic reversibility for Zn anodes. Therefore, a prolonged lifespan in symmetric cells of >1000 h at 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2 can be achieved and stable Zn‖MnO2 cells with 87.5% capacity retention after 900 cycles and high coulombic efficiency of 99.88% are obtained.
Introduction
Nowadays, green smart grids that allow scalable utilization of renewable power are widely used, reducing people's dependence on ever-depleting fossil fuels. Different from the intermittent and seasonal supply of solar energy and wind energy, electrochemical energy storage stands out for its low carbon footprint, modularity, high efficiency, and versatility.1–3 Among various electrochemical energy storage systems, rechargeable aqueous Zn ion batteries (AZIBs) have been paid great attention as promising candidates in recent years due to their competitive price, high safety, and environmental benignity.4,5 To date, although various types of cathode materials have been extensively investigated and achieved high energy and power densities,6–8 the practical application of AZIBs is still restricted by the poor cycling stability of Zn anodes due to the detrimental issues of dendrite growth and side reactions.9–11
A large body of work already exists to tackle these problems, intensively focusing on electrolyte optimization,12–14 novel separators,15–17 electrode structural design,18–20 and surface engineering.21–23 Recently, constructing heterogeneous surface structures, including Zn/Sn,24 ZnS,25 ZnP,26 ZnF2,27 Zn/Ag nanoparticles,28 indium-based compounds,29 and metal–organic frameworks,30 has been proposed to regulate the formation of Zn dendrites, yet it has not been completely eliminated. Beyond that, the electrochemical stability of introduced foreign materials or in situ formed solid electrolyte interphase layers, as well as their impact on the long-term cyclability of cathode materials, are unclear. In theory, metal anodes guarantee full access to electron and ion transport pathways throughout the plating/stripping processes.31 However, it is challenging for the ideal metallic Zn anode interface to remain stable and planar after repeated plating/stripping cycles. The repeated formation and dissolution of the metallic Zn phase tends to result in non-planar deposition morphology, which eventually induces dendritic growth that short-circuits the battery.31 Given this, most of the research focuses on the electrodeposition procedure when studying the cycling performance of Zn anodes, while in practice, the Zn surface structure modification should be able to survive both the stripping and plating processes to support repeated cycling. Regrettably, rare endeavors have been made to explore the intrinsic surface topography and crystallinity of bare Zn electrodes during cycling.
Based on the above, herein, we introduce a pitted surface texture consisting of deep micro-pits on Zn metal anodes (referred to as pitted Zn), which is prepared via a facile anisotropic etching method. Ameliorated wettability, enlarged nucleus surface, and improved zincophilicity can be achieved on the pitted Zn surface. In addition, the edges of the micro-pits trigger a stronger electric field distribution, making the micro-pits function as preferred growth sites. These favor the electrode kinetics and lead to uniform Zn nucleation and deposition. More than that, the high depth-to-width ratio allows the micro-pits to last through repetitive plating/stripping as the electric field and drift flux are largely shielded deep in the pits, resulting in little to no deposition. Consequently, the pitted Zn electrode achieves a prolonged lifespan of over 1000 h at 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2 in symmetric cells and over 900 cycles in Zn‖MnO2 cells with superior coulombic efficiency (CE).
Experimental section
Preparation of the pitted Zn anodes
Commercial Zn foil (99.99% purity, 0.1 mm) was cut into circular discs (Φ = 16 mm). After rinsing with acetone and ethanol, the pristine Zn masked by Parafilm® M on the back was immersed in 1.0 M CrCl3·6H2O (analytical reagent, Shanghai Titan Scientific Co., Ltd) aqueous buffer solution for 5 minutes and then rinsed with deionized water to achieve the pitted Zn electrode.
Fabrication of MnO2 cathodes
The synthesis of α-MnO2 was based on a procedure in the literature using the hydrothermal method.32 After filtration, rinsing, and drying, a brown powder product was obtained. For the cathode, α-MnO2, graphite nanosheets (Jiangsu XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd), and carbon nanotubes (>99% purity, diameter = 10–20 nm, length = 0.5–2 μm, Jiangsu XFNANO Materials Tech Co., Ltd) with a weight ratio of 75:20:5 were dispersed in 40 mL of ethanol and sonicated for 1 h. The dispersion was then filtered onto a piece of glass fiber filter (Whatman, GF/D) to form the cathode electrode films, which were subsequently washed and dried overnight. The active material loading in the cathode is ∼2 mg cm−1.
Materials characterization
XRD patterns were collected using a Bruker-AXS ADVANCE D8 with Cu-Kα1 radiation (40 kV, 40 mA, λ = 1.5406 Å) from 10° to 80°. A field-emission SEM (Nova NanoSEM 450) equipped with EDS was used to characterize the morphology and element distribution of the electrodes. The contact angles for the electrolyte droplet on the electrodes were measured using a contact angle measuring instrument (JC2000D1, Shanghai Powereach Digital Technology Equipment Co., Ltd). Analysis of the pit size distribution based on the SEM images was done with the aid of ImageJ software. Given the image resolution (1 μm), values greater than 1 μm2 were counted.
Electrochemical measurements
The prepared Zn anodes were assembled into standard CR2025 coin-type cells by using a glass fiber filter as the separator and 2.0 M ZnSO4 aqueous solution (2.0 M ZnSO4 + 0.1 M MnSO4 for full cells) as the electrolyte. A Neware (Shenzhen, China) battery test system was used to perform galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) tests. Electrochemical measurements were conducted on a BioLogic electrochemistry workstation. EIS data were recorded over the frequency range of 10−1–104 Hz with an AC voltage of 5 mV. CV and linear polarization curves were collected at 1 mV s−1. For the three-electrode setup, the prepared Zn anodes, graphite rod, and saturated calomel electrode were adopted as the working, counter, and reference electrodes, respectively.
Theoretical computations
The first-principles DFT calculations were conducted by the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package (VASP). The generalized gradient approximation using Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functionals was utilized for the exchange–correlation. The blocked Davidson iteration scheme was used for the electronic minimization and the conjugate gradient algorithm was used for the ion relaxation. The vacuum space was 20 Å in the height direction. The energy convergence was set to 10−4 eV and the force on each relaxed atom was smaller than 0.01 eV Å−1. The fast computations with some trade-off in the accuracy were carried out on a 3 × 3 × 1 k-space mesh. Binding energy (Eb) was calculated using the following equation: Eb = Etotal − Esub − EZn(1)where Etotal, Esub, and EZn represent the fully relaxed energy of the substrate with a Zn atom attached, the fully relaxed energy of the substrate, and the energy of a standalone Zn atom, respectively. For reasonable comparison, binding energies of different Zn planes were calculated relative to that of Zn (002), which is the most stable crystal plane. The electric field distribution was simulated with COMSOL Multiphysics using the finite element method. A simplified model consisting of the Zn substrate and a zero-potential plane was constructed. As shown in the SEM images, the Zn substrate was assumed to be perfectly conducting with micro-pits of different planar-view shapes, including a circle, an ellipse, and a star, to emulate the real scenario. The dimensions of these shapes ranged from 2 μm to 10 μm with the depth set to be 10 μm. A voltage bias of 1 V was applied on the Zn electrode and a flat equipotential surface of 0 V was placed 30 micrometers away as the current drain. Visualization of the simulated results was based on the amplitude of the drift electric field in the electrolyte.
Results and discussion
It is recognized that non-uniform nucleation and growth is the principal reason for the protuberant deposition that eventually evolves into detrimental Zn dendrites. In this regard, chronopotentiometry (CP) tests were operated at 1.0 mA cm−2 in a three-electrode configuration to directly look into the plating/stripping behavior of an individual electrode, while scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were used to scrutinize the variations in the electrode surface morphology. Particularly, it should be noted that stripping as the initial step when cycling in full cells is decisive to the later uniform or dendritic Zn deposition as it may affect the surface state of electrodes. As exhibited in Fig. 1a, the voltage–time curve of the pristine Zn shows a sharp drop in the early stage, suggesting an ultrahigh stripping overpotential, which is ascribed to the high potential barrier of Zn stripping from the smooth and flat bulk surface (Fig. 1b) along with the native oxide layer. After being stripped, many fresh pits with large areas formed on the pristine Zn surface (Fig. 1c) to enable the stripping reaction to support the applied current, which is also visible to the naked eye (Fig. 1c, inset). Unfortunately, these shallow and loosely distributed pits triggered localized Zn deposition there due to the relatively rough topography and limited nucleation sites (Fig. 1d). The stripping behavior after plating was also discussed to further investigate the dynamic change of the electrode surface. We propose that in this half-cycle stripping of the plated Zn (Fig. 1a), the dissolution of large chunks of metallic Zn deposits contributed to the lower overpotential of the early part while the larger polarization in the later period was mainly on account of stripping from the bulk Zn surface owing to the greater potential barrier. Thus, the mottled electrode surface finally showed on the pristine Zn (Fig. 1e). The morphology change of the pristine Zn was verified in cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves for 1500 cycles. As presented in Fig. 1f, the current gradually increases with increasing CV cycles, indicative of an electrochemical roughening procedure with repeated plating/stripping for the flat pristine Zn surface. However, it is noteworthy that during this roughening process, irreversible topographic changes occurred on the electrode surface, generating non-uniform roughness that can easily result in Zn dendrites, which hinders the cycling stability of batteries.
 Fig. 1  (a) CP curve of the pristine Zn electrode during stripping/plating at 1.0 mA cm−2. SEM images of the pristine Zn (b) before cycling, (c) after the initial stripping step (inset: digital photo), (d) after a stripping–plating process, and (e) after a plating–stripping process. (f) CV curves of the pristine Zn in symmetric cells for 1500 cycles. 
In consideration of the aforementioned failure mechanism of the pristine Zn, we introduce a pitted surface to the Zn anode to improve the cycling stability. To prepare the pitted Zn electrode, commercial Zn foil was immersed in 1.0 M CrCl3·6H2O aqueous buffer solution (pH ≈ 1.5) for 5 minutes, during which the anisotropic grain-boundary and inwards dissolutions were executed on the Zn surface through chemical replacement (Zn + 2CrCl3 → 2CrCl2 + ZnCl2), generating large amounts of micro-pits, as illustrated in Fig. 2a. X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis was carried out to identify the crystal structures of the electrode materials. The obtained XRD patterns displayed in Fig. 2b indicate a clean Zn phase (JCPDS 04-0831) for the pitted Zn electrode. The surface analyses were performed by energy disperse spectroscopy (EDS), detecting no Cr and Cl elements on the pitted Zn surface (Fig. 2c and S1†), which indicates the validity of this chemical etching method. SEM images show that the size of the micro-pits is as small as 1–5 μm2 with high uniformity (Fig. S2†). From the top view, the micro-pits render random elongated shapes with a narrow width of about 2 μm (Fig. 2d). Apart from that, these micro-pits are deep enough to penetrate down to the bulk Zn with a depth of 10–20 μm from the side view (Fig. 2e and S3†), yielding a high depth-to-width ratio. This change in surface texture can be identified by the naked eye as well, as the silver metallic luster of the pristine Zn turned matte and pale in the pitted Zn (Fig. S4†). Then, the capacitance of the electrochemical double layer (CDL) was obtained to testify the roughness and surface area of the electrodes, which can be determined by the imaginary part of the impedance from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). When the applied frequency is higher than the time constant of any of the Faraday processes, the impedance at high frequency can be dominated by CDL and the resistance of the solution (Rs).33CDL was calculated from the following equation: (2)where f and Zim are frequency and the imaginary part of the impedance, respectively. The rougher the electrode surface, the higher the capacitance value. Given a moderate frequency of 10 kHz and ignoring the constant phase characters (Fig. S5†), the calculated CDL of the pitted Zn is 26.31 μF, which is ten times higher than that of the pristine Zn (2.44 μF), validating the high roughness and enlarged surface area of the pitted Zn. Accordingly, contact angle measurements were conducted to characterize the wettability of the electrodes. The contact angle of the electrolyte (2.0 M ZnSO4) on the pitted Zn surface (66°) is smaller than that on the pristine Zn (80.25°), which proves the improved wettability and is consistent with the enhanced surface roughness (Fig. 2f and g). The superior wettability ensures the pitted Zn enhanced electrode–electrolyte interfacial contact and better Zn ion migration, promoting Zn deposition.27,34 Additionally, the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the pitted Zn electrodes is as low as 270.0 Ω, which is only one-third of the pristine Zn (991.1 Ω), manifesting the rapid charge transfer aroused by the increased nucleation sites after being etched (Fig. 2h, S6 and Table S1†). To further figure out the influence of the pitted surface on the Zn affinity, the relative texture coefficients (Tc) of the Zn lattice planes were calculated by the following equation:35 (3)where I(hkl) and I0(hkl) are the intensity of the as-prepared electrodes and the standard value, respectively. The results show that with the etched electrode surface, Tc(101) grows while Tc(002) decreases (Fig. S7 and Table S2†). First-principles density functional theory (DFT) calculations were used to disclose the binding energies of Zn atoms onto different crystal planes of Zn (002), Zn (100), and Zn (101). As shown in Fig. 2i, the Zn (101) plane has a relatively more negative binding energy than those of the Zn (002) and Zn (100) planes, indicating easier Zn nucleation on it. On the grounds of the calculated Tc values, the pitted Zn electrode with more (101) planes exposed can offer preferred binding with Zn atoms, that is, it has better zincophilicity with expedited nucleation.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the pitted Zn. (b) XRD patterns of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn. (c) EDS of Zn, Cr, O, and Cl for the pitted Zn surface. (d) Top view and (e) cross-sectional SEM images of the pitted Zn. Contact angles of an electrolyte droplet on the (f) pristine Zn and (g) pitted Zn. (h) Nyquist plots with the corresponding equivalent circuit model of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells. (i) Calculated binding energies of Zn atoms onto different flat crystal facets. The insets show the top view of the charge transfer for the deposited atom. (j) Nucleation overpotentials of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn at 1.0 mA cm−2 after the initial stripping step. 
Symmetric cells using the pristine Zn and pitted Zn electrodes were assembled to explore the effect of the pitted surface on the electrochemical performance. Considering CV curves, compared with the pristine Zn, the onset potential in the cathodic scan of the pitted Zn is more positive while the anodic onset potential is more negative, demonstrating facilitated electrode kinetics (Fig. S8†). Except for this, the pitted Zn delivers a higher current in comparison with the case of the pristine Zn owing to the enlarged active surface area. The exchange current densities originating from the linear polarization curves of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn cells are 0.072 and 6.13 mA cm−2, respectively, testifying the achievement of rapid Zn deposition/dissolution kinetics and increased active area on the pitted Zn surface (Fig. S9†), which coincides with the EIS results.36,37 In particular, to truly reflect the nucleation overpotential, CP curves depositing at 1.0 mA cm−2 after the initial stripping course were recorded. The pitted Zn electrode presents a nucleation overpotential of 6.8 mV, lower than that of the pristine Zn (10 mV), suggesting more promoted nucleation (Fig. 2j). Therefore, we can make a brief conclusion that the anisotropic etching constructs a pitted surface texture on the Zn metal anode, where conducive wettability, facilitated charge transfers, and enhanced zincophilic property can be achieved to favor the electrode kinetics.
To further elucidate the superiority of the as-prepared pitted surface texture, the long-term cycling stability of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells was tested at 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2. Remarkably, the pitted Zn electrode achieves an outstanding cycling lifetime of >1000 h with a low voltage hysteresis of 41 mV (Fig. 3a). The voltage profile of the pitted Zn at different cycles (Fig. S10†) shows that the overpotentials after Zn plating/stripping for 500 cycles are still consistent with, and even slightly lower than, those of the initial several cycles, proving steady and durable performance. Conversely, the pristine Zn electrode exhibits a larger potential polarization with voltage hysteresis of 85 mV and a much shorter lifespan of 204 h. At a higher current density and area capacity of 2.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2, the pitted Zn symmetric cell still exhibits ultrastable electrochemical plating/stripping behavior, offering a long cycling life of over 250 h, which is more than fourfold that of the pristine Zn symmetric cell (Fig. 3b). Even with increasing the rate from 0.5 to 5.0 mA cm−2 (Fig. 3c), the polarization of the pitted Zn exhibits a smaller increase and remains significantly lower in comparison to the pristine Zn, showing an excellent rate capability. By comparing the cycling performances reported recently in Zn-based symmetric cells as listed in Table S3,† our present work on pitted Zn reveals a great advance in cycling lifespan and polarization, which confirms the preeminence of the as-fabricated pitted surface.
 Fig. 3  Cycling stability of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells at (a) 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2 and (b) 2.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2. (c) Rate performance of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells. (d) CV curves, (e) Nyquist plots before cycling, (f) discharging/charging profiles at 1, 2, 4, and 6C, and (g) long-term cycling performance at 2C of the Zn‖MnO2 full cells. 
To evaluate the practical application, full cells were assembled using the pristine Zn and pitted Zn anodes paired with α-MnO2 as the cathode. The CV curves (Fig. 3d) of both the pristine Zn‖MnO2 and pitted Zn‖MnO2 cells display distinct redox peaks corresponding to the reverse conversion between MnO2 and MnOOH.38 Compared with the pristine Zn‖MnO2 cell, the higher reduction potential but lower oxidation potential of the pitted Zn‖MnO2 cell implies smaller polarization. Additionally, the larger peak current suggests improved reaction kinetics. The low polarization and high reactivity are owed to its decreased Rct, as shown in Fig. 3e. Consequently, the pitted Zn‖MnO2 cell can deliver decent capacities of 307, 291, 240, and 195 mA h g−1 at different rates of 1, 2, 4, and 6C, respectively, surpassing those of the pristine Zn‖MnO2 cell (Fig. 3f). The lower overpotentials are noticeable at higher rates, indicating the better rate performance of the pitted Zn anode, which is in line with its lower impedance. The long-term cycling performance of full cells at 2C is compared in Fig. 3g. For the pristine Zn‖MnO2 cell, the specific capacity continuously decreases with unstable CE. On the contrary, the pitted Zn‖MnO2 cell delivers a stable discharge capacity of 253 mA h g−1 with considerable capacity retention of 87.5% after 900 cycles, along with outstanding reversibility (CE of 99.88%).
The superb cycling performance of the pitted Zn electrode is considered as the result of the improved electrode kinetics and, more importantly, the surface with reversible topography and controlled roughness. During the first stripping process, the pitted surface resulted in more favorable stripping, presenting a slight potential fluctuation in the CP curve (Fig. S11†). No sizeable pits were generated on the pitted Zn surface and the micro-pits were not electropolished after being stripped due to their sufficient depth (Fig. 4a). Then, in order to delve into the influence of the micro-pits on Zn electrodeposition, the electric field distribution around and inside a few model-shaped pits deduced from the SEM results was simulated using the finite element method (Fig. S12 and S13†). Since the depth-to-width ratio of the micro-pits is high enough, the electric field mainly distributes near the opening of the pits, extending inward by a depth approximately on the scale of one width (Fig. 4b, side view). The simulative result can be confirmed by the deposition morphology of the pitted Zn, whereby no Zn deposits are deep down the pit as the increased electric field intensity on the pit edge provokes a higher local current density, which gives rise to preferred Zn deposition near the opening of the pit (Fig. 4c). Additionally, the micro-pits on the cratered Zn surface can function as effective nucleation sites, guiding uniform Zn nucleation and deposition. Thanks to the abundance and high density of these micro-pits, the plated pitted Zn shows a relatively homogeneous deposition morphology (Fig. 4d). The comparison of deposition morphologies is more pronounced in the scenario of high capacities. For the longer deposition times of 5 h and 10 h (Fig. S14 and S15†), the pitted Zn electrodes brought about a more uniform Zn deposition. The pitted Zn electrode delivered a relatively smooth CP curve during the later stripping process (Fig. S16†), which could be mostly credited with the dissolution from the uniform coverage of Zn deposits. Hence, as expected, the deep micro-pits still existed on the surface with almost unchanged density and size (Fig. 4e and S17†), manifesting the self-preservation of the pitted texture. The repeated CV curves confirm the desirable endurance of the pitted Zn interface, which is reflected in tiny increments in current for 1500 cycles (Fig. 4f). Compared to the pristine Zn electrode (Fig. 1f), the steady CV curves of the pitted Zn are regarded as compelling evidence that the pitted structure can recover its original topography and ensures the electrode surface has controlled roughness after several cycles, endowing Zn anodes with cyclic reversibility. This can also be verified by the Rct at different cycles (Fig. S18, S19 and Table S4†). Especially, the Rct of the pristine Zn cells displays a downward trend during the initial 100 cycles, which is ascribed to the progressively roughened surface in the preliminary stage. By contrast, the Rct of the pitted Zn cells remains constant upon cycling.
 Fig. 4  (a) SEM images and digital photos of the pitted Zn after the initial stripping step. (b) Finite element method models of the pitted Zn and electric field distribution for circle-shaped micro-pits (the scale bar works for all). SEM images and digital photos of the pitted Zn (c and d) after Zn deposition at 1.0 mA cm−2 for 1 h and (e) after a plating-stripping process. (f) CV curves of the pitted Zn symmetric cell for 1500 cycles. (g) Schematic illustration of Zn deposition and dissolution on the pristine Zn and pitted Zn anode surfaces. 
The self-preserving pitted surface and uniformly rough interface lead to homogeneous Zn deposition/dissolution and a prolonged cycling lifespan, as depicted in Fig. 4g. For the pristine Zn, the big and shallow pits formed during stripping procedures introduce an uneven interface, which induces the majority of Zn deposits only inside these few roughened areas. Such preferential Zn deposition will further evolve into protuberance and ultimately Zn dendrites due to the self-amplification mechanism, leading to the short-circuiting of batteries.16 In comparison, these micro-pits are deep enough to protect them from being electropolished during stripping, and to avoid Zn deposits filling the pits as the electric field and drift flux are largely shielded deep in the pits. Therefore, the micro-pits on the pitted Zn surface can be self-preserving, which continually promotes homogeneous Zn growth with small crystal grains when plating and they recover their original texture after stripping. Moreover, etching solution concentration-controlled electrodes were fabricated to fully understand the dependence of the surface stability on the depth-to-width ratio of the micro-pits. Under a lower concentration compared with that of the pitted Zn, SEM images show that the electrode has a generally smooth and complete surface with some superficially defective areas (Fig. S20†). When etched by the solution with a higher concentration, the electrode presents a severely damaged surface, where big pits exist with a larger width of about 10 μm and a depth of approximately 10 μm thus a low depth-to-width ratio (Fig. S21†). Based on these results, clearly, the pitted surface can be adjusted through regulating the concentration of the etching solution. The pitted structure only forms when the electrode is etched by a solution with high enough concentration. However, it is important to note that the stronger etching effect brings about the smaller depth-to-width ratio of the micro-pits (Fig. S22†), which triggers directly filling the Zn deposition in the big pits, disabling the pitted structure. As a consequence, an uneven interface will emerge as the cycling goes on, facilitating dendrite growth, which can be justified by the poor cycling stability at 2.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2 (Fig. S23†).
Conclusions
In summary, a self-preserving pitted surface for Zn metal anodes was developed by chemical etching. The as-built surface provides two attractive merits. On the one hand, the anisotropic etching constructs a rough and wettable electrode surface along with strengthened Zn affinity via exposing the Zn (101) crystal plane for preferred binding to Zn atoms, which improves the electrode kinetics. On the other hand, the micro-pits on the anode surface possess a large depth but a small planar width. The large depth-to-width ratio of the micro-pits protects the pitted surface from being electropolished during stripping and avoids the electric field distributing in the micro-pits, preventing Zn deposition in them, both of which endow the interface with self-preservation ability. Then the topography of Zn anodes can be recovered and the roughness is controlled after the repeated plating/stripping processes, leading to uniform deposition with finer crystal grains instead of bulk dendritic crystals. Therefore, a highly prolonged cycling lifespan over 1000 h of the pitted Zn in symmetric cells can be accomplished with a low voltage hysteresis of 41 mV under 1.0 mA cm−2 for 1.0 mA h cm−2. Even at a higher current density and area capacity of 2.0 mA cm−2 for 2.0 mA h cm−2, the pitted Zn remains stable over 250 h with a smaller overpotential, far surpassing the pristine Zn. Furthermore, the feasibility of the pitted Zn electrode was verified in Zn‖MnO2 cells, realizing a stable CE of 99.88% and capacity of 253 mA h g−1 with retention as high as 87.5% after 900 cycles at 2C. The identification of self-preserving surfaces and the fundamental understanding of the role of the etch pits provide a route to the development of highly cyclable Zn metal anodes, which could be readily extended to other metallic electrodes.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicting interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support from the Shanghai Sailing Program (20YF1452000), the Shanghai Scientific and Technological Innovation Project (20ZR1460200), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52001232), the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (Discovery RGPIN-04178), and the Canada First Research Excellence Fund.
References
J. Zheng and L. A. Archer, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabe0219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604685 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Yang, H. Tan, X. Rui and Y. Yu, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 395 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288 RSC .
X. Jia, C. Liu, Z. G. Neale, J. Yang and G. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, R. Liang, T. Or, Y.-P. Deng, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2000064 CrossRef .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
J. Huang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2020, 37, 2005020 Search PubMed .
J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and L. A. Archer, Science, 2019, 366, 645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 13180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Li, Y. Tang, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 32, 2001854 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, J. Mao, J. Hao, J. Liu, S. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, T. Zheng, J. Liu, P. Rao and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cao, D. Li, E. Hu, J. Xu, T. Deng, L. Ma, Y. Wang, X.-Q. Yang and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, L. Dong, W. Huang, H. Jia, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hou, Y. Gao, H. Tan and B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Sun, T. Yang, L. Yu, N. Wei, Z. Tian, J. Cai, J. Lv, Y. Shao, M. H. Rümmeli, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, Z. Cong, Z. Guo, C. Chang, X. Liang, Y. Liu, W. Hu and X. Pu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 104 CrossRef .
S.-B. Wang, Q. Ran, R.-Q. Yao, H. Shi, Z. Wen, M. Zhao, X.-Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1634 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, Y. Yang, G. Liu, R. Zhu, J. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Gao, X. Chen and L. Qie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2001867 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, X. Huang, Q. Wang, D. Sun, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, S. Liang, J. Gao, S. Guo, J. Guo, C. Wang, G. Xu, X. Wu, G. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 503 RSC .
S. Li, J. Fu, G. Miao, S. Wang, W. Zhao, Z. Wu, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, B. Li, X. Li, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Liu, D. Li, C. Wu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cao, X. Zhou, A. Wei, Q. Meng, H. Ye, W. Liu, J. Tang and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100398 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Liu, Z. Lv, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, M. Ye, L. Chen, J. Zhao and C. C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, F. Huang, M. Zhu, B. T. W. Ang and J. M. Xue, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101607 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, Y. Ou, B. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Fu, M. Wan, G. Li, W. Wang, L. Wang, J. Jiang, Z. W. Seh, E. Hu, X.-Q. Yang, Y. Cui and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 3143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yuksel, O. Buyukcakir, W. K. Seong and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904215 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, D. C. Bock, T. Tang, Q. Zhao, J. Yin, K. R. Tallman, G. Wheeler, X. Liu, Y. Deng, S. Jin, A. C. Marschilok, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi and L. A. Archer, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 398 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liang, J. Fu, Y.-P. Deng, Y. Pei, M. Zhang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 36, 478 CrossRef .
G. Garcia, E. Ventosa and W. Schuhmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Y. An, C. Wei, B. Xi, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Park and D. N. Lee, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 1643 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, X. Hu, X. Liu, X. Lin, X. Fan, X. Cui, C. Sun, Q. Wu, X. Lian, R. Yuan, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 38, 190–199 CrossRef .
P. Xu, X. Li, M. Y. Yan, H. B. Ni, H. H. Huang, X. D. Lin, X. Y. Liu, J. M. Fan, M. S. Zheng, R. M. Yuan and Q. F. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22892–22900 RSC .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08400cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Eb = Etotal − Esub − EZn	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) CP curve of the pristine Zn electrode during stripping/plating at 1.0 mA cm−2. SEM images of the pristine Zn (b) before cycling, (c) after the initial stripping step (inset: digital photo), (d) after a stripping–plating process, and (e) after a plating–stripping process. (f) CV curves of the pristine Zn in symmetric cells for 1500 cycles.	 
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of the pitted Zn. (b) XRD patterns of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn. (c) EDS of Zn, Cr, O, and Cl for the pitted Zn surface. (d) Top view and (e) cross-sectional SEM images of the pitted Zn. Contact angles of an electrolyte droplet on the (f) pristine Zn and (g) pitted Zn. (h) Nyquist plots with the corresponding equivalent circuit model of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells. (i) Calculated binding energies of Zn atoms onto different flat crystal facets. The insets show the top view of the charge transfer for the deposited atom. (j) Nucleation overpotentials of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn at 1.0 mA cm−2 after the initial stripping step.	 

 	Fig. 3  Cycling stability of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells at (a) 1.0 mA cm−2/1.0 mA h cm−2 and (b) 2.0 mA cm−2/2.0 mA h cm−2. (c) Rate performance of the pristine Zn and pitted Zn symmetric cells. (d) CV curves, (e) Nyquist plots before cycling, (f) discharging/charging profiles at 1, 2, 4, and 6C, and (g) long-term cycling performance at 2C of the Zn‖MnO2 full cells.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) SEM images and digital photos of the pitted Zn after the initial stripping step. (b) Finite element method models of the pitted Zn and electric field distribution for circle-shaped micro-pits (the scale bar works for all). SEM images and digital photos of the pitted Zn (c and d) after Zn deposition at 1.0 mA cm−2 for 1 h and (e) after a plating-stripping process. (f) CV curves of the pitted Zn symmetric cell for 1500 cycles. (g) Schematic illustration of Zn deposition and dissolution on the pristine Zn and pitted Zn anode surfaces.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08400c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
