Core-corona Co/CoP clusters strung on carbon nanotubes as a Schottky catalyst for glucose oxidation assisted H 2 production   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11850H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11850H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10893-10908Core-corona Co/CoP clusters strung on carbon nanotubes as a Schottky catalyst for glucose oxidation assisted H2 production†

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunfeng 
            Qiu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Ma
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Yanping 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yongxia 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuxin 
            Ying
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yinan 
            Jiang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yixue 
            Zhu
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Shaoqin 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, No. 92 West Dazhi Street, Nan Gang District, Harbin, 150001, People's Republic of China. E-mail: qiuyf@hit.edu.cn; shaoqinliu@hit.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Micro-systems and Micro-structures Manufacturing, Harbin Institute of Technology, No. 2 Yikuang Street, Nan Gang District, Harbin 150080, People's Republic of China
cSchool of Life Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology, No. 92 West Dazhi Street, Nan Gang District, Harbin, 150001, People's Republic of China
dSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin, 150001, P.R. China
Received 
      7th December 2020
    , Accepted 5th April 2021First published on 7th April 2021AbstractThe simultaneous improvement of intrinsic activities and the number of active sites in electrocatalysts is the bottle-neck issue for H2 production. Herein, commercial CNTs serving as conductive kernels are in situ coupled with 3D ZIF-67 derived Co/CoP core-corona clusters. Such a hierarchical bead string nanostructure not only possesses highly exposed active sites, but also favours fast electron transfer for electrocatalytic kinetics. Our material shows excellent HER (η10 = −151 mV) and glucose oxidation reaction (GOR) performance, showing a smaller hybrid water splitting potential of 1.42 V compared to conventional water splitting (η10 = 1.74 V) for H2 production. DFT calculations indicate that the Schottky heterointerface at Co/CoP decreases the initial H2O dissociation energy barrier and possesses a thermoneutral H* adsorption free energy for the HER, as well as reducing the energy barrier for the GOR. Meanwhile, more oxidative cobalt oxyhydroxide favoured the GOR process. The present work opens a new avenue for designing Mott–Schottky multifunctional electrocatalysts for both energy-saving H2 production and value-added products.
1. Introduction
Nowadays, most fossil fuel reserves are exhausted, and environmental pollution is becoming more and more serious because of the fossil fuel energy consumption, and thus the development for clean energy is urgently demanded.1–5 Noticeably, hydrogen is an ideal secondary energy to alleviate the current energy and environmental problems and possesses attractive advantages including zero combustion pollution and high efficiency.6,7 Researchers have recognized the bottle-neck issue for H2 production, that is, the development of a clean and sustainable system, such as a solar cell-water splitting tandem electrolyser. Basically, for the latter part of the electrolyser, huge energy consumption and low conversion efficiency hindered the industrial application due to the existence of large overpotential on electrodes. Pt, Ru, or Ir based-noble electrocatalysts showed excellent catalytic activities toward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) or oxygen evolution reaction (OER), but they can't be widely used in industry due to their high cost, scarcity, and poor cycling stability.8–13 In particular, the catalytic properties of individual noble metals only targets a single half-reaction, either the HER or the OER, making it impossible for fabricating water electrolysers using single materials. Recently, non-noble metal based bifunctional HER and OER electrocatalysts for overall water splitting have attracted tremendous attention due to their promising potential for large-scale production and excellent catalytic activity.
A series of non-noble metal catalysts, such as transition metal carbides,14,15 nitrides,16,17 sulfides,18–20 and phosphides,21 have shown excellent HER and OER properties, displaying the prospect for replacing noble metal-based electrocatalysts. In particular, transition metal phosphides (TMPs) have attracted special attention, such as nickel phosphide,22,23 iron phosphide,24,25 molybdenum phosphide,26 and cobalt phosphide.27,28 For instances, CoP possesses excellent HER activity, chemical stability and low cost. Previous experimental results and DFT calculations proved that although CoP with abundant Co–P bonds is more conducive to providing more proton receptor sites for the HER, it failed to strike the balance between the HER and OER.29–31 In addition, CoP is generally limited by poor conductivity due to its semi-conductive properties. Therefore, promoting the electrocatalytic performance of both the HER and OER in alkaline electrolytes through rational electrocatalyst design remains a huge challenge for achieving overall water splitting.
It is noteworthy that the integration of metals and semiconductors as Mott–Schottky hybrids is a promising strategy to simultaneously promote both HER and OER activities.32–35 More specifically, at metal/semiconductor heterojunctions, electrons can flow spontaneously at such interfaces until the work function on both sides are equal, resulting in significant changes in the electronic structure and energy band of the interface. Such interface regulation continuously changes the work function of the Schottky barrier, thus altering catalysts' electron cloud density and inducing accumulation of negative charges on one side with a higher work function. As a consequence, the activity, selectivity and stability of chemical reactions are substantially improved by binary catalysts compared with single catalysts. For instance, a Janus Co/CoP Mott–Schottky electrocatalyst can be controlled by the phosphidation level, which can be used as a bifunctional electrode material for overall water splitting.32 S,N-CNTs/CoS2@Co containing cobalt metal and the cobalt disulfide semiconductor served as an excellent bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting because of the Mott–Schottky effect.33 Nitrogen-doped carbon has been implanted on CuCo/CuCoOx nanowire arrays to form an integrated core–shell Mott–Schottky architecture (NC/CuCo/CuCoOx), which showed remarkable HER and OER performances.34 CoMn/CoMn2O4 as a bifunctional catalyst is constructed in an alkaline system for both urea oxidation and the HER.35 Moreover, the rational design and construction of Mott–Schottky hybrids has provided a new perspective to regulate the bifunctional activities of electrocatalysts and achieve controllable synthesis of components. For example, when the OER was replaced by small molecule oxidation reactions with a lower overpotential, hybrid water electrocatalysts can be built to produce H2 with less-energy consumption.36–38
Herein, a series of hierarchical Mott–Schottky bead string nanostructures (CNTs@Co/CoP) with controllable components have been designed and synthesized. The integration of intrinsic activities and a number of active sites was realized simultaneously. In order to speed up the industrialization, widely available commercial MWCNTs were used to couple with core-corona clusters with abundant self-grown CNTs, which were derived from ZIF-67 during pyrolysis. We used systematic characterization, electrochemical analysis, and DFT calculations to disclose the effect of the hierarchical nanostructure and components on the water splitting performance. Our findings demonstrate that the Mott–Schottky effect at the heterointerface between the metal (Co) and semiconductor (CoP) can lead to the adjustment of the Fermi level, which was assumed to be responsible for the improved HER and glucose oxidation performance. As a result, our material was able to drive the overall water splitting at an ultra-low voltage (1.42 V) with the assistance of the glucose oxidation reaction (GOR).
2. Experimental section
2.1. Chemicals and materials
Cobalt nitrate hexahydrate (Co(NO3)2·6H2O), 2-methylimidazole, methanol, polyvinyl pyrrolidone (PVP), sulfuric acid (H2SO4, 98%), nitric acid (HNO3, 68%), potassium hydroxide (KOH), and sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2) were bought from Shanghai Aladdin Biochemical Technology Co., Ltd. Multiwall CNTs (purity: 95%, diameter: 30–50 nm, and length: <10 μm) were obtained from Beijing XF nano technology Co., Ltd. All chemicals were used directly without further purification and water used throughout all experiments was purified with a Millipore system (18.2 MΩ).
2.2. Synthesis of CNTs-COOH
CNTs (250 mg) were dispersed in a 37.5 mL mixture of concentrated nitric acid and sulfuric acid with a volume ratio of 3:1 and stirred in a water bath at 80 °C for 3 hours. Afterwards, –COOH group modified CNTs were collected by filtration using a PTFE membrane and rinsed with a large amount of distilled water until the mixture was neutralized (pH = 7) and then dried at 70 °C for 24 h.
2.3. Synthesis of CNTs@ZIF-67
In a typical procedure, carboxylated CNTs (35 mg) and PVP (200 mg) were added to 25 mL methanol (CH3OH). The above mixture solutions were ultrasonically treated for 1 h to form a uniformly dispersed black solution, and then Co(NO3)2·6H2O (582 mg) was added and stirred at room temperature for 1 h to ensure the homogeneity of the solution. Subsequently, 2-methylimidazole (765 mg) was dissolved in 25 mL methanol to form a transparent solution. Then, the prepared solution containing 2-methylimidazole was quickly poured into the black solution under vigorous stirring for 5 min and kept still for 20 h without disturbance. The resulting black sediments were collected through filtration.
2.4. Synthesis of CNTs@Co
The obtained CNTs@ZIF-67 powder was dispersed in a porcelain boat and placed in a quartz tube furnace. The furnace temperature was elevated to 350 °C at a rate of 2 °C min−1 for 90 min and continued to rise to 700 °C at the same elevating temperature rate for 210 min, and then cooled naturally to room temperature. In the whole pyrolysis process, the flow ratio of Ar and H2 in the furnace is 95 sccm and 5 sccm. The final product has a hierarchical structure of N-doped carbon nanotube cluster wrapped commercial CNTs, which is abbreviated as CNTs@Co.
2.5. Synthesis of CNTs@Co/CoP
A 20 mg CNTs@Co precursor was ground into fine powder in an agate mortar and placed in a porcelain boat in the downstream of the quartz tube. Meanwhile, 300 mg NaH2PO2 was put in the upstream of the quartz tube. The furnace was heated to 350 °C with a heating rate of 2 °C min−1 for 2 h under a 100 sccm Ar atmosphere, and then naturally cooled to room temperature. The final product was abbreviated as CNTs@Co/CoP300mg. For comparison, samples of different phosphidation degrees were synthesized using the same method using various amounts of NaH2PO2, including 100 mg (CNTs@Co/CoP100mg), 500 mg (CNTs@Co/CoP500mg) and 1 g (CNTs@Co/CoP1g), respectively.
ZIF-67 without CNTs was prepared by direct pyrolysis and phosphidation as a control group according to a similar procedure, and the final product was denoted as Co/CoP. CNTs + Co/CoPmix (mix represents physical mixture) was a physical mixture of commercial CNTs (1.4 mg) and Co/CoP (3.6 mg), and this ratio was determined on the basis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg.
2.6. Material characterization
The morphology and nanostructures of the materials were characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (FEI Quanta 200), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM) and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) (Tecnai FEI F20, USA) at 200 kV, respectively. The crystal structures were obtained by X-ray diffraction (XRD) (Panalytical X’PERT, Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation (λ = 0.1542 nm) ranging from 5 to 90° (2θ). The compositions of the fresh sample and after long-term test sample were measured by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) (HITACHI SU8010, Japan). The defect degree of the materials was determined by Raman spectroscopy (LabRAM XploRA, incident power of 1 mW, and pumping wavelength of 532 nm). The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) measurements were acquired on an ESCALAB 250Xi (Thermo Fisher, using Al (Kα) radiation as a probe). The binding energies were calibrated by using the containment carbon peak (C 1s: 284.8 eV). Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) was obtained on an automatic volumetric adsorption equipment (Micromeritics ASAP 2020). The samples were dried overnight at 200 °C under vacuum before nitrogen adsorption/desorption determination. Thermogravimetric analysis (TGA) was performed on a TGA Q500 equipment in a N2 atmosphere with a heating rate of 10 °C min−1.
2.7. Electrochemical measurements
CNTs@Co/CoP300mg (5 mg) was mixed with 5 wt% Nafion (30 μL) solution, deionized water (650 μL) and isopropanol (350 μL), and then the mixture was ultrasonicated for 30 min to form a homogeneous ink. The inks of other samples were prepared according to the same procedure.
The electrochemical measurements of the OER and HER were conducted on an electrochemical workstation CHI760E (Shanghai Chenhua, China) at room temperature using a standard three-electrode configuration in a 1 M KOH (pH = 14) electrolyte. 5 μL of ink was added dropwise on a glass carbon electrode (GCE) with a radius of 1.5 mm and baked at 50 °C for 5 min as a working electrode, and Hg/HgO and a graphite rod were used as the reference electrode and the counter electrode, respectively. All potentials are converted in accordance with the following formula in our tests: ERHE = EHg/HgO + 0.927 V(1)
Firstly, N2 was bubbled into the electrolyte solution for 20 min before the HER performance test. The polarization curves were obtained at room temperature with a potential range of −0.127–−0.323 V vs. RHE with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Polarization curves of different catalysts are used to calculate the Tafel slopes. The electrochemical double-layer capacitances (EDLCs, Cdl) in the non-faradaic potential region were calculated using CV curves with the scan rates of 10, 20, 40, 60, 80, 100, 120 and 150 mV s−1, respectively. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was performed in the frequency range of 0.1 Hz–106 Hz with an amplitude of 5 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
Unlike HER tests, OER measurements were performed in an O2-saturated electrolyte at room temperature. The linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves were recorded in the voltage range of 1.127–1.727 V vs. RHE with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Tafel slope was obtained from polarization curve by plotting E vs. log[j (mA cm−2)]. EIS for OER was carried out using the same frequency range and amplitude for hydrogen evolution reaction.
An accelerated aging test of the HER and OER was performed by continuous CV scanning for 1000 cycles in the voltage range of −0.223–0.127 V vs. RHE and −0.103–0.321 V vs. RHE with a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, respectively. The 1st and 1000th LSV curves were recorded at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The stability of the HER and OER was tested by the galvanostatic method at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
In the overall water splitting with two electrodes, the prepared ink solution of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg was added dropwise on carbon cloth (CC) with a loading mass of 1 mg cm−2 as the cathode and anode in the electrolyser, respectively. The LSV curve of the catalyst was recorded in 1.0 M KOH with a scan rate of 5 mV s−1 and no iR-compensation was conducted. Similarly, the LSV curves of the benchmark noble metal catalysts Pt/C‖Ir/C (CC‖CC) as a cathode and anode were recorded and tested in the same manner. An overall water splitting performance test for the GOR replaced OER process was performed in a 1 M KOH electrolyte containing 0.5 M glucose.
The working electrode was prepared by adding dropwise 10 μL ink droplets onto the conductive side of FTO, and a square film of about 0.5 cm × 0.5 cm was formed and dried at 70 °C for 15 min. Ag/AgCl and a graphite rod were used as the reference electrode and the counter electrode, respectively. The Mott–Schottky test was carried out in a potential range from −0.8 to 0.6 V (Ag/AgCl) and the amplitude was set as 0.01 V in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution.
The test of the relationship between temperature and catalytic performance was carried out in a variable temperature water bath. If the reaction of electrocatalytic glucose oxidation is accelerated during the increase of electrolyte temperature, the temperature dependence of the chemical rate constant is doubtless reflected. As shown in eqn (5), the Arrhenius relationship determines the apparent electrochemical activation energy (Ea) of glucose oxidation. (2)where ik (mA) is the kinetic current of materials. In this experiment, we chose the corresponding current density measured at a potential of 1.5 V (vs. RHE) in the electrolyte of 1 M KOH + 0.5 M glucose at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. T (K) represents the temperature of the electrolyte, and R represents the universal gas constant. The apparent electrochemical activation energy can be extracted from the slope of the Arrhenius plots.
2.8. Qualitative analysis of the reaction products
Oxidation products of glucose in the electrolysis process were monitored by high performance liquid chromatography (HPLC, UltiMate 3000, Thermo SCIENTIFIC). Before the test, the electrolyte containing glucose oxidation products was neutralized with 0.5 M H2SO4 solution to pH ∼7. Water and methanol mixed solutions were used as the mobile phase. 2 μL of the electrolyte was injected directly into a C18 column with a column temperature of 20 °C. The product after GOR was identified by comparing the retention time with that of the standard compound of potassium D-gluconate in the chromatograms.
2.9. DFT calculation details
We have employed the VASP39,40 to perform all the spin-polarized density functional theory (DFT) calculations within the generalized gradient approximation (GGA) using the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE)41 formulation. We have chosen the projected augmented wave (PAW)42 potentials to describe the ionic cores. Valence electrons were taken into account using a plane wave basis set with a kinetic energy cutoff of 450 eV. Partial occupancies of the Kohn–Sham orbitals were allowed using the Gaussian smearing method and a width of 0.05 eV. The electronic energy was considered self-consistent when the energy change was smaller than 10−5 eV. Geometry optimization was considered convergent when the energy change was smaller than 0.03 eV Å−1. The Brillouin zone is sampled with a 3 × 3 × 1 Monkhorst mesh. In our work, Co, CoP and an interface of Co/CoP have been established to discuss the free energies.43
Gibbs free energy can be obtained by adding corrections including entopic (TS) and zero-point energy (ZPE) to calculated DFT energy: ΔG = ΔEDFT + ΔZPE − TΔS(3)where EDFT is the calculated DFT reaction energy, ΔZPE is the change in ZPE calculated from the vibrational frequencies and ΔS is the change in the entropy referring to thermodynamics databases.
3. Results and discussion
3.1. Synthesis and characterization of CNTs@Co/CoP
Basically, for the purpose of industrialization, widely available commercial CNTs were used as a conductive scaffold for the electroactive material growth as shown in Fig. 1a. Firstly, the carboxylated CNTs facilitated the adsorption of Co2+ metal by electrostatic interaction and coordination interaction, providing a nucleation site for the subsequent growth of ZIF-67 on CNTs. After the addition of 2-methyl-imidazole, ZIF-67 polyhedrons were assembled on CNTs at room temperature. Secondly, the CVD technique was used to carbonize the materials under programmed temperature (details in the Experimental section). TGA showed that ZIF-67 underwent significant weight loss when heating to ∼500 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. S1†). A previous study demonstrated that the pre-treatment of ZIF-67 in nitrogen gas at 350 °C before annealing is favorable for preserving the configuration of ZIF-67 due to the fact that carbon generated in the first calcination might act as a temporal buffer and effectively hinder further contraction of MOFs.44 Therefore, a two-step thermal conversion process was then introduced to transform CNTs@ZIF67 into CNTs@Co. The as-synthesized CNTs@ZIF67 was first heated at 350 °C for 90 min in nitrogen gas and then annealed at different pyrolysis temperatures to form CNTs@Co. Finally, CNTs@Co/CoP was prepared by a low-temperature phosphidation process. Furthermore, the SEM images in Fig. S2a† and 1b showed the successful bead string assembly of CNTs@ZIF-67. ZIF-67 polyhedrons with a diameter of 285.2 nm were strung together on CNTs. The powder XRD pattern in Fig. 1e showed that all the characteristic peaks of the synthesized CNTs@ZIF-67 in the 2θ range of 5–50° matched well with the simulated XRD pattern of ZIF-67.45
 Fig. 1  Synthesis, morphologies and characterization of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg hybrids. High resolution SEM of (b) CNTs@ZIF-67, (c) CNTs@Co, and (d) CNTs@Co/CoP300mg. (e) XRD patterns of pure ZIF-67 and the as-synthesized CNTs@ZIF-67. (f) XRD patterns of CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g) in the 2θ range of 5–90°. (g) Raman spectra of CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g). 
Fig. S2b† shows that the morphology of ZIF-67 nanoparticles coupled with CNTs after segmental annealing in a mixed atmosphere of Ar and H2 at a ratio of 95:5 sccm was changed and the surface became rough. However, the basic particulate morphology was maintained without collapse as shown in Fig. 1c, even after phosphidation as shown in Fig. 1d, S2c and S3.† The intact morphology of ZIF-67 is mainly attributed to the two-step pyrolysis method. The XRD pattern in Fig. 1f displayed the crystal structure of a series of materials synthesized with different P sources. CNTs@ZIF-67 was annealed at 700 °C to form CNTs@Co, which shows characteristic peaks at 2θ angles of 44.2°, 51.5°, and 75.8°, agreeing well with Co metal (PDF#15–0806).46 After phosphidation with different amounts of NaH2PO2, the characteristic peak of Co metal at 44.2° still exists (as shown in Fig. 1f, S4 and S5†) even when the dosage of NaH2PO2 is 2 g, suggesting that CNTs had a strong protective effect on the internal Co metal.47 Moreover, other characteristic peaks at 2θ angles of 31.5°, 36.3°, 46.1°, 48.2°, 52.3° and 56.8° were also observed, which correspond to the (011), (111), (112), (202), (103) and (301) crystalline facets of CoP (PDF#29-0497), respectively.48 In addition, the peak at a 2θ angle of 26.4° is ascribed to the (002) plane of graphite carbon. In order to observe the change of the Co content with the increase of phosphorus source quality more intuitively, we intercepted the data of 2θ angles in the range of 42–46° in the XRD pattern. It can be concluded from Fig. S4† that the main characteristic peak of Co at 44.2° decreased with increasing the amount of phosphorus source, which proved that the content of Co and CoP in this material can be regulated. We also used XPS measurement to confirm this assumption in the next paragraph. More detailed structural information of CNTs@Co/CoP with different phosphidation degrees was further characterized by Raman spectroscopy as shown in Fig. 1g. Two broad peaks appeared at about 1339 and 1571 cm−1 for the D and G band of carbon, indicating that local phosphidation would not completely destroy the lattice structure of the carbon matrix.49 In addition, the intensity ratio of D-band to G-band (ID/IG) can be used to reflect the lattice distortion or the degree of graphitization in the carbon material. The ID/IG of CNTs@Co was 0.81, while all the ID/IG values of phosphate samples were enhanced, indicating that the defect degree of materials increased significantly after phosphidation. This feature was conducive to the exposure of active sites, which is a basic requirement for high performance electrocatalysts. CNTs@Co/CoP300mg possesses the largest ID/IG value, which further reflected that the material might demonstrate the optimal performance in the electrochemical test.
In addition, the microscopic morphology and structure can be observed more directly by TEM. The TEM image in Fig. 2a showed that the carboxylated CNTs with a diameter of about 27 nm had a smooth surface. This result is helpful to distinguish between commercial CNTs with a large diameter and in situ synthesized CNTs with an ultra-small diameter by pyrolysis. The low- and high-resolution TEM images of CNTs@Co/CoP in Fig. 2b and c confirmed that short and ultrafine CNTs were generated during pyrolysis. We also found that the amount of H2 in the pyrolysis atmosphere played a crucial role in CNT growth in Fig. S6.† In the absence of H2 (Fig. S6a and d)† or in the case of a small amount of 2 sccm H2 (Fig. S6b and e†), no CNTs were produced after pyrolysis. When the amount of H2 reached 5 sccm (Fig. S6c and f†), the surface of ZIF-67 was covered with dense ultrafine CNTs with an average diameter of 5.7 nm. It is assumed that metallic Co species were generated in the presence of H2, which served as a catalyst for the in situ N-doped CNT growth. Inspired from previous work, ZIF-67 itself could provide both C and N sources for the growth of N-doped CNTs, and Co metal nanoparticles were encapsulated in the CNT tips.50 In order to screen the materials for optimum electrochemical performance, it is imperative to optimize the calcination temperature of precursors (CNTs@ZIF-67). CNTs@ZIF-67 was annealed at 650 °C, 700 °C, 750 °C and 800 °C, respectively, and their TEM images are shown in Fig. S7.† The morphology of ZIF-67 calcined at 650 °C was slightly collapsed, while the agglomeration of Co nanoparticles in the main cluster after calcination at 800 °C is more serious than that annealed at 700 °C and 750 °C. When the precursor was pyrolyzed at 700 °C, the ZIF-67 skeleton remained intact and its surface was densely covered with in situ grown CNTs. From the HR-TEM images of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in Fig. 2d, the lattice spacing of CNTs (0.34 nm) and their internal encapsulated Co (0.204 nm) was attributed to the (002) lattice planes of carbon and (111) planes of Co nanoparticles, respectively.51–53 These results also confirmed that CNTs as an “armor” protected the internal Co from phosphidation, consistent with previous results.54,55 The interface between Co and CoP in the ZIF-67 skeleton can be clearly observed in Fig. 2e, and the lattice spacing of 0.231 nm and 0.204 nm was assigned to the crystalline facets (201) of CoP and (111) of Co, respectively. The dihedral angle between Co and CoP is 39.3°, which is consistent with the theoretical value.56,57 The inset in Fig. 2e shows the corresponding SAED pattern of this material, and the multiple diffraction rings revealed the polycrystalline properties of the obtained Co/CoP nanocrystals.
 Fig. 2  TEM and SAED characterization. (a) Low-resolution TEM images of commercial CNTs. (b and c) Low-resolution and (d and e) high resolution TEM images of CNTs-NCNTFs@Co/CoP. The inset in (d) shows a high resolution TEM image of self-grown CNT encapsulated Co metal. The inset in (e) shows the SAED image of Co/CoP nanoparticles formed by pyrolysis and phosphidation of the ZIF-67 skeleton. 
Fig. S8† displays the nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherm and pore size distribution curves of CNTs@Co/CoPT (T = 650 °C, 700 °C, 750 °C and 800 °C), showing specific surface areas of 100.3, 131.0, 154.9 and 148.1 m2 g−1, respectively. The carbonized material at 700 °C has a much higher specific surface area than that of 650 °C, but lower than that of 750 °C and 800 °C. Moreover, a characteristic type-IV behavior with a distinct hysteresis loop is also presented in the isotherm, implying the existence of a large number of mesopores in CNTs@Co/CoPT.58 In Fig. S9a,† the XRD patterns of CNTs@Co/CoPT were also tested and no additional diffraction peaks were observed for the residue or impurities, indicating that all materials were of high purity. The Raman spectra in Fig. S9b† showed that the ratio of ID/IG of CNTs@Co/CoPT annealed at different temperatures of 650 °C, 750 °C, and 800 °C was 0.85, 0.92 and 0.80, respectively, and these ratios were less than that at 700 °C (0.94). In general, a larger ratio value of ID/IG represents a larger number of defects and exposed edges in carbon, which will expose the active sites and facilitate mass transport for electrocatalytic reactions.
In order to verify the dependence of the Co content on different amounts of phosphorus sources, XPS was used to characterize the surface chemical composition and valence state of CNTs@Co/CoP with different phosphidation degrees. Overall, the electron density of Co species decreases with the participation of more phosphorus atoms because of the formation of Co–P covalent bonds, resulting in the peak shift of Co toward higher binding energy in Fig. 3a and b.59–61 In comparison with CNTs@Co, the peak position changes of Co 2p in phosphated samples directly proved the electron redistribution at the Co/CoP interface. It is also seen that CNTs@Co/CoP synthesized in the presence of a 300 mg P source demonstrates the largest peak position shift in Fig. 3b, and the positions slightly move towards lower binding energy upon increasing the amounts of P sources. This result indicates that the electron redistribution degree at the Co/CoP interface is the strongest in the case of the 300 mg P source. The atomic percentage of Co metal calculated from XPS results decreased from 11.6% to 9.75% as a function of phosphorus amounts from 0 mg to 1 g. From this result, one can see that a heterogeneous interface between Co and CoP can be facilely prepared via controlling the amount of phosphorus source, and we can regulate the composition ratio of Co metal and CoP. Besides the hierarchical nanostructures for mass transport and electron transfer, the synergy between Co and CoP will play a significant role in the initial dissociation of H2O and subsequent adsorption or desorption of the key intermediates. Therefore, the varied Co contents make it possible to get an optimal material for fabricating the best water splitting electrolyser.
 Fig. 3  Valence and content analysis of Co element. (a) The spectrum analysis of Co 2p for CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g). (b) The binding energy positions of Co metal in CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g). 
3.2. Effect of annealing temperature on HER and OER performance
Taken together, our bead-string hierarchical nanostructure possessed a bunch of advantages for electrocatalytic reactions, such as fast electron transfer, exposed active sites, favourable mass transport path, and adjustable components. The electrochemical properties of all samples were tested in a 1 M KOH electrolyte and were compared with those of previously reported cobalt-based or metal phosphide electrocatalysts in the literature. As shown in Fig. S10a,† LSV curves of various materials calcined at temperatures of 650, 700, 750 and 800 °C showed that the overpotential was dependent on the temperature. The lowest overpotential of 169 mV was obtained at 700 °C when the current density reached 10 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, the Tafel slope of this material for the HER was 72 mV dec−1 as shown in Fig. S10b,† which is the smallest value among all temperatures. Similarly, the material calcined at 700 °C gave rise to the smallest overpotential of 323 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and a Tafel slope of 61 mV dec−1 for the OER as shown in Fig. S10c and d,† respectively. Both the HER and OER performance for the sample prepared at 700 °C outperformed those of the control groups at other temperatures in terms of the smallest overpotential and Tafel slope. Basically, the sample annealed at 700 °C showed the largest specific capacitance (Cdl) of 5.80 mF cm−2 in Fig. S11a,† which was derived from the CV curves in the non-faradaic range in Fig. S12.† Subsequently, the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) can be calculated by using the equation: ECSA = Cdl/Cs.(4)
The specific capacitance value of Cs is selected as 0.040 mF cm−2 for a smooth surface electrode.62,63 The roughness factor (RF) values are obtained by using the equation: RF = ECSA/Ag(5)
In eqn (2), Ag is the geometric area of the glassy electrode. The sample annealed at 700 °C demonstrated the largest ECSA and RF values as shown in Fig. S11b,† indicating the presence of highly exposed active sites. Furthermore, the smallest charge transfer resistance for both HER and OER processes was obtained in the case of 700 °C among all tested samples as shown in Fig. S11c and d.† These aspects indicated that the annealing temperature of 700 °C was optimal for phosphidation in the following study.
3.3. HER performance
With these preliminary data in hand, we investigated the electrocatalytic performance of CNTs@Co/CoP composites with different phosphidation degrees in detail. Fig. S13† shows the HER activity of the electrode materials. The overpotential of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg was 151 mV as shown in Fig. S13a,† smaller than that of CNTs@Co/CoP100mg (197 mV), CNTs@Co/CoP500mg (198 mV) and CNTs@Co/CoP1g (169 mV) at 10 mA cm−2, demonstrating that P doping levels significantly affected the catalytic performance. Meanwhile, all phosphated samples possessed a smaller overpotential in comparison with CNTs@Co without phosphidation, indicating the importance of the introduced P elements. Considering the structural and compositional information, there was a metal/semiconductor interface, which is composed of Co metal and the CoP semiconductor in our materials. The Mott–Schottky effect can be maximized when an appropriate amount of P was introduced. In this way, electron transport occurred at the interface between Co and CoP, thus optimizing the initial dissociation of H2O and the thermoneutral adsorption of H* for the HER. As confirmed by Tafel slope analysis in Fig. S13b and c,† phosphated samples showed a greatly decreased Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1, much smaller than that of CNTs@Co (189 mV dec−1). This result indicated that the phosphidation treatment is effective to accelerate the electrocatalytic kinetics. Furthermore, in comparison with CNTs@Co (473.0 Ω), the electron transfer resistance (Rct) for phosphated samples can be reduced as indicated by the small semicircle in the Nyquist plot in Fig. S13d.† The smallest Rct is 74.4 Ω obtained when using a 300 mg P source. So far, we can see that the HER performance of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg was superior to that of other samples without phosphidation, and with phosphidation but using inappropriate amounts of P sources.
In our design, commercial CNTs not only served as a conductive template for the growth of the core-corona structure of ZIF-67, but also had a synergistic effect with active sites. The polarization curves of different materials, including CNTs, Co/CoP, CNTs + Co/CoPmix, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Pt/C, respectively, are shown in Fig. 4a. Pt/C catalysts exhibited excellent HER activity with an overpotential of 31 mV at 10 mA cm−2, whereas CNTs were inert for the HER. ZIF-67 itself derived Co/CoP polyhedrons showed an overpotential of 304 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, inferior to that of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg (151 mV). Furthermore, the physical mixture of Co/CoP and CNTs showed improved HER activity compared to pure Co/CoP and pure CNTs with respect to a smaller overpotential of 204 mV at 10 mA cm−2, but its overpotential was still larger than that of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg, suggesting that there indeed existed a synergy effect between CNTs and active sites. We further analyzed Tafel slopes in Fig. 4b. CNTs@Co/CoP300mg demonstrates a Tafel slope of 70 mV dec−1, larger than that of Pt/C (48 mV dec−1), but indeed smaller than that of other benchmark electrocatalysts including the physical mixture. It is noted that the HER of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg possibly followed a Volmer–Heyrovsky reaction (Tafel slope between 40 and 120 mV dec−1) pathway under alkaline conditions, and the electrochemical desorption of Hads is the rate-limiting step.64 The superiority of the in situ coupling between CNTs and core-corona clusters was further proved by EIS, which was recorded at 151 mV as shown in Fig. 4c. After fitting the Nyquist plots with an equivalent circuit, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg displayed the smallest Rct of 74.4 Ω, in comparison with Co/CoP (Rct = 722.8. Ω) without CNTs, and the physical mixture (Rct = 287.3 Ω). The small resistance between CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and the electrolyte indicated more favourable HER kinetics than the other control groups. A long-term stability test was performed by continuous cyclic voltammetry for 1000 cycles with an accelerated scanning speed of 50 mV s−1 in the range of −0.213 to 0.227 V vs. RHE as shown in Fig. 4d. There was no obvious change in LSV curves after the 1000th CV scan. In order to further verify the durability of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg, a galvanostatic test was carried out under a constant current of 10 mA cm−2 and a slight deactivation of 6.5% was observed after 12 h in Fig. 4e, demonstrating its excellent stability. Taken together, compared with the physical mixture of Co/CoP and CNTs, the in situ coupling synthetic strategy was more favourable for building a conductive path and seamless interface between Co/CoP and CNTs, thereby improving the HER activities due to synergy between supports and active sites.
 Fig. 4  HER measurements of commercial CNTs, Co/CoP, CNTs + Co/CoPmix, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Pt/C in 1.0 M KOH. (a) Polarization curves. All curves are recorded in N2-saturated 1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Corresponding Tafel curves. (c) Nyquist plots obtained at −151 mV. (d) Polarization curves of CNTs@Co/CoP300 mg in the 1st and 1000th CV cycles. (e) Galvanostatic measurement of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 12 h. 
3.4. OER performance
Next, we assessed the OER activity of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in an O2-saturated 1 M KOH electrolyte with the same electrode configuration as used to measure the HER activity. Prior to the test, the electrodes were activated by 20 cycles of CV scans from 1.0 V to 1.55 V. It is effective to estimate the performance of the electrocatalyst by comparing the overpotential at j = 10 mA cm−2 (η10), which is an expected indicator for a 13% efficiency of solar water splitting apparatus. The polarization curves in Fig. S14a† exhibited that CNTs@Co/CoP300mg with a medium P amount requires the lowest overpotential of 314 mV at η10, smaller than that of CNTs@Co (393 mV) without phosphidation, and also superior to that of other CNTs@Co/CoP with lower and higher P amounts, respectively. Overall, one can see that the overpotential of the phosphated samples decreased by at least 64 mV compared with that of the sample before phosphidation, further indicating the synergistic effect among all components. The Tafel slope of all phosphated CNTs@Co/CoP samples was 63, 76, 74 and 61 mV dec−1 when gradually increasing the P amounts, respectively, which was significantly improved compared with CNTs@Co (158 mV dec−1) in Fig. S14b and c.† The greatly decreased Tafel slopes for phosphated samples implied that the OH− discharge process was accelerated and showed more favourable reaction kinetics.65 Basically, all phosphated samples displayed approximately identical levels of OER activity (the maximum difference of η10 is around 15 mV). In comparison with CNTs@Co without phosphidation, Rct values gradually decreased when introducing P into the nanocomposites as shown in Fig. S14d,† demonstrating that the electron transfer became faster in the phosphated electrode.
Similar to the HER trend, CNTs was almost inert toward the OER as shown in Fig. 5a. The ZIF-67 itself derived material showed an overpotential of 373 mV when the current density reached 10 mA cm−2. Upon physical addition of CNTs into Co/CoP300mg, the overpotential slightly decreased to 371 mV at the same current density. In sharp contrast, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg prepared by the in situ coupling strategy required an overpotential of 314 mV at η10, even lower than that of noble metal Ir/C (319 mV). Further Tafel slope analysis in Fig. 5b showed that the Tafel slope for CNTs@Co/CoP300mg was 76 mV dec−1, larger than that of Ir/C (64 mV dec−1), but slightly smaller than that of the physical mixture and ZIF-67 derived material, indicating the fast electrocatalytic kinetics of the material synthesized by the in situ coupling strategy. Nyquist plots in Fig. 5c showed that CNTs@Co/CoP300mg had a smaller semicircle than other benchmark groups, indicating its small charge transfer resistance (102.4 Ω). Similarly, the stability of the OER was also determined as shown in Fig. 5d. The LSV curve after the 1000th CV cycle almost overlaps with the first scan. O2 bubbles can be continuously generated for 12 h as shown in Fig. 5e, displaying excellent durability.
 Fig. 5  OER measurements of commercial CNTs, Co/CoP, CNTs + Co/CoPmix, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Ir/C in 1.0 M KOH. (a) Polarization curves. All curves are recorded in O2-saturated electrolyte at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Corresponding Tafel curves. (c) Nyquist plots obtained at 314 mV. (d) Polarization curves of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in the 1st and 1000th CV cycles. (e) Galvanostatic measurement of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 12 h. 
3.5. Hybrid overall water-splitting performance
As CNTs@Co/CoP300mg is a bifunctional electrocatalyst, we constructed a two-electrode water electrolyser using this material as both the cathode and anode in a 1 M KOH electrolyte. The polarization curves in Fig. 6a showed that the substrate of carbon cloth (CC) was inert to drive water splitting in the two-electrode electrolyser. The CNTs@Co/CoP300mg based electrolyser reached a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.74 V, slightly higher that of the commercial Ir/C‖Pt/C based electrolyser (1.68 V). As exemplified in previous work, the OER process can be substituted by the oxidation reactions of organic substrates, such as urea, glucose and alcohols, which can effectively reduce the cell voltage of water splitting.66,67 Therefore, we further evaluated the glucose oxidation ability of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg, trying to reduce the cell voltage by replacing the OER with the glucose oxidation reaction (GOR). The LSV curves of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg for the HER with 0.5 M glucose coincided well with that in pure 1 M KOH solution as shown in Fig. 6b. This result indicated that the addition of glucose did not affect the catalytic activity for the HER. Fig. 6c shows the LSV curve of the OER after adding glucose. The overpotential decreased about 324.8 mV when reaching a current density of 10 mA cm−2, suggesting that the GOR could proceed at a smaller overpotential. To verify the effect of glucose on impedance and electron transmission during HER and OER processes, we obtained Nyquist plots after the addition of glucose in the HER and OER, respectively, as shown in Fig. S15.† In the HER test, the Rct value of the HER with and without glucose was almost unchanged, and the electron transfer rate was not affected by glucose (Fig. S15a†). In contrast, the Rct value of the OER was significantly reduced and the electron transfer rate was accelerated after the addition of glucose (Fig. S15b†). These results further indicated that glucose can reduce the overpotential of the overall water splitting without affecting the HER process. In a standard two-electrode electrolyser, after the addition of 0.5 M glucose, the cell voltage dramatically dropped from 1.74 V to 1.42 V as shown in Fig. 6d, 0.32 V lower than that of the conventional electrolyser.
 Fig. 6  Overall water splitting tests assisted by glucose oxidation. (a) LSV curves of water electrolysis of CC‖CC, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg‖CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Ir/C‖Pt/C electrolysers in a two-electrode configuration in 1.0 M KOH. Polarization curves of (b) HER measurements and (c) OER measurements for CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in 1 M KOH solution without and with 0.5 M glucose. (d) LSV curves of water electrolysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg‖CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in 1 M KOH solution without and with 0.5 M glucose. (e) The scheme of the overall water-splitting device assisted by glucose oxidation. (f) I–t curve of the electrolyser using CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 50 h assisted by the GOR. The inset shows the optical image of the overall water-splitting device assisted by the GOR, showing gas bubbles on the surface of the cathode. (g) The cell voltage diagram of the overall water-splitting device assisted by various organic substrates in previous literature. 
To probe the reaction chemistry and pathways on the CNTs@Co/CoP catalyst for the GOR, an overall water-splitting device assisted by glucose oxidation was designed. Fig. 6e shows the simulation of the electrolysis device in the presence of glucose. In this configuration, the HER occurs at the cathode to generate H2, while the OER is replaced by the GOR at the anode. In the GOR process, the electrolyte was tested by HPLC, and the results showed that potassium gluconate and electrolyte have the same retention time (ca. 3.17 min), implying that glucose might be partially oxidized to gluconic acid, a high value-added product (Fig. S16†). Previous studies demonstrated that the cleavage of the C–C bond did not occur because of the mild conditions of the electrochemical oxidation process.68 Therefore, we speculate the possible reaction mechanism of the GOR as shown in Fig. S17.† The possible intermediates and products of glucose oxidation might include: gluconic acid (GNA) and gluconolactone (oxidation of the H–CO group to COOH in the C1 position, two electron transfer), glucuronic acid (oxidation of the CH2OH group to H–CO in the C6 position, two-electron transfer), and glucaric acid (GRA) (further oxidation of the H–CO group in the C6 position, two-electron transfer).
We studied the effect of adding NaCl on the overpotential of water splitting. Fig. S18† shows that the LSV curve of water splitting with 0.5 NaCl has a negligible improvement at a high current density compared with the electrolysis without NaCl, and no significant decrease in overpotential. Compared with the addition of glucose, the anode has no high value-added product, so the GOR coupled with the HER is kind of promising. The stability of this hybrid water splitting in the presence of glucose was also tested, and the initial current density of 10 mA cm−2 slightly decreased to 8.7 mA cm−2 after 50 h as shown in Fig. 6f, indicating its durability for a long-term test. Additionally, in order to verify that the OER was replaced by the GOR process in our experiment, we recorded a video of the overall water splitting process (Video S1†). No gas was generated on the anode surface during the reaction process, proving that the GOR has potential to completely replace the OER to produce high-value added products and simultaneously realize hydrogen production. Fig. 6g compares the cell voltage diagram of the overall water-splitting device assisted by various organic substrates in previous literature. The cell voltage of our CNTs@Co/CoP300mg based water splitting device outperformed that of most transition metal based electrocatalytic systems, such as CoP NWs/CC,69 CoS2NA/Ti,70 NiCo9S8/CC,71etc.
In addition to adding glucose, we also tested the addition of other small organic compounds, including urea and ethanol. The LSV curves in Fig. S19† under the conditions of adding urea and ethanol show that the overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 decreases by 167 mV and 40 mV, respectively, compared with that in pure 1 M KOH solution. The results show that our material can not only use the GOR coupled with the HER for overall water splitting to produce H2 and high value-added products, but also use the urea oxidation reaction (UOR) and ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) coupled with the cathode.
3.6. Post characterization of catalysts after electrolysis
After HER and OER tests, the core-corona structure derived from ZIF-67 with in situ coupling of CNTs maintains a good morphology as shown in Fig. 7a and b. The solution color was brown after the long-term test of the hybrid electrolyser as shown in Fig. 7b (inset). Basically, metal phosphide undergoes spontaneous surface oxidation under ambient conditions, especially under high oxidation voltage.72 EDS elemental mapping of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg before and after long-term electrolysis was conducted as shown in Fig. 7c and d, respectively. The elemental mapping images showed that C, N, O, P and Co elements were evenly distributed in the fresh sample. In sharp contrast, the signal of O element is significantly enhanced, and that of P element almost disappeared after the long-term OER test. As a result, the newly generated metal oxides or metal oxyhydroxides were thought to be the real active sites for the initial dissociation of H2O and subsequent stabilization of OOH* intermediates. In addition, XRD patterns before and after the HER and OER tests were also recorded as shown in Fig. 8a. The characteristic peaks of CoP at 31.5°, 36.3°, 46.1°, 48.2° and 56.8° were still seen after the long-term test, reflecting the stability of the electrocatalyst.
 Fig. 7  Analysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg before and after the long-term test. SEM image of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg after (a) HER and (b) OER tests. The inset shows the digital image of the two-electrode electrolyser after the long-term test. EDS elemental mapping images of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg (c) before and (d) after OER measurements. 
 Fig. 8  Analysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg before and after long-term HER and OER tests. (a) XRD patterns. Corresponding Raman spectra in range of (b) 200–1000 cm−1 and (c) 200–3000 cm−1. XPS fine spectral analysis of (d) N 1s, (e) Co 2p, and (f) P 2p. 
Furthermore, the Raman spectra of the catalyst after the HER and OER were also recorded as shown in Fig. 8b and c. It is found that the value of ID/IG increased from 0.89 to 0.99, which is ascribed to the carbon corrosion during the long-term OER oxidation process, thus increasing the defect degree.73 Moreover, the newly appeared peaks at ∼506, 630 and 682 cm−1 were assigned to CoOOH in the electrode after the test, which validated that CoOOH was indeed formed during the OER process, while the value of ID/IG after the HER is basically consistent with that of the fresh sample.74,75 XPS was further performed to determine the changes in the chemical valence and chemical component content of the catalyst after the HER and OER. Fig. 8d displays the typical N 1s XPS spectra of the fresh sample, as well as those of samples after the HER and OER. Fine deconvolution included pyridinic-N (398.7 eV), pyrrolic-N (400.1 eV), graphitic-N (401.8 eV) and oxidized-N (403.9 eV), respectively. The content of oxidized-N was increased to 44.99% after the OER test in comparison to the fresh sample (14.65%) and electrode after the HER (7.28%). The high-resolution Co 2p spectrum was deconvoluted as shown in Fig. 8e for the fresh sample, displaying the characteristic bands of Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 at 779.1 eV and 794.2 eV, as well as Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 at 782.5 eV and 798.4 eV, respectively. Notably, Co0, Co2+ and Co3+ all exist, indicating that the Co metal is not phosphated completely. After the HER and OER, it can be observed that the characteristic peak of Co metal completely disappeared and it changed into high-valent ions (CoIII or CoIV). Co valence changes during the HER were ascribed to the activation process. Inspired from previous work, the in situ formed cobalt oxides or CoOOH is considered to be the true active species for adsorbing the key intermediate of OOH* to trigger the OER process. P 2p spectra for the fresh sample in Fig. 8f contained P 2p3/2 (129.9 eV), P 2p1/2 (130.7 eV) and surface oxidized P–O species (134.2 eV).76–78 After the HER, all characteristic peaks were preserved. However, one can see that the P element signal almost disappeared after the OER, further indicating the surface oxidation.
3.7. Mechanism analysis
On the basis of the above experimental results, it is seen that the in situ coupling of CNTs and ZIF-67 played an important role in controlling the hierarchical bead-string structure, and annealing temperatures, the H2 atmosphere, and the amounts of P sources determined the core-corona clusters and compositions. The active sites were highly exposed in our hierarchical nanostructure. As shown in Fig. S20a,† the Cdl values of a series of benchmark materials were obtained via CV curves (Fig. S21†) in the non-faradaic potential range. The Cdl for CNTs@Co/CoP300mg was 7.14 mF cm−2, larger than that of the ZIF-67 derived material (4.10 mF cm−2), the physical mixture (4.71 mF cm−2), and CNT supports (4.49 mF cm−2). Generally, the ECSA was proportional to Cdl; larger Cdl represents a larger ECSA. We summarized their ECSA and RF values in Fig. S20b.† CNTs@Co/CoP300mg had the largest ECSA and RF values, which are beneficial to the adsorption of intermediate active substances of H* or OOH* for both HER and OER processes. From the above EIS results, it is seen that the introduction of CNTs was useful to decrease the charge transfer resistance, thus accelerating the electrocatalytic kinetics. The current densities for the HER at -0.2 V and the OER at 1.57 V are plotted in Fig. 9a, showing that the usage of a 300 mg P source resulted in the largest current density in both cases. In Fig. 9b, the phosphated samples displayed lower Cdl values (obtained via CV curves in Fig. S22†) than CNTs@Co without phosphidation. Accordingly, ECSA and RF values became smaller after phosphidation in all cases with various P amounts as shown in Fig. 9c. The ECSA was preserved to some extent in CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in comparison with CNTs@Co without phosphidation; however the electrocatalytic performance improvement of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg is not solely caused by this factor, and highly probably, attributed to the intrinsic activity of the active sites. By transforming the Arrhenius formula, we found that CNTs@Co/CoP300mg had the smallest apparent activation energy (Ea) of 12.87 kJ mol−1, while the Ea values of CNTs, Co/CoP300mg and CNTs@Co/CoP300mg were 41.48 kJ mol−1, 1395 kJ mol−1 and 14.30 kJ mol−1, respectively (Fig. S23 and S24†), indicating that CNTs@Co/CoP300mg possessed the lowest reaction barrier for the GOR.
 Fig. 9  Mechanism analysis. (a) Current densities of CNTs@Co and phosphated samples in a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at −0.20 and 1.57 V versus RHE for the HER and OER, respectively. (b) Plots of Δj/2 vs. scan rates for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (c) Comparison of the ECSA and RF for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (d) Plots of C−2versus applied potential for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (e) Electronic structures of metallic Co and the Co/CoP based Mott–Schottky contact (EF: work function; EC: conduction band; EV: valence band). 
According to the theory of solid state physics, there is a Mott–Schottky effect between the low Fermi level n-type semiconductor (CoP) and high Fermi level Co metal. Therefore, Mott–Schottky measurements of pure Co-based materials and Co/CoP composites were carried out as shown in Fig. 9d. On the basis of Poisson's equation, Mott–Schottky can be expressed as follows: (6)
In eqn (3), ε is the static dielectric constant of a semiconductor, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, ND is the donor density, A is the electrode area, kB is the Boltzmann constant, T is the experimental temperature, e is the electronic charge, V is the applied bias, and Vfb is the flat band potential. As expected, the tangent slope of the longest straight line shown by the Mott–Schottky curves was positive, indicating that CoP is an n-type semiconductor, consistent with previous work.79 According to the above formula, the slope of the 1/C2–V curve is intimately related to the carrier density. It is seen that the slope of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg (9.05) is smaller than that of CNTs@Co (11.01), indicating that the former possessed higher electron density at the depletion layer. The work function of semi-metallic CoP (4.91 eV) is much lower than that of Co metal (5 eV), which indicated that the free electrons of the CoP semiconductor will transfer to Co metal until Fermi level alignment, leading to the orientation of the interface electric field from CoP to Co (Fig. 9e).80 The Janus charge distribution induced by the electron transfer endows the CoP and Co surface with a local electrophilic and nucleophilic region. As a result, the HER activity of Co is remarkably improved, which depends to a large extent on the improved electron-donating ability of the electrocatalyst to H2O and H*,81 while the formation of the electrophilic region in the CoP surface leads to the increased oxidation ability of CoP and thus a great enhancement in GOR (or OER) performance.
3.8. DFT calculation analysis
DFT calculations are documented in Fig. 10 to further understand the mechanism of the enhanced HER performance of CNTs@Co/CoP in alkaline media. The adsorption and dissociation energy of H2O (ΔGH2O*) and adsorption free energy of H (ΔGH*) are recognized as descriptors of HER activity for catalytic materials, so we have conducted research on Co, Co/CoP and CoP, respectively (Fig. S25† and 10a–f). Fig. 10g reveals that ΔGH2O* in partially phosphated Co/CoP (−0.13 eV) was higher than that of pure Co (−0.249 eV) and CoP (−0.368 eV), indicating that Co/CoP possesses spontaneous weak adsorption toward H2O. In general, a complete water dissociation process involves the initial adsorption of water, the cleavage of the HO–H bond, and the re-adsorption of water after the desorption of OH−.82 As shown in Fig. 10h, the dissociation energies of H2O on Co, CoP and Co/CoP are −0.14, 0.869 and −1.307 eV, respectively. In the case of Co/CoP, the cleavage of the HO–H bond became more favorable compared to Co and CoP in terms of optimal free energy. When the adsorbed water was favorably dissociated into OH* and H* on the surface of Co/CoP, the active sites were renewed for the subsequent re-adsorption of H2O. In sum, Co/CoP enhanced the dissociation step of H2O, which is attributed to the electron transfer between Co and CoP. The Bader charge analysis of the Co (CoP), Co, and P (CoP) atoms indicated that Co (CoP) loses electrons, which transfer to the adjacent Co layer (Table S1†), resulting in an increase in the interaction between the Co atom with positive charge enhancement in CNTs@Co/CoP and the oxygen atom with negative charge in water, promoting the Volmer step of the HER and laying a foundation for the smooth progress of subsequent reactions.83,84 In addition, the charge change of the Co atom coincides with the result of a high binding energy shift of Co (0) in XPS analysis. ΔGH* as another important criterion to evaluate HER performance is recorded in Fig. 10i; the ΔGH* of Co/CoP is −0.094 eV, which is closer to zero than that of Co and CoP, suggesting that the HER activity of the Co/CoP hybrid material formed by partially phosphidation was substantially improved and has the maximum reaction rate. According to our computational results, the most stable adsorption site of H is the Co–Co bridge site on Co/CoP and pristine CoP. Due to electron transfer between Co and CoP, the reduced electron density of the Co (CoP) d-orbital weakens the binding strength with H and optimizes the ΔGH* of CNTs@Co/CoP. The above calculation results indicate that it is a fact that electrons are transferred from CoP to Co at the Mott–Schottky interface, and this electron flow simultaneously optimizes ΔGH2O* and ΔGH*, resulting in high HER activity of CNTs@Co/CoP in alkaline media.
 Fig. 10  DFT calculation analysis. The crystal structure of H* and H2O adsorbed on (a and d) Co, (b and e) CoP and (c and f) Co/CoP (Co as the adsorption site; blue: Co; pink: P). (g) The calculated adsorption free energies of H2O on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (h) The calculated dissociation energies of H2O on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (i) The adsorption free energy of H on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. 
We also performed DFT calculations for the GOR process (Fig. 11). As shown in Fig. 11a to f, the calculated adsorption free energies of glucose on Co, CoP and Co/CoP were −2.48, −1.20 and −1.41 eV, respectively, indicating that the adsorption of glucose on the Co/CoP surface is a spontaneous process. Sabatier's principle for heterogeneous catalysis indicates that too strong binding of substrates on active sites will affect the subsequent desorption of products.85 In Fig. 11g, the adsorption free energy on Co/CoP was between those on Co and CoP surfaces, neither too strong nor too weak, indicating that favorable adsorption of glucose occurred at the Co/CoP interface. The glucose tends to be oxidized at the electrophilic domain. Self-driven electron transfer occurred at the Schottky interface between Co and CoP. The internal electric field direction was from CoP to Co due to the smaller work function of CoP when the Fermi level was equilibrated. Bader charge analysis also indicated that an amount of 0.258 e was transferred from CoP to Co (Table S1†). As a result, the Schottky interface created an electrophilic CoP domain, which provided an ideal platform for the oxidation of glucose. The key step of formyl C–H activation was evaluated for the glucose oxidation process. In general, the glucose oxidation on active sites is a tandem process, including the adsorption of glucose, the initial glucose formyl C–H activation process, and the final release of products. As shown in Fig. 11i, the free energy profiles showed that the free energy for formyl C–H activation on Co/CoP (−0.336 eV) is smaller than that on Co (0.167 eV) and CoP (−0.101 eV), which is more conducive to the oxidation reaction. The products of GNA or GRA will readily leave from the catalyst surface and dissolve in the alkaline electrolyte in the form of potassium salts (Fig. 11h). In brief, the adsorbed glucose molecules will be oxidized easily at the Schottky Co/CoP interface, and the renewed active sites will take part in the next oxidation process, thus making more active sites available for the GOR.
 Fig. 11  The crystal structures of glucose adsorbed on (a) Co, (b) CoP and (c) Co/CoP. (d) The calculated adsorption free energies of glucose on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (e) The free energy profiles of Co, CoP and Co/CoP for the GOR process. 
Our experimental results and theorical analysis indicated that the enhancement of electrocatalytic activity is mainly attributed to the following factors: (1) the three-dimensional Co/CoP core-corona structure was in situ wrapped on commercial CNTs, and such a hierarchical nanostructure could effectively expose active sites. (2) The commercial CNTs not only served as the template for the assembly of the cluster, but also acted as a conductive scaffold to improve the conductivity. (3) The synergy between the CNTs and Co/CoP containing core-corona cluster optimized the intrinsic activity of active sites. (4) The Mott–Schottky effect between the low Fermi level n-type semiconductor (CoP) and high Fermi level Co metal induced charge redistribution at their heterointerfaces. As a result, the initial H2O dissociation energy barrier would be effectively reduced on active sites, leading to a thermoneutral H* adsorption free energy (ΔGH*) for the HER. And the energy barrier of glucose oxidation at the Co/CoP interface was effectively decreased, favourable for the GOR process.
4. Conclusions
An in situ coupling strategy of commercial CNTs and ZIF-67 nanocrystals was designed and a hierarchical bead string structure containing a Mott–Schottky heterointerface was successfully prepared via partial phosphidation. The “bead” was a core-corona cluster derived from ZIF-67, which contained in situ formed ultrafine CNTs and Co/CoP domains. Systematic characterization confirmed that the hierarchical structure and composition were readily regulated via adjusting the annealing conditions and P amounts. The synergy between CNTs and core-corona clusters played an important role in improving the HER, OER, and GOR. The Mott–Schottky effect at the Co/CoP interface not only improves the electron donating ability for the HER, but also increases the oxidation capacity due to the equilibrium of the Fermi level of Co metal and CoP. Our material showed potential to serve as both the cathode and anode for hybrid water splitting using the GOR to replace the OER, which could deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.42 V, much lower than that of traditional water splitting (1.74 V). The integration of all merits into one electrocatalyst is a promising strategy to solve the bottle-neck issue of low-energy consumed H2 production, and there is still plenty of room for improvement in this field. The present work opens a new avenue for the development of rational design of multifunctional electrocatalysts via simultaneous introduction of a hierarchical nanostructure and Mott–Schottky effect.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants no. 51902071 and 21775032), National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars (grant no. 51825202), Key Laboratory of Micro-systems and Micro-structures Manufacturing of Ministry of Education, Harbin Institute of Technology (Grants no. 2015KM006), Heilongjiang Natural Science Foundation Project (Grants no. LH2020B007), Heilongjiang Postdoctoral Foundation (Grants no. LBH-Q16091), and State Key Laboratory of Urban Water Resource and Environment (Harbin Institute of Technology) (Grants no. 2019DX06).
Notes and references
T. J. Meyer, Nature, 2008, 451, 778–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hammarström, J. R. Winkler, H. B. Gray and S. Styring, Science, 2011, 333, 288 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, X. Yang, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100027 CrossRef .
S. Zheng, Q. Li, H. Xue, H. Pang and Q. Xu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
E. Chornet and S. Czernik, Nature, 2002, 418, 928–929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov and C. H. Christensen, Science, 2006, 312, 1322–1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J.-P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liu, Y. Sheng, J. W. Ager, M. Kraft and R. Xu, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100014 CrossRef .
Y. Hua, X. Li, C. Chen and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 37–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, X. Guo, H. Xue, K. Pan, C. Liu and H. Pang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10904–10907 RSC .
X. Li, J. Wei, Q. Li, S. Zheng, Y. Xu, P. Du, C. Chen, J. Zhao, H. Xue and Q. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800886 CrossRef .
Z. Kou, L. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Liu, W. Zang, J. Zhang, S. Huang, Y. Du, A. K. Cheetham and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 678–685 CrossRef CAS .
N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Lu, Y. Li, W. Xu, T. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 924 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dutta, A. Indra, Y. Feng, H. Han and T. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 521–527 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, Y. Zhao, G. Chen, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Kang, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502585 CrossRef .
H. Li, S. Chen, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Jia, Q. Zhang, L. Gu, X. Sun, L. Song and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2452 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, T. Park, J. W. Yi, J. Henzie, J. Kim, Z. Wang, B. Jiang, Y. Bando, Y. Sugahara, J. Tang and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807134 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Qiu, X. Ji, T. Ma, Z. Ma and P. A. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3792–3800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, G. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 14686–14693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, W. Li, D. Xiong, D. Y. Petrovykh and L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4067–4077 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, Y. Qiu, Y. Zhang, X. Ji and P.-A. Hu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 3091–3099 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yu, H. Zhou, Y. Huang, J. Sun, F. Qin, J. Bao, W. A. Goddard, S. Chen and Z. Ren, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2551 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, X. Ge, Z. Liu, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J, 2015, 21, 18062–18067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, G.-F. Han, H.-J. Noh, Y. Lu, J. Xu, Y. Bu, Z. Fu and J.-B. Baek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14139–14143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiao, Y.-X. Zhou and H.-L. Jiang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1690–1695 RSC .
C. Tang, R. Zhang, W. Lu, L. He, X. Jiang, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602441 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, Y. Chen, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3824–3831 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Yang, R. Wang, X. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Qiang, W. Wang, Q. Wang and Z. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19038–19046 RSC .
Y. Hua, Q. Xu, Y. Hu, H. Jiang and C. Li, J. Energy Chem., 2019, 37, 1–6 CrossRef .
Z.-H. Xue, H. Su, Q.-Y. Yu, B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602355 CrossRef .
J.-Y. Wang, T. Ouyang, N. Li, T. Ma and Z.-Q. Liu, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 1130–1140 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Cao and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704447 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Lu, Z. Mao, C. Yan, G. Shen and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000556 CrossRef CAS .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Zhang, T. He, M. Wang, R. Qi, Y. Yan, Z. Dong, H. Liu, H. Wang and B. Y. Xia, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 894–902 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, Z. Liang and R. Zou, Small, 2020, 16, 1906133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Monkhorst and J. D. Pack, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1976, 13, 5188–5192 CrossRef .
R. B. Wu, X. K. Qian, X. H. Rui, H. Liu, B. Yadian, K. Zhou, J. Wei, Q. Y. Yan, X. Q. Feng, Y. Long, L. Y. Wang and Y. Z. Huang, Small, 2014, 10, 1932–1938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Banerjee, A. Phan, B. Wang, C. Knobler, H. Furukawa, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2008, 319, 939–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Wei, Y. Yao, Z. Chen, A. Zhang, W. Li, W. D. Wu, Z. Wu, X. D. Chen and D. Zhao, Small, 2017, 13, 1702243 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Deng, D. H Deng and X. H. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606967 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wu, Y. Yang, D. Dong, Y. Zhang and J. Li, Small, 2017, 13, 1602873 CrossRef PubMed .
S. You, M. Ma, W. Wang, D. Qi, X. Chen, J. Qu and N. Ren, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601364 CrossRef .
B. Y. Xia, Y. Yan, N. Li, H. B. Wu, X. W. Lou and X. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15006 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, P. Zhao, X. Hua, W. Luo, G. Cheng, W. Xing and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16057–16063 RSC .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rösler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. R. Botz, R. A. Fischer, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, H. Sun, Y. Qiu, X. Ji, T. Ma, F. Gao, Z. Ma, B. Zhang and P. Hu, Carbon, 2019, 144, 370–381 CrossRef CAS .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 371–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, J. Guan, Y. Tu, S. Chen, Y. Wang, S. Wang, L. Yu, C. Ma, D. Deng and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 119–126 RSC .
R. Zhang, C. Tang, R. Kong, G. Du, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen and X. Sun, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4793–4800 RSC .
T. Liu, X. Ma, D. Liu, S. Hao, G. Du, Y. Ma, A. M. Asiri, X. Sun and L. Chen, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 98–102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6702–6707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Grosvenor, S. D. Wik, R. G. Cavell and A. Mar, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 8988–8998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, D.-H. Lim, D. Y. Shin, S. H. Park, H. C. Ham, J. H. Jang, H.-J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15940–15943 RSC .
Y.-P. Zhu, Y.-P. Liu, T.-Z. Ren and Z.-Y. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7337–7347 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. L. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou and H. C. Zeng, Small, 2018, 14, 1704403 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Hao, W. Yang and J. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1920–1925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707522 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Chi, B. Dong and Y. Sun, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2157–2166 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Yu, C.-C. Lang, M.-R. Gao, Y. Chen, Q.-Q. Fu, Y. Duan and S.-H. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1890–1897 RSC .
W. J. Liu, Z. Xu, D. Zhao, X. Q. Pan, H. C. Li, X. Hu, Z. Y. Fan, W. K. Wang, G. H. Zhao, S. Jin, G. W. Huber and H. Q. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lyu, J. Zheng, R. Zhang, R. Zou, B. Liu and W. Zhou, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 323–330 RSC .
S. Wei, X. Wang, J. Wang, X. Sun, L. Cui, W. Yang, Y. Zheng and J. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 776–782 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hao, W. Zhu, L. Li, J. Tian, J. Xie, F. Lei, G. Cui, Y. Zhang and B. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 338, 135883 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu, T. Wu, G. Fu, T. Gao, J. Han, T. Yao, Y. Zhang, W. Zhong, X. Wang and B. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1744–1752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, W. Li, Y.-P. Deng, Y. Ruan, Y. Zhang, X. Qin and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 67, 104208 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Wang, L. Wang, S. Liu, G.-R. Li and X.-P. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901051 CrossRef .
J. Yang and T. Sasaki, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2049–2056 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, J. Tian, W. Cui, P. Jiang, N. Cheng, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 6710–6714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huang, Z. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Lv, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 373–382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, H. Liu, J. Qu and J. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600087 CrossRef .
L. K. Putri, B.-J. Ng, W.-J. Ong, H. W. Lee, W. S. Chang and S.-P. Chai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3181–3194 RSC .
X.-H. Li, M. Baar, S. Blechert and M. Antonietti, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1743 CrossRef .
S. Yuan, Z. Pu, H. Zhou, J. Yu, I. S. Amiinu, J. Zhu, Q. Liang, J. Yang, D. He, Z. Hu, G. Van Tendeloo and S. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 472–480 CrossRef CAS .
D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes, B. Genorio, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Men, P. Li, J. Zhou, G. Cheng, S. Chen and W. Luo, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3744–3752 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, P. Li, N. Yao, G. Cheng, S. Chen, W. Luo and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4679–4684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. Voss, A.-F. Pedersen, F. Studt, T. Bligaard, A. Nilsson and J. K. Norskov, J. Catal., 2015, 328, 36–42 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11850hThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
ERHE = EHg/HgO + 0.927 V	(1)
	(2)
ΔG = ΔEDFT + ΔZPE − TΔS	(3)

 	Fig. 1  Synthesis, morphologies and characterization of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg hybrids. High resolution SEM of (b) CNTs@ZIF-67, (c) CNTs@Co, and (d) CNTs@Co/CoP300mg. (e) XRD patterns of pure ZIF-67 and the as-synthesized CNTs@ZIF-67. (f) XRD patterns of CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g) in the 2θ range of 5–90°. (g) Raman spectra of CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g).	 

 	Fig. 2  TEM and SAED characterization. (a) Low-resolution TEM images of commercial CNTs. (b and c) Low-resolution and (d and e) high resolution TEM images of CNTs-NCNTFs@Co/CoP. The inset in (d) shows a high resolution TEM image of self-grown CNT encapsulated Co metal. The inset in (e) shows the SAED image of Co/CoP nanoparticles formed by pyrolysis and phosphidation of the ZIF-67 skeleton.	 

 	Fig. 3  Valence and content analysis of Co element. (a) The spectrum analysis of Co 2p for CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g). (b) The binding energy positions of Co metal in CNTs@Co and CNTs@Co/CoP (100, 300, 500 and 1 g).	 
ECSA = Cdl/Cs.	(4)
RF = ECSA/Ag	(5)

 	Fig. 4  HER measurements of commercial CNTs, Co/CoP, CNTs + Co/CoPmix, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Pt/C in 1.0 M KOH. (a) Polarization curves. All curves are recorded in N2-saturated 1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Corresponding Tafel curves. (c) Nyquist plots obtained at −151 mV. (d) Polarization curves of CNTs@Co/CoP300 mg in the 1st and 1000th CV cycles. (e) Galvanostatic measurement of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 12 h.	 

 	Fig. 5  OER measurements of commercial CNTs, Co/CoP, CNTs + Co/CoPmix, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Ir/C in 1.0 M KOH. (a) Polarization curves. All curves are recorded in O2-saturated electrolyte at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (b) Corresponding Tafel curves. (c) Nyquist plots obtained at 314 mV. (d) Polarization curves of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in the 1st and 1000th CV cycles. (e) Galvanostatic measurement of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 12 h.	 

 	Fig. 6  Overall water splitting tests assisted by glucose oxidation. (a) LSV curves of water electrolysis of CC‖CC, CNTs@Co/CoP300mg‖CNTs@Co/CoP300mg and Ir/C‖Pt/C electrolysers in a two-electrode configuration in 1.0 M KOH. Polarization curves of (b) HER measurements and (c) OER measurements for CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in 1 M KOH solution without and with 0.5 M glucose. (d) LSV curves of water electrolysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg‖CNTs@Co/CoP300mg in 1 M KOH solution without and with 0.5 M glucose. (e) The scheme of the overall water-splitting device assisted by glucose oxidation. (f) I–t curve of the electrolyser using CNTs@Co/CoP300mg at 10 mA cm−2 for 50 h assisted by the GOR. The inset shows the optical image of the overall water-splitting device assisted by the GOR, showing gas bubbles on the surface of the cathode. (g) The cell voltage diagram of the overall water-splitting device assisted by various organic substrates in previous literature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Analysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg before and after the long-term test. SEM image of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg after (a) HER and (b) OER tests. The inset shows the digital image of the two-electrode electrolyser after the long-term test. EDS elemental mapping images of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg (c) before and (d) after OER measurements.	 

 	Fig. 8  Analysis of CNTs@Co/CoP300mg before and after long-term HER and OER tests. (a) XRD patterns. Corresponding Raman spectra in range of (b) 200–1000 cm−1 and (c) 200–3000 cm−1. XPS fine spectral analysis of (d) N 1s, (e) Co 2p, and (f) P 2p.	 

 	Fig. 9  Mechanism analysis. (a) Current densities of CNTs@Co and phosphated samples in a 1.0 M KOH electrolyte at −0.20 and 1.57 V versus RHE for the HER and OER, respectively. (b) Plots of Δj/2 vs. scan rates for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (c) Comparison of the ECSA and RF for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (d) Plots of C−2versus applied potential for CNTs@Co and phosphated samples. (e) Electronic structures of metallic Co and the Co/CoP based Mott–Schottky contact (EF: work function; EC: conduction band; EV: valence band).	 
	(6)

 	Fig. 10  DFT calculation analysis. The crystal structure of H* and H2O adsorbed on (a and d) Co, (b and e) CoP and (c and f) Co/CoP (Co as the adsorption site; blue: Co; pink: P). (g) The calculated adsorption free energies of H2O on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (h) The calculated dissociation energies of H2O on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (i) The adsorption free energy of H on Co, CoP and Co/CoP.	 

 	Fig. 11  The crystal structures of glucose adsorbed on (a) Co, (b) CoP and (c) Co/CoP. (d) The calculated adsorption free energies of glucose on Co, CoP and Co/CoP. (e) The free energy profiles of Co, CoP and Co/CoP for the GOR process.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11850h

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
