Properties, fabrication and applications of plasmonic semiconductor nanocrystals  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY02511A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY02511A
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 4141-4163Properties, fabrication and applications of plasmonic semiconductor nanocrystals

        
          
            Haibo 
            Yin
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yasutaka 
            Kuwahara
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Kohsuke 
            Mori
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Catherine 
            Louis
          
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Hiromi 
            Yamashita
          
          
        
      *ab
aDivision of Materials and Manufacturing Science, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan. E-mail: yamashita@mat.eng.osaka-u.ac.jp
bUnit of Elements Strategy Initiative for Catalyst & Batteries (ESICB), Kyoto University, Kyoto, 615-8245, Japan
cJST, PRESTO, 4-1-8 HonCho, Kawaguchi, Saitama 332-0012, Japan
dSorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR CNRS 7197, Laboratoire de Réactivité de Surface, 4 Place Jussieu, Tour 43-33, 3ème étage, Case 178, F-75252 Paris, France
Received 
      12th December 2019
    , Accepted 27th March 2020First published on 30th March 2020AbstractIn semiconductor nanocrystals (NCs), a new regime has been opened in the plasmonic field since the discovery of localized surface plasmon resonances (LSPRs). LSPRs that lead to near-field enhancement, scattering, and resonant absorption around the NC can be tuned in the range from the visible to the near-infrared (NIR) region across a wide optical spectrum by synthetically varying the doping level, and post synthetically via electrochemical control, photochemical control, and chemical oxidation and reduction. In this review, we will focus on the three widely explored and interrelated examples and their manipulation methods of LSPR of (1) hydrogen molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3−y) NCs, (2) hydrogen tungsten bronze (HxWO3−y) NCs, and (3) oxygen vacancy doped molybdenum tungsten oxide (MoxW1−xO3−y) NCs. Finally, a brief outlook on the applications of these plasmonic NCs is presented.Haibo YinHaibo Yin received his PhD degree in engineering from Osaka University under the supervision of Professor Hiromi Yamashita in 2019. Since January 2020, he has been a postdoctoral fellow at Tsinghua University. His research interests focus on the design of molybdenum-based plasmonic catalysts for various energy and environmental applications.Yasutaka KuwaharaYasutaka Kuwahara received his PhD degree in engineering from Osaka University in 2011. He had been a postdoctoral research fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, in 2011 and a researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, in 2012–2014. He had been appointed as an assistant professor in 2014–2019 and as a lecturer since 2019 in Osaka University. His current research interests include the design of nanostructured catalysts with multi-functionalities utilizing porous materials and their applications to green chemical reactions and conversion of energy and resources.Kohsuke MoriKohsuke Mori received his PhD degree from the Graduate School of Engineering Science at Osaka University under the supervision of Prof. K. Kaneda in 2003. In 2004, he joined Prof. T. Don Tilley's group at the University of California, Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow. He moved to the current faculty in 2005 and then became an associate professor in 2009. His current research interests focus on hybrid photocatalysts based on visible-light-responsive metal complexes, metal and alloy nanoparticle catalysts to establish clean and environmentally friendly chemical processes, and diesel automobile catalysts.Catherine LouisCatherine Louis is Director of Research at CNRS (French National Center of Research). She has been working in the Laboratory of “Réactivité de Surface” of Sorbonne Université since 1982, when she was appointed by the CNRS. She received her PhD degree in 1985, performing under the supervision of Prof. Michel Che; then she did a post-doctoral internship at the University of California-Berkeley in 1986–1988 with Prof. A.T. Bell. Her main research topic is the preparation of supported metal catalysts, recently gold and bimetallic catalysts.Hiromi YamashitaHiromi Yamashita has been a professor of Osaka University since 2004. He received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 1987. He was an assistant professor of Tohoku University, an associate professor of Osaka Prefecture University, and an invited professor of University Pierre and Marie Curie (UPMC). He was also a visiting research fellow of the Pennsylvania State University, the University of Texas at Austin, and California Institute of Technology. His research interests include the design of single-site photocatalysts and nanostructured catalysts.
1. Introduction
The glass of a colored glazed cup preserved in the Nara National Museum in Japan from the eighth century has different colors of transmission and reflection, which is a very classic early example of a dichroic material. The dichroic properties of this artifact derive from plasmonic metal nanoparticles (NPs) embedded in the glass, which shows what we now know as the plasmonic effect. Prior to that, our knowledge of localized surface plasmon resonance of metal NPs, especially silver (Ag) and gold (Au), has been preliminarily established, which most often lies in the visible spectral range.1–5 As a frontier in materials science, what remains now are questions about how LSPRs are different in nanocrystals (NCs) of semiconductors.4–9 With a better understanding of free carrier properties in semiconductors and the advances in colloidal synthesis, the properties of metal-like LSPRs in a variety of NC material classes have been actively explored, including silicon, metal nitrides, metal chalcogenides, and metal oxides.8–12 For example, Zhao and co-workers first reported that Cu2−xS NCs exhibit strong LSPR in the near-infrared (NIR) region in 2009.8 Soon after, Luther et al. demonstrated that appreciable free carrier concentration in semiconductor NCs is a prerequisite for sustaining LSPRs, which can be reached from the visible through the terahertz region by relying on the doping level and the size of the nanostructure.4 Due to plasmonic absorption, all the above NCs show strong resonances in the NIR region. For metal NPs (such as Ag and Au), the natural resonance frequencies for LSPRs induced by the high charge concentration (around 1022 cm−3) usually appear in the visible region. The complex morphologies and large size of NPs cause the plasmonic absorption to lie in the NIR or mid-infrared (MIR) region.13–20 On the contrary, the carrier concentration (1019–1021 cm−3) of semiconductor NCs can be tuned via electrochemical, photochemical, chemical doping, and postsynthetic chemical reactions.21–30 A modification of the copper to sulfide stoichiometry indeed impacts the LSPR peak position, as shown by Zhao et al. Analogously, charge carriers that result in plasmonic response in the NIR region can be generated by nonstoichiometric composition in WO3−x and in Cu3−xP nanocrystals. Even in some samples with simple shapes and sizes less than 50 nm, variation of their carrier concentration still allows for a controlled LSPR tuning in a wide optical range.
The origin of LSPRs in semiconductor NCs is the key point of this review. The dielectric function or a material's complex polarizability determines the response of a conductive medium to the incident light.4,5 The dielectric function involves the movement of free carriers, excitation of vibrational modes, and the contribution from transitions between electronic bands, which mainly describes the bulk properties of a material.31,32 Among them, the concentration of the free carriers and characteristics (such as crystal structure and band structure) contribute to the dielectric function.32–35 These encompass the intrinsic properties of the material. The nature of light–matter interactions should be considered from the geometrical features of NCs and the dielectric properties of the surrounding medium standpoint. For example, in thin films, the frequency and angle of the incident light have a significant influence on the oscillation of electronic charge, which usually results in strong LSPRs at the air–metal interface.
The plasmonic properties of semiconductor NCs rely largely on dopant concentration, dopant type, and shape and size of NCs.36,37 The effective design of plasmonic semiconductor NCs usually has three powerful ways: (1) control the size and shape of the NCs in conjunction, (2) select reasonable dopant types, (3) increase the concentration of the free carrier by increasing the activated dopant concentration. Of course, so far a few important breakthroughs for making LSPR assignments have been made by preciously controlling the intrinsic dopant and geometric properties of NCs during colloidal synthesis.
(1) Size and shape dependence
The control of nucleation and growth is an essential prerequisite of nanocrystal synthesis, which determines the final composition, uniformity, and size and shape of the NCs. Establishment of macroscopic thermodynamic (such as concentration and temperature) can realize the above control, which of course also involves microscopic chemical considerations such as ionic size, valence of metal precursors, ligand binding strengths, and precursor reactivities.38–40 Swihart et al. prepared high-quality plasmonic Cu2−xSe NCs with controlled size ranging from 7.2 to 16.5 nm by using OAm–Se and OA–Se precursors, where nucleation is initiated at a suitable temperature.41 Subsequently, the optimization of the growth of Cu2−xSe NCs is conducted by aging the colloidal dispersion for a time. Colloidal Cu2−xTe nanoplates, nanocubes, nanorods, and nanospheres were also synthesized by regulating the concentrations of Cu and Te precursors and the reaction temperature.42,43 Diffusion-limited growth occurs after the nucleation stage, which lasts only for a short time in the early stages of crystallization. Hutchison et al. reported that the size and structure of indium oxide NCs can be governed at the subnanometer scale by slow addition of indium carboxylate precursor into hot oleyl alcohol. During the above NC synthesis process, the growth of existing cores is impeded and new nucleation occurs.43–45 In addition, the surfactants in colloidal synthesis act as capping ligands (such as halogens and organic ligands) to balance surface charges and passivate dangling bonds at the NC surface by shape control, which allows NCs to show LSPR at the shorter wavelengths in the NIR region.46,47 Shape control is not only limited to the considerations of thermodynamics and kinetics, but also can be achieved in more complicated cases of doped NCs.48,49 Depending on the bonding strength and steric effect of the ligand (oleic acid), dot-shaped CdTe NCs with relatively broad size distribution can be prepared. Based on the principles of nucleation and growth, the synthesis of NCs can be controlled by selecting appropriate synthetic methods such as solvothermal, colloidal, nonthermal plasma methods and so forth. Introducing defects (impurities or vacancies) can make plasmonic among host materials (e.g., metal oxides and metal chalcogenides).50–53 Knoll et al. prepared tetrapod-shaped ZnO NCs with ultrasmall size (∼10 nm) by high-temperature alcoholysis and esterification, which can be tuned by varying the relative ratio of oleyl alcohol/oleic acid.53 High-quality Al-doped ZnO NCs synthesized by Milliron et al. show tunable LSPR in the NIR region,51 which were prepared by a rational alcoholysis strategy. Metal chalcogenide NCs can be synthesized mainly through variation of metal–chalcogen ratios.54–57 For example, Xu et al. synthesized Cu2−xS NCs by a one-pot strategy with Cu3N NPs as copper precursors. Their size can be controlled by the ratio of Cu/S, which affects subsequent plasmonic resonance absorption. For silicon or metal nitride NCs, which are difficult to synthesize under typical conditions of colloidal synthesis due to their high melting points, nonthermal plasma synthesis is often adopted that can circumvent the prerequisite of accurate reactivity balance between dopant precursors and host.34,58–60 For instance, Kortshagen et al. demonstrated that phosphorus-doped silicon NCs with tunable LSPRs in the MIR region were synthesized via a nonthermal plasma technique.58,59
(2) Dopant types
The major dopant types are aliovalent substitutional doping, vacancy doping, and interstitial doping. The definition of aliovalent doping is that the elemental impurities are inserted into the host lattice by an interstitial or substitutional doping mechanism, which can donate a free electron or hole to the conduction or valence band, respectively. Balancing the reactivity between host and dopants during NC growth is a requirement of interstitial or substitutional doping in NCs.21,28,61–63 Hutchison et al. reported the synthesis of In2O3 NCs substitutionally doped with Zn, Cu, Co, Fe, and Mn via slowly adding metal oleates into hot, long-chain alcohol.61 Banin et al. found that replacement of In3+ in InAs with Ag+ by substitutional doping enables control of the band gap and Fermi energy.62 The hard–soft acid–base (HSAB) theory by Pearson and others is of great importance for strategically incorporating dopants into NCs during their growth, where affinity between Lewis bases (organic ligand) and Lewis acids (metal ion) should be considered.64 In addition, the ionic radius of substitutional dopant ions also has an important implication for the lattice strain of NCs. Similar ionic radius between host metals and dopant permits directly tuning the carrier concentration without disruption of the crystallographic phase and then influencing the plasmonic property. For this trend, an example was offered by comparing the radius of Zn2+ (60 pm) with that of trivalent dopants.65 Compared to other cations, the more efficient lattice substitution should occur on the In3+ cation because its radius (62 pm) has a better match with that of Zn2+ rather than Ga3+ (47 pm) and Al3+ (39 pm), which leads to a LSPR blue-shift. In vacancy-doped or self-doped NCs, the control of the free charge carrier density depends on the tuning of the stoichiometry (for example, oxygen vacancies (Ov) in Sn-doped In2O3, Cu vacancies in Cu2−xS). Even without extrinsic dopant ions, vacancies can still introduce either free electrons or free holes. In metal chalcogenide NCs, free holes induced by cation vacancies determine the LSPR characteristics. Frenkel et al. studied the influence of vacancy doping of Cu2S NCs on the LSPR energy in the NIR region, which is induced by a copper vacancy and related free holes with the variation of I (iodine)/Cu ratios.66
(3) Activated dopant concentration
To understand how dopants perturb the host lattice and change the free carrier concentration, we must study the material's electronic structure and the defect chemistry of the crystals after discussing the reaction kinetics for achieving dopant incorporation.67,68 For instance, Mason et al. reported that the content of Sn in Sn-doped In2O3 NCs controls the concentration of Ov and activated SnIn substitutional defects. Also, the concentration of free carriers and related LSPR response of the NCs depend on the concentrations of activated dopant sites and Ov. In addition, Radovanovic et al. reported that controlling the competition between doping concentration and electron trapping allowed them to generate LSPR in Ti-doped In2O3 NCs synthesized by a colloidal method deep in the MIR region, and tuned the absorption spectra from 650 cm−1 to 8000 cm−1.69 Recently, they also demonstrated a robust electron polarization in degenerately doped In2O3 NCs, enabled by non-resonant coupling of cyclotron magneto-plasmonic modes with the exciton at the Fermi level, which is one of the most interesting and novel results.70,71 Dopants also impact the scattering of free charge carriers within the NCs as well as determining the free carrier concentration.48,49,72–76 Granqvist et al. in 1984 demonstrated that ionized impurity scattering is the dominant damping mechanism of the free electrons by experimental and theoretical calculation. For example, Sn/In2O3 NCs have a lower near-field enhancement (NFE) around LSPR-active NCs than that of Ce:In2O3 NCs owing to their stronger scattering of the charge carrier. Generally, Ce dopant orbitals hybridize far more weakly than Sn orbitals, which is close to the conduction band (CB) minimum in the In2O3 host lattice. Construction of heterostructures or codoping with dopant endows semiconductor NCs multifunctional properties. Heterostructures, typically exhibiting a synergistic multilevel coupling effect by integrating different components with diverse properties, have been used as tandem electronic systems in which the functional properties of the metals can be enhanced by excitation in the LSPR-active semiconductor.48,75–77 For example, in Au–Cu2−xS core–shell-type hybrid nanocrystals, hot electrons in the efficient interface that are transferred from the plasmonic Cu2−xS NCs to Au can efficiently improve the catalytic activity of Au for photocatalytic reactions.77,78 A similar case also happens in Pd/Cu2−xS heterostructures where hot electrons induced by LSPR of Cu2−xS NCs promote the photooxidation of benzyl alcohol.78 In addition, codoping is another promising strategy for effectively tuning the dopant population by the introduction of multifunctionality, such as plasmonic property together with magnetic property. For example, Mn–Sn codoped In2O3 NCs synthesized by Nag et al. enhance magnetization as well as shift the LSPR band toward longer wavelengths.79–82 Such an enhanced property of NCs also appears in Fe, Sn-codoped In2O3 NCs. Considering the semiconducting nature of the host material, a postsynthetic method is a useful dynamic knob to modulate LSPR characteristic by tuning the carrier concentration.83 Postsynthetic tuning can be performed according to three main approaches: chemical redox reactions, photochemical charging, and electrochemical charging and discharging.84–94 Cu2−xSe and Cu2−xTe NCs have demonstrated that oxidation/reduction of reducing/oxidizing agents is a typical way to realize the reversibility of postsynthetic tuning of the LSPRs, which involves electron transfer from or to NCs.83 Photochemical charging allows protons to add the NCs in a stoichiometric fashion, which can stabilize free electrons of the conduction band by a hole scavenger.84–86 For example, Mayer et al. found that the redox chemistry of dodecylamine-capped ZnO NCs is strongly influenced by the addition of a few protons into toluene/THF solutions.86 Electrochemical charging or discharging of the samples in the form of films has an important impact on the concentration of valence band (VB) holes or conduction band (CB) electrons. Postsynthetic electrochemical modulation of the electron concentration can dynamically and reversibly tune the LSPR of Sn-doped In2O3 NC film, which induces a shift (>1200 nm) in the plasmon wavelength. Based on the potential of NFE characteristics and scattering in addition to resonant absorption, applications of plasmonic semiconductor NCs have been explored in many fields, e.g., the photothermal effect of plasmonic NCs, which refers to heat generated by absorption of light, has been introduced for biomedical therapy, imaging and so on. The possibility to tune the LSPR of NCs in the NIR has been applied for IR enhancing spectroscopy.
In this review, we will focus on the three widely explored and interrelated examples including (1) hydrogen molybdenum bronze (HxMoO3−y) NCs, (2) hydrogen tungsten bronze (HxWO3−y) NCs, and (3) oxygen vacancy doped molybdenum tungsten oxide (MoxW1−xO3−y) NCs. Each section contains the introduction of their own hybrids. In previous reviews, owing to generally very similar properties of the first two types of NCs, they are simply discussed together. Instead, here we provide a separate description of the important plasmonic property in NCs and their manipulation methods of LSPR. Finally, we will give a brief outlook on applications of these plasmonic NCs.
2. Fundamental properties
2.1 Stoichiometric MoO3
Two crystal phases of MoO3 are commonly found: the thermodynamically stable orthorhombic α-phase and the metastable monoclinic β-phase, which are constructed in different ways based on MoO6 octahedron units (Fig. 1a).95–98 Orthorhombic α-MoO3 possesses a unique layered structure along the b axis (Fig. 1b), which offers the possibility of forming a two-dimensional (2D) morphology.96,99–104 The dual layer planar crystals in α-MoO3, which are formed by atomically thin sheets featuring a thickness of ≈1.4 nm, consist of MoO6 octahedra by corner-sharing rows and edge-sharing zigzag rows along the [100] and [001] directions, respectively.95 The interactions between atoms of the distorted MoO6 octahedra are dominated by strong ionic bonds and covalent bonds, while the octahedra are stacked in the vertical [010] direction by relatively weak van der Waals forces. Owing to different coordination, three types of oxygen atoms exist in the crystal structures (Fig. 2) (i.e., symmetrically bridging (Os), asymmetric (Oa), terminal (Ot)). The Os bonds to three Mo atoms with one vertical bond and two horizontal bonds and the bond lengths are 2.33 and 1.95 Å, respectively. The Oa bonds with two Mo atoms with lengths of 2.25 and 1.74 Å, respectively. The Ot bonds to only one Mo atom and the mean length is 1.67 Å. Unlike α-MoO3, β-MoO3 adopts a monoclinic 3D structure, where the MoO6 octahedra cannot crystalize in double layers and cannot share in zigzag rows along the [001] plane (Fig. 1c), and the 3D structure that originates from the corner-sharing of the MoO6 octahedra is not desirable for forming planar crystals.105–108 In addition, it has been reported that the β-MoO3 phase is generally transformed into the α-MoO3 on account of thermal treatments at above 350 °C. For some specific applications, some studies demonstrate that β-MoO3 generally has better catalytic properties than α-MoO3.101,109 However, such properties are generally attributed to grain size effects rather than the result of the crystal phases when samples have similar grain morphologies and dimensions. Another two less known metastable polymorph oxides also exist, hexagonal ε-MoO3 and h-MoO3 (Fig. 1d–f).
 Fig. 1  (a) MoO6 octahedra as found in the thermodynamically stable α-MoO3 composed of molybdenum and oxygen atoms. (b) Thermodynamically stable orthorhombic α-MoO3 with layered structure held together by van der Waals' forces. (c) Metastable monoclinic β-MoO3. (d) ε-MoO3, also known as MoO3-II. (e) Metastable h-MoO3. (f) Tunnel structure along the c-axis of the h-MoO3 unit cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
 Fig. 2  (a–c) Crystal structures of α-MoO3 bulk form (a), and perfect (b) and terminal defect (010) (c) surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
2.2 Non-stoichiometric MoO3
As an n-type semiconductor material, MoO3 has many significant applications in catalysis, gas sensors, and optoelectronics. However, the bandgap of ca. 3.2 eV means that MoO3 can only adsorb energy from the UV light spectrum, which occupies less than 5% of the solar energy. Considering its unique layered structure, molybdenum bronze (AxMoyOz) as a fantastic compound can be developed by intercalating cations into the van der Waals gap accompanied by the partial reduction of Mo oxidation states, where A may be an alkali metal cation (such as Li+, Na+, K+), hydrogen, and Tl+.110,111 These bronze structures drive their metallic character partially occupied 4d bands while MoO3 is an insulator with an unfilled 4d band. Since hydrogen bronzes HxMoO3−y were obtained in 1950 by Glemser and Lutz by ambient-temperature reactions,112 HxMoO3−y has been researched widely. The intercalated H+ cations primarily bind to terminal oxygen atoms and edge-shared oxygen, leading to the formation of intermediate OH2 groups in the HxMoO3−y structure.113,114 A more complete and specific research by Dickens and Birtill showed that HxMoO3−y has four distinct phases: stoichiometric phase I (H2MoO3, green colour), phase II (H1.55–1.72MoO3, red, monoclinic), phase III (H0.85–1.04MoO3, blue, monoclinic), and phase IV (H0.23–0.40MoO3, blue, orthorhombic);115 the properties of HxMoO3−y change dramatically with the variation of hydrogen content while the crystal structure of their parent MoO3 generally remains constant.115 The semiconductor–metal transition happens at a specific temperature, which was demonstrated by electric conductivity measurements on HxMoO3−y powder.116 Many previous important studies have been concentrated on the understanding of how to construct free carriers and the semiconductor-to-metal transition process induced by free carrier gas or Fermi surface nesting.117,118

2.2.1 Synthesis and applications of HxMoO3−y NCs. 
Reasonable design of the synthesis route of HxMoO3−y can realize the modification of free carrier concentration and afterwards control plasmon tuning over a wide spectral range, which makes this material very appealing for numerous applications. In 1988, Greenblatt et al.118 reported a series of solid phase HxMoO3−y by electrochemical or chemical reduction of MoO3 in acidic medium, which was first put forward by Glemser et al.112 and consummated by Dickens and Birtill in 1979.119 Similar synthesis methods were also adopted by many later researchers.115–117 At ambient temperature, electrochemical reduction in aqueous acidic medium (MoO3 + xH+ + xe− → HxMoO3) or chemical reduction using H+/metal couples (e.g., HCl/Zn) results in the formation of hydrogen molybdenum bronzes.118 By comparing their lattice parameters with those of MoO3 (Table 1),118 minimal structure rearrangement occurs when hydrogen is inserted into the MoO3 matrix.
Table 1 Unit cell dimensions of HxMoO3−y bronze phases. Reproduced with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 1988 American Chemical Society




HxMoO3−y
Color

a, Å

b, Å

c, Å

β, deg
Space group





a 
a, b, c orthorhombic → b, a, c monoclinic.





H0.34MoO3
Blue
3.8
14.0
3.7
90.0
Orthorhombic


H0.93MoO3
Blue
14.5
3.7
3.8
93.7
Monoclinic


H1.68MoO3
Red
13.9
3.7
4.0
93.9
Monoclinic


H2.0MoO3
Green
13.5
3.8
4.0
94.6
Monoclinic


MoO3a


3.9
13.8
3.6
90.0
Orthorhombic




The presence of OH and OH2 groups are evidenced by the inelastic neutron scattering spectra of HxMoO3−y, in which H atoms bond to the bridging oxygen atoms (Os) and the terminal oxygen atoms (Ot), respectively. Afterwards, hydrothermal and solvothermal syntheses of plasmonic HxMoO3−y NCs have been immensely developed by subsequently ameliorated nonhydrolytic colloidal synthesis.105,120 For example, Hu et al. reported a hydrothermal method to synthesize MoO3 nanobelts from Mo powders and H2O2 solution, which can be reduced to HxMoO3−y nanobelts by using a reducing agent (N2H4·H2O) under acidic conditions. Hydrogen doping greatly improves the conductance of HxMoO3−y nanobelts. The exponential correlation between temperature and resistance of HxMoO3−y nanobelts supports the finding that the quasi-free electrons released from Mo5+ are the conducting carriers.115
HxMoO3−y–oleylamine composite with ultrathin blue nanosheets is successfully synthesized by Huang et al. by hydrothermal treatment at 180 °C, where a water/oil emulsion is prepared by mixing cyclohexane, water and oleylamine together. The presence of a certain amount of oleylamine and oxidant drives the blue nanosheets to curve into white nanotubes. Electron spin resonance (ESR) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) results confirm that the color change is attributed to the oxidation of MoV to MoVI, which is induced by the variation of Ov.105 In this process, tunable LSPR is obviously observed as the oxidation reaction proceeds gradually. The initial blue nanosheets prominently present a photothermal effect under the irradiation of an NIR laser owing to the strong LSPRs. In the past five years, many research groups have made outstanding achievements in this field, among which Prof. Yamashita's team is a pioneer. They reported that well-defined HxMoO3−y nanosheets were prepared by a solvothermal method (non-aqueous procedure) in the absence of surfactants, where the solution-soluble precursor compound MoO2(OH)(OOH) was prepared by using H2O2 to dissolve pure Mo powder in an ethanol solution. During the synthesis process, ethanol plays two important roles: (1) it supplies a mild condition for abating the violent reaction between H2O2 and Mo powder, and (2) it acts as a reductant to reduce MoO3 into blue HxMoO3−y at higher solvothermal temperatures. XPS spectra and Mo K-edge XANES spectra all demonstrate that the valence of Mo species in HxMoO3−y is located between MoO3 and MoO2 (Fig. 3a and b). The obtained HxMoO3−y nanosheets show a strong plasmonic absorption peak in a wide range (Fig. 3c), which is tuned from the visible to the NIR by using different alcohols in the solvothermal synthesis (Fig. 3d). Such plasmonic HxMoO3−y NCs can dramatically enhance the dehydrogenation performance of ammonia borane under visible light irradiation relative to dark condition (Fig. 3e and f).98,102 However, the preferential formation of 2D MoO3 nanosheets will be available due to the intrinsic anisotropic crystal growth, which usually leads to very small surface area, accompanied by relatively low catalytic activity, given that at this point, during liquid-based synthesis processes, surfactant orientating and templating can be used for shaping MoO3. For example, a relatively high surface-area and well-crystallized MoO3 was hence prepared by an evaporation-induced self-assembly (ElSA) process. Subsequently, plasmonic HxMoO3−y NCs were synthesized by a hydrogen reduction method via a postsynthetic process. In this synthetic process, F127 as a surfactant efficiently inhibits the intrinsic growth process of tiny MoO3 nuclei to MoO3 nanosheets, which causes a much smaller nanosheet size and then increases the specific surface area. The prepared HxMoO3−y with high surface area shows temperature-dependent LSPR in the visible region, which supports a relatively high NH3BH3 dehydrogenation activity. Suib et al. developed a more effective approach to synthesize mesoporous HxMoO3−y with nanosized crystalline walls.108 In the synthesis process, tetrahydrofuran (THF) as a solvent instead of ethanol is chosen to dissolve a soft template (PEO-b-PS) without self-assembly aggregation, which is key to forming a mesoporous structure in subsequent aging.102 For the electrochemical hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), the as-synthesized mesoporous HxMoO3−y NCs show a very stable (durability >12 h) and active performance under alkaline and acidic conditions (Scheme 1). Postsynthetic control provides a dynamic adjustment of LSPR characteristics in semiconductor NCs that far surpasses what is possible with metal NPs, which includes several methods such as electrochemical, photochemical, or oxidation/reduction reactions. Postsynthetic control for tuning the LSPR peak of HxMoO3−y was further verified by Li et al. by using different reductants.102 For example, highly stable MoO3 nanodots have been designed and prepared by the oxidation of bulk MoS2 (MoS2 + 9H2O2 → MoO3 + 7H2O + 2H2SO4). Subsequently, substoichiometric HxMoO3−y nanodots are obtained from MoO3 with different reducing agents, including ascorbic acid (AA) and NaBH4. Although NaBH4 leads to a different substoichiometric oxide and XPS analysis shows substantial increase of the valence state of Mo(V), it cannot have LSPR peak tunability when the reaction finishes. By controlling the reducing concentration, the weaker reductant AA successfully realizes a dynamic tunability of plasmonic energy resonance, which can modulate LSPR features at around 700–1000 nm.
 Fig. 3  (a) Mo 3d XPS spectra of the as-prepared HxMoO3−y and commercial MoO3 samples. (b) Mo K-edge XANES spectra of HxMoO3−y and reference materials (commercial MoO3 and MoO2). (c) UV/vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the HxMoO3−y samples prepared at 160 °C (1) and 140 °C (2) for 12 h, and commercial MoO3 (3). (d) The LSPR wavelength of the products prepared using different alcohols in the solvothermal synthesis. Time course of H2 evolution from NH3BH3 aqueous solution at room temperature for different samples: (e) in the dark and (f) under visible light irradiation (λ >420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH. 
 Scheme 1  The proposed formation mechanism of inverse micelle-templated mesoporous HxMoO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
From the above results, it indicates that the right choice of reducing agents in the postsynthetic process plays a crucial role in controlling plasmon tuning over a wide spectral range. Zhang et al. synthesized plasmonic HxMoO3−y nanosheets by a solvothermal procedure with methanol as a solvent and as a reducing agent. Core–shell structured HxMoO3−y@MoO3 nanosheets with various LSPR frequencies and intensities were obtained after the calcination process. Such plasmonic NCs with preserved free carrier concentration show extraordinary sensitivity on surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) detection, which is ascribed to the shell-isolated electromagnetic enhancement by the HxMoO3−y core.121 Of course, the synthetic methods of plasmonic HxMoO3−y are not only limited to hydrothermal and solvothermal methods or templating and surfactant methods but also can be extended to other routes, such as exfoliation method and H2 plasma etching. For example, Kalantar-zadeh et al. successfully synthesized yellow/blue HxMoO3−y nanosheets with oxygen deficiency by a liquid phase exfoliation method, where high-power ultrasonication was used to grind bulk MoO3 with ethanol, facilitating mechanical liquid phase exfoliation. The as-synthesized 2D HxMoO3−y shows a considerable electrocatalytic HER performance with a fast electron transfer and low overpotential. Mai et al. also reported that oxygen-deficient α-HxMoO3−y was synthesized by H2 plasma etching, which could reduce the bandgap and expand the van der Waals gap. Electrochemical test results indicate that HxMoO3−y has a high Li+ diffusion coefficient, slight polarization and low charge transfer resistance.122 In conclusion, a variety of methods have been used for synthesizing substoichiometric HxMoO3−y NCs both in liquid- and in gas-phase media. Such plasmonic HxMoO3−y NCs have also found more and more applications in many fields, such as photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, photothermal therapy and so on.


2.2.2 Synthesis and applications of HxMoO3−y hybrids. 
Single-component materials are normally confined by their intrinsic properties in heterogeneous catalysis, such as weak light absorption and low catalytic efficiency, and consequently they are unable to fulfill the functional demands. On the contrary, hybrid materials have received more and more attention because they show synergistic multilevel coupling effect owing to different components with diverse properties.123 Hence, despite the challenges, it is important and intriguing to develop efficient synthetic methods to prepare plasmonic HxMoO3−y-based hybrids, which could further improve optical the properties and catalytic performance. For example, deposition of active metal catalysts (e.g., Pd) on plasmonic HxMoO3−y can have more extensive catalysis reaction opportunities, such as Suzuki coupling reactions and p-nitrophenol reduction. Yamashita et al. developed a solution-processed impregnation–reduction method to synthesize a plasmonic Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid by coupling metal NPs and HxMoO3−y NCs, which is extended to Au/HxMoO3−y and Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrids as well.124 The Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid was synthesized by introducing reductant NaBH4 into a suspension of PdCl42− ions and MoO3 support, which were reduced to Pd0 NPs and HxMoO3−y simultaneously (Fig. 4a). Such a Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid shows a strong LSPR absorption peak in the visible light range, displaying dramatic plasmon-improved catalysis in Suzuki–Miyaura coupling and dehydrogenation of NH3BH3 under visible light irradiation.124 One interesting property of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrids is that their LSPRs exhibit reversible tunability upon reduction by NaBH4 in solution and oxidation by O2 in air (Fig. 4b). During the gradual oxidation by O2 in air, phase structures of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid are found with no obvious changes; the plasmonic absorption peaks, however, change from a symmetrical narrow band to an asymmetrical broader band, and then shift to a broader band in the NIR region and eventually disappear. Through reduction by NaBH4 in solution, the LSPRs of the oxidized Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid can be restored (Fig. 4c), which still shows an intense plasmonic resonance approaching the original one. In addition, Cheng et al. found that the presence of a metal such as Pd drives MoO3 to reduce at lower temperature.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid upon oxidation by O2 in air and reduction by NaBH4 in solution. (b) The evolution of the optical response of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid exposed to air for different time periods. (c) The optical absorption for the original Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid, oxidized in air for 48 h, and the recovered product by NaBH4 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. 
Through the H2 reduction process, massive activated H atoms are inserted into the layered structure of an orthorhombic MoO3 host, resulting in the distortion of MoO6 octahedra (Fig. 5a), where H atoms bond strongly with terminal oxygen atoms. Before H2 reduction, only a small absorption peak in the UV region (shorter than 400 nm) is found in the Pd/MoO3 hybrid. On the contrary, the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid shows a strong absorption peak in the visible light range (Fig. 5b). Prior to H2 reduction, Mo species of Pd/MoO3 hybrid contain only Mo6+ ions, as shown in the XPS spectra of Mo 3d core level (Fig. 5c). However, not only Mo6+ but also Mo5+ and Mo4+ ions exist in the Pd/HxMoO3−y after H2 reduction at RT. First-principles DFT calculations are also used to study the electronic structure of the hydrogen bronzes. The projected density of states (PDOS) and total density of states (TDOS) of pristine MoO3 are presented in Fig. 5d and e. Apparently, no vacancy states are present in pristine MoO3 with a bandgap of around 1.9 eV. In contrast, the HxMoO3−y hybrid shows a strong metallic feature with a continuous VB across the Fermi level into the CB (Fig. 5e). The intercalation of hydrogen atoms into the MoO3 matrix results in the drastic changes in electronic structures of HxMoO3−y hybrid.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of hydrogen bronzes via H-spillover process. Optical and structural characterization of hydrogen molybdenum bronze. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (c) Mo 3d XPS spectra of Pd/MoO3 products before and after H2 reduction at room temperature. Density functional theory calculations. TDOS and PDOS of (d) pure MoO3 and (e) heavily hydrogen-doped HxMoO3−y. (f) Structure illustration for HxMoO3−y in the (010) projection. Blue balls represent Mo atoms, red for O, and green for H atoms. (g) Three-dimensional visualization of electronic charge density distribution around the Fermi level for HxMoO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Massive H atoms are inserted into the interlayer positions of the layered structure of orthorhombic MoO3 (Fig. 5f), which results in the distortion of MoO6 octahedra. Subsequently, the electrons of the activated hydrogen 1s orbital transfer to the O 2p orbital and further shift to the coordinating Mo atoms, leading to a partial reduction of Mo6+. Furthermore, the introduced electronic charge is uniformly distributed on Mo atoms due to the delocalization nature of Mo 4d electrons, which is proved by the 3D visualization of electronic charge density distribution for HxMoO3−y (Fig. 5g). The logical explanation is that a partially filled π* is generated by the intermediary O 2pπ orbitals with Mo 4d orbitals of t2g symmetry overlapping, which shifts their Fermi level within the CB. Therefore, with such a high degree of delocalization in the visible light spectrum, free electrons donated by hydrogen atoms are expected to support the LSPRs. Under visible light irradiation, these electrons of the plasmonic HxMoO3−y support will quickly transfer to the adjacent Pd NPs. That is, HxMoO3−y supports are positively charged and the surface of Pd NPs is negatively charged, which hence enhances the catalytic performance of dehydrogenation of NH3BH3 and the reduction activity of p-nitrophenol.124,125 As we all know, for the chemoselective hydrogenation of unsaturated aldehydes to saturated aldehydes, Pd-based catalysts play a key role. However, it is still difficult to obtain high selectivity and conversion. A lot of progress has been made by modulating the electron density of catalytic sites on Pd-based catalysts.125 Imran et al. integrated the advantages of 2D HxMoO3−y nanosheets and active monodispersed Pd nanotetrahedrons to synthesize hybrid nanocatalysts with high performance to convert α,β-unsaturated aldehydes to the corresponding saturated aldehydes. The as-synthesized Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid is synthesized via a simple one-pot wet-chemical synthetic method, where DMF and toluene act as solvents and PVP and CTAB are used to control the morphology of Pd NCs.123 Kuwahara et al. proved for the first time that plasmonic Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid exhibits a higher catalytic activity under visible light irradiation relative to dark conditions in the deoxygenation of diphenyl sulfoxide (DPSO). The preparation of plasmonic Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid is achieved via a facial H-spillover process (Fig. 6a). At controlled temperature (RT, 100 °C, and 200 °C), Pt ions and α-MoO3 are reduced simultaneously in a flow of H2. By in situ formed Pt NPs in the above process, a rapid dissociation of H2 occurs (H2 → 2H+ + 2e−) and subsequent free electrons and H+ are injected into MoO3 matrices, where the reduction temperature can easily modulate the vacancy densities and the H+ dopant levels. As shown in Fig. 6b, the Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid shows a strong LSPR absorption peak around 556 nm compared with the Pt/MoO3 hybrid without H2 reduction. With the reduction temperature raised, the increased concentration of free carriers not only leads to an intensification of the absorption peaks but also results in a blue shift of the plasmonic wavelength.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of hydrogen molybdenum bronzes (HxMoO3−y) via a H-spillover process. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra for the Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrids reduced at varied temperatures and for the unreduced Pt/MoO3. (c) Mo 3d XPS spectra for the Pt/HxMoO3−y (200) and pristine MoO3. Time course in the deoxygenation of diphenyl sulfoxide over (d) various Pt-loaded oxide catalysts (reduction temperature = 200 °C). (e) Time course of the yield of diphenyl sulfide over the Pt/HxMoO3−y (200) catalyst with or without H2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
In the Mo 3d XPS spectra (Fig. 6c), Mo species of Pt/HxMoO3−y (200) hybrid are mainly occupied by Mo6+ species in addition to lower oxidation states. In the deoxygenation of diphenyl sulfoxide (DPSO), plasmonic Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid shows the highest catalytic performance in 7 h of reaction with >99% yield (Fig. 6d). Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/SiO2 do not exhibit any catalytic activities, which indicates that the main active sites in this reaction are not Pt NPs. Furthermore, the plasmonic Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrid still has a certain yield even in the absence of H2, verifying that the Ov sites are the main active sites for the deoxygenation reaction (Fig. 6e). Comprehensive analyses by means of XPS, ESR, and Raman spectroscopy indicate that the strong LSPRs and massive Ov provide an effective catalytic system for the deoxygenation of DPSO.126 Recently, an important and intriguing phenomenon has been found by Yamashita et al. that activated hydrogen species of the HxMoO3−y hybrid show excellent mobility on certain metals (e.g., Ru). Ru/hydrogen molybdenum bronzes (Ru/HxMoO3−y) are prepared via a facial H-spillover route. Detailed characterization reveals that Ru/HxMoO3−y exhibits strong visible light absorption with a plasmonic peak (Fig. 7a), which is tunable by varying the reduction temperature of H2 gas. Under visible light irradiation relative to dark condition, the Ru/HxMoO3−y hybrid displays superior catalytic activity in the photocatalytic reduction of p-nitrophenol (Fig. 7b), where Ru NPs act as the active centres and HxMoO3−y support serves as an electron-donation centre. Furthermore, both hydrogen species in HxMoO3−y originating from the H-spillover process and the excited electrons transfer to the Ru NP surface under visible light irradiation, thereby leading to the reduction of the –NO2 group to the –NH2 group, which is fully demonstrated by catalytic activity (Fig. 7c).127 Exploration of the mobility of activated hydrogen species in HxMoO3−y is an interesting and valuable research. Precious metals as common co-catalysts with large work function are used to capture the photoexcited carriers and drive the reduction reaction of protons. Nevertheless, the scarcity and high cost of noble metals cannot realize the practical application, and thus developing earth-abundant, efficient, and stable co-catalysts is still a formidable challenge in many fields. Peng et al. reported that Mo-based cocatalyst (MoS2–α-MoO3−x with oxygen deficiency) is grafted on the surface of AgIn5S8 nanooctahedra via an in situ growth process, which creates more active sites and then shows an effective enhancement of visible-light-driven H2 evolution. α-MoO3−x NCs with mixed Mo5+/Mo6+ oxidation states by partial reduction play a central role in the H2 evolution reaction, which enables facial charge transport owing to their high conductivity and oxygen-deficient structure. Seo et al. demonstrated that graphene (mRGO)-MoO3−x nanohybrid shows a superior reversible and flexible electrochromic (EC) application.128 The synthesis of this nanohybrid was performed by an equipment-free Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) film deposition method, in which the mRGO-MoO3−x hybrid has a strong possibility to have super dispersibility in a water-miscible solvent. Subsequently, even without a need for a trough, the self-assembly of the nanohybrid sheets into Langmuir films could also be achieved. Electron transfer among individual mRGO-MoO3−x sheets is attributed to the good contact among the hybrid sheets, which leads to an excellent EC property with a high coloration efficiency. The requirements of high stability, catalytic activity, and solar photon-to-current conversion cannot be satisfied only by the development of a single material. Meeting the various requirements by utilizing multiple materials is a new strategy. In order to address conductivity limitation in MoS2 with a high aspect ratio structure, Jaramillo et al. prepared vertically oriented core–shell nanowires (NWs) with MoS2 shells and HxMoO3−y cores, where MoO3 NWs were obtained by a simple hot-wire chemical vapor deposition method and the MoS2 shell layer was synthesized by sulfidizing the supported MoO3 NWs in a quartz tube furnace under a mixture of H2S/H2 gas.129 The HxMoO3−y core supplies facile charge transport due to a high aspect ratio foundation, while the MoS2 shell supplies excellent electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution and stability in strong acids. There are no doubts that such studies will display many promising applications with plasmonic hybrids in solar-energy harvesting, catalysis, magneto-optics, and optoelectronics.
 Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the Ru/MoO3 samples upon H2 reduction at different temperatures. (b) Plots of relative concentration of p-nitrophenol over Ru/HxMoO3−y (100) catalyst and reference samples as a function of time. (c) Proposed mechanism of p-nitrophenol hydrogenation on Ru/HxMoO3−y (100) without H2 gas atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.3 Stoichiometric WO3
WO3s are also constituted by edge- and corner-sharing of WO6 octahedra (Fig. 8).130 There are six phases by corner-sharing: tetragonal (α-WO3), orthorhombic (β-WO3), monoclinic I (γ-WO3), triclinic (δ-WO3), monoclinic II (ε-WO3), and cubic WO3. However, cubic WO3 is not commonly observed experimentally. Similarly, WO3 crystal phase transitions can occur during cooling and annealing. Phase transformation takes place in bulk form by the following sequence: monoclinic II (ε-WO3, −43 °C) → triclinic (δ-WO3, −43 °C to 17 °C) → monoclinic I (γ-WO3, 17 °C to 330 °C) → orthorhombic (β-WO3, 330 °C to 740 °C) → tetragonal (α-WO3, >740 °C). Partial reversibility of the above phase transitions of WO3 has been reported. At subzero temperatures, only the monoclinic II phase is stable. Monoclinic I (γ-WO3) is the most stable phase at room temperature, where triclinic is also stable. WO3 will transform to α-WO3 and β-WO3 at high temperature, whereas these alternate phases cannot be retained when the temperature is returned to room temperature.
 Fig. 8  Tilt patterns and stability temperature domains of the different polymorphs of WO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. 
2.4 Non-stoichiometric WO3
Bulk WO3 (an n-type semiconductor) has a band gap of around 2.7 eV and is stable under a wide range of conditions. WO3 NCs are a particularly interesting system for the research of LSPR in NPs. Tungsten oxide bronzes (TOBs) are solid electrolytes with mixed (cation–electron) conductivity.131–134 In these substances, a stable sub-lattice is formed by the octahedra of WO6, while cations of alkali metals (or hydrogen) are displaced into the empty spaces between octahedra. These spaces form channels along which the cations can move. So these spaces can withstand a considerable amount of shallow deficiency in the oxide band structure. Creation of one-dimensional channels from WO6 octahedra in the crystal structure of WO3 is ideal to incorporate cations with specific ionic radii, such as Cs+, Ce+, Rb+, and Na+.135–137 The chemist Friedrich Wöhler in 1823 prepared sodium tungsten bronze (NaxWO3), which was the first alkali metal bronze to be discovered.136 They owe some of their properties to the relative stability of the tungsten(V) cation that is formed, leading to accumulation of delocalized free electrons in the conduction band. Hydrogen tungsten bronzes are nonstoichiometric materials with the formula HxWO3−y, where hydrogen atoms are incorporated into the structure of WO3. Glemser and Naumann for the first time in 1951 reported that HxWO3−y was obtained by reduction of tungsten trioxide or tungstates.138 Dickens and Hurditch in 1967 have tried to figure out the positions of hydrogen atoms in tetragonal HxWO3−y by neutron diffraction data. By comparing the relative intensities of a deuterium bronze and a hydrogen, they found that the H species in HxWO3−y are bound to O as an OH.138Fig. 9 clearly illustrates the structural distortions of γ-monoclinic WO3 induced by vacancies during the synthesis process. The W–W distance of a perfect structure is 4.18 Å, which reduces to 3.72 Å due to the slight motion of W atoms to an Ov for the W vacancies (Vw) case. Along the body and face diagonals of the WO6 unit cell, several locations are tested for possible interstitial sites. Compared with the W–O bond of 1.93 Å in the perfect structure, the W interstitial atom with a W–O bond of 2.08 Å is stable at the body centre (Wi). The body center (Oi-1) can be formed by an O interstitial atom, which can also lead to the formation of a W atom (Oi-2). A single O atom can bond to a H interstitial atom with a distance of 0.98 Å (Hi-1). This interstitial H atom that lies in the face centre can bond to two O atoms with O–H distances of 1.67 Å and 1.01 Å (Hi-2). Eventually, another HO interstitial vacancy ((HO)i) can form with H–O distances of 1.05 Å and 1.02 Å, which behaves similarly to Hi-2. In recent years, many groups have achieved great success in studying plasmonic HxWO3−y synthesis methods and applications.139
 Fig. 9  Structures: perfect, with vacancies, and with interstitial defects; refer to the text for details. W, O, and H atoms are shown in black, red, and green color, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature. 

2.4.1 Synthesis and applications of HxWO3−y NCs. 
Many methods for the synthesis of plasmonic HxWO3−y have been performed using both liquid- and vapor-phase-based routes.
Hydrogen tungsten bronzes were first synthesized by Glemser et al. by passing suspensions of WO3 in hydrochloric acid, in which the strength of the acid plays a vital role in controlling the composition of the product.138,139 Subsequently, Boudart et al. reported that HxWO3−y was synthesized by hydrogen reduction of a mixture of WO3 and Pt black at 130 °C. In the above study, nuclear magnetic resonance was used to further understand the kinetics of catalytic reduction of WO3, which indicates that the penetration of reducing species is rate determining below the surface of WO3 particles. After that, hydrogen reduction gradually becomes the frequently used method to synthesize plasmonic HxWO3−y. Urretavizcaya et al. reported that HxWO3−y was obtained through two steps. Cu/HxWO3−y was prepared by reducing a mixture of CuWO4 under H2 atmosphere and then Cu was washed away by concentrated HNO3.132 WO3 as a photoanode material for photoelectrochemical water splitting has attracted a lot of interest owing to its favorable bandgap. However, as the peroxo species lead to photocorrosion of WO3 in water oxidation, photoelectrochemical instability is a primary problem for the WO3 photoanode. By introduction of Ov, Li et al. proved that the photocatalytic performance and stability of WO3 after the reduction of hydrogen atmosphere at different temperatures can be simultaneously improved for water oxidation.140 The increased stability of WO3 is ascribed to the formation of substoichiometric HxWO3−y, which strongly suppresses the re-oxidation and the formation of peroxo species. Zou et al. reported that HxWO3−y is an efficient and versatile catalyst for the hydrogenation of the aryl nitro group, cyclic olefins, and linear olefins, which shows clear advantages in the aspect of selectivity and activity compared with non-noble Ni catalyst.141 First, they proved that H2 can be easily activated by the surface Ov of WO3 in kinetics and thermodynamics by using density functional theory (DFT) calculations.
Three different surfaces, HxWO2.72 surface with abundant Ov, WO3 surface with few Ov (WO3–Ov), and stoichiometric WO3 surface, are prepared to investigate the adsorption, activation, and dissociation of molecular H2 (Fig. 10). Fig. 10a shows a modest propensity to form Ov under oxygen-poor conditions depending on the formation energy of −0.44 eV (T = 0 K). From Fig. 10b and c, it is observed that almost no H2 can be activated (only 0.030 e− shifted from H2 to WO3) and H2 cannot be adsorbed (adsorption free energy of 0.436 eV). A high barrier of 1.643 eV implies that the breaking of the H–H bond is unfeasible in kinetics. On the contrary, a slight reduction occurs on both the H2 adsorption free energy and the energy barrier of H–H bond cleavage (0.428 and 1.294 eV, respectively) in WO3–Ov, where H2 is more readily adsorbed and activated. Furthermore, one dissociated H atom bonds to a bridge atom and the other with a surface W atom, indicating that the presence of Ov also changes the manner of H2 dissociation. Due to the adsorption free energy of −0.346 eV, the adsorption of H2 is very easy on the surface of HxWO2.72. In addition, the H–H bond is elongated to 1.39 Å. By transferring 0.419 e− to H2, the HxWO2.72 surface has a strong interaction with H2. DFT calculations demonstrate that molecular H2 is activated easily from the aspects of thermodynamics and kinetics by the Ov surface. In the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectrum (Fig. 10d), the strong absorption tail dramatically illustrates the presence of Ov in HxWO3−y. Even after hydrogenation reaction of 1-hexene, the absorption intensity of HxWO3−y remains unchanged. As shown in Fig. 10e and f, a lower ratio of surface O/W leads to the quicker reaction process. More importantly, a very good correlation coefficient of 0.997 strongly indicates that the initial reaction rate is linearly with the surface O/W ratio. The above result obviously exhibits the unique Ov on the surface of HxWO2.73 governs the hydrogenation activity. In addition to thermal treatment in hydrogen atmosphere, other efficient synthesis methods of HxWO3−y were also adopted. For example, Lin et al. reported that surface Ov in WO3 were prepared by an economical and simple vacuum deoxidation method, in which the vacuum heat treatment temperature efficiently controls the concentration of the oxygen vacancy. Compared to the bulk defects, the surface Ov plays a more crucial role in improving the photocatalytic performance of water oxidation under visible light irradiation.142 A recent study by Ishihara et al. reported that HxWO3−y nanotubes with large amounts of surface Ov sites were synthesized by an oleate-assisted hydrothermal method,15 which show highly efficient CO2 reduction to CH3COOH under solar light. Murray et al. reported that colloidal HxWO3−y NWs were synthesized by a high-temperature non-hydrolytic (solvothermal) reaction,143 where WCl6 as a precursor was added into the mixture of 1-octadecenol and oleylamine. As-synthesized HxWO3−y NWs with Ov show a broad absorption from the visible to the NIR region. As a result of the Burstein–Moss shift, the optical band gap of HxWO3−y NWs is improved compared to that of pristine WO3 powders. On account of this improvement, HxWO3−y NWs exhibit a direct and stable photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in photoreforming reactions using alcohols as electron donors. As we all know, HxWO3−y NCs have intense visible and NIR absorption. However, the optical absorption origin of HxWO3−y NCs is not unclear. For example, on the basis of photoluminescence and electrical transport studies, WO2.72 NWs appear to be semiconducting and their blue color may arise from polaron hopping. On the contrary, on the basis of electrical transport measurements and XPS, WO2.8 NWs seem to be metallic, but their blue color has not been discussed. Alivisatos et al. have made outstanding contribution in this field. They demonstrated that metallic phases of HxWO3−y NPs show strong and tunable LSPRs.24 HxWO3−y nanorods were synthesized under an inert atmosphere at 315 °C by hot injection of tungsten(V) ethoxide into a solvent mixture of trioctylamine acid and oleic acid.
 Fig. 10  (a) Formation energy of the WO3–Ov surface under different O chemical potentials (T = 0 K) (inset: top view of WO3 surface with Ov. The dotted vertical lines indicate the allowed range of O chemical potential). (b) Differential charge density of H2 adsorption (the yellow and blue colors represent charge depletion and accumulation, respectively, with an iso-surface value of 0.002 e Å−3. Number of electrons (N) represents the electrons transferred from H2 to the catalyst, and plus (+) represents electrons transferring from the surface to H2 while minus (−) represents the reverse). (c) Free energies of the initial (IS), transition (TS), and final states (FS) for the dissociation of H2. (d) Diffuse reflectance spectra of HxWO3−y and WO3. (e) Diagram of nitrobenzene hydrogenation reaction. (f) Linear correlation between initial reaction rate and oxygen vacancy concentration (surface O/W ratio). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The plasmon energy of such plasmonic HxWO3−y could be tuned by heating in air. A decrease in the intensity of the plasmonic absorption and a red shift are observed while the solution of HxWO3−y in N-methylpyrrolidone is heated at 175 °C in an oxidizing environment (Fig. 11a), which causes oxygen species to incorporate into the lattice, resulting in a decrease of the carrier concentration. Conversely, under an argon atmosphere, the same effect cannot arise when the solution is heated, indicating that oxygen incorporation annihilates the charge carrier and then affects the shift of bandgap absorption under heating. The disordered structure of HxWO3−y after heating is observed by XRD (Fig. 11b), which demonstrates that crystallinity is fully retained when oxygen is inserted into the structure at a low temperature.24 Sunlight-driven chemical transformation by metal oxides holds a great promise for catalyst cost and a substantial reduction in energy consumption. However, the step of energy transfer from excitons to dioxygen species remains a grand challenge to energy coupling. Xiong et al. demonstrated that WO3 with abundant Ov can approach the above challenge, which ensures the chemisorption of molecular oxygen to the WO3 surface. In addition, it is quite interesting that the Ov in tungsten oxide could also be introduced by air treatment,142 which was confirmed by XPS and ESR spectra. The above production of Ov is attributed to two mechanisms, i.e., nanoscale inhomogeneous and critical phase transition, which depends on the size of the building block and annealing time or temperature. For comparison, the Ov are also introduced by hydrogen reduction by Tang et al. Ov induced by hydrogen treatment can boost recombination of the electron–hole pair, which leads to lower electrochemical performance and photocatalytic activity. However, Ov induced by air treatment can capture and shift electrons, which decreases the recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. In conclusion, considering the opposite results on oxygen defects of HxWO3−y, there is still a lot of space for accurately understanding the formation of oxygen defects in the future.
 Fig. 11  (a) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of HxWO3−y nanorods in N-methylpyrrolidone upon heating at 175 °C in air for 0, 2, and 6 min. (b) XRD patterns of HxWO3−y nanorods in N-methylpyrrolidone (top) before and (middle) after heating at 175 °C for 6 min in air and (bottom) the reference pattern for HxWO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 


2.4.2 Synthesis and applications of HxWO3−y hybrids. 
Noble metal/plasmonic semiconductor NC hybrids have attracted great interest owing to their wide applications in catalysis. HxWO3−y NCs with strong LSPR absorption offer a big chance to realize high catalytic performance by depositing metal NPs onto their surfaces. In this case, it would be better to improve the selectivity and conversion of chemical reactions by taking advantage of LSPR excitation of HxWO3−y, which is catalyzed by the deposited metal NPs. For example, Xue et al. reported that the deposition of Pd NPs on the surface of plasmonic HxWO3−y NWs with strong LSPRs absorption dramatically enhances the Suzuki coupling reaction under long wavelength light irradiation (λ > 650 nm) catalyzed by Pd NPs.144 During the synthetic process, W(CO)6 as precursor and ethanol as solvent were used to prepare HxWO3−y NWs by solvothermal treatment at 160 °C for 12 h. After that, Pd/HxWO3−y NWs were synthesized by depositing Pd NPs on the surface of HxWO3−y with NaBH4 as a reductant. Ravikumar et al. found that platinized carbon electrodes without HxWO3−y show worse catalytic performance for methanol electrooxidation than electrodes containing Pt/HxWO3−y composite.145 Based on the XPS and XRD data, HxWO3−y NCs are presented in the form of an oxyhydroxides (W–OH), in which the promotional performance of plasmonic HxWO3−y is concerned with the W(VI)/W(IV) redox couple serving as a surface mediator for the oxidation of surface methanolic residues. Yu et al. have synthesized Pd/HxWO3−y composite by a novel and surfactant-free method, where HxWO3−y NWs with Ov supply free electrons to reduce Pd2+ in aqueous solution by an in situ redox reaction between Pd2+ and reductive HxWO3−y. Such a plasmonic Pd/HxWO3−y hybrid exhibits a high catalytic performance for the reduction of styrene and p-nitrophenol, where Ov NWs can quickly transfer electrons from the surface of HxWO3−y to Pd NPs and accelerate hydrogen adsorption and dissociation.146 From the above studies, it is of great significance to develop rational methods without a surfactant to plasmonic metal/HxWO3−y hybrid, which could ensure that the catalysts' surfaces completely avoid impurities and provide the versatile synthetic alternative. Zhao et al. reported a recyclable, stable, and clean 3D chestnut-like Ag/HxWO2.72 nanostructure (CAWN) surface-enhanced Raman scattering (SERS) substrate, which was developed by a hydrothermal reaction and a subsequent facile in situ redox of Ag species at room temperature.147 The unique recyclable capability of the SERS substrate supported by the decoration of Ag NPs on the surface of HxWO3−y is successfully realized by photocatalytic degradation of thiram. Obviously, a detection limit down to 0.32 nM is achieved by the CAWN SERS substrates in Fig. 12a. More importantly, by the detection of thiram in spiked fruit peels (such as orange and carambola), the real-life application is also performed successfully by using the SERS-active CAWN colloid (Fig. 12b). From the signal analysis of Raman spectra, two dimethylthiocarbamate fragments are generated under laser irradiation by the breaking of the S–S bond of thiram molecules. The innovative design combines a self-cleaning property and the SERS enhancement effect for highly sensitive SERS detection, which provides a reusable and multifunctional SERS platform.147 In addition, alternative catalysts avoiding noble metals are highly demanded due to their rarity on Earth and high resistive loss.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the 3D recyclable chestnut-like Ag/HxWO2.72 nanostructures and their application: (I) Ag NPs decorated on HxWO2.72 nanochestnuts, (II) analyte loading and SERS sensing, and (III) the regeneration of recyclable SERS substrates. (b) Schematic illustration of the practical detection of pesticide residuals in fruits peels by using the as-prepared Ag/HxWO3−y colloid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Photocatalytic hydrogen production through water splitting is seen as an environmentally friendly method. Herein, Yousaf et al. developed an efficient Z-scheme photocatalytic system consisting of oxygen-deficient HxWO3−y nanorods and Zn0.3Cd0.7S NPs, which exhibits a high photocatalytic H2 evolution rate (352.1 μmol h−1) with apparent quantum efficiency (AQY) of 7.3% at λ = 420 nm. Compared to WO3/Zn0.3Cd0.7S, the HxWO3−y/Zn0.3Cd0.7S heterostructure with Ov shows a considerably higher overall hydrogen evolution rate without noble metals. The strong interface contact between Zn0.3Cd0.7S NPs and HxWO3−y nanorods makes a positive contribution to the migration of electrons. The strong absorption induced by HxWO3−y nanorods favors the enhancement of the activity in the visible region. In preparation for the HxWO3−y/Zn0.3Cd0.7S heterostructure, HxWO3−y nanorods were synthesized by H2 reduction of WO3 using a hydrothermal method and subsequently HxWO3−y/Zn0.3Cd0.7S was prepared by adjusting the pH of the solution of Cd(CH3COO)2, Zn(CH3COO)2 and Na2S.148 Chen et al. reported that a facile two-step synthetic route was used to prepare HxWO3−y/C NWs with abundant Ov, involving ammonium tetrathiotungstate ((NH4)2WS4) and dopamine as the precursors. The as-synthesized free-standing HxWO3−y/C NWs demonstrate outstanding performance for H2 generation and show fairly high stability without significant current density drop even after 1000 cycles.149
To meet the demand of developing clean-energy technologies, preparation of highly earth-abundant, stable, and active photoanodes for water oxidation is a crucial step. For example, Zhang et al. reported that stable and efficient black HxWO3−y/TiO2−x core–shell nanosheet photoanodes were synthesized by H2 reduction for photoelectrochemical (PEC) conversion. Compared to a pure WO3 photoanode, such a HxWO3−y/TiO2−x photoanode shows 8 times higher photocurrent density under the same conditions. By electrochemical spectroscopy, specific band alignment, and finite-difference time-domain evidence, the high PEC water oxidation activity is attributed to charge separation and transfer, and light absorption in these HxWO3−y/TiO2−x nanosheets. Furthermore, the HxWO3−y/TiO2−x photoanodes display good photostability even after a continuous PEC water splitting experiment for 6 h.150 Construction of a 1D/2D heterostructure is a new type and has aroused great interest. For example, Xue et al. have constructed a 1D/2D HxWO3−y/g-C3N4 heterojunction through a simple solvothermal method, where HxWO3−y NWs are grown on the surface of g-C3N4 nanosheets.144 Such a hybrid shows high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of methyl orange (MO), which is ascribed to effective electron transfer from excited g-C3N4 to HxWO3−y NWs. The improved photocatalytic performance over the HxWO3−y/g-C3N4 hybrid results from the abundant Ov in HxWO3−y, which leads to a great number of free electrons on HxWO3−y nanowires. The surface of large nanowires with strong conductivity and capability for O2 adsorption drives the injected electrons to reduce these O2 and produce superoxide radicals for the degradation of MO. Although the research on the hydrogen tungsten bronze hybrids has achieved some breakthroughs, greater efforts should be made to further seriously study and fully use the plasmonic effect.

2.5 Non-stoichiometric MoxW1−xO3−y and MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid
Molybdenum and tungsten elements have the same number of electrons in the outermost layer, which belong to group VI elements in the periodic table. Moreover, the metallic phases of both HxMoO3−y and HxWO3−y NCs exhibit tunable and strong LSPRs, which provides an opportunity of rationally designing plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y for bioimaging, sensing, and light harvesting.148 Synthesis of new-type plasmonic NCs with intense light absorption property is expected to be achievable by coupling of HxMoO3−y and HxWO3−y NCs.151 For example, Yamashita et al. reported that plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid with strong LSPRs in the visible light region was synthesized by a facile non-aqueous solvothermal method without adding any surfactants.152 During the synthesis of plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid (Fig. 13a), molybdenum metal powder and tungsten metal powder were dissolved by H2O2 in 2-propanol and subsequently the obtained yellow suspension was added in a Teflon vessel for solvothermal treatment. The solution-soluble precursor compounds WO2(OH)(OOH) and MoO2(OH)(OOH) can firstly form in this process. By dehydration of the dissolved yellow Mo–W-complex in the growth stage, tiny MoxW1−xO3−y nuclei are generated. With the help of 2-propanol, the intrinsic anisotropic crystal growth results in the preferential formation of MoxW1−xO3−y NWs. The formation mechanism is based on the layered crystal structure of orthorhombic WO3 and MoO3 composed of WO6 octahedra and MoO6 octahedra sharing edges and corners, respectively. In the UV-vis-NIR spectra (Fig. 13b and c), this MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid shows a strong absorption peak located at around 630 nm, which connects with LSPRs. In plasmonic semiconductors, such a strong LSPR peak is infrequent in the visible light range, even in the NIR or MIR region. Also, the absorption peak position (630 nm) of MoxW1−xO3−y is shorter than that of previously reported HxMoO3−y (680 nm) nanosheets, as-synthesized HxWO3−y (>1400 nm), and HxMoO3−y (920 nm). It is amazing that the plasmonic peak strength of MoxW1−xO3−y is around 8, 16, and 20 times higher than that of the previously reported HxMoO3−y nanosheets, as-synthesized HxWO3−y, and HxMoO3−y, respectively. It is proved that LSPRs are formed from crystal vacancies, mainly containing oxygen defects and mutual doping defects of molybdenum ions and tungsten ions (Fig. 13d). A similar phenomenon was also observed by Xiong et al.153
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the plausible formation process of plasmonic MoxW1–xO3–y. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of MoxW1–xO3–y, HxMoO3–y, HxWO3–y, and our previously reported HxMoO3–y nanosheets. (c) Magnified UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of HxMoO3–y, HxWO3–y, and our previously reported HxMoO3–y nanosheets in (b). (d) Illustration of the possible formation process of crystal defects in the plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Recently, some researchers have already reported the importance of Ov in the ammonia synthesis process. Zhang's group first reported that Ov with abundant localized electrons on the surface of BiOBr nanosheets can remarkably promote the adsorption and activation of N2 and improve the reduction efficiency of N2 to NH3 under atmospheric pressure and room temperature by visible light irradiation. However, surface Ov are easily oxidized by the h+ in the valence band (VB) during the reaction. Therefore, robust semiconductors with abundant and sustainable Ov that efficiently promote water oxidation and N2 reduction are necessary. Xiong et al. demonstrated that this bottleneck was solved by refining the vacancy states with doping in photocatalysts.153 MoxW1−xO3−y ultrathin NWs are synthesized through a mild solvothermal method with ethanol as solvent and WCl6 and MoCl5 as precursors. In plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y with oxygen defects, the coordinatively unsaturated (CUS) metal atoms act as the active sites for electron transfer and N2 chemisorption. In facilitating N2 activation and dissociation, the doped low-valence Mo species play multiple crucial roles. On the one hand, they can boost the electron transfer from CUS sites to absorbed N2 and polarize the absorbed N2 molecules. On the other hand, the energy of photoexcited electrons for N2 reduction is sufficient because they can promote the vacancy-band center to the Fermi level. The high-resolution W 4f XPS spectra show that W4+, W5+, and W6+ appeared in the HxWO3−y and MoxW1−xO3−y (Fig. 14a). The valence state of W is not varied by Mo doping, which is proved by the similar fitting results for HxWO3−y and MoxW1−xO3−y. In principle, the low-valence W species (i.e., W4+ and W5+) should be described by eqn (1): 2W6/5+ + O2− → 2W5/4+ + O + Ov(1)where O2−, Ov, and O are the lattice oxygen, oxygen vacancy, and the removed oxygen, respectively. Excess electrons are left in the lattice by the removal of lattice oxygen. In this case, the generation of low-valence W species is concomitant with oxygen vacancy, which leads to the strong light absorption in the visible and NIR region. In addition, two peaks (at 234.7 and 231.6 eV) are attributed to the Mo6+ species of MoxW1−xO3−y (Fig. 14b). The ESR spectrum of MoxW1−xO3−y NWs shows a hyperfine structure with both perpendicular (g⊥ = 1.907) and parallel (g∥ = 1.846) bands (Fig. 14c). The g values display the existence of Mo–O tetragonal pyramids. Furthermore, the doped Mo species are coordinately unsaturated, which was demonstrated by the penta-coordination. It displays that electrons do not delocalize over the lattice but are trapped by Mo5+ atoms in consideration of the absence of a signal at g = 2.003 for free electrons, which is shown from the structure illustration for the lattice of vacancy-rich MoxW1−xO3−y (Fig. 14d). However, compared to plasmonic HxMoO3−y and HxWO3−y, the photocatalytic performance of MoxW1−xO3−y for some catalytic reactions (such as the dehydrogenation of NH3BH3 or N2 fixation) does not enhance much. Based on the above discussion on heterogeneous photocatalysis for improving catalytic performance, it is crucial and intriguing to synthesize plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y hybrids. Yamashita et al. developed a solution-processed method to prepare a plasmonic Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid by coupling a MoxW1−xO3−y and Pd NPs during the reduction process with NaBH4 as a reductant (Fig. 15a).76 The above plasmonic hybrid shows very strong LSPRs from the visible to the NIR region (Fig. 15b). Under visible light irradiation, the synthesized Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid shows dramatic H2 production activity enhancement from NH3BH3 solution, which is mainly attributed to the synergetic effect between W5+ ions and Pd NPs. Furthermore, the activity of the Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid is almost 5 and 5.2 times higher than those of previously reported Pd/HxMoO3−y nanosheets and MoxW1−xO3−y (Fig. 15c–e). It will undoubtedly have a place in this field in the near future with its excellent plasma effect.
 Fig. 14  Structural characterization for as-prepared HxWO3−y and MoxW1−xO3−y NWs. High-resolution (a) W 4f and (b) Mo 3d XPS spectra. (c) ESR spectra at 140 K. (d) Structural illustration for the lattice of defect-rich MoxW1−xO3−y NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid. UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of (b) Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y and reference samples. The plot of evolved H2 gas as a function of reaction time from an aqueous NH3BH3 solution (1 mmol in 10 mL water) hydrolysis over different catalysts (c) in the dark and (d) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) within 10 min. (e) Illustration of NH3BH3 dehydrogenation reaction over the Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3. Summary and outlook
The origins and developments of plasmonic semiconductor NCs (especially molybdenum bronze and tungsten bronze) have been described in detail. The fundamentals, main synthesis methods, and main applications of HxMoO3−y (hybrids), HxWO3−y (hybrids), and MoxW1−xO3−y (hybrids) have been presented.
1. HxMoO3−y (hybrids)
The main synthesis methods of plasmonic HxMoO3−y (hybrid) are hydrothermal and solvothermal methods (high temperature non-hydrolytic reaction), templating and surfactant methods, exfoliation method, H2 plasma etching, H2 thermal reduction, NaBH4 chemical reduction and so on. According to the above discussion, the intercalated H+ cations mainly bind to terminal oxygen atoms and edge-shared oxygen in the HxMoO3−y structure. The intercalated H+ cations can reduce the bandgap and expand the van der Waals gap. The plasmonic absorption of HxMoO3−y can also be tuned according to the H+ concentration that depends on the preparation conditions, such as the temperature of H2 reduction, the concentration of reductants and so on. HxMoO3−y (hybrids) shows dramatically enhanced photocatalytic activity, especially in the dehydrogenation of ammonia borane and the reduction of p-nitrophenol, as well as extraordinary high sensitivity on surface-enhanced Raman scattering detection.
2. HxWO3−y (hybrids)
Similarly, the intercalated H+ cations mainly bind to oxygen atoms of the HxWO3−y structure. The primary methods of plasmonic HxWO3−y (hybrids) synthesis are also H2 thermal reduction, NaBH4 chemical reduction, high temperature non-hydrolytic (solvothermal) reaction, hot injection of tungsten(V) ethoxide and so on. The plasmonic property of HxWO3−y (hybrids) can also be changed by tuning the reaction conditions. Furthermore, HxWO3−y (hybrids) exhibits a drastic increase in photocatalytic performance, such as the hydrogenation of the aryl nitro group, cyclic olefins, and linear olefins, Suzuki coupling, photocatalytic CO2 reduction and so on.
3. MoxW1−xO3−y (hybrids)
Up to now, the most frequently used and simplest method for the preparation of MoxWO1−xO3−y has been the solvothermal method. As-synthesized MoxWO1−xO3−y (hybrids) is used for photocatalytic dehydrogenation of ammonia borane, photocatalytic N2 reduction and so on.
In order to reach the desired outcomes, the review also displays how LSPRs of each plasmonic NC could be controlled and tuned owing to the synthetic methods. Heavily doped semiconductor NCs that show LSPRs is a relatively new and rapidly developing research field. A potential alternative to metal NPs in some applications is presented by this group of novel plasmonic NCs, and new applications are also developed at NIR and MIR wavelengths due to the absorbance of NCs. At present, most work in this field focuses on exploring methods for preparing high-quality NCs, developing new types of plasmonic semiconductor NCs, and essentially studying the optical properties of these semiconductor NCs for varied applications. The potential advantages of these NCs with tunable LSPRs also need to be further assessed, and the synthesis of semiconductor NCs must be optimized to better exploit these advantages. The purpose of this tutorial review is to compare synthetic methods and the applications of a variety of materials, summarizing key aspects of this research field. We hope this review will impel researchers to enter this research area. For practical applications of these novel types of plasmonic NCs, we still need to make a great amount of work with great energy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The present work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology (MEXT) of Japan (No. 26220911 and 19H00838) and JST, PRESTO (No. JPMJPR19T3). A part of this work was supported by the Element Strategy Initiative of MEXT, Japan (no. JPMXP0112101003).
Notes and references

          J. N. Anker, W. P. Hall, O. Lyandres, N. C. Shah, J. Zhao and R. P. Van Duyne, in Nanoscience and Technology, Co-Published with Macmillan Publishers Ltd, UK,  2009, pp. 308–319 Search PubMed .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hu, J. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, L. Au, G. V. Hartland, X. Li, M. Marquez and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 1084–1094 RSC .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Cooper, H. Ehrenreich and H. R. Philipp, Phys. Rev., 1965, 138, A494–A507 CrossRef .
I. Kriegel, F. Scotognella and L. Manna, Phys. Rep., 2017, 674, 1–52 CrossRef CAS .
A. Comin and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3957–3975 RSC .
Y. Zhao, H. Pan, Y. Lou, X. Qiu, J. Zhu and C. Burda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 4253–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Owen, Science, 2015, 347, 615–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. R. Kortshagen, R. M. Sankaran, R. N. Pereira, S. L. Girshick, J. J. Wu and E. S. Aydil, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11061–11127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Buonsanti and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1305–1317 CrossRef CAS .
T.-L. Ho, Chem. Rev., 1975, 75, 1–20 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, A. B. Khanikaev, R. Adato, N. Arju, A. A. Yanik, H. Altug and G. Shvets, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 69–75 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Genç, J. Patarroyo, J. Sancho-Parramon, R. Arenal, M. Duchamp, E. E. Gonzalez, L. Henrard, N. G. Bastús, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, V. F. Puntes and J. Arbiol, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 770–779 CrossRef .
S. Sun, M. Watanabe, J. Wu, Q. An and T. Ishihara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6474–6482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shen, J. Zhou, T. Liu, Y. Tao, R. Jiang, M. Liu, G. Xiao, J. Zhu, Z.-K. Zhou, X. Wang, C. Jin and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2381–2389 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Kabashin, P. Evans, S. Pastkovsky, W. Hendren, G. A. Wurtz, R. Atkinson, R. Pollard, V. A. Podolskiy and A. V. Zayats, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 867–871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Olmon, B. Slovick, T. W. Johnson, D. Shelton, S.-H. Oh, G. D. Boreman and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 235147–235156 CrossRef .
H. U. Yang, J. D'Archangel, M. L. Sundheimer, E. Tucker, G. D. Boreman and M. B. Raschke, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 235137–235147 CrossRef .
B. Auguié and W. L. Barnes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 143902–143905 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. Schimpf, K. E. Knowles, G. M. Carroll and D. R. Gamelin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1929–1937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, M. Liu and M. T. Swihart, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 13435–13447 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Schimpf, S. T. Ochsenbein, R. Buonsanti, D. J. Milliron and D. R. Gamelin, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9352–9354 RSC .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Schimpf, C. E. Gunthardt, J. D. Rinehart, J. M. Mayer and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16569–16577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Rinehart, A. M. Schimpf, A. L. Weaver, A. W. Cohn and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18782–18785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Dorfs, T. Härtling, K. Miszta, N. C. Bigall, M. R. Kim, A. Genovese, A. Falqui, M. Povia and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11175–11180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Erwin, L. Zu, M. I. Haftel, A. L. Efros, T. A. Kennedy and D. J. Norris, Nature, 2005, 436, 91–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Giannini, A. I. Fernández-Domínguez, S. C. Heck and S. A. Maier, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3888–3912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kalusniak, S. Sadofev and F. Henneberger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 137401–137405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Mendelsberg, G. Garcia and D. J. Milliron, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 063515–063518 CrossRef .
J. Kim, A. Agrawal, F. Krieg, A. Bergerud and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3879–3884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Bergerud, A. Agrawal, R. W. Johns, C. J. Dahlman, A. Singh, S. M. Selbach and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3390–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Rowe, J. S. Jeong, K. A. Mkhoyan and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1317–1322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, M. Vasilopoulou, D. Davazoglou, S. Kennou, A. Chroneos and U. Schwingenschlögl, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 40882–40891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Fichthorn, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 59, 3113–3119 CrossRef CAS .
N. T. K. Thanh, N. Maclean and S. Mahiddine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 7610–7630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xia, X. Xia and H.-C. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7947–7966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sluydts, K. De Nolf, V. Van Speybroeck, S. Cottenier and Z. Hens, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1462–1474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Morris-Cohen, M. Malicki, M. D. Peterson, J. W. J. Slavin and E. A. Weiss, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1155–1165 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Wang, B. Zhou, W.-C. Law, A. N. Cartwright and M. T. Swihart, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1256–1264 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kriegel, C. Jiang, J. Rodríguez-Fernández, R. D. Schaller, D. V. Talapin, E. da Como and J. Feldmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1583–1590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, R. Zamani, P. Rivera Gil, B. Pelaz, M. Ibáñez, D. Cadavid, A. Shavel, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, W. J. Parak, J. Arbiol and A. Cabot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7098–7101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Jansons, L. K. Plummer and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5415–5425 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jansons and J. E. Hutchison, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6942–6951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, G. K. Ong, Y. Wang, G. LeBlanc, T. E. Williams, T. M. Mattox, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5574–5579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Heo, J. Kim, G. K. Ong and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 5756–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Yu, Y. A. Wang and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 4300–4308 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Gordon, M. Cargnello, T. Paik, F. Mangolini, R. T. Weber, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6751–6761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh, M. Saha, S. Paul and S. K. De, Small, 2017, 13, 1602469–1602485 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Buonsanti, A. Llordes, S. Aloni, B. A. Helms and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4706–4710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, X. Zhong, S. Liu, D. Li and M. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3466–3470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, I. Lieberwirth and W. Knoll, Small, 2007, 3, 1194–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang and S.-H. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2986–3017 RSC .
N. C. Anderson, M. P. Hendricks, J. J. Choi and J. S. Owen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18536–18548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Q. Li, L. Lin, H. Peng, Z. Liu and D. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12006–12012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Kershaw, A. S. Susha and A. L. Rogach, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3033–3087 RSC .
N. J. Kramer, K. S. Schramke and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5597–5603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mangolini, E. Thimsen and U. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 655–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alvarez Barragan, N. V. Ilawe, L. Zhong, B. M. Wong and L. Mangolini, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2316–2322 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Jansons, K. M. Koskela, B. M. Crockett and J. E. Hutchison, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8167–8176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mocatta, G. Cohen, J. Schattner, O. Millo, E. Rabani and U. Banin, Science, 2011, 332, 77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. G. Pearson, J. Chem. Educ., 1968, 45, 581–587 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Pearson, J. Chem. Educ., 1968, 45, 643–648 CrossRef CAS .
E. Della Gaspera, A. S. R. Chesman, J. van Embden and J. J. Jasieniak, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9154–9163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Elimelech, J. Liu, A. M. Plonka, A. I. Frenkel and U. Banin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10335–10340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Hwang, D. D. Edwards, D. R. Kammler and T. O. Mason, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 129, 135–144 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, J. Fei, B. T. Diroll, T. Paik and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11680–11686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, M. Hegde, P. Yin and P. V. Radovanovic, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4970–4979 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yin, Y. Tan, H. Fang, M. Hegde and P. V. Radovanovic, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 463–467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Hartstein, A. M. Schimpf, M. Salvador and D. R. Gamelin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1831–1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. W. Johns, H. A. Bechtel, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Agrawal, S. D. Lounis and D. J. Milliron, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11583–11588 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Diroll, T. R. Gordon, E. A. Gaulding, D. R. Klein, T. Paik, H. J. Yun, E. D. Goodwin, D. Damodhar, C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4579–4588 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hamberg and C. G. Granqvist, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 721–723 CrossRef CAS .
E. Gerlach, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1986, 19, 4585–4604 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10932–10938 RSC .
Y. Kim, K. Y. Park, D. M. Jang, Y. M. Song, H. S. Kim, Y. J. Cho, Y. Myung and J. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22141–22146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, Y. Li, L. Liu, L. Chen, J. Xu, J. Ma, G. Fang, E. Zhu, H. Wu, L. Zhao, L. Wang and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6295–6301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tandon, G. S. Shanker and A. Nag, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2306–2311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Tandon, A. Yadav and A. Nag, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3620–3624 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, K. Tse, M. Wong, Y. Zhang and J. Zhu, Front. Phys., 2016, 11, 117405–117452 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, M. Saha, V. Dev Ashok, B. Dalal and S. K. De, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1180–1187 CrossRef CAS .
O. A. Balitskii, M. Sytnyk, J. Stangl, D. Primetzhofer, H. Groiss and W. Heiss, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17770–17775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Carroll, A. M. Schimpf, E. Y. Tsui and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11163–11169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Kriegel, C. Urso, D. Viola, L. De Trizio, F. Scotognella, G. Cerullo and L. Manna, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3873–3881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. Valdez, M. Braten, A. Soria, D. R. Gamelin and J. M. Mayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8492–8495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kinsey, M. Ferrera, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2015, 32, 121–142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Garcia, R. Buonsanti, E. L. Runnerstrom, R. J. Mendelsberg, A. Llordes, A. Anders, T. J. Richardson and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4415–4420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Dahlman, Y. Tan, M. A. Marcus and D. J. Milliron, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9160–9166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Llordés, G. Garcia, J. Gazquez and D. J. Milliron, Nature, 2013, 500, 323–326 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hu, C. Novo, A. Funston, H. Wang, H. Staleva, S. Zou, P. Mulvaney, Y. Xia and G. V. Hartland, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1949–1960 RSC .
V. Myroshnychenko, E. Carbó-Argibay, I. Pastoriza-Santos, J. Pérez-Juste, L. M. Liz-Marzán and F. J. García de Abajo, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4288–4293 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 331–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, J. Z. Ou, S. Zhuiykov, R. B. Kaner, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3952–3970 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 146–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, J. B. Cook, H. Lin, J. S. Ko, S. H. Tolbert, V. Ozolins and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16, 454–460 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Cheng, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 2910–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vasilopoulou, A. M. Douvas, D. G. Georgiadou, L. C. Palilis, S. Kennou, L. Sygellou, A. Soultati, I. Kostis, G. Papadimitropoulos, D. Davazoglou and P. Argitis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16178–16187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Li, Y. Li, G. Sun, Y. Zhou, S. Ji, H. Yao, X. Cao, S. Bao and P. Jin, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8298–8304 RSC .
F. D. Hardcastle and I. E. Wachs, J. Phys. Chem., 1991, 95, 10763–10772 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Cheng, Y. Liu, P. Liu, W. Cao, T. He, R. Chen and Z. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 5208–5214 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. de Castro, R. S. Datta, J. Z. Ou, A. Castellanos-Gomez, S. Sriram, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701619 CrossRef PubMed .
P. L. Baynton, H. Rawson and J. E. Stanworth, Nature, 1956, 178, 910–911 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Huang, S. Hu, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15283–15287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. O. Scanlon, G. W. Watson, D. J. Payne, G. R. Atkinson, R. G. Egdell and D. S. L. Law, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 4636–4645 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Mai, B. Hu, W. Chen, Y. Y. Qi, C. S. Lao, R. S. Yang, Y. Dai and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3712–3716 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, R. Miao, T. D. Huan, I. M. Mosa, A. S. Poyraz, W. Zhong, J. E. Cloud, D. A. Kriz, S. Thanneeru, J. He, Y. Zhang, R. Ramprasad and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600528–1600538 CrossRef .
T. Choksi and J. Greeley, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7260–7277 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, A. F. Chrimes, T. Daeneke, S. Balendhran, D. O. Bellisario, Y. Son, M. R. Field, W. Zhang, H. Nili, E. P. Nguyen, K. Latham, J. van Embden, M. S. Strano, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 91–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Onoda, K. Toriumi, Y. Matsuda and M. Sato, J. Solid State Chem., 1987, 66, 163–170 CrossRef CAS .
O. Glemser and G. Lutz, Naturwissenschaften, 1950, 37, 539–540 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, M. R. Field, T. Daeneke, A. F. Chrimes, W. Zhang, B. J. Carey, K. J. Berean, S. Walia, J. van Embden, B. Zhang, K. Latham, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3482–3493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Y. A. Alsaif, K. Latham, M. R. Field, D. D. Yao, N. V. Medehkar, G. A. Beane, R. B. Kaner, S. P. Russo, J. Z. Ou and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3931–3937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Dickens and J. J. Birtill, J. Electron. Mater., 1978, 7, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
B. Braïda, S. Adams and E. Canadell, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 5957–5969 CrossRef .
E. Canadell and M. H. Whangbo, Chem. Rev., 1991, 91, 965–1034 CrossRef CAS .
M. Greenblatt, Chem. Rev., 1988, 88, 31–53 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Dickens, J. J. Birtill and C. J. Wright, J. Solid State Chem., 1979, 28, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
A. Agrawal, S. H. Cho, O. Zandi, S. Ghosh, R. W. Johns and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 3121–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tan, L. Wang, C. Cheng, X. Yan, B. Shen and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2893–2896 RSC .
G. Zhang, T. Xiong, M. Yan, L. He, X. Liao, C. He, C. Yin, H. Zhang and L. Mai, Nano Energy, 2018, 49, 555–563 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, H.-Y. Zhou, T.-Y. Cheang, Z.-W. Zhao, C.-C. Shen, K. Liang, Y.-N. Liu, Z.-K. Yang, M. Imran and A.-W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27528–27534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, X. Qian, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4616–4621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, M. Wen, X. Ma, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, Y. Dai, B. Huang and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9316–9324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuwahara, Y. Yoshimura, K. Haematsu and H. Yamashita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9203–9210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, M. Che and H. Yamashita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3783–3789 RSC .
H. Zhang, K.-W. Jeon and D.-K. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21539–21544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, D. Cummins, B. N. Reinecke, E. Clark, M. K. Sunkara and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4168–4175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, J. Z. Ou, M. S. Strano, R. B. Kaner, A. Mitchell and K. Kalantar-zadeh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2175–2196 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Castro, F. Tonus, J.-L. Bobet and G. Urretavizcaya, J. Alloys Compd., 2010, 495, 537–540 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Vannice, M. Boudart and J. J. Fripiat, J. Catal., 1970, 17, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Hardcastle and I. E. Wachs, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1995, 26, 397–405 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Daniel, B. Desbat, J. C. Lassegues, B. Gerand and M. Figlarz, J. Solid State Chem., 1987, 67, 235–247 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Mattox, A. Bergerud, A. Agrawal and D. J. Milliron, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1779–1784 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Dickens and M. S. Whittingham, Q. Rev., Chem. Soc., 1968, 22, 30–44 RSC .
Y. Lee, T. Lee, W. Jang and A. Soon, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4528–4535 CrossRef CAS .
O. Glemser and C. Z. Naumann, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1951, 265, 288–289 CrossRef CAS .
O. Glemser and G. Z. Lutz, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 1951, 263, 17 CrossRef .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, H. Wang, X. Yang, C. Wang, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6180–6187 RSC .
J. Song, Z.-F. Huang, L. Pan, J.-J. Zou, X. Zhang and L. Wang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6594–6599 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Tang, J. Zhang and Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9750–9763 CrossRef CAS .
T. Paik, M. Cargnello, T. R. Gordon, S. Zhang, H. Yun, J. D. Lee, H. Y. Woo, S. J. Oh, C. R. Kagan, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1904–1910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lou, Q. Gu, Y. Liao, S. Yu and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 184, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Shukla, M. K. Ravikumar, S. Aricò, G. Candiano, V. Antonucci, N. Giordano and A. Hamnett, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1995, 25, 528–532 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xue, R.-J. Yu, C.-Z. Yuan, X. Xie, Y.-F. Jiang, H.-Y. Zhou, T.-Y. Cheang and A.-W. Xu, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2351–2357 RSC .
J. Huang, D. Ma, F. Chen, D. Chen, M. Bai, K. Xu and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7436–7446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Yousaf, M. Imran, S. J. Zaidi and P. Kasak, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6574–6584 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Qiu, Y. Xia, F. Wang, X. Liu, X. Sun, Q. Liang and Z. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 445403–445413 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yuan, Q. Cao, H.-L. Lu, M. Zhong, X. Zheng, H.-Y. Chen, T. Wang, J.-J. Delaunay, W. Luo, L. Zhang, Y.-Y. Wang, Y. Deng, S.-J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 14697–14706 RSC .
X. C. Song, E. Yang, G. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. S. Liu, H. F. Chen and Y. Wang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2010, 12, 2813–2819 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yin, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Cheng, M. Wen, Y. Huo and H. Yamashita, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 23531–23540 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, A. Jalil, D. Wu, S. Chen, Y. Liu, C. Gao, W. Ye, Z. Qi, H. Ju, C. Wang, X. Wu, L. Song, J. Zhu and Y. Xiong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9434–9443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Haibo Yin	Haibo Yin received his PhD degree in engineering from Osaka University under the supervision of Professor Hiromi Yamashita in 2019. Since January 2020, he has been a postdoctoral fellow at Tsinghua University. His research interests focus on the design of molybdenum-based plasmonic catalysts for various energy and environmental applications.
Yasutaka Kuwahara	Yasutaka Kuwahara received his PhD degree in engineering from Osaka University in 2011. He had been a postdoctoral research fellow at Georgia Institute of Technology, USA, in 2011 and a researcher at the National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Japan, in 2012–2014. He had been appointed as an assistant professor in 2014–2019 and as a lecturer since 2019 in Osaka University. His current research interests include the design of nanostructured catalysts with multi-functionalities utilizing porous materials and their applications to green chemical reactions and conversion of energy and resources.
Kohsuke Mori	Kohsuke Mori received his PhD degree from the Graduate School of Engineering Science at Osaka University under the supervision of Prof. K. Kaneda in 2003. In 2004, he joined Prof. T. Don Tilley's group at the University of California, Berkeley, as a postdoctoral fellow. He moved to the current faculty in 2005 and then became an associate professor in 2009. His current research interests focus on hybrid photocatalysts based on visible-light-responsive metal complexes, metal and alloy nanoparticle catalysts to establish clean and environmentally friendly chemical processes, and diesel automobile catalysts.
Catherine Louis	Catherine Louis is Director of Research at CNRS (French National Center of Research). She has been working in the Laboratory of “Réactivité de Surface” of Sorbonne Université since 1982, when she was appointed by the CNRS. She received her PhD degree in 1985, performing under the supervision of Prof. Michel Che; then she did a post-doctoral internship at the University of California-Berkeley in 1986–1988 with Prof. A.T. Bell. Her main research topic is the preparation of supported metal catalysts, recently gold and bimetallic catalysts.
Hiromi Yamashita	Hiromi Yamashita has been a professor of Osaka University since 2004. He received his PhD degree from Kyoto University in 1987. He was an assistant professor of Tohoku University, an associate professor of Osaka Prefecture University, and an invited professor of University Pierre and Marie Curie (UPMC). He was also a visiting research fellow of the Pennsylvania State University, the University of Texas at Austin, and California Institute of Technology. His research interests include the design of single-site photocatalysts and nanostructured catalysts.

 	Fig. 1  (a) MoO6 octahedra as found in the thermodynamically stable α-MoO3 composed of molybdenum and oxygen atoms. (b) Thermodynamically stable orthorhombic α-MoO3 with layered structure held together by van der Waals' forces. (c) Metastable monoclinic β-MoO3. (d) ε-MoO3, also known as MoO3-II. (e) Metastable h-MoO3. (f) Tunnel structure along the c-axis of the h-MoO3 unit cell. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–c) Crystal structures of α-MoO3 bulk form (a), and perfect (b) and terminal defect (010) (c) surfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 


H0.34MoO3	Blue	3.8	14.0	3.7	90.0	Orthorhombic
H0.93MoO3	Blue	14.5	3.7	3.8	93.7	Monoclinic
H1.68MoO3	Red	13.9	3.7	4.0	93.9	Monoclinic
H2.0MoO3	Green	13.5	3.8	4.0	94.6	Monoclinic
MoO3a	
	3.9	13.8	3.6	90.0	Orthorhombic

 	Fig. 3  (a) Mo 3d XPS spectra of the as-prepared HxMoO3−y and commercial MoO3 samples. (b) Mo K-edge XANES spectra of HxMoO3−y and reference materials (commercial MoO3 and MoO2). (c) UV/vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the HxMoO3−y samples prepared at 160 °C (1) and 140 °C (2) for 12 h, and commercial MoO3 (3). (d) The LSPR wavelength of the products prepared using different alcohols in the solvothermal synthesis. Time course of H2 evolution from NH3BH3 aqueous solution at room temperature for different samples: (e) in the dark and (f) under visible light irradiation (λ >420 nm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Scheme 1  The proposed formation mechanism of inverse micelle-templated mesoporous HxMoO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid upon oxidation by O2 in air and reduction by NaBH4 in solution. (b) The evolution of the optical response of the Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid exposed to air for different time periods. (c) The optical absorption for the original Pd/HxMoO3−y hybrid, oxidized in air for 48 h, and the recovered product by NaBH4 reduction. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the formation of hydrogen bronzes via H-spillover process. Optical and structural characterization of hydrogen molybdenum bronze. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra and (c) Mo 3d XPS spectra of Pd/MoO3 products before and after H2 reduction at room temperature. Density functional theory calculations. TDOS and PDOS of (d) pure MoO3 and (e) heavily hydrogen-doped HxMoO3−y. (f) Structure illustration for HxMoO3−y in the (010) projection. Blue balls represent Mo atoms, red for O, and green for H atoms. (g) Three-dimensional visualization of electronic charge density distribution around the Fermi level for HxMoO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of hydrogen molybdenum bronzes (HxMoO3−y) via a H-spillover process. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra for the Pt/HxMoO3−y hybrids reduced at varied temperatures and for the unreduced Pt/MoO3. (c) Mo 3d XPS spectra for the Pt/HxMoO3−y (200) and pristine MoO3. Time course in the deoxygenation of diphenyl sulfoxide over (d) various Pt-loaded oxide catalysts (reduction temperature = 200 °C). (e) Time course of the yield of diphenyl sulfide over the Pt/HxMoO3−y (200) catalyst with or without H2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 126. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of the Ru/MoO3 samples upon H2 reduction at different temperatures. (b) Plots of relative concentration of p-nitrophenol over Ru/HxMoO3−y (100) catalyst and reference samples as a function of time. (c) Proposed mechanism of p-nitrophenol hydrogenation on Ru/HxMoO3−y (100) without H2 gas atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2019 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Tilt patterns and stability temperature domains of the different polymorphs of WO3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structures: perfect, with vacancies, and with interstitial defects; refer to the text for details. W, O, and H atoms are shown in black, red, and green color, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2017 Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Formation energy of the WO3–Ov surface under different O chemical potentials (T = 0 K) (inset: top view of WO3 surface with Ov. The dotted vertical lines indicate the allowed range of O chemical potential). (b) Differential charge density of H2 adsorption (the yellow and blue colors represent charge depletion and accumulation, respectively, with an iso-surface value of 0.002 e Å−3. Number of electrons (N) represents the electrons transferred from H2 to the catalyst, and plus (+) represents electrons transferring from the surface to H2 while minus (−) represents the reverse). (c) Free energies of the initial (IS), transition (TS), and final states (FS) for the dissociation of H2. (d) Diffuse reflectance spectra of HxWO3−y and WO3. (e) Diagram of nitrobenzene hydrogenation reaction. (f) Linear correlation between initial reaction rate and oxygen vacancy concentration (surface O/W ratio). Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) UV-vis-NIR absorption spectra of HxWO3−y nanorods in N-methylpyrrolidone upon heating at 175 °C in air for 0, 2, and 6 min. (b) XRD patterns of HxWO3−y nanorods in N-methylpyrrolidone (top) before and (middle) after heating at 175 °C for 6 min in air and (bottom) the reference pattern for HxWO3−y. Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the 3D recyclable chestnut-like Ag/HxWO2.72 nanostructures and their application: (I) Ag NPs decorated on HxWO2.72 nanochestnuts, (II) analyte loading and SERS sensing, and (III) the regeneration of recyclable SERS substrates. (b) Schematic illustration of the practical detection of pesticide residuals in fruits peels by using the as-prepared Ag/HxWO3−y colloid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the plausible formation process of plasmonic MoxW1–xO3–y. (b) UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of MoxW1–xO3–y, HxMoO3–y, HxWO3–y, and our previously reported HxMoO3–y nanosheets. (c) Magnified UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of HxMoO3–y, HxWO3–y, and our previously reported HxMoO3–y nanosheets in (b). (d) Illustration of the possible formation process of crystal defects in the plasmonic MoxW1−xO3−y structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 
2W6/5+ + O2− → 2W5/4+ + O + Ov	(1)

 	Fig. 14  Structural characterization for as-prepared HxWO3−y and MoxW1−xO3−y NWs. High-resolution (a) W 4f and (b) Mo 3d XPS spectra. (c) ESR spectra at 140 K. (d) Structural illustration for the lattice of defect-rich MoxW1−xO3−y NWs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure of the Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid. UV-vis-NIR diffuse reflectance spectra of (b) Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y and reference samples. The plot of evolved H2 gas as a function of reaction time from an aqueous NH3BH3 solution (1 mmol in 10 mL water) hydrolysis over different catalysts (c) in the dark and (d) under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm) within 10 min. (e) Illustration of NH3BH3 dehydrogenation reaction over the Pd/MoxW1−xO3−y hybrid. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
