Modifying photocatalysts for solar hydrogen evolution based on the electron behavior  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA10497E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA10497E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5235-5259Modifying photocatalysts for solar hydrogen evolution based on the electron behavior

        
          
            Zhaoyong 
            Lin
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lihua 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lili 
            Yu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Weijia 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Guowei 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies, Nanotechnology Research Center, School of Materials Science & Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, Guangdong, P. R. China. E-mail: stsygw@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Received 
      7th December 2016
    , Accepted 7th February 2017First published on 7th February 2017AbstractConverting abundant solar energy into precious and clean hydrogen energy through photocatalytic water splitting is a highly promising way to address energy shortages. Solar H2 evolution is a practical technology in the environmental and energy fields. The electron is the protagonist in solar H2 evolution and the electron behavior determines performance. Three pivotal steps, electron generation, electron survival and electron utilization, are involved in this photocatalytic process. This review discusses some typical cases from the last two years of improving the performance of solar H2 evolution through elaborately manipulating the electron behavior. The manipulation can be accomplished by modifying the photocatalyst itself (self-modification) and with the assistance of foreign materials (extra-modification). It is expected that the main ideas behind these strategies can be extracted and used when designing efficient and robust photocatalytic systems in the future.Zhaoyong LinZhaoyong Lin is a Ph.D. candidate in Materials Physics and Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Guowei Yang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. He received his B.S. degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2014. His research interests include the synthesis of novel photocatalytic materials and the exploration of the photocatalytic mechanism.Lihua LiLihua Li received her B.S. degree in 2013 from Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China. She is now a Ph.D. candidate with Prof. Guowei Yang in Condensed State Physics at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University. Her research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of photocatalytic nanomaterials.Lili YuLili Yu is a Ph.D. candidate in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her B.S. degree from Zhengzhou University in 2007 and M.E. degree from Shandong University in 2014. Her research interests include semiconductor nanocomposites, semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, and advanced materials for environmental and energy applications.Weijia LiWeijia Li received his B.S. degree in Material Physics in 2014 from Sun Yat-sen University. Now, he is a postgraduate student at Sun Yat-sen University. His research interests focus on photocatalytic hydrogen production, advanced 2D materials and the mechanism of photocatalysis.Guowei YangGuowei Yang received his Ph.D. in Material Physics and Chemistry at the Tsinghua University of China in 2000. He held a postdoctoral position at the Department of Physics and Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign of the United States before joining the Sun Yat-sen University of China in 2002 where he is currently a Cheung-Kong Professor of Materials Physics and Chemistry and Dean of Materials Science & Engineering. His research interests include the thermodynamic theory of nanostructure growth and laser ablation in liquids (LAL) and their application in the synthesis of nanocrystals and fabrication of nanostructures.
1 Introduction
Photocatalysis is a portmanteau word combining light and catalysis. As the name implies, photocatalysis is an environmentally friendly approach to the conversion of light energy into chemical energy through some catalytic reactions. Natural photosynthesis is a typical case of photocatalysis. For practical applications, photocatalysis is used in pollutant degradation, bacteria decontamination, hydrogen (H2) evolution, oxygen (O2) evolution, overall water splitting, carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction and so on.1 The core of these applications is using the photo-generated electrons and holes to drive the corresponding reduction and oxidation reactions.
In 1972, Fujishima and Honda realized the goal of splitting water into O2 and H2 in an electrochemical cell where a TiO2 single crystal electrode irradiated by ultraviolet light was connected with a Pt electrode without the application of an external voltage. This is the so-called Fujishima–Honda effect that opens the gate to photocatalysis.2 Solar H2 evolution via water splitting is an attractive strategy to address energy shortages thanks to the high energy density of H2. Photocatalytic H2 evolution is one of the half-reactions of water splitting, without releasing O2, the other half-reaction. This may help to make full use of the H2 energy, avoiding the back reaction between H2 and O2.
Generally, there are three procedures involved in the solar H2 evolution process, light harvesting, charge separation and the H2 evolution reaction (HER), as shown in Fig. 1.3,4 Actually, we should pay more attention to the photo-generated electrons, instead of the whole process of photocatalysis. It is clear that the electron is the protagonist in photocatalytic H2 evolution. From the viewpoint of the electron behavior, electron generation, survival and utilization are the pivotal steps determining the H2 evolution performance, eliminating the external factors (such as irradiation, the degree of vacuum, hole scavengers etc.).
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution process. 
The first step is electron generation (step a). A powdery photocatalyst is dispersed in an aqueous solution. Electrons in the valence band (VB) of the photocatalyst are excited to the conduction band (CB) upon light irradiation, and holes are left in the VB. The photocatalyst is required to possess a high efficiency of light use (a broad spectrum response range and large absorbance). Furthermore, the electrons should have a sufficiently powerful reduction ability. This means that the bottom of the CB should be more negative than the thermodynamic H+/H2 potential. The second step is electron survival (steps b–e). After the photo-excitation, electrons and holes transfer to the surface of the photocatalyst (steps b and c) while some of them are consumed through bulk (step d) and surface (step e) recombination to give optical and thermal radiation. This consumption can be inhibited by spatial charge separation, which is still the bottleneck of photocatalytic technology. The key is to urge charge separation under a driving force. The last step is electron utilization (steps f and g). Holes on the surface are eliminated by hole scavengers (electron donors) (step f).5 These scavengers include alcohols (methanol, ethanol, ethylene glycol, glycerol), acids (ascorbic acid, lactic acid, acetic acid, disodium ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid), sulfide ions (Na2S–Na2SO3) and other reducing agents (glucose, triethanolamine, triethylamine).6 The remaining electrons drive the HER to reduce H+ to H2 (step g). In terms of thermodynamics, the potential of the electrons should be sufficiently negative. Moreover, a kinetic overpotential is present. Certainly, the rate of the HER is also determined by many other factors, such as the number of active sites, the H evolution pathway, the transport impedance at the solid/liquid interface, and so on.
Ideally, semiconductors with a negative CB bottom potential would all be suitable for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Considering the practical electron behavior, it is much more complicated. In this review, we focus on how to get the optimal photocatalytic H2 evolution performance upon solar irradiation. The answer is apparently to provide as many electrons with a powerful reduction ability as possible. In a given environment, the best approach is to modify the photocatalyst to manipulate the electron behavior, including electron generation, survival and utilization.
This review summarizes the recent representative progress in different strategies for improving photocatalysts for solar H2 evolution from the perspective of the electron over the last two years. This topic is discussed in three aspects: electron generation, electron survival and electron utilization, which compose the so-called electron behavior. Every aspect is divided into self-modification and extra-modification based on the modification strategies.7 Self-modification means modifying the photocatalyst itself whereas extra-modification means modifying the photocatalyst with the aid of foreign materials. We aim to extract the main ideas behind these strategies in order to search for and modify efficient and robust photocatalysts in the future. It should be noted that one strategy usually gives rise to more than one effect. For example, loading a cocatalyst will not only promote charge separation, but also provide active sites for the reactions. We only pay attention to the main effect in the discussed instances.
2 Electron generation
Electron generation is the beginning of the photocatalytic H2 evolution process. The number and the reduction ability of the generated electrons are important to the final HER. In this procedure, the energy supply derives from the incident solar light. Solar light lies in the wavelength range of 300 to 2500 nm, and is composed of 5% ultraviolet (UV, below 400 nm), 43% visible light (Vis, 400 to 760 nm) and 52% near infrared (NIR, above 760 nm) in terms of energy.
Inter-band absorption is the main light-harvesting process of semiconductors. A narrow bandgap endows the photocatalyst with a broad spectral response range. Photons with an energy larger than the bandgap energy can be absorbed by the photocatalyst. Electrons in the VB are excited to the CB and converted into active photoelectrons for the subsequent reactions. Therefore, many strategies are adopted to narrow the bandgap of the photocatalyst by self-modification. In addition to this inter-band absorption, many strategies have also been adopted to broaden the spectral response without narrowing the bandgap. Certainly, modifying the photocatalyst with foreign light-harvesting materials is also an effective strategy.
However, every coin has two sides. Narrowing the bandgap of the photocatalyst by self-modification is usually at the expense of weakening the reduction ability of the photoelectrons due to the down-shift of the CB. Recombination centers may come into being because of the introduction of non-equivalent ions, resulting in the recombination of the electrons and holes. The foreign light-harvesting materials may shield the light absorption of the photocatalyst. Therefore, there should be a balance between the positive and negative effects of these modifications. The details will be discussed in the instances below.
2.1 Self-modification for electron generation

2.1.1 Structural defect introduction. 
In this section, structural defect introduction will be discussed, including lattice distortion and self-doping without the addition of other chemical elements.
α-Ag2WO4 (AWO) is a typical UV-active photocatalyst with a wide bandgap of 3.55 eV. Thus AWO only absorbs UV light, leading to low solar energy utilization. Lin et al. report that its band structure can be adjusted by introducing lattice distortion.8 AWO consists of [WO6], [AgO7], [AgO6], [AgO4] and [AgO2] clusters, in which the O–Ag–O and O–W–O bonds are weak interactions (Fig. 2a). AWO nanorods with abundant cluster distortions can be fabricated by LAL. Cluster distortions, especially [WO6] distortions, are introduced into the lattice of the AWO. Therefore, the intermediate energy levels are inset into the bandgap, forming new states for photoexcitation with lower energies. The bandgap is therefore decreased to 2.78 eV from 3.22 eV. First-principles calculations reveal this phenomenon of electronic reconstruction (Fig. 2b–d). The bandgap is monotonically decreased upon increasing the displacement of the W atom.
 Fig. 2  Bandgap states of AWO samples before and after LAL. (a and b) Optimized equilibrium configuration and band structure, respectively, of pristine bulk AWO. (c) Plot of the bandgap with respect to the displacement of the W atom. (d) Band structure of a specific [WO6] cluster distortion with a displacement of the W atom of 0.17 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. 
Zn2GeO4 (ZGO) is also a promising photocatalyst attracting intense research interest. Similarly, its wide bandgap of 4.68 eV hinders its solar energy utilization. Its light harvesting range can be extended into the Vis region by constructing a built-in chromophore inside the lattice, which modifies the local structure at the atomic level.9 Metallic Ge–Ge bonds are believed to be able to act as this chromophore-like center, producing orange ZGO. Orange ZGO exhibits a narrow bandgap of 2.28 eV. First-principles calculations indicate that two occupied gap states come into being upon constructing Ge–Ge bonds, which narrow the bandgap by 0.5 eV. Upon increasing the number of Ge–Ge bonds, the central Ge atom becomes more negatively charged and the bandgap is narrowed further. The Ge–Ge bonds are demonstrated to act as a light-absorbing chromophore, giving rise to the Vis light photocatalytic activity of orange ZGO.
Accordingly, we can conclude that the introduction of lattice distortion is a valid method to tailor the electronic structure of the photocatalyst and influence the electron behavior. Electron generation can be promoted by this method. Vis light-driven H2 evolution by the distorted AWO and ZGO is thereby achieved, which is not possible with undistorted AWO and ZGO.
Self-doping is another strategy to facilitate electron generation. TiO2 is a well-known and robust photocatalyst with a wide bandgap of about 3.2 eV. Ti3+ is usually brought into the lattice to extend its working spectrum to the Vis region. Self-doped TiO2 has been successfully prepared by many methods. In recent years, laser ablation in liquids (LAL) has been popular. Generally, a Ti target is ablated by a focused pulsed laser in liquid. Ti3+ is introduced because of far from thermodynamic equilibrium processes in the generated plasma plumes on the solid–liquid interface. The degree of self-doping can be tailored with the pulsed laser power. The bandgaps of self-doped TiO2 prepared by ms-, ns- and fs-LAL are respectively 2.58, 2.43 and 2.15 eV, which are much smaller than that of non-doped TiO2 (3.2 eV).10–12 However, most of these Ti3+ ions are in the bulk due to the large scale of the particles, forming recombination centers for the electrons and holes and limiting the photocatalytic performance.13 Accordingly, sub-10 nm self-doped TiO2 nanoparticles were prepared by Li et al. to increase the percentage of surface/sub-surface defects compared with bulk defects in order to promote charge-carrier separation.14 Samples T-1, T-2 and T-3 are rutile TiO2 with decreasing Ti3+ concentrations. In Fig. 3a, the Vis light absorbance is obviously increased by increasing the Ti3+ concentration in T-1 and T-2. Fig. 3b gives bandgaps of 2.74, 2.84 and 2.98 eV for T-1, T-2 and T-3, respectively. The bandgap is narrowed by introducing Ti3+. The electron carrier densities are respectively determined to be 1.10 × 1018, 0.95 × 1018 and 0.45 × 1018 cm−3. Therefore, electron generation upon solar irradiation will be strengthened since the defect sites can act as electron donors. The band diagrams of reference and sub-10 nm rutile TiO2 are shown in Fig. 3c. Compared with T-3, T-1 shows a 0.3 eV upward shift in its VB top. This would be the origin of the narrowing of its bandgap. Furthermore, the upward shift of the VB top is demonstrated to be due to the abundant Ti3+ in T-1. These sub-10 nm self-doped TiO2 nanoparticles with abundant surface/sub-surface defects exhibit the state-of-the-art for activity among TiO2-based semiconductors for visible-light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution.
 Fig. 3  Bandgap states of rutile TiO2 samples T-1, T-2 and T-3. (a and b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra and (c) band energy diagrams for the samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
The narrowing of the bandgap by self-doping can be found in a report by Huang et al.15 The bandgap of CeO2 is reduced to 2.76 eV from 3.10 eV. The H2 evolution rate is improved by a factor of 3.5. It was found that the better the light absorption, the higher the H2 yield. First-principles calculations indicated that Ce3+ can narrow the bandgap. The Vis light harvesting ability is enhanced because Ce3+ is easier to excite than Ce4+ upon the same irradiation.
Graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) is a significant photocatalyst attracting more and more attention. Holey GCN (HGCN) nanosheets with abundant carbon vacancies (self-doping with the element N) were prepared by Liang et al. from bulk GCN (BGCN).16 Compared with BGCN with a bandgap of 2.59 eV, HGCN shows an increased bandgap of 2.90 eV due to the quantum confinement effect. This is contrary to the results for self-doped TiO2 and CeO2. Interestingly, HGCN presents a broad and strong tail from 530 nm to the NIR region in its absorption spectrum. The presence of carbon vacancies results in spin-polarized conduction electrons in the spin-down branch and subsequent enhanced NIR absorption. Therefore, the broader light absorption, higher donor density and longer lifetime of its charge carriers endow HGCN with a nearly 20 times higher H2 evolution activity.
Self-doping with a low-valence element can also induce polaron absorption, which is a serviceable means to broaden the optical response, especially the NIR region, making it possible to realize full-spectrum-responsive photocatalysis from the UV and Vis to NIR regions. This phenomenon has been observed in CsxWO3 nanorods, which consist of mixed chemical valence W ions, W6+ and W5+.17 This can be exactly expressed as CsxWx5+W1−x6+O3. Fig. 4a shows the crystal structure of CsxWO3 mainly comprising corner-sharing [WO6] clusters. As shown in Fig. 4b, fully oxidized CsxWO3+x/2 without W5+ exhibits a bandgap excitation at 500 nm in its absorbance spectrum. After introducing W5+ into the lattice, an apparent absorption covering the whole solar region of 300–2500 nm can be found, especially in the NIR region of 780–2500 nm. This suggests the function of low-valence W5+ as a chromophore. Li et al. believe that this is derived from inter-valence charge transfer and polaron absorption, as shown in Fig. 4c. The NIR light absorption is due to polaron transfer by hopping between two neighboring nonequivalent W6+ and W5+ sites along with a phonon. Generally, upon NIR light irradiation, an electron will escape from the W5+ site to the neighboring W6+ site. The original W5+ and W6+ are changed to W6+ and W5+. In the photocatalytic environment, the escaped electron is provided for photocatalytic reactions instead of reducing the neighboring W6+. Meanwhile, the remaining hole on the W5+ site is consumed by the hole scavenger. This guarantees the stability of the photocatalyst. A similar polaron absorption phenomenon can be found in WO3−x and Cu2(OH)PO4.18,19 Although only the NIR light-driven photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants has been achieved, we believe there is potential for H2 evolution based on this polaron absorption theory for full-spectrum-driven photocatalysis.
 Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of CsxWO3 nanorods viewed down the c and b axes. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of CsxWO3 and CsxWO3+x/2. (c) Schematic diagram of polaron hopping between the W6+ and W5+ states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 


2.1.2 Chemical impurity introduction. 
Structural defect introduction is a strategy for broadening the optical response and accelerating electron generation without the addition of other chemical elements. Besides this, doping the photocatalyst with foreign chemical impurities to tailor its electronic structure is a feasible strategy as well. Both nonmetallic and metallic elements have been used.
The solar light absorption of TiO2 can be extended to the Vis region by doping with the nonmetallic element N.20 Upon increasing the N content, N-doped TiO2 photocatalysts show an enhanced absorbance in the Vis region. N doping is demonstrated to introduce some shallow trap states at the surface/sub-surface of TiO2, extending its optical response. Interestingly, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate is also increased upon increasing the N content. Similarly, the bandgap of SiC can be decreased from 2.341 eV to 1.935 eV by B doping.21 After B doping, the CB and VB of SiC both decrease by 0.4 and 0.5 eV respectively. The decrease of the CB is due to the mixing of Si 3p and B 2p orbitals and the decrease of the VB is due to the mixing of C 2s, Si 3s and B 2p orbitals. Therefore, the photocatalytic H2 evolution rate is increased 20 times. In addition, Li et al. report that the photocatalytic performance of covalent triazine-based frameworks (CTFs) can be efficiently improved by S doping.22 The absorption spectrum is extended to 750 nm from 450 nm. The enhanced solar energy utilization is ascribed to an upshift of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO), which is due to S 2p level doping.
Metallic element doping is also applicable to extending the optical response of photocatalysts. Cr is demonstrated to be an efficient dopant for the Vis light absorbance extension of perovskite Sr2TiO4.23 As shown in Fig. 5a, doping with Cr forms a spin-polarized VB from the Cr 3d orbitals, guaranteeing its Vis light response. In addition, the optical response of the AgGaS2 photocatalyst can be tailored by doping with different metal elements (Fe, Co, Ni, Cu).24Fig. 5b shows the absorbance spectra of doped and undoped AgGaS2. Doping with Fe, Co, Ni, or Cu apparently strengthens the Vis region absorption. Note that the bands at 650–800 nm for Co-doped AgGaS2 are due to d–d transitions instead of band-related absorptions. Based on the absorbance spectra, all of the dopant atoms Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu generate an electron donor level in the forbidden band of AgGaS2, boosting electron generation upon solar irradiation. Moreover, the bandgap of UV-active ZnS can be tuned from 3.43 to 2.36 eV by doping Cu (0–10 mol%) into the lattice.25 The absorbance spectra of ZnS and Cu/ZnS are shown in Fig. 5c. Compared with the undoped ZnS, Cu/ZnS shows a red shift in its absorption edge. Cu/ZnS with a Cu concentration of 2.0 mol% exhibits the best photocatalytic performance since the new energy levels and enhanced light absorption make electron excitation easier. Although light absorption is further enhanced upon further increasing the Cu concentration, recombination centers will unfortunately form. This will result in a decrease of the photocatalytic activity. Furthermore, codoping is also a common approach. The bandgap of SnO2 can be adjusted from 3.5 to 2.9 eV through the meticulous codoping of Ce and Sb into its lattice, as reported by Liu et al.26 The photocatalytic performance is clearly improved.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the band alignment of Cr-doped Sr2TiO4 and the possible electron generation procedures. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of Fe (red), Co (blue), Ni (green), and Cu (orange) 1 mol%-doped and undoped (black) AgGaS2. (c) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of Cu-doped and undoped ZnS. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 


2.1.3 Surface modification. 
As discussed above, sub-10 nm self-doped TiO2 nanoparticles exhibit excellent activity for visible-light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution due to the increase of the percentage of surface/sub-surface defects compared with bulk defects. That is because bulk Ti3+ defects are inclined to form recombination centers for the electrons and holes in the bulk. Actually, only photo-generated electrons transferred to the surface of the photocatalyst can drive photocatalytic H2 evolution. Photocatalysis is a surface reaction. Therefore, surface modification for electron generation has emerged and drawn attention.27 Nevertheless excessive surface defects from modifying the surface with external radicals will lead to new recombination centers. A tradeoff between the number of defects and the photocatalytic activity is necessary.
Hydrogenation of the surface of TiO2 is a typical case of surface modification for electron generation. Wang et al. report that the surface hydrogenation of a TiO2 photocatalyst leads to bandgap narrowing.28 As shown in Fig. 6a, compared with TiO2 hollow spheres (CST), hydrogenated cagelike TiO2 hollow spheres (CST-H-750) present an obvious band tail in the VB XPS spectrum. This is because of surface hydrogenation induced lattice disorder (the disordered surface layer and oxygen vacancies). This results in the insertion of midgap states in the forbidden band. Therefore a stronger light harvesting ability, especially in the Vis region, is possessed by the hydrogenated TiO2. Electron generation and the photocatalytic performance are boosted, as well. At this point, the bandgap of TiO2 has been changed. On the other hand, Samsudin et al. also fabricated hydrogenated TiO2.29 Interestingly, no bandgap narrowing was observed. They annealed TiO2 powders in H2 for 0, 6, 12 and 24 h, labeled as H0-TiO2, H6-TiO2, H12-TiO2 and H24-TiO2, respectively. Obviously, in the absorbance spectra in Fig. 6b, all the hydrogenated TiO2 powders show extended light absorption towards the NIR region. The UV absorbance is reduced whereas the Vis and NIR absorbance increases. There is little change in their bandgaps, shown in Fig. 6c and d. The color change from white TiO2 to bluish-gray for hydrogenated TiO2 is ascribed to the formation of surface disorder and Ti3+. The Ti 2p XPS spectra in Fig. 6e show a systematic but small negative shift of the binding energy, indicating the formation of O–Ti–H bonds on the surface. This negative shift indicates that the Ti 2p is electron-rich. The electron density should be increased because oxygen is more electronegative than hydrogen. The oxygen vacancies within the TiO2 lattice can serve as electron donors. Therefore, electron generation is facilitated and the photocatalytic performance is improved. It should be noticed that excessive surface defects will deteriorate the photocatalytic activity as they serve as the recombination centers.
 Fig. 6  (a) VB XPS spectra of CST and CST-H-750. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of H0-TiO2, H6-TiO2, H12-TiO2 and H24-TiO2. (c and d) Kubelka–Munk plots for H0-TiO2 and H6-TiO2. (e) XPS spectra showing the Ti 2p deconvoluted peaks of H0-TiO2, H6-TiO2, H12-TiO2 and H24-TiO2. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 the American Chemical Society. (b–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Moreover, surface fluorination and surface O–Zn–Cl modification are also good for promoting electron generation and improving the photocatalytic performance of TiO2.30,31 Recently, a Mg-free black TiO2 material with optimized properties for Vis light photocatalysis was developed by Sinhamahapatra et al.32 This black TiO2 possesses an optimum bandgap and band position, and optimum numbers of oxygen vacancies, surface defects and recombination centers. The light absorption is enhanced by surface modification, resulting from magnesiothermic treatment. Besides this, hydrogenated g-C3N4,33 hydrogenated TaON,34 surface Fe(III)-modified BiOCl35 and surface Rh(III)-modified BiOCl36 are all able to improve photocatalytic activity by expediting electron generation.


2.1.4 Crystal engineering and electron reduction ability. 
In photocatalytic H2 evolution, only the electrons with a potential above the H+/H2 redox level can drive the HER, and this depends on the CB position. Elevating the CB is demonstrated to be a feasible way to strengthen the reduction ability of the photo-generated electrons. In the synthesis process for the photocatalyst, the morphology and structure can be tuned by simply varying the synthesis conditions. The properties of the photocatalyst are therefore tuned. Its band positions can be tailored by tuning its crystal structure and crystallinity. We call this crystal engineering.
Tetrazole-derived potassium poly(heptazine imide)s (PHIs) possess long range crystallinities and small layer-stacking distances resulting in altered electronic band structures.37 PHIs are a kind of photocatalytically active carbon nitride material. The crystallinity of a PHI is tunable. Its band positions can be tailored by crystal engineering. Upon decreasing the crystallinity, the bandgap of a PHI does not change significantly. Instead, the CB position varies from −0.09 to −0.32 eV (vs. RHE). A less crystalline PHI possesses a more negative CB. In particular, Fig. 7 shows the band energy diagrams of PHIK-0.1 (the most crystalline PHI product) and mpg-CN (a mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride with poor crystallinity). It can be clearly seen that the CB of mpg-CN is 0.79 eV higher than that of PHIK-0.1. This endows mpg-CN with a stronger reduction ability for the HER.
 Fig. 7  The band energy diagrams of PHIK-0.1 and mpg-CN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
Janáky et al. have investigated tungsten-based semiconductors for solar hydrogen evolution experimentally and theoretically.38 They present various synthesis methods and the resulting crystal structures. The band positions are strongly influenced by the crystal structure. The CBs of these tungsten-based semiconductors are dominated by the W 5d orbital. The crystal field around the W atoms is different in different binary tungstates, which will greatly influence the orbital distribution of the central atom W. A weak effect of the surrounding crystal field can be obtained by lengthening the W–O bond, leading to a narrower W 5d band distribution and an upward CB edge. The reduction ability of the CB electrons is enhanced.

2.2 Extra-modification for electron generation

2.2.1 Narrow-bandgap semiconductor modification. 
Combining photocatalysts, especially wide-bandgap photocatalysts, with narrow-bandgap semiconductors is a conspicuous extra-modification method for extending their working spectrum.
3D mesoporous TiO2 (MT) and black TiO2 (MBT) are both outstanding photocatalysts as discussed above.39 Their light harvesting capacities can be raised by modification with the narrow- bandgap semiconductor MoS2. The absorbance spectra of MT, MBT and sandwich MT/MoS2/MT and MBT/MoS2/MBT are shown in Fig. 8a. MT can only absorb UV light whereas MBT extends its spectrum to the Vis region due to the introduction of Ti3+. After combining it with narrow-bandgap MoS2, the absorbance, especially in the Vis region, is enhanced greatly. The bandgaps of MT, MT/MoS2/MT, MBT and MBT/MoS2/MBT are determined to be 3.00, 2.82, 2.12 and 1.97 eV, respectively (Fig. 8b). This indicates that the light harvesting capacities of TiO2 and black TiO2 can both be heightened by MoS2 modification. Similarly, Liu et al. report that narrow-bandgap Cu2O (2.0 eV) can improve the light harvesting capacity of the Vis light-active g-C3N4 photocatalyst (2.7 eV).40
 Fig. 8  Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra (a) and the corresponding Kubelka–Munk plots (b) for MBT/MoS2/MBT, MBT, MT/MoS2/MT and MT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 


2.2.2 Dye sensitization. 
Dye sensitization is a successful strategy for broadening the optical response of and providing electrons for a photocatalyst thanks to the photo-sensitivity of the organic dye. For example, as shown in Fig. 9a and b, erythrosin B sensitized UiO-66 octahedrons show a mixture of the features of the erythrosin B dye and UiO-66 octahedrons in their absorbance spectra.41 The peak at about 530 nm is the characteristic absorption of erythrosin B dye. In recent years, many dye sensitized systems have been investigated, such as phenothiazine sensitized TiO2,42 fluorescein sensitized g-C3N4,43 eosin Y sensitized Ni/graphene,44 and so on.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of UiO-66 octahedrons and a suspension of ErB sensitized UiO-66. (c) Typical principles of a dye sensitized semiconductor for Vis light-induced photocatalytic H2 evolution. (d) Mechanism of photocatalytic H2 evolution with CXTS (X = Zn, Ni, Fe, Co and Mn) nanofibers. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (c) Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2016 Wiley. 
The typical principles of a dye sensitized semiconductor for photocatalytic H2 evolution are illustrated in Fig. 9c.45 Upon irradiation, dye molecules are excited and electrons transfer from the HOMO to the LUMO. The electrons in the LUMO are injected into the CB of the semiconductor due to the driving force of the energy level difference. Then the electrons in the CB will migrate to the surface of the photocatalyst and trigger the reduction reactions. At the same time, dye molecules are regenerated for cyclic utilization through sacrificing the electron donor (hole scavenger).
Furthermore, Gonce et al. studied the photocatalytic activity difference between eosin Y sensitized Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS), Cu2NiSnS4 (CNTS), Cu2FeSnS4 (CFTS), Cu2CoSnS4 (CCTS) and Cu2MnSnS4 (CMTS) nanofibers.46 The photocatalytic rates for the nanofibers are in the order CNTS > CFTS > CCTS > CZTS > CMTS. The difference is attributed to the CB energy levels of the photocatalysts. As shown in Fig. 9d, electrons in the HOMO of eosin Y (Eox = 0.89 eV vs. normal hydrogen electrode) transfer to the CB of the photocatalyst. The CB levels of CNTS, CFTS, CCTS, CZTS and CMTS are respectively −0.55, −0.69, −0.73, −0.92 and −1.10 eV. The differences between the eosin Y LUMO energy level and the CB levels of the photocatalysts are in the order CNTS > CFTS > CCTS > CZTS > CMTS. A bigger difference is good for the photocatalytic HER. In addition, perylene tetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI) sensitized g-C3N4 was investigated by Chen et al.47 The anionic radical of PTCDI acts as a strong electron donor. The ordered π–π stacking of PTCDI on the surface of π-conjugated g-C3N4 promotes intra-/inter-molecular charge transfer. The photocatalytic activity is therefore boosted. This investigation demonstrates that a strong interaction between PTCDI and g-C3N4 favors electron supply. It is necessary to consider the compatibility between the selected dye molecule and the photocatalyst to optimize the photocatalytic performance.


2.2.3 Up-conversion material modification. 
As discussed above, many present photocatalysts are UV light-active or Vis light-active. Considering that 52% of light in solar irradiation is NIR, many researchers have devoted themselves to searching for NIR light-active photocatalysts. Obviously, if up-conversion luminescence agents that can generate one high-energy photon by absorbing two or more low-energy photons are brought into the photocatalytic system, the solar utilization will be improved greatly. This requires that the up-conversion materials can emit light with a suitable energy that can be absorbed by the photocatalyst. Generally, the up-conversion process is achieved through chains of GSA (ground state absorption) and ESA (excited state absorption). Upon multiple-wavelength light excitation, the population of an excited state may be realized through ESA or ETU (energy transfer up-conversion) or PA (photon avalanche).
Wang et al. prepared the up-conversion material modified photocatalyst Er3+:Y3Al5O12/Pt–KNbO3 to extend its working spectrum from the UV to the Vis region.48 KNbO3 is a UV light-active photocatalyst with a wide bandgap larger than 3.3 eV. Er3+:Y3Al5O12 can convert the Vis light in solar irradiation into UV light, which can effectively excite KNbO3 for photocatalytic H2 evolution. Furthermore, they used two up-conversion materials to extend the working spectrum to the NIR region. Er3+:Y3Al5O12 converting Vis light to UV light and Tm3+,Yb3+:NaYF4 converting NIR light to UV light were combined with the UV light-active photocatalyst MoS2–NaTaO3.49 The bandgap of NaTaO3 is 4.0 eV. The photocatalytic mechanism of this Tm3+,Yb3+:NaYF4–Er3+:Y3Al5O12/MoS2–NaTaO3 is shown in Fig. 10. The Vis and NIR light in the irradiation can both be converted into UV light, by up-conversion by Er3+:Y3Al5O12 and Tm3+,Yb3+:NaYF4. This indicates that the light irradiated onto the surface of NaTaO3 is totally UV light, which can be effectively employed by NaTaO3.
 Fig. 10  NIR-Vis light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution principles and process of Tm3+,Yb3+:NaYF4–Er3+:Y3Al5O12/MoS2–NaTaO3 nanocomposite particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
Carbon quantum dots are a novel class of popular carbon nanomaterials that are used in photocatalytic H2 evolution frequently. They possess both up- and down-converted photoluminescence, photo-induced electron transfer and reservoir properties. They can convert NIR light into Vis light and transfer it to the photocatalyst. The photocatalyst should be Vis light-active to match the photoluminescence of carbon dots. Therefore, surface hydrogenated TiO2 nanobelts and TaON hollow nanourchins are employed.34,50 This up-conversion material modification strategy makes it possible to boost the electron generation upon solar irradiation and realize full spectrum solar photocatalytic H2 evolution.


2.2.4 Plasmonic electron generation. 
Localized surface plasmon resonance (LSPR) is the light-excitation-induced collective oscillation of free charges confined in a highly conductive nanocrystal. The oscillation amplitude reaches its maximum at a certain wavelength called the LSPR wavelength. The local electric field in the nanoscale spatial region around the nanocrystal is greatly enhanced upon resonant excitation. Noble metals are good materials that can support LSPR in the Vis and NIR regions because of their big free charge-carrier (electron) concentrations of up to 1021 cm−3. Therefore, plasmonic materials are mostly used to extend the photocatalytic activities of wide-bandgap photocatalysts from the UV to the Vis or NIR regions. The excitation of the LSPR is usually at a lower energy.
When integrating the plasmonic material with the semiconductor photocatalyst, the interaction between them is interesting. Two effects, the plasmonic enhancement of light absorption and the hot electron effect, are proposed by Wang’s group, as shown in Fig. 11.51 When the plasmonic material is excited, a strongly enhanced electromagnetic field is localized around it. A semiconductor with absorption spectrally overlapping with the LSPR of the plasmonic material will be subjected to the strong electric field (Fig. 11a). The number of electrons generated in the semiconductor is therefore greatly increased since the generation rate is proportional to the local excitation light intensity. This is the so-called plasmonic enhancement of light absorption effect. The other one is the hot electron effect, which is also called the plasmonic sensitization effect. It describes the electron transfer process at the interface from the plasmonic material to the semiconductor (Fig. 11b). Besides this, Yang et al. have elucidated the photothermal effect induced by the LSPR and its influence on the photocatalytic performance.52 Therefore, the exact mechanism of photocatalysis based on the LSPR needs to be further studied. No matter which mechanism the photocatalytic process obeys, it is sure that electron generation upon solar irradiation is greatly boosted by introducing plasmonic materials.
 Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms for plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions over metal/semiconductor hybrid nanostructures. (a) The plasmonic enhancement of light absorption and (b) the hot electron effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014 Wiley. 
Nowadays, many plasmonic materials have been found and studied thoroughly. Among them the noble metals, such as Au and Ag, are the most popular. Au has been used to modify TiO2, CdS, La2Ti2O7 and Cu2FeSnS4 to improve their photocatalytic activities based on the LSPR effect.53–57 Ag modified TiO2 and AgCl have also been investigated.58,59 Hot electrons in the plasmonic materials are injected into the photocatalysts, providing more electrons and advancing photocatalytic H2 evolution. This could be explained by the hot electron effect. Furthermore, Au–Ag bimetal nanoshells with a tunable LSPR wavelength were employed to improve the photocatalytic performance of a ZnIn2S4 nanocore.60 A Au–Ag nanoshell with a LSPR wavelength at 700 nm performed best. Li et al. believe that this is due to its having the strongest coupling between the nanoshell and the photocatalyst matrix. Moreover, an interlayer of SiO2 with a thickness of about 17 nm was inserted into the core–shell structure to block electron transfer between the plasmonic material and the photocatalyst. Notably, the photocatalytic activity was improved. This study demonstrates the plasmonic enhancement of light absorption effect.61
In addition, the LSPR effect has also been observed in the non-noble metal Al by Halas’s group.62 This can be used to improve photocatalytic performance as well. They propose that the plasmonic Al nanoparticles can act as nanoantennas for a catalytic reactor of Pd nanoparticles. Light can be coupled into Pd, forcing a plasmonic response. Hot electrons are generated by the plasmon decay, converting the catalyst into a photocatalyst.63 Moreover, the LSPR effect can also be found in many deficient metal oxides and chalcogenides, such as WO3−x, In2O3−x, TiO2−x, Cu2−xS, Cu2−xSe and so on.10,64–70 We believe they would also be suitable for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution.

3 Electron survival
In the process of photocatalytic H2 evolution, the photo-generated electrons and holes transfer to the surface of the photocatalyst after the photo-excitation. Some of them are consumed through bulk and surface recombination on the recombination centers, which are generally the lattice defects. A direct response to this problem is to shorten the journey and lower the defect concentration. The above-discussed sub-10 nm self-doped TiO2 is an exemplary case. The small scale shortens the journey for the electrons to transfer to the surface. The increase in the number of surface defects reduces the bulk defects for charge recombination. Beyond that, applying an internal or external driving force to urge charge separation is a rational strategy, as well.
In this section, we are going to talk about how to promote electron survival by suppressing charge recombination. Self-modification by morphology engineering and structure engineering is involved. Extra-modification by cocatalysts, heterojunctions and Z-scheme strategies is included. All of these strategies can urge charge separation under a driving force and therefore guarantee electron survival for the following reduction reaction. Given that unavoidable negative effects are usually brought about, there should be a balance between the positive and negative effects of these modifications.
3.1 Self-modification for electron survival

3.1.1 Morphology engineering for anisotropy-induced charge separation. 
Morphology engineering is a kind of self-modification for electron survival in the process of photocatalytic H2 evolution by introducing anisotropy into the system. It is this anisotropy that improves charge separation and thereby boosts the photocatalytic activity.
Brookite TiO2 nanorods with a diameter of about 5 nm and a tunable length were prepared by Cargnello et al.71 Depending on their length, varying from 25 nm to 45 nm, they were labeled as short, short-medium, medium, medium-long, and long rods. Their bandgaps were all determined to be 3.4 eV, showing no apparent difference in electron generation, the first step of photocatalytic H2 evolution. The photocatalytic rate normalized by the surface area was demonstrated to be proportional to the length. The long rod was found to be the most active. This is due to its having the longest carrier lifetime. This indicates that the survival rate of the photo-generated electrons was the largest in the long rod. Generally, the hole and electron diffusion lengths in TiO2 are approximately 10 nm and several micrometers, respectively. Therefore, holes can be confined to the widths of the nanorods whereas electrons can transfer over the whole length. This anisotropy leads to charge separation and electron survival. The photocatalytic H2 evolution activity was therefore improved.
Manipulating the morphology of the photocatalyst to expose different facets with different surface energies is also a versatile approach for promoting spatial charge separation. This is called facet engineering. The photo-generated electrons and holes display spatial separation between different facets. This can be found in many semiconductors, such as TiO2, BiVO4, CeO2, AgBr, Cu2O and so on.72–81
Anatase TiO2 is a semiconductor that tends to expose its {101} facets instead of its {001} facets due to the higher thermodynamic stability of the {101} facets. The phenomenon that the high-surface-energy {001} facets exhibit higher photocatalytic activity is considered to be caused by the high density of active unsaturated Ti atoms and active oxygen atoms. In addition, Yu’s group reports that optimization of the ratio of {101} and {001} facets can improve the photocatalytic activity of anatase TiO2 due to the appearance of a surface heterojunction.72 The density of states plots for the {101} and {001} facets of anatase TiO2 are shown in Fig. 12a. Interestingly, their Fermi levels are quite different. The Fermi level of the {001} facets is within their VB whereas that of the {101} facets is at the top of their VB. When the {001} and {101} surfaces contact each other in a single crystal, their Fermi levels should be equal. Therefore, a surface heterojunction is formed. Electrons and holes will migrate to the {101} and {001} facets, respectively, realizing charge spatial separation, as shown in Fig. 12b. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 12c, cocatalysts of Pt and Co3O4 are respectively deposited onto the {101} and {001} facets to reduce charge recombination.73 The loading of the cocatalysts will be discussed in detail later. Lately, Selcuk and Selloni discuss this phenomenon based on first-principles simulations.74 They find that an excess electron at the aqueous {101} interface can trigger water dissociation and become trapped into a stable surface Ti3+-bridging OH complex. Also, oxidation reactions are favored on the {001} facets since electrons avoid the {001} facets. These results support the above discussions.
 Fig. 12  (a) Density of states (DOS) plots for the {101} and {001} surfaces of anatase TiO2. (b and c) Schematic illustration of the synergetic effect of the surface heterojunction and the co-deposition of dual cocatalysts. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014 the American Chemical Society. (b and c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 


3.1.2 Structure engineering for atomic-level directional charge separation. 
In addition to morphology engineering for anisotropy-induced charge separation, directional charge separation can be achieved on the atomic level through structure engineering, another kind of self-modification for electron survival. The internal electric field caused by the structural anisotropy on the atomic level is the origin of the directional charge separation.
Bi2WO6 nanosheet-assembled microspheres were prepared by Ma et al. for photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation.82 A heterojunction interface with a space charge was provided by the sandwich structure [Bi2O2]2+–[WO4]2−–[Bi2O2]2+ of Bi2WO6. The CB bottom of Bi2WO6 was composed of a W 5d orbital located in the middle layer [WO4]2− whereas the VB top originated from an O 2p orbital from the surface [Bi2O2]2+. Therefore, the photo-generated holes and electrons could be confined in the surface and middle layers respectively. Directional charge separation for electron survival was accomplished. Nevertheless, for bulk Bi2WO6 made of numerous [Bi2O2]2+–[WO4]2−–[Bi2O2]2+ layers, the separated electrons will recombine on the sites between the adjacent [Bi2O2]2+–[WO4]2−–[Bi2O2]2+ monolayers. The efficiency of charge separation is limited in bulk materials.
Therefore, monolayered Bi2WO6 nanosheets were synthesized by Zhou et al. to overcome the defects of bulk materials for effective charge separation by mimicking a heterojunction interface.83 It is found that bulk Bi2WO6 is composed of numerous [Bi2O2]2+–[WO4]2−–[Bi2O2]2+ layers. Monolayer Bi2WO6 has two possible configurations: a sandwich substructure [BiO]+–[WO4]2−–[BiO]+ and a non-sandwich substructure [Bi2O2]2+–[WO4]2−. First-principles calculations indicate that the sandwich substructure is more thermodynamic stable. The structure of monolayer Bi2WO6 with a thickness of 0.82 nm is shown in Fig. 13a (left). Upon irradiation, electrons and holes can be generated respectively in the middle layer and on the surface layer, resulting in directional charge separation for electron survival (Fig. 13a right).
 Fig. 13  (a) Structure of pristine monolayer Bi2WO6 (left). Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of monolayer Bi2WO6 (right). (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 evolution over monolayer MnSb2S4. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of Bi12O17Cl2–MoS2 and of the charge flow processes within Bi12O17Cl2–MoS2. (d) Schematic illustration of the band alignments in Bi12O17Cl2 and MoS2 monolayers and the photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
Unfortunately, both bulk Bi2WO6 and monolayer Bi2WO6 are used in photocatalytic organic pollutant degradation instead of H2 evolution. That is because the photo-generated electrons are confined in the middle layer, which is not in direct contact with the aqueous solution (especially H+). It is reported that electrons can be restricted in the surface layer of free standing MnSb2S4 monolayer nanosheets for photocatalytic H2 evolution.84 As shown in Fig. 13b, electrons and holes are formed on the surface [SbS]+ layer (CB) and the middle [MnS2]2− layer (VB), respectively. Moreover, Li et al. realized the goal of extracting the electrons to the surface layer via atomic-level charge flow steering for photocatalytic H2 evolution.85 They synthesized novel Janus bilayer junctions by assembling metallic 1T MoS2 monolayers onto the Bi12O17 end-faces of Bi12O17Cl2 monolayers. Similarly, in the Bi12O17Cl2 monolayer, an internal electric field along the [001] orientation perpendicular to the (Bi12O17)2+ and (Cl2)2− layers is built up because the charge density surrounding the (Bi12O17)2+ layer is higher than that of the (Cl2)2− layer. This internal electric field can drive the photo-generated electrons and holes to the (Bi12O17)2+ and (Cl2)2− layers, respectively. Furthermore, MoS2 monolayers were chemically adhered to the Bi12O17 end-faces of Bi12O17Cl2 monolayers to extract the electrons. Electrons in the (Bi12O17)2+ layers can transfer along Bi–S bonds to the (MoS2) layers. This atomic-level directional charge separation is illustrated in Fig. 13c. Also, the whole photocatalytic H2 evolution process is shown in Fig. 13d. Electrons transferring to the MoS2 layers drive the HER whereas the holes staying in the (Cl2)2− layers are consumed by the scavengers.
Another case of atomic-level directional charge separation is established in a bismuth-based layered organic–inorganic hybrid material.86 BiOHCOO is composed of numerous (Bi2O2)-2(HCOO) layers. When BTC layers are inserted into the lattice to replace the HCOO layers, the obtained BiO-BTC retains the layered structure of BiOHCOO. Since the size of a BTC ion is larger than that of an HCOO ion, the BiO4 tetrahedron in the Bi2O2layer is distorted. This distortion induces an internal electric field, which creates directional charge separation and prolongs the lifetimes of the charge carriers.87 All of these cases demonstrate that directional charge separation for electron survival can be achieved by structure engineering at the atomic level.

3.2 Extra-modification for electron survival

3.2.1 Cocatalysts for electron collection. 
If the photo-generated electrons can be collected in time by the active sites for the HER, the probability of charge recombination will be reduced greatly and electron survival will be protected. A cocatalyst is a material that can catalyze and accelerate photocatalysis instead of triggering the HER upon irradiation. It generally acts as a sink for trapping the photo-generated electrons as well as being an active site for the HER.88
The noble metal Pt, with its large work function, is regarded as the best candidate cocatalyst for trapping electrons. Pt nanoparticles are usually deposited onto the surface of the photocatalyst to collect the electrons from the CB of the photocatalyst. Rahman et al. prepared 2D carbon nitride nanosheet (NS-CN) photocatalysts with Pt nanoparticles as a cocatalyst recently.89 The Pt usage was reduced to only 0.03 wt% (it is generally more than 0.5 wt%) by optimizing the electro-optical properties of the NS-CN. The function of the Pt cocatalyst is shown in Fig. 14a. The electrons in the CB transfer to the Pt cocatalyst due to its large work function. Therefore, the electrons and holes are separated. Pt acts as an electron collector and transporter for the HER.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the function of a Pt cocatalyst in the photocatalytic process of NS-CN. (b) Differential charge density determined by first-principles simulations for Pt(100) shells on Pd(100) substrates in the presence of one additional electron. The olive and cyan colors represent an increase and decrease in the electron density, respectively. (c) Gibbs free energy profiles of the HER at the equilibrium potential (U = USHE) on the (101) and (001) surfaces of a TiO2 system with and without cocatalysts such as Pt and PtO. (a) Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
Xiong’s group reports that the Pt usage can be reduced by employing atomically controlled Pd@Pt quasi-core-shell cocatalysts for a TiO2 photocatalyst, as well.90 Electron trapping by the Schottky junction can be promoted by the charge polarization at the interface of Pd and Pt. Fig. 14b illustrates the differential charge densities in the presence of one additional electron as a function of the Pt shell thickness. Three-atom-thick Pt is the most favorable environment for charge separation. Given that the work function of Pt (5.77 eV) is much larger than that of Pd (5.12 eV), electron migration across the interface from Pd to Pt should take place to equilibrate their electron Fermi distributions. Thus the Pt surface presents higher electron density. The increased electron density at the Pt surface and the lattice strain resulting from the ultrathin coating enhance the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the Pt surface. Therefore, the HER is promoted by loading this Pd@Pt quasi-core-shell cocatalyst onto the surface of TiO2.
To improve the photocatalytic H2 evolution performance of TiO2, metallic Pt was used as cocatalyst in most previous studies.91 Recently, Yang’s group developed a new PtO cluster cocatalyst for TiO2, which is even better than Pt.92 The Gibbs free energies (ΔG) of the H+ discharge step for six typical configurations are shown in Fig. 14c. It is believed that the maximum photocatalytic rate would be obtained at ΔG ≈ −0.05 eV. After loading a Pt cocatalyst onto the bare TiO2, the free energies become much smaller. Pt is demonstrated to be able to catalyze the photocatalytic HER. Loading with PtO can reduce the Gibbs free energy further to 0.31 eV for Pt8O8/TiO2(101) and −0.25 eV for Pt8O8/TiO2(001). Both are close to the optimized value of −0.05 eV, accounting for the higher cocatalytic activity of PtO compared with metallic Pt. A PtO cluster cocatalyst on the (001) face significantly shortens the migration path of the electrons whereas a PtO cluster cocatalyst on the (101) face can trap the electrons more effectively. Therefore, more electrons can survive for the subsequent HER.
Although a reduction of Pt usage can be achieved by many methods, it is still impractical to use Pt-based cocatalysts since Pt is expensive and rare. Nowadays, many materials have been developed to imitate or even replace Pt for cocatalysis, including Cu and its derivatives, Ni and its derivatives, bimetals, transition metal chalcogenides, phosphides and borides, etc.93–99 It should be noted that an unanchored NiSx cocatalyst has been employed by Liu et al., using a process which is quite different from the common cocatalyst loading method.100 The NiSx cocatalyst is not anchored on the surface of the photocatalyst and instead exists in the reaction solution as freestanding subnanometer clusters. The charge transfer is believed to be accomplished through collisions, inhibiting the back reaction and leading to high photocatalytic activity.


3.2.2 Heterojunctions. 
A heterojunction photocatalyst is a hybrid photocatalyst formed by combining two semiconductors. A built-in electric field at the interface is created due to electron flow between the semiconductors, which have different Fermi levels. Depending on the band alignment, heterojunctions can be divided into three categories: straddling gap (type I), staggered gap (type II) and broken gap (type III).101 Among them, a type I heterojunction means that the CB and VB of the narrower bandgap semiconductor are enveloped in those of the larger bandgap semiconductor. Charge flow can take place in it. In a type II heterojunction, the CB and VB are staggered between the two semiconductors, enabling the accumulation of opposite charges at the two sides and realizing charge separation. With Type III it is hard to obtain charge separation since the CB of one semiconductor is below the VB of the other one and charge recombination is predominant. Type III heterojunctions are rarely applied in photocatalysis. In this review, they will not be discussed.
In a type I heterojunction, both the electrons and holes will transfer to the narrower bandgap semiconductor. They are inclined to recombine with each other. Charge separation is hard to accomplish in a type I heterojunction. Interestingly, Du’s group challenges this view.102 Two novel mechanisms shown in Fig. 15a are proposed based on the CdS/ZnS core/shell heterojunction: the hole transfer mechanism (A) and electron tunneling mechanism (B). There are generally many intrinsic defects, such as zinc vacancies (VZn) and interstitial sulfur vacancies (IS) in the ZnS shell, which will act as hole acceptors. Therefore, holes in the VB of the CdS core will be captured by the defects of the ZnS shell, promoting efficient charge separation. That is the hole transfer mechanism. Hole transfer from CdS to ZnS occurs. On the other hand, electrons in the CB of CdS may transfer to the environment across a ZnS shell with a thickness of less than 10 nm. ZnS acts as the electron tunneling pathway in this electron tunneling mechanism. The surface-deep trap states of the CdS core are passivated by being coated with the ZnS shell. According to these two mechanisms, electrons and holes can be separated and the electrons can inject into the liquid environment effectively in a type I heterojunction.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanisms for photocatalytic H2 evolution over core/shell CdS/ZnS nanorods. (b) Schematic illustration of the ternary multi-node sheath hetero-nanorod –[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–. (c) The periodic type I band alignment of the binary –[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS–[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS– hetero-nanorod. (d) The periodic band alignment of ternary –[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS– hetero-nanorods. (a) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015 Wiley. 
In a type II heterojunction, electrons and holes flow in opposite directions, achieving charge separation. It is generally believed that a type II heterojunction performs better than a type I heterojunction in charge separation. Yu’s group designed and synthesized a multi-node sheath hetero-nanorod to realize the conversion of a type I heterojunction into a type II one.103 The multi-node sheath hetero-nanorod is shown in Fig. 15b. Before loading with Au, the –[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS–[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS– hetero-nanorod exhibits periodic type I band alignment (Fig. 15c). Both electrons and holes will accumulate at the ZnS/CdS parts, promoting charge recombination. After the loading of Au onto the surface of the CdS, free electrons flow from the Au to the CdS, bending the CdS bands. The periodic band alignment of the ternary nanorods is shown in Fig. 15d. The rod is converted into type II from type I. Therefore, the photo-generated electrons are delivered to ZnS, leaving the holes in the CdS. Charge separation is accomplished and the electrons survive.
Type II heterojunctions have been demonstrated to be effective. There are generally two kinds of type II heterojunction in photocatalysis. The first one is formed by two phases of one semiconductor. It is also called a heterophase junction in some reports. The TiO2(B)–anatase heterojunction is a typical example.104 This structure is depicted in Fig. 16a. The CB and VB potentials of TiO2(B) are both higher than those of anatase. Upon irradiation, the photo-generated electrons in the CB of TiO2(B) will transfer to the CB of anatase whereas the holes transfer from the VB of anatase to the VB of TiO2(B), realizing spatial charge separation, as shown in Fig. 16b. In addition, many other heterophase junctions have also been investigated, such as anatase–rutile TiO2, isotype triazine-/heptazine based g-C3N4, the zinc blende–wurzite Zn1−xCdxS solid solution, hexagonal–cubic CdS, and so on.105–109
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram depicting the TiO2(B)–anatase heterophase junction. (b) Schematic illustration of charge transfer across the TiO2(B)–anatase heterophase junction. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the BiOI(001)/BiOCl(001) and BiOI(001)/BiOCl(010) heterojunctions and the directions of the internal electric fields. (e) The band alignment of the CdSe QD/WS2 NS nanocomposite with various QD sizes. (f) The photocatalytic mechanism of the p–n heterojunction between p-type CuO and n-type g-C3N4. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
The second one is formed by two different semiconductors, such as TiO2/CdS, CdS/CdSe, CdS/Co0.85Se, nanodiamond/Cu2O and so on.110–113 The improvement in the photocatalytic performance should be due to the built-in electric field, which plays a very important role in the charge flow steering. For example, the built-in electric field induced by the type II BiOI/BiOCl heterojunction drives the photo-generated electrons and holes to transfer to BiOCl and BiOI, respectively, achieving charge separation.114 In addition, BiOCl itself possesses an internal static electric field between the [Bi2O2]2+ slabs and the halogen anionic layers along the c axis. Sun et al. further investigated the influence of this internal electric field on electron flow and survival. In BiOI(001)/BiOCl(001), the internal electric field of the BiOCl is perpendicular to the interface (Fig. 16c). Electrons arriving in the interface will go across the BiOCl layer to inject into the liquid environment. Some of the electrons are consumed due to the long diffusion distance. In BiOI(001)/BiOCl(010), the internal electric field of the BiOCl is parallel to the interface (Fig. 16d). Electrons at the heterojunction will rapidly reach the adjacent adsorbates and inject into the liquid environment. This leads to improved photocatalytic activity.
It should noted that both of these kinds of type II heterojunction can be integrated in one single system to optimize the charge separation and electron survival for photocatalytic H2 evolution. This was achieved in a photocatalyst made of a palladium phosphorous sulphide PdP∼0.33S∼1.67 modified twin nanocrystal Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution.115 The zinc blende–wurzite heterophase junction in the photocatalyst host Zn0.5Cd0.5S inhibits charge recombination and guarantees electron survival. The heterojunction between PdP∼0.33S∼1.67 and Zn0.5Cd0.5S extracts the electrons in the photocatalyst host and promotes charge separation further. Therefore, this combination can provide more electrons for the HER and significantly improve the HER activity.
In a type II heterojunction, the driving force for the electron transfer from the higher CB to the lower CB is the energy level difference. It is generally considered that the bigger the difference is, the larger the driving force will be. However, the reduction ability of the electrons will be decreased at the same time. Zhong et al. report that the energy levels should match with each other.116 The difference between the two CBs will cause an energy loss. They believe that the CBs should be at the same level, making the electron transfer free without any energy loss. They fabricated a band gap matched CdSe quantum dot (QD)/WS2 nanosheet (NS) nanocomposite by tuning the size of the QDs, taking advantage of the quantum size effect. Fig. 16e shows the band alignment. Obviously, they are all type II heterojunctions. The CBs of the CdSe QDs go down upon increasing their size. When the size is 7–8 nm, the CB of the QDs is closest to that of WS2. That is the most favorable for electron transfer from the QDs to the nanosheets. This matched type II heterojunction endows the system with more surviving electrons and excellent photocatalytic performance.
Forming a p–n heterojunction is a special case in type II heterojunction photocatalysis. The directional electric field is enhanced in the p–n heterojunction when a p-type semiconductor is combined with an n-type semiconductor. In this way, charge separation is promoted. A typical p–n heterojunction between p-type CuO and n-type g-C3N4 is shown in Fig. 16f.117 An internal electric field from g-C3N4 to CuO forms at the interface. Also, the CB of the p-type semiconductor is higher than that of the n-type semiconductor after Fermi level equilibration. The photo-generated electrons in the CB of the CuO transfer to the CB of the g-C3N4 under the electric field driving force. Holes are confined in the CuO at the same time. Therefore, the holes and electrons are separated. Many other p–n heterojunctions using Co3O4/TiO2, Ag2O/BiOCOOH and Cu2O/TiO2 have also been investigated in detail.118–122
Besides the above heterojunctions, heterojunction photocatalysts with nanoscale interfacial contacts are also a promising kind of material for photocatalytic H2 evolution.123 The carrier transfer distance is shortened and the interfacial contact areas are expanded.124 In addition, ternary heterojunctions can be used to improve the charge separation further. For example, Jiang et al. have prepared a ternary heterostructured In2S3/MoS2/CdS composite photocatalyst.125 The MoS2/CdS heterojunction promotes interfacial charge transfer. The In2S3/CdS heterojunction pushes the holes in the VB of the CdS to the In2S3 due to the good matching of the VB of the CdS with that of the In2S3.


3.2.3 Z-Scheme photocatalysis. 
Heterojunctions can drive efficient charge separation, but the reduction ability of the electrons is unfortunately weakened since they generally transfer from the higher CB of one semiconductor to the lower CB of the other one. Z-Scheme photocatalysis is a strategy mimicking the natural photosynthesis process. It involves a two-step photoexcitation.126
There are three types of artificial Z-scheme photocatalysis at present.127 The first one is the closest to natural photosynthesis. In this system, it is not necessary for the two semiconductors to be in contact with each other. An electron acceptor/donor (A/D) pair as an electron mediator is needed to promote charge transfer, like Fe2+/Fe3+ and I−/IO3−. Yan et al. have established one Z-scheme system of this type, TiO2/g-C3N4. The photocatalytic process is shown in Fig. 17a.128 Upon irradiation, TiO2 and g-C3N4 are photo-excited. Electrons in the CB of TiO2 transfer to the VB of g-C3N4 through the electron mediator Fe2+/Fe3+. Fe3+ in the solution is reduced to Fe2+ by accepting the electrons from the CB of TiO2. The reduced Fe2+ is simultaneously oxidized to Fe3+ by accepting the holes from the VB of g-C3N4. As a result, electrons and holes are left in the CB of g-C3N4 and the VB of TiO2, respectively. The holes can oxidize H2O to O2 or be consumed by the scavengers. The surviving electrons therefore drive the HER.
 Fig. 17  (a–c) Schematic illustration of the three types of artificial Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. (d and e) The charge density difference and a planar-averaged view of TiO2/g-C3N4. The yellow and cyan areas respectively indicate electron accumulation and depletion. (f) The proposed Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for TiO2/g-C3N4. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The second and third types of artificial Z-scheme photocatalysis are the A/D-free systems. They are also called all-solid-state Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. In the second type, a conductor is needed to replace the A/D pair as the electron mediator. In the third type, even the electron mediator is not needed. One Z-scheme system of the second type, namely n-type TiO2/p-type metal sulfide, has been established.129 Reduced graphene oxide (RGO) is employed to serve as the electron mediator. As shown in Fig. 17b, the insertion of RGO builds a bridge for communication between the TiO2 and metal sulfide with a low contact resistance. Electrons in the CB of TiO2 can directly recombine with the holes in the VB of metal sulfide through the RGO, leaving electrons and holes respectively in the CB of the metal sulfide and the VB of TiO2 to drive the redox reactions. The electron transfer distance is reduced in this type.
To reduce the number of defects caused by the solid–solid contact, the third type of Z-scheme photocatalysis was developed. The electron mediator is removed and the two semiconductors are in contact with each other, reducing the solid–solid contact interface area. Certainly, the conductor in the second type shows a stronger ability to transfer charge than in the case of the solid–solid contact interface in the third type. However, this can be compensated by optimizing systems of the third type. This mediator-free direct Z-scheme photocatalytic system has been set up by Huang et al., as shown in Fig. 17c.130 A CdS/WO3 hybrid photocatalyst was prepared and RGO was used to strengthen electron transfer in the whole process. It should be noted that the function of RGO in this case was not the same as that in the case of TiO2/RGO/metal sulfide. RGO was not inserted into the interface between TiO2 and the metal sulfide and therefore it could not act as an electron mediator. Upon irradiation, both CdS and WO3 generate electrons and holes. Electrons in the CB of CdS transfer to the VB of WO3 directly without the assistance of an electron mediator. The communication between CdS and WO3 is through electrostatic interaction. This electrostatic interaction in direct Z-scheme photocatalysis is further demonstrated by a study by Yu’s group, taking TiO2/g-C3N4 as an example.131 The three-dimensional charge density difference at the TiO2/g-C3N4 interface was calculated and is shown in Fig. 17d and e. Charge redistribution mainly occurs around the interface. The electron flow is in a direction from g-C3N4 to TiO2, whereas the holes stay in g-C3N4. A built-in electric field at the interface is established in a direction from g-C3N4 to TiO2 due to the net charge accumulation. As shown in Fig. 17f, this electric field is beneficial to the injection of electrons from TiO2 to g-C3N4 upon irradiation.
Therefore, artificial Z-scheme photocatalytic systems also promote charge separation, like heterojunctions. The advantage of Z-scheme photocatalytic systems is their excellent redox ability compared with heterojunctions since the available electrons stay in a high CB instead of transferring to a low one. However, half of the photo-generated electrons are consumed by recombining with the holes in the photocatalytic process. It should be recognized that both Z-scheme photocatalysis and heterojunction photocatalysis have their own merits.

4 Electron utilization
After experiencing generation and survival, the surviving photo-generated electrons finally reach the sites where they will be used for the subsequent HER. These are generally located on the surface of the photocatalyst or in the cocatalyst. What is in front of them is a new phase, the liquid phase. They are now at the solid/liquid interface. The electrons on the active sites should be emitted from the solid and transported to the liquid to drive the HER through various pathways. Every step will influence the overall photocatalytic performance. In this section, what we focus on is how to make the best use of the available surviving electrons.
4.1 Self-modification for electron utilization

4.1.1 P-type doping and electron emission. 
At the solid/liquid interface, Fermi level pinning takes place.132 This creates an additional energy barrier for charge emission from the photocatalyst to the liquid. As shown in Fig. 18a, when an n-type semiconductor comes into contact with water, upward surface band bending appears. This establishes an energy barrier for the electrons, driving them toward the bulk region, and an electron depletion layer at the surface of the photocatalyst. This barrier inhibits electron emission. On the other hand, as shown in Fig. 18b, the band bending of a p-type semiconductor with water is downward, creating an energy barrier for the holes. Electron emission from the photocatalyst is instead promoted, resulting in improved photocatalytic H2 evolution performance.133
 Fig. 18  (a) The upward band bending at an n-type semiconductor/liquid interface. (b) The downward band bending at a p-type semiconductor/liquid interface. (c) Schematic illustration of the charge trapping mechanism of Pt supported anatase TiO2 with various crystallite sizes. (d and e) Schematic illustration of the interfacial charge transfer and recombination occurring on (d) Pt/TiO2 and (e) F–TiO2/Pt (or P–TiO2/Pt). A represents the surface adsorbed fluorides or phosphates and D indicates the organic substrates. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 the American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Sharma et al. report that copper vacancies can lead to partial occupation of the bands around the CuBi2O4 VB edge and cause p-type conductivity in CuBi2O4.134 In addition, Wu et al. prepared p-type ZnO by Na doping.135 It is necessary to reduce the Fermi level by p-type doping. The Fermi level of ZnO can be reduced with Na incorporation. Upon increasing the Na doping concentration, the Fermi level decreases continuously. This results in p-type ZnO. Therefore, the photocatalytic H2 evolution activities of both CuBi2O4 and ZnO can be greatly improved by p-type doping for electron emission due to downward band bending at the solid/liquid interface.


4.1.2 Surface functionalization and reaction active sites. 
It is known that photocatalysis is a surface reaction. Electrons concentrate on the active sites for the HER, which are generally located on the surface of the photocatalyst or in the cocatalyst. The surface should be functionalized to increase the number of active sites. Loading a balanced amount of cocatalyst onto the surface of the photocatalyst is a common method. In this part we pay more attention to self-modification of the surface functionalization of the photocatalyst without foreign materials.
It is obvious that extending the specific surface area of the photocatalyst by reducing its size is viable. However, too small a size of photocatalyst will lead to negative effects. Su et al. point out that there should be a deliberate trade-off between the surface area effects and the quantum size effects.136 They took Pd nanoparticles (about 3.0 nm) supported on anatase TiO2 as an example. The photocatalytic H2 evolution performance was investigated through varying the crystallite size (6.6–26.6 nm) of the anatase TiO2. An optimum quantum efficiency of about 78% was achieved with a medium crystallite size of 15.9 nm. Upon increasing the size from 6.6 to 15.9 nm, the activity was significant enhanced. Compared to the electrons trapped in the bulk, the free electrons on the surface and the surface trapped electrons are thermodynamically and kinetically more favorable for the HER. Theoretical analysis indicates that for anatase with a small crystallite size, the trapped electrons are predominantly in the bulk, resulting in the poor photocatalytic activity. As shown in Fig. 18c, larger anatase particles provide more near-surface sites for charge trapping. This benefits charge storage and its transportation to the Pd surface sites and gives rise to more efficient utilization of the electrons. A further increase of the size to 26.6 nm deactivates the activity unfortunately, due to the decrease of the specific surface area and number of active sites.
The number of active sites on g-C3N4 can be increased by modifying the surface with hydrazine.137 Diazanyl groups are therefore introduced onto the surface of the g-C3N4. This activates the surface of the g-C3N4 and many other functional groups can be introduced, like the water electrolysis active group C(S)SNi. Modification with C(S)SNi coordinated to Ni2+ makes g-C3N4 able to perform photocatalytic H2 evolution, without platinum. This is because the modification adds many active sites for the HER onto the surface of the g-C3N4.
The interaction of water and the photocatalyst is crucial to achieve the photocatalytic process. The interfacial structure between liquid water and the TiO2 (110) surface was observed by Hussain et al.138 It was composed of an ordered array of hydroxyl molecules (OH) with molecular water in the second layer. These bound surface OH groups always act as the hole trapping sites.139 The resulting bound OH radicals provide recombination centers for charge recombination. As shown in Fig. 18d, OH groups and organic substrates (scavengers) are adsorbed on the surface of TiO2 decorated with a Pt cocatalyst. The photo-generated electrons in the TiO2 are extracted by the Pt. The holes transfer to the bound groups to produce OH radicals and activated organic substrates. Both of them are still bound on the surface. The electrons in the Pt will react with them. Therefore, the electrons are consumed partly, inhibiting the HER. Cho et al. report that the surface adsorbed OH groups and organic substrates can be replaced by the anionic adsorbates fluoride and phosphate. Fluorization or phosphatization of the surface of the TiO2 can release the bound OH groups and organic substrates. Fig. 18e shows the mechanism for enhancing the photocatalytic activity. F or P on the surface cannot act as hole trapping sites, unlike OH. The electrons are harvested by the Pt whereas the holes transfer to the solution directly. The ejected holes are consumed by the scavengers immediately. Since no recombination centers are formed, the electrons in the Pt can drive the HER effectively.

4.2 Extra-modification for electron utilization

4.2.1 Promoting charge transport. 
In the case of F–TiO2/Pt (or P–TiO2/Pt), graphene oxide (GO) layers were also added to the system. Charge transport is facilitated by the direct contact between the high conductivity GO and the TiO2 surface. Certainly, an excessive loading of GO will decrease the photocatalytic activity due to the light shielding effect.140 This strategy is also employed with many other systems, like self-doped TiO2/Pt and p-type Cu2O/Au.141,142 Carbon nanotubes are used, as well.143
Improving photocatalytic activity by adding materials with high conductivities to promote charge transport is very widespread. Nevertheless, it is very practical and effective. Therefore, it has been mentioned in this section but we shall not go into detail.


4.2.2 Tailoring the reaction pathway. 
After the electrons transfer across the solid/liquid interface, it is time to pay attention to the reaction pathway where the HER proceeds. It is discussed above that the holes are consumed by the scavengers whereas the electrons reduce the H+ to H2. In practice, the process is much more complicated. There are a lot of reports on this topic. Only some typical cases are discussed here.
The elimination of holes can be tailored by coating the interface with a layer of amorphous oxyhydroxide.144 An amorphous TiOXH (or TiOXH/SiOH) layer can be coated onto a LaMg1/3Ta2/3O2N solid solution photocatalyst with a RhCrOy cocatalyst, as shown in Fig. 19a. The photo-generated holes in the photocatalyst will be injected into the oxygen species (OH groups or hydrated water) in the amorphous layer, preventing the excessive accumulation of holes in the photocatalyst surface. Since the amorphous layer is in direct contact with the solution, the holes in the layer will be transported to the solution and react with the scavengers.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for water splitting on a surface-coated photocatalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 evolution with the hole shuttle mechanism. The blue arrows denote the movement of the species. The red arrows denote redox reactions. (c) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution and back-reaction processes. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group. 
Simon et al. report that relaying the holes from the photocatalyst to the scavengers can be accomplished by increasing the pH of the solution.145 In most photocatalytic systems, the cocatalyst is deposited on the surface the photocatalyst. A steric barrier forms for the scavengers, suppressing their diffusion to the surface of photocatalyst and the transfer of the holes. In this case, holes can be released from the photocatalyst by relying on the redox couple ˙OH/OH−, operating as a shuttle. Compared to the direct reaction between the holes and the scavengers, this redox shuttle mechanism enhances the photocatalytic H2 evolution greatly when using Ni/CdS nanorods with ethanol as the scavenger. As shown in Fig. 19b, a large number of small-sized OH− under highly alkaline conditions diffuse to the CdS nanorod easily. They are then oxidized to hydroxyl radicals, which move in the solution freely. The ethanol scavenger is then oxidized by the hydroxyl radicals to acetaldehyde, which proceeds at a high rate. Meanwhile, the hydroxyl anion is regenerated by the dissociation of water molecules. In other words, the slow hole elimination process is replaced with two faster reactions involving a redox mediator. The electrons in the Ni particles are separated from the holes and drive the HER immediately.
The photo-generated electrons can reduce the H+ to H2 in the photocatalytic process. The undesirable hydrogen oxidation reaction can also take place at the same time, especially in Pt-involving systems since metallic Pt can catalyze this reaction due to its low activation energy (Fig. 19c). Yang’s group proposes that the unidirectional suppression of this back reaction can be realized by increasing the valence state of Pt to Pt2+.146 A similar phenomenon has been observed with Pt/PtO modified CeO2, as well.147
In the photocatalytic H2 evolution process, it is possible to produce O2 at the same time if the VB of the photocatalyst is more positive than the oxidation potential for H2O to O2, especially in scavenger-free systems.148 The back reaction of H2 and O2 to regenerate H2O on the surface of the photocatalyst will occur.149 This results in a low H2 evolution rate. Fortunately, this back reaction can be suppressed by the addition of the O2 transfer reagent hemin chloride.150 Hemin chloride will capture the generated O2 and take it away from the surface of the photocatalyst. In addition, if the generation of O2 is unavoidable, it would be beneficial to H2 evolution to promote O2 generation. This means that the holes can be consumed in time, inhibiting the recombination of the electrons and holes. Photocatalytic H2 evolution is then changed into photocatalytic overall water splitting. Liu et al. report that the conventional one-step four-electron reaction of C3N4 for water splitting can be replaced by a stepwise two-electron/two-electron two-step pathway with the addition of carbon nanodots.151 That is, a slow reaction is replaced by two faster reactions. The C3N4 is responsible for the first step, photocatalysis (2H2O → H2O2 + H2), and the carbon nanodots are responsible for the second step, chemical catalysis (H2O2 → H2O + ½O2).

5 Conclusion and prospective
Photocatalysis is a highly appealing multifunction technology, especially in the environment and energy fields. Solar H2 evolution via water splitting is an attractive strategy to address energy shortages by converting abundant solar energy directly into precious hydrogen energy. Many organic pollutants can even be employed as scavengers for hole consumption during the photocatalytic H2 evolution process. Therefore, solar H2 evolution plays an important role in environmental purification and energy supply.
The electron is the protagonist in solar H2 evolution. Three pivotal steps of electron generation, electron survival and electron utilization are involved in this photocatalytic process. Taking some typical cases as examples, these three steps were discussed in detail. The photocatalytic H2 evolution performance can be improved through elaborately manipulating these steps of electron generation, survival and utilization. The manipulation can be accomplished by modifying the photocatalyst itself (self-modification) and with the assistance of foreign materials (extra-modification).
To boost electron generation, it is necessary to broaden the optical response range. Inter-band absorption enhancement and additional absorption band introduction are the two main approaches. Introducing structural defects and chemical impurities into the lattice can widen the spectral response of the photocatalyst itself. Foreign narrow-bandgap semiconductors, dye molecules, up-conversion materials and plasmonic materials can be employed to combine with the photocatalyst to strengthen electron generation as well. Furthermore, raising the CB through crystal engineering has been demonstrated to be a feasible way to strengthen the reduction ability of the photo-generated electrons.
Electron–hole recombination is the bottleneck in photocatalytic H2 evolution, and is detrimental to electron survival. The recombination probability can be reduced through providing a driving force on the photocatalyst. Anisotropy induced by self-modification by morphology engineering can lead to effective charge separation. Structure engineering, another kind of self-modification, can create atomic-level directional charge separation. Bringing a cocatalyst into the photocatalytic system can extract the photo-generated electrons from the CB of the photocatalyst, resulting in charge separation. The driving force at a heterojunction pushes electrons and holes to move in opposite directions. Z-Scheme photocatalysis is a strategy mimicking the natural photosynthesis process involving a two-step photoexcitation. It also promotes charge separation, like a heterojunction. The electrons have excellent reduction abilities compared with those separated by a heterojunction.
After experiencing generation and survival, the surviving photo-generated electrons finally reach the sites where they will be used for the subsequent HER. The electrons on the active sites should be emitted from the solid and transported to the liquid to drive the HER through various pathways. P-type doping can create downward band bending. Electrons can then be emitted from the photocatalyst to the solid/liquid interface smoothly. The surface of a photocatalyst can be modified to achieve functionalization to increase the number of active sites. Moreover, the charge transport at the solid/liquid interface can be accelerated by adding foreign materials with high conductivities into the system. The reaction pathways of electrons and holes can be tailored using foreign materials.
All of the above strategies play positive roles in improving the photocatalytic H2 evolution performance. Certainly, negative effects are usually brought in. There should be a balance between the positive and negative effects of these modifications.
Keeping these discussions in mind, the comprehensive design of photocatalytic systems based on the modification of the three pivotal steps of electron generation, survival and utilization is important in order to optimize photocatalytic H2 evolution performance. Nowadays, many novel photocatalytic systems have been developed for H2 evolution and pollutant degradation. Aerogel systems such as AgX/graphene (X = Br, Cl) and C3N4/graphene oxide and the hydrogel systems Pt/TiO2 and NiB/CdS have been demonstrated to work effectively.152–154 A free-standing TiO2/Al(H2PO4)3 film can act as a separator-free and washing-resistant photocatalyst.155 Three-dimensional carbon architectures can be used to support active photocatalysts in new designs of photocatalytic systems, such as a floating sheet of Cu2O/WSe2/carbon foam.156,157 Although some of these systems have not been used for H2 evolution, they still provide worthwhile information for the comprehensive design of H2 evolution systems. It is strongly expected that in the future robust and effective photocatalyst systems based on the idea of rationally manipulating electron generation, electron survival and electron utilization will appear for the optimization of photocatalytic H2 evolution performance.
Acknowledgements
The National Basic Research Program of China (2014CB931700) and the State Key Laboratory of Optoelectronic Materials and Technologies of Sun Yat-sen University supported this work.
References
L. Jing, W. Zhou, G. Tian and H. Fu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9509–9549 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, J. Yu, J. Low, Y. Fang, J. Xiao and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2485–2534 CAS .
L. Yuan, C. Han, M.-Q. Yang and Y.-J. Xu, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2016, 35(1), 1–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Berr, P. Wagner, S. Fischbach, A. Vaneski and J. Schneider, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 223903 CrossRef .
Y. Li, B. Wang, S. Liu, X. Duan and Z. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, D. Jing, M. Liu, Y. Chen, S. Shen, J. Shi and K. Zhang, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2014, 5, 994–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, J. Li, Z. Zheng, J. Yan, P. Liu, C. Wang and G. Yang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(7), 7256–7265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qian, J. F. Chen, Y. H. Li, L. Wu, H. F. Wang, A. P. Chen, P. Hu, L. R. Zheng and H. G. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11467–11471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Li, Z. X. Deng, J. X. Xiao and G. W. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 255705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, P. Liu, J. Yan and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14853–14863 CAS .
J. Yan, P. Liu, C. Ma, Z. Lin and G. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8826–8838 RSC .
K. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. Zhang, Y. Qu, L. Wang, W. Hu, K. Pan, M. Li, Y. Xie, B. Jiang and G. Tian, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 50506–50512 RSC .
L. Li, J. Yan, T. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao, J. Zhang, J. Gong and N. Guan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 6, 5881 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, C.-F. Yan, C.-Q. Guo and Y. Shi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7919–7926 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, Z. Li, Z.-H. Huang, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6885–6892 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, C. Guo, M. Yan and S. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yan, G. Li, C. Guo, W. Guo, D. Ding, S. Zhang and S. Liu, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17828–17835 RSC .
G. Wang, B. Huang, X. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Qin, X. Zhang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Whangbo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4810–4813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, P. Gao, Y. Yang, P. Yang, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18126–18131 CAS .
T. Yang, X. Chang, J. Chen, K.-C. Chou and X. Hou, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8955–8961 RSC .
L. Li, W. Fang, P. Zhang, J. Bi, Y. He, J. Wang and W. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12402–12406 CAS .
X. Sun, Y. Xie, F. Wu, H. Chen, M. Lv, S. Ni, G. Liu and X. Xu, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7445–7453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamato, A. Iwase and A. Kudo, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2902–2906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-J. Lee, S. Anandan, S. J. Masten and J. J. Wu, Renewable Energy, 2016, 89, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, K. Zhao, T. Wang, J. Deng and H. Zeng, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 40, 670–675 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, H.-I. Kim, G.-H. Moon and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 411–433 CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Cai, M. Wu, H. Zhang, M. Meng, Y. Tian, T. Ding, J. Gong, Z. Jiang and X. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23006–23014 CAS .
E. M. Samsudin, S. B. A. Hanid, J. C. Juan, W. J. Basirum and A. E. Kandjani, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 359, 883–896 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Le, D. Flahaut, H. Martinez, H. K. H. Nguyen and T. K. X. Huynh, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 165, 260–268 CrossRef .
S. Yan, Y. Yu, Y. Gu, Y. Liu and Y. Cao, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 171, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sinhamahapatra, J.-P. Jeon and J.-S. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3539–3544 CAS .
X. Li, G. Hartley, A. J. Ward, P. A. Young, A. F. Masters and T. Maschmeyer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14938–14946 CAS .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, C. Yang, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 143–153 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huang, J. Hu, S. Cong, Z. Zhao and X. Qiu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 174–175, 105–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, X. Wu, C. Huang, W. Fan and X. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 387, 45–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savateev, S. Pronkin, J. D. Epping, M. G. Willinger, C. Wolff, D. Neher, M. Antonietti and D. Dontsova, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 167–174 CrossRef CAS .
C. Janáky, K. Rajeshwar, N. R. de Tacconi, W. Chanmanee and M. N. Huda, Catal. Today, 2013, 199, 53–64 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Z. Xing, H. Zhang, W. Wang, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, X. Wu, X. Yu and W. Zhou, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1118–1124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Y. Qi, J. Hu, W. An, S. Lin, Y. Liang and W. Cui, Mater. Lett., 2015, 158, 278–281 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-S. Yin, S.-W. Cao, G.-S. Xu, C.-H. Li and C. Xue, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
N. Manfredi, B. Cecconi, V. Calabrese, A. Minotti, F. Peri, R. Ruffo, M. Monai, I. Romero-Ocana, T. Montini, P. Fornasiero and A. Abbotto, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6977–6980 RSC .
J. Qin, J. Huo, P. Zhang, J. Zeng, T. Wang and H. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2249–2259 RSC .
W. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Zeng and S. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Peng and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 CAS .
M. K. Gonce, E. Aslan, F. Ozel and I. H. Patir, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 600–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, C. Wang, B. R. Bunes, Y. Li, C. Wang and L. Zang, Appl. Catal., A, 2015, 498, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, Y. Li, S. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Wang, Energy, 2015, 82, 72–79 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, C. Lu, L. Tang, S. Wei, Y. Song and J. Wang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 149, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, Y. Leng, Z. Zhao, Y. Xia, Y. Sang, P. Hao, J. Zhan, M. Li and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 419–427 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, B. Li, C. Fang and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5274–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, L. Q. He, Y. W. Hu, X. Lu, G. R. Li, B. Liu, B. Ren, Y. Tong and P. P. Fang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11462–11466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-H. Wu, W.-T. Liu, T.-Y. Chen, T.-P. Perng, J.-H. Huang and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 412–419 CrossRef CAS .
W. Jiang, S. Bai, L. Wang, X. Wang, L. Yang, Y. Li, D. Liu, X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Small, 2016, 12(12), 1640–1648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yu, X. Wang, J. Cao, S. Wu, W. Yan and G. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 2394 RSC .
F. Meng, S. K. Cushing, J. Li, S. Hao and N. Wu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1949–1955 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ha, L. Y. S. Lee, H.-W. Man, S. C. E. Tsang and K.-Y. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9072–9077 CAS .
S. Yang, H. Wang, H. Yu, S. Zhang, Y. Feng, S. Zhang and F. Peng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 3446–3455 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Xiao, J. Yan, P. Liu, L. Li and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7649–7658 CAS .
C.-H. Li, M.-C. Li, S.-P. Liu, A. C. Jamison, D. Lee, T. R. Lee and T.-C. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9152–9161 CAS .
J. S. DuChene, B. P. Williams, A. C. Johnston-Peck, J. Qiu, M. Gomes, M. Amilhau, D. Bejleri, J. Weng, D. Su, F. Huo, E. A. Stach and W. D. Wei, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 1501250 Search PubMed .
L. Zhou, C. Zhang, M. J. McClain, A. Manjavacas, C. M. Kreuter, S. Tian, F. Berg, H. O. Everitt, E. A. Carter, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1478–1484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, H. Zhao, L. Zhou, A. E. Schlather, L. Dong, M. J. McClain, D. F. Swearer, P. Nordlander and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 6677–6682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Manthiram and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3995–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Hsu, C. Ngo and A. R. Tao, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2372–2380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. V. Naik, V. M. Shalaev and A. Boltasseva, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3264–3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Luther, P. K. Jain, T. Ewers and A. P. Alivisatos, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 361–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Lounis, E. L. Runnerstrom, A. Llordes and D. J. Milliron, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1564–1574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Comin and L. Manna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3957–3975 RSC .
P.-H. Liu, M. Wen, C.-S. Tan, M. Navlani-Farcia, Y. Kuwahara, K. Mori, H. Yamashita and L.-J. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 57–63 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cargnello, T. Montini, S. Y. Smolin, J. B. Prebe, J. J. D. Jaen, V. V. T. Doan-Nguyen, I. S. McKay, J. A. Schwalbe, M.-M. Pohl, T. R. Gordon, Y. Lu, J. B. Baxter, A. Bruckner, P. Fornasiero and C. B. Murray, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113(15), 3966–3971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, J. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Meng, J. Zhang, D. Xu, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 286–294 CrossRef CAS .
S. Selcuk and A. Selloni, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1107–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, R. Li, Z. Li, A. Li, S. Wang, Z. Liang, S. Liao and C. Li, J. Catal., 2016, 337, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Z. Sun, S. Zhu, Y. Liao, Z. Chen and D. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, S. Weng, Z. Zheng, Z. Fang and P. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 11186–11189 RSC .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Zhao, Q. Xu, X. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bao, Z. Wang, X. Gong, C. Zeng, Q. Wu, B. Tian and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18570–18577 CAS .
R. Li, X. Tao, R. Chen, F. Fan and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14337–14341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bai, L. Wang, Z. Li and Y. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600216 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Q. Liu, Q. Wang, D. Qu and J. Shi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 18916–18923 RSC .
Y. Zhou, Y. Zhang, M. Lin, J. Long, Z. Zhang, H. Lin, J. C.-S. Wu and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8340 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, S. Ning, Z. Yang, Z. Zhang, S. Huang, J. Long, H. Lin and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13381–13384 RSC .
J. Li, G. Zhan, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Wang, J. Dong, Y. An, B. Huang, X. Qin, X. Zhang and Y. Dai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2016, 469, 231–236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. She, J. Wu, J. Zhong, H. Xu, Y. Yang, R. Vajtai, J. Lou, Y. Liu, D. Du, H. Li and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, D. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46(8), 1900–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Z. Rahman, J. Ran, Y. Tang, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2445–2452 CAS .
S. Bai, L. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Lin, J. Lu, J. Jiang and Y. Xiong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1–6 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, W. Jones, P. P. Wells, D. Morgan, L. Dong, B. Hu, N. Dimitratos, M. Dong, M. Bowker, F. Besenbacher, R. Su and G. Hutchings, Appl. Catal., A, 2016, 518, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Li, C. Peng, S. Yang, H. F. Wang and H. G. Yang, J. Catal., 2015, 330, 120–128 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gong, Y. Lu, P. Wu, Z. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Dang, N. Zhu, G. Lu and J. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 365, 280–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Li, L. R. Zheng and H. G. Yang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 15454–15459 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Fang, X. L. Wang, Y. H. Li, P. F. Liu, Y. L. Wang, H. D. Zeng and H. G. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 578–584 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Li, L. Li, L. Yu, W. Li and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 773–781 CAS .
J. Hu, A. Liu, H. Jin, D. Ma, D. Yin, P. Ling, S. Wnag, Z. Lin and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11004–11010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, H. Zheng, J. Li and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2668–2676 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Deng, L. Yu, Z. Lin, W. Wang and G. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Su, J. Shi, X. Wang and L. Guo, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16515 Search PubMed .
Y.-P. Yuan, L.-W. Ruan, J. Barber, S. C. J. Loo and C. Xue, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3934–3951 CAS .
D. Jiang, Z. Sun, H. Jia, D. Lu and P. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 675–683 CAS .
T. T. Zhuang, Y. Liu, M. Sun, S. L. Jiang, M. W. Zhang, X. C. Wang, Q. Zhang, J. Jiang and S. H. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11495–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, Y. Wang, Y. Zhu, M. Wu, H. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Jiang and M. Meng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 24987–24992 CAS .
F. Wang, J. H. Ho, Y. Jiang and R. Amal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23941–23948 CAS .
H. Liu, D. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Jing and R. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 300–313 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Hsu, N.-T. Suen, C.-C. Chang, S.-F. Hung, C.-L. Chen, T.-S. Chan, C.-L. Dong, C.-C. Chan, S.-Y. Chen and H. M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22558–22569 CAS .
A. Litke, J. P. Hofmann, T. Weber and E. J. M. Hensen, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 9491–9498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, M. Han, R. Chen, S.-L. Li, S.-L. Xie, C. Mao, X. Bu, X.-L. Cao, L.-Z. Dong, P. Feng and Y.-Q. Lan, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8906–8911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, J. Chen, W. Zou, L. Zhang, L. Hu, M. He, L. Gu, J. Deng and X. Xing, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 1160–1165 RSC .
H. Chauhan, Y. Kumar, J. Dana, B. Satpati, H. N. Ghosh and S. Deka, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15802–15812 RSC .
S. Cao, Y. Chen, L. Kang, Z. Lin and W.-F. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18711–18717 CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Xiao, L. Li, P. Liu, C. Wang and G. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501865 CrossRef .
L. Sun, L. Xiang, X. Zhao, C.-J. Jia, Z. Jin, X. Cheng and W. Fan, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3540–3551 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, H. Zhao, R. Sun, X. Li and D. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 225–235 CAS .
Y. Zhong, Y. Shao, F. Ma, Y. Wu, B. Huang and X. Hao, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Zeng and R. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2016, 178, 308–311 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bala, I. Mondal, A. Goswami, U. Pal and R. Mondal, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20288–20296 CAS .
S. Li, K. Xu, S. Hu, W. Jiang, J. Zhang, J. Liu and L. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 397, 95–103 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, B. Wang, S. Liu, X. Duan and Z. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 736–744 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, S. Zhao, J. Qi, H. Yin, C. Gao, A. M. Khattak, Y. Wu, A. Iqbal, L. Wu, Y. Gao, R. Yu and Z. Tang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 488–493 RSC .
L. Sinatra, A. P. LaGrow, W. Peng, A. R. Kirmani, A. Amassian, H. Idriss and O. M. Bakr, J. Catal., 2015, 322, 109–117 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, G. Chen, C. Li, J. Sun, C. Lv, S. Fan and W. Xing, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 5936–5942 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Z. Qin, X. Wang, X. Guo and L. Guo, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 18159–18166 RSC .
W. Jiang, Y. Liu, R. Zong, Z. Li, W. Yao and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18406–18412 CAS .
R. Abe, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2011, 84(10), 1000–1030 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4920–4935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, H. Wu, H. Chen, Y. Zhang and F. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 191, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
K. Iwashina, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 604–607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Liu, D. Zhu, Y. Xin and B. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13626–13635 CAS .
J. Liu, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 31175–31183 RSC .
M. G. Kibria, S. Zhao, F. A. Chowdhury, Q. Wang, H. P. T. Nguyen, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3825 CAS .
M. G. Kibria, F. A. Chowdhury, S. Zhao, B. AlOtaibi, M. L. Trudeau, H. Guo and Z. Mi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Sharma, Z. Zhao, P. Sarker, B. A. Nail, J. Wang, M. N. Huda and F. E. Osterloh, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2936–2942 CAS .
Z. Wu, Y. Li, L. Gao, S. Wang and G. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 11145–11149 RSC .
R. Su, N. Dimitratos, J. Liu, E. Carter, S. Althahban, X. Wang, Y. Shem, S. Wendt, X. Wen, J. W. Niemantsverdriet, B. B. Iversen, C. J. Kiely, G. J. Hutchings and F. Besenbacher, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4239–4247 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Yang, H. Zhu, W. Yu and J.-M. Basset, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 286, 339–346 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hussain, G. Tocci, X. Torrelles, C. L. Pang, D. S. Humphrey, C. M. Yim, D. C. Grinter, O. Bikondoa, R. Lindsay, J. Zegenhagen, A. Michaelides and G. Thornton, Nat. Mater. DOI:10.1038/nmat4793 .
J. Kim, D. M. Satoca and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7647–7656 CAS .
Y.-J. Cho, H. Kim, S. Lee and W. Choi, J. Catal., 2015, 330, 387–395 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Yu, Z. Lin and G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8536–8545 CAS .
S. Bai, J. Ge, L. Wang, M. Gong, M. Deng, Q. Kong, L. Song, J. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Luo, Y. Xie and Y. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5689–5695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, L. Wang, P. Wang, A. Kostka, M. Wark, M. Muhler and R. Beranek, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 270–285 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pan, T. Takata, M. Nakabayashi, T. Matsumoto, N. Shibata, Y. Ikuhara and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2955–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Simon, N. Bouchonville, M. J. Ber, A. Vaneski, A. Adrovic, D. Volvers, R. Wyrwich, M. Doblinger, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, F. Jackel, J. K. Stolarczyk and J. Feldmann, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1013–1018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Li, J. Xing, Z. J. Chen, Z. Li, F. Tian, L. R. Zheng, H. F. Wang, P. Hu, H. J. Zhao and H. G. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2500 Search PubMed .
N. R. Manwar, A. A. Chilkalwar, K. K. Nanda, Y. S. Chaudhary, J. Subrt, S. S. Rayalu and N. K. Labhsetwar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2323–2332 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, H. Kim, G. Moon and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 411–433 CAS .
A. Pzatsoura, D. I. Kondarides and X. E. Verykios, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 64, 171–179 CrossRef .
Z. Li, B. Tian, W. Zhen, Y. Wu and G. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S.-T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. Kang, Science, 2015, 347(6225), 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, W. Ma, D. Han, S. Gan, X. Dong and L. Niu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3767–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wan, S. Yu, F. Dong, Q. Zhang and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7823–7829 CAS .
L. Li, Z. Lin, L. Yu, W. Li and G. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15920–15928 CAS .
W. Jiang, Z. Qiu, W. Yao, Y. Zhu and W. Cui, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wan, Y. Lin, A. Prakash and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18687–18705 CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Li, Z. Zheng, L. Li, L. Yu, C. Wang and G. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600510 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Zhaoyong Lin	Zhaoyong Lin is a Ph.D. candidate in Materials Physics and Chemistry under the supervision of Prof. Guowei Yang at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou, China. He received his B.S. degree from Sun Yat-sen University in 2014. His research interests include the synthesis of novel photocatalytic materials and the exploration of the photocatalytic mechanism.
Lihua Li	Lihua Li received her B.S. degree in 2013 from Hunan Normal University, Changsha, China. She is now a Ph.D. candidate with Prof. Guowei Yang in Condensed State Physics at the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Sun Yat-sen University. Her research interests mainly focus on the synthesis of photocatalytic nanomaterials.
Lili Yu	Lili Yu is a Ph.D. candidate in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Sun Yat-sen University. She received her B.S. degree from Zhengzhou University in 2007 and M.E. degree from Shandong University in 2014. Her research interests include semiconductor nanocomposites, semiconductor photoelectrochemistry, and advanced materials for environmental and energy applications.
Weijia Li	Weijia Li received his B.S. degree in Material Physics in 2014 from Sun Yat-sen University. Now, he is a postgraduate student at Sun Yat-sen University. His research interests focus on photocatalytic hydrogen production, advanced 2D materials and the mechanism of photocatalysis.
Guowei Yang	Guowei Yang received his Ph.D. in Material Physics and Chemistry at the Tsinghua University of China in 2000. He held a postdoctoral position at the Department of Physics and Frederick Seitz Materials Research Laboratory of the University of Illinois at Urbana – Champaign of the United States before joining the Sun Yat-sen University of China in 2002 where he is currently a Cheung-Kong Professor of Materials Physics and Chemistry and Dean of Materials Science & Engineering. His research interests include the thermodynamic theory of nanostructure growth and laser ablation in liquids (LAL) and their application in the synthesis of nanocrystals and fabrication of nanostructures.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution process.	 

 	Fig. 2  Bandgap states of AWO samples before and after LAL. (a and b) Optimized equilibrium configuration and band structure, respectively, of pristine bulk AWO. (c) Plot of the bandgap with respect to the displacement of the W atom. (d) Band structure of a specific [WO6] cluster distortion with a displacement of the W atom of 0.17 Å. Reprinted with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Bandgap states of rutile TiO2 samples T-1, T-2 and T-3. (a and b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra and (c) band energy diagrams for the samples. Reprinted with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Crystal structure of CsxWO3 nanorods viewed down the c and b axes. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of CsxWO3 and CsxWO3+x/2. (c) Schematic diagram of polaron hopping between the W6+ and W5+ states. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the band alignment of Cr-doped Sr2TiO4 and the possible electron generation procedures. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of Fe (red), Co (blue), Ni (green), and Cu (orange) 1 mol%-doped and undoped (black) AgGaS2. (c) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of Cu-doped and undoped ZnS. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) VB XPS spectra of CST and CST-H-750. (b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of H0-TiO2, H6-TiO2, H12-TiO2 and H24-TiO2. (c and d) Kubelka–Munk plots for H0-TiO2 and H6-TiO2. (e) XPS spectra showing the Ti 2p deconvoluted peaks of H0-TiO2, H6-TiO2, H12-TiO2 and H24-TiO2. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016 the American Chemical Society. (b–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  The band energy diagrams of PHIK-0.1 and mpg-CN. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra (a) and the corresponding Kubelka–Munk plots (b) for MBT/MoS2/MBT, MBT, MT/MoS2/MT and MT. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Diffuse reflectance UV-Vis spectra of UiO-66 octahedrons and a suspension of ErB sensitized UiO-66. (c) Typical principles of a dye sensitized semiconductor for Vis light-induced photocatalytic H2 evolution. (d) Mechanism of photocatalytic H2 evolution with CXTS (X = Zn, Ni, Fe, Co and Mn) nanofibers. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2015 Elsevier. (c) Reproduced from ref. 45 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2016 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  NIR-Vis light-driven photocatalytic H2 evolution principles and process of Tm3+,Yb3+:NaYF4–Er3+:Y3Al5O12/MoS2–NaTaO3 nanocomposite particles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic illustration of the mechanisms for plasmon-enhanced chemical reactions over metal/semiconductor hybrid nanostructures. (a) The plasmonic enhancement of light absorption and (b) the hot electron effect. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2014 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Density of states (DOS) plots for the {101} and {001} surfaces of anatase TiO2. (b and c) Schematic illustration of the synergetic effect of the surface heterojunction and the co-deposition of dual cocatalysts. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2014 the American Chemical Society. (b and c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Structure of pristine monolayer Bi2WO6 (left). Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic mechanism of monolayer Bi2WO6 (right). (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 evolution over monolayer MnSb2S4. (c) Schematic illustration of the crystal structure of Bi12O17Cl2–MoS2 and of the charge flow processes within Bi12O17Cl2–MoS2. (d) Schematic illustration of the band alignments in Bi12O17Cl2 and MoS2 monolayers and the photocatalytic H2 evolution mechanism. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 85. Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the function of a Pt cocatalyst in the photocatalytic process of NS-CN. (b) Differential charge density determined by first-principles simulations for Pt(100) shells on Pd(100) substrates in the presence of one additional electron. The olive and cyan colors represent an increase and decrease in the electron density, respectively. (c) Gibbs free energy profiles of the HER at the equilibrium potential (U = USHE) on the (101) and (001) surfaces of a TiO2 system with and without cocatalysts such as Pt and PtO. (a) Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the mechanisms for photocatalytic H2 evolution over core/shell CdS/ZnS nanorods. (b) Schematic illustration of the ternary multi-node sheath hetero-nanorod –[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–. (c) The periodic type I band alignment of the binary –[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS–[ZnS–CdS]–ZnS– hetero-nanorod. (d) The periodic band alignment of ternary –[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS–[ZnS–(CdS/Au)]–ZnS– hetero-nanorods. (a) Reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2015 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic diagram depicting the TiO2(B)–anatase heterophase junction. (b) Schematic illustration of charge transfer across the TiO2(B)–anatase heterophase junction. (c and d) Schematic illustration of the BiOI(001)/BiOCl(001) and BiOI(001)/BiOCl(010) heterojunctions and the directions of the internal electric fields. (e) The band alignment of the CdSe QD/WS2 NS nanocomposite with various QD sizes. (f) The photocatalytic mechanism of the p–n heterojunction between p-type CuO and n-type g-C3N4. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017 Elsevier. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a–c) Schematic illustration of the three types of artificial Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. (d and e) The charge density difference and a planar-averaged view of TiO2/g-C3N4. The yellow and cyan areas respectively indicate electron accumulation and depletion. (f) The proposed Z-scheme photocatalytic mechanism for TiO2/g-C3N4. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2015 the American Chemical Society. (c) Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d–f) Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The upward band bending at an n-type semiconductor/liquid interface. (b) The downward band bending at a p-type semiconductor/liquid interface. (c) Schematic illustration of the charge trapping mechanism of Pt supported anatase TiO2 with various crystallite sizes. (d and e) Schematic illustration of the interfacial charge transfer and recombination occurring on (d) Pt/TiO2 and (e) F–TiO2/Pt (or P–TiO2/Pt). A represents the surface adsorbed fluorides or phosphates and D indicates the organic substrates. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2016 the American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism for water splitting on a surface-coated photocatalyst. (b) Schematic illustration of photocatalytic H2 evolution with the hole shuttle mechanism. The blue arrows denote the movement of the species. The red arrows denote redox reactions. (c) Schematic illustration of the photocatalytic H2 evolution and back-reaction processes. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2015 Wiley. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 146. Copyright 2013 Nature Publishing Group.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
