Three dimensional architectures: design, assembly and application in electrochemical capacitors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA02743H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA02743H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 15792-15823Three dimensional architectures: design, assembly and application in electrochemical capacitors

        
          
            Minghao 
            Yu†
, 
      
        
          
            Weitao 
            Qiu†
, 
      
        
          
            Fuxin 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Teng 
            Zhai
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Pingping 
            Fang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xihong 
            Lu
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yexiang 
            Tong
          
          
        
      *
      MOE of the Key Laboratory of Bioinorganic and Synthetic Chemistry, KLGHEI of Environment and Energy Chemistry, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou 510275, People's Republic of China. E-mail: luxh6@mail.sysu.edu.cn; chedhx@mail.sysu.edu.cn
Received 
      15th April 2015
    , Accepted 9th June 2015First published on 9th June 2015AbstractCurrently, supercapacitors (SCs) are considered to be one of the most promising energy storage devices, mainly due to their unique properties such as high output power, long cycling stability, and fast charge/discharge capability. Nevertheless, the low energy density of SCs still limits their promotion in practical applications. Given this, designing three dimensional (3D) architectures for SC electrodes is perceived as an efficient strategy because well-constructed 3D structures could enable reduced “dead surface”, good electron transport kinetics, hierarchical porous channels and short ionic diffusion distances. This review aims to describe the current progress of different synthetic processes with respect to the preparation of 3D SC electrodes and focuses on both template-assisted strategies and non-template strategies. We summarize recently proposed methods, novel structures, and electrochemical performances for these 3D electrodes. The advantages and disadvantages accompanying them are also analyzed. Finally, we discuss the challenges and prospects of the fabrication of 3D SC electrodes.Minghao YuMinghao Yu received his BS degree in polymer chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2012. He is currently a 3rd year materials physics and chemistry PhD student in Prof. Yexiang Tong's group at Sun Yat-sen University. His research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials for application in supercapacitors.Weitao QiuWeitao Qiu received his BS degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2014. He is currently a 1st year master of physics and chemistry student in Prof. Yexiang Tong's group at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials for the application of Li-ion batteries.Teng ZhaiTeng Zhai received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry from Shandong Agricultural University, China, in 2010. He is currently a 4th year PhD candidate in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University, PR China. His research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.Pingping FangDr Ping-Ping Fang received her BS degree in the Department of Chemistry from Shandong University in 2005. Thereafter, she moved to Xiamen University and received her PhD degree from Xiamen University and University Pierre et Marie Curie in 2011. She then worked as a Scientist in Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne from 2011 to 2013. She is now a lecturer in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. Her current research focuses on Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for energy conversion and storage, Electrochemistry at liquid/quid interface, Catalysis, etc.Xihong LuDr Xihong Lu received his BS degree (2008) and his PhD degree (2013) in Physical Chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University, PR China. He is now an associate professor in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functionally nanostructured materials for applications in supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries, and photoelectrochemical/photocatalytic water splitting.Yexiang TongProf. Yexiang Tong received his BS in General Chemistry in 1985, MS in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He is a professor of Chemistry in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His current research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications for energy conversion and storage.
1. Introduction
Due to the rapid growth of the global population and economy, there is an ever-increasing demand for sustainable sources of energy.1,2 In view of the problems associated with climatic change and limited availability of fossil fuels, the development of efficient renewable energy conversion and storage devices has attracted extensive interest.3,4 Substantial efforts have been devoted to the development of new technologies for harvesting renewable energies, such as wind, solar energy, geothermal energy, and tidal energy.3–5 However, constructing highly efficient, low cost, and environmentally friendly energy storage devices to store these intermittent renewable energies remains one of the greatest challenges.5 In this context, supercapacitors (SCs), also known as electrochemical capacitors, have been considered to be promising candidates for energy storage devices due to their high power density (>10 kW kg−1), fast charge/discharge capability (within seconds) and long cyclic stability (>105 cycles).6–9Fig. 1 illustrates the power and energy densities of various types of energy storage systems. In comparison to conventional capacitors, SCs could deliver a specific energy density that is several orders of magnitude higher due to their unique charge storage mechanisms, especially their pseudocapacitance. Furthermore, SCs achieve a faster discharge in a shorter period of time, enabling a much higher output power than batteries. All these features not only allow SCs to complement batteries by providing back-up power supplies to deal with high power demands, but also enable them to be favorable power sources for portable power tools, emergency power supplies and hybrid electric vehicles.
 Fig. 1  Specific power density against specific energy density, also called a Ragone plot, for various electrical energy storage devices. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
However, the main drawback of SCs is that they are not capable of delivering energy densities that are large enough to be comparable to those of lithium-ion batteries, which severely hinders their practical application as primary power sources.5,11 It is imperative to further boost the energy density of SCs while maintaining their high power density and long cyclic stability. Tremendous efforts have been devoted to this issue and great advances have been obtained over the last ten years.8,9 The maximum energy (E) stored for a single cell SC is given in eqn (1): (1)where C is the total capacitance of the SC, and V is its operation potential window. Both these elements extensively depend on the electrode materials, which are accordingly crucial to the final energy density of the as-fabricated SC. To date, electrode materials can be generally categorized into (1) carbon materials with a large surface area; (2) transition metal compounds such as metal oxides/hydroxides, metal nitrides, and metal sulfides; and (3) conducting polymers. These materials have their intrinsic pros and cons when used as capacitive electrodes.6 For instance, carbon materials are evaluated as commercial SC electrodes, in terms of their high conductivity and superior electrochemical stability. However, their insufficient specific capacitance, derived only from their electronic double layer, severely limits their widespread use. Moreover, even though high specific capacitance can be obtained for both metal compounds and conducting polymers with the introduction of Faradaic redox reactions, their obvious demerits, such as poor conductivity for metal oxides and fast capacitance fade for conducting polymers, cannot be ignored. Combining different materials to construct composites is a new research direction in SC electrode exploration, which realizes synergistic effects through the design of various components.
Constructing nanostructured active materials is another feasible solution owing to new and superb properties obtained at the nanoscale. A well-designed nanostructure can offer a short ionic diffusion distance to the electrode surface, an efficient transport pathway for electrons within the electrode, and more electroactive sites for electronic storage, resulting in both fast kinetics and high charge/discharge capacities even at high current densities.6 According to their morphology, nanostructured materials can be generally classified as zero-dimensional (0D) nanomaterials (nanoparticles and nanospheres), one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials (nanorods and nanowires), two-dimensional (2D) nanomaterials (nanoplates), and three-dimensional (3D) nanomaterials. Among these, 3D nanostructured electrodes attract particular interest when compared to lower dimensional structures.12–15 As shown in Fig. 2, 3D constructed electrodes, which are hierarchically assembled from low-dimensional units (including one or more types of 0D, 1D, 2D nanomaterials), can not only inherit the intrinsic properties of the low-dimensional structure, but can also enable faster and more efficient electronic transfer, which is attributed to the multi-pathway formed from structural interconnectivities. Moreover, 3D architectures always allow sufficient utilization of space, which is beneficial for reducing “dead surface” without sacrificing hierarchical porous channels. It also offers opportunities for the assembly of large mass loading electrodes with considerably enhanced energy storage capacity, if a rationally designed nanostructure is chosen.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the possible electron paths taking place on different nano-designed electrodes with 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D architectures. 
To date, many synthetic strategies for the fabrication of 3D SC electrodes have been reported and numerous 3D electrodes with various structures have emerged. In this review, a brief summary of recent research progress on the development of these 3D electrodes is presented, mainly including template-assisted methods and non-template methods. The parameters related to the capacitive properties were addressed to illustrate the merits of the 3D architectures. As for these template-assisted methods, we categorically discuss the synthesis approaches and electrochemical applications in detail, based on the template selected. The most common 3D templates include nickel foam, silica with various morphologies, and polystyrene spheres. The characteristics of these templates are also addressed. Then, we further summarize the applied strategies for fabricating 3D electrodes using non-template methods and their SC applications, which are classified according to the types of active materials, including carbon materials, metal oxides and other materials. Moreover, the main challenges and new trends in 3D electrode development have also been considered. We hope that our review can guide important progress in developing advanced SC electrodes with high energy storage capability.
2. Evaluation of supercapacitor electrodes
Current evaluation techniques for a SC electrode mainly include cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) methods.6,16 In general, the capacitances of the electrodes can be calculated from CV and GCD curves based on eqn (2) and (3), respectively. (2) (3)where Cm (F g−1) is the specific capacitance, Q (C) is the average charge during the charging and discharging process, ΔV (V) is the potential window, m (g) is the mass loading of active material, SCV (A V) is the integrated area of the CV curve, v (V s−1) is the scan rate in the CV test, I (A) is the constant discharging current during the GCD test, and Δt (s) is the discharging time. Large specific capacitances are favorable for the electrodes, which are also directed to high energy densities. In particular, the capacitance retention of the electrode tested at a high scan rate or a large discharge current always reflects fast charge/discharge and large power output ability. Besides, there are other characteristics associated with the CV and GCD curves, corresponding to the capacitive behaviors of electrodes. For example, the symmetry of their shapes suggests the reversibility of the redox reactions during the charge/discharge processes, the coulombic efficiencies give information about effective availability for stored energy, and the IR drops observed from the discharge curves are related to the internal resistance of the electrodes.
As for the EIS measurement, Nyquist plots and Bode plots are the most popular diagrams for assessing the dynamic process of the electrode.17 Nyquist plots provide the relationship between the imaginary part of the impedance, Z(f)′′, and the real part of the impedance, Z(f)′, and usually consist of a single semicircle in the high-frequency region and a slope in the low-frequency region. Fitting to an equivalent circuit is a convenient method to analyze these, as shown in Fig. 3. Among these parameters, charge transfer resistance (Rct) implies the conductivity of the active material, which can also be obtained from the diameter of the semicircle in the high frequency region. The pure capacitive feature could be determined from the impedance plots in the low frequency range, which show a near vertical line intersecting with the real axis. However, in most cases, the inclined angles of the line intersecting with the real axis are smaller than 90°, corresponding to the Warburg diffusion mechanism. In addition, Bode plots reflect the variation in the phase angle with increasing frequency, f. The purely capacitive behavior of the electrode corresponds to a phase angle closer to −90° at low frequencies. In particular, the frequency obtained at a phase angle of −45° is a characteristic one, which corresponds to the frontier between the capacitive and resistive behavior of the electrode. Relaxation time (τ0), calculated from eqn (4), indicates the response time required to efficiently deliver the stored energy. Moreover, capacitance is calculated from eqn (5), which should be theoretically consistent with half of the total capacitance of the electrode. (4) (5)
 Fig. 3  The common equivalent circuit used to fit the Nyquist plots. 
3. Template-assisted fabrication of 3D electrodes
Template-assisted synthesis has been widely adopted to obtain certain structures that inherit the original shape of the template scaffold. This is considered to be the most straightforward method for contriving 3D structures with high uniformity, controllable pore size and tunable morphologies.18 By various means, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), hydrothermal reaction and electrodeposition, multiple materials with different morphologies could be grown on or bound with templates.19–21 Therefore, active materials with particular structures could be loaded against the backbone, increasing electrode dimensions and thus forming a 3D network. Moreover, the subsequent removal of templates will further generate pores and spacing, which could provide mass transfer pathways, ion diffusion buffers and extra surface area, enabling effective contact with electrolytes. The enhancing effect of 3D electrodes might be attributed to their unique 3D structure with increased pore and surface area compared to their bulk counterparts.21,22 Though template methods appear to be versatile, the designing of 3D electrodes appears to be contrarily limited by the various properties displayed by different templates, which should be considered at the very beginning of the design. In this section, three templates (nickel foams, silica templates and polystyrene spheres) and their corresponding applications in SC electrode fabrication will be mainly discussed due to the recent wide application of these three templates in building 3D SC electrodes, whereas other template methods will be listed in the last part of the section as a supplement.
3.1. Nickel foams
Nickel foam (NF), usually used as a 3D current collector, has a conductive and interconnected 3D skeleton of pure nickel. When serving as a 3D electrode template, such a backbone features high pore density (50–90%), excellent conductivity (350 S cm−1), thermal stability, catalytic activity and susceptibility to acid etching (normally FeCl3/HCl solution), which allows its selective removal after the formation of active materials and leads to larger electrode dimensions.23,24 Due to the continuous network that NFs possess, electrodes produced by the NF template method usually acquire a monolithic structure. Recently, studies have been conducted on monolithic 3D electrodes for SC applications that involve the application of NF; these were usually covered with a pre-coating of graphene to subsequently construct a composite of graphene foam and active materials (e.g. metal oxides or hydroxides), demonstrating high gravimetric or areal capacitance. In this perspective, graphene foam derived from NF templates will be mainly discussed accompanied with metal oxide/graphene foam composites and 3D electrodes using NFs as a skeleton.
Graphene is one of the most common materials that exploit NF as a template scaffold. To grow a graphene layer on the network, CVD was the first method used, in which the key to the successful deposition of graphene is the catalytic activity of NF; this is an important feature of a nickel metal network. A representative synthesis procedure is shown in Fig. 4, which illustrates the preparation of the first reported 3D graphene foam derived from NF mold by Chen et al.24 In this case, a defect-free graphene layer was initially deposited using a catalysis-assisted CVD process in a CH4/H2/Ar atmosphere, followed by the impregnation of poly-(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) to reinforce the strength of the graphene coating (Fig. 4a and b). Then, the subsequent removal of nickel in a FeCl3/HCl solution results in self-supporting graphene foam, whose structure remained intact due to the PMMA layer (Fig. 4c and d). Finally, the PMMA layer was dissolved and poly-(dimethyl siloxane) (PDMS) was infiltrated into the graphene framework to further strengthen the network and enhance the flexibility (Fig. 4e and f). The resultant graphene network inherited the 3D structure of NF with a density of 5 mg cm−3, exhibiting high electron transfer efficiency due to the defect-free and continuous graphene produced by CVD.
 Fig. 4  (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films onto nickel foam in CH4/H2/Ar atmosphere at 1000 °C. (c and d) Coating of PMMA as a supporting layer along with the following nickel etching process in a FeCl3/HCl solution. (e and f) Dissolution of PMMA layer and infiltration of PDMS support. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
Due to its excellent conductivity and electrochemical performance, graphene foam prepared from an NF template is highly eligible as an electrode material support. Therefore, a considerable amount of research has been conducted on metal oxides/graphene foam composites and their utilization in producing materials with significantly improved capacitance is well-known.25–27 The growth of metal oxides such as Co3O4 was examined by Dong et al. through simply immersing a graphene framework into a growth solution for facilitating a hydrothermal reaction.25 The as-obtained composite gave a capacitance of 1100 F g−1 at a current density of 10 A g−1. He et al.26 also reported an MnO2-coated freestanding 3D graphene foam that was fabricated by square-wave pulse current electrodeposition of a uniform MnO2 coating on 3D graphene foam, showing a remarkable areal capacitance of 1.42 F cm−2 with a high mass loading (92.9% of the whole electrode weight). Based on the CVD-derived graphene foam with a macroscopic scaffold, constructing a microscopic structure against its surface produced a monolithic electrode with a hierarchical structure, which enhanced both the electron and the ion transfer efficiency of the active materials grown on the skeleton. For this purpose, He and coworkers28 also fabricated a 3D micro-/nano-interconnected carbon based electrode comprising NF-derived graphene foam as its primary backbone, an outer layer of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the secondary electrode and MnO2 nanosheets attached on CNTs as the third. After the growth of CNT and MnO2 thin layers, the electrode maintained the flexibility of NF-derived graphene foam and exhibited a specific capacitance of 946 F g−1 with a mass loading of 0.1 mg cm−2, significantly exceeding that of a MnO2/graphene foam electrode (482 F g−1), a control sample without a CNT forest. The result showed that the surface coating of the CNT structure served as a conducting support as well as extended the accessible or exposed area of the MnO2 nanosheets. Moreover, the macro-pores of the primary scaffold allowed the fast infiltration of the electrolyte and therefore this hierarchical system achieved an outstanding performance. Besides MnO2/CNTs/graphene hybrids, microscopic honeycomb-like CoMoO4 layers were assembled against the graphene foam surface in the same pursuit to extend the porous structure from the macroscopic network to a microscopic level by Yu and his group.29 Similarly, extraordinary specific capacitance was demonstrated with a monolithic electrode that gave a capacitance as high as 2741 F g−1 at a current density of 1.43 A g−1 and a remarkable capacitance retention of 96.36% at 400 A g−1 after 100000 cycles (electrode mass loading: 0.51 mg cm−2). All these examples confirm that 3D conducting scaffolds with hierarchical structures are able to maximize the utilization of active materials and thus maximize the capacitance and stability.30,31
As CVD-assisted fabrication is not the only way to produce NF-derived 3D graphene foam, hydrothermal reduction of a graphene oxide suspension was also conducted to assemble graphene on NF.34 Zhai et al.32 most recently fabricated NF-derived graphene foams (denoted as a 3D graphene hollow structure, 3DGH) via a hydrothermal process without the need of PMMA impregnation. After annealing the as-prepared 3DGH in a reducing atmosphere, good crystallinity and conductivity were achieved, and coating of MnO2 and V3S4 layers onto 3DGH was subsequently carried out; the resultant electrodes were denoted as MnO2/3DGH and V3S4/3DGH, respectively. A Nyquist plot of the 3DGH was studied before and after nickel removal, indicating a charge transfer resistance of 0.3 Ω before and 1 Ω after nickel removal and no apparent change in electrical resistance was observed. A quasi-solid state device, namely, MnO2/3DGH//V3S4/3DGH, was assembled with a separator and gel electrolyte, in which the mass of active materials occupied 24% of the whole capacitor (21 mg cm−2 for whole device, Fig. 5a). As shown in Fig. 5b, the device delivered an extraordinary energy density of 7.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of 3000 W kg−1, approaching the density of Li-ion batteries. Other than hydrothermal fabrication, a facile and scalable electrochemical fabrication method is reported by Zhang et al.33 Graphene oxide was first cast onto a NF framework via a solution process and an electrochemical reduction to induce electrochemically reduced graphene oxide (ERGO) on the surface of the skeleton to obtain ERGO electrodes (Fig. 5c). More interestingly, further studies showed that MnO2 could be attached to the nickel backbone by simply coupling the electrochemical reduction with electrodeposition (Fig. 5d), while a facile dip-coating with a subsequent electrochemical reduction realized the assembly of CNTs on the ERGO foam surface (Fig. 5e). Both the MnO2–ERGO and CNT–ERGO electrodes were inspected for SC application at a current density of 1 A g−1, showing specific capacitances of 422.5 F g−1 and 280.4 F g−1, respectively. EIS curves of MnO2–ERGO, CNT–ERGO and ERGO showed that the equivalent series resistances (ESRs) of the three electrodes are very close with values of 11, 9 and 5 Ω, respectively, proving that these 3D frameworks of ERGO can serve as highly conductive backbones. Prolonged cycling stability was also achieved for these electrodes. Their excellent performance further proved the importance of 3D networks for SC electrodes and such skeletons granted superior flexibility to the electrode, while maintaining over 95% of its capacity after they had been bent at large angles for 100 times.
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH all-quasi device. (b) Ragone plot of V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device, showing an energy density close to that of lithium-ion batteries. (c) SEM image of ERGO electrode, (d) SEM image of MnO2–ERGO electrode and (e) SEM image of CNT–ERGO electrode. Insets show the corresponding photographs of different electrodes. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c–e) from ref. 33 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Despite the merits brought about by template removal, NF templates, in many cases, were retained after coating with active materials, which served as a current collector as well as a 3D scaffold.35–37 Note that the aforementioned graphene coating on NF template is relatively high-cost; meanwhile, nickel foam itself can serve as a conducting pathway in place of graphene, so using NF template as a conducting scaffold might reduce the overall cost of the electrode preparation process.38 Moreover, nickel is vulnerable to the etching process and this enables it to act as a source for the in situ growth of nickel oxides or hydroxides.23,39,40 Under this consideration, other researchers, who were in pursuit of a scalable 3D electrode synthesis, used NF directly as a conducting backbone without graphene coating. For instance, Yu et al.23 developed a scaled-up surface treatment for NF activation (activated nickel foam, namely ANF) to grow a layer of NiO on a nickel network. Through the partial etching of NF in the presence of HCl, the original layer of NiO existing on the NF surface was removed and a new layer of oxide was produced on the rougher surface (as shown in Fig. 6a) during the drying process, giving an areal capacitance of 2.0 F cm−2 at a current density of 8 mA cm−2. An activated surface gave ANF a superior surface capacitance compared to pristine NF (Fig. 6b), and an excellent electrochemical performance was achieved at various current densities (Fig. 6c). This work was in fact an example of the in situ growth of a microscopic structure onto a macroporous nickel skeleton, in which NF was a nickel source as well as a monolithic conductive support for producing an intact electrode. Another in situ synthesis from NF was developed by Xiong et al.39 The NiO layer on the NF was first etched away and the foam was stored in a glass vial to allow surface oxidation in a wet environment, forming a dense layer of Ni(OH)2, followed by an alkaline and oxidative solution treatment to transform the morphology into a nanosheet array. After the transformation process, the dense layer still retained a high mass loading of 1.8–2.0 mg cm−2. The as-obtained 3D nanosheets/NF electrode demonstrated a specific capacitance of 2384.3 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of NF; the resultant ANF was darkened due to the activation. (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of NF and ANF electrodes. (c) Areal capacitance as a function of the current density of NF and ANF electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group. 
To produce a 3DNF electrode maintaining the NF backbone, other ex situ syntheses of active materials on NF were intensively investigated. Primarily, these efforts involved simple and one-pot hydrothermal reactions and electrodeposition to obtain cost-effective and scalable 3D electrodes from NF templates. Metal oxides,41–44 sulfides,45,46 hydroxides36,38 and their composites35,37,47 with various morphologies were studied for their electrochemical performance and application in SCs. For instance, several reports pertaining to NiCo2O4 suggested good prospects for the application of such mixed metal oxides.41,48 Yuan et al.49 synthesized mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanosheets on NF for 3D SC electrodes, which delivered a specific capacitance of 1450 F g−1 at 20 A g−1 with a relatively small active materials loading of 0.4 mg cm−2. 3D metal oxide composites were also obtained directly through a one-step hydrothermal route. Most recently, NiCo2O4/MnO2 nanowire arrays on NF were produced by Zou et al.,50 which gave a specific capacitance of 2339 F g−1 at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. Through the sulfidation of the aforementioned NiCo2O4 in a Na2S solution, the resulting NiCo2S4 showed a lower Rct and achieved a capacitance of 2415 F g−1 at a current density of 30 mA cm−2, as demonstrated by Li et al.51 All these studies proved that the facile preparation of high performance 3D electrodes for SCs is feasible by directly applying NF as a support.
3.2. Silica templates
Silica with various morphologies have been synthesized such as nanoparticles,52–54 nanosheets55 and ordered mesoporous/macroporous structures.56–58 Unlike NF templates, silica is considerably more stable against high temperatures and acid solutions. Thus, preparation methods that involve silica templates are usually accompanied with high temperatures or strongly acidic surroundings.59 The highly stable structure of silica prevents the shrinkage of materials upon annealing or reaction; however,60 such stability in turn becomes a drawback for its application because the removal of silica templates (involving HF or hot base etching) is difficult, limiting its use mainly to the carbonization of organic precursors to produce porous carbon networks (e.g. ordered mesoporous carbon) or the preparation of materials that are stable against strong bases.61–64 Nonetheless, silica templates with microscopic structures, such as particle-like and mesoporous structures, introduce micro-/meso-pores into the target framework and thus broaden its potential application in building 3D electrodes.
Silica particles are most commonly used for silica templates with advantages such as facile preparation, controllable particle size and easy dispersion in solution.53,54 When used as templates, silica particles are first dispersed in the reaction solution, followed by a growth process to coat active materials on the templates. The general preparation route might consist of three steps: (1) impregnation of active materials or precursor into the matrices of templates; (2) pyrolysis or further treatment to achieve the desired product with sufficient crystallinity; (3) removal of silica templates in HF solution or hot bases. For instance, Yu et al.18 synthesized mesoporous Li4Ti5O12 hollow spheres for lithium-ion batteries (as shown in Fig. 7) that showed excellent rate capability and cyclic stability. Typically, silica nanoparticles were initially dispersed in a hydroxypropyl–cellulose/ethanol/water mixture to form a monodisperse colloid. Subsequently, TBOT was injected into the mixture to deposit a TiO2 layer on the silica templates. The following hydrothermal treatment in LiOH solution assisted the gradual removal of silica and meanwhile converted the TiO2 coating into a precursor that was thereafter calcined in air to acquire discrete Li4Ti5O12 hollow spheres. However, templates formed from silica particles without an interconnected skeleton usually produced a porous or hollow 3D microscopic structure, rather than the monolithic framework derived from NF.65–67 The powdered product should be applied on Cu foil or Al foil before electrochemical investigation and the disruption of long-range electron transfer because the disconnected nature of the particles hindered the capacitive performance by intercepting electrons during particle-to-particle transfer.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of Li4Ti5O12 hollow spheres as a representative synthesis procedure using silica templates. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In spite of the monodisperse characteristics featured by silica particles, attempts have been made to use a silica template to fabricate a 3D structure that is continuous on a larger scale by assembling and fastening silica particles into a so-called 3D colloidal crystal.68–71 Such fabrication methods involve the precipitation of colloidal particle templates by an external force such as gravity, an assembly process directed by capillary forces, electrostatic forces or hydrophobic interactions at oil–water interfaces and, finally, an optional fastening process through heating (especially for silica templates or polymer templates).20 Once connections between particles are formed, a 3D network is obtained and active material can be confined in spaces to cast an inverse structure with an interwoven network. According to the example shown in Fig. 8, Wen et al.72 attempted to build a three-dimensional hierarchical porous carbon structure (3DHPC) by adopting preheated silica spheres that had formed necks between each other (Fig. 8a). The subsequent impregnation of a mesoporous carbon precursor (consisting of phenol, formaldehyde, NaOH and F127 surfactant) and a follow-up heat treatment gave rise to the formation of ordered mesoporous carbon in the spacing that existed between silica particles (Fig. 8b and c). The as-prepared 3DHPC electrodes (mass loading = ∼5.5 mg cm−2) were tested for capacitive deionization, showing a relatively low capacitance of 118.1 F g−1; this value was considerably larger than that of regular ordered mesoporous carbon. Enhancements in IR drop and charge transfer resistance were also observed, revealing that an interconnected structure might have an impact on electron transfer efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of periodically arranged PS colloidal crystal. (b) High magnification TEM image of 3DHPC electrode. (c) Illustration of bi-modal porous 3D structure of 3DHPC. Reproduced from ref. 72. 
The connected silica casting mold shows an interconnected network at a relatively larger scale, but it is still considerably smaller than that of NF because of the limited size of the silica particles. Besides, the preparation of colloidal crystals is costly and time-consuming. Therefore, most of the studies have focused on fabricating 3D electrodes with template methods that used silica templates as an auxiliary tool to integrate mesopores into a macroporous skeleton (e.g. graphene foam or aerogel) for building bi-modal or tri-modal porous 3D frameworks.57,73 Through combining graphene aerogel (GA) and mesoporous silica layers, a composite of graphene aerogel and mesoporous silica (denoted as GA-SiO2) was successfully synthesized and used as a 3D electrode template by Wu and coworkers,74 as shown in Fig. 9a. In this case, a graphene aerogel was prepared by the hydrothermal reduction of a graphene oxide dispersion and was subsequently suspended in an aqueous solution of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB). The absorption of CTAB facilitated the uniform hydrolysis of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS) and thus produced an even SiO2 layer on the GA surface. 3D GA-based mesoporous carbon (GA-MS) or GA-based metal oxides (GA-Co3O4 and GA-RuO2) were constructed via a nanocasting technology. To prove that the GA-SiO2 was suitable to serve as a versatile 3D electrode backbone for SCs, the as-fabricated GA-MS and GA-RuO2 were evaluated in a 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte, giving specific capacitances of 226 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1 and 560 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1, respectively. Further calculation of the pseudocapacitive utilization of RuO2 (1090 F g−1) showed that the 3D GA-SiO2 templates had a large, accessible electrode–electrolyte interface due to their bi-modal porous structure. Besides building a silica layer on the backbone surface to increase porosity, silica can also be intercalated into a macroporous framework to prevent restacking and induce a hierarchical structure. One of these examples was shown by Lei et al.,73 in which they attempted to infiltrate mesoporous silica spheres into graphene stacks as templates to induce an intercalated mesoporous carbon sphere via CVD, depositing carbon inside the mesopores of the intercalated silica spheres. The resultant carbon spheres, after the removal of silica, remain intact and intercalated in the graphene matrices, preventing the restacking of graphene without impeding the electron conduction of the framework (Fig. 9b and c). The composites were subsequently subjected to an NH3 atmosphere for reduction and gave outstanding capacity retention, which remained at 85% of its initial value, compared with less than 30% retention for a pristine RGO electrode (Fig. 9d). The result revealed that the enhanced rate performance could be ascribed to the presence of highly conductive reduced graphene sheets as well as the intercalated mesoporous carbon spheres, which served as conducting spacers.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hierarchical macro- and meso-porous GA-SiO2 frameworks. (b) TEM image of RGO. (c) TEM image of GMCS. (d) Capacitance retention against current density of RGO and GMCS-based electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from the American Chemical Society and ref. 74. 
3.3. Polystyrene spheres
An advantage of polystyrene (PS) or other polymer templates over silica is that the organic nature of the polymer facilitates clean and thorough cleansing of templates by simple calcinations or hot organic solvent dissolution, while its susceptibility to high temperature also makes it ineligible for fabrication routes that require heat treatment. Similar to silica, polystyrene has been commonly used as templates in the form of spheres, which are discrete when dispersed in aqueous media and unsuitable for the formation of a monolithic and uniformly continuous framework.75–77 To construct a 3D structure with such templates, two strategies have been employed: (1) transforming PS colloids into 3D colloidal crystals before template formation,78 similar to silica colloids; (2) self-assembly of such templates with other materials (e.g. graphene) to induce extra porosity.79
As for methods aiming to achieve 3D colloidal assembly, the fabrication of PS colloidal crystals, in this aspect, is close to that of silica particles, except for the organic nature of the polymer, which enables the fastening of PS into a periodically arranged pattern at a considerably lower temperature of around 100 °C. To date, diverse methods have been developed to transfer PS onto a conductive substrate, which might broaden the application of PS spheres in assembling 3D electrodes.68 These methods mainly include: (1) dropping PS colloids onto a lateral substrate surface along with follow-up evaporation;80 (2) deposition of PS onto a vertically suspended substrate in PS colloids by evaporation of solvent along the surface;81–83 (3) a dip-wetting method, in which substrates are drawn out of PS colloids at a constant speed and angle;84–87 (4) electrophoretic deposition of PS spheres onto a conductive substrate.88 However, 3D colloidal crystal formation is normally time-consuming and requires extra labor compared to procedures that directly integrate PS spheres into macroporous matrices. As an example, exploiting the self-assembly of templates with graphene, Choi et al.89 developed 3D macroporous graphene frameworks (embossed chemically modified graphene, denoted as e-CMG) for SCs using a filtration technique (as shown in Fig. 10a). Two suspensions, PS and graphene oxide, were mixed at pH 2, which maintained their uniformity in the media without sedimentation. Subsequently, the mixture was filtered and adjusted to pH 6 to promote the electrostatic interaction between PS and graphene oxide, which is directed by the opposite charge carried at such a pH. The resultant self-supported graphene framework collected after the removal of PS possessed a high mass of 10 mg for a single electrode and delivered a specific capacitance calculated to be 202 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 10c), which was double that of the film prepared without PS (93 F g−1). An all-3D asymmetric supercapacitor device was also fabricated, as shown in Fig. 10b, with e-GMC as a negative electrode and a positive electrode was obtained by depositing MnO2 onto e-GMC, demonstrating an energy density of 44 W h kg−1 and a power density of 25 kW kg−1 within a potential window of 2.0 V.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembly process of e-CMG and MnO2/e-CMG composite films. (b) Rate performance shown in specific capacitance of various electrodes against current density. (c) Image giving an illustration of the all-3D device assembly. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3.4. Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)
Metal–organic frameworks are of great interest as intriguing templates for 3D supercapacitor electrode materials because their unique structure can be designed via a bottom-up route and this is the very feature that distinguishes them from common hard templates.90–92 Most of the aforementioned templates used to achieve 3D scaffolds are considered from a top-down perspective. For example, NFs can cast out graphene foams that inherit the original frameworks; in other words, an upper-level structure is used to produce a lower-level one. On the contrary, the structure of an MOF is itself assembled from microscopic molecules with a certain geometric symmetry and sites that coordinate with metal ions, leaving considerably greater flexibility for 3D structure design. Undoubtedly, numerous earlier studies have reported that some types of MOFs possess excellent activity for electrochemical capacitors, and these will not be considered in this section because they cannot be classified as templating methods.93–95 However, the conversion of MOF frameworks into highly porous carbon frameworks that are active for SC application can be achieved using a templating method to build up a 3D structure, as presented in Fig. 11a; the figure presents a carbonization example of using MOFs to produce a sheet-like porous carbon (Fig. 11b).96 From this perspective, MOFs should be referred to as sacrificial and chemical templates in some cases because the exploitation of such templates involves a chemical conversion process.20 To date, studies pertaining to such sacrificial templating methods have explored the electrochemical properties and have tentatively examined the applications of the MOF-derived carbons in SC devices. For the first time, Liu et al. carbonized a MOF-5 framework impregnated with polymerized furfuryl alcohol (FA), resulting in a structure for which the N2 sorption isotherms indicated the existence of different pore sizes spanning from micropores to macropores (Fig. 11c). A specific capacitance of 159 F g−1 at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1 was observed, as shown in the CV diagram presented in Fig. 11d.96 Since then, porous carbons derived from MOFs have been further studied by many researchers.97–103 Despite the high surface area achieved by MOF templates, these 3D nanoporous carbons have a relatively low specific capacitance (no more than 350 F g−1), which is probably due to the low theoretical capacitance of carbon itself. These abnormal phenomena were also attributed to the low conductivity of some of these compounds; it was concluded that a low carbonization temperature brought about higher porosity but lower conductivity.99 To the best of our knowledge, such a high surface area might have a significant impact on electrochemical properties once the problem of low conductivity was resolved and further improvements still need to be done for templating method involving MOFs. More interestingly, a continuous metal organic gel was deployed as a self-templated carbon source through a three-step gel-aerogel-carbonization method by Wei et al., fabricating a monolithic carbon electrode.104 However, the electrode was merely examined with regard to its use in lithium sulfur batteries and its electrochemical performance in SCs is unknown. Thus, a monolithic 3D electrode derived from a metal organic gel, in this respect, might still be of interest and research value.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the carbonization procedure of MOF-5 infiltrated with FA precursors. (b) The N2 sorption isotherms for an NPC electrode. (c) SEM image of sheet-like carbon. (d) Cyclic voltammetry of NPC in 1 M H2SO4 at different scan speeds. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3.5. Other templates
Driven by increasing demand for flexible and wearable devices, various templates other than NF, silica and polystyrene have been employed to construct 3D electrodes. However, the synthesis procedures are quiet similar, even though numerous templates have been used for 3D electrodes. Thus, this part will only give a brief description of template materials applied as scaffolds for 3DSC electrodes. Among these templates, most are backbones with macroscopic skeletons105–109 and particle templates22,110 coupled with self-assembled graphene.
For instance, Liu et al. improvised a polypyrrole stabilized cable-type 3D electrode with a deposited MnO2 middle layer and a graphene inner layer as an electron conducting pathway, delivering a maximal areal capacitance of 0.52 F cm−2 at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 that remained almost constant at scan rates up to 100 mV s−1.107 Other examples with macroscopic backbones include a 3D hybrid electrode of nanoporous gold/nanocrystalline MnO2 (reported by Lang et al., giving a capacitance of 1145 F g−1 (ref. 105)) and a template method employing carbonized cotton cloth, developed by Pang et al.108 In addition to these, particle templates (e.g. CaCO3) have also been exploited in assisting the self-assembly of graphene or as molds for hollow structure design, similar to silica and polystyrene templates. Meng et al.110 developed a facile assembly method using CaCO3 formed in situ in the GO dispersion process to produce a free-standing porous graphene film (3D-RGO). The in situ formed CaCO3 intercalated in between the graphene stacks and subsequently porosity was increased by the removal of CaCO3 with HCl solution. This work demonstrated a flexible 3D-RGO/PANI electrode with a specific capacitance of 362 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, indicating a capacitance retention of 94%.
To date, numerous endeavors have shown the shifting mosaic of template methods because the properties of templates vary according to the intrinsic nature of materials. However, unresolved problems, especially with regards to the controversial application of such procedures in large scale manufacturing, still need to be explored and solved.
4. Non-template fabrication of 3D electrodes
Although great progress has been made in the template-assisted fabrication of 3D electrodes, the existence of a template, to some extent, might have a negative effect on their capacitive behavior such as their chemical stability during the charge/discharge process. Moreover, the use of a template will obviously increase the total weight of the electrode, resulting in an inevitable reduction in specific power and energy density. Attempts have been made to remove the templates, which always require complicated steps, harsh conditions, high cost and are time consuming. In this regard, many alternative reliable synthetic routes without templates have been developed. These methods mainly rely on the self-assembly of low-dimensional monomers, multistep assembly of hierarchical structures and post-treatment of 3D natural precursors. In this section, we will provide a review of non-template synthesis methods for fabricating 3D electrodes with different types of materials, along with their properties and SC applications.
4.1. Carbon material
As a large family, carbon materials are perceived as the most common SC materials attributed to their fascinating properties, including abundant sources, low cost, superior conductivity, ultralong stability and environmental friendliness.8,14 Among the various carbon materials, most efforts of researchers have focused on the design of graphene-based 3D electrodes due to their unique lamellar structures and hollow tubular structures. In addition, composite electrodes constructed from carbon materials together with other pseudocapacitive materials, which always possess hierarchical structures, have become immediate areas of research focus. Dual functions are utilized for carbon materials, which provide high capacitance and excellent conductive pathways for electron transport.

4.1.1. Graphene. 
Since Novoselov et al. first discovered graphene by the micromechanical exfoliation of bulk graphite in 2004,111 the study of graphene has achieved enormous growth. Graphene is a type of one-atom-thick 2D single layer of sp2-bonded carbon, allowing a high electron mobility, high mechanical strength and a highly accessible large surface area (2600 m2 g−1).112 These unique properties enable graphene to be very promising as a monomer in the assembly of 3D architectures. In previous sections, we have introduced some strategies for fabricating 3D graphene architecture with the assistance of templates such as nickel foam and polystyrene spheres. In this part, we mainly focused on 3D graphene electrodes synthesized through non-template methods.
In 1985, Hummers et al.113 reported chemically exfoliated graphite oxide (GO) through the oxidation of natural graphite powder with strong oxidants. Inspired by this method, wet chemical approaches were rapidly used to construct 3D graphene structures through the gelation of GO dispersions followed by reduction to reduced graphite oxide (RGO). Crumpled graphene can be directly obtained from a GO dispersion through a direct drying method or an aerosol spray drying method.114–118 Under these conditions, graphene sheets tend to form a highly crumpled surface with a high pore volume, which can prevent them from agglomerating and re-stacking in a certain time. Such characteristics could enable significant improvement in terms of various performance parameters of SCs. For instance, Ruoff's group118 were the first to fabricate crumpled ball-like GO particles using an aerosol spray drying method (Fig. 12a). During this process, the GO suspension was transformed into fine droplets and the GO sheets formed crumpled and hollow shapes during evaporation. Then, the as-obtained GO particles were reduced and expanded by treating in a microwave oven. Finally, the crumpled graphene ball was activated through thermal treatment with KOH. Consequently, the unique three-dimensional pore structures in the crumpled graphene provided a remarkable BET surface area of up to 3290 m2 g−1. When tested as SC electrodes in a two-electrode symmetrical cell with an ionic liquid electrolyte, the device displayed rectangular shapes for CV curves and almost unchanged capacitance values with a scan rate change from 100 to 400 mV s−1 (Fig. 12b). Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy was performed to further evaluate the electrochemical behavior of the crumpled graphene-based device, as shown in Fig. 12c and d. A nearly ideal capacitive behavior was suggested by the vertical slope observed in the Nyquist plot in the low-frequency region. The resistance, calculated by extrapolating the vertical portion of the plot to the real axis, was only 3.75 Ω, indicating the low ESR value of the crumpled graphene-based device. Simultaneously, the crumpled graphene-based device exhibited phase angles close to −90° in low frequency regions, which further confirmed the pure capacitive behavior (Fig. 12d). The relaxation time, τ0, calculated at the phase angle of −45° is only 1.67 s, corresponding to its superior rate capability.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of highly porous crumpled graphene with hierarchical pore structures. (b) Cyclic voltammetry curves for different scan rates obtained for this crumpled graphene. (c) Nyquist plot showing the imaginary part versus the real part of the impedance. The inset magnifies the data in the high-frequency range. (d) Impedance phase angle versus frequency. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
The stabilization of GO sheets in water is believed to be the result of a force balance between the inter-planar van der Waals attractions among GO sheets and the electrostatic repulsions from edge-bound hydrophilic oxygenated groups. The self-assembly of the GO sheets would occur if the balance is broken and one of the most efficient methods for achieving this is the hydrothermal method. For example, Shi and coworkers119 reported the self-assembly of graphene hydrogel through a direct hydrothermal reaction. As shown in Fig. 13a, the as-prepared graphene hydrogel is mechanically strong, showing no deformation with a high weight loading. Moreover, a well-defined and cross-linked 3D porous structure was observed in the SEM image (Fig. 13b). Such a high specific surface area grants the hydrogel a large electric double layer capacitance of 175 F g−1 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in an aqueous electrolyte. In addition, chemical doping with foreign atoms is believed to be an efficient way to improve the electronic characteristics of graphene materials, which could enrich their free charge-carrier density and improve their electrical conductivity. Besides, pseudo-capacitance is always introduced into graphene by substituting carbon atoms in the graphene plane with foreign atoms. Adding additives into the reaction media of hydrothermal reactions is a convenient strategy for the fabrication of foreign atom-doped 3D graphene architectures. Recently, attempts have been made to dope one or more types of foreign atoms into graphene through this method such as nitrogen,120,121 sulphur,83,122 phosphorus123,124 and boron.120,125 Wu et al.120 realized the co-doping of nitrogen and boron into graphene by adding ammonia boron trifluoride (NH3BF3). The interconnected frameworks with macroporous architectures were well maintained, which are favorable for ion diffusion and electron transport in bulk electrodes. An all-solid-state symmetric SC device was also fabricated based on this graphene, exhibiting a large energy density of 8.65 W h kg−1. In addition, efforts have been made to assemble hydrogel composites of graphene and pseudocapacitive materials as reported by Xie et al.,126 combining 3D graphene hydrogel with porous MnO2. This unique structure featured hydrogels with a combination of high conductivity and high specific capacitance.
 Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of a strong RGO aerogel allowing easy handling and supporting weight. (b) SEM image of RGO aerogel interior microstructures. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of RGO aerogel based SC at two different scan rates. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of RGO aerogel based SC at a constant current of 1 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Filtration through a porous membrane filter is another common method for constructing 3D graphene architecture from a GO dispersion. In this situation, the graphene macroscopically appear as a thin paper. Ruffo and co-workers creatively assembled free-standing graphene oxide (GO) paper for the first time through the direct filtration of the aqueous solution of dispersed GO.127 Immediately, Li et al.128–130 applied this technique to fabricate a graphene paper using a further reduction step and investigated its application as a SC. The individual graphene sheet was arranged in a nearly parallel manner through the directional flow, yielding a freestanding structure with a density of ∼1.8 g cm−3. A symmetric SC device with an organic electrolyte based on a wet graphene paper was then assembled, reaching a large voltage window of 4 V. The SCs could offer a large specific capacitance of 273.1 F g−1, a power density of 776.8 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 150 W h kg−1.129 Moreover, they further exchanged the water in the wet graphene paper with a mixture containing volatile and non-volatile liquid (H2O/H2SO4), as shown in Fig. 14.130 After the volatile part in graphene was completely evaporated, porous dry graphene film was obtained (Fig. 14a). The packing density of this film could be easily tuned from 0.13 g cm−3 to 1.49 g cm−3 by changing the ratio of volatile to non-volatile liquid (Fig. 14b–d). In particular, a high gravimetric capacitance of 203.2 F g−1 was reached by the graphene film with a packing density of 0.13 g cm−3, while a high volumetric capacitance of 255.5 F cm−3 was exhibited by the graphene film with a packing density of 1.33 g cm−3 at 0.1 A g−1 in an aqueous electrolyte.
 Fig. 14  (a) A photograph showing the flexibility of the film. SEM images of the cross sections of the obtained graphene films containing (b) 78.9 volume percent (vol%) and (c) 27.2 vol% of H2SO4, corresponding to ρ = 0.42 g cm−3 and ρ = 1.33 g cm−3. (d) The relationship between the volumetric ratio of incorporated electrolyte and the packing density as well as the estimated inter-sheet spacing. (e) Gravimetric capacitances with varied charging/discharging current densities. Electrochemical characterization of graphene films in 1.0 M H2SO4 (ρ = 0.13, 0.42, 0.76, 1.33 and 1.49 g cm−3). Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
However, a critical issue encountered in this process is the easy aggregation or restacking of graphene sheets into a graphitic structure due to the π–π stacking interaction and van der Waals attraction among their basal planes. The restacking severely hinders the diffusion of ions into the interspace among the densely packed graphene sheets, resulting in a large loss of energy storage capability. In view of this problem, a spacer is inserted between the graphene sheets to prevent their restacking. Many studies have been focused on these composite graphene films using different types of spacer materials such as CNTs,131–133 metal oxides,126,134–138 polymers,110,139 and others.140 For example, Fan et al.131 added Co(NO3)2 to a graphene suspension as a catalyst, followed by growth of CNTs in-between the graphene layers through a CVD reaction (Fig. 15a). As shown in Fig. 15b and c, a typical graphene–CNT–graphene sandwich structure has been obtained, which possessed a layered structure with CNT spaces, without impeding its electrical conductivity (40.7 and 180.1 S m−1 in vertical and parallel directions, respectively). The unique structure combines fast transportation of electrolyte ions and electrons, comprehensive utilization of double-layer capacitance for carbon materials and the high pseudo-capacitive behavior of residual cobalt, exhibiting an excellent capacitance of 385 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1.
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the formation of CNT/graphene sandwich (CGS) structures. (b and c) SEM images of CGS. (d) Electrochemical performances of CGS:CV results measured at scan rates of 10, 20, 50, and 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Other novel methods were applied to fabricate 3D graphene architectures for SC application.141–144 For instance, Kaner et al.143 took advantage of a light scribe technique to exfoliate graphene sheets. Chen et al.144 reported a leavening strategy to form a porous structure in compact graphene structures. The obtained graphene foams with open pores and continuous cross links were used to assemble flexible symmetric SCs, showing a high specific capacitance of 110 F g−1. Maiti et al.142 used electrostatic attraction to realize the self-assembly of 3D graphene film. A Zn foil was placed into a graphene oxide suspension and the electrons were transferred from the Zn foil to graphene oxide sheets due to the low reduction potential of Zn. Moreover, the graphene oxide was reduced to graphene and assembled into 3D structures with water as a spacer, obtaining an RGO foam with a density of 0.44 mg cm−2 and a high electrical conductivity of 103.3 S m−1. The SC based on this type of 3D graphene film delivered a remarkable energy density of 2.73 μW h cm−2. Most recently, our group141 directly applied the modified Hummers method to graphite paper and macroscopically fabricated a type of 3D graphene scaffold (Fig. 16). After a process that combined Hummers method with a freezing technique, the volume was substantially expanded more than 10 times (Fig. 16a–c). The high quality of the graphene sheet was confirmed from SEM and TEM images (Fig. 16d and e). This unique 3D structure not only exhibited superior capacitive properties (the largest specific capacitance of 331.3 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1), but also worked well as a scaffold to support other electrochemically active materials. As an example, PANI nanorods were deposited on its surface and the specific capacitance of as-prepared composite electrodes, based on the whole mass (18 mg cm−3), reached 931.8 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1.
 Fig. 16  Photographs of (a) graphite paper (GP), (b) 3D graphene foams (3DGFs), and (c) their comparison. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of 3DGFs. (f) CV curves collected at 20 mV s−1 of GP, 3DGFs and PANI@3DGFs electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 


4.1.2. Other carbon materials. 
Besides graphene, other types of carbon materials have also been used to fabricate 3D SC electrodes. Among these, the electrochemical performance of CNTs has been widely evaluated since their discovery by Iijima in 1991 (ref. 145) because of their unique tubular porous structures, extremely high electrical conductivities and outstanding mechanical properties. There are mainly two strategies for fabricating 3D CNT based electrodes. One is using the CNTs as “wires” to weave into a 3D architecture. For example, Kohlmeyer et al.146 fabricated CNT organogels, using Fc-PPE and Fc-PPETE as chemical cross-linkers. After heat treatment, the as-prepared CNT aerogels are mechanically stable and stiff, showing a high porosity of 99%, an excellent electrical conductivity of 1–2 S cm−1 and a large specific surface area of 590–680 m2 g−1. However, investigations on the capacitive behavior of pure CNT based 3D electrodes are rare. This may be due to their low specific capacitance relying on the double layer. In view of this, attention has been given to the combination of CNTs with pseudo-capacitive materials. Several researchers have tried to synthesize textile-like 3D CNT based electrodes.121,147–149 In particular, Lu et al.121,147,148 developed a series of tangled 3D architectures of CNTs with V2O5 nanowires. Most recently, they evaluated the energy storage ability of this CNTs/V2O5 3D composite as a sodium-ion SC electrode. As shown in Fig. 17a and b, V2O5 nanowires and CNTs interpenetrate into 3D networks with interconnected pore channels, enabling fast access to the electrolyte, effective electron transport, and shortened ion diffusion paths. In addition, the typical layered structure of V2O5 with an interplanar spacing of 0.95 nm for the (001) plane allow fast sodium ion intercalation and deintercalation during the pseudocapacitive charge storage process. First, 1 M NaClO4 in propylene carbonate (PC) was utilized as an electrolyte, whereas sodium foil was selected as both the counter and reference electrodes. Fig. 17c shows a main capacitive contribution of 82% to the charge storage process, which represents a much larger ratio for pseudo-capacitance than double-layer-based capacitance. Then, they assembled coin-type asymmetric SCs using CNTs/V2O5 as the cathode and commercial activated carbon as the anode. These novel sodium-ion SCs exhibited a large energy density of 38 W h kg−1 at a high mass loading of 3 mg cm−2, even higher than those of previously reported lithium-ion SCs. The other strategy is directly depositing active materials on the surface of CNTs, which can efficiently make use of a synergistic effect. Zhang et al. coated manganese oxide and PANI on the CNTs using an electrochemical deposition method, achieving a 3D architecture with hierarchical pores.126 The MnO2/CNTs composite with a mass loading of 0.037 mg cm−2 achieved a very high specific capacitance of 199 F g−1 (corresponding to a volumetric capacitance of 305 F cm−3), a high rate capability of 50.8% at 77 A g−1, and a long-term electrochemical stability of 20000 cycles. On the other hand, the PANI/CNTs 3D composite also achieved a high specific capacitance of 1030 F g−1 and a cyclic stability of 5000 cycles. Recently, vanadium nitride (VN) nanoparticles were synthesized on the CNTs through a reactive RF magnetron sputtering method by Zhang et al. (Fig. 18a).150 As shown in Fig. 18b, monocrystalline VN particles were uniformly coated on the surface of CNTs. A remarkable specific capacitance of 289 F g−1 was demonstrated for these 3D nanostructures in 1 M KOH electrolyte at 20 mV s−1 (Fig. 18c and d). Furthermore, more than 80% capacitance retention was reached even at a very high scan rate of 1 V s−1, indicating their remarkable rate capability.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of a nanocomposite consisting of interpenetrating networks of V2O5 nanowires and CNTs, intimate contacts between the V2O5 nanowire and CNTs facilitating charge transport, and Na+ intercalation within the V2O5 layer structure. (b) SEM image of a V2O5/CNT nanocomposite, demonstrating nanowire V2O5 networks penetrated with CNTs. (c) Capacitive and diffusion-controlled contributions to charge storage. The capacitive current is shaded and compared with the total measured current. (d) Ragone plots of Na-ion and Li-ion asymmetric SCs made from a V2O5/CNT nanocomposite anode and an activated carbon cathode. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 18  (a) A schematic summarizing the synthesis process and ultimate morphology of the VN/CNT 3D array. (b) Magnified SEM micrographs of VN/CNT. (c) CV curves of VN/CNT in the potential range from 1.0 to 0.06 V, at different scan rates from 20 to 1000 mV s−1. (d) Relationship between the specific capacitance versus scan rate. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
As a derivative of CNTs, carbon nanohorns are also perceived as crooked and twisted graphene sheets with irregular horn-like shapes, which are easily self-assembled into 3D structured Dahlia-like spheres with diameters below 100 nm.151–156 Unlike CNTs, the advantage of carbon nanohorns lies not only in a large specific surface area but also in easy permeation of the electrolyte. To address their closed wall structure, Yang et al.153 realized the hole-opening of carbon nanohorns through a very easy oxidation treatment. Through the nanowindows formed from the holes in the wall of carbon nanohorns, solvated ions in the electrolyte are able to access the internal spaces, hence resulting in a substantially enriched electronic double layer capacitance. The carbon nanohorns with a hole-opening structure achieved a much higher specific capacitance of 116 F g−1 at a discharge current density of 1 mA cm−2, compared to only 66 F g−1 for the pure carbon nanohorns. Composite 3D electrodes based on carbon nanohorns were also used by the researchers with the aim of engineering a well defined, ordered pore structure and for introducing pseudocapacitance.151,152,156 For example, Hata et al.156 reported a novel 3D CNTs/carbon nanohorns composite film with well-defined pore structures. Because of the superior ability to hold sufficient electrolytes within its void volume, facile ion transport was obtained, leading to a maximum power rating of 990 kW kg−1.
Considerable attention has also been paid to the construction of 3D electrodes based on hierarchical carbon materials with high surface areas and rich pore structures.157–160 Hierarchical pores including micro-, meso- and macro-pores were incorporated into this structure. Among them, micro-pores are perceived to have the main contribution to energy storage; meso- and macro-pores can accelerate ion diffusion in the electrode, corresponding to an improvement in power density. In this way, these 3D hierarchical pore structures could guarantee a superior electrochemical performance. Cheng et al.159 synthesized a 3D periodic hierarchical porous graphitic carbon (HPGC) using a phenolic resin as the carbon source. The texture of the macroporous cores with diameters of about 1 mm was clearly revealed, as shown in Fig. 19a, which serves as good ion-buffering reservoir. The TEM image in Fig. 19b shows meso-pores with diameters between 10 and 50 nm uniformly distributed within the thin walls. Furthermore, a considerable number of micro-pores were observed through the pore-size distribution derived using nonlocal density functional theory (Fig. 19c). Such abundant hierarchical pores enable the HPGC to act as a very promising SC material with high specific capacitance and fast charge/discharge ability. Even at a fast discharge rate of only 3.6 s, the HPGC can deliver an outstanding energy and power density of 22.9 W h kg−1 and 23 kW kg−1. (Fig. 19d) Carbon aerogel (CA) is also a superior candidate for a highly conductive porous matrix, which has a 3D well-connected through-pore structure.161–167 These hierarchical carbon aerogels are always obtained from the pyrolysis of polymer materials. For example, Gutierrez et al.168 recently reported 3D carbon aerogels with hierarchical pores from a PPO-PEO-PPO block copolymer. A short chain block copolymer was selected as the surfactant to create carbon aerogel monoliths, which possess a bimodal porosity in the micro and the macro ranges. The resulting carbon aerogel exhibited a remarkable electronic conductivity of 2.5 S m−1, as well as a maximum electronic double layer capacitance of 225 F g−1. Furthermore, hierarchically porous graphite particles were designed by Chen et al. based on an aerosol process using sucrose as a carbon source.148 Through rational design of the production process, this method enables continuous, scalable synthesis of such carbon species, which contain a hierarchical pore structure and a graphitized shell. Symmetric SCs based on these graphite particles achieved a gravimetric energy density of 30 W h kg−1 at a power density of 270 W kg−1, which is considerably higher than the corresponding values for active carbon and CNT based symmetric SCs, despite the high mass loading used in this work (4–12 mg). Moreover, researchers have also paid attention to the fabrication of 3D carbon aerogel-based composite electrodes with pseudocapacitive materials such as MnO2,162,166 NiCo2O4,165 SnO2 (ref. 163) and polypyrrole.164 Lu et al.165,166 successively combined phenolic resin-derived carbon aerogels with MnO2 and NiCo2O4. The specific capacitances reached 503 and 1700 F g−1 for carbon aerogel/MnO2 and carbon aerogel/NiCo2O4 electrodes at 25 mV s−1, respectively.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of the macroporous cores of the HPGC material. (b) TEM image of the mesoporous walls and micro-pores. (c) Pore-size distribution of the HPGC material. (d) CV results measured at sweep rates of 20, 50, 100, and 200 mV s−1 in an alkaline electrolyte (6 mol L−1 KOH). Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Carbide-derived carbon with natural properties inherited from its soft organic source is also a key material for the fabrication of 3D architecture. To date, various types of natural carbides have been explored such as dead leaves,169 banana peel,170 silk proteins,171 rice husk,172 stover,173 corn cobs,174 and waste paper.175,176 For instance, Ogale's group169 developed a single-step pyrolysis method to treat dead leaves. Internal activation was suggested to be provided by the natural constituents in the leaves. Different capacitive behaviors were confirmed by treating different types of dead leaves (Neem and Ashoka leaves), which were attributed to the different constitutions and compositions of the bio-source. The 3D porous carbon derived from Neem leaves achieved an ultrahigh surface area of about 1230 m2 g−1, a remarkable specific capacitance of 400 F g−1, and a high energy density of 55 W h kg−1 at 0.5 A g−1 in 1 M H2SO4. Most recently, corn cob shell was reported to be applied in the synthesis of 3D carbon based architecture by Genovese et al.174Fig. 20a depicts the related synthesis method, which includes the removal of amorphous surroundings, pyrolysis process and exfoliation process with thermal flash. As expected, the obtained 3D biochar appears as an agglomeration of thin carbon sheets, similar to dry graphene (Fig. 20b). The thin sheet-like carbon structure, shown in Fig. 20c, clearly revealed the exfoliated carbon sheets. Due to its high surface area, superior porosity and introduced oxygen functionality, the exfoliated biochar demonstrated a high specific capacitance of 221 F g−1, 78% capacitance retention at a fast discharge current of 40 A g−1 and a stable electrochemical performance within 5000 cycles. Hierarchical porous carbon foams were also prepared from banana peel through a self-assembly strategy by Lv et al.170 Due to the abundant natural porous structure formed from the biopolymers in cell walls, banana peel absorbed a large amount of zinc ions and phenolic compounds in a metal–organic framework style. After a carbonization process, the hierarchical porous carbon foams were obtained that contained macroporous cores and mesoporous and microporous channels, which possessed a high specific surface area of 1650 m2 g−1. As expected, a remarkable specific capacitance of 206 F g−1 was reached at a current density of 1 A g−1. In addition, it is reported that up to 4 kg of waste paper is generated per household each week. Recycling or reuse of waste paper as an energy storage material is one of the most promising solutions for its disposal. Simple KOH activation of waste paper was reported for SC application by Kalpana et al.175 Significantly, a much lower charge-transfer resistance was observed for carbon derived from waste paper than carbon aerogel from RF gel, as illustrated by the EIS results. Moreover, a line that was close to the vertical in the low frequency region for carbon derived from waste paper further confirmed its pure capacitive behavior. A maximum specific capacitance of 180 F g−1 was revealed from the CV results at 2 mV s−1. Table 1 summarizes the mass loading of active materials, conductivity and capacitive performance of the 3D carbon electrodes prepared through template-assisted and template-free methods.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis strategy for the exfoliated corn cob biochar. (b) SEM image of the exfoliated biochar. (c) TEM image of the exfoliated biochar depicting a layered structure of thin microporous nanosheets. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge plot of exfoliated biochar electrodes in a symmetric 2-electrode SC cell with 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at rates from 1 to 10 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 174. 
Table 1 Summarized properties of 3D carbon electrodes and their corresponding capacitive performances




Electrode description
Fabrication method
Mass loading
Conductivity
Specific capacitance
Cycling performance
Ref.




The first graphene foam derived from NFs
Nickel foam templating
∼5 mg cm−3
10 S cm−1
—
—

24



ERGO foam
Nickel foam templating
—
—
156.9 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
—

33



CNT–ERGO
Nickel foam templating
—
—
280.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
—

33



GA-MC
Silica templating
—
—
∼226 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1
No capacitance loss after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1

74



GMCS–NH3
Silica templating
5.0–7.0 mg cm−2
381 S m−1
29.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1
94% retention after 1000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1

177



3D hierarchical porous carbon
Silica templating
∼5.5 mg cm−2
—
118.1 F g−1
—

72



e-CMG
PS templating
10 mg for a whole electrode
1204 S m−1
202 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
—

89



3D-RGO/PANI film
Other templates (CaCO3)
0.25 mg cm−2
—
362 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
90% retention over 5000 cycles at 5 A g−1

110



NPC carbon
Other templates (MOFs)
—
—
159 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1
—

96



NPC800
Other templates (MOFs)
—
—
190 F g−1 at 3 A g−1
98% retention rate after 1500 cycles at 3 A g−1

103



Self-assembled graphene hydrogel
Non-template method
—
Up to 4.9 mS cm−1
175 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1
—

119



Nitrogen and boron co-doped GAs c
Non-template method
—
—
26.2 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1
100% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles at 2 A g−1

120



GO paper from filtration
Non-template method
1.8 g cm−3
—
—
—

127



Self-stacked, solvated graphene
Non-template method
0.45 mg cm−2
—
273.1 F g−1
—

129



Electrolyte-mediated CCG
Non-template method
Tunable from 0.13 g cm−3 to 1.49 g cm−3
—
∼200 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1
—

130



Carbon nanotube/graphene sandwich
Non-template method
—
40.7 and 180.1 S m−1 in vertical and parallel directions
385 F g−1
Increased with 20% after 2000 cycles at 200 mV s−1

131



Laser scribed graphene
Non-template method
—
1738 S m−1
265 F g−1 at 250 A g−1
>97% of its initial response after 10000 cycles

143



rGO foams
Non-template method
—
—
110 F g−1
—

144



Interfacially gelated rGO foam
Non-template method
0.44 mg cm−2
103.3 S m−1
33.8 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2
97.8% retention after 4000 cycles at 10 mA cm−2

142



PANI@3DGF
Non-template method
18 mg cm−3
252.0 S cm−1 for 3DGF
931.8 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1
70.2% retention after 1000 cycles at 40 mV s−1

141



CA1-800 monolith
Non-template method
—
2.5 S cm−1
120–130 F g−1 at 150 mA cm−2
95% retention after 10000 cycles at 100 mA cm−2

168



Hierarchically porous graphite particles
Non-template method
4–12 mg cm−2
—
102 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
98% retention rate after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1

178



Dead leaf derived carbon
Non-template method
—
0.588 S cm−1 (1.7 Ω cm−1)
250–400 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
—

169



Carbon-based microporous nanoplates
Non-template method
—
∼1.15 × 104 S m−1
Over 100 F g−1 at 70 A g−1
>93% retention over 10000 cycles at 2.5 A g−1

171



Exfoliated biochar nanosheets from corn cob
Non-template method
1.5 mg cm−2
—
221 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
97% retention over 5000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1

174






4.2. Metal oxides
Metal oxides, such as MnO2,73,179 NiO,180,181 Co3O4,182–184 VOx,185,186 and Fe2O3,187 are indispensable pseudocapacitive materials for SC electrodes. Generally, metal oxides can allow higher specific capacitance than carbon materials, which further enhances the energy density of the SCs.188 This is because these metal oxides can not only store energy through electronic double layer capacitance, but also through the reversible faradaic reaction between them and the ions in the electrolyte. However, the main drawback that severely limits their general application in SCs is their low conductivity.188 With this in mind, a rationally designed 3D structure can ensure an efficient channel for electron transportation. The construction methods for 3D metal oxide electrodes can be briefly divided into one-step self-assembly and multistep assembly. In this section, the main strategies for the construction of 3D metal oxide architectures are summarized. Notably, we introduced 3D metal oxides/carbon materials at the beginning of this paper, hence we will not repeat it in this section.

4.2.1. One step self-assembly of 3D metal oxide electrodes. 
The self-assembly design of 3D metal oxides is theoretically based on the crystal growth law. Many methods have been applied by researchers for the synthesis of metal oxide crystals such as electrochemical deposition, hydrothermal method and solvothermal method.126,180,189–196 Controllable fabrication of 3D architectures was realized through tuning different synthesis parameters during the growth of metal oxide crystals. Among these, the hydrothermal method can be easily adjusted for the synthesis of nanocrystalline metal oxides by optimizing reaction times, precursors, temperature, and additives. Chen et al.194 used the hydrothermal method to fabricate MnO2 nanostructures with well-controlled morphology and crystal phase, as shown in Fig. 21. As the reaction time increased, the morphology of MnO2 changed from 3D nanoflowers to tangled nanowires, and then to dispersive nanotubes; at the same time, the crystal phase converted from δ-MnO2 to α-MnO2. Vajtai and co-workers189 macroscopically synthesized V2O5 thin nanosheets with a thickness of only 4 nm using a hydrothermal method. By using these nanosheets as building blocks, the self-assembly of 3D architectures was achieved after a further freeze-drying method. The 3D architecture was made up of thin walls and multilevel pores, providing easy access of electrolytes to the V2O5 surface (Fig. 22a and b). In an energy storage test, the 3D V2O5 electrode reached a large specific capacitance of 451 F g−1 in an aqueous electrolyte of Na2SO4 (Fig. 22c) and the energy density reached 107 W h kg−1 at a high power density of 9.4 kW kg−1 (Fig. 22d).
 Fig. 21  TEM images of the MnO2 nanostructures obtained at different hydrothermal reaction times. (a) MnO2-1 h; (b) 1.5 h; (c) 2 h; (d) 4 h; (e) 8 h; (f) 12 h. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 22  (a and b) Typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of the 3D V2O5 architecture constructed from nanosheets. (c) Specific capacitances calculated from galvanostatic charge/discharge with various current densities. (d) Power density and energy density of V2O5 3D architecture, stacked V2O5 film, and bulk V2O5 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
An electrochemical deposition method was also adopted to fabricate metal oxide materials with a 3D morphology. Huang et al.190 deposited 3D vanadium oxide (VOx) on a graphite substrate with a VOSO4-based electroplating electrolyte; the maximum specific capacitance of which reached 180 F g−1. The 3D nanoporous NiO film prepared by an electrochemical route180 achieved a high surface area of 264 m2 g−1. In these studies, 3D architectures were generally assembled by low-dimensional nanostructures such as VOx nanowires190 and NiO nanosheets.180


4.2.2. Multistep assembly of 3D metal oxide composite electrodes. 
Some investigations were also conducted for the stepwise assembly of 3D metal oxide composite electrodes. Generally, a low-dimensional backbone material is fabricated, followed by the deposition of branch materials. One-dimensional ZnO is chosen as a favorable backbone material because its synthesis is well-established. For example, a two-step seed-assisted hydrothermal process was used to construct a 3D ZnO nanoforest, as shown in Fig. 23a.197 This was followed by the deposition of a thin MnO2 shell, maintaining the 3D nanoforest morphology (Fig. 23b and c). For comparison, 1D ZnO@MnO2 nanowires were also fabricated. Fig. 23d depicts the galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the ZnO@MnO2 nanowires and nanoforest at a same discharge current density. The substantially longer discharge time for the ZnO@MnO2 nanoforest indicated that it has a much higher areal capacitance compared with ZnO@MnO2 nanowires (Fig. 23d). The calculated areal capacitance reached 31.3 mF cm−2, which is almost 5 times that of the corresponding nanowires electrode (Fig. 23e). Similarly, MnO2 and NiO nanoflakes were synthesized step by step on ZnO nanowires,181,198 which also exhibited a superior capacitive behavior as SC electrodes.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the designed 3D ZnO nanoforest counterpart. (b and c) Typical SEM images of the synthesized 3D ZnO@MnO2 core/shell forest of nanotrees. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the 3D ZnO@MnO2 core/shell nanoforest and nanowire arrays at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2. (e) Specific discharging capacitances at different current densities of electrodes made of nanoforest and nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 197. 
Moreover, more 3D metal oxide–metal oxide composite structures were designed and fabricated by researchers, including Co3O4@NiO,181 Co3O4@MnO2,199 SnO2@V2O5,200 Co3O4@NiOH,37 Co3O4@Fe2O3,201 CuO@MnO2 (ref. 202) and MnMoO4@CoMoO4 (ref. 203) backbone-branch structures. Taking advantage of the synergistic effect from capacitive backbones and branches, these 3D structures usually delivered favorable electrochemical performances. In particular, significant progress was made by Fan et al.37,181,198,199 For instance, using the hydrothermal method, Co3O4 nanowires were first fabricated on a FTO substrate, NiO nanoflakes were then uniformly coated on the Co3O4 cores by a chemical bath strategy181 (Fig. 24a and b). On the one hand, the well-separated NiO nanoflakes distributed on the Co3O4 nanowire cores enable full exposure of both active materials to the ions in the electrolyte. On the other hand, good mechanical stability and electrical conductivity was guaranteed by the synergistic effect of cores and shells. Therefore, the composite electrode achieved a considerable higher capacitance than Co3O4 nanowire or NiO nanoflakes individually (Fig. 24c). Moreover, the Co3O4@NiO electrode exhibits excellent stability with a specific capacitance of 853 F g−1 maintained at 2 A g−1 after 6000 cycles. However, it is worth noting that though such 3D structures based on metal oxides can enhance electronic transport along the electrode in a certain way, they cannot improve their naturally poor conductivity. Table 2 summarizes the mass loading of active materials, conductivity and capacitive performance of the 3D metal oxide-based electrodes prepared through template-assisted and template-free methods.
 Fig. 24  (a) SEM and (b) TEM of Co3O4@NiO core/shell nanowire arrays grown on an FTO substrate. (c) Charge/discharge curves at the 10th cycle and (d) cycling performances at 2 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Table 2 Summarized properties of 3D metal-oxide based electrodes and their corresponding capacitive performances




Electrode description
Fabrication method
Mass loadings
Conductivity
Specific capacitance
Cycling performance
Ref.




3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composite
Nickel foam templating
—
—
∼1100 F g−1 at 10 A g−1
∼1100 F g−1 after 500 cycles

25



MnO2-coated freestanding 3D graphene foam
Nickel foam templating
0.85–9.8 mg cm−2
55 S cm−1
1.42 F cm−2 at 2 mV s−1
82% retention at 1.5 mA cm−2 after 5000 cycles

26



3D graphene/CNFs/MnO2 composite
Nickel foam templating
0.1 mg cm−2
55 S cm−1
946 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1
94.1% retention after 1000 cycles at 10 A cm−2

28



CoMoO4 NHC-like films-3D graphene foam composite
Nickel foam templating
0.51 mg cm−2
—
2741 F g−1 at 1.43 A g−1
96.36% retention at 400 A g−1 after 100000 cycles

29



MnO2/3DGH
Nickel foam templating
1.5 mg cm−2
—
345 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1
—

32



MnO2–ERGO
Nickel foam templating
—
—
422.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
—

33



MnO2–ERGO//CNT–ERGO device
Nickel foam templating
—
—
69.4 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1
84.4% retention after 10000 cycles at 5 A g−1

33



Nickel foam
—
—
350 S cm−1
—
—

24



ZnO@Co3O4
Nickel foam support
2.0 mg cm−2
—
857.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
78% retention at 6 A g−1 after 6000 cycles

35



CN@NCH
Nickel foam support
2.0 mg cm−2
—
2550 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
92.70% retention after 5000 cycles at 20 A g−1

36



CoO@NiOOH
Nickel foam support
∼3.0 mg cm−2
—
798.3 F g−1 at ∼1.67 A g−1
96.7% retention after 2000 cycles at 10 A g−1

37



Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on nickel foam
Nickel foam support
1.8–2.0 mg cm−2
—
2384.3 F g−1 at ∼1 A g−1
75% retention after 3000 cycles at 5 A g−1

39



Activated nickel foam
Nickel foam support
25.5 mg cm−2 including nickel foam
—
2.0 F cm−2 at 8 mA cm−2
Increased from 0.47 to 1.27 F cm−2 after 100000 cycles at 100 mV s−1

23



3D CoO@PPy nanowire array electrode
Nickel foam support
∼2.0 mg cm−2
—
2223 F g−1 at 1 mA cm−2
∼99.8% capacitance after 2000 cycles at 20 mA cm−2

44



Cobalt oxide nanobrush–graphene@NixCo2x(OH)6x
Nickel foam support
∼2.0 mg cm−2
—
2550 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
92.70% retention after 5000 cycles at 20 A g−1

36



Ultrathin mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanosheets
Nickel foam support
0.4 mg cm−2
—
1450 F g−1 at 20 A g−1
94% retention after 2400 cycles

49



Networked NiCo2O4/MnO2 BNH arrays
Nickel foam support
∼1 mg cm−2
—
1891 F g−1 at 100 mA cm−2
98.4% retention after 3000 cycles

50



GA-RuO2
Silica templating
—
—
∼348 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1
—

74



MnO2/e-CMG
PS templating
10 mg for a whole electrode
—
389 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
—

89



e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG device
PS templating
10 mg for a whole electrode
—
—
95% retention after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1

89



PPy–MnO2–CNT–cotton thread
Other templates (cotton thread)
Up to 3 mg cm−2 for SWCNT coating
—
0.52 F cm−2 at 1 mV s−1
96% after 3000 cycles at 3.33 mA cm−2

107



Nanoporous gold/nanocrystalline MnO2
Other templates (noble metal)
—
—
1145 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1
∼85% retention up to 1000 cycles

105



V2O5/CNT nanocomposite
Non-template method
3 mg cm−2
—
∼400 C g−1 at 2 mV s−1
∼80% retention after 900 cycles at 60 C

147



VN/CNT 3D array
Non-template method
0.037 mg cm−2 for VN
∼23 S cm−1 (43.5 mΩ cm−1)
289 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1
—

150



3D V2O5 architecture
Non-template method
—
—
521 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1
∼90% retention after 4000 cycles 5 A g−1

189



Nanostructured MnO2
Non-template method
2–3 mg cm−2
—
110 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
Capacitance increased after 5000 cycles

194



3D porous vanadium oxide
Non-template method
—
—
150–160 F g−1 at 250 mV s−1
—

190



3D nanoporous NiO
Non-template method
—
—
1776 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1
97.9% over 1000 cycles

180



ZnO@MnO2 nanoforest
Non-template method
—
—
31.30 mF cm−2 0.02 mA cm−2
—

197



MnO2–NiO nanoflakes
Non-template method
—
—
0.101 F cm−2
96.4% retention after 1500 cycles at 8.5 mA cm−2

198



ZnO/NiO core/shell nanowire arrays
Non-template method
3 mg cm−2
—
853 F g−1 at 2 A g−1
95.1% after 6000 cycles at 2 A g−1

181



Co3O4 nanowire@MnO2 nanosheets
Non-template method
1.5 mg cm−2
—
480 F g−1 at 2.67 A g−1
97% after 5000 cycles at 11.25 mA cm−2

199



CuO@AuPd@MnO2 NWs
Non-template method
0.55 mg cm−2
—
493 F g−1
100% over 5000 cycles at 100 mV s−1

202



Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowires
Non-template method
—
—
187.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
98% after 1000 cycles at 3 A g−1

203






4.3. Other materials
Conducting polymers, including polyaniline (PANI),204–206 polypyrrole (PPy),207 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) and poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT-PSS),208,209 are also believed to be promising SC electrode materials due to their low cost, environmentally friendly properties, high conductivity in a doped state, high electronic storage capacity, and adjustable redox activity through chemical modification. 3D porous structures were easily fabricated through the self-assembly of low-dimensional nanostructures.204–209 Common preparation methods are mainly divided into electrochemical polymerization204–207 and direct chemical polymerization.208,209 For example, Yu et al.204 constructed a porous 3D network consisting of numerous PANI nanofibers on a stretchable CNT based substrate by a one-step electrochemical deposition method with a solution of 0.1 M aniline and 1 M H2SO4 (Fig. 25). The as-obtained PANI-based electrode exhibited a remarkable specific capacitance of 1023 F g−1 and a corresponding areal capacitance of 481 mF cm−2. Such stretchable electrodes also provide an opportunity for the fabrication of high-performance stretchable SC devices. As a demo, a solid-state stretchable symmetric SC was assembled (denoted as PANI-SSC), which uses H2SO4/PVA as an electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 25c. The as-fabricated PANI-SSC device not only achieved an excellent energy density of 0.15 mW h cm−3, but also displayed stable capacitive properties under both static and dynamic stretching conditions (Fig. 25d).
 Fig. 25  (a) SEM images of polyaniline nanowires. Inset: high-resolution SEM image. (b) TEM image of polyaniline nanowires. Inset: corresponding SAED pattern. (c) A schematic diagram of stretchable PANI-SSC. Inset: digital photograph of a PANI-SSC device. (d) Cycling performance of the PANI-SSC device collected at 10 mV s−1 under dynamic stretching and releasing conditions. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, a large number of novel electrode materials were investigated as SC electrode materials such as metal nitride,210–212 metal sulfide213,214 and metal selenium.215 Although only a few studies have been focused on the fabrication of 3D architectures based on these materials,213,215–217 it is believed that the construction of 3D structures will facilitate the development of the electrochemical performance of these materials. Similar strategies using metal oxides can be found in the literature, including self-assembly and multi-step assembly. As a preliminary attempt, 3D hierarchical GeSe2 was self-assembled through a thermal evaporation method by Wang et al.;215 it was constructed with pyramid-like architectures and had wire-like or belt-like nanostructures grown epitaxially on them. Electrochemical evaluation revealed a remarkable performance with a large specific capacitance of 300 F g−1 and a superior cycling stability of 99.3% capacitance retention after 2000 charge/discharge cycles. Table 3 summarizes the mass loading of active materials, conductivity and capacitive performance of the other 3D electrodes.
Table 3 Summarized properties of 3D electrodes based on other materials and their corresponding capacitive performances




Electrode description
Fabrication method
Mass loading
Conductivity
Specific capacitance
Cycling performance
Ref.




V3S4/3DG
Nickel foam templating
2.8 mg cm−2
—
225 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1
98.3% retention at 100 mV s−1 for 5000 cycles

32



V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH quasi-solid device
Nickel foam templating
21 mg cm−2 for whole device
—
22.2 F g−1 at 6 mA cm−2
96.4% retention at 30 mA cm−2 for 5000 cycles

32



Ni–Co sulfide nanowires
Nickel foam support
∼2.5 mg cm−2
—
2.9 F cm−2 at 30 mA cm−2
78.5% retention after 3000 cycles at 2.5 mA cm−2

51



PANI/MWCNT/PDMS based device
Non-template method
—
4.19 S cm−1
159 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1
95% capacitance retention after 500 cycles

204



3D micro-supercapacitor device based on PANI
Non-template method
—
—
45.2 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2
93.1% retention after 2000 cycles at 1000 mV s−1

206



PANI + HPCM
Non-template method
26% of the whole electrode weight
0.02 S cm−2
2200 F g−1 at 0.67 A g−1
76% retention after 1200 cycles at various rate

205



PEDOT/PSS-SWNT film
Non-template method
8 mg cm−2
10–20 S cm−1
133 F g−1 at 0.67 A g−1
90% retention after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1

208



TiN NWs on carbon cloth
Non-template method
—
—
117.5 F g−1 at 1.8 A g−1
83% retention after 15000 cycle

210



WON nanowires
Non-template method
167.5 mg cm−3
—
4.95 F cm−3 at 12.5 mA cm−3
93% retention after 100000 cycles at 0.5 A cm−3

211



3D hierarchical GeSe2
Non-template method
—
—


99.3% retention after 2000 cycles at 1 A g−1

215





5. Summary and prospective
Since 3D structures have multiple advantages over their low-dimensional counterparts,13,14 constructing electrodes with such frameworks will significantly improve the electrochemical performance in SC devices. To achieve a high energy density in SCs, advanced features in 3D structures are preferable such as interconnectivity, reduced “dead surface”, high utilization of active materials, shortened ionic diffusion and faster electrolyte infiltration. In this review, we summarized the fabrication of 3D electrodes and their corresponding application in SC energy storage; we believe this review to be of importance in designing 3D electrodes and in giving insights into future electrode fabrication. An overview of both templated and non-templated 3D electrode fabrication showed promising application potential. However, the research focus with respect to 3D electrodes remains in the field of carbon materials, especially graphene, for which the specific capacitance is too low to meet the demand of a high energy density comparable to that of lithium-ion batteries. In addition, template methods require long and costly removal processes. Even though template-derived morphologies are more controllable, these methods have not progressed beyond small-scale production and raise controversies with regard to their industrial applications. Moreover, the mechanical strength of 3D electrodes cannot yet meet the requirements of commercial flexible devices. One of the advantages usually possessed by 3D electrodes, i.e. flexibility, still lacks detailed and quantitative research. With all these unresolved problems, the following aspects might attract the attention of researchers who hope to develop 3D electrodes with ultrahigh energy density and power density in SC devices:
(1) Current studies have been focused on carbon materials, especially for graphene foam or aero-gel electrodes. The relatively low capacitance of carbon materials might limit the overall energy density of the electrode. However, metal oxides, which have been indispensable in the field of SCs,6 usually possess high theoretical capacitance. Forming composites between metal oxides and 3D carbon materials should be a part of mainstream research in the near future as the 3D conductive backbone effectively transports electrons and its unique structure allows fast ion diffusion and electrolyte contact, while metal oxides act as pseudocapacitive reaction sites that provide extra capacitance that can be fully utilized due to the 3D backbone.
(2) Mechanical strength has always been one of the major concerns with respect to 3D electrodes. Electrodes with sufficient strength can tolerate external forces induced by bending or pressing and can even recover from shape changes, making them suitable for flexible applications.7 Generally speaking, reinforcement of the 3D network in current studies commonly involves the impregnation of elastic polymers like PMMA.24 The insulating nature of such polymers dramatically impedes the conduction of electrons, and the polymer infiltration into porous structures hinders the advantages originally provided by the porous structure. Thus, new modifications need to be sought that could increase strength without sacrificing the integrity of the 3D structure.
(3) Graphene foam or aerogel is one of the most promising 3D electrodes developed in the recent studies due to its macroporous backbone.15 Several reports describe the integration of mesopores into monolithic macroporous matrices of graphene foams to produce hierarchical porous 3D electrodes and such structures do enhance the electrochemical performance.73,74,89 It is known that nano-/meso-porosity facilitates electrochemical reactions and ion diffusion into the internal regions of the 3D electrode matrices. Moreover, macropores derived from NF or self-assembly enable fast mass transfer to produce a quick electrochemical response. This means that a hierarchical porous structure might provide some advantages in energy storage with high power and sufficient energy density.159,218,219 On such a basis, further investigation might continue on balancing the ratio of the macroscopic backbone to the microscopic porosity of the graphene foam to produce robust 3D electrodes with maximal utilization of electrochemically active reaction sites.
(4) Countless template-derived and non-template electrodes have been developed from various templates and assembling procedures, but most of these fabrication procedures require multiple steps and involve expensive starting materials. In templating methods, the extra step of template removal further obstructs the commercial application. Therefore, further optimization by developing convenient templates or a facile synthesis procedure might be of value with regard to a future fabrication route towards 3DSC electrodes.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through the contributions of all the authors. All the authors have given approval to the final version of the manuscript.
Conflict of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge the financial support of this work received by the Natural Science Foundation of China (21403306 and 21273290), Guangdong Province Natural Science Foundation for Distinguished Young Project (2014A030306048), Foundation for Youth Innovative Talents in Higher Education of Guangdong (2014KQNCX003) and The Research Foundation of IARC-SYSU (201408).
References
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Holdren, Science, 2007, 315, 737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Menegaki, Renewable Energy, 2012, 39, 30 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Akella, R. P. Saini and M. P. Sharma, Renewable Energy, 2009, 34, 390 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2160 Search PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .
K. Naoi, W. Naoi, S. Aoyagi, J. Miyamoto and T. Kamino, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850 CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Liu, L. Pan and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2856 CAS .
H. Jiang, P. S. Lee and C. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 41 CAS .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutierrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794 RSC .
P. Yang and W. Mai, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-C. Gao, W.-Y. Tsai, B. Daffos, P.-L. Taberna, C. R. Pérez, Y. Gogotsi, P. Simon and F. Favier, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Hurst, E. K. Payne, L. Qin and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. Goebl and Y. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2610 RSC .
D. Chao, X. Xia, J. Liu, Z. Fan, C. F. Ng, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Wu, A. Pan, H. H. Hng and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, W. Wang, C. Li, T. Zhai, X. Lu and Y. Tong, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6, e129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Dong, H. Xu, X. W. Wang, Y. X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L. H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, L. L. Zhang, H. Ji, Y. Li, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, W. Chen, J. Zhou, X. Li, P. Tang, Z. Zhang, J. Fu and E. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 210 CAS .
X. Yu, B. Lu and Z. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Maiyalagan, X. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286 RSC .
Y. Wang, C. X. Guo, X. Wang, C. Guan, H. Yang, K. Wang and C. M. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 195 CAS .
T. Zhai, X. Lu, H. Wang, G. Wang, T. Mathis, T. Liu, C. Li, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhang, F. Xiao, L. H. Qian, J. W. Xiao, S. Wang and Y. Q. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400064 Search PubMed .
F. Luan, G. Wang, Y. Ling, X. Lu, H. Wang, Y. Tong, X. X. Liu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7984 RSC .
D. Cai, H. Huang, D. Wang, B. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Li and T. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15905 CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Zhao, A. M. Khan, C. Han, K. M. Hercule, M. Yan, X. Liu, W. Chen, D. Wang, Z. Cai, W. Xu, K. Zhao, X. Zheng and L. Mai, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, J. Liu, C. Cheng, H. Li, X. Li, W. Zhou, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4496 CAS .
P. Yuan, N. Zhang, D. Zhang, T. Liu, L. Chen, X. Liu, R. Ma and G. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11188 RSC .
X. Xiong, D. Ding, D. Chen, G. Waller, Y. Bu, Z. Wang and M. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cai, D. Zhang, L. Shi, J. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Huang, H. Li and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7346 RSC .
K. Xu, W. Li, Q. Liu, B. Li, X. Liu, L. An, Z. Chen, R. Zou and J. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4795 CAS .
Y. Chen, B. Qu, L. Hu, Z. Xu, Q. Li and T. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 9812 RSC .
D. Yan, Z. Guo, G. Zhu, Z. Yu, H. Xu and A. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 199, 409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pu, Z. Wang, K. Wu, N. Yu and E. Sheng, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 785 RSC .
W. Wei, L. Mi, Y. Gao, Z. Zheng, W. Chen and X. Guan, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3418 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Tang, X. Yin and H. Gong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10574 CAS .
G. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yuan, J. Li, L. Hou, X. Zhang, L. Shen and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zou, M. F. Yuen, Z. Zhang, J. Hu and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1717 CAS .
Y. Li, L. Cao, L. Qiao, M. Zhou, Y. Yang, P. Xiao and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6540 CAS .
A. Lesniak, F. Fenaroli, M. P. Monopoli, C. Åberg, K. A. Dawson and A. Salvati, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, Q. He, J. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Ma, L. Zhang and J. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. T. Zhu, Z. Wang, S. Ding, J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 397 RSC .
K. Nakanishi, M. Tomita and K. Kato, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 4732 RSC .
H. S. Huang, K. H. Chang, N. Suzuki, Y. Yamauchi, C. C. Hu and K. C. Wu, Small, 2013, 9, 2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, K. Qian, J. Yang, J. Zhang, L. Li, C. Yu and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Hwang, D. W. Cho, J.-W. Lee and C. Im, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 2094 RSC .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 153 RSC .
J. B. Joo, Q. Zhang, I. Lee, M. Dahl, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, D. Gu, F. Zhang, Y. Shi, H. Yang, Z. Li, C. Yu, B. Tu and D. Zhao, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 7215 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ryoo, S. H. Joo, M. Kruk and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 677 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Yoon, S. M. Oh, C. H. Shin and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 359 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, S. Han and T. Hyeon, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 478 RSC .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Niu, Z. Yang, Z. Hu, Y. Lu and C. C. Han, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yu, Y. Wang, E. Barlow and F. Caruso, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Marlow, P. S. Muldarisnur, R. Brinkmann and C. Mendive, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Holtz and S. A. Asher, Nature, 1997, 389, 829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuai, S. Badilescu, G. Bader, R. Brüning, X. Hu and V. V. Truong, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wong, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 15589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, D. Zhang, L. Shi, T. Yan, H. Wang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23835 RSC .
X. Lu, D. Zheng, T. Zhai, Z. Liu, Y. Huang, S. Xie and Y. Tong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2915 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, Y. Sun, Y. Z. Tan, S. Yang, X. Feng and K. Mullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Ding, C.-L. Zhang, M. Yang, X.-Z. Qu, Y.-F. Lu and Z.-Z. Yang, Polymer, 2006, 47, 8360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Kim, M. Kim, W. Y. Lee and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yang, J. Ma, C. Zhang, Z. Yang and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, H. B. Wu, J. Bao, L. Liang, X. W. Lou and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Liu, W.-J. Cui, L.-H. Jin, C.-X. Wang and Y.-Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3661 RSC .
M. Muller, R. Zentel, T. Maka, S. G. Romanov and C. S. Torres, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 1499 CrossRef CAS .
P. N. Bartlett, P. R. Birkin and M. A. Ghanem, Chem. Commun., 2000, 1671 RSC .
S. K. Karuturi, J. Luo, C. Cheng, L. Liu, L. T. Su, A. I. Tok and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2011, 6, 205 CrossRef CAS .
J. Elias, I. Utke, S. Yoon, M. Bechelany, A. Weidenkaff, J. Michler and L. Philippe, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 110, 387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hsia, M. S. Kim, L. E. Luna, N. R. Mair, Y. Kim, C. Carraro and R. Maboudian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18413 CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Ya, Y. Xin, J. Ma and C. Zhou, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 297, 223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Xia, J. P. Tu, J. Zhang, J. Y. Xiang, X. L. Wang and X. B. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 186 CAS .
I. Yamaguchi, M. Watanabe, T. Shinagawa, M. Chigane, M. Inaba, A. Tasaka and M. Izaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 1070 CAS .
B. G. Choi, M. Yang, W. H. Hong, J. W. Choi and Y. S. Huh, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, O. K. Farha, J. Roberts, K. A. Scheidt, S. T. Nguyen and J. T. Hupp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1450 RSC .
S.-L. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1656 CAS .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y.-B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Zheng, P. Xiong, Y. Li and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19005 CAS .
R. Díaz, M. G. Orcajo, J. A. Botas, G. Calleja and J. Palma, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 126 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, T. Akita and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Gao and J. Hu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 3017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yuan, J. Chen, S. Tan, N. Xia and Y. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chaikittisilp, M. Hu, H. Wang, H. S. Huang, T. Fujita, K. C. Wu, L. C. Chen, Y. Yamauchi and K. Ariga, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7259 RSC .
A. J. Amali, J. K. Sun and Q. Xu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1519 RSC .
B. Liu, H. Shioyama, H. Jiang, X. Zhang and Q. Xu, Carbon, 2010, 48, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hu, H. Wang, Q. Gao and H. Guo, Carbon, 2010, 48, 3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. Zhao, L. Bian, X. Feng and Q. Pu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10280 CAS .
W. Xia, B. Qiu, D. Xia and R. Zou, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1935 Search PubMed .
X. Lang, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lang, L. Zhang, T. Fujita, Y. Ding and M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, W. Ma, J. Tao, X. Zhang, J. Su, L. Li, C. Yang, Y. Gao, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pang, S. J. Ee, Y. Dong, X. Dong and P. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 1027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, C. Jiang, J. Wang and L. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Meng, K. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2009, 110, 132 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, J. Liu, Z. Fan, T. Wei and L. Zhang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Lee, C. Baik, H. Yoo, M. Min, Y. Park, S. M. Lee and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4437 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wen, X. Wang, S. Mao, Z. Bo, H. Kim, S. Cui, G. Lu, X. Feng and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, H. D. Jang and J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, G. Jung, S. Yoo, K. S. Suh and R. S. Ruoff, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, A. Winter, L. Chen, Y. Sun, A. Turchanin, X. Feng and K. Mullen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Qin, D. Weng, Q. Xiao, Y. Peng, X. Wang, H. Li, F. Wei and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, N. Mahmood, H. Yin, F. Liu and Y. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Some, J. Kim, K. Lee, A. Kulkarni, Y. Yoon, S. Lee, T. Kim and H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Martins, R. Miwa, A. J. da Silva and A. Fazzio, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 196803 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xie, C. Zhang, M. B. Wu, Y. Tao, W. Lv and Q. H. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 11092 RSC .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, M. B. Müller, K. J. Gilmore, G. G. Wallace and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, J. Zhu, L. Qiu and D. Li, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, C. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Qiu and D. Li, Science, 2013, 341, 534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, J. Yan, L. Zhi, Q. Zhang, T. Wei, J. Feng, M. Zhang, W. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Du, D. Yu, L. Dai, S. Ganguli, V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4810 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, L. Wang, L. Yao and J. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5016 RSC .
X. Cao, B. Zheng, X. Rui, W. Shi, Q. Yan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Y. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1245 RSC .
Y. G. Zhu, Y. Wang, Y. M. Shi, Z. X. Huang, L. Fu and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301788 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, W. Chen and L. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2765 CAS .
H. Wang, H. Yi, X. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1165 CAS .
L. Zhang, F. Zhang, X. Yang, G. Long, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, K. Leng, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, A. Yu and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1408 Search PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Yang, L. Zhan, L. Ma, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Huang, C. Li, Y. Zeng, W. Wang, Y. Li, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. N. Maiti, J. Lim, K. E. Lee, W. J. Lee and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Niu, J. Chen, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Kohlmeyer, M. Lor, J. Deng, H. Liu and J. Chen, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, X. Jia, Q. Xiao, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, V. Augustyn, J. Wen, Y. Zhang, M. Shen, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. Shi, J. Zhu, D. J. Kharistal, W. Zhao, B. S. Lalia, H. H. Hng and Q. Yan, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. M. B. Holt, E. J. Luber, B. C. Olsen, H. Wang, M. Danaie, X. Cui, X. Tan, V. W. Lui, W. P. Kalisvaart and D. Mitlin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24381 CAS .
D. Wei, H. Wang, P. Hiralal, P. Andrew, T. Ryhanen, Y. Hayashi and G. A. Amaratunga, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 435702 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Deshmukh and M. V. Shelke, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 21390 RSC .
C. M. Yang, Y. J. Kim, M. Endo, H. Kanoh, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima and K. Kaneko, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Azami, D. Kasuya, R. Yuge, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima, T. Yoshitake and Y. Kubo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1330 CAS .
H. J. Jung, Y.-J. Kim, J. H. Han, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima, H. Kanoh, Y. A. Kim, K. Kaneko and C.-M. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25877 CAS .
A. Izadi-Najafabadi, T. Yamada, D. N. Futaba, M. Yudasaka, H. Takagi, H. Hatori, S. Iijima and K. Hata, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Peng, Z. Wen, Y. Qin, L. Schmidt-Mende, C. Li, S. Yang, D. Shi and J. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, B. Ding, P. Nie, L. Shen, J. Wang and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2013, 19, 12306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Angew. Chem., 2008, 120, 379 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132 RSC .
J. Li, X. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Gamboa and P. J. Sebastian, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Wang, Q. Huang, S. Gamboa and P. J. Sebastian, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 1501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-W. Hwang and S.-H. Hyun, J. Power Sources, 2007, 172, 451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. An, Y. Wang, X. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Wang, L. Yi, L. Bai and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-C. Chien, W.-Y. Cheng, Y.-H. Wang and S.-Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 5038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lin, T.-Y. Wei, H.-C. Chien and S.-Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Miller and B. Dunn, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 799 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Gutiérrez, F. Picó, F. Rubio, J. Manuel Amarilla, F. Javier Palomares, M. L. Ferrer, F. del Monte and J. M. Rojo, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1236 RSC .
M. Biswal, A. Banerjee, M. Deo and S. Ogale, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1249 CAS .
Y. Lv, L. Gan, M. Liu, W. Xiong, Z. Xu, D. Zhu and D. S. Wright, J. Power Sources, 2012, 209, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Yun, S. Y. Cho, J. Shim, B. H. Kim, S. J. Chang, S. J. Baek, Y. S. Huh, Y. Tak, Y. W. Park, S. Park and H. J. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, P. Ling, M. Yu, X. Wang, X. Zhang and M. Zheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 105, 635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jin, X. Wang, Y. Shen and Z. Gu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 110, 18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Genovese, J. Jiang, K. Lian and N. Holm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 2903 CAS .
D. Kalpana, S. H. Cho, S. B. Lee, Y. S. Lee, R. Misra and N. G. Renganathan, J. Power Sources, 2009, 190, 587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-C. Liu, L.-B. Kong, C. Lu, X.-M. Li, Y.-C. Luo and L. Kang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1890 RSC .
Z. Lei, N. Christov and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1866 CAS .
Z. Chen, J. Wen, C. Yan, L. Rice, H. Sohn, M. Shen, M. Cai, B. Dunn and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, T. Zhai, X. Lu, X. Chen, S. Xie, W. Li, C. Liang, W. Zhao, L. Zhang and Y. Tong, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liang, X. Tang and W. Hu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11062 RSC .
X. Xia, J. Tu, Y. Zhang, X. Wang, C. Gu, X. B. Zhao and H. J. Fan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, C. Yuan, J. Zhu, J. Wang, X. Zhang and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xia, D. Chao, Z. Fan, C. Guan, X. Cao, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guan, Z. Zeng, X. Li, X. Cao, Y. Fan, X. Xia, G. Pan, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Small, 2014, 10, 300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, T. Zhai, H. Wang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhai, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Liu, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, Y. Zeng, M. Yu, T. Zhai, C. Liang, S. Xie, M. S. Balogun and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jiang, J. Ma and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, L. Cao, Y. Wu, Y. Gong, Z. Liu, H. E. Hoster, Y. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Yang, Q. Yan, P. M. Ajayan and R. Vajtai, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-M. Huang, C.-C. Hu, K.-H. Chang, J.-M. Li and Y.-F. Li, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren and L. Gao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 93, 3560 CAS .
Y.-T. Wang, A.-H. Lu, H.-L. Zhang and W.-C. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5413 CAS .
P. Yu, X. Zhang, D. Wang, L. Wang and Y. Ma, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 528 CAS .
W. Chen, R. B. Rakhi, Q. Wang, M. N. Hedhili and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Lei, J. Li, L. Gu, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6739 CAS .
Y. Lei, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Gu, Y. Chang, H. Yuan and D. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1773 CAS .
X. Sun, Q. Li, Y. Lu and Y. Mao, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 4456 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, M. Bosman and H. J. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2419 RSC .
J. Liu, J. Jiang, C. Cheng, H. Li, J. Zhang, H. Gong and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2076 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, A. Sumboja, E. Khoo and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 746 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, M. Xu, Y. Wang and G. Zheng, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Mai, F. Yang, Y. L. Zhao, X. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Z. Luo, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 381 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, M. S. Balogun, K. Mai, Z. Zhang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Fan, Y. S. Hu, J. Maier, P. Adelhelm, B. Smarsly and M. Antonietti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Meng, J. Maeng, S. W. M. John and P. P. Irazoqui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301269 Search PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, A. C. Rastogi and S. B. Desu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Antiohos, G. Folkes, P. Sherrell, S. Ashraf, G. G. Wallace, P. Aitchison, A. T. Harris, J. Chen and A. I. Minett, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15987 RSC .
A. K. Cuentas Gallegos and M. E. Rincón, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, M. Yu, S. Xie, Y. Ling, C. Liang, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, Y. Han, X. Cheng, L. Hu, Y. Zeng, M. Chen, F. Cheng, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Balogun, W. Qiu, W. Wang, P. Fang, X. Lu and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1364 CAS .
X. Xia, C. Zhu, J. Luo, Z. Zeng, C. Guan, C. F. Ng, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Small, 2014, 10, 766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, L. Wan, S. Yang, F. Xiao and S. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, B. Liu, Q. Wang, W. Song, X. Hou, D. Chen, Y. B. Cheng and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Wang, H. Sun, Y. Ji, W. Li and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, L. Jiao, H. Du, J. Yang, Q. Huan, W. Peng, Y. Si, Y. Wang and H. Yuan, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 6960 RSC .
J. Liu, S. Z. Qiao, S. Budi Hartono and G. Q. Lu, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 5101 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yuan, X. Zhang, L. Su, B. Gao and L. Shen, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5772 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Minghao Yu	Minghao Yu received his BS degree in polymer chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2012. He is currently a 3rd year materials physics and chemistry PhD student in Prof. Yexiang Tong's group at Sun Yat-sen University. His research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials for application in supercapacitors.
Weitao Qiu	Weitao Qiu received his BS degree in chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University in 2014. He is currently a 1st year master of physics and chemistry student in Prof. Yexiang Tong's group at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research focuses on the development of nanostructured materials for the application of Li-ion batteries.
Teng Zhai	Teng Zhai received his BS degree in Materials Chemistry from Shandong Agricultural University, China, in 2010. He is currently a 4th year PhD candidate in the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University, PR China. His research interests include the synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials and their applications in energy conversion and storage.
Pingping Fang	Dr Ping-Ping Fang received her BS degree in the Department of Chemistry from Shandong University in 2005. Thereafter, she moved to Xiamen University and received her PhD degree from Xiamen University and University Pierre et Marie Curie in 2011. She then worked as a Scientist in Ecole polytechnique fédérale de Lausanne from 2011 to 2013. She is now a lecturer in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. Her current research focuses on Surface Enhanced Raman Spectroscopy for energy conversion and storage, Electrochemistry at liquid/quid interface, Catalysis, etc.
Xihong Lu	Dr Xihong Lu received his BS degree (2008) and his PhD degree (2013) in Physical Chemistry from Sun Yat-Sen University, PR China. He is now an associate professor in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His research interests focus on the design and synthesis of functionally nanostructured materials for applications in supercapacitors, Li-ion batteries, and photoelectrochemical/photocatalytic water splitting.
Yexiang Tong	Prof. Yexiang Tong received his BS in General Chemistry in 1985, MS in Physical Chemistry in 1988, and PhD in Organic Chemistry in 1999 from Sun Yat-Sen University. He is a professor of Chemistry in the school of chemistry and chemical engineering at Sun Yat-Sen University. His current research focuses on the electrochemical synthesis of alloys, intermetallic compounds and metal oxide nanomaterials, and investigation of their applications for energy conversion and storage.

 	Fig. 1  Specific power density against specific energy density, also called a Ragone plot, for various electrical energy storage devices. Reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the possible electron paths taking place on different nano-designed electrodes with 0D, 1D, 2D, and 3D architectures.	 
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 3  The common equivalent circuit used to fit the Nyquist plots.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a and b) CVD growth of graphene films onto nickel foam in CH4/H2/Ar atmosphere at 1000 °C. (c and d) Coating of PMMA as a supporting layer along with the following nickel etching process in a FeCl3/HCl solution. (e and f) Dissolution of PMMA layer and infiltration of PDMS support. Reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration of V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH all-quasi device. (b) Ragone plot of V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH device, showing an energy density close to that of lithium-ion batteries. (c) SEM image of ERGO electrode, (d) SEM image of MnO2–ERGO electrode and (e) SEM image of CNT–ERGO electrode. Insets show the corresponding photographs of different electrodes. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from the American Chemical Society and (c–e) from ref. 33 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram illustrating the activation process of NF; the resultant ANF was darkened due to the activation. (b) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of NF and ANF electrodes. (c) Areal capacitance as a function of the current density of NF and ANF electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 23 with permission from the Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of Li4Ti5O12 hollow spheres as a representative synthesis procedure using silica templates. Reproduced from ref. 18 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM image of periodically arranged PS colloidal crystal. (b) High magnification TEM image of 3DHPC electrode. (c) Illustration of bi-modal porous 3D structure of 3DHPC. Reproduced from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hierarchical macro- and meso-porous GA-SiO2 frameworks. (b) TEM image of RGO. (c) TEM image of GMCS. (d) Capacitance retention against current density of RGO and GMCS-based electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 177 with permission from the American Chemical Society and ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the assembly process of e-CMG and MnO2/e-CMG composite films. (b) Rate performance shown in specific capacitance of various electrodes against current density. (c) Image giving an illustration of the all-3D device assembly. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the carbonization procedure of MOF-5 infiltrated with FA precursors. (b) The N2 sorption isotherms for an NPC electrode. (c) SEM image of sheet-like carbon. (d) Cyclic voltammetry of NPC in 1 M H2SO4 at different scan speeds. Reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of highly porous crumpled graphene with hierarchical pore structures. (b) Cyclic voltammetry curves for different scan rates obtained for this crumpled graphene. (c) Nyquist plot showing the imaginary part versus the real part of the impedance. The inset magnifies the data in the high-frequency range. (d) Impedance phase angle versus frequency. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Photographs of a strong RGO aerogel allowing easy handling and supporting weight. (b) SEM image of RGO aerogel interior microstructures. (c) Cyclic voltammograms (CV) of RGO aerogel based SC at two different scan rates. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of RGO aerogel based SC at a constant current of 1 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) A photograph showing the flexibility of the film. SEM images of the cross sections of the obtained graphene films containing (b) 78.9 volume percent (vol%) and (c) 27.2 vol% of H2SO4, corresponding to ρ = 0.42 g cm−3 and ρ = 1.33 g cm−3. (d) The relationship between the volumetric ratio of incorporated electrolyte and the packing density as well as the estimated inter-sheet spacing. (e) Gravimetric capacitances with varied charging/discharging current densities. Electrochemical characterization of graphene films in 1.0 M H2SO4 (ρ = 0.13, 0.42, 0.76, 1.33 and 1.49 g cm−3). Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from the American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of the formation of CNT/graphene sandwich (CGS) structures. (b and c) SEM images of CGS. (d) Electrochemical performances of CGS:CV results measured at scan rates of 10, 20, 50, and 100 mV s−1. Reproduced from ref. 131 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  Photographs of (a) graphite paper (GP), (b) 3D graphene foams (3DGFs), and (c) their comparison. (d) SEM and (e) TEM images of 3DGFs. (f) CV curves collected at 20 mV s−1 of GP, 3DGFs and PANI@3DGFs electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic of a nanocomposite consisting of interpenetrating networks of V2O5 nanowires and CNTs, intimate contacts between the V2O5 nanowire and CNTs facilitating charge transport, and Na+ intercalation within the V2O5 layer structure. (b) SEM image of a V2O5/CNT nanocomposite, demonstrating nanowire V2O5 networks penetrated with CNTs. (c) Capacitive and diffusion-controlled contributions to charge storage. The capacitive current is shaded and compared with the total measured current. (d) Ragone plots of Na-ion and Li-ion asymmetric SCs made from a V2O5/CNT nanocomposite anode and an activated carbon cathode. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) A schematic summarizing the synthesis process and ultimate morphology of the VN/CNT 3D array. (b) Magnified SEM micrographs of VN/CNT. (c) CV curves of VN/CNT in the potential range from 1.0 to 0.06 V, at different scan rates from 20 to 1000 mV s−1. (d) Relationship between the specific capacitance versus scan rate. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of the macroporous cores of the HPGC material. (b) TEM image of the mesoporous walls and micro-pores. (c) Pore-size distribution of the HPGC material. (d) CV results measured at sweep rates of 20, 50, 100, and 200 mV s−1 in an alkaline electrolyte (6 mol L−1 KOH). Reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis strategy for the exfoliated corn cob biochar. (b) SEM image of the exfoliated biochar. (c) TEM image of the exfoliated biochar depicting a layered structure of thin microporous nanosheets. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge plot of exfoliated biochar electrodes in a symmetric 2-electrode SC cell with 0.5 M H2SO4 electrolyte at rates from 1 to 10 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 174.	 

The first graphene foam derived from NFs	Nickel foam templating	∼5 mg cm−3	10 S cm−1	—	—	
24

ERGO foam	Nickel foam templating	—	—	156.9 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	—	
33

CNT–ERGO	Nickel foam templating	—	—	280.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	—	
33

GA-MC	Silica templating	—	—	∼226 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1	No capacitance loss after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1	
74

GMCS–NH3	Silica templating	5.0–7.0 mg cm−2	381 S m−1	29.6 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	94% retention after 1000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1	
177

3D hierarchical porous carbon	Silica templating	∼5.5 mg cm−2	—	118.1 F g−1	—	
72

e-CMG	PS templating	10 mg for a whole electrode	1204 S m−1	202 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	—	
89

3D-RGO/PANI film	Other templates (CaCO3)	0.25 mg cm−2	—	362 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	90% retention over 5000 cycles at 5 A g−1	
110

NPC carbon	Other templates (MOFs)	—	—	159 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1	—	
96

NPC800	Other templates (MOFs)	—	—	190 F g−1 at 3 A g−1	98% retention rate after 1500 cycles at 3 A g−1	
103

Self-assembled graphene hydrogel	Non-template method	—	Up to 4.9 mS cm−1	175 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1	—	
119

Nitrogen and boron co-doped GAs c	Non-template method	—	—	26.2 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1	100% capacitance retention after 1000 cycles at 2 A g−1	
120

GO paper from filtration	Non-template method	1.8 g cm−3	—	—	—	
127

Self-stacked, solvated graphene	Non-template method	0.45 mg cm−2	—	273.1 F g−1	—	
129

Electrolyte-mediated CCG	Non-template method	Tunable from 0.13 g cm−3 to 1.49 g cm−3	—	∼200 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	—	
130

Carbon nanotube/graphene sandwich	Non-template method	—	40.7 and 180.1 S m−1 in vertical and parallel directions	385 F g−1	Increased with 20% after 2000 cycles at 200 mV s−1	
131

Laser scribed graphene	Non-template method	—	1738 S m−1	265 F g−1 at 250 A g−1	>97% of its initial response after 10000 cycles	
143

rGO foams	Non-template method	—	—	110 F g−1	—	
144

Interfacially gelated rGO foam	Non-template method	0.44 mg cm−2	103.3 S m−1	33.8 mF cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2	97.8% retention after 4000 cycles at 10 mA cm−2	
142

PANI@3DGF	Non-template method	18 mg cm−3	252.0 S cm−1 for 3DGF	931.8 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1	70.2% retention after 1000 cycles at 40 mV s−1	
141

CA1-800 monolith	Non-template method	—	2.5 S cm−1	120–130 F g−1 at 150 mA cm−2	95% retention after 10000 cycles at 100 mA cm−2	
168

Hierarchically porous graphite particles	Non-template method	4–12 mg cm−2	—	102 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	98% retention rate after 5000 cycles at 2 A g−1	
178

Dead leaf derived carbon	Non-template method	—	0.588 S cm−1 (1.7 Ω cm−1)	250–400 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	—	
169

Carbon-based microporous nanoplates	Non-template method	—	∼1.15 × 104 S m−1	Over 100 F g−1 at 70 A g−1	>93% retention over 10000 cycles at 2.5 A g−1	
171

Exfoliated biochar nanosheets from corn cob	Non-template method	1.5 mg cm−2	—	221 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	97% retention over 5000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1	
174


 	Fig. 21  TEM images of the MnO2 nanostructures obtained at different hydrothermal reaction times. (a) MnO2-1 h; (b) 1.5 h; (c) 2 h; (d) 4 h; (e) 8 h; (f) 12 h. Reproduced from ref. 194 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a and b) Typical field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) images of the 3D V2O5 architecture constructed from nanosheets. (c) Specific capacitances calculated from galvanostatic charge/discharge with various current densities. (d) Power density and energy density of V2O5 3D architecture, stacked V2O5 film, and bulk V2O5 electrodes. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process for the designed 3D ZnO nanoforest counterpart. (b and c) Typical SEM images of the synthesized 3D ZnO@MnO2 core/shell forest of nanotrees. (d) Galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of the 3D ZnO@MnO2 core/shell nanoforest and nanowire arrays at a current density of 0.02 mA cm−2. (e) Specific discharging capacitances at different current densities of electrodes made of nanoforest and nanowire arrays. Reproduced from ref. 197.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) SEM and (b) TEM of Co3O4@NiO core/shell nanowire arrays grown on an FTO substrate. (c) Charge/discharge curves at the 10th cycle and (d) cycling performances at 2 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composite	Nickel foam templating	—	—	∼1100 F g−1 at 10 A g−1	∼1100 F g−1 after 500 cycles	
25

MnO2-coated freestanding 3D graphene foam	Nickel foam templating	0.85–9.8 mg cm−2	55 S cm−1	1.42 F cm−2 at 2 mV s−1	82% retention at 1.5 mA cm−2 after 5000 cycles	
26

3D graphene/CNFs/MnO2 composite	Nickel foam templating	0.1 mg cm−2	55 S cm−1	946 F g−1 at 2 mV s−1	94.1% retention after 1000 cycles at 10 A cm−2	
28

CoMoO4 NHC-like films-3D graphene foam composite	Nickel foam templating	0.51 mg cm−2	—	2741 F g−1 at 1.43 A g−1	96.36% retention at 400 A g−1 after 100000 cycles	
29

MnO2/3DGH	Nickel foam templating	1.5 mg cm−2	—	345 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1	—	
32

MnO2–ERGO	Nickel foam templating	—	—	422.5 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	—	
33

MnO2–ERGO//CNT–ERGO device	Nickel foam templating	—	—	69.4 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1	84.4% retention after 10000 cycles at 5 A g−1	
33

Nickel foam	—	—	350 S cm−1	—	—	
24

ZnO@Co3O4	Nickel foam support	2.0 mg cm−2	—	857.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	78% retention at 6 A g−1 after 6000 cycles	
35

CN@NCH	Nickel foam support	2.0 mg cm−2	—	2550 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	92.70% retention after 5000 cycles at 20 A g−1	
36

CoO@NiOOH	Nickel foam support	∼3.0 mg cm−2	—	798.3 F g−1 at ∼1.67 A g−1	96.7% retention after 2000 cycles at 10 A g−1	
37

Ni(OH)2 nanosheets on nickel foam	Nickel foam support	1.8–2.0 mg cm−2	—	2384.3 F g−1 at ∼1 A g−1	75% retention after 3000 cycles at 5 A g−1	
39

Activated nickel foam	Nickel foam support	25.5 mg cm−2 including nickel foam	—	2.0 F cm−2 at 8 mA cm−2	Increased from 0.47 to 1.27 F cm−2 after 100000 cycles at 100 mV s−1	
23

3D CoO@PPy nanowire array electrode	Nickel foam support	∼2.0 mg cm−2	—	2223 F g−1 at 1 mA cm−2	∼99.8% capacitance after 2000 cycles at 20 mA cm−2	
44

Cobalt oxide nanobrush–graphene@NixCo2x(OH)6x	Nickel foam support	∼2.0 mg cm−2	—	2550 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	92.70% retention after 5000 cycles at 20 A g−1	
36

Ultrathin mesoporous NiCo2O4 nanosheets	Nickel foam support	0.4 mg cm−2	—	1450 F g−1 at 20 A g−1	94% retention after 2400 cycles	
49

Networked NiCo2O4/MnO2 BNH arrays	Nickel foam support	∼1 mg cm−2	—	1891 F g−1 at 100 mA cm−2	98.4% retention after 3000 cycles	
50

GA-RuO2	Silica templating	—	—	∼348 F g−1 at 100 mV s−1	—	
74

MnO2/e-CMG	PS templating	10 mg for a whole electrode	—	389 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	—	
89

e-CMG//MnO2/e-CMG device	PS templating	10 mg for a whole electrode	—	—	95% retention after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1	
89

PPy–MnO2–CNT–cotton thread	Other templates (cotton thread)	Up to 3 mg cm−2 for SWCNT coating	—	0.52 F cm−2 at 1 mV s−1	96% after 3000 cycles at 3.33 mA cm−2	
107

Nanoporous gold/nanocrystalline MnO2	Other templates (noble metal)	—	—	1145 F g−1 at 50 mV s−1	∼85% retention up to 1000 cycles	
105

V2O5/CNT nanocomposite	Non-template method	3 mg cm−2	—	∼400 C g−1 at 2 mV s−1	∼80% retention after 900 cycles at 60 C	
147

VN/CNT 3D array	Non-template method	0.037 mg cm−2 for VN	∼23 S cm−1 (43.5 mΩ cm−1)	289 F g−1 at 20 mV s−1	—	
150

3D V2O5 architecture	Non-template method	—	—	521 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1	∼90% retention after 4000 cycles 5 A g−1	
189

Nanostructured MnO2	Non-template method	2–3 mg cm−2	—	110 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	Capacitance increased after 5000 cycles	
194

3D porous vanadium oxide	Non-template method	—	—	150–160 F g−1 at 250 mV s−1	—	
190

3D nanoporous NiO	Non-template method	—	—	1776 F g−1 at 1 mV s−1	97.9% over 1000 cycles	
180

ZnO@MnO2 nanoforest	Non-template method	—	—	31.30 mF cm−2 0.02 mA cm−2	—	
197

MnO2–NiO nanoflakes	Non-template method	—	—	0.101 F cm−2	96.4% retention after 1500 cycles at 8.5 mA cm−2	
198

ZnO/NiO core/shell nanowire arrays	Non-template method	3 mg cm−2	—	853 F g−1 at 2 A g−1	95.1% after 6000 cycles at 2 A g−1	
181

Co3O4 nanowire@MnO2 nanosheets	Non-template method	1.5 mg cm−2	—	480 F g−1 at 2.67 A g−1	97% after 5000 cycles at 11.25 mA cm−2	
199

CuO@AuPd@MnO2 NWs	Non-template method	0.55 mg cm−2	—	493 F g−1	100% over 5000 cycles at 100 mV s−1	
202

Hierarchical MnMoO4/CoMoO4 nanowires	Non-template method	—	—	187.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	98% after 1000 cycles at 3 A g−1	
203


 	Fig. 25  (a) SEM images of polyaniline nanowires. Inset: high-resolution SEM image. (b) TEM image of polyaniline nanowires. Inset: corresponding SAED pattern. (c) A schematic diagram of stretchable PANI-SSC. Inset: digital photograph of a PANI-SSC device. (d) Cycling performance of the PANI-SSC device collected at 10 mV s−1 under dynamic stretching and releasing conditions. Reproduced from ref. 204 with permission from WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

V3S4/3DG	Nickel foam templating	2.8 mg cm−2	—	225 F g−1 at 10 mV s−1	98.3% retention at 100 mV s−1 for 5000 cycles	
32

V3S4/3DGH//MnO2/3DGH quasi-solid device	Nickel foam templating	21 mg cm−2 for whole device	—	22.2 F g−1 at 6 mA cm−2	96.4% retention at 30 mA cm−2 for 5000 cycles	
32

Ni–Co sulfide nanowires	Nickel foam support	∼2.5 mg cm−2	—	2.9 F cm−2 at 30 mA cm−2	78.5% retention after 3000 cycles at 2.5 mA cm−2	
51

PANI/MWCNT/PDMS based device	Non-template method	—	4.19 S cm−1	159 F g−1 at 5 mV s−1	95% capacitance retention after 500 cycles	
204

3D micro-supercapacitor device based on PANI	Non-template method	—	—	45.2 mF cm−2 at 0.3 mA cm−2	93.1% retention after 2000 cycles at 1000 mV s−1	
206

PANI + HPCM	Non-template method	26% of the whole electrode weight	0.02 S cm−2	2200 F g−1 at 0.67 A g−1	76% retention after 1200 cycles at various rate	
205

PEDOT/PSS-SWNT film	Non-template method	8 mg cm−2	10–20 S cm−1	133 F g−1 at 0.67 A g−1	90% retention after 1000 cycles at 1 A g−1	
208

TiN NWs on carbon cloth	Non-template method	—	—	117.5 F g−1 at 1.8 A g−1	83% retention after 15000 cycle	
210

WON nanowires	Non-template method	167.5 mg cm−3	—	4.95 F cm−3 at 12.5 mA cm−3	93% retention after 100000 cycles at 0.5 A cm−3	
211

3D hierarchical GeSe2	Non-template method	—	—	
	99.3% retention after 2000 cycles at 1 A g−1	
215

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
