The applications of carbon nanotubes and graphene in advanced rechargeable lithium batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA01546H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA01546H
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8932-8951The applications of carbon nanotubes and graphene in advanced rechargeable lithium batteries

        
          
            Wenyu 
            Yuan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yani 
            Zhang
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Laifei 
            Cheng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Heng 
            Wu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lianxi 
            Zheng
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Donglin 
            Zhao
          
        
      ab
aScience and Technology on Thermostructural Composite Materials Laboratory, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 710072, Xi'an, China. E-mail: yani-ZHANG@hotmail.com; zhangyani@nwpu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Solidification Processing, Northwestern Polytechnical University, 710072, Xi'an, China
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Khalifa University, 127788, Abu Dhabi, UAE
Received 
      21st February 2016
    , Accepted 29th March 2016First published on 30th March 2016AbstractAdvanced rechargeable lithium batteries are desired energy storage devices for electric vehicles. These batteries require their electrodes to have high electrical and thermal conductivity, an appropriate high specific surface area, an outstanding hierarchical architecture, high thermal and chemical stability and to be relatively low cost and environmentally benign. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene are two candidate materials that could meet these requirements, and thus have been widely studied. The present paper reviews the applications of CNTs and graphene in batteries, with an emphasis on the particular roles (such as conductive, active, flexible and supporting roles) they play in advanced lithium batteries. We will summarize the unique advantages of CNTs and graphene in battery applications, update the most recent progress, and compare the prospects and challenges of CNTs and graphene for future full utilization in energy storage applications. The effects and mechanisms of heteroatoms doping, the distribution of pore sizes, different architectures (anchored, sandwich-like and wrapped hybrid architecture) are discussed in detail.
1. Introduction
Oil represents 34% of the world's total energy source, and results in over 40% of the world's CO2 emissions,1 which is contributing to future energy-depletion issues and raising a lot of environmental concerns. Electric vehicles (EVs), hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), and plug-in hybrid EV (PHEVs) will be among the first batch of immediate applications that could significantly reduce our energy dependence on fossil fuels. The further development of these applications, however, requires advanced energy storage devices that could offer high energy density, high power density, a long cycle life and high temperature resistance, etc.2
Among several main energy conversion and storage devices, advanced lithium batteries, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries and lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries, are potential candidates to meet the requirements for EV and HEV applications,3 and have thus also attracted great scientific interest.
In general, LIBs have high energy density, a small self-discharge current and high current charge/discharge cycles; while Li–S batteries offer low-cost, are environmentally benign, have high gravimetric/volumetric energy density, and lower operation voltage; and Li–O2 batteries have very high specific energy density. The energy and power density of LIBs, Li–S batteries and Li–O2 batteries are shown in Fig. 1. At the same time, these batteries face many obstacles, such as safety issues, low active material utilization, and a capacity fade in LIBs, volume expansion in Li–S batteries and poor cycle life in Li–O2 batteries.
 Fig. 1  Distribution of the different electrochemical energy storage performances. 
Currently, the realization of their potentials and elimination of the challenges/concerns largely depend on the selection of electrode materials and the design of electrode structures, with considerations including the conductivity, specific surface area (SSA), development of a hierarchical architecture and structural stability. Nanomaterials, especially carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene have been widely studied for battery applications owing to their outstanding electrical conductivity, excellent mechanical properties and good structural stability. When used as the electrodes in lithium batteries, these nanostructured materials can offer: (1) fast transport of mobile species; (2) enhanced surface reactivity; (3) mechanical robustness; (4) enhanced ionic and electronic conductivity; (5) high SSA.4 This review article will summarize the unique roles of CNTs and graphene in advanced lithium batteries, and update their most recent research progress. Specifically, CNTs and graphene, respectively, as conductive, active, supporting and mechanical materials will be discussed in detail.
2. Challenges for advanced lithium batteries

Fig. 2 presents the principle of LIBs, Li–S and Li–O2 batteries.5 For a LIB, the process can be represented as: (−)-Cn|1 mol L−1 LiPF6–EC + DEC|LiMOx (+), in which C means carbon materials and M indicates a metal. During the charging process, Li+ ions are de-intercalated from the cathode and intercalate into anode materials. During the discharging process, Li+ ions are deintercalated from the anode and intercalate back to cathode materials. The overall reaction is:  
 Fig. 2  Schematic of Li-ion, non-aqueous Li–O2 and Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group. 
For a Li–S battery, sulfur, one of the most abundant and cheap (∼$150 per ton) elements on earth, is used as a cathode material, which has a highest theoretical capacity of 1675 mA h g−1 among the solid elements.6 As a result, Li–S batteries have a high theoretical energy density of ∼2600 W h kg−1. The overall reaction is:7  
During the discharging process, high order lithium polysulfides Li2Sx (6 < x < 8) are produced first, then lower order lithium polysulfides Li2Sx (2 < x < 6) and Li2S at the end of discharging.
For a Li–O2 battery, the theoretical energy density can reach 5200 W h kg−1, 10 times higher than that of a LIB. In a non-aqueous system, the overall reaction is thought to be:  
During the discharging process, the lithium metal releases Li+ and combines with O2 from the air electrode, and finally Li2O2 is formed. During the charging process, the Li2O2 is oxidized to reform Li+ and O2.8
In LIBs, the cathode materials mainly include layered LiMO2 (e.g. LiCoO2, LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NCM),9 LiCo0.2Ni0.4Mn0.4,10 LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA)), spinel LiM2O4 (e.g. LiMn2O4, LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4−x) and olivine LiMPO4 (e.g. LiFePO4, LiMnPO4, LiCoPO4) and silicate compounds Li2MSiO4 (e.g. Li2FeSiO4, Li2MnSiO4); while the anode materials mainly include graphite, Si,11,12 SnO2 and MnO2. The key challenges with LIBs are believed to be in the following areas: (1) the side reactions, which occur at the interface, between the electrolyte and electrode during normal operation of the batteries or under abuse conditions, as these not only consume electrode materials, but also deposit impurities on the surface of active materials, resulting in capacity fade and thermal instability (fire or explosion);13–16 (2) the low conductivity of some cathode materials, such as LiCoO2 and LiFePO4 (LFP), which causes their low utilization and results in a low energy (power) density of the batteries;17,18 (3) the heat generation due to the irreversibility in batteries and from the electrochemical reactions and the consequent slow thermal runaway, which can lead to serious safety issues; (4) the volume changes during the intercalation and de-intercalation of Li+ in some anode materials, such as Si, Ge,19 and Sn, which can cause drastic capacity fading and lead to a poor cycle life.
In Li–S batteries, sulfur and Li2S are the common cathode materials, meanwhile lithium metal is used as the anode material. Overall, Li–S batteries offer substantially higher specific energy compared with LIBs, but they have low active material utilization, and suffer from capacity degradation, self-discharge, poor coulombic efficiency, a poor cycle life, and electrode volume expansion. On the cathode side, the low conductivity of sulfur (5 × 10−30 S cm−1) leads to a low capacity and fast capacity fading, while the volume change of sulfur (up to 76% during charging and discharging processes) leads to structural deterioration and break down in the morphology, and the formation of polysulfide anions, which can cause structural damage and surface reactions. On the lithium anode side, the instability of lithium metal raises some safety concerns and the surface coating results in low cycling efficiency.5,6
Li–O2 batteries display the highest theoretical specific energy among all the lithium batteries, but the achieved performance is still far from the theoretical capacity and the batteries suffer from poor cycling stability because of the following issues: (1) the pores of the air cathodes can become increasingly blocked by Li2O2 precipitates as the discharge proceeds; (2) an overpotential develops during discharging and charging processes due to the deposition of discharge products and blockage of the transport pathway at the cathode;20 and (3) the Li metal anode usually suffers low cycling efficiency and has safety issues because of the interfacial carbonate formation.21

Table 1 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of the common electrode materials, which could be used as guidance in battery improvement. Many issues could be resolved through appropriate electrode design.
Table 1 Advantages and disadvantages of the common electrode materials






Advantages
Disadvantages




Cathode materials
LiFePO4
Relatively high capacity, thermal stability, excellent reversibility, low cost, environmental benign
Lower electronic conductivity, low Li-ion diffusion coefficient


LiNiO2
Good specific capacity
Poor safety, poor cycle life


LiCoO2
High specific capacity
High cost, poor conductivity


LiMn2O4
Naturally abundant, environmentally friendly, good safety
Low capacity, capacity fading


S
High specific capacity (1675 mA h g−1), non-toxic, low cost
Low conductivity, poor cyclic performance, volume change (80%)


Li2S
Improved safety with a theoretical capacity of 1166 mA h g−1
Low electronic and ionic conductivities, sensitivity to moisture and oxygen


Anode materials
Li
Low potential and high capacity (∼3860 mA h g−1)
Unstable, poor safety


Graphite
Low cost, good conductivity
Limited gravimetric capacity


Fe3O4
High theoretical capacity (≈1000 mA h g−1), non-toxic, improved safety, and low cost
Poor cycling performance and low rate capability, large specific volume changes


Sn
High theoretical capacity (993 mA h g−1), high electronic conductivity, safety
High volume change (∼300%), poor cyclability


Si
High theoretical specific capacity (∼4200 mA h g−1)
Huge volume change (>300%), poor conductivity


MnO2
Low cost and rich resources
Poor conductivity, instability


ZnO
Abundant, low cost and eco-friendly
Huge volume change (∼163%)




3. Requirements in electrodes for advanced lithium batteries
As mentioned above, most challenges in the batteries are directly related to the electrode materials, and even the realization of the general requirements of high energy density and high power density could also be linked to the specific properties of electrode materials. Here, we discuss in detail the material requirements in terms of conductivity, SSA, micro- and nano-structures, and cost and safety related properties.
3.1 Electrical conductivity
One of the basic requirements for electrode materials is high electric conductivity, which is helpful to improve energy density and power density. There are three intrinsic negative aspects of poor electrical conductivity: (1) it reduces the operating voltage, the specific capacity, the energy density and the power density. Usually,U = E − IR,C = It = Ut/Ror      
We can see that the voltage, capacity, energy density and power density decrease with the increase of resistance; (2) Li+ cannot be fully extracted/inserted at room temperature, because of the difficulty in transport. Several materials have failed to fully utilize the redox sites, and no pathways exist for electron transport between the redox site and external circuit;22 (3) the mass of electrodes is increased if conductive additives have to be used. In order to increase the conductivity, conductive additives, such as carbon black, are usually added to active materials to increase their electrochemical performance.
The electrical conductivity data of the common electrode materials is shown in Table 2. The electrical conductivity of a powder material is generally lower than that of the theoretical bulk material, since the interface between the particles offers extra resistance to charge transport.23 It is found that most currently used electrode materials (e.g. LFP, Si, MnO2, S, etc.) have poor electrical conductivity, and therefore, the overall performance of the batteries is limited. Enhancing the conductivity of current electrode materials or utilizing new electrode materials that have high conductivity as well as other electrochemical properties will be a key step for further applications in EVs, HEVs and PHEVs.
Table 2 Electrical and thermal properties of the electrode materials




Materials
Theoretical capacity (mA h g−1)
Electrical conductivity (S cm−1)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Density (g cm−3)




LiCoO2
274
∼0.5
∼102
5.1


LiMnO2
285
<10−10


3.4


LiFePO4
170
<10−9
10 to 102
3.6


LiMn2O4
148
∼10−5


4.2


LiNiO2
275
∼10−1


4.8


Graphene
1116
∼2 × 103 (in plane)
9 × 103




CNT
1116
102 to 106
4–6 × 103




Graphite
372
2–3 × 104
2–5 × 103
2.28


Si
4200
5 × 10−4
3–30
2.33


MnO2
2500








Sx
1675
5 × 10−30


1.96–2.07




3.2 Specific surface area
An appropriately high SSA of electrode materials increases the contact area between the electrodes and the electrolytes and provides more active sites, which reduces the polarization loss and improves the specific energy, power density, cycle stability and utilization of the active materials.
According to a simplified equation for the capacitance of electrical double-layer capacitors (EDLCs):  
The specific capacitance is directly proportional to the SSA. Similarly, the capacitance of batteries can be calculated from this equation:  where m is the mass of active materials involved in the reaction, n is the electron number in the equation and M is the molar mass of active materials. In general, a higher SSA means more atoms (M) are involved in the reaction and this then yields a higher battery capacitance.
A high SSA usually results in a smaller current density under the same discharge current, which is beneficial for the decrease of electrochemical polarization and improvement of the utilization of active materials, especially decreasing the concentration polarization. The distribution of current density under non-concentration polarization can be described by the following equation:  where ia,0, ic,0, ia,L, ic,L express the oxidized current density and reduced current density of the surface outside (x = 0) and at depth (x = L), α, β are the transfer coefficients, S means SSA and κ means the electrical conductivity. From this equation we can see that a higher SSA results in a more uniform distribution of current density.
A high SSA is also helpful to improve the rapid charge performance. Because of the strong electrostatic repulsion between lithium ions and the cations in active materials, a high rate capability is usually difficult to expect.24 The mean diffusion (or storage) time τeq is determined by the diffusion coefficient (D) and the diffusion length (L) according to the following formula:τeq = L2/2D.
Shortening the diffusion time could be achieved by increasing D and/or decreasing L, where D is determined by the electrodes and electrolytes. The values of D can be calculated by the following equation:D = R2T2/2A2n4F4C2σ2.where R is the gas constant, T is the absolute temperature, A is the surface area of the cathode electrode, n is the number of electrons per molecule during, F is the Faraday constant, C is the Li+ concentration and σ is the Warburg factor associated with Zre (Zre ∝ σω−1/2). We can see that with the increase of SSA, D increases and the diffusion time has been shortened.
At the same time, a high SSA usually results in a more solid electrolyte interface (SEI), mainly formed on the surface of carbon below 1.0 V. SEI on the one hand can contribute to the uniform distribution of Li+, a decrease of the overpotential and a long cycle life. On the other hand, SEI can easily lead to irreversible capacity fade and safety issues. So an appropriately high SSA is needed for HEVs with high energy and power density and rapid charge performance.
3.3 Microstructure of electrode materials
Although micropores provide a high SSA compared to mesopores, this high SSA may not be fully utilized because it is too hard for the electrolytes to access it. This problem could be overcome by using a hierarchical structure comprising a range of pores from the micro-scale to the macro-scale. The macropores facilitate mass (electrolyte) transport and lithium ion diffusion, while the mesopores shorten the diffusion length of the lithium ions, and the micropores provide a large surface area for lithium storage and access for lithium. The overall structure enables higher capacities and shortens the charge/discharge time. Li can be intercalated in electrode materials mostly by addition reactions but also possibly by substitution reactions, as shown in Fig. 3.25 Evidence shows that micropores (small upto 0.4 nm) in monodisperse hard carbon spherules can store a large quantity of Li, while the hierarchical structure provides fast transport and a short diffusion length of Li ions, allowing for excellent rate capability of the presented cathode material.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the LiC6 structure with the stacking sequences of lithium occupancy perpendicular to the basal plane. (b) Schematic depicting the lithium storage in the form of Li2 covalent molecules. (c) Dahn's model of lithium adsorption on the two sides of an isolated graphene sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH. 
The pore distribution is also a key factor to influence the battery performance. Excessive micropores are not necessarily good for a battery even though they offer an extremely large SSA. For example, in Li–O2 batteries, the surface area dictates the number of electrochemically active sites available to form lithium oxides, and a smaller pore size means a shorter diffusion length and thus a faster discharging process (i.e. oxygen reduction at the cathode). But a small pore size also means a lower number of oxygen atoms could reach the surface because of the difficulty in mass transport, resulting in a small capacity. The relationship between the discharge time and specific capacity with the average pore size is illustrated in Fig. 4.26 This shows that the discharge capacity increases almost linearly with the increase of average pore diameter, but at the same time, the discharge time becomes longer for larger pore sizes. The effects of the distribution of the pore sizes (DPS) on Li–S batteries shows a similar observation.27,28 These results suggest that the DPS must be carefully designed to optimize the overall electrochemical performance of the batteries.
 Fig. 4  Discharge time and specific capacity (mA h g−1) as a function of average pore diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
3.4 Cycle life, safety, cost and environmental-related requirements
The cycle life usually depends on the stability of electrode materials, including the thermal stability and electrochemical stability. The capacity fade usually results from structural instability or structural damage and new material deposits generated via side reactions. The large volumetric expansion of sulfur and the blocked pores of the air electrodes directly result in the failure of Li–S batteries and Li–O2 batteries. The volume change of sulfur and silicon is up to 76% and 300%, during the charging and discharging process, leading to the structural deterioration and decrease in the cycle life.29,30 In addition, thermal expansion also leads to the invalidation of the batteries.
The safety issue is mainly caused by the thermal problem, which is related to the thermal management and the thermal properties of the materials. SEI plays a critical role in determining the safety of LIBs. The thermal instability of the SEI can easily trigger a fire or explosion in LIBs.31 Mild oxidation, deposition and coating are common methods to enhance the safety of SEI.32
The cost is another concern. The amount of Li on the earth is limited. The price of lithium carbonate is about $5000/-. With increases in the price of lithium and cobalt, low-cobalt/lithium-content materials and other materials with similar structure attract more and more attention. The utilization efficiency of active materials is also a concern. The utilization of Li in LiCoO2 is only 50%, resulting in an unsatisfactory specific capacity (140 mA h g−1), far lower than the theoretical capacity.28,29 The improvement of the utilization lies on decreasing the grain size, and the utilization of a nanohybrid or carbon coating.
From the above discussion, we can draw a conclusion that the desirable electrodes should have high conductivity, an appropriately high SSA, an abundant hierarchical architecture, high thermal conductivity and high thermal and chemical stability. Obviously, CNTs and graphene are very suitable for advanced lithium batteries. Their unique performance on electron transport, ion storage, architecture and the stability of CNTs and graphene endow them with excellent congenital superiorities to fulfil the requirements of advanced lithium batteries.
4. CNTs in advanced lithium batteries
CNT is a 1D material with an aspect ratio in excess of 1000. The sp2 carbon–carbon bonds provide amazing mechanical properties. Theoretical calculations have shown a Young's modulus as high as 1.2 TPa and a tensile strength of 50–200 GPa, making it suitable for use as a strength additives for batteries.33 Moreover, its high electrical and thermal conductivity, negligible thermal expansion coefficient and high SSA make it an ideal candidate for batteries and other energy storage devices. It's hopeful that researchers can overcome the above-mentioned battery obstacles with the introduction of CNTs and achieve high performance lithium batteries with high energy and power density, fast ion transport and a long cycle life. The conductive, active and supporting roles will be discussed in detail next and the recent research progress will be summarized.
4.1 CNTs as conductive materials
Because of their high electrical conductivity (usually 102 to 106 S cm−1), CNTs have been used to enhance the conductivity of the battery active materials. It has been found that the conductivity improvement relies on the architecture/morphology of CNTs. As shown in Fig. 5, CNTs could exist in electrodes as discontinuous CNTs, a binder-free CNT network or as CNT arrays (CNTAs). Here, we discuss the conductivity improvement according to these three architectures.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of CNTs. (a) Discontinuous CNTs, (b) binder-free CNT network, and (c) CNT arrays. 
Discontinuous CNTs were used in electrodes because of the facile fabrication process, and as their high aspect ratio allows for a low weight percentage to achieve a comparable high conductivity compared to the other carbon additives. Indeed, only 0.2% loading of single-walled CNTs can achieve comparable conductivity due to the percolation network.34 LFP/C/CNTs prepared by Xing-Long Wu and co-workers achieved ultrahigh rate capability (59% capacity retention at rates of up to 120C).35 CNTs were used to construct a highly efficient conductive network to decrease the internal resistance and hence enhance the rate performance of batteries. Alberto Varzi et al.36 reported novel high power LIBs (ZnFe2O4–C/LFP-CNT). The gravimetric energy and power density values were 202 W h kg−1 and 3.72 W kg−1. The high reversibility of the system enables sustaining more than 10000 cycles at elevated C-rates (∼10C with respect to the LFP cathode), while retaining up to 85% of the initial capacity.
In order to further improve the conductivity, binder-free CNT networks are used in electrodes. The methods to fabricate a binder-free CNT network are mainly spinning, filtration and chemical vapour deposition (CVD). Sora Yoon et al.37 prepared CNT films through a direct spinning process. Heat treatment under high temperature greatly increased the capacity to 446 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.5C, due to the enhanced conductivity. For CNT films fabricated by a filtration method, the capacity is between 100 and 550 mA h g−1.38,39 Depositing the CNT network on a carbon layer by CVD was discussed by Jun Chen et al.40 The reversible capacity was 572 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles, comparable to that of carbon-fibre based CNT films (546 mA h g−1).41 Yong Chen et al.42 fabricated the cathodes with a CNT network for Li–O2 batteries via a floating catalyst based CVD, and the electrode showed a high specific capacity of 34600 mA h g−1 at a current density of 500 mA h g−1.
Such free-standing CNT networks can be applied directly as flexible electrode materials, which can significantly lighten the weight compared with other metal current collectors. Yongzhu Fu et al.43 reported a sandwiched cathode composed of Li2S powder and two layers of binder-free CNT electrodes. Fast ion transport, efficient electron conduction and the trapping of charged and discharged products of this special structure make it a high-electronic-resistant and low-lithium-ion-diffusive Li2S. The capacity was 838 mA h g−1, 787 mA h g−1, 652 mA h g−1 and 578 mA h g−1, respectively, at C/10, C/5, C/2 and 1C rates. Moreover, an excellent cycle life at different rates was achieved owing to the sandwich architecture.
Among the three architectures shown in Fig. 5, CNTA electrodes have obvious advantages in terms of electron transport, because each individual CNT is a micro-electrode, and the total resistance is greatly decreased because of the parallel configuration. Three-dimensional array-like electrodes exhibited higher capacities, and better rate and cycle performances compared electrodes formed by any other disordered entangled CNT (ECNT) electrodes. Applications of CNTA electrodes in supercapacitors have been widely investigated.44,45 Aligned CNTs could allow for better contact with the current collector and increased ion diffusivity to significantly improve bulk electron transport properties, thereby allowing for improved rate capabilities.46,47 CNTA electrodes obtain higher reversible capacity and much better rate and cycle performance than ECNT electrodes, as shown in Fig. 6.48 A large capacity of 1789 mA h g−1 of a CNTA during the first reduction was observed. In addition, the CNTA electrode exhibited a higher reversible capacity than the ECNT electrode. Fig. 6(c) shows that at a high discharge rate, the CNTA still retains a high reversible capacity and much better rate performance than the ECNT electrode (Fig. 6(d)).
 Fig. 6  The charge/discharge curves of (a) CNTA and (b) ECNT anodes at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and the cycle performance of (c) CNTA and (d) ECNT anodes at various charge/discharge rates. The insets of (c) and (d) are the SEM images of the CNTA and ECNT anodes, respectively. (e) Schematic diagram showing the LIB devices with CNTA (upper) and ECNT (under) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
CNT arrays based on hybrid electrodes can fully make use of the conductivity of CNTs and active materials, realizing a synergistic effect. An excellent cyclic stability and capacity of coaxial MnO2/CNT array electrodes, resulting from the hybrid nature of the electrodes with improved electronic conductivity and a dual mechanism of lithium storage, have been reported by Arava Leela Mohana Reddy et al.49 The specific capacity can be improved to around 1000 mA h g−1. Aligned CNT/Si hybrid electrodes have also achieved high discharge capacity (2562 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) and cyclic stability (93% retention after 100 cycles).50 This high performance mainly lies on the continuous and conductive network of 3D-aligned CNTs. Fig. 7(a) shows a schematic diagram of the synthesis of the aligned CNT/Si hybrid electrodes. Fig. 7(b)–(g) shows its high performance and good cyclic stability. Qing Zhang et al.51 developed a novel architecture to enhance the electrochemical performance of a Ge film by adopting aligned CNT arrays as a 3D current collector. The hybrid delivered a reversible capacity of 1314 mA h g−1 and outstanding capacity retention of 97.2% after 100 cycles. Nikhil Koratkar et al.52 recently reported a foldable Li–S rechargeable battery, with the highest areal capacity (∼3 mA h cm−2) among all types of foldable energy storage devices reported to date. The key to this remarkable result was the use of a foldable, superelastic and conductive CNT current collector.
 Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Schematic of the synthesis of the 3D aligned CNT/Si structure. (c) Cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Charge/discharge voltage profiles at 0.5 A g−1. (e) Cyclic performance at a current density of 1 A g−1. (f) The cyclic performance at different current densities. (g) Long-life performance over 1000 cycles at 5 A g−1. (h) Comparison of the cyclic performance of the bare CNT sheet, Si-coated CNT sheet and 3D aligned CNT/Si hybrid at 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 CNTs as active materials
CNTs can directly serve as active materials. The surface of CNTs can store Li+ and play a catalytic role for Li–O2 batteries. The improvement of capacity and stability with the introduction of CNTs has been proved by many groups. When CNTs are used as active materials, their intrinsic characteristics, SSA, and defects are key parameters in studying their electrochemical properties in batteries.
The influences of CNTs' intrinsic characteristics, such as the wall layer, aspect ratios, crystallinity and the diameter on electrochemical performance in batteries have been studied.38,39 It is found that single-walled CNTs provide higher specific capacity, but with strong capacity fading, as shown in Fig. 8.38 So multi-walled CNTs (MWNTs) are more widely used in rechargeable lithium batteries.53 Besides, the high crystallinity also lead to high specific capacity.
 Fig. 8  The electrochemical performance of free-standing CNT films: (a) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles in the 1st cycle and (b) cycling behaviour between 0.01 and 2.00 V vs. Li/Li+ at a specific current of 25 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2009 Elsevier. 
Both out-surface and the interior of CNTs can store lithium ions, thus increasing the reversible capacity. The maximum theoretical value for the reversible capacity of CNTs in LiC2 stoichiometry has been estimated as 1116 mA h g−1, which is over three times higher than that for graphite (372 mA h g−1).54 Nevertheless, challenges also come with CNTs. For instance, during the first charge/discharge cycle, more lithium ions are inserted into CNTs than ever come out, leading to an irreversible lithium ion capacity and sharp capacity fade; and then the operation voltage decreases with the discharge of cells, as shown in Fig. 9,55 resulting in low energy density (W h g−1), even though they have high specific capacity (mA h g−1).
 Fig. 9  Schematic the typical discharge curves of a graphite- and CNT-based anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 Elsevier. 
The defects of CNTs can be considered as active sites for the absorption and storage of lithium ions. The method to introduce defects on the surface of CNTs mainly include the solvothermal process,56 microwave synthesis,57 thermal chemical reaction58 and nitrogen (N) doping. These defects usually lead to better rate performance and higher specific capacity. A 4.32 wt% of nitrogen doping followed by KOH activation results in a large SSA (2642 m2 g−1) and high inner pore volume (1.31 cm3 g−1), and leads to a higher specific capacity and better stability.59
In Li–O2 batteries, introducing CNTs is helpful to reduce the overpotential and increase the reversible capacity. Hao Wang et al.60 compared the performance of CNTs and N-doped CNTs. The results showed that N-doped CNTs delivered a higher specific capacity and better cycle stability, resulting from more nucleation sites and a more uniform distribution of discharge products. The research of Yongliang Li et al. showed that N-doped CNT electrodes have a high discharge capacity of 866 mA h g−1, about 1.5 times that of normal CNTs (590 mA h g−1).61 N-Doped CNTs are potential electrode materials in future advanced Li–O2 batteries.
4.3 CNTs as supporting materials
The large SSA and variety in architectures allow CNTs to act as supporting materials for loading other active materials in order to achieve full utilization of the active materials. Various active materials, such as Si,62 PANI, S, Co3O4,63 NiO,64 NiCoO2/SnO2 (ref. 65) and MnO2 have been loaded on CNT structures, and significant improvements in battery performance have been observed.
The introduction of a microstructure and enlargement of SSA was attempted by introducing open holes on the surface of CNTs. The idea was used to improve the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries, and was proved by Zhubing Xiao et al.66 The holes not only enhanced the diffusion of Li ions, but also enabled more sulfur to fill the interior of the CNTs. Compared with the raw CNT–S composite, the composite with open holes exhibited a much higher capacity at various rates, with specific capacities of 1308, 985 and 922 mA h g−1 at 0.5, 1 and 2C, respectively, as drawn in Fig. 10(b). Fig. 10(c) and (d) shows the high reversible capacity and high coulombic efficiency.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of the CNTs, (b) rate performance and (c) cycling stability of raw CNTs–S hybrids and porous CNTs (PCNT)–S hybrids. (d) The cycling stability of PCNTs–S composites at various current rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition to the open-hole approach, more effort has been paid on building hierarchical architectures, because these structures could offer a range of pores from the micro sized to macro sized. This is more beneficial to the batteries compared with increasing the SSA alone, because the battery performance not only depends on the SSA and the loading amount of active materials, but also strongly depends on the DPS, as we discussed in Section 3. The hierarchical structures were formed by the in situ loading of active materials on various formats of CNT architectures, including CNT fibres,67,68 CNT films69,70 and 3D CNTs. By changing the morphologies of both the active materials and CNTs, the pore size and size distribution could be tuned and optimized.
A CNT fibril electrode was recently used in a novel Li–O2 battery to carry a soluble catalyst, reported by Hee-Dae Lim et al.71 The fibril-based hybrid electrodes used the LiI redox mediator, and had a hierarchical nanoporous structure, providing effective rapid transport channels for both the reaction products and the soluble catalyst. Here, the facile diffusion of the soluble catalyst throughout the entire air electrode could decrease the polarization during the charging process, enabling an enhanced capacity and energy efficiency. The hierarchical fibril CNT electrode reported by Kisuk Kang et al.72 also displayed improved cyclability. Sn-filled CNTs hierarchical architecture reported by Yanjie Hu et al.73 exhibited above 1000 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Hierarchical vine-tree-like carbon nanotube architectures reported by Qiang Zhang et al.74 exhibited excellent cycling stability and rate performance because of the structural stability and full utilization of the active materials. Transition metal oxides/CNT hybrid anodes prepared by MOE Key Laboratory displayed high electrochemical performance. The in situ growth of transition metal oxides (Co3O4,63 NiO64 and NiCoO2/SnO2,65) on CNTs presented higher specific capacity (respectively 400 mA h g−1 at a current density of 6 A g−1, 1034 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.8 A g−1 and 1166 mA h g−1 at a current density of 0.4 A g−1) and better cycle stability.
Free-standing CNT films were used to prepare electrodes by Li-Feng Cui et al. The resultant electrode had a low sheet resistance, high specific charge storage capacity (2000 mA h g−1) and a good cycling life.61 A hierarchical free-standing CNT–S paper electrode was also used in Li–S batteries to load S. An ultrahigh sulfur loading of 6.3 mg cm−2 was prepared by Zhe Yuan et al.75 A similar method76 was used by Li Sun et al.,77 as shown in Fig. 11, to improve the utilization of sulfur. To further improve the poor reaction activity of solid sulfur, lithium/dissolved polysulfide batteries with CNT electrodes prepared by Fu et al. obtained highly reversible capacities because the dissolved active material could be fully utilized compared to with solid sulfur.78
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of the nano S-superaligned CNTs (S-SACNT) composite. (b) TEM images of the nano S-SACNT composite. (c) SEM image of the nano S-SACNT composite. (d) Cycling performance at a charge/discharge rate of 1C/1C. (e) Rate performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
3D hybrid aerogels and/or 3D networks consisting of micropores and mesopores were reported by Dengteng Ge et al. The structure could incorporate a broader range of active materials.79,80 Susanne Dorfler et al.81 reported a new approach based on binder-free vertically aligned CNT (VA-CNT)/sulfur composite electrodes, which enabled a high sulfur loading of up to 70 wt%. The discharge capacities of the devices were higher than 800 mA h g−1. Fig. 12 shows the scheme of the preparation. High sulfur loadings and high discharge capacities have been reported by Xin-Bing Cheng et al. and the relationship between the capacity and the ratio of CNT/S was discussed.82Fig. 13 shows the electrochemical properties of CNT–S hybrid electrodes. A high percentage of CNT/S resulted in a high capacity. Aligned CNTs also served as continuous electron pathways and the support for sulfur nanoparticles in the composite cathode, so that the sulfur could be efficiently utilized as a cathode material. The power density of these Li–S batteries was almost close to that of supercapacitors, as shown in Fig. 13(g).
 Fig. 12  Scheme of CNT/S electrode preparation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 13  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of pristine aligned CNTs; (c) SEM image of CNT/sulfur composite cathode; (d) cycling performance with different sulfur loadings; (e) the rate performance with different sulfur loadings; (f) the coulombic efficiency of CNT/sulfur cathodes; and (g) the coulombic efficiency of sulfur cathode with 90% loading; (g) Ragone plot of CNT/sulfur cathodes with different sulfur loadings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
5. Graphene in advanced lithium batteries
Graphene has a very high mechanical stiffness, strength and elasticity (Young's modulus of 1 TPa and intrinsic strength of 130 GPa), very high electrical and thermal conductivity (above 3000 W m−1 K−1) and high room-temperature electron mobility (2.5 × 105 cm2 V−1 s−1),83,84 and is therefore a good potential electrode material for electrochemical energy storage devices. Compared to CNTs, graphene provides more electrochemical reaction active sites in electrochemical reactions because of its high theoretical SSA (2630 m2 g−1), and is also easier to be functionalized by heteroatoms, such as N atoms. Here, the active, conductive and supporting roles of graphene in lithium batteries will be discussed.
5.1 Graphene as active materials
Ideally, graphene can accommodate Li ions on both sides, so its theoretical capacity is at least two times that in other carbon materials. However, in practice, the capacity of graphene is lower than the theoretical value because of the repulsion forces between Li+ at both surfaces of graphene.85
A number of oxygen containing functional groups, including epoxy, hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, could attach to graphene to form graphene oxide (GO), making it easy to be dispersed in solution (e.g. H2O, C2H5OH). These functional groups also make it possible to incorporate GO into conducting polymers or hybridize with inorganic components, e.g. Mn3O4, VO2 and SnO2. For example, polypyrrole/graphene hybrid electrodes can be prepared via the chemical polymerization of pyrrole, followed by chemical reduction. These types of electrodes exist as a porous composite film, showing a high specific capacitance86 and high specific energy density.87 Mn3O4–graphene hybrid electrodes prepared by Hailiang Wang et al. via a two-step solution-phase method not only provides high capacity (Fig. 14) but also involves low-cost and they are environmentally friendly.88 For Li–O2 batteries, graphene is hopeful to overcome the challenges, extend the cycle life and reduce the overpotential.89
 Fig. 14  Electrochemical characterizations of a half-cell composed of Mn3O4/rGO and Li. (a) Charge (red) and discharge (blue) curves of Mn3O4/rGO for the first cycle at a current density of 40 mA g−1. (b) Representative charge (red) and discharge (blue) curves of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (c) Capacity retention of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (d) Capacity retention of free Mn3O4 nanoparticles without graphene at a current density of 40 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
The edge and defect sites,90,91 in addition to the functional groups, on graphene nanosheets are usually considered as active sites for chemical reactions, and also vacancy-type defects help to promote reversible lithium storage capacity in graphene.92 Chemical doping with nitrogen atoms is then used to intentionally modify the electronic properties, provide more active sites and enhance the interaction between the carbon structure and other molecules. Its effects on lithium storage can be summarized as follows: (1) the optimal geometry of lithium adsorption has changed, because the Li ion is easy to be adsorbed at the centre of the defect; (2) N sites deliver high efficiency to enhance the interaction between Li ions and graphene, resulting in fast lithium storage; (3) it is much easier for Li to be absorbed by N atoms than by graphene because of its larger average adsorption energy.93 At the same time, the doping with heteroatoms has a side effect, namely degradation of the electrical conductivity. Therefore the heteroatom-doping must be balanced between lithium storage and conductivity in optimizing the overall performance. Yongliang Li and co-workers firstly introduced N-graphene into Li–O2 batteries, and it was found that the N-graphene showed excellent electrocatalytic activity for oxygen reduction.94 Jieshan Qiu et al.95 successfully prepared porous N-doped graphene frameworks with a high specific capacity and good rate performance. A specific energy density of 2400 W h kg−1 at a power density of 1300 W kg−1 was delivered. In addition to N doping, hydrogen-doping was also used to improve the electrochemical performance of graphene. Jianchao Ye et al.96 recently studied the detailed roles of hydrogen in the electrochemical performance of graphene, and concluded that the doping facilitated fast lithium transport, and thus improved the rate capacity and additional reversible capacity.
Compared with CNTs, graphene is a 2D material, which is easier to restack together during the preparation process, therefore optimizing DPS becomes more critical when graphene is used as the active material. Several methods, including chemical or physical activation, template etching, a hybrid with mesoporous materials and evaporation-induced drying, can be used to obtain a large SSA and to control the DPS, as shown in Fig. 15. The chemical activation method, e.g. KOH activation,97 can yield a high SSA of 2313 m2 g−1, and at the same time a higher reversible capacity (up to 1379 mA h g−1 at 0.2C) and remarkable cycling stability, but this method mainly produces micropores, which are not easy to access for electrolytes.98 Template etching was then proposed to prepare a mesoporous architecture to solve this problem. Qiang Zhang et al.99 successfully prepared mesoporous 3D graphene-based hybrid electrodes on mesoporous oxide templates via CVD and etching processes. The high SSA of 1448 m2 g−1 derived from mesopores yielded a high sulfur utilization of 71% and a low fading rate (0.04% per cycle) at 1.0C. Angang Dong et al.100 recently reported highly ordered mesoporous graphene frameworks with 3 nm opening holes and a SSA of 1000 m2 g−1via the etching of self-assembled Fe3O4 nanoparticles, and the frameworks exhibit excellent cycling performance (specific capacity of 520 mA h g−1 after 400 cycles). To combine the advantages of RF carbon aerogels and graphene aerogels (GAs), Shuangke Liu et al. fabricated a 3D-GAs with hollow carbon spheres.101 The discharge capacity was about 1070 mA h g−1 at a 0.1C rate. The capacity decay rate at 0.5C after 400 cycles was only 0.052%. Bing Sun et al. achieved the highest capacity (17710 mA h g−1) via the addition of ruthenium (Ru) nanocrystals to porous graphene networks prepared by the SiO2 template etching (Fig. 15(c)).20 A similar fabricating method was also used to prepare a sulfur and nitrogen dual-doped mesoporous graphene electrocatalyst.102 It is accepted that the decrease of the number of macropores and the increase in mesopores can significantly improve the number of active sites, and give better catalytic performance. The evaporation-induced drying method has been found to be very effective for this purpose.103 The porous structure made from this method can accommodate more lithium ions, and overcome the aggregation and the large interfacial resistance problems that exist in loosely stacked graphene sheets.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of graphene with KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) CVD self-assembly on porous oxide templates following by chemical etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (c) Scheme of etching SiO2 template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Hybrid with mesoporous RF aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.2 Graphene as conductive materials
As mentioned early, LiCoO2, LiFePO4, silicon and MnO2 have very poor electronic conductivity, so graphene is widely used in these electrode materials to take advantage of its high in-plane conductivity. Graphene has been successfully introduced into these electrode materials through a hydrothermal process,105 spray-drying technique,106 co-precipitation method,107 mechanically mixing method108 and a solvothermal method, with better performance achieved in composite electrodes. Recently, Jong Hyeok Park et al.109 reported N-doped C/graphene/LiFePO4 with high specific capacity (171.9 mA h g−1 at 0.1C). The highly conductive graphene made undeniable contributions. The great electron transport was mutually promoted with a shortened Li diffusion length, resulting in high capacity under a high discharge rate. A Si/graphene 3D electrode architecture built by drop-casting a composite of graphene-coated Si nanoparticles on an ultrathin-graphite foam was prepared, with a specific capacity of 983 mA h g−1 on the first cycle,110 which is much higher than that of the graphite electrode used in a commercial cell, with a gravimetric capacity of 244 mA h g−1. Ji et al.111 described a 3D multilayered nanostructure consisting of Sn nanoarrays and graphene via using a conventional film deposition method. After 30 cycles, the capacities were 679 mA h g−1, indicating slow capacity fading. A Fe3O4–C–rGO composite designed by B. Li et al.112 showed a high specific discharge capacity of 952 mA h g−1. After 100 cycles, the capacity was only down ∼11%. The enhanced electrical conductivity and superior structure stability of graphene attributed to these high performances. A metal-free graphene nanosheet electrode was prepared by Eunjoo Yoo et al. The removal of functional groups from the graphene surface by heat treatment prevented oxidation by the oxygen atoms released in the charging process.113 Similar results were also found by Bing Sun and co-workers.114
It is found that the numbers of layers and defects directly affect the conductivity of graphene. Single-layer graphene has a higher electrical conductivity and better cyclic ability.115 In future, ordered and excellent cross-linked single-layered graphene-based composites need to be carefully designed to achieve better performance.
5.3 Graphene as supporting materials
GA,116 or 3D graphene foam, with a high SSA, light weight, hierarchical architecture, high electrical conductivity and good mechanical properties is an ideal flexible supporting material to support other metal oxide materials.117 Its advantages can be summarized as following: (1) the pore-rich and binder-free 3D graphene networks are favourable for lithium-ion diffusion and electron transport;118 (2) the flexible and macropores can accommodate the volume expansion of the active materials during charging and discharging; (3) it provides the possibility of chemical interaction with the electrolyte for additional capacitance, and the high SSA leads to the full utilization of the active materials.
The general methods of fabricating flexible nanoparticles/GA include: the CVD method, self-assembly method,119 template method120 and 3D printing technique.121 Several main preparation methods are summarized in Fig. 16. Based on these basic preparation methods, various GA-based hybrid electrode materials have been successfully synthesized.
 Fig. 16  Method of fabricating flexible nanoparticles/rGO aerogels (a) CVD method; reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Self-assembly method; reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) 3D-printing method; reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
When GA combines with nanoparticles, synergistic effects are generated in the hybrid structures, with graphene providing chemical functionality and compatibility to allow the easy processing of nanoparticles in the composite, while the metal oxide component provides high capacity.124 The combining models mainly include: the anchored model, wrapped model, encapsulated model, sandwich-like model, layered model and mixed model, as summarized in Fig. 17. The wrapped model and encapsulated model can be included in the same category. The sandwich-like model and layered model can be included in one category too. The synergistic effects between graphene and nanoparticles are shown in Fig. 17(g), where they allow combining the advantages of both graphene and nanoparticles. Below, we introduce the unique effects of these structures and their recent research progress in batteries.
 Fig. 17  Schematic of structural models of graphene/metal oxide composites: (a) anchored model. (b) Wrapped model. (c) Encapsulated model. (d) Sandwich-like model. (e) Layered model. (f) Mixed model. Red: metal oxide particles; blue: graphene sheets. (g) Schematic of the preparation of graphene/metal oxide composites with synergistic effects between graphene and the nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2011 Elsevier Ltd. 

5.3.1 Anchored architecture. 
Nanoparticles with an anchored graphene hybrid structure lead to lower electrochemical resistance compared to a mixed structure, resulting in a higher capacity and rate capacity.125 The nanoparticles in an anchored architecture can completely contact with electrolytes, leading to full utilization of the active materials.
The anchored architecture is helpful for overcoming the expansion of some active materials, such as ZnO126,127 and Sn. Using the in situ CVD technique, an extremely long cycling stability was obtained, with a capacity of 682 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1, and approximately 96.3% after 1000 cycles. Recently, Sn– and SnO2–graphene flexible foams were prepared via freeze-drying and reduction under high temperature, and demonstrated high capacity and cyclability.128 Zhou et al.129 fabricated N-doped graphene as a conductive support to pin SnO2 nanoparticles, and the hybrid electrode had high reversible capacity and good cyclability, as the Sn–N–C bonds prevent the aggregation of nanoparticles. Similarly, a 3D-SnS2/GA was fabricated by Xin Jiang et al.,130 and the hybrid aerogels had a high reversible capacity (656 mA h g−1) and excellent rate capability (240 mA h g−1 at the rate of 1000 mA g−1). Chunnian He et al.131 fabricated a graphene architecture anchored with Sn nanoparticles encapsulated with graphene shells. The unique architecture delivered excellent elasticity, high conductivity and improved cycle stability. This hybrid anode had a very high rate performance (652 mA h g−1 at 2C). These breakthrough advances strongly rely on the architecture of graphene: the high SSA and unique 2D plane structure accommodate the volume expansion of electrodes. 3D graphene foams cross-linked with Fe3O4 were prepared to provide protection against the aggregation and volume changes of Fe3O4. A cycling performance of 1059 mA h g−1 over 150 cycles was achieved by Klaus Müllen.132 Sheng Han et al. reported 3D-macroporous-GA-supported Fe5(PO4)4(OH)3·2H2O microspheres cathode materials, which showed an excellent reversible specific capacity of 155 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles, superior to that of LiFePO4.133
Nano-sized Li2S and the uniform dispersion of active materials on graphene aerogels were also studied. 25–50 nm diameter Li2S on GA was fabricated by Chao Wang et al. It showed excellent capacity and cyclability.134 Similarly, the nano-S was introduced into GAs. The hydrothermal temperature was a major factor: a higher temperature results in higher capacity, resulting from the stronger C–O–S bonding under higher temperature.135,136
For Li–O2 batteries, the anchored architecture also has been proven to be an effective way to improve the capacity and to lower the overpotential. A graphene/g-C3N4 hybrid air electrode was first reported by Wen-Bin Luo et al., in which g-C3N4 nanosheets play a key catalyst role.137 The hybrid electrodes exhibited excellent capacity and high efficiency. Ruthenium (Ru)-based GAs, with an average size below 2.5 nm, reduced the average charge potential and achieve a high specific capacity.138 GA with δ-MnO2 directly on the Ni foam was prepared by Jian Xie et al. and delivered a high discharge capacity of around 3660 mA h g−1 and maintained a stable cycling of 132 times with a low overpotential, resulting from the high SSA and porous structure of the highly conductive graphene network.139


5.3.2 Sandwich-like architecture. 
A sandwich-like (layer-by-layer) hybrid architecture can ensure a short diffusion length, low internal ion diffusion resistance, adaption to the volume change and fast electron transfer. These characteristics of a sandwich-like structure can accelerate the development of flexible and stretchable batteries with high performance.140 The sandwich structure of graphene with TiO2,141 SnO2,142 Si143 and WS2 (ref. 144) have led to great improvements in battery performance compared to the performance of batteries with randomly mixed hybrid structures. The enhanced capacity of sandwich-like TiO2/rGO,145 MoS2/rGO146 and SnO2/rGO composites mainly comes from the enhanced charge transfer, while the improvements in the cycle stability of Si mainly comes from the accommodation of the volume change. For Li–S batteries, the sandwich structure not only accommodates the large volumetric expansion of sulfur,147 it also allows a much higher sulfur loading and more uniform distribution of the sulfur nanoparticles,148 resulting in better overall electrochemical behaviours, including fast charge/discharge rates, high reversible capacity, etc. A functionalized sandwich-type graphene–sulfur nanocomposite synthesized by Yuliang Cao et al., had a reversible capacity of ∼505 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1680 mA g−1 (1C).148 Furthermore, the introduction of silica into the sandwich structure and then etching it away using HF provided the electrodes with a mesoporous structure and enabled it to achieve an excellent electrochemical performance.149


5.3.3 Wrapped architecture. 
A wrapped (encapsulated) hybrid architecture can stabilize the active materials and avoid exposure of the active particles to the electrolyte. Such a wrapped architecture usually leads to higher stability and a longer cycle life. Bo Wang et al.150 wrapped LFP nanoparticles with GA to prepare a GA-modified-LFP composite via the electrostatic attraction between positively charged LFP nanoparticles and negatively charged GO sheets. Fig. 18 shows the outstanding electrochemical performance of the LFP/GA. A high energy and high power density (∼close to that of supercapacitors) can be obtained simultaneously. A similar electrostatic interaction preparation method was used by Quan-Hong Yang et al.,151 who achieved an excellent rate capacity. Si-based metallic glass alloy anodes were wrapped by rGO, as reported by Il-Doo Kim et al.,152 and showed excellent rate performance, because the wrapped structure prevented the loss of active materials and stabilized the SEI layers. The lower overpotential of graphene-based hybrid electrodes for Li–O2 batteries has also been observed by Mingwei Chen et al.153 CVD graphene with encapsulated RuO2 nanoparticles shows enhanced catalytic activity and stability.
 Fig. 18  (a) Preparation process of LFP@N-GA. (b) HRTEM images revealing the pores inside LFP@N-GA. (c) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Ragone plot of LFP@N-GA in comparison with some advanced energy storage and conversion devices. (e) Charge current and capacity of LFP@N-GA as a function of charge time. Inset: charge current and efficiency of LFP@N-GA as a function of charge time. (f) Comparison of the volumetric energy density of LFP@N-GA and commercial LFP/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 

6. CNTs and graphene as multi-role materials
In the above discussions, the applications of CNTs and graphene were discussed according to their major roles in batteries, with an aim to link the battery performance directly to the material parameters, but one must also be aware that both CNTs and graphene may play multiple roles at the same time. In many cases, these conductive, active and supporting roles are effective together and can achieve a synergistic effect in improving battery performance.
For example, aligned CNTs can provide high electrical conductivity, while at the same time they can be considered as an ideal supporting network without the need for a binder.154 Dongyuan Zhao et al.155 achieved the controllable synthesis of Co3O4/CNTA for LIBs. A high specific capacity of up to 781 mA h g−1, which is close to the theoretical capacity of Co3O4, and an excellent rate performance and cycling stability were observed. Fe3O4/CNTA prepared via the CVD process was reported by Jiaping Wang et al.156 and exhibited a high reversible capacity of ∼800 mA h g−1 and high stability. In these applications, aligned CNTs can provide excellent channels for electron transport, while the array-like morphology offers a 3D framework for loading active materials at the same time.
Similarly, graphene, especially GA, may be used as the supporting, active and conductive materials at the same time. Mingyang Xing et al.157 prepared GA/TiO2 electrodes for LIBs that exhibited a high specific capacity. Graphene provides high conductive electron pathways, and the 3D-hierarchically porous structure provides host sites for TiO2 nanoparticles. 3D N-doping graphene/sulfur cathode materials for Li–S batteries also exhibited excellent rate capability and cyclability.158 The capacity fading rate was as low as 0.05% per cycle. N-Doped graphene provided excellent conductivity, while at the same time it had high activity.
However, the requirements of the material characteristics may be different and may even be opposite sometimes, depending on the role played in batteries. When carbon nanomaterials (CNTs and graphene) act as conductive materials, a high degree of graphitization is preferred, but defects and doping are more helpful to increase the amounts of active sites when they are used as active materials. A large SSA and multi-scale pores are required for supporting materials, but such a morphology and associated preparation process usually decrease the conductivity of the materials. Therefore, a good balance or trade-off between conductivity, SSA and DPS is needed in optimizing the battery performance.
7. CNTs or graphene?
Both graphene and CNTs have shown they have a bright future for their applications in advanced lithium batteries, but they are slightly different when they act in active, conductive, flexible or supporting roles.
From the perspective of conductivity, CNTs have more advantages. Although the conductivity of perfect graphene can be up to 106 S m−1, which is in the same order of magnitude as CNTs, the effects of the defects, number of layers and heteroatoms sharply decrease the conductivity of graphene, resulting in the real conductivity of ∼103 to 104 S m−1. The difference is about 2 to 3 orders of magnitude when compared to CNTs. In addition, the two-dimensional structure of graphene makes it difficult to achieve its directional growth, thus the random dispersion in nanohybrid electrodes leads to reduced electric conductivity. In contrast, CNTs could be readily grown in any particular direction, for example CNT arrays, and then show more potential in structure design to take advantage of their high axial conductivity.
From the perspective of active roles, graphene has more advantages than CNTs. Since both sides of graphene can store Li+, while only the outside surface of CNTs can be utilized, the theoretical specific surface area of graphene (2630 m2 g−1) is twice that of CNTs. Thus, graphene can provide more active sites to contact with the electrolyte, which improves the energy density and the specific capacitance. The abundant surface functional groups of graphene oxide makes it easy to spread in a variety of solvents and it can be effectively doped to improve the electrochemical performance, adding further merits for graphene in processing.
Instead of considering them as competitors though, scientists are taking advantages of their combination, by using graphene/CNTs hybrid electrodes,159–163 with the CNT contributing to the electrical conductivity while graphene contributes to the SSA. Feiyu Kang et al.164 prepared a graphene/CNT/sulfur (GCS) hybrid structure through a one-pot self-assembly approach. The loading of sulfur was as high as 70 wt%. The hybrid delivered a discharge capacity of 1008 mA h g−1 at 0.3C. After 450 cycles, the hybrid showed an excellent cyclic performance, with a capacity of 657 mA h g−1 at a high rate of 1.0C. The high performance was attributed to the conductive network of graphene sheets and CNTs, which supply a continuous path for electrons and Li ions. The porous architecture accommodated the volume variation of sulfur. The residual functional groups on graphene enhanced the contact of electrolytes. Such a one-pot self-assembly method was taken by Yuanfu Chen et al.76 to prepare GCS. The positive effect of the highly conductive CNTs and the benefit of a greater cycle life were observed. A high sulfur utilization of 81% of such a GCS structure was observed by Qiang Zhang et al.165 Zexiang Shen et al.166 reported an assembly GF/CNT/MnO2 and GF/CNT/Ppy hybrid films. These hybrid electrodes delivered a high energy/power density (22.8 W h kg−1 at 860 W kg−1 and 2.7 kW kg−1 at 6.2 W h kg−1). These electrodes demonstrate great potential as power sources for future flexible and lightweight electronic devices. A detailed comparison between CNT electrodes, graphene electrodes and CNT/graphene hybrid electrodes is given in Table 3.
Table 3 The performance of CNT, graphene, and CNT/graphene based hybrid electrodes




Hybrid electrodes
Capacity (mA h g−1)
Specific energy (W h kg−1)
Specific power (kW kg−1)
Capacity fade/cycle
Reference




CNT/Si
∼2000 at C/10




0.30%

62



CNT/S
995 at 0.05C




0.20%

75



CNT/MnO
2293 at 0.6 mA cm−2




Quickly fade

167



CNTA/Si
2562 at 1 A g−1







50



CNTA/S
563.7
1249.2
1.2038



168



CNTA/MnO2
∼500 after 15 cycles







49



Graphene/Si
983




∼6%

110



Graphene/C/LiFePO4
171.9 at 0.1C







109



Graphene


2.5 mW h cm−3
495 W cm−3
∼0.009%

169



Graphene/S
1379 at 0.2C




0.30%

98



CNT/graphene/MnO2


22.8
0.86
∼0.001%

166



CNT/graphene/S
1098.4 at 0.5C




0.08%

76



CNT/graphene/Ppy


6.7
2.7



166





8. Summary and outlook
Conductivity, SSA, microstructure, cyclability, and safety are key issues that must be fully considered in selecting electrode materials for advanced lithium batteries. CNTs and graphene have their unique merits in these aspects and thus have been widely studied. It was found that the performance of CNT- and graphene-based electrodes depends both on the quality and the architecture of the materials. Defects, heteroatoms doping and the control of DPS can enhance their electrochemical properties; oriented structures, like CNTA, can achieve electrical and thermal conductivity in specific directions; anchored and wrapped structures tend to have high stability while a sandwich-like structure can offer fast ion transport. Moreover, both CNTs and graphene can serve as flexible supporting materials, and can fit next generation flexible lithium batteries. Furthermore, graphene/CNT hybrid materials can make full use of the advantages of both graphene and CNTs, leading to high electrochemical performance.
Both materials also show some disadvantages in battery applications. For graphene, stacking is a major concern because it reduces the effective SSA. GA may largely solve this problem but current aerogel products show relatively low conductivity and low volumetric capacitance. For CNTs, their inner surface is still hard to use, leading to a low SSA that is only half of that of graphene. In addition, the insufficient functional groups of CNTs lead to the difficulty of doping, functionalization and uniform dispersion.
Nevertheless, both materials have shown great potential and witnessed fast development in uses in transparent, flexible, wearable energy storage devices. Their high thermal and chemical stability will play a major role in future batteries with their large temperature window and good safety properties. In this regard, CNTs and graphene will not only be key materials for future flexible advanced lithium batteries, but will also be promising for other energy conversion and storage devices, such as solar cells, new Al-ion batteries, sodium ion batteries and fuel cells.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by Shaanxi Province Foundation for Fundamental Research (No. 2014JQ6229), Northwestern Polytechnical University (NPU) Foundation for Fundamental Research (No. NPU96-QZ-2014, No. 3102014JCQ01031, & No. 3102015ZY086), and the National Natural Science Fund (No. 51302220) of China.
Notes and references
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.uscar.org, accessed April 2014.
G. Zhou, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
M.-K. Song, S. Park, F. M. Alamgir, J. Cho and M. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2011, 72, 203–252 CrossRef .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu and Y.-S. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y.-K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994–10024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, S. Xiao, Z. Chang, Y. Yang and Y. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 9209–9211 RSC .
Z. Li, N. A. Chernova, M. Roppolo, S. Upreti, C. Petersburg, F. M. Alamgir and M. S. Whittingham, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A516–A522 CrossRef CAS .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Chan, J. W. Choi, I. Ryu, Y. Yao, M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, A. Jackson, Y. Yang, L. Hu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 310–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dubarry, B. Y. Liaw, M.-S. Chen, S.-S. Chyan, K.-C. Han, W.-T. Sie and S.-H. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 3420–3425 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Abraham, E. M. Reynolds, P. L. Schultz, A. N. Jansen and D. W. Dees, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, A1610–A1616 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Abraham, J. L. Knuth, D. W. Dees, I. Bloom and J. P. Christophersen, J. Power Sources, 2007, 170, 465–475 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, H. Fortier, J. N. Reimers and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A609–A613 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee, S. Jeong and J. Cho, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1161–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cho, S. Lee, Y. Lee, T. Hong and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 821–828 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Chen, M. T. McDowell, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 1042–1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, X. Huang, S. Chen, P. Munroe and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3145–3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhai, K. C. Lau, H.-H. Wang, J. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. Lu, F. Kang, B. Li, W. Yang, J. Gao, E. Indacochea, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1041–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Bai and M. Z. Bazant, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3585 Search PubMed .
B. Marinho, M. Ghislandi, E. Tkalya, C. E. Koning and G. de With, Powder Technol., 2012, 221, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9452–9455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664–2680 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tran, X.-Q. Yang and D. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2057–2063 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, L. Liu, H. Zhao, A. Krall, Z. Wen, J. Chen, P. Hurley, J. Jiang and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 882–888 RSC .
S. Wang, Z. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. Deng, Z. Li and G. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
D.-W. Wang, G. Zhou, F. Li, K.-H. Wu, G. Q. Lu, H.-M. Cheng and I. R. Gentle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8703–8710 RSC .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Qin, Y. Ren, W. Lu, C. Orendorff, E. P. Roth and K. Amine, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4023–4030 CAS .
Q. Wang, P. Ping, X. Zhao, G. Chu, J. Sun and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 210–224 CrossRef CAS .
X.-M. Liu, Z. d. Huang, S. w. Oh, B. Zhang, P.-C. Ma, M. M. F. Yuen and J.-K. Kim, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2012, 72, 121–144 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. D. Cress, R. A. DiLeo and R. P. Raffaelle, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 638–654 CAS .
X.-L. Wu, Y.-G. Guo, J. Su, J.-W. Xiong, Y.-L. Zhang and L.-J. Wan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1155–1160 CrossRef CAS .
A. Varzi, D. Bresser, J. von Zamory, F. Müller and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400054 Search PubMed .
S. Yoon, S. Lee, S. Kim, K.-W. Park, D. Cho and Y. Jeong, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 495–501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chew, S. H. Ng, J. Wang, P. Novák, F. Krumeich, S. L. Chou, J. Chen and H. K. Liu, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2976–2983 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Landi, M. J. Ganter, C. M. Schauerman, C. D. Cress and R. P. Raffaelle, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7509–7515 CAS .
J. Chen, A. I. Minett, Y. Liu, C. Lynam, P. Sherrell, C. Wang and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 566–570 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Z. Wang, A. I. Minett, Y. Liu, C. Lynam, H. Liu and G. G. Wallace, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 393–396 CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Li, D.-M. Tang, Z. Jian, C. Liu, D. Golberg, A. Yamada and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13076–13081 CAS .
Y. Fu, Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 201300655 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, W. Wang, K. Yuan, B. Xu, W. Zhang, J. Cheng and Y. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 1153–1159 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Electrochem. Commun., 2008, 10, 1056–1059 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Futaba, K. Hata, T. Yamada, T. Hiraoka, Y. Hayamizu, Y. Kakudate, O. Tanaike, H. Hatori, M. Yumura and S. Iijima, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 987–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Y. Yang and Z. Gu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2008, 155, K19–K22 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, G. Cao, Z. Wang, Y. Yang, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 2873–2877 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. M. Reddy, M. M. Shaijumon, S. R. Gowda and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1002–1006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weng, H. Lin, X. Chen, J. Ren, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu, G. Guan and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9306–9312 CAS .
X. Wang, R. A. Susantyoko, Y. Fan, L. Sun, Q. Xiao and Q. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 2826–2829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. P. Wu, H. Sun, D. Chen, J. Gao, S. Suresh, P. Chow, C. V. Singh and N. Koratkar, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11342–11350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. L. De Volder, S. H. Tawfick, R. H. Baughman and A. J. Hart, Science, 2013, 339, 535–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Schauerman, M. J. Ganter, G. Gaustad, C. W. Babbitt, R. P. Raffaelle and B. J. Landi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12008–12015 RSC .
C. de las Casas and W. Li, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 74–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, G. Shao, Z. Ma, G. Wang and J. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 504–510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Wu, G. Di Benedetto, J. L. Zunino Iii and S. Mitra, Carbon, 2015, 91, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Wu, F. Zhao, Y. Wei, J. Wang, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Carbon, 2014, 69, 444–451 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Xie, X. Zhou, Y. Zou, J. Tang, S. Wang, F. Chen and L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1800–1807 CAS .
R. Mi, H. Liu, H. Wang, K.-W. Wong, J. Mei, Y. Chen, W.-M. Lau and H. Yan, Carbon, 2014, 67, 744–752 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, J. Liu, D. Geng, J. Yang, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 668–672 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Cui, L. Hu, J. W. Choi and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3671–3678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, F. Wang, Y. Zhang, S. Yang, M. Zhao and X. Song, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8067–8072 RSC .
X. Xu, H. Tan, K. Xi, S. Ding, D. Yu, S. Cheng, G. Yang, X. Peng, A. Fakeeh and R. V. Kumar, Carbon, 2015, 84, 491–499 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Chen, C. Xiao, K. Xi, C. Guo, S. Guo, S. Ding, D. Yu and R. V. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6004–6010 CAS .
Z. Xiao, Z. Yang, H. Nie, Y. Lu, K. Yang and S. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8683–8689 CAS .
P. Xu, T. Gu, Z. Cao, B. Wei, J. Yu, F. Li, J.-H. Byun, W. Lu, Q. Li and T.-W. Chou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300759 Search PubMed .
F. Meng, X. Zhang, R. Li, J. Zhao, X. Xuan, X. Wang, J. Zou and Q. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2480–2485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, D. Hu, H. Chen, Z. Yong, M. Chen, Z. Feng, Y. Zhu and Q. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5457–5464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Li, Y. Gu, X. Zhang, S. Wang, Q. Li and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3060–3066 RSC .
H.-D. Lim, H. Song, J. Kim, H. Gwon, Y. Bae, K.-Y. Park, J. Hong, H. Kim, T. Kim, Y. H. Kim, X. Lepró, R. Ovalle-Robles, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 3926–3931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-D. Lim, K.-Y. Park, H. Song, E. Y. Jang, H. Gwon, J. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. D. Lima, R. O. Robles, X. Lepró, R. H. Baughman and K. Kang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1348–1352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hou, H. Jiang, Y. Hu, Y. Li, J. Huo and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6672–6677 CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, H.-J. Peng, G.-L. Tian, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng, C. Tang and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7051–7058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yuan, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, X.-Y. Liu, D.-W. Wang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6105–6112 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Chen, P. Li, F. Fu, Z. Wang and W. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18605–18610 CAS .
L. Sun, M. Li, Y. Jiang, W. Kong, K. Jiang, J. Wang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4044–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 7068–7073 CrossRef .
D. Ge, L. Yang, A. Honglawan, J. Li and S. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1678–1685 CrossRef CAS .
R. Carter, L. Oakes, A. P. Cohn, J. Holzgrafe, H. F. Zarick, S. Chatterjee, R. Bardhan and C. L. Pint, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20137–20151 CAS .
S. Dorfler, M. Hagen, H. Althues, J. Tubke, S. Kaskel and M. J. Hoffmann, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4097–4099 RSC .
X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, H.-J. Peng, M.-Q. Zhao and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Mayorov, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, L. Britnell, R. Jalil, L. A. Ponomarenko, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. K. Geim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2396–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Moser, A. Barreiro and A. Bachtold, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 163513 CrossRef .
C. Xu, B. Xu, Y. Gu, Z. Xiong, J. Sun and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1388–1414 CAS .
A. Liu, C. Li, H. Bai and G. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22783–22789 CAS .
Y. Yang, C. Wang, B. Yue, S. Gambhir, C. O. Too and G. G. Wallace, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 266–272 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. Sanchez Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, M. Leskes, W. Yu, A. J. Moore, L. Zhou, P. M. Bayley, G. Kim and C. P. Grey, Science, 2015, 350, 530–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mahmood, C. Zhang, H. Yin and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15–32 CAS .
J. C. Ye, S. Charnvanichborikarn, M. A. Worsley, S. O. Kucheyev, B. C. Wood and Y. M. Wang, Carbon, 2015, 85, 269–278 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Weng, X. Liu, X. Wang, D.-M. Tang, W. Tian, C. Zhang, W. Yi, D. Liu, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1164–1171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, J. Wang, X. Li, D. Geng, M. N. Banis, R. Li and X. Sun, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 18, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, S. Liu, J. Yang, X. Fan, H. Huang and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6913–6920 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ye, M. T. Ong, T. W. Heo, P. G. Campbell, M. A. Worsley, Y. Liu, S. J. Shin, S. Charnvanichborikarn, M. J. Matthews, M. Bagge-Hansen, J. R. I. Lee, B. C. Wood and Y. M. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sun, P. Cheng, H. Wang, H. Xu, L. Dang, Z. Liu and Z. Lei, Carbon, 2015, 92, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ding, C. Yuan, L. Shen, G. Xu, P. Nie, Q. Lai and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1096–1101 CAS .
J.-L. Shi, C. Tang, H.-J. Peng, L. Zhu, X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, W. Zhu and Q. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 5243–5252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiao, D. Han, L. Liu, L. Ji, G. Guo, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 5819–5823 CrossRef .
S. Liu, K. Xie, Z. Chen, Y. Li, X. Hong, J. Xu, L. Zhou, J. Yuan and C. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11395–11402 CAS .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, D.-H. Liu, W. Lv, D.-W. Wang, W. Wei, G.-M. Zhou, S. Wang, F. Li, B.-H. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5592–5597 RSC .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, M. D. Stoller, K. J. Ganesh, W. Cai, P. J. Ferreira, A. Pirkle, R. M. Wallace, K. A. Cychosz, M. Thommes, D. Su, E. A. Stach and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2011, 332, 1537–1541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Liu, C. Xiao, S. Dong, P. Han, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, C. Bi and G. Cui, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 1685–1689 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353–3358 RSC .
Y. Ding, Y. Jiang, F. Xu, J. Yin, H. Ren, Q. Zhuo, Z. Long and P. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 10–13 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. Su, C. You, Y.-B. He, W. Lv, W. Cui, F. Jin, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9644–9650 RSC .
K. Zhang, J.-T. Lee, P. Li, B. Kang, J. H. Kim, G.-R. Yi and J. H. Park, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6756–6763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, H. Ji, L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Bai, X. Fan, F. Zhang and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4673–4677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ji, Z. Tan, T. Kuykendall, E. J. An, Y. Fu, V. Battaglia and Y. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3611–3616 CAS .
B. Li, H. Cao, J. Shao and M. Qu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10374–10376 RSC .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sun, B. Wang, D. Su, L. Xiao, H. Ahn and G. Wang, Carbon, 2012, 50, 727–733 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, G.-L. Tian, J.-Q. Nie, H.-J. Peng and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3410 Search PubMed .
H. Sun, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Biener, M. Stadermann, M. Suss, M. A. Worsley, M. M. Biener, K. A. Rose and T. F. Baumann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 656–667 CAS .
M. Ye, Z. Dong, C. Hu, H. Cheng, H. Shao, N. Chen and L. Qu, Small, 2014, 10, 5035–5041 CAS .
G. Zeng, N. Shi, M. Hess, X. Chen, W. Cheng, T. Fan and M. Niederberger, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4227–4235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, T. Y.-J. Han, E. B. Duoss, A. M. Golobic, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini and M. A. Worsley, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ren, K. N. Hui, K. S. Hui, Y. Liu, X. Qi, J. Zhong, Y. Du and J. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wu, G. Zhou, L.-C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Dong, X. Wang, X. Zhao, J. Tu, Q. Su and G. Du, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, A. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Li and G. Shi, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 11419–11424 RSC .
H. Y. Yue, S. Huang, J. Chang, C. Heo, F. Yao, S. Adhikari, F. Gunes, L. C. Liu, T. H. Lee, E. S. Oh, B. Li, J. J. Zhang, T. Q. Huy, N. V. Luan and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1639–1646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Botas, D. Carriazo, G. Singh and T. Rojo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13402–13410 CAS .
X. Zhou, L.-J. Wan and Y.-G. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2152–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. Zhu, J. Shen, K. Fan and C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 237, 178–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, C. He, N. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. Shi, E.-Z. Liu and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1728–1738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, S. Yang, H. Zhou, I. Lieberwirth, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2909–2914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Han, J. Wang, S. Li, D. Wu and X. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6174–6179 CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, A. Kushima, J. Chen, Y. Huang and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1796–1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, M. Lu, X. Ling, Z. Jiao, L. Chen, L. Chen, P. Hu and B. Zhao, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 645, 509–516 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Chen, H. Zhou and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 678–686 CrossRef CAS .
W.-B. Luo, S.-L. Chou, J.-Z. Wang, Y.-C. Zhai and H.-K. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 2817–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-G. Jung, Y. S. Jeong, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, B. Scrosati and Y. J. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3532–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Zhu, J. Xie, Y. Huo, H. Y. Yang, T. Zhu, G. Cao, X. Zhao and S. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301960 Search PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 6217 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, C. Cao, P. Huang, L. Peng, Y. Sun, F. Wei and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8701–8705 CAS .
J. Tang, J. Yang, L. Zhou, J. Xie, G. Chen and X. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6292–6295 CAS .
D. He, F. Bai, L. Li, L. Shen, H. H. Kung and N. Bao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 169, 409–415 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, T. Zhao, W. Wu, F. Wu, L. Li, J. Qian, R. Xu, H. Wu, H. M. Albishri, A. S. Al-Bogami, D. A. El-Hady, J. Lu and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5899–5904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, F. Wang, Y. Liu, J. Wang, J. Yang, L. Zhang, A. A. Elzatahry, D. Al-Dahyan, Y. Xia and D. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2186–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jing, E. O. Ortiz-Quiles, C. R. Cabrera, Z. Chen and Z. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 147, 392–400 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, S. Pei, L. Li, D.-W. Wang, S. Wang, K. Huang, L.-C. Yin, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 625–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, X. Li, I. A. Aksay, J. Lemmon, Z. Nie, Z. Yang and J. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 7660–7665 RSC .
K. H. Kim, Y.-S. Jun, J. A. Gerbec, K. A. See, G. D. Stucky and H.-T. Jung, Carbon, 2014, 69, 543–551 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, W. Al Abdulla, D. Wang and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 869–875 CAS .
W. Wei, W. Lv, M.-B. Wu, F.-Y. Su, Y.-B. He, B. Li, F. Kang and Q.-H. Yang, Carbon, 2013, 57, 530–533 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jung, W.-H. Ryu, J. Shin, K. Park and I.-D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6717–6727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guo, P. Liu, J. Han, Y. Ito, A. Hirata, T. Fujita and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6137–6143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, Y. Wu, F. Zhao, J. Wang, K. Jiang and S. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 11121–11125 CAS .
D. Gu, W. Li, F. Wang, H. Bongard, B. Spliethoff, W. Schmidt, C. Weidenthaler, Y. Xia, D. Zhao and F. Schüth, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7060–7064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Wei, J. Wang, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 818–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, K. Su, W. Wan, H. Guo, H. Zhou, J. Chen, X. Zhang and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5018–5023 CAS .
H. Yoshida, S. Takeda, T. Uchiyama, H. Kohno and Y. Homma, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2082–2086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Komori, T. Terse-Thakoor and A. Mulchandani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 3647–3654 CAS .
J. Niu, M. Li, W. Choi, L. Dai and Z. Xia, Carbon, 2014, 67, 627–634 CrossRef CAS .
V. Varshney, S. S. Patnaik, A. K. Roy, G. Froudakis and B. L. Farmer, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1153–1161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. D. Novaes, R. Rurali and P. Ordejón, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7596–7602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Niu, W. Lv, C. Zhang, Y. Shi, J. Zhao, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, H.-J. Peng, J. Liang, J.-Q. Huang, C.-M. Chen, X. Guo, W. Zhu, P. Li and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 746–755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, L. Zhang, H. B. Wu, J. Lin, Z. Shen and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3709–3719 CAS .
W.-B. Luo, S.-L. Chou, W. Jia-Zhao, Y.-C. Zhai and H.-K. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300655 Search PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2487 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Distribution of the different electrochemical energy storage performances.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic of Li-ion, non-aqueous Li–O2 and Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2012 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 		 

 		 

Cathode materials	LiFePO4	Relatively high capacity, thermal stability, excellent reversibility, low cost, environmental benign	Lower electronic conductivity, low Li-ion diffusion coefficient
LiNiO2	Good specific capacity	Poor safety, poor cycle life
LiCoO2	High specific capacity	High cost, poor conductivity
LiMn2O4	Naturally abundant, environmentally friendly, good safety	Low capacity, capacity fading
S	High specific capacity (1675 mA h g−1), non-toxic, low cost	Low conductivity, poor cyclic performance, volume change (80%)
Li2S	Improved safety with a theoretical capacity of 1166 mA h g−1	Low electronic and ionic conductivities, sensitivity to moisture and oxygen
Anode materials	Li	Low potential and high capacity (∼3860 mA h g−1)	Unstable, poor safety
Graphite	Low cost, good conductivity	Limited gravimetric capacity
Fe3O4	High theoretical capacity (≈1000 mA h g−1), non-toxic, improved safety, and low cost	Poor cycling performance and low rate capability, large specific volume changes
Sn	High theoretical capacity (993 mA h g−1), high electronic conductivity, safety	High volume change (∼300%), poor cyclability
Si	High theoretical specific capacity (∼4200 mA h g−1)	Huge volume change (>300%), poor conductivity
MnO2	Low cost and rich resources	Poor conductivity, instability
ZnO	Abundant, low cost and eco-friendly	Huge volume change (∼163%)
U = E − IR,
C = It = Ut/R

 		 

 		 

 		 

LiCoO2	274	∼0.5	∼102	5.1
LiMnO2	285	<10−10	
	3.4
LiFePO4	170	<10−9	10 to 102	3.6
LiMn2O4	148	∼10−5	
	4.2
LiNiO2	275	∼10−1	
	4.8
Graphene	1116	∼2 × 103 (in plane)	9 × 103	

CNT	1116	102 to 106	4–6 × 103	

Graphite	372	2–3 × 104	2–5 × 103	2.28
Si	4200	5 × 10−4	3–30	2.33
MnO2	2500	
	
	

Sx	1675	5 × 10−30	
	1.96–2.07

 		 

 		 

 		 
τeq = L2/2D.
D = R2T2/2A2n4F4C2σ2.

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the LiC6 structure with the stacking sequences of lithium occupancy perpendicular to the basal plane. (b) Schematic depicting the lithium storage in the form of Li2 covalent molecules. (c) Dahn's model of lithium adsorption on the two sides of an isolated graphene sheet. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2009 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Discharge time and specific capacity (mA h g−1) as a function of average pore diameter. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of CNTs. (a) Discontinuous CNTs, (b) binder-free CNT network, and (c) CNT arrays.	 

 	Fig. 6  The charge/discharge curves of (a) CNTA and (b) ECNT anodes at a current density of 0.5 mA cm−2 and the cycle performance of (c) CNTA and (d) ECNT anodes at various charge/discharge rates. The insets of (c) and (d) are the SEM images of the CNTA and ECNT anodes, respectively. (e) Schematic diagram showing the LIB devices with CNTA (upper) and ECNT (under) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) and (b) Schematic of the synthesis of the 3D aligned CNT/Si structure. (c) Cyclic voltammograms at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Charge/discharge voltage profiles at 0.5 A g−1. (e) Cyclic performance at a current density of 1 A g−1. (f) The cyclic performance at different current densities. (g) Long-life performance over 1000 cycles at 5 A g−1. (h) Comparison of the cyclic performance of the bare CNT sheet, Si-coated CNT sheet and 3D aligned CNT/Si hybrid at 1 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  The electrochemical performance of free-standing CNT films: (a) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles in the 1st cycle and (b) cycling behaviour between 0.01 and 2.00 V vs. Li/Li+ at a specific current of 25 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2009 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic the typical discharge curves of a graphite- and CNT-based anode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2012 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis process of the CNTs, (b) rate performance and (c) cycling stability of raw CNTs–S hybrids and porous CNTs (PCNT)–S hybrids. (d) The cycling stability of PCNTs–S composites at various current rates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the synthesis procedure of the nano S-superaligned CNTs (S-SACNT) composite. (b) TEM images of the nano S-SACNT composite. (c) SEM image of the nano S-SACNT composite. (d) Cycling performance at a charge/discharge rate of 1C/1C. (e) Rate performance. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Scheme of CNT/S electrode preparation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) SEM and (b) TEM images of pristine aligned CNTs; (c) SEM image of CNT/sulfur composite cathode; (d) cycling performance with different sulfur loadings; (e) the rate performance with different sulfur loadings; (f) the coulombic efficiency of CNT/sulfur cathodes; and (g) the coulombic efficiency of sulfur cathode with 90% loading; (g) Ragone plot of CNT/sulfur cathodes with different sulfur loadings. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Electrochemical characterizations of a half-cell composed of Mn3O4/rGO and Li. (a) Charge (red) and discharge (blue) curves of Mn3O4/rGO for the first cycle at a current density of 40 mA g−1. (b) Representative charge (red) and discharge (blue) curves of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (c) Capacity retention of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (d) Capacity retention of free Mn3O4 nanoparticles without graphene at a current density of 40 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing the microwave exfoliation/reduction of GO and the following chemical activation of graphene with KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2011 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) CVD self-assembly on porous oxide templates following by chemical etching. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (c) Scheme of etching SiO2 template. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) Hybrid with mesoporous RF aerogels. Reproduced with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  Method of fabricating flexible nanoparticles/rGO aerogels (a) CVD method; reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (b) Self-assembly method; reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (c) 3D-printing method; reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic of structural models of graphene/metal oxide composites: (a) anchored model. (b) Wrapped model. (c) Encapsulated model. (d) Sandwich-like model. (e) Layered model. (f) Mixed model. Red: metal oxide particles; blue: graphene sheets. (g) Schematic of the preparation of graphene/metal oxide composites with synergistic effects between graphene and the nanoparticles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 124. Copyright 2011 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Preparation process of LFP@N-GA. (b) HRTEM images revealing the pores inside LFP@N-GA. (c) CV curves at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1. (d) Ragone plot of LFP@N-GA in comparison with some advanced energy storage and conversion devices. (e) Charge current and capacity of LFP@N-GA as a function of charge time. Inset: charge current and efficiency of LFP@N-GA as a function of charge time. (f) Comparison of the volumetric energy density of LFP@N-GA and commercial LFP/C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

CNT/Si	∼2000 at C/10	
	
	0.30%	
62

CNT/S	995 at 0.05C	
	
	0.20%	
75

CNT/MnO	2293 at 0.6 mA cm−2	
	
	Quickly fade	
167

CNTA/Si	2562 at 1 A g−1	
	
	
	
50

CNTA/S	563.7	1249.2	1.2038	
	
168

CNTA/MnO2	∼500 after 15 cycles	
	
	
	
49

Graphene/Si	983	
	
	∼6%	
110

Graphene/C/LiFePO4	171.9 at 0.1C	
	
	
	
109

Graphene	
	2.5 mW h cm−3	495 W cm−3	∼0.009%	
169

Graphene/S	1379 at 0.2C	
	
	0.30%	
98

CNT/graphene/MnO2	
	22.8	0.86	∼0.001%	
166

CNT/graphene/S	1098.4 at 0.5C	
	
	0.08%	
76

CNT/graphene/Ppy	
	6.7	2.7	
	
166


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
