Nanometer scale carbon structures for charge-transfer systems and photovoltaic applications  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B617684B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B617684B
(Invited Article)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1400-1420Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanometer scale carbon structures for charge-transfer systems and photovoltaic applications

        
          
            Dirk M. 
            Guldi
          
        
      
Universität Erlangen, Institute of Physical and Theoretical Chemistry, 91058, Erlangen, Germany
Received 
      4th December 2006
    , Accepted 3rd January 2007First published on 8th February 2007AbstractThis article surveys and highlights the integration of nanometer scale carbon structures—in combination with chromophores that exhibit (i) significant absorption cross section throughout the visible part of the solar spectrum and (ii) good electron donating power—into novel electron donor–acceptor conjugates (i.e., covalent) and hybrids (i.e., non-covalent). The focus of this article is predominantly on performance features—charge-transfer and photovoltaic—of the most promising solar energy conversion systems. Besides documenting fundamental advantages as they emerge around nanometer scale carbon structures, critical evaluations of the most recent developments in the fields are provided.
Introduction
It is foreseeable that artificial photosynthetic systems that will ultimately power practical solar fuels production must be based on molecular and supramolecular assemblies.1 Specific requirements that such assemblies must meet include the collection of light energy, separation of charges, and transport of charges to catalytic sites, where water oxidation and CO2 reduction will occur. Notable progress has been made on each aspect of these complex problems—yet researchers have not developed components that are both efficient and robust, and have not integrated the existing functional components into a working system.2 The design and development of light harvesting, photoconversion, and—as a long term aim—catalytic modules capable of self-ordering and self-assembling into an integrated functional unit will make it possible to realize efficient artificial photosynthetic systems based on nanometer scale carbon structures.
Electron acceptors
A first prominent example of nanometer scale carbon structures are fullerenes—see Scheme 1. Ever since their initial discovery, scientists worldwide have studied their solid state properties ranging from superconductivity and nanostructured devices to endohedral fullerene chemistry.3 Hereby, the three-dimensional structure of fullerenes, which exclusively consist of electron-rich hexagons and electron-deficient pentagons, evoked a lively interest to relate their properties to conventional one-dimensional π-systems. The extraordinary electron acceptor properties of, for example, the most abundant fullerene, namely, C60 with a diameter of 7.8 Å, have led to noteworthy utilizations of such nanoscale architectures in areas of light-induced electron transfer chemistry and solar energy conversion.
 Scheme 1  Molecular building blocks—C60 and single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT)—as electron acceptors. 
Importantly, original and well-established synthetic methodologies emerged as potent means en-route to a wide variety of novel fullerene derivatives.4 Such methodologies ensure the complete control over chemically functionalizing fullerenes in simple or even sophisticated ways. With these methods in hand, the synthesis of relatively complex molecular tectons—one-dimensional, linear arrays and three-dimensional, spheroidal architectures—has been accomplished. In these tectons the unique electrochemical and photophysical features, which pristine C60 exhibits, have largely been preserved.
More recently, a different class of nanometer scale carbon structures is drawing considerable attention: carbon nanotubes (CNT)—see Scheme 1.5 Of the wide range of CNT, single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT) protrude as unique materials: they are fascinating, with exceptionally high tensile strength, the highest thermal conductivity known and extraordinary field emission properties.
In contrast to fullerenes, SWNT are one-dimensional nanometer scale carbon structures.5 Structurally, CNT are a member of the fullerene family. However, in contrast to the spherical nature of fullerenes, CNT are cylindrical, with at least one end typically capped with a fullerene hemisphere. The structure of a SWNT can be conceptualized by wrapping a one-atom-thick layer of a graphene sheet, that is, an interlinked hexagonal lattice of carbon atoms, into a seamless cylinder. The way the graphene sheet is wrapped is represented by a pair of indices (n,m) called the chiral vector. The diameter of most SWNT is close to 1 nm, with a tube length that might be many thousands of times larger. For instance, SWNT with lengths up to several centimetres have been produced to yield impressively high aspect ratios.
MWNT consist of multiple layers of graphite rolled in on themselves to form a tube shape. They are constructed by rolling several cylinders of graphene sheets, each cylinder with a slightly larger circumference then the first.6
The technological interests in CNT rest on their exceptional mechanical, electrical and optoelectronic properties.5 CNT materials show much improved features relative to classical materials like organic polymers or semiconductors. Some nanotubes are, for example, stronger than steel, lighter than aluminium and more conductive than copper or silver. All of these remarkable properties give CNT a range of potential applications: for example, in reinforced composites, sensors, nanoelectronics and display devices. Moreover, the graphitic surface of SWNT is chemically very robust, which, in turn, guarantees long-term stable operations.
Important breakthroughs—prompting the potential use of CNT in controlling other nanoscale structures—have already been achieved in fields like electronics, optoelectronics, sensors, fillers in new generation polymer composites, therapeutics and diagnostics.7 Most of the aforementioned applications implement electron transfer reactions that evolve between CNT and photo- and electroactive materials. The high polarizability and the smooth surface of SWNT is the inception of strong van der Waals interactions, reaching values as high as 500 eV per 1 μm of CNT length, and to aggregation into insoluble bundles and/or ropes.8 Such features are responsible for the low solubility of SWNT in common organic solvents. Important for the chemical reactivity is the fact that metallic CNT are slightly less aromatic than semiconducting ones and, in turn, more reactive than the latter.
Fullerenes and CNT are natural electron acceptors.9 Qualitative molecular orbital theory follows isolated C2 fragments that are brought together starting from infinite distance. Implicit is that each C2 fragment possesses a π and a π* orbital. If these fragments are brought together—forming, for example, a SWNT—the two degenerate sets of π and π* orbitals mix. Energetically, they spread, with the low-lying edge of the π* orbitals ready to accept electrons. In the context of charge-transfer, an additional attribute of CNT should be considered. In particular, all nanotubes are expected to be very good thermal conductors along the tube, exhibiting a property known as “ballistic conduction”. Note, however, that CNT are good insulators laterally to the tube axis. Thus, CNT not only act as electron acceptors but also provide high fields at the donor/CNT interfaces for exciton dissociation.
Electron donors: chromophores
In light of the moderate absorption features of the aforementioned nanometer scale carbon structures in the visible range, functionalization with chromophoric functionalities has developed as an important objective. Leading examples are gathered in Scheme 2. Such an approach is meant to promote the visible absorption characteristics of the resulting conjugates/hybrids and, importantly, to improve the light harvesting efficiency. Specifically, suitable photosensitizers assist to extend the absorption further into the red, yielding, upon excitation, energetically low-lying excited states. As a direct consequence, the role of the nanometer scale carbon structures is significantly changed. Under these circumstances, i.e., bearing a photoactive and electroactive moiety, nanometer scale carbon structures operate nearly exclusively as electron and/or energy acceptor moieties.
 Scheme 2  Molecular building blocks—porphyrins (i.e., ZnP and H2P) and phthalocyanines (i.e., ZnPc and H2Pc)—as chromophores and electron donors. 
Porphyrinoid and especially metalloporphyrinoid systems—with their rich and extensive absorptions throughout the visible region of the solar spectrum—hold particularly great promise as integrative building blocks with increased absorptive cross sections.10 Over the course of recent years they emanate as light harvesting building blocks in the construction of molecular architectures. Their high electronic excitation energy, typically exceeding 2.0 eV, powers a strongly exergonic electron transfer and intercedes hereby the conversion between light and chemical/electrical energy. Another important feature of porphyrins is their highly delocalized π-electron systems. Such delocalization results—upon an uptake or release of electrons—in minimal structural change upon electron transfer. Rich redox properties render porphyrins and porphyrin analogues as essential components in important biological electron transport systems including photosynthesis and respiration.
Another class of chromophoric functionalities is phthalocyanines.10 They play a central role in view of their outstanding electronic properties, which rely on their extensive aromatic π-system. These planar macrocycles are ideally suited for photovoltaic applications, since they present exceptional optical and thermal stability, strong absorption in the visible, finely tunable redox properties, and may be incorporated into different kinds of condensed phases, due to their tendency to aggregate by π–π stacking. Most importantly, the strong absorption of phthalocyanines in the solar spectrum with extinction coefficients as high as 200 000 M−1 cm−1 in the 700 nm range, together with their rich redox chemistry, provides both excellent light harvesting and electron donor features and hints at their potential. Phthalocyanines can also function as electron acceptors, which depends, in part, on the peripheral substitution and the corresponding counterpartner.
General aspects of charge-transfer systems
The Marcus theory of electron transfer, which treats the rate constants of non-adiabatic intramolecular electron transfer—for both charge separation (kCS) and charge recombination (kCR) —as a parabolic dependence on the free energy changes of the reaction (−ΔG°CS or −ΔG°CR).11 This relationship provides a valuable guide for the control over the efficiency and kinetics of charge separation versus charge recombination. The electronic coupling (V) between donor and acceptor states and, foremost, the reorganization energies (λ) regulate the absolute rate constants.
Notably, the rate constant first increases with increasing thermodynamic driving force (−ΔG° < λ). This range is generally referred to as the Marcus normal region of the bell-shape relationship. When the driving force becomes, however, of the same magnitude as the reorganization energy (−ΔG°
					∼
					λ), the reaction rate reaches a maximum. Under such conditions, the rate constant is basically controlled by the magnitude of electronic coupling (V) between the interacting donor and acceptor moieties. Hereby, V relates to the overlap of the donor and acceptor orbitals. Upon passing the thermodynamic maximum (−ΔG°
					∼
					λ), the highly exothermic region of the parabola (−ΔG° > λ) is entered. Here, an additional increase of the free energy change results in an actual slow down of the reaction rate. An increasingly poor vibrational overlap of the product and reactant wavefunctions, is responsible for this behavior. The highly exergonic range is generally referred to as the Marcus inverted region.
The ultimate goal of any solar energy conversion system should be to power a thermodynamically driven charge separation event to yield a highly energetic radical ion pair. Perceptibly, charge separation should take place at small free energy changes, −ΔG°CS. This is beneficial, to store most of the excited state energy. Just the contrary consideration holds for the energy gap that characterizes the charge recombination (−ΔG°CR): this should be kept as large as is feasible. Ideally, large energy gaps should ensure dynamics that are deeply shifted into the Marcus inverted region and, consequently, to slow down the limiting and energy wasting charge recombination.
In the context of modulating the electron transfer rates, variation of the reorganization energy (λ) is an effective way. In particular, modifying λ influences the maximum of the parabolic log kETversus
					−ΔG°ET dependence on the abscissa. A closer look reveals even more dramatic impacts on the activation energies for the charge separation (ΔG#CS) and the charge recombination (ΔG#CR). These are much reduced and increased, respectively, when λ gets smaller. An ideal scenario implies small reorganization energies. Fig. 1 illustrates this explanatory for a spherical C60 and a planar naphthalenediimide. This leads to optimal charge-separation kinetics, which are located near the top of the Marcus curve—even if the driving forces are small—and a deceleration of the charge recombination rates, which are buried far into the Marcus inverted region.
 Fig. 1  Profile for the free energy surfaces for electron transfer in D–A1 (A1—solid line: spherical C60) and D–A2. (A2—dashed line: planar naphthalenediimide). 
This raises the crucial question: what would determine a small λ and especially what would render nanometer scale carbon structures particularly promising acceptor candidates. The energy required to reorganize any given system to an optimum configuration for electron transfer defines λ. Before going into structural details, it should be noted that the following two constituents add up to the reorganization energy (λ): firstly, a purely structural component (λi) should be considered, which include mainly vibrations of the molecules, etc.; secondly, contributions stemming from the polarization changes in the solvent environment (λS) play an important role. To this end, the characteristic λ emerges as one of the most significant parameters to understand interactions between solute and solvent before, during and after the electron transfer process.
Let’s turn first to fullerenes, where several criteria are worth referring to. The high degree of delocalization within the extended π-system and its immediate impact on λi should be taken into account. A set of 60 molecular orbitals, which split into 30 bonding/30 antibonding π-molecular orbitals, evokes for C60 a five-fold degenerate HOMO (hu) and a three-fold degenerate LUMO (t1u).12 They are separated by an energy gap of 1.8 eV. In line with three isoenergetic LUMO are electrochemical experiments that reveal six equally-spaced (i.e., 450 ± 50 mV) reduction waves for C60.13 Such a unique separation is a clear manifestation for conditions that guarantee the optimal delocalization of charges, namely, electrons.
Calculating the bond reorganization energies (λB)—via an expedient bond-order-based method—adds more weight to the electrochemical measurements.14 For C60, C60˙−, C602−, C603−, C604−, C605− the bond reorganization energies are nearly identical. In other words, structural changes, such as bond length variations etc., are similar upon adding electrons.
With regard to λi, the structural rigidity of the fullerene core is crucial. Particularly small Stokes-shifts were determined for C60 derivatives.15 One may infer, for example, the fact that the force constants, controlling the vibrational levels in the first singlet excited state, resemble those in the singlet ground state. In fact, a low Franck–Condon instability energy of ∼20 cm−1 reflects the rigid structure found in fullerenes and their functionalized derivatives. Similar for each additional electron, the difference between the ground and one-electron reduced state, as expressed by Raman shifts of the totally symmetric “pentagonal pinch” mode, is negligible.16 The exact experimental number is 6 cm−1 for C60. In addition, for the insulating K6C60 composition, reflecting the complete filling of the three-fold degenerate LUMO (t1u), the vibrational frequency shifts from 1467 cm−1 to 1430 cm−1, which corresponds to a frequency shift of 6 to 7 cm−1 per added electron.17
At last, the symmetrical shape and large size of fullerenes in general leads to small values for the solvent-dependent term (λS).18 Implicit in λS is the energy that is associated with adjusting a newly generated state (i.e., excited or reduced state) to a new solvent environment relative to its precursor state (i.e., ground state). In other words, it is conceivable that solvent molecules in a solvation sphere are little perturbed by a small charge density. Notably, the charge density is highly delocalized in each carbon atom of fullerenes. This results in low values of λS even in highly polarizable solvents.
Most of the aforementioned rationales are also applicable for CNT. In fact, pioneering work by Weismann et al. on SWNT shed a detailed light onto the relationship between ground state absorption and excited state fluorescence.19 Despite the large number of structural CNT present in their studies correlating emission, excitation and absorption spectra, a structural library was realized. Here, small Stokes-shifts of 65 cm−1 evolved.
When turning to Raman spectra of CNT, one particular mode is especially interesting: it is the so-called A1g radial breathing mode.20 Among three possible scenarios, namely, transversal radial (i.e., orthogonal to the tube surface), longitudinal and transversal axial (i.e., parallel to the tube surface) vibrations, the first one, which relates to the deformation orthogonal to the tubular axis, should be considered. The exact frequency of this mode scales inversely proportional with the nanotube diameter multiplied by a factor of 230 cm−1.
To accommodate all these observations, we must conclude that in three- and one-dimensional nanometer scale carbon structures the electron acceptor in its ground, reduced and also excited state is similar. Therefore, changes in the equilibrium nuclear configurations, that is, the vertical displacement on the reaction coordinate, which are associated with the transformation of a molecule in a photoinduced charge-transfer reaction from an initial (i.e., photoexcited state) to a final (i.e., charge-separated state) are appreciably small.
First examples of charge-transfer systems—fullerenes
For intermolecular electron transfer processes of electron donors and electron acceptors at diffusional encounters, however, definitive evidence for the Marcus inverted region is almost nonexistent.21 Notably, the rate constants for intermolecular reactions consist not only of an activation component (kact), but also include a diffusion related term (kdiff), with the latter defining the upper limit of the observable rate. Thus, generally, the rate constant first increases with increasing the overall driving force as far as the following relationship holds: kdiff > kact. Once kdiff starts to approach kact, the rate constants enter the diffusional limit. Now, in most cases it remains at this purely diffusion-controlled level and only the Marcus normal and top region—assuming that kdiff is not too slow—is observed.
Several reasons might be considered to rationalize the failure in realizing the Marcus inverted region. Low kdiff, obscuring the decline of the overall rate, or the distribution of intermolecular donor acceptor distances on the energy gap are just two prominent examples. In the context of donor acceptor distances, enlargement of the driving force, especially into the highly exergonic region (−Δ°G
					≫ 0), results in an increase in λ. Notably strong is the impact of λS to illustrate this, for a reaction between a particular donor and acceptor a larger solvent reorganization energy holds the rate constant large for greater energy gaps (−ΔG°ET). A large λS means, however, a bigger encounter distance. (1) (2) (3)A breakthrough in this respect came from pulse radiolytic studies to test intermolecular charge shift reactions (kCSH) from fullerenes (C60, C76 and C78) to a series of arene π-radical cations in dichloromethane (i.e., eqn (1)–(3)).22,23 Varying the oxidation strength of the arene π-radical cation, which was generated in a radical-induced oxidation evolving from the solvent radical cation (dichloromethane)˙+, helped to vary −ΔG°CSH. In such charge-shift type electron transfer reactions, the solvation before and after the electron transfer may be largely cancelled out when the free energy change of the electron transfer is expected to be rather independent of the solvent polarity. On the other hand, the solvent reorganization energy for the electron transfer reaction is expected to decrease with decreasing the solvent polarity. Thus, this is an ideal system to examine whether fullerenes have a small intrinsic reorganization energy (λ) or not in a less polar solvent such as dichloromethane. Fig. 2 illustrates that the driving force dependence of kCSH shows a pronounced decrease towards the highly exothermic region, representing the first definitive confirmation of the existence of the Marcus inverted region in a truly intermolecular electron transfer. The log kCSH value increases with increasing the driving force to reach a diffusion-limited value, and then decreases with further increase in the driving force. Please note that kCSH (2.3 × 109 M−1 s−1) for a highly exergonic electron transfer from C78 to the mesitylene radical cation (−ΔG°CSH = 0.73 eV) is about 20 times smaller than the value (4.5 × 1010 M−1 s−1) for a much less exergonic electron transfer from C76 to, for example, the chrysene radical cation (−ΔG°CSH = 0.32 eV). From these experiments, an experimental value of ca. 0.36 ± 0.04 eV was deduced for the total reorganization energy of C76 and C78 in oxidative charge shift processes in dichloromethane.
 Fig. 2  Plot of log kCSHvs. −ΔGCSH for electron transfer from C60 (circle with interior point), C76 (solid circles) and C78 (hollow circles) to arene radical cations in dichloromethane. The solid line is drawn based on the Marcus theory of electron transfer. 
Charge shift reactions—involving fullerenes—were alternatively studied via intermolecular electron transfer from a series of radiolytically generated metalloporphyrin π-radical anions, (MP)˙− (i.e., eqn (4)).23 This enabled the fine tuning of the reduction strength of the reducing species, with reduction potentials varying between −1.35 and −0.8 V versus SCE and, in turn, the variation of the free energy changes −ΔG°CSH. Addition of various concentrations of C60 resulted in an accelerated decay of the absorption between 600 and 800 nm. The linear dependence of the observed rates on the C60 concentration supported the view that the MP˙− did indeed react with C60via electron transfer. Most importantly, the grow-in rate of the C60˙− absorption at various wavelengths in the 980–1100 nm range was nearly identical to the decay rate of the MP˙− absorption between 600 and 800 nm. Surprisingly, the rate constants for electron transfer between all the investigated MP˙− and C60 are found to be in the range of (1–3) × 109 M−1 s−1, despite the large variation in one-electron reduction potentials for the examined metalloporphyrins. The lack of dependence of the rate constant on the free energy change of the reaction has been ascribed to weak electronic interactions between the metalloporphyrins and C60 in the ground state. It should be noted, however, that no ground state charge-transfer interactions were detectable. (4)Intermolecular electron transfer reactions were also studied with ZnP (i.e., eqn (5)) and ZnPc (i.e., eqns (6) and (7))—but in their triplet excited state.24,25 Studies with ZnPc unravel an interesting twist.25 Excitation of C60 in polar benzonitrile gives rise to the rapid formation of the C60 and ZnPc diagnostic π-radical anion and π-radical cation bands, respectively. In non-polar solvents—as a direct consequence of raising the energy levels for the charge separated radical pair—the electron transfer is shut off and, instead, the intriguing energy transfer route is activated. (5) (6) (7a) (7b)
Linearly shaped charge-transfer systems—fullerenes
As far as intramolecular electron transfer reactions are concerned, marked effects were seen in a study in which we probed a ZnP–C60 conjugate with van der Waals contacts—see Scheme 3.26,27 The short separation (Ree) of ∼3.0 Å guaranteed that an intramolecular charge-separation succeeds in virtually any solvent and dominates over the competing energy transfer. The rapid formation and decay of ZnP˙+ between 670–680 nm and C60˙− around 900 nm in toluene testifies to the charge separation and charge recombination processes, respectively. Now, the systematic change in solvent polarity, for example, from non-polar toluene to polar benzonitrile, provided the powerful means to alter the free energy changes over a wide range—no change in the chemical structure deemed necessary. Indeed, a marked acceleration of the charge recombination rates was seen at smaller −ΔG°CR, namely, at higher dielectric constants, which corroborated our working hypothesis. To illustrate this, the lifetimes varied over a wide range: 619 ps (toluene) to 38 ps (benzonitrile). Most importantly, correlating log kET with −ΔG°ET (i.e., charge separation and charge recombination) and fitting of the resulting parabolic dependence yielded an experimental λ-value of 0.86 eV. The delocalization of electrons in C60, provided by its large three-dimensional π-system, leads to the conclusion that the reorganization energy in the ZnP–C60 systems is not receptive towards large changes in the solvent polarity in going, for example, from toluene and THF to benzonitrile. Accordingly, the reorganization energies of the ZnP–C60 conjugate are reasonably assumed to be comparable in the different solvents.
 Scheme 3  π-stacked ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugate. 
Next, linear arrays were tested in which a systematic variation of Ree separating the donor (ZnP) from the acceptor (C60), to about 11.9 Å, leads to lifetimes of up to 2.7 μs in deoxygenated THF.28 Notably, ZnP–C60 conjugates (Scheme 4), whose donor-acceptor distances fall essentially in between these limits—3.0 and 11.9 Å—reveal lifetimes that are typically on the order of several tens to hundreds of picoseconds.29–31 In THF, values of 45 ps, 89 ps, 100 ps and 398 ps document some interesting trends: placing the same bridge at different positions of the porphyrin (i.e., meso- versus pyrrole-position) and/or using different bridges (i.e., ethynylene versus phenyleneethynylene) impacts the electronic coupling element (V).
 Scheme 4  Leading examples of short distance ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugates. 
The reorganization energies describe a fundamental distance dependence: first they drop from 0.82 eV at Ree = 3.0 Å to ∼0.5 eV at Ree = 6.18 Å and after that they steadily increase to 0.66 eV at Ree = 11.9 Å. The electronic coupling, on the other hand, decreases monotonically with distance throughout the series, from 415 cm−1 at Ree = 3.0 Å to 3.9 cm−1 at Ree = 11.9 Å.
Similar effects were also seen for several H2P–C60 conjugates.28,29 An important consideration implies, however, that the higher oxidation potential of the H2P˙+/H2P couple relative to that of ZnP˙+/ZnP of around 200 mV, would allow storing a larger fraction of the excited state energy as chemical potential in the charge-separated state. Slower kCS and kCR are logical consequences that stem from the energy gap variation in H2P–C60versus ZnP–C60 ensembles. For the pyrrole linked H2P–C60 and ZnP–C60, which are compared in Scheme 5, radical ion pair state lifetimes of 290 ps and 50 ps, respectively, have been reported.
 Scheme 5  Energetic and mechanistic comparison between ZnP–C60 and H2P–C60 charge-transfer conjugates. 
In an extension of that work, we reported on the first comprehensive assay of λ for intramolecular electron transfer involving C60 and planar naphthalenediimide (NIm).32 In this context we probed a series of ZnP–C60 and ZnP–NIm conjugates endowed with similar rigid spacers. Importantly, in all ZnP–C60 the value of kCS is much larger than the value of kCR. Conversely, kCR in the corresponding NIm-based dyad, ZnP–NIm, is much larger than kCS, as determined by picosecond transient absorption spectrum and the decay of the ZnP fluorescence. λ and V are obtained from the intercept and the slope as 0.59 ± 0.15 eV and 7.9 ± 1.7 cm−1, respectively. A linear correlation was also obtained for ZnP–Nlm, which afforded a much larger λ (1.41 ± 0.33 eV) together with a comparable V (7.8 ± 3.2 cm−1). Such an extraordinary large difference in λ between the C60 and NIm conjugates is the reason why the kCS/kCR ratios are reversed in the two electron donor-acceptor conjugates and why the difference in charge recombination is as large as four orders of magnitude.
Encouraged by such remarkable results, several linear triads—with Ree
					∼ 30.3 Å—and tetrads—with Ree
					∼ 48.9 Å—were designed around the ZnP/C60 couple.33 The first promising results stem from a set of molecular triads in which C60 is linked either to an array of two porphyrins (i.e., ZnP–H2P) or to a Fc–ZnP fragment—see Scheme 6. In ZnP–H2P–C60, the ZnP moiety performs as an antenna molecule, transferring its singlet excited state energy to H2P. In polar benzonitrile, this energy transfer is followed by a sequential electron transfer yielding ZnP–H2P˙+–C60˙− and subsequently ZnP˙+–H2P–C60˙−. Considering the overall efficiency of 40% for (i) funnelling light from the antenna chromophore (i.e., ZnP) to the H2P chromophore, (ii) charge injection into the fullerene core and (iii) charge shift, this artificial reaction center reproduces the natural system very well.
 Scheme 6  Leading examples of long distance C60 charge-transfer conjugates: ZnP–C60, Fc–ZnP–C60, ZnP–H2P–C60 and Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60. 
The lifetimes of ZnP˙+–H2P–C60˙− correlate well with the solvent polarity: 34 μs (THF), 21 μs (benzonitrile), 20 μs (DMF). Since the driving force for charge recombination (−ΔG°CR) decreases even in ZnP–H2P–C60 with increasing solvent polarity, the observed trend suggests that the measured rate constants are in the Marcus inverted region.
The function of the Fc–ZnP–C60 and Fc–H2P–C60 systems is limited to two consecutive electron transfers, yielding Fc˙+–ZnP–C60˙− and Fc˙+–H2P–C60˙− in nearly 82 and 25%, respectively. In oxygen-free benzonitrile, Fc˙+–ZnP–C60˙− (1.3 × 105 s−1) and Fc˙+–H2P–C60˙− (1.2 × 105 s−1) decay, however, considerably faster than what is seen for ZnP˙+–H2P–C60˙− (4.8 × 104 s−1). Taking into account the similarity in molecular structure and separation, Ree = 30.3 Å, the different thermodynamics must be responsible for this intrinsic behavior. In fact, variation of −ΔG°CR (i.e., comparing THF and DMF) indicated that the electron transfer kinetics within the Fc˙+/C60˙− couples are in the Marcus normal region.
Successful mimicry of the primary events in photosynthesis using ZnP–H2P–C60 and Fc–ZnP–C60 encouraged us to combine these two systems into integrated single conjugates: Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60 and Fc–ZnP–ZnP–C60. The lifetimes of the spatially separated (Ree = 48.9 Å) radical pairs, the products of a sequence of energy and multistep electron transfer reactions, reaches well beyond milliseconds (Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60: 0.38 s; Fc–ZnP–ZnP–C60: 1.3 s), into a time domain, which has never been accomplished so far in artificial photosynthetic reaction centers. The lifetime is comparable, for example, to the lifetimes of ∼1 s in the bacteriochlorophyll dimer radical cation ((Bchl)2˙+)–secondary quinone radical anion (QB˙−) ion pair in the purple bacterial photosynthetic reaction center.
The aforementioned cases demonstrate our success in controlling the radical ion pair state lifetime in C60-containing electron donor–acceptor conjugates more or less at will. Placing donor and acceptor moieties in positions that they either assume van der Waals contacts or that they are separated by 5 nm impacts the lifetime values by nearly nine orders of magnitude. Key to this fundamental breakthrough is the choice of intervening spacers that mediate charges poorly. In fact, an electronic dumping factor (β) of 0.6 Å−1 was determined when correlating the radical ion pair state lifetimes in ZnP–C60, ZnP–H2P–C60 and Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60.
Notably, integrating spacers that provide better conductance paths, as found in oligo(para-phenylene vinylene) (i.e., β = 0.02 Å−1)34 or oligo(para-phenylene ethynylene) (i.e., β = 0.32 Å−1)30,35, accelerates the charge transfer. Scheme 7 summarizes some leading examples. This holds likewise for kCS and kCR. At comparable donor–acceptor distances—Ree
					∼ 39 Å—a lifetime of only 1.1 μs emerges, which is six orders of magnitude lower than those found in Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60 or Fc–ZnP–ZnP–C60. Somewhat larger are, however, the attenuation factors (i.e., β = 0.06 ± 0.005 Å−1) found for oligoalkyne bridges.31
 Scheme 7  Leading examples of molecular wire ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugates: oligo(para-phenylene vinylene), oligoalkyne and oligo(para-phenylene ethynylene). 
When comparing ZnP–C60 or H2P–C60 conjugates with the related ZnPc–C60 or H2Pc–C60 conjugates, a number of key differences should be highlighted.36 Firstly, significant red-shifts of the visible absorption features are established (i.e., ∼600 nm versus
					∼700 nm). This favors unquestionably the utilization of light in the range of highest solar flux. Secondly, enhanced absorption cross-sections in the visible range of the solar spectrum (i.e., ε
					∼10 000 M−1 cm−1versus ε > 200 000 M−1 cm−1) enhance the light harvesting in general. Thirdly, larger energy gaps (i.e., −ΔG°CS < 0.7 eV versus
					−ΔG°CS > 0.7 eV) and faster rates evolve for the charge separation processes, which, in turn, assist in suppressing alternative deactivation channels for the singlet excited state, such as radiative and non-radiative decays. Finally, smaller energy gaps for the charge recombination step (i.e., −ΔG°CR) pulls these processes closer to the top of the Marcus parabola and, therefore, destabilizes the radical ion pair states. In this context, ZnP–C60 and ZnPc–C60, which are compared in Scheme 8, give rise to radical ion pair lifetimes in THF of 50 ps and 49 ps, respectively.35
 Scheme 8  Energetic and mechanistic comparison between ZnP–C60 and ZnPc–C60 charge-transfer conjugates. 
Spherically-shaped charge-transfer ensembles: fullerenes
A first report on spherically-shaped ensembles documents the development of novel dendritic macromolecules, which form highly stable supramolecular hybrids with C60 in a well-defined fashion by virtue of strong interactions at the focal point of the cyclodimeric porphyrin cavity. Remarkably, the observed association constants (4.3 × 104 M−1) are nearly two orders of magnitude larger than those with dendritic host molecules reported to date.37
Photochemical and photophysical properties of the triplet excited states of dendritic multiporphyrin arrays have been investigated by measuring the nanosecond transient absorption spectra in the visible and near-IR regions with changing the generation number, that is, first, third and seventh. In the presence of C60, intermolecular charge separation takes place via the triplet excited states of the porphyrin. Deceleration of the electron transfer rate constants from the first to the third generation and the acceleration from the third to the seventh generation were observed, in which the latter tendency was interpreted by considering an increase in effective encounter radius. The observed small change of the rate constants for charge recombination between the oppositely charged species with the dendrimer generation was also reasonably interpreted by taking a smaller effective radius, due to electrostatic attraction, into consideration. Dendrimer generation effect was also observed for the intermolecular hole transfer process.38
The most recent example focuses on dendritic molecules appended with multiple ZnP—ranging from 6 to 24—that trap bipyridine compounds carrying multiple C60 (i.e., one, two or three). Overall, coordination complexes are formed that bear photoactive layers consisting of spatially segregated donor and acceptor arrays on their surface. Upon increasing the number of these donor and acceptor units, the electron transfer reaction was remarkably facilitated, while the recombination of the resulting charge-separated state remained virtually intact. Within the new family, the largest kCS/kCR ratios (i.e., 3400) are found when accommodating 24 ZnP units and roughly 30 C60 units on the dendrimer surface.39
One-dimensional charge-transfer systems: carbon nanotubes
An intriguing concept involves using the surface of semiconducting and metallic CNT as templates to integrate porphyrins or phthalocyanines that serve as visible light harvesting chromophores.
A first example reports on the efficient covalent tethering of SWNT with porphyrins through the esterification of SWNT-bound carboxylic acid groups—Scheme 9. Based on the initially established approach, the surface bound carboxylic acid groups were produced by acid treatment. In particular, the work started with two porphyrin derivatives containing terminal hydroxyl groups [5-(p-hydroxyhexyloxyphenyl)-10,15,20-tris(p-hexadecyloxyphenyl)-21H,23H-porphine] and [5-(p-hydroxymethylphenyl)-10,15,20-tris(p-hexadecyloxyphenyl)-21H,23H-porphine].40 FTIR and thermal analysis indicated that amide or ester bonds were formed to bridge between the excited state electron donor and the SWNT. In the corresponding electron donor–acceptor nanoconjugates (i.e., SWNT–H2P), the photoexcited porphyrins deactivate through a transduction of excited state energy. Interestingly, the rates and efficiencies of the excited state transfer depend on the length of the tether that links the porphyrins with the SWNT. Thus, materials with shorter tethers showed the least fluorescence quenching.
 Scheme 9  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanoconjugates: SWNT–H2P and SWNT–ZnP. 
Extending the scope of the aforementioned work, the carboxylic functionalities proved to be convenient for linking 5-p-hydroxyphenyl-10-15-20-tritolylporphyrin to either SWNT or MWNT.41 According to thermogravimetric analyses, the amount of grafted porphyrins was estimated to range from 8 to 22%, depending on the initially-employed porphyrin concentrations.
Unsymmetrically-substituted aminophthalocyanines ZnPc were linked to SWNT through a reaction of the terminal carboxylic acid groups of shortened, chemically-etched SWNT.42 However, the resulting materials are nearly insoluble in common organic solvents. The solubility/dispersability of the SWNT–ZnPc conjugates is, however, an indispensable task for a ready manipulation and a feasible solution phase processing.
Quite different is the approach represented in Scheme 10, which involves SWNT functionalization, namely, placing pyridyl isoxazolino functionalities along the sidewalls of short SWNT.43 The synthesis is based on the 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of a nitrile oxide onto SWNT. The resulting SWNT-py form complexes with ZnP. Formation of the SWNT-py/ZnP complex was firmly established by a detailed electrochemical study. However, photochemical excitation of the complex between SWNT-py/ZnP does not lead to electron transfer with the generation of charge-separated states. Fluorescence and laser flash studies indicate that the main process is energy transfer from the singlet excited state of ZnP to SWNT-py.
 Scheme 10  SWNT-py/ZnP charge-transfer nanoconjugate. 
SWNT functionalization is also the basis when applying Suzuki coupling reactions (Scheme 9).44 Recent work documents that this type of coupling reaction represents an efficient method for introducing ZnP onto the SWNT sidewalls. Despite all perceptions, covalently functionalized SWNT were found to serve as efficient quenchers even after their perfectly conjugated sidewall structure has been disrupted.
Still an important consideration when associating CNT with electron donor building blocks, is to preserve—as much as possible—the unique electronic structures of the CNT. A versatile approach involves grafting SWNT with polymers such as poly(sodium 4-styrenesulfonate) (SWNT–PSSn−) with a SWNT-to-PSSn− ratio of 55 : 45—see Scheme 11.45 The attached PSSn− functionalities also assist in exfoliating individual SWNT–PSSn− from the larger bundles. AFM and TEM analysis corroborated the presence of SWNT with lengths reaching several micrometers and diameters around 1.2 nm. A Coulomb complex formation was achieved with SWNT–PSSn− and an octapyridinium H2P salt (H2P8+). Several spectroscopic techniques such as absorption, fluorescence, and TEM were used to monitor the complex formation between SWNT–PSSn− and H2P8+, yielding SWNT–PSSn−/H2P8+. Importantly, photoexcitation of H2P8+ results in the newly-formed nanohybrid structure; an efficient intrahybrid charge separation event (0.3 ns). The charge separation is governed by a large thermodynamic driving force of 0.81 eV. The newly-formed radical ion pair exhibits a remarkably long lifetime of 14 μs under anaerobic conditions, which constitutes one of longest reported for any CNT ensemble found so far.
 Scheme 11  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanoconjugates: SWNT–PSSn−/H2P8+ and SWNT–PVP/ZnP. 
Similarly, dispersable SWNT—grafted with poly(4-vinylpyridine)—were tested in coordination assays with ZnP.46 Grafting of the polymer to the sidewalls of SWNT was supported by Raman and near-IR spectra and the composition of the resulting SWNT–PVP was estimated as 61/39. AFM images and Raman spectra showed that the covalently-modified SWCNT-PVP (Scheme 11) exhibits either individual or thin bundles of SWNT. Kinetic and spectroscopic evidence corroborates the successful formation of SWNT–PVP/ZnP nanohybrids in solutions. Within this SWNT–PVP/ZnP nanohybrid, static electron transfer quenching 2.0 (± 0.1) × 109 s−1 converts the photoexcited ZnP chromophore into a microsecond-lived radical ion pair state; that is, one-electron oxidized ZnP and reduced SWNT.
A series of SWNT that are functionalized with PAMAM dendrimers were recently described.47 Importantly, the dendrimers are linked directly to the SWNT surface using a divergent methodology. This approach allows increasing the number of functional groups on the nanotubes without provoking significant damages to the conjugated π-system of SWNT. Scheme 12 shows that several tetraphenylporphyrin moieties can be linked to the periphery of the dendrimers. The photophysical properties of the resulting nanoconjugates (i.e., SWNT–(H2P)n) have been investigated with a series of steady state and time resolved spectroscopy. The fluorescence kinetics provide evidence for two transient decays: one very short-lived (i.e., 0.04 ± 0.01 ns) and one long-lived (i.e., 8.6 ± 1.2 ns). A possible explanation is that some porphyrin units do not interact with the nanotubes, thus exhibiting a fluorescence lifetime similar to that of the free porphyrin. Complementary transient absorption measurements not only corroborate the fast decay of the photoexcited H2P, but also confirm that intraconjugate charge separation evolves from the excited porphyrin to the SWNT.
 Scheme 12  Dendritic SWNT–(H2P)n charge-transfer nanoconjugate. 
Molecular organization: fullerenes
Organizing nanometer scale carbon structures with electron donor components that are dissimilar and sometimes incompatible brings about novel structural features, physical properties, and complex functions. These arise from the synergetic interactions of the individual constituents. The excitement about using biological organization principles stems from the ability to self-assemble and organize at near-atomic precision into structures with useful and predictable properties. In addition, the ability of certain biological systems to handle enormous amounts of data and compute at high speeds should be considered. Biological methods are often more efficient, environmentally friendly, and overall superior to current technology.
C60 is a strongly hydrophobic and bulky compound. This all-carbon cage is virtually insoluble in polar media and has an equally strong and evident penchant towards solvents able to establish interactions with its π-electron system. Attaching polar/hydrophilic functionalities has also become a critical element to promote and modulate supramolecular aggregation; a process where factors such as growth, arrangement, and dimensions are being regulated. Solid samples of such functionalized fullerene can be directly introduced in aqueous media. The individual molecules extracted from amorphous solids diffuse into the liquid phase. Dipolar interactions between the ionic moiety and water molecules are responsible for the solvation process, which is usually further increased by ultrasonic treatment. In contrast, the lack of dipolar interactions completely prevents dissolution of pristine fullerenes.
Solvent variations promote the self assembly—into either nanorods or vesicles—of fullerenes functionalized with an ionic group.48 This notion was confirmed through the investigation of the supramolecular behavior in aqueous media of three C60 derivatives (Fig. 3). When the fullerene core carries a short organic side-chain, which is terminated by an ionic ammonium group—after solubilization assisted by ultrasonication—exclusively spherical nanostructures with an average diameter of 800 nm are noted (Fig. 3a).
 Fig. 3  Ordering fullerene materials at nanometer dimensions. 
Next, we look at fullerene derivatives that carry a long side-chain (Fig. 3b and c). In one of them, a second charge is located on the nitrogen atom of the pyrrolidine ring, which was introduced to enhance its hydrophilicity and therefore its solubility in water. Differently from the aforementioned case, these two systems form rod-like supramolecular nanostructures. The nanorods are several microns long, have a diameter of about 4 nm and form uniform bundles. These observations corroborate the hypothesis that the size of the functional group attached to C60 determines the shape of the final aggregate.
All the molecules discussed above have two elements of ordering, the hydrophobic fullerene cage and the hydrophilic ionic group. In the following, a third element of ordering was added. It is known that porphyrin and/or phthalocyanine groups favor π-stacking interactions among themselves and with fullerenes. Sonication-assisted solubilization of C60–H2P salt (Scheme 13) in water led to a completely different nanostructure. The one-dimensional nanotubules have uniform dimensions typically reaching 30 nm in diameter and 500 nm in length. In this case, the strong interactions that favor the formation of nanoaggregates are either porphyrin–porphyrin or C60–porphyrin and are several times larger than the C60–C60 interactions.
 Scheme 13  Leading examples of amphiphilic C60 charge-transfer conjugates: H2P–C60 and ZnPc–C60 salts. 
Induction of self organization between ZnPc and C60 moieties in an amphiphilic ZnPc–C60 salt, which occurs predominantly through intermolecular forces, results in uniformly nanostructured one-dimensional nanotubules.49 Their photoreactivity, in terms of an ultrafast (i.e., ∼1012 s−1) charge separation and ultraslow charge recombination (i.e., ∼103 s−1), is remarkable. In addition, the observed ZnPc˙+–C60˙− lifetime of 1.4 ms implies, relative to the monomeric ZnPc–C60, an impressive stabilization of six orders of magnitude. Clearly, the charge separation lifetime found in ZnPc–C60 one-dimensional nanotubules reaches into a time domain typically found in thin solid films of donor acceptor composites.
Control over molecular organization is also accomplished when spreading solutions of amphiphilic fullerene derivatives at the air-water interface.50,51 In fact, a single monolayer, tightly packed coverage was only found when the balance between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity is appropriate. Notably, the balance between hydrophobic and hydrophilic interactions is so delicate that it was possible to trigger and observe phase transitions (i.e., structural rearrangements) in the monolayers. At first glance, the products of the cooperative rearrangements are uniformly oriented rods. They are several hundred micrometers long and have an outside diameter of ∼1.1 ± 0.2 μm. A closer look reveals that the inner structure depend on the hydrophilic functionality. For instance, the all equatorial e,e,e-C60[C(COOH)2]3 leads to rods that are formed from well-ordered layers where the fullerenes arrange into a hexagonal pattern. Of equal importance are side groups, which govern the supramolecular organization. The presence of six polar termini in e,e,e-C60[C(COOH)2]3, in the all-equatorial arrangement, promotes the formation of hexagonal patterns.
An alternative to force structural ordering in solution or at the air–water interface (vide infra) is the use of polyelectrolyte surfaces. Here, an important requisite is the presence of ionic functionalities in the molecule. Pyrrolidinium ions, which add amphiphilic character to C60, are probate means.52 Orderly assemblies were found in cases that are either flexible (i.e., oligoethylene glycol bridges) or rigid (i.e., androstane bridge), but strong differences emerge. For the flexible system, topographic images of the surfaces show fine-grained structures—with two-dimensional aggregates of 20–50 nm sizes—that develop into a continuous uniform film. A surprisingly high level of intermolecular organization characterized by linear aggregates, typically 10 nm in height and 1–3 μm in length, emerge for the rigid system. The organization is the outcome of the structural anisotropy, which is larger for the rigid compound. Importantly, water inhibits the formation of the rods, and films with regular grain morphology (i.e., 20–50 nm-sized nanoaggregates) are obtained. When only 10 vol% of water is added to the DMSO solution, an intermediate morphology appeared characterized by a two-dimensional network of spaghetti.
Molecular organization: carbon nanotubes
While supramolecular interactions play only a secondary role when dealing with fullerenes, they have been implemented as a major player in the field of CNT, especially in the context of dispersing CNT.
As a leading example our recent success in the facile supramolecular association of pristine SWNT with linearly-polymerized porphyrin polymers towards versatile electron donor–acceptor nanohybrids should be considered.53 The target SWNT nanohybrids, which are dispersable in organic media, were realized through the use of soluble and redox-inert poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) bearing surface immobilized porphyrins (i.e., H2P–polymer). Conclusive evidence for H2P–polymer/SWNT interactions came from absorption spectroscopy: the fingerprints of SWNT and H2P-polymer are discernable throughout the UV, VIS, and NIR part of the spectrum. A similar conclusion was also derived from TEM and AFM. AFM images illustrate, for example, the debundling of individual SWNT. An additional feature of H2P–polymer/SWNT is an intrahybrid charge separation, which has been shown to last for 2.1 ± 0.1 μs.
Following an essentially similar strategy, SWNT were found to strongly interact with a highly soluble, conjugated ZnP–polymer,54 a novel triply fused ZnP–trimer,55 and just ZnP56 (Scheme 14)—a rare earth phthalocyanine (i.e., HErPc2)57 and a tetraformylporphyrin/diaminopyrene polymer58 were also tested. Successful complexation with, for example, the ZnP–polymer was manifested in a 127 nm bathochromic shift of the Q-band absorption. Additional evidence for interactions between the ZnP–polymer, ZnP–trimer and ZnP and SWNT was obtained from fluorescence spectra, where the ZnP fluorescence was significantly quenched. The fluorescence quenching has been ascribed to energy transfer between the photoexcited porphyrin and SWNT.
 Scheme 14  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanohybrids: SWNT/ZnP, SWNT/ZnP-trimer and SWNT/ZnP-polymer. 
Generally, SWNT interactions with H2P turned out to be appreciably stronger than what is typically seen when employing ZnP.56 AFM images of, for example, SWNT/H2P revealed smaller bundle sizes than those recorded for SWNT/ZnP with even some individual specimen (i.e., diameters of 1.5 ± 0.2 nm). Overall, SWNT/H2P interactions open the way to suspensions that are more stable than those of SWNT/ZnP.
The trend of stability was further corroborated with a water-soluble H2P derivative, namely, [meso-(tetrakis-4-sulfonatophenyl) porphine dihydrochloride].59 In these SWNT suspensions, which were shown to be stable for several weeks, eminent interactions protect H2P against protonations to the corresponding diacid. Moreover, these strongly interacting hybrids have been successfully aligned onto hydrophilic polydimethylsiloxane surfaces by flowing SWNT solutions along a desired direction and then transferred to silicon substrates by stamping.
Of interest is the following work: SWNT were effectively worked-up with H2P–[5,10,15,20-tetrakis(hexadecyloxyphenyl)-21H,23H-porphine].60 The insoluble and recovered SWNT were separated from H2P by treatment with acetic acid and vigorous centrifugation. After heating the recovered SWNT and the free SWNT to 800 °C in a nitrogen atmosphere, the spectroscopic analysis showed that the semiconducting SWNT and the free SWNT are enriched in recovered and metallic SWNT, respectively. We must assume selective interactions between H2P and semiconducting SWNT as the inception to a successful separation of metallic and semiconducting nanotubes.
Ionic pyrene derivatives (i.e., 1-(trimethylammonium acetyl) pyrene (pyrene+)—Scheme 15) were used to solubilize SWNT through π–π interactions with solubilities as high as 0.2 mg ml−1 and a stability that reaches several months under ambient conditions without showing any apparent precipitations.61 In terms of electronic interactions between the two π-systems, the most important data stem from steady-state voltammetry with SWNT/pyrene+: large potential shifts of 0.4 V with respect to free pyrene+. Now that the surface of SCNT is covered with positively-charged ionic head groups, van der Waals and electrostatic interactions are utilized to complex oppositely-charged electron donors. Water-soluble porphyrins 5,15-bis-[2′,6′-bis-2″,2″-bis-(carboxy)-ethyl-methyl-4′-tert-butyl-pheny]-10,20-bis-(4′-tert-butylphenyl) porphyrin octasodium (H2P8−) salt and the related zinc complex (ZnP8−) were selected as ideal candidates for the development of SWNT-based photo-active systems. In the composite systems, fluorescence and transition absorption studies showed rapid intrahybrid electron transfer (0.2 ± 0.05 ns). The driving force for photoinduced electron transfer reactions is appreciably large with values around 1.0 eV. The differential absorption changes of the SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8− or SWNT/pyrene+/H2P8− assemblies are governed by broad absorptions in the visible spectrum between 600–800 nm because of ZnP8−- or H2P8−-centered redox products.
 Scheme 15  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanohybrids: SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8− and SWNT/pyrene−/ZnP8+. 
Multiple concentric cylindrical graphitic tubes MWNT are more suitable for achieving charge transfer and charge transport. MWNT interact similarly to SWNT with pyrene+ and produce stable nanocomposites.62 Interestingly, a better delocalization of electrons in MWNT helps to significantly enhance the stability of the radical ion pair (5.8 ± 0.2 microseconds) relative to the analogous SWNT (0.4 ± 0.05 microseconds). Percolation of the charge inside the concentric wires in MWNT decelerates the decay dynamics that are associated with the charge recombination.
Applying similar π–π interactions, SWNT were integrated with a series of negatively-charged pyrene derivatives (pyrene−), such as 1-pyreneacetic acid, 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid, 1-pyrenebutyric acid, 8-hydroxy-1,3,6-pyrenetrisulfonic acid and a series of water soluble, positively-charged porphyrins into functional nanohybrids through a combination of associative van der Waals and electrostatic interactions.63 Solubilities of SWNT/pyrene− nanocomposites were around 2.0 mg mL−1. The resulting nanohybrids were photoexcited with visible light, and found to behave similar to the previously described systems.

Thin-film photovoltaics and photoelectrochemical cells. 
The requirement to develop inexpensive renewable energy sources has stimulated new approaches for the production of efficient, low cost organic photovoltaic devices.1 Particular attention has been drawn in recent years towards developing bulk heterojunction organic solar cells, which possess an active layer of a conjugated polymer as electron donor. Here, nanometer scale carbon structures—C60 and CNT—usually serve as electron acceptors.64 The quest is to integrate carbon nanostructures together with porphyrins or phthalocyanines into multifunctional hybrid cells that reveal considerable promise for applications as photochemical energy conversion systems. Please note that sometimes very different photocurrent characterization conditions (i.e., light power, intensities, size of the cells, etc.) were used, which limits a meaningful comparison.

Thin-film photovoltaics
Thin-film photovoltaics made from bulk heterojunctions are made by drop casting or spin-coating. The morphology of the active layer in these devices has garnered particular interest because electron transfer from the donating polymer to the accepting fullerene occurs over a distance of ca. 10 nm, suggesting that an interpenetrating network of that length scale is necessary for maximum device performance.65
A first demonstration of a working solar cell—Scheme 16—using ZnPc–C60 as the active material led to power conversion efficiencies under simulated solar illumination of 0.02%.66 This is a promising result for application of ZnPc–C60 to photovoltaics. Increasing the C60 content—similar to in C60/polymer blends—prompted us to create and test a ZnPc–(C60)2.67 Here, notable charge transport problems were, however, hampering meaningful improvements of the device performance.
 Scheme 16  Leading examples of ZnPc–C60 charge-transfer conjugates for photovoltaic cells: ZnPc–C60, ZnPc–(C60)2 and ZnPc/C60 polymer. 
An improvement was noted in a ZnPc/C60 polymer material that is based on a polynorbornene framework to which the photo- and electroactive ZnPc and C60 are randomly attached as pendant units.68 This material has been prepared by ring-opening metathesis polymerisation. Moderate power conversion efficiencies of ∼0.04% demonstrate this trend.
Photoelectrochemical cells
Self assembled monolayers of ZnP/C60 and H2P/C60 conjugates (i.e., covalent), is by far the most frequently and systematically studied approach for the construction of nanostructured photoelectrodes.69 In particular, covalently linked dyad and triad conjugates involving porphyrins and C60 with a thiol functionality have been self assembled onto gold electrodes for photocurrent measurements. Cathodic photocurrents were observed upon irradiation of the modified gold electrodes, in which ZnP-containing cells revealed better performance than the analogous H2P cells. Further performance improvements were noted when boron dipyrrin was coassembled as an antenna—improving the absorption in the green and in the blue region.70 However, strong excited state quenching of the porphyrin by the gold surface is the limiting factor that prevents attaining higher charge separation quantum yields.
Highly transparent (>90%) and conductive indium tin oxide (ITO) support electrodes are much better suited for nanostructured photoelectrodes than the aforementioned gold electrodes, due to the lack of porphyrin singlet excited state quenching.71 Thiol or siloxy groups were chosen as chemical linkers that help to bind, for example, H2P–C60 conjugates (Scheme 17) to the electrode surface. In the case of siloxy groups, the conjugates contain two linkers for connecting the H2P and C60 moieties and enforcing them essentially to similar geometries of the donor–acceptor couple, and two linkers to ensure the attachment of the dyads to the ITO surface with two desired opposite orientations.72 Placing C60 between ITO and H2P shows photocurrents that are 25 times higher than that for the reversed ordering. Among the fullerene–porphyrin conjugates that bear multiporphyrin arrays/dendrimers H2P instead of ZnP led to higher photocurrent conversion efficiencies.
More recently, a self assembled monolayer of a ZnP–C60 conjugate, in which a triosmium carbonyl cluster moiety links C60 and a porphyrin unit and 3-(triethoxysilyl)propyl isocyanide as a surface anchoring ligand, is shown to exhibit the highest photocurrent efficiency ever reported for a covalently linked systems.73
 Scheme 17  Leading examples of H2P–C60 charge-transfer conjugates for photoelectrochemical cells. 
The hybrid strategy (i.e., non-covalent) is in general more promising/effective because the photocurrent conversion efficiency has often been limited by the poor vectorial electron flow in covalently linked conjugates.74 For example, non-covalent fullerene–porphyrin hybrids that rely on hydrogen bonding, van der Waals, π–π, and electrostatic interactions have been shown to be suited for the construction of nanostructured photoelectrodes. Most efficient photocurrent generations were accomplished when well tailored energy and redox gradients, in hybrid structures of fullerenes, porphyrins and ferrocenes were constructed.
An alternative concept to organic solar cells relies on the quaternary self organization of H2P and C60via their clusterization with gold nanoparticles on nanostructured SnO2 electrodes.75 First, porphyrin–alkanethiolate monolayer-protected gold nanoparticles are prepared (i.e., secondary organization) starting from the primary porphyrin–alkanethiol component. In this context, the effective π–π interactions between H2P and C60 in solutions and in the solid state are important as a means towards donor–acceptor nanoclusters that are characterized by an interpenetrating network and an enhanced light harvesting throughout the solar spectrum. In fact, the porphyrin-modified gold nanoparticles were found to form complexes with C60 (i.e., tertiary organization), and they are clustered in a solvent mixture of acetonitrile and toluene (i.e., quaternary organization). The highly colored composite clusters can then be assembled as three-dimensional arrays onto nanostructured SnO2 films to afford photoelectrodes using an electrophoretic deposition method. The corresponding films exhibit incident photon-to-photocurrent efficiencies as high as 54% and broad photocurrent action spectra. The power conversion efficiency of the composite electrode reaches as high as 1.5%, which is 45 times higher than that of the reference system, namely, the individual porphyrin and fullerene components.
A remarkably high power conversion efficiency of nearly 1.3% and a maximum incident photon-to-photocurrent efficiency of 42% were attained using composite clusters of H2P–peptide octamer and C60—without, however, the use of gold nanoparticles—see Schemes 18 and 19.76 Using a H2P-dendrimer as electron donor, the photon-to-photocurrent efficiency drops—under comparable conditions—to 15%. A reference, H2P–C60, shows only 0.4%.77
 Scheme 18  H2P–peptide octamer for photoelectrochemical cells. 
 Scheme 19  H2P–dendrimer for photoelectrochemical cells. 
Some initial promising reports on photoelectrochemical devices integrating SWNT—as electron acceptor—on ITO are based on non-covalent assembly strategies. In most of these instances, the ITO electrodes were covered with a base layer of polyelectrolyte (i.e., poly(diallyl-dimethylammonium)chloride (PDDAn+) or sodium polystyrene-4-sulfonate (PSSn−)) through hydrophobic–hydrophobic forces—Scheme 20.78,79 A proper grafting of SWNT with pyrene derivatives bearing polar functional groups permits one to disperse them in aqueous media and to assemble them electrostatically on the polyelectrolyte base layer. In the final step, water soluble but oppositely-charged porphyrins were assembled as the top layer. This approach has been extended to double wall carbon nanotubes (DWNT), MWNT and thin-MWNT. Importantly, thin-MWNT showed the best performance as electron acceptor layer material with monochromatic power-conversion efficiencies of up to 10.7% for a device that contains a single layer of thin-MWNT and a single layer of ZnP.
 Scheme 20  Leading example of a SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8− nanohybrid for photoelectrochemical cells. 
Photoelectrochemical solar cells were also designed with a light harvesting nanoarchitecture consisting of SWNT and porphyrin moieties.80 In this particular work, molecular assemblies of protonated porphyrin and SWNT were assembled as three-dimensional arrays onto nanostructured SnO2 films by an electrophoretic deposition method. The composite cluster electrode exhibits an incident photon-to-photocurrent efficiency as high as 13% under an applied potential of 0.2 V versus SCE. The dual role of SWNT in promoting photoinduced charge separation and facilitating charge transport is presented.
Summary and outlook
In summary, combining nanometer scale carbon structures—fullerenes and carbon nanotubes—with electron donor groups represents an innovative concept to solar energy harvesting systems, which leads to appreciable conversion of solar light into practical electricity.82
In this context, the delocalization of charges—electrons or holes—within the giant, spherical carbon framework of fullerenes is of great interest. It offers unique opportunities for stabilizing charged entities. Unquestionably, the most striking observation is that charge recombination in ZnP–C60 and H2P–C60 conjugates is located deep in the inverted region of the Marcus parabola, with lifetimes ranging from as short as tens of picoseconds to all the way to seconds. Please note that a time window of seconds is a time domain that has not been accomplished so far in artificial photosynthetic reaction centers.
Similarly, CNT (i.e., SWNT and MWNT) have been combined with electron donors that lead to new generations of donor acceptor nanohybrids, which, upon illumination, give rise to slow charge recombination with lifetimes typically in the range of microseconds.
The lifetimes of the charge-separated species in most of the surveyed nanometer scale carbon structures are so long that these systems are excellent candidates for the fabrication of photovoltaic devices. In fact, in first attempts the photocurrents are quite high. It is reasonable to ascribe the limitations seen in the photocurrents to (i) the efficiency of electron–hole separation at the donor–acceptor interface or (ii) the efficiency of transfer of electrons from the electron acceptor to the electron collecting electrodes. Moreover, the efficiency of electron-hole separation might depend either on the inherent energy levels of the donor and the acceptor, or on the number and distance of contacts between the donor and the acceptor.
In terms of future prospects, particularly noteworthy are single wall carbon nanohorns (SWNH) see Scheme 21. These new nanometer scale carbon structures possess high porosity and large surface areas—Scheme 21.81 SWNH are typically constituted by tubes of about 2–5 nm of diameter and 30 to 50 nm long, which associate with each other to give rise to round-shaped aggregates of 100 nm of diameter.
 Scheme 21  Molecular building blocks—single wall carbon nanohorns (SWNH)—as electron acceptors. 
Acknowledgements
This work was carried out with partial support from the SFB 583, DFG (GU 517/4-1), FCI, and the Office of Basic Energy Sciences of the U.S. Department of Energy. I am deeply indebted to Profs. Ford, Fukuzumi, Hirsch, Imahori, Jux, Kotov, Maggini, Martin, Prato, Schuster, Sessler, Torres, Valli, and Zilbermann for their productive collaborations and numerous stimulating discussions. This Invited Article is dedicated to Professor Ortwin Brede on the occasion of his 65th birthday and his retirement.
References

Basic Research Needs for Solar Energy Utilization, Report of the Basic Energy Sciences Workshop on Solar Energy Utilization April 18–21, 2005—http://www.sc.doe.gov/bes/reports/files/SEU_rpt.pdf Search PubMed.

          V. Balzani, Electron Transfer in Chemistry, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2001, vol. I–V Search PubMed .

  (a) 
            A. Hirsch and M. Brettreich, Fullerenes: Chemistry and Reactions, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            K. M. Kadish and R. S. Ruoff, Fullerenes: Chemistry, Physics, and Technology, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2000 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            D. M. Guldi and N. Martin, Fullerenes: From Synthesis to Optoelectronic Properties, Series: Developments in Fullerene Science, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  2002 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            T. Braun, Nuclear and Radiation Chemical Approaches to Fullerene Science Series: Developments in Fullerene Science, Kluwer Academic, Dordrecht,  2000 Search PubMed .

  (a) F. Diederich, L. Isaacs and D. Philp, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1994, 23, 243 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Prato and M. Maggini, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 519 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, V. Georgakilas, C. Gamboz, M.-R. Soranzo and M. Prato, Compt. Rend. Chim., 2003, 6, 597 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Synlett, 2003, 6, 768 ; 
  (e) F. Diederich and M. Gomez-Lopez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1999, 28, 263 RSC .

  (a) 
            S. Reich, C. Thomsen and J. Maultzsch, Carbon Nanotubes: Basic Concepts and Physical Properties, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus and P. Avouris, Carbon Nanotubes: Synthesis, Structure, Properties and Applications, Springer, Berlin,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            P. J. F. Harris, Carbon Nanotubes and Related Structures: New Materials for the Twenty-First Century, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, UK,  2001 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) Special issue on Carbon Nanotubes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 997 CrossRef ; 
  (e) 
            S. Roth and D. Carroll, One-Dimensional Metals: Conjugated Polymers, Organic Crystals, Carbon Nanotubes, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2004 Search PubMed ; 
  (f) 
            V. N. Popov and P. Lambin, Carbon Nanotubes, Springer, Dordrecht,  2006 Search PubMed .

  (a) T. W. Ebbesen and P. M. Ajayan, Nature, 1992, 358, 220 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Iijima and T. Ichihaschi, Nature, 1993, 364, 737 CAS ; 
  (c) C. H. C. Bethune, M. S. de Vries, G. Gorman, R. Savoy, J. Vazques and R. Beyers, Nature, 1993, 363, 605 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Zhang, T. Ichihashi, E. Landree, F. Nihey and S. Iijima, Science, 1999, 285, 1719 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. S. Gudiksen, L. J. Lauhon, J. Wang, D. C. Smith and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2002, 415, 617 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 1035 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) J. J. Davis, K. S. Coleman, B. R. Azamian, C. B. Bagshaw and M. L. H. Green, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 3733 ; 
  (e) G. G. Wildgoose, C. E. Banks, H. C. Leventis and R. G. Compton, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 152, 187 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. Hu, X. Chen and S. Hu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 586, 77 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) J. J. Gooding, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 3049 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) E. Bekyarova, M. Davis, T. Burch, M. E. Itkis, B. Zhao, S. Sunshine and R. C. Haddon, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 19717 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) G. L. Luque, N. F. Ferreyra and G. A. Rivas, Microchim. Acta, 2006, 152, 277 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (j) P. W. Barone, S. Baik, D. A. Heller and M. S. Strano, Nat. Mat., 2005, 4, 86 Search PubMed ; 
  (k) E. S. Snow, F. K. Perkins and J. A. Robinson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 790 RSC ; 
  (l) P. Calvert, Nature, 1999, 399, 210 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (n) M. M. J. Treacy, T. W. Ebbesen and J. M. Gibson, Nature, 1996, 381, 678 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (o) B. Zhao, H. Hu, S. K. Mandal and R. C. Haddon, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3235 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (p) J. N. Coleman, U. Khan and Y. K. Gun’ko, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 689 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (q) N. W. S. Kam, M. O’Connell, J. A. Wisdom and H. J. Dai, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 11600 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (r) S. J. Son, J. Reichel, B. He, M. Schuchman and S. B. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7316 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (s) C. R. Martin and P. Kohli, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2003, 2, 29 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (t) A. Bianco and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1765 CrossRef ; 
  (u) A. Bianco, K. Kostarelos and M. Prato, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2005, 9, 674 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (v) R. S. Ruoff and D. C. Lorents, Carbon, 1995, 33, 925 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (w) M. M. J. Treacy, T. W. Ebbesen and J. M. Gibson, Nature, 1996, 381, 678 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (x) M. R. Falvo, G. J. Clary, R. M. Taylor II, V. Chi, F. P. Brooks, Jr, S. Washburn and R. Superfine, Nature, 1997, 389, 582 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (y) S. G. Rao, L. Huang, W. Setyawan and S. Hong, Nature, 2003, 425, 36 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert, C. Xu, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert, G. E. Scuseria, D. Tomanek, J. E. Fischer and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1996, 273, 483 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Li, Y. Zhang and M. Zhang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 364, 328 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Yoshida and J.-I. Aihara, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 227 RSC ; 
  (c) J.-I. Aihara and H. Kanno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 398, 440 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) 
            K. Kalyanasundaram, Photochemistry of Polypyridine and Porphyrin Complexes, Academic Press,  1997 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            M. Gouterman, P. M. Rentzepis and K. D. Straub, Porphyrins: Excited States and Dynamics, ACS Symposium Series, N° 321,  1987 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) 
            D. Dolphin, The Porphyrins, Academic Press,  1978 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) 
            K. M. Kadish, K. M. Smith and R. Guilard, The Porphyrin Handbook, Academic Press,  2003 Search PubMed .

  (a) R. A. Marcus and N. Sutin, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1985, 811, 265 CAS ; 
  (b) R. A. Marcus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 1111 CrossRef .

  (a) R. C. Haddon, Acc. Chem. Res., 1988, 21, 243 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. C. Haddon, Science, 1993, 261, 1545 CAS .
L. Echegoyen and L. E. Echegoyen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1998, 31, 593 CrossRef CAS .
G. Duskesas and S. Larsson, Theor. Chem. Acc., 1997, 97, 110 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi and K.-D. Asmus, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 1472 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 695 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. McGlashen, M. E. Blackwood and T. G. Spior, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 2074 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Haddon, A. F. Hebard, M. J. Rosseinsky, D. W. Murphy, S. J. Duclos, K. B. Lyons, B. Miller, J. M. Rosamilia, R. M. Fleming, A. R. Kortan, S. H. Glarum, A. V. Makhija, A. J. Muller, R. H. Eick, S. M. Zahurak, R. Tycko, G. Dabbagh and F. A. Thiel, Nature, 1991, 350, 320 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kroto, J. R. Heath, S. C. O’Brien, S. F. Curl and R. E. Smalley, Nature, 1985, 318, 162 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Bachilo, M. S. Strano, C. Kittrell, R. H. Hauge, R. E. Smalley and R. B. Weisman, Science, 2002, 298, 2361 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Dresselaus, G. Dresselhaus, R. Saito and A. Jorio, Phys. Rep., 2005, 409, 47 CrossRef .

  (a) N. Mataga, T. Asahi, Y. Kanda and T. Okada, Chem. Phys., 1988, 127, 249 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) 
            N. Mataga and H. Miyasaka, in Electron Transfer from Isolated Molecules to Biomolecules Part 2, ed. J. Jortner and M. Bixon, Wiley, New York,  1999 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) N. Mataga, H. Chosrowjan, Y. Shibata, N. Yoshida, A. Osuka, T. Kikuzawa and T. Okada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 12422 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi and K. D. Asmus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 5744 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Fukuzumi, K. Ohkubo, H. Imahori and D. M. Guldi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2003, 9, 1585 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, P. Neta and K. D. Asmus, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4617 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka and O. Ito, J. Porphyrins Phthalocyanines, 2000, 4, 591 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. Fujisawa, Y. Ohba and S. Yamauchi, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 282, 181 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) D. M. Martino and H. van Willigen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2000, 104, 10701 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nojiri, M. M. Alam, H. Konami, A. Watanabe and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1997, 101, 7943 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) E. Dietel, A. Hirsch, E. Eichborn, A. Rieker, S. Hackbarth and B. Röder, Chem. Commun., 1998, 1981 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, M. Prato, E. Dietel and A. Hirsch, Chem. Commun., 2000, 373 RSC ; 
  (c) D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, M. Prato, A. Troisi, F. Zerbetto, M. Scheloske, E. Dietel, W. Bauer and A. Hirsch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 9166 CrossRef CAS .
N. Armaroli, G. Marconi, L. Echegoyen, J.-P. Bourgeois and F. Diederich, Chem.–Eur. J., 2000, 6, 1629 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Luo, D. M. Guldi, H. Imahori, K. Tamaki and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 6535 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori, M. E. El-Khouly, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 325 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, K. Tamaki, D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 2607 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Imahori, N. V. Tkachenko, V. Vehmanen, K. Tamaki, H. Lemmetyinen, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2001, 105, 1750 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Drovetskaya, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, Tetrahedron Lett., 1995, 36, 7971 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Kuciauskas, S. Lin, G. R. Seely, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, D. Gust, T. Drovetskaya, C. A. Reed and P. D. W. Boyd, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 15926 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lembo, P. Tagliatesta and D. M. Guldi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11424 CAS .
S. A. Vail, P. J. Krawczuk, D. M. Guldi, A. Palkar, L. Echegoyen, J. P. C. Tome, M. A. Fazio and D. I. Schuster, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 3375 CrossRef CAS .
H. Imahori, H. Yamada, D. M. Guldi, Y. Endo, A. Shimomura, S. Kundu, K. Yamada, T. Okada, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2344 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Imahori, D. M. Guldi, K. Tamaki, Y. Yoshida, C. Luo, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6617 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, H. Imahori, K. Tamaki, Y. Kashiwagi, H. Yamada, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 541 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) C. Luo, D. M. Guldi, H. Imahori, K. Tamaki and Y. Sakata, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 6535 CrossRef CAS .
F. Giacalone, J. L. Segura, N. Martin, J. Ramey and D. M. Guldi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2005, 11, 4819 CrossRef CAS .
Unpublished results.

  (a) D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, Chem. Commun., 2002, 205 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, J. Ramey, M. Victoria Martínez-Díaz, A. de la Escosura, T. Torres and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2002, 2774 RSC .
T. Nishioka, K. Tashiro, T. Aida, J.-Y. Zheng, K. Kinbara, K. Saigo, S. Sakamoto and K. Yamaguchi, Macromolecules, 2000, 33, 9182 CrossRef CAS .
H. Luo, M.-S. Choi, Y. Araki, O. Ito and T. Aida, Bull. Chem. Soc., 2005, 78, 405 Search PubMed .
W.-S. Li, K. S. Kim, D.-L. Jiang, H. Tanaka, T. Kawai, J. H. Kwon, D. Kim and T. Aida, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 10527 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, R. B. Martin, B. A. Harruff, R. A. Carino, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 896 CrossRef CAS .
D. Baskaran, J. W. Mays, X. P. Zhang and M. S. Bratcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6916 CrossRef CAS .
G. de la Torre, W. Blau and T. Torres, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 765 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Alvaro, P. Atienzar, P. de la Cruz, J. L. Delgado, H. Garcia and F. Langa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12691 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Alvaro, P. Atienzar, P. de la Cruz, J. L. Delgardo, V. Troiani, H. Garcia, F. Langa, A. Palkar and L. Echegoyen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6626 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and A. Adronov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 18, 5389 CAS .

  (a) S. Qin, D. Qin, W. T. Ford, J. E. Herrera, D. E. Resasco, S. M. Bachilo and R. B. Weisman, Macromolecules, 2004, 35, 3965 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, J. Ramey, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Qin, W. T. Ford, D. Balbinot, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2034 RSC .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, S. Qin, M. Tchoul, W. T. Ford, M. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, F. Paolucci, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 2152 CrossRef CAS .
S. Campidelli, C. Sooambar, E. Lozano-Diz, C. Ehli, D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12544 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, D. M. Guldi, M. Melle-Franco and F. Zerbetto, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 5075 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, A. Gouloumis, P. Vazquez, T. Torres, V. Georgakilas and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5811 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, Y. Tian, J. H. Fendler, H. Hungerbühler and K.-D. Asmus, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 2753 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Tian, J. H. Fendler, H. Hungerbühler, D. M. Guldi and K.-D. Asmus, Materials Science and Engineering, C, 1999, 7, 67 Search PubMed .
D. M. Guldi, M. Maggini, S. Mondini, F. Guerin and J. H. Fendler, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 1311 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, D. Koktysh, N. A. Kotov, T. Da Ros, S. Bosi and M. Prato, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 775 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, C. Luo, N. A. Kotov, T. Da Ros, S. Bosi and M. Prato, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7293 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, H. Taieb, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 871 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and A. Adronov, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 5053 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, S. Zhang, A. Adronov, L. Echegoyen and F. Diederich, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 6062 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Murakami, T. Nomura and N. Nakashima, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 378, 481 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. M. A. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 62 RSC .
L. Cao, H.-Z. Chen, H. B. Zhou, L. Zhu, J.-Z. Sun, X.-B. Zhang, J.-M. Xu and M. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 909 CrossRef CAS .
A. Satake, Y. Miyajima and Y. Kobuke, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 716 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen and C. P. Collier, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7605 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, L. Gu, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, S. Kumar, L. F. Allard and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1014 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5526 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. Ehli, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, D. M. Guldi, F. Paolucci, F. Marcaccio, D. Paolucci, M. Melle-Franco, F. Zerbetto, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 11222 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2005, 2038 RSC .

  (a) D. M. Guldi and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2517 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, N. Jux, D. Balbinot, U. Hartnagel, N. Tagmatarchis and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9830 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 11432 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori Y. Mori and Y. Matano, J. Photochem. Photobiol. C: Photochem. Rev., 2003, 4, 51 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2004, 2, 1425 RSC ; 
  (d) H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 14, 525 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Winder and N. S. Sariciftci, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1077 RSC ; 
  (b) C. J. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 15 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, P. Denk, H. Hoppe, H. Neugebauer, C. Winder, D. Meissner, C. Brabec, N. S. Sariciftci, A. Gouloumis, P. Vázquez and T. Torres, J. Mater. Chem., 2003, 4, 700 RSC .
A. Gouloumis, A. de la Escosura, P. Vazquez, T. Torres, A. Kahnt, D. M. Guldi, H. Neugebauer, C. Winder, M. Drees and N. S. Sariciftci, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5187 CrossRef CAS .
A. de la Escosura, M. V. Martínez-Díaz, R. H. Grubbs, D. M. Guldi, T. Torres, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Chem. Asian J., 2006, 1, 148 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Imahori, H. Yamada, S. Ozawa, K. Ushida and Y. Sakata, Chem. Commun., 1999, 1165 RSC ; 
  (b) H. Yamada, H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 2034 RSC .
H. Imahori, H. Norieda, H. Yamada, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki, Y. Sakata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 100 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Yamada, H. Imahori, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 892 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Yamada, H. Imahori, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9129 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Imahori, M. Kimura, K. Hosomizu, T. Sato, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki, Y. Araki, O. Ito and S. Fukuzumi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5111 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Yamada, H. Imahori, Y. Nishimura, I. Yamazaki, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9129 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chukharev, T. Vuorinen, A. Efimov, N. V. Tkachenko, M. Kimura, S. Fukuzumi, H. Imahori and H. Lemmetyinen, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 6385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Cho, T. K. Ahn, H. Song, K. S. Kim, C. Y. Lee, W. S. Seo, K. Lee, S. K. Kim, D. Kim and J. T. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 2380 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Imahori, J.-C. Liu, K. Hosomizu, T. Sato, Y. Mori, H. Hotta, Y. Matano, Y. Araki, O. Ito, N. Maruyama and S. Fujita, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2066 RSC ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, I. Zilbermann, G. A. Anderson, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, R. Tafuro and L. Valli, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 303 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Conoci, D. M. Guldi, S. Nardis, R. Paolesse, K. Kordatos, M. Prato, G. Ricciardi, M. G. H. Vicente, I. Zilbermann and L. Valli, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6523 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) T. Vuorinen, K. Kaunisto, N. V. Tkachenko, A. Efimov, H. Lemmetyinen, A. S. Alekseev, K. Hosomizu and H. Imahori, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5383 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) D. M. Guldi, I. Zilbermann, G. Anderson, A. Li, D. Balbinot, N. Jux, M. Hatzimarinaki, A. Hirsch and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2004, 726 RSC ; 
  (f) D. M. Guldi, F. Pellarini, M. Prato, C. Granito and L. Troisi, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 965 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) H. Imahori, J. C. Liu, H. Hotta, A. Kira, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano, G. Li, S. Ye, M. Isosomppi, N. V. Tkachenko and H. Lemmetyinen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18465 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14962 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Imahori, A. Fujimoto, S. Kang, H. Hotta, K. Yoshida, T. Umeyama, Y. Matano and S. Isoda, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1727 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Fujimoto, T. Hirakawa and S. Fukuzumi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1216 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, P. V. Kamat, V. Troiani, N. Solladie, T. K. Ahn, S. K. Kim, D. Kim, A. Kongkanand, S. Kuwabata and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 19 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Hasobe, H. Imahori, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 12105 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Hasobe, P. V. Kamat, M. A. Absalom, Y. Kashiwagi, J. Sly, M. J. Crossley, K. Hosomizu, H. Imahori and S. Fukuzumi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12865 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) T. Hasobe, Y. Kashiwagi, M. A. Absalom, J. Sly, K. Hosomizu, M. J. Crossley, H. Imahori, P. V. Kamat and S. Fukuzumi, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 975 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) H. Imahori, T. Hasobe, H. Yamada, P. V. Kamat, S. Barazzouk, M. Fujitsuka, O. Ito and S. Fukuzumi, Chem. Lett., 2001, 8, 784 CrossRef .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, M. Prato, N. Jux, S. Qin and W. T. Ford, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2015 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba, S. Campidelli and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2264 CrossRef .

  (a) D. M. Guldi, G. M. A. Rahman, V. Sgobba, N. A. Kotov, D. Bonifazi and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2315 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. M. A. Rahman, D. M. Guldi, R. Cagnoli, A. Mucci, L. Schenetti, L. Vaccari and M. Prato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10051 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasobe, S. Fukuzumi and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25477 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pagona, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, Y. Araki, J. Fan, N. Tagmatarchis, M. Yudasaka, S. Iijima and O. Ito, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 20729 CrossRef CAS .
N. Martín, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2093 RSC .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Molecular building blocks—C60 and single wall carbon nanotubes (SWNT)—as electron acceptors.	 

 	Scheme 2  Molecular building blocks—porphyrins (i.e., ZnP and H2P) and phthalocyanines (i.e., ZnPc and H2Pc)—as chromophores and electron donors.	 

 	Fig. 1  Profile for the free energy surfaces for electron transfer in D–A1 (A1—solid line: spherical C60) and D–A2. (A2—dashed line: planar naphthalenediimide).	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Plot of log kCSHvs. −ΔGCSH for electron transfer from C60 (circle with interior point), C76 (solid circles) and C78 (hollow circles) to arene radical cations in dichloromethane. The solid line is drawn based on the Marcus theory of electron transfer.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7a)
	(7b)

 	Scheme 3  π-stacked ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugate.	 

 	Scheme 4  Leading examples of short distance ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugates.	 

 	Scheme 5  Energetic and mechanistic comparison between ZnP–C60 and H2P–C60 charge-transfer conjugates.	 

 	Scheme 6  Leading examples of long distance C60 charge-transfer conjugates: ZnP–C60, Fc–ZnP–C60, ZnP–H2P–C60 and Fc–ZnP–H2P–C60.	 

 	Scheme 7  Leading examples of molecular wire ZnP–C60 charge-transfer conjugates: oligo(para-phenylene vinylene), oligoalkyne and oligo(para-phenylene ethynylene).	 

 	Scheme 8  Energetic and mechanistic comparison between ZnP–C60 and ZnPc–C60 charge-transfer conjugates.	 

 	Scheme 9  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanoconjugates: SWNT–H2P and SWNT–ZnP.	 

 	Scheme 10  SWNT-py/ZnP charge-transfer nanoconjugate.	 

 	Scheme 11  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanoconjugates: SWNT–PSSn−/H2P8+ and SWNT–PVP/ZnP.	 

 	Scheme 12  Dendritic SWNT–(H2P)n charge-transfer nanoconjugate.	 

 	Fig. 3  Ordering fullerene materials at nanometer dimensions.	 

 	Scheme 13  Leading examples of amphiphilic C60 charge-transfer conjugates: H2P–C60 and ZnPc–C60 salts.	 

 	Scheme 14  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanohybrids: SWNT/ZnP, SWNT/ZnP-trimer and SWNT/ZnP-polymer.	 

 	Scheme 15  Leading examples of SWNT charge-transfer nanohybrids: SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8− and SWNT/pyrene−/ZnP8+.	 

 	Scheme 16  Leading examples of ZnPc–C60 charge-transfer conjugates for photovoltaic cells: ZnPc–C60, ZnPc–(C60)2 and ZnPc/C60 polymer.	 

 	Scheme 17  Leading examples of H2P–C60 charge-transfer conjugates for photoelectrochemical cells.	 

 	Scheme 18  H2P–peptide octamer for photoelectrochemical cells.	 

 	Scheme 19  H2P–dendrimer for photoelectrochemical cells.	 

 	Scheme 20  Leading example of a SWNT/pyrene+/ZnP8− nanohybrid for photoelectrochemical cells.	 

 	Scheme 21  Molecular building blocks—single wall carbon nanohorns (SWNH)—as electron acceptors.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2007
