Dielectric materials for electrolyte gated transistor applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02271G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02271G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9348-9376Dielectric materials for electrolyte gated transistor applications

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Chen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Gang 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Yao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xinming 
            Zhuang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Robert M. 
            Pankow
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuhua 
            Cheng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tobin J. 
            Marks
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Antonio 
            Facchetti
          
          
        
      *bc
aSchool of Automation Engineering, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC), Chengdu, Sichuan 611731, China. E-mail: whuang@uestc.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemistry and the Materials Research Center, Northwestern University, IL 60208, USA. E-mail: t-marks@northwestern.edu; a-facchetti@northwestern.edu
cFlexterra Corporation, 8025 Lamon Avenue, Skokie, IL 60077, USA
Received 
      17th May 2021
    , Accepted 30th June 2021First published on 1st July 2021AbstractIn this review, we summarize the recent progress in developing dielectric materials for electrolyte gated transistors (EGTs). Semiconductors for EGTs have been extensively studied and reviewed since they dominate the key transport properties of these types of transistors. However, the electrolyte dielectric component of these devices is equally important since it provides ionic displacement dominating the device capacitance, driving voltage, and switching times, and determines how to integrate EGTs in/with other device components. Thus, the development of electrolyte dielectrics not only improves the EGT performance but also enables new features and opens up new possibilities for EGTs. Liquid electrolytes are more suitable for integration at the bio-interface and in sensing applications, while solid electrolytes can be printable and are compatible with circuit monolithic integration. Moreover, understanding the mechanism of electrolyte dielectric gating has also accelerated the expansion of emerging electrolyte-based electric double layer transistors (EDLTs) and electrochemical transistors (ECTs). In this review, we first discuss the structure and operation of EDLTs and ECTs, for the latter particularly those based on organic semiconductors (OECTs), since they are the major users of these materials. Next, different types of electrolyte dielectric materials are discussed, driven by relevant applications. We complete this paper with a summary and an outlook of this field.
Wei Huang
Wei Huang obtained his BS (2010) in physics from Nankai University and his PhD (2016) in optical engineering from University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). He was a postdoctoral fellow and later a research assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, under the supervision of Professor Tobin J. Marks and Professor Antonio Facchetti. Currently, he is a research professor in the School of Automation Engineering, UESTC. His research interests include flexible/stretchable electronics, transistor-based multifunctional sensors and solar cells.
Tobin J. Marks
Tobin Marks is Ipatieff Professor of Catalysis and Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. He holds a BS from the University of Maryland and a PhD from MIT. Recognitions: US National Medal of Science, ACS Priestley Medal, Spanish Asturias Prize, MRS Von Hippel Award, Dreyfus Prize in Chemical Sciences, NAS Award in Chemical Sciences, CAS President's International Distinguished Scientist Award, Israel Harvey Prize. Membership: US, European, German, Italian, and Indian Academies of Science, US NAE and NAI, American Academy of Arts and Sciences; RSC, MRS, ACS, AIC Fellow. Research interests: unconventional catalysis, soft and hard matter electronic materials, and photovoltaics.
Antonio Facchetti
Antonio Facchetti obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milan. He is a co-founder and currently the Chief Technology Officer of Flexterra Corporation and an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry at Northwestern University. Dr Facchetti has published more than 500 research articles, 14 book chapters, and holds more than 120 patents (H-index 107). He is a Fellow of the Kavli Foundation, AAAS, MRS, ACS PMSE, RSC, and the National Academy of Inventors. He has received the Italian Chemical Society Research Prize, the 2016 ACS Award for Creative Invention and the Giulio Natta Gold Medal.
1. Introduction
The development of modern electronics relies on advances in active and passive materials as well as in device engineering.1–4 New materials, including conductors, semiconductors, dielectrics, and passive materials, combined with novel device concepts not only make integrated circuits (IC) faster, cheaper and smaller, but also stimulate new applications including next-generation displays, sensors, and human–machine interfaces. Among all the electronic devices, transistors of different structures and mode of operations are among the most important electronic building blocks. For metal-oxide-semiconductor field-effect transistors (MOSFETs), the channel dimension is regarded as the major figure of merit of the central processing unit (CPU), which has now reached 5 nm in commercialized products5 and ∼1 nm in state of the art prototype circuits.6 Thin film transistors (TFTs) are used in active matrix circuits driving flat panel displays7 and key components of new types of sensors.8
In the new era of artificial intelligence and Internet of things, transistors which enable efficient human–machine interfacing, along with low power dissipation, and excellent mechanical durability are highly desirable.9–11 Electrolyte gated transistors (EGTs) are transistors that are gated with electrolytes rather than conventional solid-state gate insulators. Due to the high capacitance of the electrolyte (typically >1 μF cm−2), EGTs can be driven at low operating voltages (even lower than 1 V); moreover, since the formation of an electrical double layer (EDL) is not limited to the TFT geometry, the EGT architecture can be widely tuned based on the needs of the application, making it particularly suitable for human–machine interfacing, (bio)sensing, and flexible/stretchable circuits.12–14 The electrolyte gating effect was discovered in the 1955s by Brattain and Garrett using germanium as the semiconductor.15 However, the potential advantages of this effect, such as low operating voltages and reduced complexity of integration, have only been extensively explored recently in emerging applications, such as electrical/chemical physiological sensors, artificial neural networks, and printed circuits.16–19
After extensive research efforts, several semiconductors have been integrated into EGTs, including metal oxides (e.g., ZnO, IGZO, WO3),20–23 organics and carbonaceous materials (e.g., PEDOT:PSS, rubrene, CNTs),24–26 and two-dimensional transition metal chalcogenides (e.g., MoS2).27 Several reviews focused on the EGT's semiconductor component28,29 while others primarily addressed the applications and fields of use such as in biosensors,10,30–32 printed devices/circuits,33,34 and synaptic electronics.35,36 However, electrolyte materials, as one of the most important EGT components, have not been systematically reviewed.17,37 Thus, in this review article, we first introduce the structure and the working principles of EGTs. Next, we summarize different classes of electrolytes, including liquid-based electrolytes, polymer-based electrolytes, and oxide electrolytes. Finally, this review is concluded with a summary and an outlook.
2. Basics of electrolyte materials and electrolyte gated transistors
An electrolyte is an ionic conductor but an electronic insulator. Unlike conventional gate dielectrics for transistors, such as silicon dioxide and hafnium oxide, which are in the solid state, electrolyte dielectric materials for EGTs can be either in the form of liquids, gels, or solids. In this review we classify the electrolytes for EGTs into six different types based on their composition and physical states, as follows: type I, aqueous salt electrolytes; type II, ionic liquid (IL) electrolytes; type III, polymer electrolytes; type IV, ion gel electrolytes; type V, polyelectrolytes; and type VI, oxide electrolytes.
Representative chemical structures of these electrolyte families are shown in Fig. 1. Among them, types I and II electrolytes are in the liquid state. In aqueous salt electrolytes (type I, Fig. 1a), the cations and anions of the salt dissolved in water are typically surrounded by one or several solvation shell(s), also called the hydration shell, where the solvent molecules coordinate the ions. Different salt types and concentrations lead to different types of solvation shells greatly affecting the electrolyte properties. ILs (type II, Fig. 1b) are composed exclusively of cations and anions (Fig. 1b). ILs with different chemical structures have been synthesized and play an important role not only in the EGT field but also in other technologies such as batteries, pharmaceuticals, etc.37,39,40 Three types of electrolytes, type III–V, contain polymer species in their chemical composition. Polymer electrolytes (type III, Fig. 1c) consist of a polymer or a polymer matrix capable of supporting the transport of mobile ions. Typically, the mobile ions are salts, e.g., LiClO4, used in aqueous salt electrolytes while the most frequently used polymer is polyethylene oxide (PEO). Ion gels (type IV, Fig. 1d) are composed of a crosslinked polymer network in which an IL is incorporated. Polyelectrolytes (type V, Fig. 1e) are macromolecules that are composed of a single type of charged monomer subunits, and therefore the overall polymer is either positively or negatively charged. Thus, unlike the previously mentioned electrolytes, where both cation and anions are mobile, in polyelectrolytes only cations (in polyanions) or anions (in polycations) are mobile. Finally, oxide electrolytes (type VI, Fig. 1f), are inorganic solids capable of transporting O2− and/or cationic species such as proton (H+), Li+, Na+, and other ions. They are widely utilized in batteries and fuel cells41,42 as well as, more recently, as gate dielectrics for thin-film transistors, especially for artificial synaptic simulations.35,36,43 A representative oxide electrolyte is based on the garnet-type cubic Li7La3Zr2O12 structure which conducts Li ions.38 In Section 3, we discuss the details of each electrolyte family along with its representative applications based on the basic properties.
 Fig. 1  Illustrations of different electrolyte types. (a) Type I: aqueous salt solutions where the first solvation shells of both cations and anions are shown. (b) Type II: ionic liquids (ILs) consisting of pure cations and anions. (c) Type III: representative polymer electrolytes, where the salt cations and anions are coordinated with polyethylene oxide-like polymer chains. (d) Type IV: representative ion gel electrolytes based on an ABA triblock copolymer and IL, note that the IL is insoluble in the A blocks (maroon) and soluble in the B blocks (blue). (e) Type V: polyelectrolytes where the upper one is based on the polymerization of cations (polycation), while the lower one is based on the polymerization of anions (polyanion). (f) Type VI: a representative oxide electrolyte based on garnet-type cubic Li7La3Zr2O12,38 where the Li atoms are shown as green/white spheres. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
2.1. Key parameters of electrolyte gate dielectrics
A parallel-plate metal–insulator–metal (MIM) device, where the dielectric is sandwiched between two metal pads (Fig. 2a), is typically adopted to characterize the dielectric properties of the materials. When a voltage bias (V) is applied between the two electrodes, the dielectric polarizes due to the establishment of an electric field, which induces a net positive charge (+Q) at the interface of one electrode and a net negative charge (−Q) at that of the other electrode. The amount of charge Q stored in a capacitor is proportional to V according to eqn (1) C = Q/V = εrε0A/d(1)where C is the capacitance of the parallel-plate MIM capacitor with an electrode area of A, εr is the relative permittivity (or typically called dielectric constant), ε0 is the vacuum permittivity, and d is the thickness of the dielectric film. The capacitance per unit area (Ci), which is defined by eqn (2), is a more frequently used parameter of a dielectric. Ci = εrε0/d(2)
 Fig. 2  Structures of parallel-plate metal–insulator–metal (MIM) capacitors based on (a) conventional dielectric and (b) electrolyte dielectric materials. Schematic diagrams of (c) a planar electrode-based electrolyte capacitor, (d) capacitor with an Ag/AgCl electrode, and (e) capacitor with an electrochemically active electrode. Representative capacitances per unit area (f) and highest operatable frequencies (g) of different types of electrolytes dielectrics used in EGTs. 
There is no electrical current flowing in an ideal dielectric under any voltage bias until breakdown; however in reality, there is a certain amount of current, defined as leakage current (Ileak, or leakage current density, Jleak), flowing through the dielectric when a voltage bias is applied. Note, an exponential increase of Jleak occurs when a large enough voltage bias (or electric field, E = V/d) is applied, due to a portion of the dielectric becoming electrically conductive. This voltage/electric field is called the breakdown voltage (Vb)/breakdown electric field (Eb). Ci, Jleak, and Vb are among the most important parameters of a dielectric material when used in a transistor device, as they directly affect the device driving voltage, power dissipation and robustness of operation, and they are typically quantified by carrying out charge transport and impedance spectroscopy measurements. In order to increase Ci, high εr dielectric materials and thinner dielectric films should be used, and for thin-film transistors, this typically refers to materials with a εr greater than that of amorphous SiO2 (εr = 3.6), such as amorphous Al2O3 (εr = 9.1), and a thickness <300 nm and preferably <100 nm for SiO2. Typically, a good dielectric for TFTs should have a Jleak <1 × 10−6 A cm−2 at 2 MV cm−1 although lower numbers may be required depending on the device in which the TFT is utilized.44
Specifically for electrolyte gate dielectrics, Ci, Jleak and Vb remain important performance parameters and can be measured using similar MIM capacitor structures (Fig. 2b). However, the electrodes used in these devices are not limited to metals but can involve redox-active materials and semiconductors; thus, the capacitance of electrolyte-based capacitors also depends on the electrode materials (vide infra). When a voltage bias is applied, the electrolyte polarizes due to the migration of ions leading to the formation of two electrical double layers (EDLs) at both sides of the electrode/electrolyte interfaces of the capacitor. The EDL, which consists of ions at the interface screening the opposite charges in the electrode, can be regarded as nanometer-thick capacitors, and the EDL capacitance per unit area can be expressed using eqn (3), CEDL = εrε0/λ(3)where εr is the relative permittivity of the EDL and λ is the EDL thickness. εr and λ are different for different electrolytes, but they are typically >1 and ∼1 nm, respectively. As a result, CEDL is typically >1 μF cm−2.45,46 Consequently, Ci of an electrolyte-based MIM capacitor is expressed as two capacitors in series (eqn (4)), Ci = 1/(1/CEDL1 + 1/CEDL2)(4)where CEDL1 and CEDL2 are the two EDL capacitances on either side of the electrodes (Fig. 2b).
It is worth noting that since the formation of an EDL is not limited to a given capacitor geometry, using a parallel-plate MIM structure is not essential to extract the capacitance of an electrolyte-based dielectric. Thus, since the construction of a parallel-plate MIM structure is relatively complex, especially for the liquid electrolytes, a planar structure (Fig. 2c) or replacing one electrode film with a non-polarizable electrode, e.g. a Ag/AgCl electrode (Fig. 2d), can also be adopted to measure the electrolyte capacitance. Note in a capacitor structure comprising a non-polarizable electrode as shown in Fig. 2d, a negligible voltage drop exists at the non-polarizable side of the capacitor since the capacitance at this side can be regarded as infinitely large, thus, Ci = CEDL. On the other hand, electrochemically-active or porous electrodes could lead to the generation of a bulk EDL/doping in the electrode as shown in Fig. 2e. In this case, the charge is stored primarily in the bulk of the electrode and a more common descriptor of the charge storage capacity of the capacitor is the capacitance per unit volume (C*),47 which is given by eqn (5) C* = Ci/de(5)where de is the thickness of the electrode.

Fig. 2f compares the representative Ci values of different types of electrolytes based on a survey of the literature. It is obvious that most of the highest Ci values reported to date (>100 μF cm−2) are based on type I aqueous electrolytes. This is mostly due to research highlights for electrochemical transistors (ECT, vide infra), where electrochemically active semiconductors have been employed as one of the electrodes of the capacitor (Fig. 2e), leading to bulk charge accumulation and, thus, ultra-high Ci values. Except for the high Ci values due to the utilization of electrochemically active electrodes, the other Cis are within the range of 1–100 μF cm−2, which are dominated by the formation of the EDL. As mentioned above, CEDL depends not only on the ions of the electrolyte, but also on the electrode material. Ions with a small solvated ionic radius are likely to accumulate more efficiently at the interface with the electrode leading to a higher CEDL,48 while electrodes that are more hydrophilic would also likely accumulate more charges.49 Note that the oxide electrolytes typically exhibit a lower Ci as the relatively low ion concentration and the rigid oxide matrix at the interface with the electrode tend to reduce the active area of the EDL.
Interestingly, in most of the EGT literature, reporting and accurate estimation of the electrolyte Jleak is missing, likely because the leakage current is low as long as the operating voltage is within the highest voltage that the electrolyte can endure. Note that Jleak of electrolytes can also be accessed from the EGT off-current (IOFF) together with the channel dimensions, and has been reported to be in the range of 10−7–10−4 A cm−2, which is typically higher than that of conventional solid-state dielectrics.33 This also implies a major difference between conventional dielectrics and electrolyte dielectrics, where Eb (or Vb) is typically used to determine the electronic robustness of the conventional gate dielectrics under an electric field, and Vb can be effectively increased by simply increasing the thickness of the dielectric material. However, Vb for electrolyte dielectrics is typically independent of the film thickness/geometry, but it depends on the electrochemical potential window of the electrolyte. The typical highest voltages that can be applied to electrolytes are lower than 3 V (for aqueous electrolyte, the voltage is typically lower than 1 V; for oxide electrolyte, higher voltages of more than 5 V have been reported50) to avoid decomposition/side reactions of the electrolytes.51
The formation of the EDL relies on the drift of the mobile ions in the electrolyte under a voltage, and thus a higher ionic conductivity leads to a faster EDL formation and enables the electrolyte to work at higher operating frequencies. Obviously, compared to conventional dielectric materials, such as SiO2, the EDL formation time is much longer than that of electronic and orientational polarizations.44 Moreover, the polarization time (τ) of an electrolyte depends on the ionic conductivity (σ), thickness of the electrolyte dielectric (d) and CEDL, and is given by eqn (6),33 τ = RCEDL = dCEDL/σ(6)where R is the ionic resistance of the electrolyte. Since σ and de of an electrolyte are typically 10−7–10−1 S cm−1 and >0.1 μm, respectively, the shortest τ is in the range of ∼10−7 s. Consequently, the highest polarization frequencies for electrolyte-based electronic devices are in the MHz range, indicating that the EGT-based circuits can be used only for bio-signal monitoring, very slow switching sensors and displays, where the operation frequencies not greater than 107 Hz are required.20,52–54 Based on literature reports, the highest reported frequencies of different types of electrolytes in EGTs are summarized in Fig. 2g. It is obvious that the highest operatable frequency of ion gel electrolyte increased steadily in the past decade and now approaches 100 kHz,21,55,56 while for polymer electrolytes and polyelectrolytes, the reported frequencies are typically <10 kHz.57,58 Compared to other types of electrolytes, ion gels show high ion conductivity (10−5–10−2 S cm−1), while for polymer electrolytes and polyelectrolytes, it is only 10−7–10−4 S cm−1. Moreover, the thickness and geometry of ion gels can be well controlled compared to those of aqueous electrolytes and ILs. Consequently, short τ values are more easily accessible for ion gel electrolytes than other electrolytes.
Another important parameter of an electrolyte is the working temperature. Aqueous salt electrolytes show the narrowest working temperature dominated by the freezing and boiling points of the liquid solution. Similarly, the working temperature of ILs is also limited by their melting temperatures, which are typically around −20 °C, while the boiling point is less of a concern since it is typically >400 °C.39 For polymer electrolytes, σ is highly temperature-dependent and it increases with the temperature. Thus, the typical working temperatures for polymer electrolytes are at room temperature or higher, as long as the high temperature would not start the decomposition of the electrolyte.59 For ion gels, the working temperature is mostly dominated by the IL component and by the decomposition temperature of the polymer. The working temperature of several polyelectrolytes is less studied but it should be similar to that of polymer electrolytes and ion gels. Oxide electrolytes possess the widest working temperature range due to their thermally stable structure. Temperature as high as 700 °C can be used for some oxide electrolytes.60 Consequently, oxide electrolytes can be utilized in applications where high operating temperatures are required.
2.2. Structures and working modes of electrolyte gated transistors
In this review, we primarily focus on electrolyte gated transistors the structures of which can be similar to that of TFTs. These devices are comprised of three key essential material components, the conductor, the dielectric, and the semiconductor functioning as the source/drain/gate electrical contact, the gate electronic charge insulator, and the charge carrying channel, respectively. There are typically four TFT architectures depending on the relative arrangement of the electrical contacts and the other components (Fig. 3a–d), including the bottom gate top contact (BGTC), bottom gate bottom contact (BGBC), top gate top contact (TGTC) and top gate bottom contact (TGBC) architectures. However, the most commonly used architectures are the BGTC and TGBC ones since they typically show better transistor characteristics due to superior charge injection characteristics and, for TGBC, facile reduction of the channel length geometry.61 The most commonly used TFT materials are metals as conductors, undoped silicon, organics and metal oxides as semiconductors, and metal oxides and organic insulating polymers, mainly polyacrylates, as gate dielectrics.
 Fig. 3  Thin-film transistor architectures operating with an n-type (positive charges) semiconductor: (a) bottom gate top contact (BGTC), (b) bottom gate bottom contact (BGBC), (c) top gate top contact (TGTC) and (d) top gate bottom contact (TGBC). Note, the illustration is based on n-type TFTs, where the accumulated electrons in the channel by a positive gate bias are presented. (e) Transfer and (f) output plots of an n-type (solution processed IGZO) TFT indicating the linear and saturation regimes and how other relevant TFT performance parameters are measured. 
The characteristic that best defines a TFT is the possibility to modulate the conductivity (or electrical current) of the channel between the source and drain electrodes by using two independent electric fields (or biases), one provided by applying a bias between the source and drain electrodes (VD) and the second via the source and gate electrodes (VG). Thus, assuming a given VD, a positive/negative VG will induce negative/positive charges at the insulator–semiconductor interface for n-type and p-type TFTs, respectively, and the number of the accumulated charges depends on both VG and Ci of the gate insulator. Upon increasing both VG and VD, the current measured between the source and drain contacts (ID) will increase following two different regimes which depends on the relative strength of VDvs. VG. Thus, in the linear regime, when VD ≪ (VG − VT), ID is given by eqn (7), while in the saturation regime, when VD > (VG − VT), it is given by eqn (8), (7) (8)where μ is the field-effect mobility, VT is the threshold voltage, and W and L are channel width and length, respectively. The μ is one of the most important figures-of-merit of TFTs, while others are VT, turn-on voltage (VON), ION/IOFF ratio, and subthreshold swing (SS). These parameters can be extracted from the output (ID − VD) and transfer (ID − VG) plots (Fig. 3e and f, respectively) and additional details of TFT operation and parameter extraction models can be found in previous reviews.44,61
When using an electrolyte as the gate dielectric in EGTs, the device architecture could be similar to those reported above for a TFT but since most studies employed liquid or gel electrolytes, bottom-contact geometries with a top-gate electrode are far more common. Typical semiconductors utilized in TFTs have also been adopted in EGTs, including undoped slicon,62 oxides,34,63,64 organics,49,65,66 and two-dimensional metal chalcogenides,27,67 while source/drain electrodes are typically Au, carbon paste and conducting polymers. Regarding the gate electrode, common metal electrodes have been used but non-polarizable and electro-chemically active electrodes, such as Ag/AgCl and a PEDOT:PSS electrode, have been more commonly explored in recent years.62,68
There are two basic operation mechanisms for EGTs. In a case where the semiconductor layer is impermeable to the ions of the electrolyte and does not undergo an electrochemical reaction (Fig. 4a), the application of a VG leads to migration and accumulation of the ions at the gate/electrolyte and the semiconductor/electrolyte interfaces. The ions at these interfaces screen the charges in the gate electrode and cause accumulation of carriers in the semiconductor channel. The result is that EDLs are formed at each interface. Double layer charging in these devices is similar to that of a field-effect in TFTs. Thus, EGTs with impermeable semiconductors or with electrolyte incapable of penetrating the semiconductor are typically called electric double layer transistors (EDLTs) and we will use this terminology in this review.33
 Fig. 4  (a) A typical p-type EDLT structure with a top-gate bottom contact geometry with a semiconductor that is impermeable to ions of the electrolyte. (b) A simplified equivalent circuit of an EGT. (c) Illustration of a p-type ECT structure with the distribution of cations and anions highlighted. (d) Illustration of a p-type EDLT with a side-gate structure. 

Fig. 4b displays the simplified equivalent circuit model of an EGT showing that the total capacitance of the gate/electrolyte/semiconductor stack is the result of two CEDLs in series (similar to that in Fig. 2b), where CG and CCH are the CEDLs at the gate side and semiconductor side, respectively, REL is the electrolyte resistance, and RCH is the channel resistance that is modulated by CCH. Upon the application of a VG, the fraction of the VG that drops across the channel is controlled by the nature and geometry of the gate electrode. For efficient gating, CG must be more than ten times larger than CCH; otherwise, a large fraction of the applied VG will drop at the gate/electrolyte interface. For conventional gate electrodes based on metals, the common way to increase the capacitance is to enlarge the area of the gate electrode; however, such large gates can be technically difficult to implement for some applications; consequently, using a thick PEDOT:PSS electrode or a nonpolarizable electrode, such as Ag/AgCl, as the gate can help achieve a large CG. In this case, the voltage drop at the gate/electrolyte interface is negligible, and effective gating is achieved.32,57,69–71
To evaluate the performance of an EDLT, eqn (7) and (8) are also applicable for the calculation of μ. However, since these equations depend on Ci and since the electrolyte dielectric capacitance is strongly frequency dependent due to a relatively long τ, accurate extraction of μ in an EDLT can be challenging. A common way to minimize the calculated mobility error is to correlate the frequency of the VG sweeping to the capacitance–frequency (C–F) characteristics of the electrolyte dielectric so that a more accurate capacitance can be used for the calculation of μ.34 Thus, the transconductance (gm) is a more commonly reported parameter for EGTs, and is defined by eqn (9) gm = ΔID/ΔVG(9)which directly reflects the current sensitivity of the EGT to gate voltage variations, and circuits with EGTs having higher gm would typically show superior amplification capability.
EGTs with ion permeable and redox-active semiconductors are called electrochemical transistors (ECTs). In the case of ECTs, electrolyte ions penetrate into the semiconductor under the application of a VG, thereby changing the doping state of the semiconductor and hence its conductivity (Fig. 4c). The capacitor formed here is not based on an EDL at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface but on a volumetric capacitor (same as Fig. 2e, with C* typically larger than 10 F cm−3).32 Note that not all semiconductors can function properly in the electrochemical regime since only those capable of redox processes/bulk ion uptake from the electrolyte within the electrochemical potential window of the electrolyte exhibit electronic conductance upon gating. Nowadays, the most adopted ECT semiconductors are organic polymers,69,72,73 and some electrochemically active oxides.22,74 Typically, to evaluate whether an EGT is functioning as an EDLT or an ECT, impedance and/or cyclic voltammetry measurements are carried out.75
Since during the ECT operation ions from the electrolyte enter the channel layer and change the bulk electronic conductivity of the semiconductor, a more accurate qualification of the ECT performance is typically by normalizing gm based on the channel geometry:76,77 (10)where ds is the semiconductor film thickness. However, it is also found that gm,norm still depends on VG (in saturation) according to eqn (11),47 gm,norm = μC*(VG − VT)(11)
Consequently, μC* is also widely regarded as a major figure-of-merit in OECTs.78 In recent years, ECTs have been extensively investigated due to their outstanding gm values and excellent compatibility to biological systems.29–32,79
Since ECTs and EDLTs function on different working principles, they possess different advantages and limitations. Due to the high capacitance related to bulk electrochemical doping, high gm and the high current densities that can be achieved in ECTs, they are ideal for small signal amplification in biosensors and electrochromic elements where large currents are needed. Conversely EDLTs typically exhibit faster switching speeds and smaller I–V hysteresis compared to ECTs; thus they are more suitable for integration in logic circuits where higher frequencies are required. Moreover, since the formation of the EDL and the volumetric capacitor are not limited by the geometry of the device/electrolyte, and considering that most of the electrolytes show excellent mechanical deformation, the structure of EGTs and the location of gate are not as restricted as in TFTs. Note, while in a conventional TFT the gate is either on the top or at the bottom of the semiconducting layer (Fig. 3), the EGT architectures can be side-gated (Fig. 4d), making them ideal for various unconventional applications, including assembling with micro fluid channels/chambers,80 logic circuits,81 interfacing on live tissues,82 and integration with textiles.83
3. Electrolyte gate dielectric materials
Electrolyte materials with different chemical structures and physical states enable diverse EGT functionalities and are differently suitable for certain applications. Liquid-based electrolytes are mostly utilized in sensors, including biosensors and chemical sensors. Polymer-based electrolytes are most broadly used in EGTs, due to the tunable viscosity characteristics and processing temperatures, enabling film processing with various coating and printing techniques. Furthermore, since polymer-based electrolytes are mostly in the solid-state, they enable efficient EGT circuit integration.84 Inorganic electrolytes provide additional opportunities for EGTs thanks to their enhanced stability at high temperatures. In this section, we discuss the structures of several electrolyte material families, their current development status, major properties, and potential applications.
3.1. Liquid electrolytes
Liquid electrolytes used in EGTs can be mainly divided into aqueous salt electrolytes (type I) and ILs (type II). Fig. 5 shows the major salts used in aqueous electrolytes and the chemical structures of common ILs used in EGTs. Note, water is by far the most utilized solvent in salt electrolytes; however, other solvents such as formamide, ethanol, and propylene carbonate have also been investigated.85,86
 Fig. 5  Representative liquid electrolyte chemical structures. (a) Cations and (b) anions of salts typically used in salt electrolytes. (c) Cations and (d) anions of ILs (ionic liquids) typically used in electrolytes. 

3.1.1. Type I, aqueous salt electrolytes. 
The first demonstration of electrolyte gating was reported in 1955 using germanium as the semiconductor and 0.1 M KOH, KCl, or HCl aqueous solutions;15 however, it was not until 1970 that the first functional transistor using an electrolyte (0.002–1 M NaCl aqueous solution) as a gate dielectric was constructed. It consisted of an aqueous electrolyte with a SiO2 layer acting as a series dielectric capacitor of a Si MOSFET.87 This pioneering work is regarded as the first ion sensitive field-effect transistor (ISFET) and stimulated the development of EGTs.88–90
After decades of development, the most common salts used today in aqueous electrolytes include lithium bis(trifluoro-methane-sulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), sodium chloride (NaCl), potassium perchlorate (KClO4), potassium hexafluorophosphate (KPF6), and potassium chloride (KCl) (Fig. 5a and b). Among them, bio-compatible electrolytes such as NaCl, KCl, and phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) solutions have been mostly adopted in EGTs for chemical/electrical physiological signal detection, bio-interfacing, and health monitoring.73,91 Importantly, since OECTs are the devices mostly utilizing aqueous salt electrolytes, mechanistic studies addressing the influence of different salts on the electrochemical process largely promoted the development of high-performance OECTs.
As OECT research progressed, several new polymer semiconductors were synthesized/utilized to facilitate ion diffusion in the organic active layer.92–94 Both high performance p- and n-type semiconducting polymers with stable electrochemical behaviour in aqueous electrolytes have been reported by incorporating hydrophilic functional groups (e.g., ethylene glycol chains) on known semiconducting polymer backbones. However, the chemical structure of the salt used in the aqueous solution greatly affects the OECT performance in both traditional hydrophobic and newly developed hydrophilic polymers used as the semiconductor.
Ginger et al. first studied how the anion of different potassium electrolytes affects the mixed ionic/electronic transport properties of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5diyl) (P3HT) based OECTs.95 The authors investigated 20 mM solutions of K+ salts including F−, Cl−, Br−, ClO4−, PF6−, or TFSI−. It was found that both ID and VT of the P3HT-based OECTs strongly depended on the anion type of the electrolyte, with the maximum ID increasing and VT decreasing in the following anion order: F− → Cl− → Br− → ClO4− → PF6− → TFSI− (Fig. 6a). Surprisingly, it appeared that ion diffusion into, and the doping ability of, P3HT for OECTs using electrolytes with bulkier anions, like PF6− and TFSI−, was more efficient than those based on smaller Cl− and ClO4− (Fig. 6b). These results were rationalized considering the negligible number of water molecules coordinating to the large anions, which effectively reduces their ionic radii in solution. The same group carried out a similar study but using a more hydrophilic polymeric semiconductor, poly(3-{[2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethoxy]methyl}thiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3MEEMT).96 Since the ethylene glycol side chains facilitate the diffusion of anions, it was found that P3MEEMT based OECTs exhibit faster anion injection rates compared with those based on P3HT. Fig. 6c shows the absorption spectra versus time of P3HT and P3MEEMT films upon electrochemical doping using either 0.1 M KCl or 0.1 M KPF6 electrolyte solutions (VG = 0.7 V and 0.5 s between spectra). For both polymers, the neutral absorption peak decreases with a longer VG bias time, along with an enhanced red-shifted polaron peak. When using PF6− as the anion, the neutral and polaron peaks decrease and increase more rapidly, respectively, for both P3MEEMT and P3HT, indicating a higher doping rate compared to that measured using a Cl−-based solution. Representative transfer curves for OECTs with a P3MEEMT active layer with both electrolytes (Fig. 6d) indicated that a 5× higher drain current and transconductance were achieved with KPF6 than with KCl. This difference originates from a ∼126 mV decreased threshold voltage for KPF6 compared to KCl. The resulting μC* of 96.7 ± 10.2 F cm−1 V−1 s−1 for KPF6 is ∼2× higher than that (49.1 ± 5.0 F cm−1 V−1 s−1) measured for KCl.
 Fig. 6  (a) Representative transfer curves of P3HT OECTs with six different aqueous electrolytes. (b) Schematic illustration showing that Cl− is less intercalating than TFSI−. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of P3HT and P3MEEMT films upon electrochemical doping at 0.7 V in aqueous solutions of KCl and KPF6 (0.5 s between spectra). (d) Transfer and transconductance curves of P3MEEMT OECTs in aqueous KCl and KPF6 solutions. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Scheme illustrating the mechanism of electrochemical oxidation with KPF6 under different voltage biases. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
These studies demonstrate that regardless of the hydrophobicity of polymer the performance and, especially, VT of the p-type OECTs depend on the anion type of the aqueous electrolyte. In general, a smaller driving force for ion penetration into the semiconducting polymer is required for larger, less polarizable anions with a lower surface charge density. This phenomenon could arise from a competition between the ion hydration number and semiconductor polymer doping kinetics, where more chaotropic ions tend to dope the polymer more easily than more kosmotropic ions.
Recently, Ginger et al. further investigated the mechanism of ion-dependent electrochemical oxidation (doping) of p-type OECTs on cations.97 By adopting a combination of electrochemical quartz microbalance gravimetry and glow discharge optical emission spectroscopy, it was shown that charge compensation during the polymer redox processes is also cation-dependent. As shown in Fig. 6e, after a P3MEEMT film is immersed into the KPF6 electrolyte solution, swelling occurs even without applying bias voltage. The authors pointed out that water, K+, and PF6− diffused into the bulk of the polymer film (Panel II) at 0 mV bias; when a relatively low negative bias (−300 mV) was applied, part of the water and most of the K+ were expelled from the film (Panel III); using a higher bias (−600 mV) would then further lead to more anion penetration and higher oxidation/doping levels (panel IV). Note, when the bulkier tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate is used (TBAPF6, see Fig. 5a for the molecular structure), negligible/little cation transport into the film is observed. More interestingly, with KCl and tetrabutylammonium chloride (TBACl) as electrolytes, no obvious cation injection before or during the bias scan is observed, indicating that both anion and cation determine the swelling process of the polymer. It was suggested that this was due to the large solvation shell of Cl−, which inhibited the injection of both ions.
Another important factor that can affect the properties of an aqueous electrolyte for OECTs is the salt concentration since it influences solvation shell properties and electrochemical behaviour of the electrolyte.51 By using different NaCl concentrations in water (10 mM – 6 M) as electrolytes, Inal et al. quantified the amount of water and dopant anion that is incorporated into a hydrophilic p-type semiconductor film [p(g2T-TT)] as well as investigated the structural and morphological changes during the electrochemical doping process.98 The oscillation frequency and dissipation of energy overtone from Electrochemical Quartz Crystal Microbalance with Dissipation Monitoring (EQCM-D) were carefully monitored when the potential pulse on the p(g2T-TT) films was applied with the electrolyte having different NaCl concentrations and transformed into mass changes (Fig. 7a). When the polymer is doped in the presence of more dilute NaCl(aq), the semiconductor film gained more mass when applying the same potential (Fig. 7b). For instance, the p(g2T-TT) film mass increased by 86% and 42% at 0.5 V (voltage bias of the p(g2T-TT) film side), when using 10 mM and 6 M NaCl(aq) electrolytes, respectively. In addition, when the potential was reverted to 0 V, a fraction of the incorporated mass remained in the film, which was higher for the film in contact with the electrolyte having a lower NaCl concentration (Fig. 7c). Since the charge density directly corresponds to the number (mass) of doping anions in the film while the mass calculated from the injected anions is smaller than the measured mass, this discrepancy corresponds to the mass of water being incorporated into the polymer film. Interestingly water uptake increased with decreasing electrolyte concentration, which was rationalized by the larger degree of anion hydration. Moreover, a fraction of water remained in the film even after the dedoping pulse (bias = 0 V), and this was most pronounced when using more dilute NaCl solutions. The authors pointed out that in the solution osmosis also plays an important role in determining water drift since it is the greatest when using NaCl(aq) 10 mM due to the maximized difference in solute concentration between the electrolyte and the film. These results evidence two important phenomena regarding the doping process in a p-type organic semiconductor using aqueous electrolytes: (1) the anions that enter the semiconductor film are hydrated; (2) the semiconductor film swells more upon uptake of the anions from a low concentration electrolyte solution, thus retaining water more efficiently under these conditions. The authors also investigated the corresponding p(g2T-TT) OECTs with different NaCl concentrations (Fig. 7d). Both ID and gm were always greater at higher NaCl concentrations. Moreover, the hole mobility was found to scale with the NaCl concentration as: μ = 0.15, 0.20, 0.22, and 0.33 cm2 V−1 s−1 when NaCl(aq) = 10 mM, 100 mM, 1 M, and 6 M, respectively (Fig. 7e). The extent of semiconductor swelling also influenced the OECT transient characteristics, with the OECTs gated in NaCl(aq) 1 M switching ON more efficiently, while the slowest response was predominantly measured in NaCl(aq) 10 mM. At the highest NaCl(aq) concentration (6 M), the low ion hydration led to greater ion paring forces which opposed the injection of Cl− ions into the film to compensate for polarons. Therefore, the OECTs gated with NaCl(aq) 6 M switch ON slower compared with those gated with 1 M. The authors also showed that the infiltration of the hydrated ions into the film irreversibly changes the polymer structure and negatively impacts the efficiency, reversibility, and speed of charge generation. When less water was incorporated into the device channel the OECTs exhibited higher transconductance and faster switching speeds.99 Although semiconductor swelling is thought to be a necessity for efficient ion to electron transduction, these studies uncovered the negative impact of a swollen semiconductor on the performance of accumulation mode OECTs and laid the foundation for future materials design/screening not only for semiconductors but also for electrolytes.97,100,101
 Fig. 7  (a) Applied potential waveform as a function of time, and changes in the mass of p(g2T-TT) films when doped with four electrolytes of varying ion concentrations. (b) Schematic representation of the p(g2T-TT)-NaCl(aq) system in the EQCM-D chamber during doping at low and high electrolyte concentrations. (c) The number of water molecules injected into the films at the end of the doping pulse at 0.5 V and remaining in the film upon the subsequent dedoping pulse applied at 0 V as a function of NaCl concentration. (d) Transfer and transconductance plots of p(g2T-TT) OECTs with different NaCl concentrations. (e) Hole mobility of p(g2T-TT) films as a function of NaCl(aq) concentration, and response time of the OECTs as a function of the NaCl concentration measured at VG = VD = −0.5 V. Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Due to the liquid nature and excellent bio-compatibility of most aqueous salts, EGTs based on these electrolytes have been investigated for physiological sensing and health monitoring.104–106 Furthermore, due to the ultra-high transconductance, low driving voltage and low power for operation, considerable efforts have been made in using OECTs in the area of self-powered electronics.102,107 For instance, Someya et al. combined flexible organic photovoltaic cells (OPVs) with OECTs and realized self-powered ultra-flexible electronic devices that can adhere to moveable and complex three-dimensional biological tissues to measure the biometric signals with very high signal to-noise ratios (Fig. 8a).102 In this study, a physiological PBS solution was first used as the aqueous electrolyte for OECTs demonstrating a conformal self-powered cardiac sensor using OECTs as the sensing elements. The device was mounted on a human fingertip and consisted of gold contacts, a PBS electrolyte and PEDOT:PSS as a channel material and it had the OECT source electrode grounded with a gel–electrode attached to the human chest (Fig. 8b). The potential difference between the gel electrode on the chest and the OECT channel on the fingertip acts as the gate bias, affecting the PEDOT:PSS channel conductance. Consequently, clear biological signal curves were detected with the OPV under LED light illumination providing electrical power to drive the OECT. The peak intensity and standard deviation of the recorded OECT ID, which is induced by the cardiac signal, were 0.47 μA and 23.5 nA, respectively, resulting in a calculated signal-to-noise ratio of 25.9 dB. Taking advantage of the mechanical flexibility and bio-compatibility of this OECT, the fabricated device was next attached to the exposed surface of a rat heart, where the body fluid on the heart surface acted as the electrolyte (Fig. 8c). The electrocardiographic (ECG) signals of the rat heart, due to the heart-action-evoked potential, were measured under LED illumination and exhibited strong ECG signals with an amplitude of 2.96 μA and a standard deviation of 25.2 nA, resulting in a signal-to-noise ratio of 40.02 dB.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of an OPV integrated with an OECT, along with a photograph of the integrated device (scale bar, 5 mm) and the corresponding circuit diagram. (b) Wiring diagram for cardiac signal recording and a photograph of the self-powered integrated electronic device attached to a finger. The lower panel shows the measured output current from the recorded cardiac signal trace under light illumination. (c) Photograph of the self-powered integrated electronic device attached to the heart of a rat (left), and enlarged images of the channel area (right, top) and of the source–drain electrode (right, bottom), along with the measured output current from the ECG trace, under light illumination. Reprinted with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Stretchable OECT array on a honeycomb grid substrate, and cross section of the stretchable OECT array. (e) A 4 × 4 stretchable OECT array when intrinsically stretched (scale bar, 3 mm). (f) Image of the positioning of and (g) ECG signals from the 4 × 4 OECT array on the heart of a rat, along with (h) time delay of ECG signals. Reprinted with permission.103 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
The liquid state of aqueous electrolytes can simplify EGT integration in sensing arrays.108 For instance, a stretchable multielectrode array consisting of (4 × 4) OECTs is similar to that of an active matrix structure in a flat panel display (including a data line and scan line), was fabricated on a 1.2 μm-thick parylene substrate (Fig. 8d).103 The total thickness was as thin as 2.6 μm, including the top encapsulation of a 1.2 μm-thick parylene layer, resulting in a highly flexible and stretchable structure. A cross-section of the stretchable device (Fig. 8d) shows layers of the PEDOT:PSS and source/drain gold electrodes deposited on a honeycomb grid substrate. The honeycomb grid substrate was chosen due to its mechanical stability and structural stretchability (Fig. 8e). Note, the outermost layers are made of poly(3-methoxypropyl acrylate) (PMC3A), which provides high blood compatibility. The 4 × 4 array was attached to the exposed surface of the heart of rats to measure physiological signals (Fig. 8f). The conformal contact between the device film and the surface of the heart was possible by the use of honeycomb holes on the ultrathin substrate. The result of the spatial distribution of the recorded ECG outputs is shown in Fig. 8g. Spatial voltage maps of all nodes at four sequential time points are reported in Fig. 8h. The anatomical signals show different shapes based on the location of the sensors. The OECT array successfully recorded spatial–temporal distribution of ECGs on the heart surface with multiplexing. Consequently, high-precision monitoring of electrophysiological signals with high spatial and temporal resolutions was realized with the stretchable OECT array.
The above studies demonstrated the advantages of adopting OECTs as the sensing elements for electrophysiology. Chemical physiological signals can also be detected by proper design of EGTs with functional electrolytes and/or interface engineering.110–113 For instance, by introducing different aptamers on a solution processed nanometer-thin In2O3 film (Fig. 9a), Andrews et al. developed EDLTs that bypassed the EDL shielding effect and realized devices that are extremely sensitive to several important analytes in PBS (Fig. 9b), including dopamine, serotonin, glucose, and sphingosine-1-phosphate (S1P).109 Note, the EDL shielding effect means that in ionic solutions the EDL shields the semiconductor charge carriers to limit gating in response to recognition events, and the extent of shielding (i.e., the effective sensing distance) is characterized by the Debye length, which in physiological fluids is <1 nm. An example of an aptamer for dopamine is shown in Fig. 9c. This molecule exhibits high sensitively and selectivity to dopamine based on fluorescence responses (Fig. 9d). With this aptamer, the device was responsive to a wide range of dopamine concentrations (10−14 to 10−9 M) in physiological PBS (Fig. 9e). Importantly, dopamine aptamer-EDLTs were selective to dopamine versus serotonin, norepinephrine, and tyramine as well as dopamine metabolites (Fig. 9f). Note, a specific aptamer for each analyte was adopted to yield high sensitivity and selectivity. The hypothesized mechanism involves analyte-induced reorientation of the aptamer in close proximity to the semiconductor channel and within, or very near to, the Debye length. As shown in Fig. 9g (left), for dopamine and glucose, the transfer curves are consistent with aptamer reorientations occurring such that a substantial portion of the negatively charged backbone moves closer to the n-type semiconductor channel, thereby increasing the electrostatic repulsion of the charge carriers, and thus decreasing the transconductance. In contrast, it is hypothesized that serotonin and S1P aptamers move predominantly away from channel surfaces upon analyte capture, thereby increasing the transconductance (Fig. 9g, right).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of EDLT surface chemistry, where PTMS is trimethoxy(propyl)silane; APTMS is (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane; and MBS is 3-maleimidobenzoic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester, along with (b) EDLT microscope image, and photograph of experimental setup. (c) Aptamers for dopamine, and (d) fluorescence–concentration curves (RFU, relative fluorescent units) indicate selectivity of the dopamine aptamers versus nonspecific targets. (e) Responses of EDLT sensors functionalized with the dopamine aptamer or its scrambled sequence, compared to EDLT responses with a previously reported dopamine aptamer, along with (f) the selectivity of the EDLT. (g) Hypothesized mechanism of stem-loop aptamer target-induced reorientations in close proximity to semiconductor channels and within or near the Debye length: (left) aptamers reorient closer to EDLTs to deplete channels electrostatically; (right) aptamer stem-loops reorient away from the semiconductor channel, thereby increasing transconductance. Reprinted with permission.109 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.1.2. Type II, ionic liquid electrolytes. 
ILs are salts that are in the liquid phase at room temperature and have several advantages compared to aqueous salt electrolytes such as absence of a volatile solvent, larger electrochemical window (∼3 V), low melting point (typically <20 °C) and high boiling point (typically >400 °C). Consequently, IL electrolytes are typically preferred compared to aqueous electrolytes especially when bio-compatibility is not required. Representative IL structures used in EGTs are shown in Fig. 5, where the most common cations include diethylmethyl(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium (DEME+), 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium (EMIM+), 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium (BMIM+), and 1-hexyl-3-methylimidazolium (HMIM+), while the anions are bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (TFSI−), bis(fluorosulfonyl) imide (FSI−), dicyanamide (DCA−), tetrafluoroborate (BF4−), bis(pentafluoroethylsulfonyl)imide (BETI−), tris(pentafluoroethyl)-trifluorophosphate (FAP−), n-octylsulfate (OctOSO3−), and thiocyanate (SCN−). Note, there are several other IL structures not listed here and they can be found in specialized publications.39,40
Even though ILs have been widely adopted in electrochemical mechanical actuators and electrochromic windows,116 the development of ILs as a gate dielectric for transistors only started in 2007, when Hebard et al. used [EMIM][BETI] to gate indium oxide EDLTs.117 In 2008, Takeya et al. investigated rubrene single-crystal based EDLTs with various IL electrolytes such as [EMIM][TFSI], [EMIM][FSI], [EMIM][BF4], and [EMIM][DCA] (Fig. 10a).114,118 The dielectric response of the ILs was measured in the Au/IL/Au capacitor structure in the frequency range from 0.1 Hz to 1 MHz. For all ILs the capacitance was found to increase when the frequency decreased particularly in the frequency range of 10–1 kHz because of the slow rotational reorientation/rearrangement of the ionic molecules. Specifically, the capacitance differed by two orders of magnitude upon anion variation and ranged from as high as 170 μF cm−2 for [EMIM][DCA] to as low as about 5 μF cm−2 for [EMIM][FSI] at 0.1 Hz. The large capacitance difference was attributed to different molecular arrangements of the cations and the anions in the EDLs and to their slower dynamics such as collective polarization of molecular clusters. Rubrene EDLTs with the ILs and OFETs with an air gap as gate dielectric demonstrated that the large IL capacitance led to a much high carrier density in the channel when using [EMIM][DCA] (∼5.3 × 1014 cm−2), which was 50 times higher than that of typical SiO2 based devices (Fig. 10b). However, the devices based on the ILs with a higher capacitance (e.g., [EMIM][DCA]) showed a significantly lower hole mobility (0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1) than those with a lower capacitance (e.g., [EMIM][FSI], μ = 9.5 cm2 V−1 s−1). Similar trends where the mobility decreases with increasing gate insulator dielectric constant were reported for OFETs based on conventional gate dielectrics.61,119 This result was attributed to polaronic self-localization of the charge carriers (Fröhlich polarons) at the semiconductor/dielectric interface due to the interaction with the highly polarizable gate dielectric material. Similarly, high capacitance ILs could also introduce coupling of the carrier motion in the vicinity of the EDLs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Structure of an EDLT based on an organic single crystal semiconductor and an IL as gate dielectric (top) and capacitance of the indicated ILs as a function of frequency measured by impedance technique (bottom). (b) Transfer characteristics of EDLTs with an air-gap, [EMIM][FSI], [EMIM][TFSI], and [EMIM][BETI] as the gate dielectric (VD = −0.1 V). Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2009, AIP Publishing. (c) Time course of linear transfer curves of EDLT based on [EMIM][FSI] (VD = −0.1 V and scan rate = 20 mV s−1). (d) Time course of the normalized ID measured at VG = −0.3 V (black squares). The red solid line is the fitted data. The blue dotted line represents the time when the detrapping gate voltage (VG,detrapping = 1.5 V) was applied. (e) Schematic of the carrier trapping and detrapping dynamics by the FSI anions in the first IL layer. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Fukui et al. recently investigated the details of the charge trapping mechanism in IL gated EDLTs using [EMIM][TFSI] as the electrolyte and a single crystal rubrene as the semiconductor.115 The time course of the linear transfer curves of the EDLT is shown in Fig. 10c. After 540 min of the initial carrier injection, the transfer curve shifted by −0.11 V but without variation of the slope of the linear region as well as the width of the subthreshold region. This result was similar to that of bias stressed p-type OFETs exhibiting a negative VT shift, where carriers (holes) were trapped in the organic semiconductors.120–124Fig. 10d shows the time course of the normalized ID[ID(t)/I0, I0 = ID(t = 0 s)] measured at VG = −0.3 V. When a large OFF-state (VG > Vturn-on) gate voltage (VG = 1.5 V) was applied, the linear transfer curve shifted back to the initial position, the signature of a carrier detrapping process. After detrapping, the linear transfer curve gradually shifted to the negative direction again on the same time scale as that before detrapping, indicating that this bias stress process was reversible. By using electrochemical frequency modulation, atomic force microscopy and molecular dynamic (MD) simulations, the authors suggested a gradual structuring of the first IL layer facing the carriers injected in the rubrene surface, leading to ion reorientations and electrostatic stabilization by forming a patchwork structure (Fig. 10e). In this stable configuration, negatively charged O and F atoms of the FSI−, pointing to the positively charged rubrene surface, come closer and lead to the gradual hole carrier trapping (Fig. 10e). Moreover, when a large positive gate voltage was applied, this structured IL layer was deformed and IL-induced bias stress recovered immediately by detrapping the hole carriers.
The liquid nature of ILs can also be used to gate unconventional device/channel architectures where solid dielectrics would be difficult to conformally contact the semiconductor. Thus, Okaue et al. fabricated vertical channel EDLTs with a channel length as short as 40 nm which can be easily accessible to the IL.125 The device fabrication process and the resulting structure are reported in Fig. 11a and consist of gold source and drain electrodes, patterned by electron beam lithography, and spaced by a sputtered SiO2 layer, defining the device channel length (L = thickness of SiO2). An under-etched space was realized with HF etching, and then was filled by the semiconductor (a diketopyrrolopyrrole–terthiophene donor–acceptor polymer, PDPP) which was deposited by spin-coating and patterned by O2 reactive ion etching. Note, Cr and Ti were used for better adhesion between Au and SiO2. A cross-sectional SEM image of the device cut through the transistor channel (before contacting the electrolyte-gate pair) is shown in Fig. 11b, where a well-defined organic semiconducting polymer channel can be observed. The EDLT was then completed by using [EMIM][TFSI] as the dielectric. Typical transfer curves of this device are shown in Fig. 11c, where a large ION/IOFF ratio of up to 108 is observed, along with a large on-current of ∼10−3 A at extremely low VD (−0.3 V) and VG (<1.5 V) biases. This performance corresponds to a high current density in the range of 104–107 A cm−2 when only accounting the area of the semiconducting materials, a remarkable value for organic transistors.
 Fig. 11  (a) Vertical EDLT fabrication process. (b) Colored cross-sectional SEM image near the edge of the vertical device. (c) Transfer characteristics of a PDPP based vertical EDLT measured in ambient atmosphere. The solid lines represent the trace and the dashed lines are the re-trace. Reprinted with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 

3.2. Polymer-based electrolytes
Typical insulating polymers do not transport electronic charge and, if pure, do not contain ions and will not form an EDL upon the application of a voltage bias. Thus, these materials are usually excellent gate dielectrics for transistors of different structures.126–130 To enable polymer based electrolytes, ions must be added to, or incorporated into, the polymer structure typically via three strategies, which result in the following classes of polymer based electrolytes: (1) polymer electrolytes (type III), obtained by mixing a salt with a polymer, resulting in a solid solution; (2) ion gel electrolytes (type IV), obtained by mixing a salt, typically an IL, with a polymer resulting in a gel; and (3) polyelectrolytes (type V), which are polymers containing charged or ionizable groups. Representative polymers employed in the above-mentioned families are illustrated in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Representative chemical structures of polymers used in polymer-based electrolytes. (a) Polymers for polymer electrolytes; (b–d) polymers for ion gel, where (b) are triblock-copolymers, (c) are fluorinated polymers, and (d) are representative copolymers (SOS–N3 and SEAS–N3) with photo crosslinkable units. (e) Polyelectrolytes. 

3.2.1 Type III, polymer electrolytes. 
Polymer electrolytes typically consist of a salt dissolved in an ion coordinating polymer (Fig. 2c). The most studied coordinating polymer in this family is poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), since the oxygen lone pairs on the PEO backbone efficiently coordinate the positive ions, leading to a strongly coupled ionic motion and polymer backbone reorganization when an electric field is applied.131–133 Other polymers, including poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)134–136 and polycarbonates (PCs),137 have also been utilized (Fig. 12a). Most of the salts used for aqueous electrolyte solutions can be used in polymer electrolytes (Fig. 5), although the most frequently adopted one is LiClO4.132,135,138–140 Polymer electrolytes are prepared by dispensing a polymer + salt solution on the area of interest and drying it. It is worth noting that, since a polymer is used in these formulations, the rheological properties of the solution can be tuned, and controlled, to a greater extent than those of aqueous and IL electrolytes (types I and II) making them more suitable for several different processing techniques, as different as, inkjet printing, spin-coating, and aerosol jet printing.
The first work reporting a polymer electrolyte as a gate dielectric of a transistor was published in 1987 and was based on a side-gate transistor geometry using LiCF3SO3 + PEO as the polymer electrolyte and P3HT as the semiconductor.141,142 Compared to liquid electrolytes, the solid-state nature of polymer-based electrolytes enables their efficient integration into circuits and enhanced stability while retaining a geometry suitable for EDL formation.143–146 Dasgupta et al. investigated high performance EDLTs based on a single-crystal ZnO nanowire semiconductor and an inkjet-printed polymer electrolyte dielectric consisting of PVA:propylene carbonate:LiClO4 = 20:63:7 in mass, where the propylene carbonate acted as a plasticizer (Fig. 13a).147 These ZnO EDLTs operated at low voltages (≤2 V) and exhibited a high μ of 62 cm2 V−1 s−1, an ION/IOFF ratio of 107, a gm of 155 μS μm−1, and an SS of 115 mV dec−1. Moreover, as shown in Fig. 13b, the EDLT transfer characteristics show minor variations (e.g. ΔVT < 0.2 V) after storing in air for 20 days. The same group also utilized the same polymer electrolyte to fabricate all-printed IGZO EDLTs, and integrated them to demonstrate resistor (R-mode), enhancement type (E-mode), and depletion type (D-mode) loaded inverters (Fig. 13c).138 Among all these devices, the E-mode based inverter showed the highest gain of about 3 for a low driving voltage of 0.5 V (Fig. 13d). Note, even though the inverter performance based on all these modes was not ideal, it demonstrated the possibility of using a polymer electrolyte as functional dielectrics in more complex circuits.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of a ZnO nanowire EDLT using an inkjet-printed polymer electrolyte dielectric. (b) Representative transfer curves of ZnO nanowire EDLTs measured immediately after device fabrication and after storing for 20 days in the air. Reprinted with permission.147 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic representations of IGZO-EDLT based logic inverter circuits using three different types of loads: a resistor (R-mode), an enhancement type (E-mode), and a depletion type (D-mode). (d) The corresponding voltage transfer and gain characteristics. Reprinted with permission.138 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Cross-sectional and top views of a top-gate EDLT based on In2O3. (f) Comparison of the transfer characteristics of an in-plane EDLT (sweep rate: 10 mV s−1) with a top-gate EDLT (sweep rate: 2 mV ms−1) at VDS = 1 V. (g) Comparison of the measured transient behavior of a resistor loaded inverter with an in-plane EDLT and a top-gate EDLT measured at VDD = 1 V. Reprinted with permission.148 Copyright 2017, IEEE. 
As mentioned in Section 2, electrolyte dielectrics enable the utilization of side-gate architectures (Fig. 4d), which are much easier to fabricate compared to top gate structures (Fig. 4a), and are widely adopted in EGT based sensors.149 However, these devices suffer from slow switching, and thus low frequency of operation, since the gate-channel distance in these EGT architectures can be several μms or more and thus, according to eqn (6), the polarization time is large. In order to reduce the polarization time, the performance of a side-gate indium oxide (In2O3) EDLT was compared with that of a top-gate bottom-contact In2O3 EDLT with a printed PEDOT:PSS gate electrode and printed PVA/propylene carbonate/LiClO4 polymer electrolyte (Fig. 13e).148 Note, printing a gate electrode on top of a liquid electrolyte is not conceivable but possible when using a solid polymer electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 13f, the transfer characteristics of the EDLT were measured with the side-gate (ITO gate electrode, which is coplanar with the source and drain ITO electrodes), and remeasured after printing the PEDOT:PSS top-gate (Fig. 13e). Clearly, a considerably enhanced ID along with a VT of only ∼0 V was obtained in this device configuration due to improved electrostatic coupling even when the sweeping speed of VG for the top-gate EDLTs (2 V s−1) is much greater compared to that (10 mV s−1) of the side-gate devices. The voltage output curves were recorded in a resistor (R = 19 kΩ) loaded inverter. With a 1 Hz rectangular VIN (0 and 1 V), the delay time decreases significantly from around 110 to 0.8 ms for the top-gate device, along with a much smaller voltage of the low level VOUT (Fig. 13g).
Based on top-gate EGTs with the same polymer electrolyte, more complex circuits were developed. Aghassi-Hagmann et al. designed, fabricated, and characterized an inkjet-printed full-wave rectifier using diode-connected EDLTs (Fig. 14a).57VIN with an amplitude of 1 V and frequencies of 10 Hz and 1 kHz were utilized for the measurements (Fig. 14b). The resulting output voltage at an input frequency of 10 Hz indicated that the rectifier functioned properly with only a small voltage loss. As the input frequency increased to 1 kHz, the amplitude of the rectified signal decreased as the transistor started to work in a nonquasi-static mode. The carrier accumulation/depletion processes in the channel failed to follow the applied VG at high frequencies, a signature of the limited polarization time (>1 ms) of the electrolyte. Moreover, due to variations in the printing process, the printed polymer electrolyte thickness also varied significantly, leading to different AC characteristics between the devices. Overall, the above circuit could effectively rectify VIN as low as 500 mV, and featured a small voltage loss of 140 mV and a cut-off frequency of 300 Hz at a VIN of 1 V. The authors concluded that the device characteristics are suitable for a variety of energy-harvesting applications.
 Fig. 14  (a) Full-wave rectifier schematic, and a photograph of a diode-connected EDLT based full-wave rectifier. (b) Waveform of the measured VOUT and smoothed output voltage (VOUT,smooth) using a load capacitor of 20 pF and 10 μF, respectively, and a load resistance RL of 1 MΩ. Reprinted with permission.57 Copyright 2020, IEEE. Transient analysis of (c) NAND and (d) NOR gates measured at VDD = 1 V. (e) Oscillation frequency and power consumption of a three-stage ring oscillator based on EDLTs, along with (f) the output signal of the ring oscillator (VDD = 1 V). Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2020, IEEE. 
Other logic gates were also realized with top-gate In2O3 EDLTs having a polymer electrolyte (PVA:propylene carbonate:LiClO4 = 20:63:7 in mass).150 As shown in Fig. 14c and d, NAND and NOR gates were assembled based on unipolar n-type inverters. The voltage output characteristics of these NAND and NOR gates revealed well performing characteristics at a driving voltage under 1 V and exhibited switching frequencies of ∼1 Hz. In addition, NAND gate ring oscillators were fabricated and started functioning at a VDD of only 0.7 V (Fig. 14e). The output signal of the ring oscillator recorded at VDD of 1.0 V is shown in Fig. 14f. In between supply voltage levels of 0.7 and 1.5 V, the oscillation frequency rose from 271 Hz to 1.14 kHz, respectively.


3.2.2. Type IV, ion gel electrolytes. 
Ion gel electrolytes are typically composed of an IL dissolved into a polymer network achieved by crosslinking the polymer component (Fig. 2d) using either a chemical or physical, preferentially photochemical, method.33 Frisbie et al. reported the first ion gel dielectric for EGTs in 2007, where poly(styrene-block-ethylene oxide-block-styrene) (PS–PEO–PS) with [BMIM][PF6] (PS–PEO–PS:[BMIM][PF6] = 1:9 in weight) were adopted in a TGBC transistor structure. In addition to PS–PEO–PS,151–154 several other block copolymers have also been used in ion gel electrolytes including polystyrene-b-poly(ethyl acrylate)-b-polystyrene (PS–PEA–PS),56 and poly(styrene-b-methyl methacrylate-b-styrene) (PS–PMMA–PS) (Fig. 12b).153,155–157 Note, there are also ion gels that are composed of an IL in inorganic matrixes, e.g. hexagonal boron nitride (hBN).158 Ion gel electrolytes can be printed as polymer electrolytes; however, due to the liquid nature of the IL, they typically show higher specific capacitance and shorter polarization time, enabling >kHz switching frequencies.154 As shown in Fig. 15a, Frisbie's group reported aerosol jet-printed arrays of EDLTs on a flexible polyimide substrate, where Au nanoparticle inks were used as the source and drain electrodes, P3HT as the semiconductor, an ion gel ([EMIM][TFSI] with PS–PMMA–PS) as the gate dielectric (∼20 μF cm−2 at 10 Hz), and PEDOT:PSS as the gate electrode (Fig. 15b, top panel). The transfer characteristics of these devices demonstrated an excellent subthreshold behaviour and an ION/IOFF ratio of 105 (Fig. 15b). Printed resistor-loaded (20 kΩ resistor by printing carbon ink) EDLT inverters on plastic (Fig. 15c) exhibited good inverter characteristics, in which the output voltage was switched between −1.5 V and 0 V as the input gate voltage was swept. Fig. 15c also demonstrates that the output voltage of the printed inverter responded well to a 1 kHz square-wave input voltage signal.
 Fig. 15  (a) Optical image of an aerosol-printed EDLT array based on an ion gel dielectric (PS–PMMA–PS:[EMIM][TFSI]) fabricated on a flexible polyimide substrate. (b) Transfer characteristics of a P3HT-based EDLT measured at a VD = −1 V (L = 20 μm, W = 1400 μm). The top of the panel shows a schematic cross-section diagram of the device. (c) Output voltage response of a resistor loaded EDLT inverter at VDD = −1.5 V when VG is pulsed at 1 kHz. The input–output voltage characteristics are shown in the inset. The top panel shows the device schematic diagram. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2008, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic representation of the ion gel electrolyte preparation process using P(VDF–HFP):[EMIM][TFSI] + P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE). (e) Cross-sectional diagram of a top-gate/bottom-contact IGZO EDLT. (f) Transfer curves of IGZO, P3HT and PDFDT based EDLTs. Solid lines and dashed lines represent ID and gate current (IG), respectively. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
More recently, fluorinated polymers have also been widely used in ion gel electrolytes with the most prominent being polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF),55,160 poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-trifluoroethylene) [P(VDF–TrFE)],161 poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) [P(VDF–HFP)],162–165 and poly(vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene–chlorotrifluoroethylene) [P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE)] (Fig. 12e).159 Due to the high-εr of the polymer component along with the formation of the EDL, high capacitance along with efficient polarization was achieved. For instance, Noh et al. investigated ion gel electrolytes based on high-k fluorinated polymers where less than 1% of ILs were added. Unlike ion gel dielectrics with conventional block copolymers, in which the IL is a considerable portion of the total mass (typically >50% in mass), in these ion gel electrolytes, the IL mass content is very small, yet, they can achieve capacitance values higher than 1 μF cm−2. The ion gels reported in this study were fabricated by spin-coating a mixture of P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE) + P(VDF–HFP)–[EMIM][TFSI] in 2-butanone on different semiconductors, including organic polymer and oxide semiconductors (Fig. 15d).159 The authors reported that by increasing the P(VDF–HFP)-[EMIM][TFSI] to P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE) content, the capacitance increased from 49.12 nF cm−2 for neat P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE), to 1.96, 4.50 and 5.53 μF cm−2 for the ion gel with a 0.5, 1.0, and 2 vol% of P(VDF–HFP)-[EMIM][TFSI], due to EDL formation. These electrolytes were found to have a good compatibility with different types of semiconductors (e.g. IGZO, CNT, P3HT, and PDFDT) and were incorporated in a top-gate bottom-contact EDLT structure shown in Fig. 15e. These devices exhibited typical transfer curves for driving voltages as low as 1.5 V, substantial on/off switching behaviour, and low I–V hysteresis (Fig. 15f). The resulting carrier mobilities were 11.09 cm2 V−1 s−1 for IGZO, 1.30 cm2 V−1 s−1 for P3HT, and 2.42 cm2 V−1 s−1 for PDFDT devices.
Another important question is whether electrolyte dielectrics can be photopatterned, thus be compatible with conventional photolithographic processes. Frisbie et al. demonstrated a facile fabrication route to patterned ion gel electrolyte thin films for EGTs using a photo crosslinkable ABA-triblock copolymer.166 The authors utilized the azide groups of poly(styrene-r-vinylbenzylazide) (PS–N3) or poly[(styrene-r-vinylbenzylazide)-b-ethylene oxide-b-(styrene-r-vinylbenzylazide)] (SOS–N3, Fig. 12d) for photocuring these polymers (λ = 254 nm) in the presence of the IL [EMIM][TFSI] (Fig. 16a). The SOS–N3 ion gel films were fabricated using a solution-casting (spin-coating or drop-casting) technique from a solution prepared by dissolving SOS–N3 polymer and [EMIM][TFSI] in ethyl acetate (1:9:10 ratio in weight of SOS–N3:[EMIM][TFSI]:ethyl acetate). Interestingly, the authors found that the ion transport (ionic conductivity ∼2 mS cm−1) and film microstructure of the ion gel were not affected by UV crosslinking, leading to capacitance greater than ∼5 μF cm−2 over the measured frequency range (1–100 kHz) (Fig. 16b). N-Type (ZnO) EDLTs with a TGBC structure were fabricated and showed a respectable carrier mobility (∼0.7 cm2 V−1 s−1) and an ION/IOFF ratio of ∼105 at supply voltages below 2 V (Fig. 16c). Recently, the same group further optimized the fabrication process of the EDLTs by utilizing a similar photo crosslinkable polymer (SEAS–N3, Fig. 12d) but screen printed it to carefully control the ion gel overlap with the channel and the source/drain electrodes.21 These devices consisted of a ZnO semiconductor film deposited by ALD and patterned by photolithography. The Au source and drain electrodes with the Ti adhesion layers were then defined by photolithography followed by deposition of a SiO2 passivation overlayer, which was deposited using e-beam techniques and patterned by photolithography. Importantly, the SiO2 passivation layer reduced the contact area of the ion gel with the source and drain electrodes, with the goal of reducing parasitic (also called overlap) capacitance, which can reduce the switching time. The ion gel film, composed of a 1:9 weight ratio mixture of poly(styrene)-b-poly(ethylacrylate)-b-poly(styrene) triblock copolymer (SEAS, Fig. 16d) and [EMIM][TFSI] in ethyl acetate, was screen-printed and UV-crosslinked/patterned. The well-defined 0.5- to 1-μm thick ion gel films were patterned on the semiconductor channels as a narrow 10 μm stripe. Finally, a stencil was aligned with the gel and used as the mask for the vapor deposition of the Au top gate electrode. Fig. 16e reports the quasi-static transfer characteristics at VD = 1 V for a ZnO EDLT exhibiting an electron mobility of >2 cm2 V−1 s−1, an ION/IOFF of >105 and a VT of ∼0.5 V. The channel-width-normalized gm/W along with the output characteristics of the device are also shown in Fig. 16e, where the linear ID–VD traces near VD = 0 V suggest a good source/drain contact, along with well-behaving current saturation. The authors also fabricated unipolar inverters (Fig. 16f)21 exhibiting a gain >20 from the quasi-static response at VDD = 3 V and a sweep rate of 500 mV s−1 (Fig. 16g). The dynamic performance of the inverter was also investigated and showed a clear response up to 2.5 kHz. A five-stage ring oscillator with an inverter buffer based on the ZnO EDLT inverters was also fabricated (Fig. 16h) and exhibited a maximum oscillation frequency of 1.9 kHz at VD = 3 V and VBias = 2.75 V, which correlated to a stage delay of 50 μs, considering the five-stage ring oscillator rule. The authors concluded that screen printing and photo-crosslinking provided a clean room-compatible method to fabricate EGT circuits with improved sensitivity (gain) and computational power.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of chemical cross-linking of SOS–N3 ion gels by UV irradiation. (b) Frequency dependence of the specific capacitance for SOS–N3 ion gel films before chemical cross-linking and after UV irradiation for 90 min. The inset shows a schematic of the setup used for measuring the impedance of the Au/ion gel/Au capacitor. (c) Transfer characteristics of ZnO EDLTs with a photopatterned ion-gel. Reprinted with permission.166 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) The device schematic architecture and optical image of a ZnO EDLT with a well-patterned ion gel. (e) Transfer curve, channel-width-normalized gm, and output characteristics of a ZnO EDLT. (f) Schematic and the optical microscope image of an inverter based on ZnO EDLTs, and (g) the corresponding quasi-static output versus input and gain measurements at VD = 3 V. (h) Optical image of a five-stage ring oscillator based on ZnO EDLTs, and output characteristics of a typical ring oscillator with an oscillation frequency as high as 1300 Hz, along with frequency and output range of the ring oscillator as a function of VD. Reprinted with permission.21 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
It is intuitive to understand that liquid based electrolytes are compatible with mechanical deformation; however, ion gel electrolytes can also achieve excellent mechanical flexibility/stretchability while preserving dielectric behaviour during stress.11 Lee et al. reported a stretchable EDLT to simulate synapse functions based on organic nanowires consisting of a blend of a diketopyrrolopyrrole conjugated polymer (FT4-DPP) and PEO (7:3, w/w), functioning as the semiconductor, and an ion gel dielectric (PS–PMMA–PS:[EMIM][TFSI] = 0.7:9.3) (Fig. 17a).155 A single nanowire was transferred onto a 100% pre-stretched styrene–ethylene–butylene–styrene (SEBS) rubbery substrate on which CNT source/drain electrodes were patterned. After releasing the strain on the elastic substrate, a wavy nanowire structure was formed, and this configuration was retained after repeated stretching to a 100% strain (Fig. 17b). The corresponding EDLTs exhibited a typical p-type behaviour for driving voltages below 2 V (Fig. 17c). The relatively slow formation of the EDLs at the gate/electrolyte and electrolyte/semiconductor interfaces led to an anticlockwise hysteresis of the transfer characteristics, which could stimulate the behaviour of a biological synaptic response. More importantly, the maximum ID (∼1 μA) and the carrier mobility remained stable when the EDLT was stretched with up to a 100% strain along both the channel length and width directions (Fig. 17c) as well as even after 50 cycles at a 100% strain in both directions. This strategy of incorporating a stretchable ion gel dielectric in the EGT is promising for the development of bioinspired soft electronics, neurologically inspired robotics, and electronic prostheses.
 Fig. 17  (a) Device structure schematic of an organic nanowire-based EDLT and its similarity to the neural signal transmission from preneuron to postneuron through a biological synapse. (b) Optical microscopy image of a wavy nanowire stretched from 0 to 100% strain. (c) Transfer characteristics of the pre-stretched nanowire-based EDLT at 0, 50, and 100% strains, and maximum ID and mobility as a function of various strains along the channel length and width directions. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


3.2.3. Type V, polyelectrolytes. 
Polymers containing repeating units bearing an ionic or ionizable group are polyelectrolytes and, depending on the charge type on the polymers, they are classified as polycations and polyanions.167,168 Representative polyelectrolytes used in EGTs are shown in Fig. 12e, which include poly(styrene sulfonic acid) (PSSH), with H+ as the counterion;169 poly(styrene sulfonic acid sodium salt) (PSSNa), with Na+ as the counterion;170 poly[(vinyl phosphonic acid)-co-(acrylicacid)] [P(VPA–AA)], with H+ as the counterion;171,172 and poly[(1-vinylpyrrolidone)-co-(2-ethyldimethylammonioethyl methacrylate ethyl sulfate)] [P(VP–EDMAEMAES)], with ethyl sulfate as the counterion.171 Some natural polymer derivatives are also common polyelectrolytes that are used in EGTs, including chitosan,74,173–176 carboxymethyl cellulose and other cellulose derevatives.149,177–179 An efficient way of generating a polyelectrolyte is by polymerizing one of the ion of an IL,180 for example: poly(styrene-b-1-[(2-acryloyloxy)-ethyl]-3-butylimidazolium bis(trifluoromethyl sulfonyl)imide-b-styrene) (PS–PIL–PS), where TFSI− is the counterion.58
As indicated in Section 2, ECTs typically show higher gms compared to EDLTs; however, since the former require bulk ion uptake in the semiconductor, they suffer from slower switching speeds compared with simple EDL formation in EDLTs. The switching speed of a transistor is an important parameter to take into account for the fabrication of circuits operating at high frequencies. Polyelectrolytes are interesting dielectric materials that can provide fast switching in EGTs, especially for organic polymer based EGTs, since, if the redox process occurring in the semiconductor requires the intercalation of the charge located on the immobile polymer component, bulk incorporation is prevented, thus the device can only function as an EDLT.181 In 2007, a pioneering work employed a polyelectrolyte [P(VPA–AA)] as the gate dielectric of P3HT transistors and demonstrated that the electrochemical doping of the p-type polymer can be completely prevented; thus, these devices functioned as EDLTs.182 A short switching time (<0.3 ms) in P3HT based transistor with a top gate structure was realized without patterning of the dielectric and semiconductor, as the electrochemical doping of the P3HT bulk was prevented by using only immobile anions in the polyelectrolyte.
Berggren et al. further demonstrated complementary integrated circuits based on organic EDLTs using polyanions and polycations as the gate dielectrics for p- and n-type transistors, respectively (Fig. 18a).171 The polyelectrolytes were matched with the semiconductors to prevent mobile ion penetration in the organic semiconductor, thus, as shown in Fig. 18a, P(VPA–AA), which conducts H+, was used to gate the p-type poly(2,5-bis(2-thienyl)-3,6-dihexadecylthieno[3,2-b]thiophene) (P(T0T0TT16)) while P(VP–EDMAEMAES), which conducts ethyl sulfate anions, was adopted to gate the n-type poly{[N,N′-bis(2-octyldodecyl)-naphthalene-1,4,5,8-bis(dicarboximide)-2,6-diyl]-alt-5,5′-(2,2′-bithiophene)} (P(NDI2OD-T2) or N2200). Fig. 18b and c show the transfer characteristics of polyanion and polycation gated transistors, respectively. Both EDLTs show negligible hysteresis indicating that the polyelectrolyte polarizes quickly without significant electrochemical doping of the semiconductor. Moreover, the cut-off frequencies for the p- and n-type EDLTs in this work were estimated to be 16 kHz and 6.7 kHz, respectively, at a supply voltage of 1 V, which is high considering their electrolyte gating nature. Based on the relatively balanced transistor performances, a complementary inverter was also fabricated (Fig. 18d). This circuit provided respectable output swings and high gains up to 17.5 for supply voltages between 0.2 V and 1 V. Low static currents of ∼100 pA at low VIN and ∼1 nA at high VIN indicated low power consumption. The authors stressed that it is compatible with portable electronics.
 Fig. 18  (a) Materials used for fabricating complementary polyelectrolyte-gated EDLTs. Schematic cross sections and illustrations of the charge distribution within the polyelectrolyte gate insulator layers in p- and n-channel transistors that are gated with negative and positive gate voltages, respectively. Transfer characteristics for (b) a p-type EDLT with a P(VPA-AA) dielectric, and for (c) an n-type EDLT with a P(VP-EDMAEMAES) dielectric. (d) Complementary polyelectrolyte-gated inverter performance based on p- and n-type EDLTs. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of a biological synapse, and a chitosan gated ITO neuromorphic transistor. (f) Transfer curves of an ITO neuromorphic transistor, and (g) ID triggered by gate pulses with different amplitudes at a constant duration of 1 min. (h) Operation mechanism of an ITO neuromorphic transistor operated under different gate biases. (i) Schematic diagram of the spike trains. Thirty consecutive potentiation (P) gate spikes are followed by 30 consecutive depression (D) gate spikes. (j) Obtained synaptic weights after receiving consecutive P and D spikes. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons. 
Several natural polyelectrolytes that can be used as electrolyte dielectrics have been integrated in EGTs for the realization of artificial synapses, circuits, and sensors.172,179,183–186 Zhu et al. fabricated a chitosan-gated neuromorphic transistor that can work both in an EDLT mode and an ECT mode depending on the applied VG (Fig. 18e).74Fig. 18f shows typical transfer characteristics of the ITO neuromorphic transistor operating as a EDLT, where the ION/IOFF ratio, SS, VT, and μ are ∼1.4 × 106, 87.1 mV per decade, 0.01 V and 10.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Here, the applied VG was not higher than the electrochemical threshold voltage (UT) of ITO. Note, despite the oxide nature of this semiconductor there are several papers reporting the doping and de-doping processes for ITO due to exchange with H+.183,187 As shown in Fig. 18g, after 1 and 2 V VG pulses, IDs return to the initial IOFF value, indicating the absence/negligible electrochemical doping of the semiconductor. However, when applying larger (3 and 4 V) VG pulses, IDs increase to ∼38.4 μA and ∼53.2 μA, respectively, and when the pulses end (VG back to 0 V), IDs gradually decays back to ∼16.2 μA and ∼42.3 μA instead of the initial IOFF value (which was in the nA range), signature of an electrochemical process. Fig. 18h illustrates the schematic diagram of the operation mechanism of this device. When a positive VG < 3 V is applied, protons only accumulate at the chitosan/ITO channel interface, producing an EDL layer. When the gate voltage is above UT (>3 V), some protons penetrate into the ITO channel, resulting in bulk doping. The dopant protons will remain in the ITO channel even when VG is reset to 0 V, leading to a non-volatile ID changes which mimics the long-term increase in synaptic weight. Thus, the ITO gate electrode and the ITO channel can be regarded as pre- and post-synaptic signals, respectively (Fig. 18e). Consecutive VG spikes hold the potential to adjust the synaptic weight of the neuromorphic transistor (Fig. 18i). By reading out the synaptic weight with a small VD pulse, the authors showed that positive potentiation voltage spikes (P) incrementally increased the synaptic weight from ∼4.0 to ∼11.0 μA (Fig. 18j), while negative depression voltage spikes (D) incrementally decreased the synaptic weight from ∼11.0 to ∼4.0 μA. Furthermore, good repeatability of this modulation was confirmed through six P/D cycles. This result demonstrates potential applications of the proposed oxide neuromorphic transistors in flexible neuromorphic cognitive platforms.

3.3 Type VI, oxide electrolytes
Oxide electrolytes have been extensively investigated in the area of batteries and fuel cells for the realization of more reliable and safer energy conversion and storage devices.41,42 However, these materials have been rarely reported as transistor gate dielectrics due to their relatively complex fabrication processes and the lack of in-depth understanding of the electrolyte gating phenomena in some solution processed oxide dielectrics, for instance, H rich AlOx (vide infra).188,189
Katz et al. pioneered the use of sodium beta-alumina (SBA) dielectrics for fabricating both metal oxide and organic EDLTs.60,190 The SBA film was prepared by spin-coating a SBA precursor sol–gel, consisting of sodium acetate and Al(OC4H9)3 in water, on ITO glass or Si wafer substrates followed by thermal annealing at up to 830 °C. Next, the semiconductor and the source/drain electrodes then deposited to form an EDLT with a BGTC structure. SBA is an excellent high capacitance electrolyte due to its unique multilayer structure having mobile Na+ within the AlOx lattice planes but negligible ionic and electronic interlayer charge transport (Fig. 19a). C–F measurements were carried out on metal–insulator–metal structures and the SBA films exhibited a capacitance of 2.0 μF cm−2 at 50 Hz, which is far greater than that of typical inorganic oxide dielectric films. The capacitance of the SBA film decreased with frequency, which was expected due to the limited ion polarization time (Fig. 19b). However, a high capacitance of 350 nF cm−2 was also measured at 1 MHz, which implied that high-frequency/low-voltage operation EDLTs could be realized. Fig. 19c shows the transfer characteristic of a BGTC zinc-tin-oxide (ZTO) EDLT based on SBA operating at VD = 2 V in an ambient atmosphere. This device showed an ION/IOFF ratio of 2 × 104 and negligible hysteresis. Moreover, the calculated average effective mobility was in the range of 22–29 cm2 V−1 s−1, assuming a ‘1 Hz-frequency’ extrapolated capacitance of 2.5 μF cm−2.
 Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of sodium beta-alumina (SBA), where blue represents the mobile sodium ions and red and yellow represent the oxygen and aluminum atoms, respectively. (b) C–F characteristics of a 75 nm SBA film. (c) Transfer characteristics of a ZTO transistor fabricated on an ITO glass substrate with SBA as the dielectric. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2009, Springer Nature. (d) False color cross section SEM image showing the device structure of a Li-ion synaptic transistor. (e) Schematic of a synaptic transistor with Li1−xCoO2 as the channel material and LiPON as the electrolyte. (f) Source–drain conductance (GSD) as a function of VG, with VD = 100 mV. The inset shows repeated cycling over the voltage window of −4.1 V < OCP < −3.0 V. The cycle numbers 1, 10, 20, 30, and 40 are shown in various colors. Reprinted with permission.191 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (g) C–F characteristics of the AlOx dielectric films annealed at 300 °C and 400 °C, with the secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) hydrogen depth profiles of AlOx/InOx stacking layers, and the transfer curves of the AlOx/InOx transistors in the saturation region. Reprinted with permission.192 Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. (h) Schematic image of a laterally coupled synaptic transistor with two in-plane gates based on nanogranular SiO2 electrolytes. (i) Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) triggered by presynaptic spike 1 (0.5 V, 20 ms) and presynaptic spike 2 (1.0 V, 20 ms). Reprinted with permission.193 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
Another interesting approach to fabricate an ECT with an oxide electrolyte is to convert a well-developed Li-ion battery (LIB), a two terminal device, to a transistor, by defining the source/drain electrodes and transistor channel at the anode (cathode) side of the battery, while the cathode (anode) side acts as the gate electrode.191,194 An example of this approach is shown in Fig. 19d, where the authors fabricated a Li-ion synaptic transistor (LISTA) using Pt source and drain electrodes (yellow) contacting a 120 nm thick Li1−xCoO2 channel (red) with a channel length of 2 μm. A 400 nm thick lithium phosphorous oxynitride electrolyte (LiPON) layer (green) separated the channel from a 50 nm Si gate electrode (purple). The LiPON solid electrolyte was chosen for the large chemical stability window and high electrical resistivity (>1015 Ωcm).195 This EGT worked as an ECT due to the bulk (de)doping of Li ions in the Li1−xCoO2 channel. Fig. 19e illustrates the resistance switching mechanism in this LISTA device. Here, VG determines the source–drain conductance, GSD, by controlling the Li content in the channel. Application of a negative VG to the open circuit potential (OCP = VG at IGD = 0 A) electrochemically drives Li-ions from the channel into the gate electrode through the solid electrolyte. For Li1−xCoO2, the removal of Li oxidizes Co from +3 to +4 and generates positively charged polarons. As the fraction x in Li1−xCoO2 was varied from 0 to 0.5 the electronic conductivity increased by nearly six orders of magnitude. This process is highly reversible as proved in well-developed rechargeable LIB, and a positive VG with respect to OCP re-intercalates Li ions in Li1−xCoO2 and the channel becomes insulating again (Fig. 19f).
Other than the conventional oxide electrolytes typically used in batteries, other oxides, including amorphous Li doped and H doped/rich AlOx are also emerging as solid electrolytes that can provide superior dielectric performance.50,196,197 Note, even though for a conventional AlOx dielectric, the mobile hydrogen would lead to an overestimation of carrier mobility, large hysteresis, and performance instability, this property can be extremely useful for applications of memristors and artificial synapses.188,189 Pei et al. proposed transistor-based artificial synapses that were simply constructed with a solution-processed InOx channel and an AlOx electrolyte gate dielectric.192 Due to the mobile hydrogen in low temperature processed AlOx (Fig. 19g), under a positive gate bias, the hydrogen can either form an EDL or electrochemically dope InOx, depending on the magnitude of VG, leading to short term potentiation or long term potentiation. Synapses based on this all-oxide structure typically showed a much more stable performance when compared to other artificial synapses based on EGT with IL or aqueous solution electrolytes.
Nanogranular SiO2 can also be an efficient proton conductor and was integrated in an in-plane lateral-coupled oxide-based artificial synapse network based on EDLTs with multiple side-gates.43,193,198,199 Multiple pre-synapses were recorded in this lateral structure due to the proton-related EDL effect (Fig. 19h). When a presynaptic spike was applied on the pre-synapse (a VG pulse on the side-gate electrode), protons migrated to the SiO2/IZO interface and triggered an excitatory postsynaptic current (EPSC). A presynaptic spike (0.5 V, 20 ms) applied on presynapse 1 would trigger an EPSC 1 with an amplitude of ∼30 nA, and a presynaptic spike (1.0 V, 20 ms) applied on pre-synapse 2 would trigger an EPSC 2 with an amplitude of ∼50 nA (Fig. 19i). When two presynaptic spikes were applied on presynapse 1 and presynapse 2, protons migrated to the interface region accumulated; therefore, the two EPSCs would be summed in the postsynapse. This summation is a dynamic analogue function of time. These results demonstrated that the spatiotemporal EPSC summation in this laterally coupled synaptic transistor can effectively simulate spatiotemporally correlated signal processing.
3.4. Electrolyte dielectric in series
The six types of electrolyte dielectrics discussed here each exhibit advantages and disadvantages. The utilization of two or more types of electrolyte dielectrics simultaneously, or employing electrolyte dielectrics in series, hold great potential to maximize advantages. For example, the proper functioning of sensor devices requires high selectivity along with good sensitivity. While EGT based sensors have demonstrated extraordinary sensitivities, they typically show no or inferior selectivity when using a single type of electrolyte.200 Moreover, most EGT sensors are based solely on aqueous electrolytes, which is an issue for long-term stability due to the evaporation of water. To enable good selectivity and stability, more than one type of electrolyte has been utilized in an EGT to balance selectivity and stability.200,201 A representative device structure of this type is shown in Fig. 20a.202 This OECT used a PEDOT:PSS channel on which a glass ring chamber was mounted and filled with an agarose aqueous solution (1 wt%), KCl (10−3 M), and disodium ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid (Na2EDTA, 5 × 10−2 M). After gelation of the electrolyte at room temperature, the chamber was sealed by placing a standard PVC-based K+-selective membrane on top of the hydrogel. Finally, a top rubber chamber (2 mL volume) was used for containing the analyte solution and the gate electrode (Ag/AgCl). This device should show specific selectivity to K+, and the selectivity can be easily tuned by just changing the ion-selective membrane. For instance, by using a Na+-selective membrane, a highly sensitive and selective Na+ OECT sensor can be achieved.201 As shown in Fig. 20b, ID was recorded at a constant VG and VD while the Na+ concentration in the water (analyte) was increased stepwise. The Na+ concentration was adjusted by adding a certain amount of different saline solutions (10−4–10−1 M NaCl) to a larger reservoir (here a 200 mL H2O beaker) which was connected via PVC tubing to the flow cell and further to retracing micro syringes, producing a constant flow of 1 ml min−1. An extremely sensitive response on ID (decrease of ∼250–500 nA dec−1) was observed by varying the Na+ concentration from 10−6 M to 10−1 M due to the change in effective gate potential. Furthermore, good reversibility and selectivity of this ion-sensitive OECT were demonstrated (Fig. 20c). Fast response towards Na+ was observed when the concentration was varied between 10−4 M Na+ (base line) and 10−3 M Na+, while a weak response (∼7% on the variation of ID) to high concentration K+ (10−2 M) is observed. In comparison, by only increasing the concentration from 10−4 M to 10−3 M Na+, 5 times higher ID change was detected, confirming the superior selectivity to Na+ ions.
 Fig. 20  (a) Cross-section schematic of an ion-sensitive OECT. Reprinted with permission.202 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (b) ID response to an increasing Na+ concentration of a typical ion-sensitive OECT with a PVC ion-selective membrane, exhibiting a response time of ∼30 s (see inset). (c) Response curve of a Na+ selective OECT. Reprinted with permission.201 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (d) OECT device schematic with the ion exchange gel positioned on top of the active layer, along with the schematic of OECT operation upon application of a gate bias, ions from solution (Cl−) enter the ion exchange gel and ions from the ion exchange gel (TFSI−) enter and dope the semiconductor polymer layer. (e) Transfer curve of the OECT with and without the ion exchange gel and gm as a function of VG (dotted line). The inset shows the transfer curve and gm as a function of VG (dotted line) of the OECT without the ion exchange gel. (f) Output curves for the OECT with the ion exchange gel. (g) Schematic of the standard Ag/AgCl electrode and ion exchange gel based OECT attached to a Venus flytrap. (h) Current and voltage as a function of time from an OECT and an Ag/AgCl electrode, respectively, upon triggering the hair inside the flytrap four times. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. 
Several newly developed semiconducting polymers exhibit superior electrochemical doping capabilities; however, they are poor ionic conductors of biologically relevant ions (K+, Na+, Cl−, etc.).32,73 Ginger et al. changed the transistor operating mode from that of an organic EDLT to that of an OECT by incorporating an ion exchange gel dielectric between the semiconducting polymer layer and the aqueous electrolyte dielectric (Fig. 20d).203 The ion exchange gel in this device is composed of a blend of (PVDF-HFP) and [BMIM][TFSI]. [BMIM][TFSI] and was chosen as the IL component because it is immiscible with water and contains TFSI−, an anion that efficiently diffuses and dopes hydrophobic conjugated polymers. The semiconducting polymer poly[2,5-bis(3-tetradecylthiophen-2-yl) thieno[3,2-b]thiophene] (PBTTT) was selected because of its high FET mobility (∼1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1), however this polymer is very textured and hydrophobic and is unable to uptake biologically relevant anions in the absence of the ion exchange gel. The device working principle is that upon application of a VG, Cl− ions from the aqueous electrolyte enter the ion exchange gel and the TFSI− ions enter the underlying semiconductor polymer active layer, compensating for holes on the polymer backbone (Fig. 20d). Fig. 20e shows the transfer curves of OECTs with and without the ion gel. The transfer curve shows a greatly enhanced ID when employing ion gel, which is more than four orders of magnitude compared to that in a device without ion gel. The gm increases from ∼1.0 × 10−4 to ∼9.0 mS upon applying the ion exchange gel, along with an enhanced ION/IOFF ratio from ∼4.4 to 105. Fig. 20f shows the corresponding output curves with the application of the ion exchange gel, which show decent linear and saturation regimes.
Next, as a practical demonstration, ion-exchange-gel-modified OECTs were used for measuring extracellular action potentials of a Venus flytrap (Dionaea muscipula) upon mechanical stimulation. The upper leaf of the Venus flytrap typically contains six trigger hairs, which generate an action potential when stimulated. A commercial Ag/AgCl electrode wire and an OECT with an ion exchange gel were placed on the surface of the leaf of the Venus flytrap and the signals from both the OECT and Ag/AgCl electrodes were simultaneously recorded while stimulating the hairs to activate the action potential (Fig. 20g). Note, an aqueous 0.1 M KCl solution was used as an interface between the plant and the ion exchange gel. As stimulation was applied on the trigger hairs, traces of ID/voltage versus time showed the simultaneous recording of the action potential on both the ion exchange gel based OECT and a standard commercial Ag/AgCl wire electrode (Fig. 20h, left). The Ag/AgCl electrode served as a control and measured changes in potential between the Venus flytrap leaf and ground. The signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) was calculated by dividing the amplitude of the depolarization peak (IA or VA) by the standard deviation (σ) of the noise without flytrap stimulation. SNR increased from ∼10 (IA = ∼0.27 μA, σ = 28 nA) to ∼1250 (IA = 35 μA, σ = 28 nA) when the ion exchange gel was applied. These results showed the possibility of using interface engineering to open up a wider palette of organic semiconductors as OECTs that can be gated by aqueous solutions.
4. Summary and perspective
In conclusion, we have reviewed the major electrolyte materials used in EGTs with details concerning their chemical structures/properties and electronic/ionic performances, and have particularly emphasized their impact on EGT functions and fields of use in different applications.
To better compare the different types of electrolytes in this summary section, Table 1 compiles major dielectric properties including specific capacitance, thickness, cut-off frequency, highest applied voltage, and working temperature. All of the electrolytes show high capacitance, typically higher than 1 μF cm−2; although in some studies capacitances higher than 1000 μF cm−2 for electrolytes based on types I, II, or V have been reported due to the bulk doping in ECTs. Except for type I and II electrolytes, the thickness of the other classes can be controlled to be under 100 nm, where thicknesses as low as 20 nm are reported in oxide electrolytes.197 On the other hand, since the formation of the EDL is minimally affected by the electrolyte thickness, thick electrolyte films of more than 500 μm can also be utilized. However, as mentioned in Section 2.1, thicker dielectrics will definitely increase the switching times and reduce operating frequencies. Consequently, for types I and II electrolytes, the cut-off frequencies are typically lower than 103 Hz, while by optimizing the thickness of other solid-state electrolytes cut-off frequencies can be enhanced to values as high as 106 Hz. Furthermore, the highest applied voltage and working temperature are the two parameters that primarily limit the applications of the different types of electrolytes, where type I electrolytes have the narrowest voltage and temperature range, while type VI electrolytes are more robust, having broad applicability over broader voltage and temperature ranges.
Table 1 Summary of the dielectric properties of different types of electrolytes




Electrolyte dielectric

C (μF cm−2)

d (μm)
Cut-off frequency (Hz)
Highest applied voltage (V)
Working temperature (°C)




Type I: aqueous solutions
1–10000
NA
<103
∼1
<100


Type II: ionic liquids
2–2000
NA
<104
∼3
<400


Type III: polymer electrolytes
1–100
0.1–500
<103
∼3
<300


Type IV: ion gels
1–200
0.05–400
<106
∼3
<300


Type V: polyelectrolytes
0.2–3000
0.05–100
<104
∼3
<300


Type VI: oxide electrolytes
0.5–1.6
0.02–1
<104
Can be > 5 V
<700




Considering the different dielectric properties of these materials, they are more or less differently suited for certain applications. However, all these types of electrolytes can be used for synaptic simulation, as the key synaptic feature is based on the relatively slow polarization of the electrolyte component. Except for type VI electrolytes (oxides), all other electrolytes should be equally suitable for flexible/stretchable electronics. Note, type VI electrolytes can also be used for flexible electronics, but would typically exhibit less reliable mechanical properties than the other electrolytes. Type I electrolytes are best suited for bio-interfacing and biosensing purposes due to their biocompatibility, while they are less reliable for circuit integration compared to solid-state electrolytes (types III–VI). Nevertheless, research highlights in human–machine interfacing and brain–computer interfacing may further facilitate the development of circuits based on type I electrolytes. Studies on liquid-based electrolytes provide important insights into how different ions affect EGT performance. Moreover, since the majority of polymer-based electrolytes rely on the same (or at least one of them for polyelectrolytes) mobile ions used in liquid-based electrolytes to form the EDL, the development and mechanistic insights for liquid-based electrolytes facilitated the development of polymer-based electrolytes. For example, it was found that the ionic liquid [EMIM][TFSI] is compatible with most of the semiconductors used in EGTs, thus several studies on ion gel electrolytes incorporated [EMIM][TFSI] to fabricate high performance EGTs.160,166,204 Furthermore, the impact of ion identity on the functionality and performance of p-type OECTs has been widely investigated; thus, the anions affording efficient/fast electrochemical doping of p-type polymers have been identified and are now widely used.73,97,98,205 However, the development of high-performance n-type OECTs remains far behind their p-type counterparts. This is partially due to the design and synthesis challenges of high-performance n-type electrochemically active polymers. Thus, greater investigation and deeper understanding of how the electrolyte affects n-type polymer durability and performance may provide an additional insight into new electron-conducting polymer design/synthesis. Importantly, identification of optimal electrolytes, and particularly the cationic component, for n-type OECTs should not only be limited to ion paring, cation penetration, solvent-induced active layer swelling effects, but also involve understanding of the suppression of side reactions during application of the positive bias, which can be more detrimental for negative vs. positive (bi)polaronic species. Moreover, since aqueous-based electrolytes are widely used in bio-related applications, such as physiological sensing, which directly use biological fluids as the electrolyte, the stability of the electrolytes under bias needs to be studied more accurately, as any side reaction and overshoot of the bias voltage (considering the electrochemical window of aqueous electrolytes is only ∼1 V) could lead to toxic byproduct generation.
The development of printed circuits based on EGTs has accelerated with the incorporation of polymer-based electrolytes and various logic gates. For example, ring oscillators can now operate at frequencies of more than 10 kHz.56 However, their commercialization will require well-defined patterning of all EGT components including the electrolyte, which can further enhance the operation frequency and minimize the overall power consumption by decreasing the parasitic capacitive effects. The development of more efficient photopatternable polymer-based electrolytes is thus of primary importance for applications and could be an effective way to accelerate the introduction of this technology as well as reducing the fabrication costs. Pioneering works have proven the feasibility of this approach,21 but patterning efficiency and resolution need further improvements. Furthermore, for certain applications it is essential that the process is compatible with the existing conventional semiconductor FAB manufacturing techniques.
The thermal stability and the maximum operating voltage of electrolyte dielectrics are much more limited compared to conventional dielectrics, preventing EGT application in several areas where large operating temperature and/or voltages are required for device function such as in bionic robotics, smart textiles, and electrophoretic displays. Oxide electrolytes exhibit far better thermal stability and can sustain far larger break-down voltages/electric fields than other types of electrolytes, and they may enable EGTs for these applications. While most of the high-performance oxide electrolytes still require far higher processing temperatures compared to liquid and polymer-based electrolytes, there are promising new approaches to fabricate them at a temperature compatible with plastic substrates. Finally, EGT operating speeds are too low for applications in, e.g., video rate displays. However, there is a large space where far slower imaging processing are required, e.g., in electronic shelf label and ultra-large/low resolution signage, and this could be important fields where new and exciting electrolyte/EGT research would have impact.
Overall, the development of EGTs relies on research progress in both semiconductors and electrolytes. Since most of the EGT research to date has focused on semiconductors, equally important challenges and thus opportunities lie in the electrolyte. Much can be learned from fields where electrolytes have been actively pursued such as batteries, supercapacitors, fuel cells, drug delivery, catalysis, actuators, dye sensitized solar cells, and electrochromic devices. Thus, active collaborations between the transistor community with other research and technology areas should afford significant advances, considering the similarity in several aspects of processability, ionic conductivity, and stability. We believe the progress in electrolyte materials will greatly influence the development of EGTs, and represents one of the barriers for the large-scale commercialization of EGT-based devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support by AFOSR grant FA9550-18-1-0320, Northwestern University MRSEC grant NSF DMR-1720139, U.S. Department of Commerce, National Institute of Standards and Technology as part of the Center for Hierarchical Materials Design (CHiMaD) award 70NANB19H005, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. U1830207) and Flexterra Corp.
Notes and references
K. Sim, Z. Rao, F. Ershad and C. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e1902417 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Koo, J. K. Song, S. Yoo, S. H. Sunwoo, D. Son and D. H. Kim, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5, 2000407 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Xie, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13643–13653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ji, T. Li and H. Fuchs, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100843 CrossRef CAS .
Better Yield on 5 nm than 7 nm: TSMC Update on Defect Rates for N5, http://www.anandtech.com, accessed June, 2021.
S. B. Desai, S. R. Madhvapathy, A. B. Sachid, J. P. Llinas, Q. Wang, G. H. Ahn, G. Pitner, M. J. Kim, J. Bokor, C. Hu, H. P. Wong and A. Javey, Science, 2016, 354, 99–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ji, J. Jang, J. H. Park, D. Kim, Y. S. Rim, D. K. Hwang and Y. Y. Noh, J. Inf. Disp., 2020, 22, 1–11 Search PubMed .
U. Zschieschang and H. Klauk, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 5522–5533 RSC .
V. Milo, G. Malavena, C. Monzio Compagnoni and D. Ielmini, Materials, 2020, 13, 166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Someya, Z. Bao and G. G. Malliaras, Nature, 2016, 540, 379–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Yang, C. Xu, Q. Zhang and Z. Peng, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2018, 39, 1800246 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Borges-González, C. J. Kousseff and C. B. Nielsen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1111–1130 RSC .
V. G. Reynolds, S. Oh, R. Xie and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 9276–9285 RSC .
H. Sun, J. Gerasimov, M. Berggren and S. Fabiano, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11778–11784 RSC .
W. H. Brattain and C. G. B. Garrett, Bell Syst. Tech. J., 1955, 34, 129–176 CrossRef .
S. T. Keene, C. Lubrano, S. Kazemzadeh, A. Melianas, Y. Tuchman, G. Polino, P. Scognamiglio, L. Cina, A. Salleo, Y. van de Burgt and F. Santoro, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 969–973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Du, X. Lin, Z. M. Xu and D. W. Chu, J. Mater. Sci., 2015, 50, 5641–5673 CrossRef CAS .

          J. C. Dutta, presented in part at the 2012 2nd National Conference on Computational Intelligence and Signal Processing (CISP), 2012.
T. G. Backlund, H. G. O. Sandberg, R. Osterbacka and H. Stubb, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3887–3889 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chae, J. H. Park, H. W. Son, K. S. Hwang and T. G. Kim, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 262, 876–883 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zare Bidoky, B. Tang, R. Ma, K. S. Jochem, W. J. Hyun, D. Song, S. J. Koester, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 30, 1902028 CrossRef .
J. T. Yang, C. Ge, J. Y. Du, H. Y. Huang, M. He, C. Wang, H. B. Lu, G. Z. Yang and K. J. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801548 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Park, S. Lee, C. H. Kim, I. Lee, W. J. Lee, S. Kim, B. G. Lee, J. H. Jang and M. H. Yoon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Kim, C. H. Kim, Y. Kim, N. Kim, W. J. Lee, E. H. Lee, D. Kim, S. Park, K. Lee, J. Rivnay and M. H. Yoon, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3858 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shimotani, T. Kanbara, Y. Iwasa, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi and H. Kataura, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073104 CrossRef .
P. Gkoupidenis, N. Schaefer, B. Garlan and G. G. Malliaras, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Fathipour, E. W. Kinder, A. C. Seabaugh and S. K. Fullerton-Shirey, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4900–4910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chung, A. Khot, B. M. Savoie and B. W. Boudouris, ACS Macro Lett., 2020, 9, 646–655 CrossRef CAS .
E. Zeglio and O. Inganas, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800941 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kergoat, B. Piro, M. Berggren, G. Horowitz and M. C. Pham, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2012, 402, 1813–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Teymourian, M. Parrilla, J. R. Sempionatto, N. F. Montiel, A. Barfidokht, R. Van Echelpoel, K. De Wael and J. Wang, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 2679–2700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rivnay, S. Inal, A. Salleo, R. M. Owens, M. Berggren and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17086 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Kim, K. Hong, W. Xie, K. H. Lee, S. Zhang, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1822–1846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cadilha Marques, D. Weller, A. T. Erozan, X. Feng, M. Tahoori and J. Aghassi-Hagmann, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806483 CrossRef PubMed .
H. F. Ling, D. A. Koutsouras, S. Kazemzadeh, Y. van de Burgt, F. Yan and P. Gkoupidenis, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 011307 CAS .
H. Zhong, Q. C. Sun, G. Li, J. Y. Du, H. Y. Huang, E. J. Guo, M. He, C. Wang, G. Z. Yang, C. Ge and K. J. Jin, Chin. Phys. B, 2020, 29, 040703 CrossRef CAS .
T. Fujimoto and K. Awaga, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 8983–9006 RSC .
R. Jalem, M. J. D. Rushton, W. Manalastas, M. Nakayama, T. Kasuga, J. A. Kilner and R. W. Grimes, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2821–2831 CrossRef CAS .
M. Watanabe, M. L. Thomas, S. Zhang, K. Ueno, T. Yasuda and K. Dokko, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7190–7239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Lu, F. Yan and J. Texter, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2009, 34, 431–448 CrossRef CAS .
C. Duan, J. Huang, N. Sullivan and R. O'Hayre, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 011314 CAS .
K. D. Kreuer, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2003, 33, 333–359 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wan, L. Q. Zhu, J. M. Zhou, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 4491–4497 RSC .
B. Wang, W. Huang, L. Chi, M. Al-Hashimi, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5690–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Panzer and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3177–3180 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Garlapati, M. Divya, B. Breitung, R. Kruk, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707600 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rivnay, P. Leleux, M. Ferro, M. Sessolo, A. Williamson, D. A. Koutsouras, D. Khodagholy, M. Ramuz, X. Strakosas, R. M. Owens, C. Benar, J. M. Badier, C. Bernard and G. G. Malliaras, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1400251 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Yuan, H. Shimotani, A. Tsukazaki, A. Ohtomo, M. Kawasaki and Y. Iwasa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6672–6678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Buth, D. Kumar, M. Stutzmann and J. A. Garrido, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 153302 CrossRef .
H. K. Li, T. P. Chen, P. Liu, S. G. Hu, Y. Liu, Q. Zhang and P. S. Lee, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 244505 CrossRef .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, L. Jiang, E. P. van Geest, L. M. Lima and G. F. Schneider, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603610 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tarabella, F. M. Mohammadi, N. Coppede, F. Barbero, S. Iannotta, C. Santato and F. Cicoira, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 1395–1409 RSC .
K. S. Ngai, S. Ramesh, K. Ramesh and J. C. Juan, Ionics, 2016, 22, 1259–1279 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Yang, Y. K. Kwon, S. B. Lee, S. Kim, K. Hong and K. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8813–8818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zare Bidoky, W. J. Hyun, D. Song and C. D. Frisbie, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 053301 CrossRef .
X. Feng, A. Scholz, M. B. Tahoori and J. Aghassi-Hagmann, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2020, 67, 4918–4923 CAS .
J. H. Choi, W. Xie, Y. Gu, C. D. Frisbie and T. P. Lodge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7294–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Fullerton-Shirey and J. K. Maranas, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 2142–2156 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Pal, B. M. Dhar, K. C. See and H. E. Katz, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 898–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ponce Ortiz, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 205–239 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kutovyi, I. Zadorozhnyi, V. Handziuk, H. Hlukhova, N. Boichuk, M. Petrychuk and S. Vitusevich, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 7305–7313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Singh, G. Palazzo, G. Romanazzi, G. P. Suranna, N. Ditaranto, C. Di Franco, M. V. Santacroce, M. Y. Mulla, M. Magliulo, K. Manoli and L. Torsi, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 174, 383–398 RSC .
Y. Ren, H. Yuan, X. Wu, Z. Chen, Y. Iwasa, Y. Cui, H. Y. Hwang and K. Lai, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4730–4736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Mracek, T. Syrovy, S. Pretl, S. Nespurek and A. Hamacek, 2016 39th International Spring Seminar on Electronics Technology (Isse), 2016, pp. 66–70.
F. Leonardi, S. Casalini, Q. Zhang, S. Galindo, D. Gutierrez and M. Mas-Torrent, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10311–10316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thiemann, M. Gruber, I. Lokteva, J. Hirschmann, M. Halik and J. Zaumseil, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1656–1662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Weller, G. C. Marques, J. Aghassi-Hagmann and M. B. Tahoori, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39, 831–834 CAS .
R. B. Rashid, R. J. Ciechowski and J. Rivnay, Flex. Print. Electron., 2020, 5, 014007 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Paterson, A. Savva, S. Wustoni, L. Tsetseris, B. D. Paulsen, H. Faber, A. H. Emwas, X. Chen, G. Nikiforidis, T. C. Hidalgo, M. Moser, I. P. Maria, J. Rivnay, I. McCulloch, T. D. Anthopoulos and S. Inal, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Rim, J. Inf. Disp., 2020, 21, 203–210 CrossRef CAS .
P. Romele, P. Gkoupidenis, D. A. Koutsouras, K. Lieberth, Z. M. Kovacs-Vajna, P. W. M. Blom and F. Torricelli, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Giovannitti, R. B. Rashid, Q. Thiburce, B. D. Paulsen, C. Cendra, K. Thorley, D. Moia, J. T. Mefford, D. Hanifi, W. Y. Du, M. Moser, A. Salleo, J. Nelson, I. McCulloch and J. Rivnay, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yu, L. Q. Zhu, H. Xiao, W. T. Gao and Y. B. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804025 CrossRef .
M. Kettner, I. Vladimirov, A. J. Strudwick, M. G. Schwab and R. T. Weitz, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118, 025501 CrossRef .
C. B. Nielsen, A. Giovannitti, D. T. Sbircea, E. Bandiello, M. R. Niazi, D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, A. Amassian, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10252–10259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Giovannitti, K. J. Thorley, C. B. Nielsen, J. Li, M. J. Donahue, G. G. Malliaras, J. Rivnay and I. McCulloch, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706325 CrossRef .
S. Inal, G. G. Malliaras and J. Rivnay, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1767 CrossRef PubMed .
A. G. Polyravas, V. F. Curto, N. Schaefer, A. B. Calia, A. Guimera-Brunet, J. A. Garrido and G. G. Malliaras, Flexible Printed Electron., 2019, 4, 044003 CrossRef CAS .
V. F. Curto, B. Marchiori, A. Hama, A. M. Pappa, M. P. Ferro, M. Braendlein, J. Rivnay, M. Fiocchi, G. G. Malliaras, M. Ramuz and R. M. Owens, Microsyst. Nanoeng., 2017, 3, 17028 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Andersson Ersman, R. Lassnig, J. Strandberg, D. Tu, V. Keshmiri, R. Forchheimer, S. Fabiano, G. Gustafsson and M. Berggren, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, D. Kim, N. Matsuhisa, M. Nagase, M. Sekino, G. G. Malliaras, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 10554–10559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hamedi, L. Herlogsson, X. Crispin, R. Marcilla, M. Berggren and O. Inganas, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 573–577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. T. Erozan, G. C. Marques, M. S. Golanbari, R. Bishnoi, S. Dehm, J. Aghassi-Hagmann and M. B. Tahoori, IEEE Transactions on VLSI Systems, 2018, vol. 26, pp. 2935–2946.
S. Zhang, P. Kumar, A. S. Nouas, L. Fontaine, H. Tang and F. Cicoira, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 014911 CrossRef .
K. Manoli, P. Seshadri, M. Singh, C. Di Franco, A. Nacci, G. Palazzo and L. Torsi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 20573–20581 RSC .
P. Bergveld, IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng., 1970, 17, 70–71 CAS .
P. Bergveld and N. F. Derooij, Sens. Actuators, B, 1981, 1, 5–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krüger, M. R. Buitelaar, T. Nussbaumer, C. Schönenberger and L. Forró, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 78, 1291–1293 CrossRef .
S. Rosenblatt, Y. Yaish, J. Park, J. Gore, V. Sazonova and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 869–872 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Koutsouras, G. G. Malliaras and P. Gkoupidenis, MRS Commun., 2018, 8, 493–497 CrossRef CAS .
A. Giovannitti, D. T. Sbircea, S. Inal, C. B. Nielsen, E. Bandiello, D. A. Hanifi, M. Sessolo, G. G. Malliaras, I. McCulloch and J. Rivnay, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 12017–12022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Moser, T. C. Hidalgo, J. Surgailis, J. Gladisch, S. Ghosh, R. Sheelamanthula, Q. Thiburce, A. Giovannitti, A. Salleo, N. Gasparini, A. Wadsworth, I. Zozoulenko, M. Berggren, E. Stavrinidou, S. Inal and I. McCulloch, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002748 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Savva, R. Hallani, C. Cendra, J. Surgailis, T. C. Hidalgo, S. Wustoni, R. Sheelamanthula, X. Chen, M. Kirkus, A. Giovannitti, A. Salleo, I. McCulloch and S. Inal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1907657 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Flagg, R. Giridharagopal, J. J. Guo and D. S. Ginger, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5380–5389 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Flagg, C. G. Bischak, J. W. Onorato, R. B. Rashid, C. K. Luscombe and D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4345–4354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Flagg, C. G. Bischak, R. J. Quezada, J. W. Onorato, C. K. Luscombe and D. S. Ginger, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
A. Savva, C. Cendra, A. Giugni, B. Torre, J. Surgailis, D. Ohayon, A. Giovannitti, I. McCulloch, E. Di Fabrizio, A. Salleo, J. Rivnay and S. Inal, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 927–937 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cendra, A. Giovannitti, A. Savva, V. Venkatraman, I. McCulloch, A. Salleo, S. Inal and J. Rivnay, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807034 CrossRef .
A. Melianas, T. J. Quill, G. LeCroy, Y. Tuchman, H. V. Loo, S. T. Keene, A. Giovannitti, H. R. Lee, I. P. Maria, I. McCulloch and A. Salleo, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eabb2958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. van de Burgt, E. Lubberman, E. J. Fuller, S. T. Keene, G. C. Faria, S. Agarwal, M. J. Marinella, A. Alec Talin and A. Salleo, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 414–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lee, S. Kobayashi, M. Nagase, Y. Jimbo, I. Saito, Y. Inoue, T. Yambe, M. Sekino, G. G. Malliaras, T. Yokota, M. Tanaka and T. Someya, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau2426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Y. Liu, F. Wu, X. Cao, Z. Li, M. Alharbi, A. N. Abbas, M. R. Amer and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1170–1178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Rim, S. H. Bae, H. Chen, J. L. Yang, J. Kim, A. M. Andrews, P. S. Weiss, Y. Yang and H. R. Tseng, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12174–12181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yang, G. S. Cai, X. Z. Wang and Y. L. Pei, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2019, 66, 3554–3559 CAS .
D. Ohayon, G. Nikiforidis, A. Savva, A. Giugni, S. Wustoni, T. Palanisamy, X. Chen, I. P. Maria, E. Di Fabrizio, P. Costa, I. McCulloch and S. Inal, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 456–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gkoupidenis, D. A. Koutsouras and G. G. Malliaras, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Nakatsuka, K. A. Yang, J. M. Abendroth, K. M. Cheung, X. Xu, H. Yang, C. Zhao, B. Zhu, Y. S. Rim, Y. Yang, P. S. Weiss, M. N. Stojanovic and A. M. Andrews, Science, 2018, 362, 319–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Faddoul, R. Coppard and T. Berthelot, presented in part at the 2014 IEEE Sensors, 2014.
J. Kim, Y. S. Rim, H. Chen, H. H. Cao, N. Nakatsuka, H. L. Hinton, C. Zhao, A. M. Andrews, Y. Yang and P. S. Weiss, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4572–4582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Magliulo, A. Mallardi, M. Y. Mulla, S. Cotrone, B. R. Pistillo, P. Favia, I. Vikholm-Lundin, G. Palazzo and L. Torsi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2090–2094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Janata, ECS Solid State Lett., 2012, 1, M29–M31 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ono, K. Miwa, S. Seki and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 063301 CrossRef .
D. Okaue, I. Tanabe, S. Ono, K. Sakamoto, T. Sato, A. Imanishi, Y. Morikawa, J. Takeya and K. Fukui, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 2543–2552 CrossRef .
W. Lu, A. G. Fadeev, B. Qi, E. Smela, B. R. Mattes, J. Ding, G. M. Spinks, J. Mazurkiewicz, D. Zhou, G. G. Wallace, D. R. MacFarlane, S. A. Forsyth and M. Forsyth, Science, 2002, 297, 983–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Misra, M. McCarthy and A. F. Hebard, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 052905 CrossRef .
S. Ono, S. Seki, R. Hirahara, Y. Tominari and J. Takeya, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 103313 CrossRef .
M. H. Yoon, C. Kim, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12851–12869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kettner, M. Zhou, J. Brill, P. W. M. Blom and R. T. Weitz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 35449–35454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. Jang, K. Kim, H. Kim, S. H. Kim and C. E. Park, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7241–7246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jiang, H. B. Ma, D. G. Hasko, X. J. Guo and A. Nathan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1700029 CrossRef .
S. Park, S. H. Kim, H. H. Choi, B. Kang and K. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904590 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. S. Kale, E. Plunkett, W. Shi, B. J. Kirby, D. H. Reich and H. E. Katz, Macromolecules, 2018, 51, 6011–6020 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lenz, F. del Giudice, F. R. Geisenhof, F. Winterer and R. T. Weitz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 579–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, W. Y. Lee, C. C. Shih, M. Y. Wen and W. C. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 25522–25532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, J. Kang, C. Lee, K. Jeong and S. G. Im, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 2000314 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stucchi, G. Dell'Erba, P. Colpani, Y. H. Kim and M. Caironi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800340 CrossRef .
D. Ji, T. Li, Y. Zou, M. Chu, K. Zhou, J. Liu, G. Tian, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, L. Li, D. Wu, H. Dong, Q. Miao, H. Fuchs and W. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2339 CrossRef PubMed .
B. W. Yao, J. Li, X. D. Chen, M. X. Yu, Z. C. Zhang, Y. Li, T. B. Lu and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100069,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.202100069 .
C. Samanta, R. R. Ghimire and B. Ghosh, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2018, 65, 2827–2832 CAS .
Y. Zhu, G. Liu, Z. Xin, C. Fu, Q. Wan and F. Shan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1061–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shimotani, H. Suzuki, K. Ueno, M. Kawasaki and Y. Iwasa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 242107 CrossRef .
S. K. Garlapati, N. Mishra, S. Dehm, R. Hahn, R. Kruk, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 11498–11502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Singaraju, T. T. Baby, F. Neuper, R. Kruk, J. A. Hagmann, H. Hahn and B. Breitung, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Baby, S. K. Garlapati, S. Dehm, M. Haming, R. Kruk, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3075–3083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Grey, L. Pereira, S. Pereira, P. Barquinha, I. Cunha, R. Martins and E. Fortunato, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1500414 CrossRef .
B. K. Sharma, A. Stoesser, S. K. Mondal, S. K. Garlapati, M. H. Fawey, V. S. K. Chakravadhanula, R. Kruk, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22408–22418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Lu, Q. Fu, S. M. Huang and J. Liu, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 623–627 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Siddons, D. Merchin, J. H. Back, J. K. Jeong and M. Shim, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 927–931 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chao and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 2197–2199 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chao and M. S. Wrighton, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109, 6627–6631 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Garlapati, J.
S. Gebauer, S. Dehm, M. Bruns, M. Winterer, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600476 CrossRef .
S. Dasgupta, G. Stoesser, N. Schweikert, R. Hahn, S. Dehm, R. Kruk and H. Hahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4909–4919 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Tao, V. Koncar and C. Dufour, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, H572–H577 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stoesser, F. von Seggern, S. Purohit, B. Nasr, R. Kruk, S. Dehm, W. Di, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 415205 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Nasr, D. Wang, R. Kruk, H. Rosner, H. Hahn and S. Dasgupta, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1750–1758 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Marques, S. K. Garlapati, D. Chatterjee, S. Dehm, S. Dasgupta, J. Aghassi and M. B. Tahoori, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2017, 64, 279–285 CAS .
D. Zhao, Y. Zhu, W. Cheng, W. Chen, Y. Wu and H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, e2000619,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202000619 .
G. C. Marques, A. Birla, A. Arnal, S. Dehm, E. Ramon, M. B. Tahoori and J. Aghassi-Hagmann, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2020, 67, 3146–3151 CAS .
Y. He, P. G. Boswell, P. Buhlmann and T. P. Lodge, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 4645–4652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cho, J. Lee, Y. He, B. Kim, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 686–690 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hong, Y. H. Kim, S. H. Kim, W. Xie, W. D. Xu, C. H. Kim and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7032–7037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Cho, J. Lee, Y. Xia, B. Kim, Y. He, M. J. Renn, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 900–906 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Y. Oh, W. Xu, O. Kim, T. R. Kim, J. Kang, Y. Kim, D. Son, J. B. Tok, M. J. Park, Z. Bao and T. W. Lee, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat7387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. White, K. D. Dorfman and C. D. Frisbie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, W. Zhang, M. J. Ha, J. H. Cho, M. J. Renn, C. H. Kim and C. D. Frisbie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 587–594 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hyun, L. E. Chaney, J. R. Downing, A. C. M. de Moraes and M. C. Hersam, Faraday Discuss., 2021, 227, 92–104 RSC .
B. Nketia-Yawson, G. D. Tabi, J. W. Jo and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000842 CrossRef CAS .
K. G. Cho, H. J. Kim, H. M. Yang, K. H. Seol, S. J. Lee and K. H. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 40672–40680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Nketia-Yawson, S. J. Kang, G. D. Tabi, A. Perinot, M. Caironi, A. Facchetti and Y. Y. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605685 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Nketia-Yawson, G. D. Tabi and Y. Y. Noh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17610–17616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Lee, S. Lee, Y. Ji, K. G. Cho, K. S. Choi, C. Jeon, K. H. Lee and K. Hong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 40243–40251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ji, H. J. Lee, S. Lee, K. G. Cho, K. H. Lee and K. Hong, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, S. Oh, Y. Choi, S. Seo, M. J. Oh, M. Lee, W. B. Lee, P. J. Yoo, J. H. Cho and J. H. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804397 CrossRef .
J. H. Choi, Y. Gu, K. Hong, W. Xie, C. D. Frisbie and T. P. Lodge, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19275–19281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, Q. Zhao and J. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 6754–6773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Kim, B. Chen, Z. Suo and R. C. Hayward, Science, 2020, 367, 773–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sinno, S. Fabiano, X. Crispin, M. Berggren and I. Engquist, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 113306 CrossRef .
L. L. Du, D. D. He, Y. X. Liu, M. S. Xu, Q. P. Wang, Q. Xin and A. M. Song, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2018, 39, 1334–1337 CAS .
L. Herlogsson, X. Crispin, S. Tierney and M. Berggren, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4684–4689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, S. Fabiano, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Liu, L. Q. Zhu, P. Feng, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5599–5604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fabiano, S. Braun, M. Fahlman, X. Crispin and M. Berggren, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 695–700 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, L. Gan, Y. Liu, W. J. Gui, W. Li and X. H. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 419, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Wu, J. Zhang, X. Wan, Y. Yang and S. H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6249–6255 RSC .
I. Cunha, R. Barras, P. Grey, D. Gaspar, E. Fortunato, R. Martins and L. Pereira, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606755 CrossRef .
P. Grey, S. N. Fernandes, D. Gaspar, E. Fortunato, R. Martins, M. H. Godinho and L. Pereira, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 29, 1805279 CrossRef .
S. Dai, Y. Chu, D. Liu, F. Cao, X. Wu, J. Zhou, B. Zhou, Y. Chen and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2737 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Qian, J. Texter and F. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1124–1159 RSC .
A. Laiho, L. Herlogsson, R. Forchheimer, X. Crispin and M. Berggren, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 15069–15073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Herlogsson, X. Crispin, N. D. Robinson, M. Sandberg, O. J. Hagel, G. Gustafsson and M. Berggren, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wu, P. Feng, X. Wan, L. Zhu, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 23578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Guo, J. Tao, L. Q. Zhu, H. Xiao, W. T. Gao, F. Yu and Y. M. Fu, Org. Electron., 2018, 61, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Liu, X. Wan, L. Q. Zhu, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2014, 35, 1257–1259 CAS .
M. Galliani, C. Diacci, M. Berto, M. Sensi, V. Beni, M. Berggren, M. Borsari, D. T. Simon, F. Biscarini and C. A. Bortolotti, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2001218 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zhou, Y. H. Liu, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2014, 35, 280–282 CAS .
K. Banger, C. Warwick, J. Lang, K. Broch, J. E. Halpert, J. Socratous, A. Brown, T. Leedham and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6337–6346 RSC .
X. Zhuang, S. Patel, C. Zhang, B. Wang, Y. Chen, H. Liu, V. P. Dravid, J. Yu, Y. Y. Hu, W. Huang, A. Facchetti and T. J. Marks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 12440–12452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Liu, S. Agarwala, M. L. Yeh and H. E. Katz, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4254–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Fuller, F. E. Gabaly, F. Leonard, S. Agarwal, S. J. Plimpton, R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, C. D. James, M. J. Marinella and A. A. Talin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604310 CrossRef PubMed .
X. C. Liang, Z. W. Li, L. Liu, S. J. Chen, X. Z. Wang and Y. L. Pei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 012102 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Zhu, C. J. Wan, L. Q. Guo, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3158 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. Nikam, M. Kwak, J. Lee, K. G. Rajput, W. Banerjee and H. Hwang, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 18883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lacivita, N. Artrith and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 7077–7090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, D. Jiang, Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, Q. Chen and J. Zhang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1901363 CrossRef CAS .
F. Neuper, G. C. Marques, S. A. Singaraju, R. Kruk, J. Aghassi-Hagmann, H. Hahn and B. Breitung, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2020, 67, 3828–3833 CAS .
Z. Y. Ren, L. Q. Zhu, Y. B. Guo, T. Y. Long, F. Yu, H. Xiao and H. L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 7833–7839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wan, Y. Yang, P. Feng, Y. Shi and Q. Wan, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37, 299–302 CAS .
E. Bandiello, M. Sessolo and H. J. Bolink, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10277–10281 RSC .
K. Schmoltner, J. Kofler, A. Klug and E. J. List-Kratochvil, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6895–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sessolo, J. Rivnay, E. Bandiello, G. G. Malliaras and H. J. Bolink, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4803–4807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Bischak, L. Q. Flagg and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, S. Zhang, Y. Gu, T. P. Lodge and C. D. Frisbie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9522–9527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, B. Wang, Y. Chen, W. Huang, L. Chi, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Adv. Mater., 2021, e2007041,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202007041 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Wei Huang
	Wei Huang obtained his BS (2010) in physics from Nankai University and his PhD (2016) in optical engineering from University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC). He was a postdoctoral fellow and later a research assistant professor in the Department of Chemistry, Northwestern University, under the supervision of Professor Tobin J. Marks and Professor Antonio Facchetti. Currently, he is a research professor in the School of Automation Engineering, UESTC. His research interests include flexible/stretchable electronics, transistor-based multifunctional sensors and solar cells.

Tobin J. Marks
	Tobin Marks is Ipatieff Professor of Catalysis and Materials Science and Engineering at Northwestern University. He holds a BS from the University of Maryland and a PhD from MIT. Recognitions: US National Medal of Science, ACS Priestley Medal, Spanish Asturias Prize, MRS Von Hippel Award, Dreyfus Prize in Chemical Sciences, NAS Award in Chemical Sciences, CAS President's International Distinguished Scientist Award, Israel Harvey Prize. Membership: US, European, German, Italian, and Indian Academies of Science, US NAE and NAI, American Academy of Arts and Sciences; RSC, MRS, ACS, AIC Fellow. Research interests: unconventional catalysis, soft and hard matter electronic materials, and photovoltaics.

Antonio Facchetti
	Antonio Facchetti obtained his PhD in Chemical Sciences from the University of Milan. He is a co-founder and currently the Chief Technology Officer of Flexterra Corporation and an Adjunct Professor of Chemistry at Northwestern University. Dr Facchetti has published more than 500 research articles, 14 book chapters, and holds more than 120 patents (H-index 107). He is a Fellow of the Kavli Foundation, AAAS, MRS, ACS PMSE, RSC, and the National Academy of Inventors. He has received the Italian Chemical Society Research Prize, the 2016 ACS Award for Creative Invention and the Giulio Natta Gold Medal.

 	Fig. 1  Illustrations of different electrolyte types. (a) Type I: aqueous salt solutions where the first solvation shells of both cations and anions are shown. (b) Type II: ionic liquids (ILs) consisting of pure cations and anions. (c) Type III: representative polymer electrolytes, where the salt cations and anions are coordinated with polyethylene oxide-like polymer chains. (d) Type IV: representative ion gel electrolytes based on an ABA triblock copolymer and IL, note that the IL is insoluble in the A blocks (maroon) and soluble in the B blocks (blue). (e) Type V: polyelectrolytes where the upper one is based on the polymerization of cations (polycation), while the lower one is based on the polymerization of anions (polyanion). (f) Type VI: a representative oxide electrolyte based on garnet-type cubic Li7La3Zr2O12,38 where the Li atoms are shown as green/white spheres. Reprinted with permission.38 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
C = Q/V = εrε0A/d	(1)
Ci = εrε0/d	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Structures of parallel-plate metal–insulator–metal (MIM) capacitors based on (a) conventional dielectric and (b) electrolyte dielectric materials. Schematic diagrams of (c) a planar electrode-based electrolyte capacitor, (d) capacitor with an Ag/AgCl electrode, and (e) capacitor with an electrochemically active electrode. Representative capacitances per unit area (f) and highest operatable frequencies (g) of different types of electrolytes dielectrics used in EGTs.	 
CEDL = εrε0/λ	(3)
Ci = 1/(1/CEDL1 + 1/CEDL2)	(4)
C* = Ci/de	(5)
τ = RCEDL = dCEDL/σ	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Thin-film transistor architectures operating with an n-type (positive charges) semiconductor: (a) bottom gate top contact (BGTC), (b) bottom gate bottom contact (BGBC), (c) top gate top contact (TGTC) and (d) top gate bottom contact (TGBC). Note, the illustration is based on n-type TFTs, where the accumulated electrons in the channel by a positive gate bias are presented. (e) Transfer and (f) output plots of an n-type (solution processed IGZO) TFT indicating the linear and saturation regimes and how other relevant TFT performance parameters are measured.	 
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  (a) A typical p-type EDLT structure with a top-gate bottom contact geometry with a semiconductor that is impermeable to ions of the electrolyte. (b) A simplified equivalent circuit of an EGT. (c) Illustration of a p-type ECT structure with the distribution of cations and anions highlighted. (d) Illustration of a p-type EDLT with a side-gate structure.	 
gm = ΔID/ΔVG	(9)
	(10)
gm,norm = μC*(VG − VT)	(11)

 	Fig. 5  Representative liquid electrolyte chemical structures. (a) Cations and (b) anions of salts typically used in salt electrolytes. (c) Cations and (d) anions of ILs (ionic liquids) typically used in electrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Representative transfer curves of P3HT OECTs with six different aqueous electrolytes. (b) Schematic illustration showing that Cl− is less intercalating than TFSI−. Reprinted with permission.95 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectra of P3HT and P3MEEMT films upon electrochemical doping at 0.7 V in aqueous solutions of KCl and KPF6 (0.5 s between spectra). (d) Transfer and transconductance curves of P3MEEMT OECTs in aqueous KCl and KPF6 solutions. Reprinted with permission.96 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Scheme illustrating the mechanism of electrochemical oxidation with KPF6 under different voltage biases. Reprinted with permission.97 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Applied potential waveform as a function of time, and changes in the mass of p(g2T-TT) films when doped with four electrolytes of varying ion concentrations. (b) Schematic representation of the p(g2T-TT)-NaCl(aq) system in the EQCM-D chamber during doping at low and high electrolyte concentrations. (c) The number of water molecules injected into the films at the end of the doping pulse at 0.5 V and remaining in the film upon the subsequent dedoping pulse applied at 0 V as a function of NaCl concentration. (d) Transfer and transconductance plots of p(g2T-TT) OECTs with different NaCl concentrations. (e) Hole mobility of p(g2T-TT) films as a function of NaCl(aq) concentration, and response time of the OECTs as a function of the NaCl concentration measured at VG = VD = −0.5 V. Reprinted with permission.98 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of an OPV integrated with an OECT, along with a photograph of the integrated device (scale bar, 5 mm) and the corresponding circuit diagram. (b) Wiring diagram for cardiac signal recording and a photograph of the self-powered integrated electronic device attached to a finger. The lower panel shows the measured output current from the recorded cardiac signal trace under light illumination. (c) Photograph of the self-powered integrated electronic device attached to the heart of a rat (left), and enlarged images of the channel area (right, top) and of the source–drain electrode (right, bottom), along with the measured output current from the ECG trace, under light illumination. Reprinted with permission.102 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Stretchable OECT array on a honeycomb grid substrate, and cross section of the stretchable OECT array. (e) A 4 × 4 stretchable OECT array when intrinsically stretched (scale bar, 3 mm). (f) Image of the positioning of and (g) ECG signals from the 4 × 4 OECT array on the heart of a rat, along with (h) time delay of ECG signals. Reprinted with permission.103 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic of EDLT surface chemistry, where PTMS is trimethoxy(propyl)silane; APTMS is (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane; and MBS is 3-maleimidobenzoic acid N-hydroxysuccinimide ester, along with (b) EDLT microscope image, and photograph of experimental setup. (c) Aptamers for dopamine, and (d) fluorescence–concentration curves (RFU, relative fluorescent units) indicate selectivity of the dopamine aptamers versus nonspecific targets. (e) Responses of EDLT sensors functionalized with the dopamine aptamer or its scrambled sequence, compared to EDLT responses with a previously reported dopamine aptamer, along with (f) the selectivity of the EDLT. (g) Hypothesized mechanism of stem-loop aptamer target-induced reorientations in close proximity to semiconductor channels and within or near the Debye length: (left) aptamers reorient closer to EDLTs to deplete channels electrostatically; (right) aptamer stem-loops reorient away from the semiconductor channel, thereby increasing transconductance. Reprinted with permission.109 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Structure of an EDLT based on an organic single crystal semiconductor and an IL as gate dielectric (top) and capacitance of the indicated ILs as a function of frequency measured by impedance technique (bottom). (b) Transfer characteristics of EDLTs with an air-gap, [EMIM][FSI], [EMIM][TFSI], and [EMIM][BETI] as the gate dielectric (VD = −0.1 V). Reprinted with permission.114 Copyright 2009, AIP Publishing. (c) Time course of linear transfer curves of EDLT based on [EMIM][FSI] (VD = −0.1 V and scan rate = 20 mV s−1). (d) Time course of the normalized ID measured at VG = −0.3 V (black squares). The red solid line is the fitted data. The blue dotted line represents the time when the detrapping gate voltage (VG,detrapping = 1.5 V) was applied. (e) Schematic of the carrier trapping and detrapping dynamics by the FSI anions in the first IL layer. Reprinted with permission.115 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Vertical EDLT fabrication process. (b) Colored cross-sectional SEM image near the edge of the vertical device. (c) Transfer characteristics of a PDPP based vertical EDLT measured in ambient atmosphere. The solid lines represent the trace and the dashed lines are the re-trace. Reprinted with permission.125 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Representative chemical structures of polymers used in polymer-based electrolytes. (a) Polymers for polymer electrolytes; (b–d) polymers for ion gel, where (b) are triblock-copolymers, (c) are fluorinated polymers, and (d) are representative copolymers (SOS–N3 and SEAS–N3) with photo crosslinkable units. (e) Polyelectrolytes.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of a ZnO nanowire EDLT using an inkjet-printed polymer electrolyte dielectric. (b) Representative transfer curves of ZnO nanowire EDLTs measured immediately after device fabrication and after storing for 20 days in the air. Reprinted with permission.147 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic representations of IGZO-EDLT based logic inverter circuits using three different types of loads: a resistor (R-mode), an enhancement type (E-mode), and a depletion type (D-mode). (d) The corresponding voltage transfer and gain characteristics. Reprinted with permission.138 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Cross-sectional and top views of a top-gate EDLT based on In2O3. (f) Comparison of the transfer characteristics of an in-plane EDLT (sweep rate: 10 mV s−1) with a top-gate EDLT (sweep rate: 2 mV ms−1) at VDS = 1 V. (g) Comparison of the measured transient behavior of a resistor loaded inverter with an in-plane EDLT and a top-gate EDLT measured at VDD = 1 V. Reprinted with permission.148 Copyright 2017, IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Full-wave rectifier schematic, and a photograph of a diode-connected EDLT based full-wave rectifier. (b) Waveform of the measured VOUT and smoothed output voltage (VOUT,smooth) using a load capacitor of 20 pF and 10 μF, respectively, and a load resistance RL of 1 MΩ. Reprinted with permission.57 Copyright 2020, IEEE. Transient analysis of (c) NAND and (d) NOR gates measured at VDD = 1 V. (e) Oscillation frequency and power consumption of a three-stage ring oscillator based on EDLTs, along with (f) the output signal of the ring oscillator (VDD = 1 V). Reprinted with permission.150 Copyright 2020, IEEE.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Optical image of an aerosol-printed EDLT array based on an ion gel dielectric (PS–PMMA–PS:[EMIM][TFSI]) fabricated on a flexible polyimide substrate. (b) Transfer characteristics of a P3HT-based EDLT measured at a VD = −1 V (L = 20 μm, W = 1400 μm). The top of the panel shows a schematic cross-section diagram of the device. (c) Output voltage response of a resistor loaded EDLT inverter at VDD = −1.5 V when VG is pulsed at 1 kHz. The input–output voltage characteristics are shown in the inset. The top panel shows the device schematic diagram. Reprinted with permission.154 Copyright 2008, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic representation of the ion gel electrolyte preparation process using P(VDF–HFP):[EMIM][TFSI] + P(VDF–TrFE–CTFE). (e) Cross-sectional diagram of a top-gate/bottom-contact IGZO EDLT. (f) Transfer curves of IGZO, P3HT and PDFDT based EDLTs. Solid lines and dashed lines represent ID and gate current (IG), respectively. Reprinted with permission.159 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of chemical cross-linking of SOS–N3 ion gels by UV irradiation. (b) Frequency dependence of the specific capacitance for SOS–N3 ion gel films before chemical cross-linking and after UV irradiation for 90 min. The inset shows a schematic of the setup used for measuring the impedance of the Au/ion gel/Au capacitor. (c) Transfer characteristics of ZnO EDLTs with a photopatterned ion-gel. Reprinted with permission.166 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) The device schematic architecture and optical image of a ZnO EDLT with a well-patterned ion gel. (e) Transfer curve, channel-width-normalized gm, and output characteristics of a ZnO EDLT. (f) Schematic and the optical microscope image of an inverter based on ZnO EDLTs, and (g) the corresponding quasi-static output versus input and gain measurements at VD = 3 V. (h) Optical image of a five-stage ring oscillator based on ZnO EDLTs, and output characteristics of a typical ring oscillator with an oscillation frequency as high as 1300 Hz, along with frequency and output range of the ring oscillator as a function of VD. Reprinted with permission.21 Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Device structure schematic of an organic nanowire-based EDLT and its similarity to the neural signal transmission from preneuron to postneuron through a biological synapse. (b) Optical microscopy image of a wavy nanowire stretched from 0 to 100% strain. (c) Transfer characteristics of the pre-stretched nanowire-based EDLT at 0, 50, and 100% strains, and maximum ID and mobility as a function of various strains along the channel length and width directions. Reprinted with permission.155 Copyright 2018, The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Materials used for fabricating complementary polyelectrolyte-gated EDLTs. Schematic cross sections and illustrations of the charge distribution within the polyelectrolyte gate insulator layers in p- and n-channel transistors that are gated with negative and positive gate voltages, respectively. Transfer characteristics for (b) a p-type EDLT with a P(VPA-AA) dielectric, and for (c) an n-type EDLT with a P(VP-EDMAEMAES) dielectric. (d) Complementary polyelectrolyte-gated inverter performance based on p- and n-type EDLTs. Reprinted with permission.171 Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. (e) Schematic illustration of a biological synapse, and a chitosan gated ITO neuromorphic transistor. (f) Transfer curves of an ITO neuromorphic transistor, and (g) ID triggered by gate pulses with different amplitudes at a constant duration of 1 min. (h) Operation mechanism of an ITO neuromorphic transistor operated under different gate biases. (i) Schematic diagram of the spike trains. Thirty consecutive potentiation (P) gate spikes are followed by 30 consecutive depression (D) gate spikes. (j) Obtained synaptic weights after receiving consecutive P and D spikes. Reprinted with permission.74 Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Crystal structure of sodium beta-alumina (SBA), where blue represents the mobile sodium ions and red and yellow represent the oxygen and aluminum atoms, respectively. (b) C–F characteristics of a 75 nm SBA film. (c) Transfer characteristics of a ZTO transistor fabricated on an ITO glass substrate with SBA as the dielectric. Reprinted with permission.60 Copyright 2009, Springer Nature. (d) False color cross section SEM image showing the device structure of a Li-ion synaptic transistor. (e) Schematic of a synaptic transistor with Li1−xCoO2 as the channel material and LiPON as the electrolyte. (f) Source–drain conductance (GSD) as a function of VG, with VD = 100 mV. The inset shows repeated cycling over the voltage window of −4.1 V < OCP < −3.0 V. The cycle numbers 1, 10, 20, 30, and 40 are shown in various colors. Reprinted with permission.191 Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. (g) C–F characteristics of the AlOx dielectric films annealed at 300 °C and 400 °C, with the secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS) hydrogen depth profiles of AlOx/InOx stacking layers, and the transfer curves of the AlOx/InOx transistors in the saturation region. Reprinted with permission.192 Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. (h) Schematic image of a laterally coupled synaptic transistor with two in-plane gates based on nanogranular SiO2 electrolytes. (i) Excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) triggered by presynaptic spike 1 (0.5 V, 20 ms) and presynaptic spike 2 (1.0 V, 20 ms). Reprinted with permission.193 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Cross-section schematic of an ion-sensitive OECT. Reprinted with permission.202 Copyright 2014, John Wiley and Sons. (b) ID response to an increasing Na+ concentration of a typical ion-sensitive OECT with a PVC ion-selective membrane, exhibiting a response time of ∼30 s (see inset). (c) Response curve of a Na+ selective OECT. Reprinted with permission.201 Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. (d) OECT device schematic with the ion exchange gel positioned on top of the active layer, along with the schematic of OECT operation upon application of a gate bias, ions from solution (Cl−) enter the ion exchange gel and ions from the ion exchange gel (TFSI−) enter and dope the semiconductor polymer layer. (e) Transfer curve of the OECT with and without the ion exchange gel and gm as a function of VG (dotted line). The inset shows the transfer curve and gm as a function of VG (dotted line) of the OECT without the ion exchange gel. (f) Output curves for the OECT with the ion exchange gel. (g) Schematic of the standard Ag/AgCl electrode and ion exchange gel based OECT attached to a Venus flytrap. (h) Current and voltage as a function of time from an OECT and an Ag/AgCl electrode, respectively, upon triggering the hair inside the flytrap four times. Reprinted with permission.203 Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.	 

Type I: aqueous solutions	1–10000	NA	<103	∼1	<100
Type II: ionic liquids	2–2000	NA	<104	∼3	<400
Type III: polymer electrolytes	1–100	0.1–500	<103	∼3	<300
Type IV: ion gels	1–200	0.05–400	<106	∼3	<300
Type V: polyelectrolytes	0.2–3000	0.05–100	<104	∼3	<300
Type VI: oxide electrolytes	0.5–1.6	0.02–1	<104	Can be > 5 V	<700

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
