Coordinated behaviors of artificial micro/nanomachines: from mutual interactions to interactions with the environment  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00877B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00877B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3211-3230Coordinated behaviors of artificial micro/nanomachines: from mutual interactions to interactions with the environment

        
          
            Hong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Martin 
            Pumera
          
          
        
      bcde
aSchool of Chemical Engineering & Technology, China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou, Jiangsu 221116, P. R. China. E-mail: hongwang@cumt.edu.cn
bCenter for Advanced Functional Nanorobots, Department of Inorganic Chemistry, University of Chemistry and Technology Prague, Technická 5, CZ-166 28 Prague, Czech Republic
cDepartment of Medical Research, China Medical University Hospital, China Medical University, No. 91 Hsueh-Shih Road, Taichung, Taiwan
dDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Yonsei University, 50 Yonsei-ro, Seodaemun-gu, Seoul 03722, Korea
eFuture Energy and Innovation Laboratory, Central European Institute of Technology, Brno University of Technology, Purkyňova 656/123, Brno, CZ-616 00, Czech Republic
Received 
      5th February 2020
    First published on 20th April 2020AbstractThe coordinated behaviors of living organisms in nature have inspired the design of artificial micro/nanomachines that mimics biological methods of group motion and responses to the environment. Designing and developing the coordinated behavior of micro/nanomachines will bring benefits of synchronized operation, multitasking, and adaptability to a wide spectrum of environments. Similar to macroscale organization in biological systems, we can postulate that interactions between neighbors follow simple rules and that their capabilities to sense and respond to the environment matters for achieving coordinated behavior among micro/nanomachines. In this review, we focus on the efforts made toward the coordinated behavior of micro/nanomachines from both individual–individual and individual–environment interactions. The possible interactions that might be useful to induce coordinated behavior among micro/nanomachines are categorized and illustrated. By highlighting the progress toward designing and studying these interactions, we anticipate insight into the design of artificial micro/nanomachines capable of behaving in a coordinated manner.
Hong Wang
Hong Wang received her BSc from Tianjin University, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in Division of Chemistry & Biological Chemistry, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2017. She completed her thesis work on preparation and applications of micro/nanomotors with Prof. Martin Pumera as her thesis advisor. She is currently a professor in College of Chemical Engineering at China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou. Her research interests include micro/nanomachines, nanomaterials, and electrochemistry.
Martin Pumera
Martin Pumera is the Director of the Center for the Advanced Functional Nanorobots and a tenured faculty member at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. He received his PhD from Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the United States and Spain), he became tenured group leader at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006. In 2010 Martin joined Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, where he worked as tenured associate professor for almost a decade. Prof. Pumera has broad interests in nanomaterials and microsystems, in the specific areas of electrochemistry and synthetic chemistry of 2D nanomaterials, nanotoxicity, micro and nanomachines, and 3D printing. Martin is “2017–2019 Highly Cited Researcher” by Clarivate Analytics.
1. Introduction
From microbial self-organization and ant colonies to bird flocking and fish schooling, biological systems exhibit a wide spectrum of group motion and responses to their environment in striking ways. These ingenious collective survival strategies utilize the diverse advantages of staying close to each other and help living creatures survive. Although natural collective motion appears choreographed, these remarkable behaviors are attributed to self-organization in the absence of any coordinators or controllers. The individuals in the group seem to do their own things solely based on locally available information, yet the group as a whole acts in an extremely coordinated manner. The coordinated behaviors, or in other words self-organized collective performance, of living organisms have fascinated researchers for a long time and have now inspired the design for artificial swarm robotics, comprising large numbers of relatively simple robots able to coordinate and self-organize.
Artificial micro/nanomachines are micro/nanoscale devices capable of converting energy into mechanical motion and forces. Various forms of energy, including chemical, acoustic, electric, magnetic, and optical, can be utilized to power micro/nanomachines.1 As a frontier of interdisciplinary research, great strides have been made in the field of micro/nanomachines due to the efforts of researchers from multiple fields.2,3 The forms and functional strategies of micro/nanomachines have been largely enriched in the past decade.4,5 Nowadays, research on micro/nanomachines is gradually progressing from the basic study of motion at micro/nanoscale to their application in addressing practical problems.6,7 Although the functions of individual micro/nanomachines are limited, a group of micro/nanomachines can perform a wide range of functions beyond the scope of any single unit similar to the benefits of natural swarms. The uniform simple structure, miniaturized size, and batch production of micro/nanomachines are all desired characteristics for swarm robotics to take advantage of a large population. The tiny sizes of micro/nanomachines enable their coordinated behaviors to implement tasks in narrow spaces that normal-sized robots cannot reach, holding great potential for revolutionizing our way of life. In the biomedical field, envisioned applications of micro/nanomachines include in-body bioimaging, diagnosis and treatment down to the cellular level.8 In other engineering fields, micro/nanomachines are promising for sensing, targeted delivery, micromanipulation, microelectronics and so on.9 These prospective applications require micro/nanomachines to perform complex tasks with extraordinary precision and robustness in a dynamically changing environment, which is obviously beyond the capabilities of a single micro/nanomachine.
Coordinated behaviors provide micro/nanomachines the capabilities of synchronized operation and multitasking as well as adaptability to a wide spectrum of environments. The self-organized nature enables micro/nanomachines to allocate themselves dynamically to match the specific requirements of different operating conditions. Compared to conventional approaches using a single machine, a swarm of micro/nanomachines capable of performing coordinated behaviors has advantages in the aspects of efficiency, robustness, flexibility and scalability.10 For some tasks which are too complex for a single micro/nanomachine, a large number of machines will have enhanced task performance at an increased solution speed with the abilities of task sequencing and allocation. For example, a micro/nanomachine may have limited sensing capabilities, but collective perception of the swarm is able to provide comprehensive information of the area. The decentralized control and self-organization endow swarm systems with robustness feature, that is, the ability to function in spite of failures in the individuals to perform their tasks, or disturbances in the environment. In addition to fault tolerance, low unit complexity of the swarm system makes it less susceptible to failures compared to a single complex system able to perform the same task. In response to changes in the environment, swarm systems have the flexibility to utilize different coordination strategies to provide user-specified solutions. Meanwhile, the swarm system can operate under a wide range of group sizes according to the tasks at hand and the operation will not be disturbed by changes in the group sizes.
Despite the simple structures, artificial micro/nanomachines exhibit elegant collective behaviors similar to biological entities.11–14 In natural systems, macroscale organization of living organisms typically stems from neighbor interactions following simple rules as well as their capabilities to sense and respond to the environment. For instance, self-organization of insects requires both direct and indirect interactions.10 Direct interactions are apparent interactions among neighbors including antennation, trophallaxis, and visual and chemical contact, while indirect interactions, denoted as stigmergy, refer to interactions through the environment. Specifically, the environment modified by individual behavior in turn modifies the behavior of other individuals. Likewise, to mimic the coordinated behaviors in nature, we think both the interactions of micro/nanomachines with each other and their interactions with the environment matter. Here, we review the efforts made toward coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines from both aspects. The possible interactions that might be useful to induce coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines are categorized and illustrated (Table 1). Local interactions of micro/nanomachines with one another can be processed through chemical signaling, like cells and microorganisms, or through the introduction of different forces, the consequences of which are changes in the individual motion behavior or dynamic assembly and swarming of local micro/nanomachines. Note that for the purpose of this review, the term “swarming” is used to refer to the self-organization of a large population of micro/nanomachines into densely packed groups or highly ordered colonies, and “assembly” refers to the self-assembly of a few numbers of micro/nanomachines into functional structures or active clusters. Interactions of micro/nanomachines with the environment are mainly manifested in the collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to the stimuli in the environment. Like the taxis behavior of organisms in nature, synthetic micro/nanomachines exhibit movement as a result of various stimuli including gravity, shear flow, physical contact, chemical concentration gradients, magnetic fields, and light. Collective directional motion enables self-targeting of micro/nanomachines, especially in occasions with unknown or dynamically changing target locations. On the other hand, interactions with the environment are conducive to reducing the communication needed between micro/nanomachines. Understanding the local individual–individual and individual–environment interactions is essential for achieving meaningful coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines. By highlighting the progress toward studying these interactions, we intend to reveal the opportunities and challenges facing coordinated behaviors of artificial micro/nanomachines and provide insight into the design of artificial micro/nanomachines capable of behaving in a coordinated way.
Table 1 Brief summarization of possible interactions to induce coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines




Interactions
Types
Introducing ways
Phenomena
Mechanisms




Mutual interactions
Chemical signalling
Silver ions
Speed acceleration
Enhanced fuel decomposition due to silver deposition


Electrolyte gradients
Reversible swarming/assembly into active clusters
Electrophoretic, electroosmotic and chemophoretic effects


Non-electrolyte gradients
Reversible swarming/dynamic assembly into active clusters
Diffusiophoretic and osmotic effects


DNA
Reversible swarming
DNA hybridization


Electrostatic forces
Self-generated electrostatic imbalance
Random assembly
Electric fields generated from self-electrophoretic propulsion


Induced polarization by an external electric field
Directed assembly into multimers/various collective active states
Induced dipoles arising from shape asymmetry or differential dielectric response of materials


Photogenerated charge separation
Light-reversible assembly of active clusters
Light-switchable electrostatic interactions


Magnetic forces
Magnetization
Random assembly into structures with multicomponents
Magnetic dipole interactions in the absence of magnetic fields


Magnetic control by an external magnetic field
Precise assembly and disassembly, reconfigurable swarming
Magnetic dipole interactions in the presence of magnetic fields


Hydrodynamics
Motion of particles in viscous fluids
Fingering instability and clustering, macroscopic directed motion
Hydrodynamic disturbance mediated by solvent


Acoustic radiation force, van der Waals force, optical force, hydrophobic force, capillary force
Applying acoustic/optical fields, hydrophobic surface modification, bubble attachment, etc.
Swarming, assembly into active clusters, patterning, etc.
Interactions due to corresponding interparticle forces






Interactions with the environment
Gravity
Inhomogeneous mass distribution
Gravitaxis
Alignment due to bottom heaviness


Shape asymmetry
Alignment due to fore–rear asymmetry


Light propulsion under upward light
Alignment induced by sufficient light propulsion


Shear flows
Shape/mass anisotropy, partial attraction to the substrate
Rheotaxis
Drag anisotropy exerted by the flow


Physical contacts
Motion along geometric boundaries
Thigmotaxis
Constraint of the motion by two perpendicular surfaces to one dimension


Magnetic fields
Incorporation of permanent magnetic dipoles
Magnetotaxis
Magnetic dipole interactions with external magnetic fields


Chemical gradients
Inhomogeneous distribution of fuel or reaction catalyst
Chemotaxis
Changes in propulsion speed


Light
Asymmetric distribution of photocatalytic materials
Phototaxis
Chemical gradients formed from asymmetric photocatalytic reactions


Isotropic photocatalytic materials with limited light penetration


Light gradients
Solvent demixing by the heating effect of inhomogeneous illumination




2. Interactions between micro/nanomachines
Complex coordinated behaviors can result from simple interactions of individuals with one another. Local interactions between micro/nanomachines can be achieved by chemical signaling or as a function of various forces, ensuring the distributed coordination of micro/nanomachines without centralized control. Interactions via different approaches lead to effects ranging from speed changes to the dynamic self-assembly and reconfiguration of micro/nanomachines. We will discuss those interactions via (i) chemical signaling, (ii) electrostatic forces, (iii) magnetic forces, (iv) hydrodynamics and (v) other forces.
2.1 Interactions via chemical signaling
Chemical signaling is the primary means of communication between and within cells. By sending and receiving signaling molecules, cells can perceive and respond to their environment. As part of the communication process, chemical signaling is related to the physiological activities of cells and the coordinated operation of multiple cells. Bacteria and other microorganisms use chemical signaling to communicate both within and between species. This communication is established on the basis of the interaction between the signaling molecules, ligands, and their receptors. Binding with ligands results in changes in the shape or activity of the receptors, allowing for the transmission of signals and its subsequent physiological effects. Similar to the cells and microorganisms in nature, micro/nanomachines also influence each other by chemical signaling. Micro/nanomachines can sense the chemical secretions of another micro/nanomachine and act correspondingly.
It has been demonstrated that bimetallic nanowire machines exhibit specific acceleration in the presence of trace silver ions.15 This acceleration is attributed to the deposition of silver on the nanorod, which enhances the electrocatalytic decomposition of hydrogen peroxide. Based on the unusual influence of silver ions on the speed of nanowire machines, a motion-based DNA detection method has been developed.16 The activation effect of silver ions makes it feasible to utilize them as chemical signals to mediate the interactions between micro/nanomachines. Chemical communication between a Janus polystyrene (PS)/Ni/Au/Ag nanomachine and a Janus SiO2/Pt nanomachine has been established via silver ions (Fig. 1A).17 The Ag nanomachine releases silver ions spontaneously due to the combined effect of silver dissolution in hydrogen peroxide and galvanic corrosion facilitated by the Au layer. Upon approaching the SiO2/Pt nanomachine, the released silver ions from the silver nanomachine will be absorbed and deposited as metallic Ag on the Pt surface of the SiO2/Pt nanomachine. The deposition of silver contributes to the enhanced decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, leading to dramatic acceleration of the SiO2/Pt nanomachine. In this way, the silver ions serve as transmitted chemical signals between micro/nanomachines, which are then translated into a significant speed increase of the activated nanomachine.
 Fig. 1  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via chemical signaling. (A) Schematic diagram illustrating the interaction between a PS/Ni/Au/Ag nanomachine (activator) and a SiO2/Pt nanomachine (activated machine). The control machine is a SiO2/Pt nanomachine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (B) Collective oscillations of AgCl particles due to the generation of ionic reaction products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (C) Transition between exclusion and schooling behaviors of Ag3PO4 particles through chemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Snapshots of clusters formed by cationic–anionic ion-exchange particles. Cationic ion-exchange particles appear red and anionic ion-exchange particles appear blue. The red arrows indicate the motion direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (E) Living crystals formed by polymeric spheres with protruding hematite cubes under blue light illumination (left) and dissolution of crystals upon extinguishing the light (right). The scale bars are 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2013 AAAS. (F) Association and disassociation of microtubes through DNA hybridization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27 under the CC-BY license. 
The swarm behavior of insects is well established on the basis of their rapid response communication system using pheromones as chemical messages. The use of chemical signals also enables synthetic micro/nanomachines to replicate the swarming of insects. By means of chemical reactions, micro/nanomachines can secrete ionic reaction products and form concentration gradients of electrolytes in their neighbors and induce coordinated behavior of the surrounding micro/nanomachines. Due to the different diffusion speeds of anions and cations, a net electric field is generated that causes the micromachines and surrounding particles to move phoretically in response. In the presence of UV light, silver chloride (AgCl) particles exhibit oscillatory movement in dilute hydrogen peroxide as a result of reversible conversion between AgCl and Ag at the surface (Fig. 1B).18 Upon exposure to UV light, the decomposition of AgCl in water generates protons and chloride ions in solution. On the other hand, the Ag metal can be oxidized by H2O2 to generate AgCl by the consumption of protons and chloride ions. Because of the different diffusion speeds of protons and chloride ions, an oscillating electric field concomitant with the two net reactions is produced, leading to the corresponding motion of the adjacent silica tracer particles. The tracer particles display collective oscillations, being periodically attracted and released by the AgCl particles.
The net electric field generated due to the different diffusivities of cations and anions not only acts on the surrounding particles, but also on the charged fluid layer in the electrical double layer of the substrate. The former results in electrophoretic motion of the particles while the latter leads to fluid motion through electroosmosis. Usually, electroosmotic flow dominates over electrophoresis. Moreover, the concentration gradient of the electrolytes also affects the double layer of the particles and causes a solution flow from higher to lower electrolyte concentration, which is referred to as the chemophoretic effect.19 The reversible swarming behavior of gold microparticles in a hydrogen peroxide solution was established by repeated additions of hydrazine.20 Ionic products can be generated through the reaction between hydrogen peroxide and hydrazine catalyzed by gold surfaces. The electric field caused by the electrolyte gradients induces electrophoretic motion of the gold microparticles and leads to an electroosmotic effect, pumping the fluids toward the ion-producing gold microparticles. The combined action of these two effects results in the aggregation of gold microparticles. The aggregation will be dispersed when hydrazine is depleted, whereas school formation will be renewed upon addition of hydrazine again. Similarly, the schooling and exclusion behavior of Ag3PO4 microparticles can be induced by the action of ammonia solution (Fig. 1C).21 With the addition of ammonia, Ag3PO4 microparticles react with it through a chemical equilibrium to generate different ionic products, among which hydroxyl ions diffuse faster than other ions. As such, an electric field directed away from the ion-producing particles is formed, resulting in the inward electrophoretic motion of the surrounding negatively charged Ag3PO4 microparticles and the outward electroosmotic flow. Compared with electrophoresis, electroosmotic flow is dominant and causes exclusion behavior of the Ag3PO4 microparticles in the presence of ammonia. When ammonia is exhausted, the reaction is reversed and the ions migrate back to the Ag3PO4 microparticles. Therefore, the effects mentioned above are also reversed and the Ag3PO4 microparticles exhibit schooling behavior upon the removal of ammonia. Additionally, UV light could also serve as a stimulus to trigger the transition of Ag3PO4 microparticles from schooling to exclusion. Upon exposure to UV light, the photooxidation properties of Ag3PO4 enable ion-producing reactions, which consequently generate an outward electric field away from the particles. As a result, it is possible to utilize UV to disassemble the schools of Ag3PO4 microparticles. In both cases, a chemophoretic effect facilitates the exclusion by driving the particles away from the higher electrolyte concentration area near the particles’ surface.
In addition to the chemical reactions discussed above, another chemical mechanism, ion exchange, is used to create concentration gradients of electrolytes. Cationic ion-exchange particles exchange contained protons with other cations, generating a local electric field due to the different diffusion coefficients of ions.22 Consequently, an electroosmotic flow pumping fluid toward the cationic ion-exchange particle will be formed above the negatively charged substrate. Due to the symmetry of the ion-exchange particles, a single particle does not self-propel but generates interactions with other particles, leading to the net propulsion of clusters. Theoretical studies showed that active colloids with asymmetric mutual diffusiophoretic interactions can self-assemble into active clusters that exhibit overall translational or rotational propulsion depending on their symmetry.23 The proposed possibility to obtain active clusters has been validated by experiments using ion-exchange particles. Small aggregates consisting of a cationic ion-exchange particle with several anionic ion-exchange particles or passive particles form autonomously and, due to the symmetry breaking of the self-electroosmotic flow, they will perform linear or circular directed motion depending on whether the clusters have reflection symmetry (Fig. 1D).
The chemical signaling between micro/nanomachines is not limited to electrolyte products. The interaction between micromachines can also be mediated via nonelectrolyte products. Unequal concentrations of neutral molecules secreted by the particle generate an osmotic gradient that induces fluid flow and diffusiophoretic movement of the particle. The Janus micromachine composed of an iridium cap and a silica microsphere displays motion in ultra-low concentrations of hydrazine.24 Hydrazine decomposes into hydrogen gas, nitrogen gas, and ammonia with the catalysis of iridium. The created concentration gradient of solute molecules across the Janus micromachines causes water to flow from the region of low solute concentration to that of high solute concentration and, thus, propels the micromachine in the opposite direction, that is, toward the SiO2 side. In the sole presence of hydrazine, it was observed that the Janus micromachines exhibit a swarming behavior (Fig. 1D). Different from the aggregation of gold microparticles in the presence of hydrazine and hydrogen peroxide, the swarming of iridium-based Janus micromachines is ascribed to the osmotic and diffusiophoretic effects. Living crystals, formed by dynamic assembly of photo-activated micromotors, have been demonstrated taking advantage of osmotic and phoretic effects (Fig. 1E).25 The light-activated micromotor consists of a polymeric sphere with most of the canted hematite cube embedded inside and part exposed to the exterior. Upon illumination with blue light, hematite catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide, resulting in chemical concentration gradients together with consequent osmotic and phoretic effects. The self-propelled micromotors assemble spontaneously into organized crystallite structures that can actively join, split, translate, rotate, and collide. When the light is extinguished, the osmotic and phoretic effects cease and the crystallites dissolve due to thermal diffusion. Another example of light-controlled coordinated behavior was demonstrated in the system of TiO2 microparticles and tracer particles. Due to the photoactivity of TiO2, the swarming behavior of tracer particles around TiO2 microparticles can be controlled reversibly by UV light.26 In contrast to living crystals, tracer particles tend to aggregate around TiO2 particles spontaneously in the absence of UV light regardless of the charge, whereas the colloidal particles immediately disassemble upon exposure to UV light. Researchers believe that this phenomenon is due to the combined effect of both electrolyte and non-electrolyte products as well as surface charge interaction.
While the aforementioned interactions lack programmability, Watson–Crick base-pairing makes DNA an ideal interface to control the swarming of micro/nanoobjects in a programmable way. The sensing and information processing abilities of DNA enable programmed and reversible behaviors regulated by corresponding DNA signals through hybridization. The swarming of DNA-functionalized microtubes propelled by kinesin has been demonstrated by programming the interactions among microtubes with the use of DNA crosslinkers as signals.27 Microtubes tethered with single-stranded DNA can glide on kinesin-coated substrates due to the motion of kinesins powered by adenosine triphosphate (ATP). Upon the introduction of linker DNA that can hybridize with the ssDNA on the microtubes, the microtubes will associate into swarms, while dissociation of the swarms is initiated by the introduction of dissociation DNA able to extract linker DNA via a DNA strand exchange reaction (Fig. 1F). The swarming mode (translational or circular motion) can be modulated by adjusting the stiffness of the microtubes, and the formation of different types of swarming is totally independent of each other because of the selective hybridization property of DNA. When a photoresponsive residue, azobenzene, is introduced into the DNA strands as a sensor, the switching between solitary and swarm behavior of microtubes will be further controlled by ON/OFF switching of the hybridization between DNA strands in response to photoirradiation. In spite of the limitless arrangement possibilities afforded by DNA base-pairing, the assembly mediated by base-pairing requires complex design steps and must be undertaken in a very narrow range of conditions. Considering the scalability of assembly, a combination of non-base pairing DNA and layer-by-layer process has been proposed to construct large scale nanoparticle assemblies.28 Apart from the nanoparticle size and nanoparticle layer number, the use of single-stranded DNA capping ligand renders DNA length as an additional tunable parameter in the nanoparticle assemblies to regulate their plasmonic behavior. Based on the synthesis and hydrolysis of DNA, finite-state automaton (FSA, or finite-state machine) capable of state transitions in response to signal inputs was also developed.29 The reagents needed for both generation and degeneration of DNA (DNA precursors, DNA polymerase and DNA-hydrolyzing enzyme) were flowed into microfluidic devices with precisely spaced obstacles at the same time. The locomotion behavior of the dynamic DNA material can be regarded as a series of FSAs undergoing state transitions from Init to Growth, and Decay. The use of each FSA as a unit allows programming of the material behavior by connecting them in a serial way through “Flow altered” signals.
2.2 Interactions via electrostatic forces
Electrostatic forces are among the most frequently used interactions to mediate the interplay between nanoparticles. Depending on the charges of nanoparticles, electrostatic forces can be either attractive or repulsive while the range of the forces, long- or short-ranged, is also tunable with the variation of experimental conditions. To induce electrostatic forces between micro/nanomachines, it is necessary to create an electrostatic imbalance across the micro/nanomachine structure so that the micro/nanomachines with imbalanced charges can interact with each other. An electrostatic imbalance can be induced by different ways, such as a self-generated electric field, polarization under external electric fields, and photogenerated charge separation.
The motion of bimetallic nanorod machines is attributed to a self-electrophoretic mechanism. Two different electrochemical half reactions occurring at opposite ends of the nanorod lead to a concentration gradient of ions and a consequent local electric field that drives the motion of the nanorod. Originated from the self-generated electric field, the two ends of the nanorod are surrounded by oppositely charged solutions, which has been verified by the attachment of differently charged microparticles to different ends of the nanorod. Due to the attraction of opposite ends, the nanorods can dynamically assemble into staggered doublets and triplets in hydrogen peroxide when moving in the same direction as illustrated in Fig. 2A.30
 Fig. 2  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via electrostatic forces. (A) Interactions between self-electrophoretic nanorods moving in the same direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences. (B) Chiral clusters formed by polystyrene dimers under electric fields. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015 National Academy of Sciences. (C) Collective states formed by spheres with off-centered charges under electric fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (D) Assembly and disassembly of TiO2/Pt Janus micromachines through light-switchable electrostatic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Microscopic images illustrating the assembly and disassembly of a TiO2/Pt Janus micromachine with colloidal particles in the presence and absence of UV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Given that micro/nanomachines can be polarized under external electric fields, induced dipolar interactions between micro/nanomachines mediate the formation of various collective states of the micro/nanomachines. The assembly of achiral particles into chiral clusters has been demonstrated using alternating current (AC) electric fields.31 Polystyrene dimers with asymmetric lobes were employed as building blocks to form chiral clusters. The aqueous suspension of the asymmetric dimers filled the gap between two indium-tin-oxide (ITO) glasses. When applying a perpendicular AC electric field across the gap, the dimers are polarized and dipolar interactions between the dimers facilitate the formation of a family of chiral clusters with a central standing dimer and other dimers lying on the substrate as petals. With the small lobes pointing toward the center, the petals bind to the central dimer closely, forming either right-handed or left-handed clusters. Both in-plane and out-of-plane dipolar interactions contribute to the assembly of clusters. The number of petals in the clusters is not fixed and the clusters consisting of four or fewer petals are all chiral without exception (Fig. 2B). For clusters with five petals, a small portion of the clusters are chiral, whereas for clusters with six petals, only achiral clusters exist. Unbalanced hydrodynamic flow arising from the chirality of the clusters results in their rotation propulsion in the plane perpendicular to the applied electric field and the rotation direction is governed by their handedness. Different from shape asymmetry, another electric field-based strategy to direct the reconfiguration of micromachines takes advantage of the difference in polarization of distinct materials.32 Silica microspheres with one side coated with a metal were subsequently covered with a thin layer of SiO2 in order to achieve a homogeneous outermost layer. The application of an AC electric field polarizes the metal and silica hemispheres differently. As a result, the ionic flows on the two sides of the microspheres have different magnitudes, causing the propulsion of particles perpendicular to the electric field. Moreover, imbalanced electrostatics arising from the differential dielectric response result in dipolar interactions among the spherical micromachines. As the dielectric response is dependent on the frequency of the electric field, the behavior of the micromachines can be adjusted by tuning the frequency (Fig. 2C). At a low electric field frequency, dipolar interactions are very weak and the particles move and collide randomly. With a moderate increase of the frequency, dipolar interactions start to act and all the micromachines move toward their metallic sides. Due to the repulsion between the metallic hemispheres, the micromachines form swarms, keeping relatively uniform distances from their surrounding neighbors. When the frequency reaches the megahertz level, head-to-tail chains are formed as a consequence of the strong attraction between the opposite dipoles of the metallic and dielectric hemispheres. Upon the addition of salt, compact clusters are formed due to changes in the dipolar interaction. Standing surface acoustic waves (SSAW) can induce AC electric fields due to nonuniform charge distribution, thus offering a way to mediate the communication of micromachines through electrostatic forces.33 Polarized by the SSAW-induced AC electric field, nanowires form stable patterns under the action of electrostatic forces and dielectrophoretic forces.
The properties of photocatalytic materials to generate electron–hole charge separation upon exposure to light provide another possibility to maneuver the interaction between micro/nanomachines by light. Taking advantage of light-switchable electrostatic interactions, light-controlled dynamic interactions between TiO2/Pt Janus micromachines made of TiO2 microspheres and Pt caps have been demonstrated.34 In the presence of UV light, charge separation occurs and the photogenerated electrons in the TiO2 are transferred to the Pt layer. Water reduction and oxidation occur, respectively, at the two sides to create a concentration gradient of protons that leads to the self-electrophoretic motion of the TiO2/Pt Janus micromachines. As illustrated in Fig. 2D, due to the electrostatic attraction between the oppositely charged TiO2 and Pt components, the micromachines aggregate under UV irradiation. When the UV is off, charge separation stops and the aggregation of micromachines disassembles as a result of Brownian motion. When the UV is back on, the micromachines will not assemble into dense aggregates immediately as a combined result of several effects; that is, the decreased electrostatic attraction due to the increased distance in between, the exclusive motion of micromachines due to the osmophoretic and electrophoretic effect, as well as Brownian motion, together result in the delay of micromachine aggregation. Based on this delay in the on–off–on cycle of UV irradiation, the aggregation of these Janus micromachines is able to be avoided with the use of pulsed UV irradiation. The light-switchable electrostatic interactions are not limited to communication among the micromachines and they can also mediate the dynamic interplay between micromachines and other colloidal particles.35 With UV irradiation, the TiO2/Pt Janus micromachines attract and assemble charged colloidal particles in the surroundings (Fig. 2E). In the case of negatively charged silica particles, they are attracted by the positively charged TiO2 ends, whereas in the case of positively charged PS particles, they are attracted to the negatively charged Pt ends. The resulting assembly of passive colloidal particles moves together with the micromachines as a whole. When the UV light is turned off, the assembly of micromachines with colloidal particles disintegrates and the process can be reversed through the control of light exposure.
2.3 Interactions via magnetic forces
For long-range interactions, the introduction of magnetic forces between micro/nanomachines can induce their interplay to assemble into multicomponent machines or to form complex patterns. Interactions between micro/nanomachines based on magnetic forces require magnetic components in the structure of micro/nanomachines. Demonstrated examples of magnetic interactions between micro/nanomachines relate to the different magnetic behaviors of materials. Ferromagnetic materials remain magnetized after magnetization by an external magnetic field even when the field is removed. Typical ferromagnetic materials include Fe, Co, and Ni. While all the magnetic moments are aligned in the same direction in ferromagnetic materials, the magnetic moments are aligned in the opposite directions and balanced completely in antiferromagnetic materials. As a canted antiferromagnet, the hematite particle possesses a small permanent moment and can be oriented in an external magnetic field.36 Paramagnetic materials can be magnetized in a magnetic field, but their magnetism disappears when the field is removed.
Magnetic interactions can facilitate the assembly of micro/nanomachines into multicomponent machines. Due to the ferromagnetic components in the structure of micro/nanomachines, attractive forces are generated between micromachines and lead to assembly configurations. The magnetically assisted self-organization of V-shaped nanomachines and Janus Ni/SiO2 microspheres into helicopter-like nanomachine systems has been demonstrated by mixing the two types of magnetized structures.37 The V-shaped nanomachines, with ferromagnetic Ni layers deposited on the elbow, stand upright on the Ni sides of the Janus microspheres (Fig. 3A). One arm of the V-shaped nanomachine is coated with a layer of Pt, which catalyzes the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and causes the rotation of the structure in hydrogen peroxide. Compared with non-magnetized structures, magnetic interactions dramatically increase the yield of the desired helicopter structures.
 Fig. 3  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via magnetic forces. (A) Self-assembly of helicopter-like nanomachine systems through magnetic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. (B) Dynamic assembly of ultrasound-propelled nanorods into multimers through magnetic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (C) Microscopic images and schematic diagrams illustrating the assembly of helical micromachines into the chain configuration and other configurations. Fl and Fs are the propulsion forces exerted on the helical micromachines with different sizes. FT is the towing force. Dl and Ds are the drag forces. The scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Four collective formations formed by peanut-shaped hematite micromachines under magnetic fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright AAAS. (E) Ant bridge-mimicking microswarms of conductive nanomachines controlled by magnetic fields. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Dynamic interactions between external energy-propelled micro/nanomachines based on magnetic forces and the resulting changes in propulsion behavior have also been studied. Bimetallic nanorods display autonomous motion in fluid with the excitation of ultrasound due to the asymmetric acoustically driven fluid streaming around the concave and convex ends of the nanorods. Ni stripes are intentionally arranged at the ends of the nanorods to facilitate the formation of multimers via magnetic attraction between the ferromagnetic Ni segments (Fig. 3B).38 The nanorod machines tend to form and enlarge the assembly through collisions. Dimers, trimers, and higher multimers with regular geometries are all able to be formed. The number of nanorods in the assembly is dependent on the motion speed and number density of the nanorods. The generated assemblies are propelled by ultrasound as a whole and display various modes of motion. Furthermore, magnetic guidance via a weak magnetic field also works for the motion of these assemblies. The magnetic attraction between the nanorods is very stable, so that the assembly structures remain intact under the guidance of an external magnetic field or after isolation by drying.
Inspired by the motion of flagellar bacteria, rotating helical micromachines achieve directional motion by creating nonreciprocal motion in the presence of rotating magnetic fields. The helical micromachines are made of polymeric helical structures with a layer of ferromagnetic coating on the outside. Assemblies of helical micromachines with different geometrical configurations such as crosses and straight (or bent) chains are formed via magnetic forces between the micromachines and the configurations of the assemblies affect their propulsion behaviors to a large extent (Fig. 3C).39 One advantage of the magnetically propelled helical micromachines is that the assembly and disassociation of micromachines can be well controlled by adjusting the direction, strength, and speed of the rotating field. For the straight chain configuration, the attractive forces between the two helical micromachines with different designs allow them to assemble into a chain and propel together at relatively low frequencies. With the reversal of the magnetic rotation direction, the propulsion direction of the whole assembly is also reversed. However, when the magnetic frequency is increased beyond a threshold, the drag forces acting on the micromachines exceed the magnetic attraction forces, resulting in disassociation of the assembly. For non-straight assemblies, the propulsion properties highly depend on the angles between the helical micromachines. Peanut-shaped hematite particles with a permanent moment along their short axis can display different modes of motion, such as oscillating, rolling, wobbling, tumbling, and spinning, in an alternating magnetic field.40 Individual micromachine dynamics determine the interaction between the micromachines and trigger the self-organization of micromachines into various forms including liquid, chains, ribbon, and vortex (Fig. 3D). Hydrodynamic interactions and magnetic dipole forces are the main interactions between the micromachines contributing to the formation of swarms. These four collective formations are interconvertible through fast and reversible transformations by adjusting the frequency and polarization of the rotating magnetic field. In another study, paramagnetic and electrically conductive nanoparticles were prepared by functionalizing Fe3O4 nanoparticles with gold layers through the assistance of polydopamine.41 The formed Fe3O4@polydopamine@Au nanoparticles can serve as building blocks to construct ribbon-like swarms that can be elongated and shortened reversibly, enabling the connection of disconnected electrodes by building conductive pathways (Fig. 3E). By mimicking the structure and function of ant bridges, the application of these conductive swarms in microswitches, flexible circuits, and repairing microcircuits has been demonstrated.
2.4 Interactions via hydrodynamics
A particle moving in a viscous fluid induces a hydrodynamic disturbance that can influence its neighbor. Long-range interactions mediated by the solvent are called “hydrodynamic interactions.” In low Reynolds number environments, where viscous forces dominate over inertial forces, hydrodynamic interactions are predominant forces that cannot be neglected. Through generating and reacting to the fluid flows, micro/nanomotors in the solution experience hydrodynamic interactions with each other. It has been demonstrated that hydrodynamic interactions alone can result in the spontaneous formation of persistent clusters of rotating magnetic particles.42 Polymeric spheres with magnetic hematite cubes embedded inside, which will rotate with a rotating magnetic field due to their small permanent magnetic moment, were employed in the study to isolate the role of hydrodynamics. Despite the propulsion by magnetic fields, the dominant particle–particle interaction is hydrodynamic and inter-particle magnetic interactions are negligible in comparison. The spheres rotating near a wall around an axis will exhibit motion in the perpendicular direction, but the speed resulting from rotation is much lower than the fluid velocity at their surface. As such, the motion of the rotating spheres is mainly attributed to being advected in the flow of neighboring particles. The density-dependent mean velocity results in the development of a shock front, which rapidly becomes unstable in the direction transverse to propagation. The unstable front exhibits density fluctuations growing to fingers, which is called “fingering instability” (Fig. 4A). Regardless of the viscosity and driving torque, the instability wavelength is directly proportional to the height of the particles above the wall, which can be adjusted by tuning the solvent density. When the particles are high enough, the fingers detach from the front to form stable compact clusters rotating around their center of mass and moving much faster than single particles. Both the fingering instability and clustering phenomena described above are able to be reproduced by simulations with only hydrodynamic interactions. The instability is a generic feature of particles rotating parallel to a floor with hydrodynamics to be the dominant interparticle interaction.
 Fig. 4  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via hydrodynamics and other forces. (A) Fingering instability of magnetic microrollers arising from hydrodynamic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Transition of Quincke rollers to directed collective motion. From left to right are isotropic gas, propagating band, and homogeneous polar-liquid, respectively. The scale bar is 500 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) Microscopic images illustrating the swarming behavior of bimetallic nanorods in the presence of ultrasound. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (D) Chain and ring patterns formed by ultrasound-propelled nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (E) SEM image of the spinning dimer formed by two tadpole nanomachines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. (F) Assembly of micromachines through hydrophobic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (G) Schematic diagram and microscopic image of assembled microtubes through capillary forces between bubbles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
Another example of coordinated behavior induced by hydrodynamic interactions is macroscopic directed motion of Quincke rollers (Fig. 4B).43 Different from the magnetic rollers driven by a rotating magnetic field discussed above, the rotation direction of Quincke rollers is not prescribed, but arises from the system dynamics. Upon applying an electric field with a high enough amplitude to an insulating sphere placed in a conducting fluid, infinitesimal fluctuation will disrupt the charge distribution at the sphere's surface and bring about a net electrostatic torque to rotate the sphere at a constant speed in random directions. In this study, poly(methyl methacrylate) beads immersed in a hexadecane solution and filling the gap between two conducting glass slides were used as self-propelled rollers. The rollers were electrically confined in racetracks. At very low densities, the rollers rotate at the same speed in random directions, forming an isotropic gaseous phase. When increasing the area fraction above a critical value, a macroscopic band spontaneously forms and propagates at a constant velocity through an isotropic phase. The critical fraction is a material constant independent of the particle velocity and the electric field amplitude. Upon further increasing the area fraction, the propagating bands catch up with themselves in the racetrack and form a homogeneous polar-liquid phase. The emergence of these coordinated behaviors chiefly originates from hydrodynamic interactions between the electrically powered rollers. In addition, hydrodynamic interactions also stabilize the polar-liquid phase by suppressing giant density fluctuations.
2.5 Interactions via other forces
In addition to the forces discussed above, it is also feasible to induce interactions between micro/nanomachines through other forces. Acoustic radiation force, van der Waals force, optical force, hydrophobic force, and capillary force have also been proposed to mediate the interaction between micro/nanomachines, despite the limited examples and lack of evidence in some cases. Further studies on the role of these forces in the interactions between micro/nanomachines are needed to achieve better swarm control.
Acoustic radiation forces consist of primary forces exerted on single particles by the acoustic field and secondary forces that cause interactions between particles. The primary forces lead to the migration and assembly of particles in the acoustic field. Micro/nanomachines move toward low-pressure regions in the acoustically generated pressure gradients. In this way, localization and swarming of micromachines can be achieved with the use of acoustic fields. For example, in the absence of sound waves, the nanorod machines display autonomous motion in hydrogen peroxide, whereas the application of standing sound waves results in the rapid gathering of bimetallic nanorod machines in nodes or antinodes (Fig. 4C).44 The secondary forces are mutual forces between particles and cause attraction or repulsion, and sometimes the formation of multi-particle assemblies. The spontaneous formation of acoustically propelled nanorods into chain and ring patterns in the levitation plane is believed to originate from the attractive secondary acoustic radiation force as well as van der Waals forces (Fig. 4D).45 Another phenomenon proposed to result from van der Waals forces is the assembly of two tadpole-shaped micromachines consisting of silica microspheres and TiO2 arms into spinning dimers (Fig. 4E).37 Analogous to acoustic fields, optical fields induce mechanical forces on micro/nanoparticles that are proportional to the gradient of the light intensity. Light scattering results in interparticle forces, namely, optical binding, through which particle patterns within an optical trap can be formed. The assembly of gold nanoparticles into well-organized arrays has been achieved through the cooperation of optical binding interaction and optical forces.46 Utilizing the properties of hydrophobic forces to drive nonpolar substances to aggregate, micromachines with hydrophobic hemispheres spontaneously form assemblies with the hydrophobic sides facing one another (Fig. 4F).47 The attraction due to hydrophobic interactions allows each of the micromachines to have a range of orientational freedom in the assembly. The platinum caps on the other sides of the micromachines generate a net force on the resulting assembly and lead to its motion. Different modes of motion emerge from diverse orientations of the assemblies. As to bubble-propelled micro/nanomachines, bubbles expelled by the machines can serve as signals to mediate their interactions.48 Attractive capillary forces between bubbles are strong enough to pull attached microtubes together and form assemblies (Fig. 4G). However, to make bubbles firmly attached to the microtubes, the experiments were conducted in a thin aqueous film of propylene carbonate with hydrogen peroxide, which is not applicable to the normal operating condition in aqueous solutions. The assembly and disassembly of the microtubes are decided by the balance between the attractive capillary force and the repulsive driving force. With the addition of a drop of hydrogen peroxide, the microtubes disassemble gradually.
3. Interactions of micro/nanomachines with the environment
Interaction with and response to the environment are key features of mobility. For living systems, the capability of sensing surroundings is crucial and the migration along a gradient is called “taxis.” The classification of taxis is based on the type of stimulus and, among the identified types of taxis, micro/nanomachines exhibit gravitaxis, rheotaxis, thigmotaxis, chemotaxis, magnetotaxis, and phototaxis. Depending on the motion direction with respect to the stimulus, taxis behaviors can be divided into positive and negative taxis. In this part, we discuss the collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to different stimuli as a result of their interactions with the environment.
3.1 Collective directional motion in response to gravity
Gravitaxis, or geotaxis, describes the orientation of an organism relative to the gravitational field of the earth. Positive gravitaxis refers to a swimming motion toward the center of the earth and negative gravitaxis means swimming in the opposite direction of the gravitational force. Despite the higher density of microorganisms compared with the surrounding medium, negative gravitaxis enables them to counteract sedimentation and find optimal positions in the environment for their growth and reproduction. Gravitaxis is also involved in the vertical motion of photosynthetic microorganisms to adjust the amount of solar radiation with natural variability. The vast majority of studies on micro/nanomachines have concentrated on their motion in one focus plane without considering the vertical motion. As motion control in all three dimensions is essential for real-world applications, the influence of gravity on the motion behavior of micro/nanomachines is not negligible. Generally, gravitactic motion requires a stable orientation of the microorganism with respect to the gravitational field. In addition to the physiological mechanism proposed for some organisms, mechanical alignment mechanisms via purely passive effects, inhomogeneous mass distribution, and shape asymmetry have also been suggested to result in gravitaxis. For real biological systems, gravitaxis may be the combined effect of these factors, whereas micro/nanomachines also display gravitaxis despite the lack of physiological processes.
Gravitaxis induced by inhomogeneous mass distribution has been demonstrated using catalytic Janus micromachines. The Janus micromachines typically form with one side of the polystyrene microspheres coated with a thin layer of platinum. The mass asymmetry brought by the hemispherical platinum coating orientates the Janus microspheres in a “cap down” (bottom heavy) configuration, whereas the self-diffusiophoresis propulsion mechanism caused by the asymmetric decomposition of H2O2 generates thrust pointing away from the platinum cap.49 As such, the preferential propulsion direction of Janus micromachines is upward in spite of the gravitational field, exhibiting negative gravitaxis. Enlarging the size of Janus microspheres reveals an apparent tendency for upward motion. This size dependency is attributed to the increased masses of the platinum caps and their further positions from the center of the microspheres, both of which contribute to an increasing torque to bias the orientation of micromachines with respect to gravity. For photochemically propelled AgCl–poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and Ag–PMMA Janus micromachines, the active caps are also oriented downward because of higher densities, propelling the micromachines away from the cap to move upward upon activation by light (Fig. 5A).50,51 The light-induced negative gravitaxis of these two kinds of photochemically driven micromachines is attributed to mass asymmetry and the illumination light source is not necessarily from the bottom.
 Fig. 5  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to gravity and shear flow. (A) Negative gravitaxis of PMMA–AgCl micromachines under light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Experimental trajectories of L-shaped micromachines under increasing illumination intensity. The illumination intensity gradually increases from 1 to 6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) The negative gravitaxis of TiO2/SiO2 micromachines under light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (D) Positive rheotaxis of polymer spheres with hematite protrusions. The viscous drag Fs exerted by the flow on the particle generates a torque MF, which aligns the particle with the flow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 AAAS. (E) Self-electrophoresis mechanism of bimetallic nanorods and their orientation by shear flow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Apart from mass asymmetry, shape asymmetry alone is sufficient to lead to gravitaxis. Asymmetric L-shaped particles with homogeneous density were employed in the study to investigate the role of shape anisotropy in gravitactic motion.52 The short arms of the particles were coated with a thin layer of gold, which results in local heating upon laser illumination. When suspended in a binary mixture of water and 2,6-lutidine, the particles exhibit phoretic motion in the direction perpendicular to the metal cap as a result of local demixing of the solvent by the heating effect. During passive sedimentation, the L-shaped particles exhibit an alignment with shorter arms at the bottom. Comparison between Au-coated L-shaped particles and non-coated particles shows no measurable deviations, proving the feasibility of taking the coated particles as study objects with homogeneous mass distribution and fore–rear asymmetry. Once the self-propulsion in the presence of laser illumination is powerful enough to overcome sedimentation, the L-shaped micromachines will perform negative gravitaxis, moving in an upward direction. The angle between the trajectory of the micromachine and the y-axis increases with increasing self-propulsion through the adjustment of light intensity until it exceeds 90 °C. With a further increase of the light intensity, the micromachines display downward motion again and trochoid-like motion at even higher light intensities. Fig. 5B shows the experimental trajectories of L-shaped micromachines under increasing illumination intensity. These results suggest that shape anisotropy alone is sufficient to result in either positive or negative gravitaxis.
Alignment of the motion direction with the direction of the gravitational field is necessary to exhibit gravitaxis. In the case of negative gravitaxis, the self-propulsion of micro/nanomachines must be powerful enough to overcome their sedimentation. For Janus micromachines without obvious bottom heaviness, a light-controlled strategy to align phototactic micromachines and to induce negative gravitaxis of the micromachines has been demonstrated.53 Janus micromachines with one hemisphere coated with TiO2 can exhibit a phototactic response as photocatalytic decomposition of H2O2 at the TiO2 side creates chemical gradients to propel the particle away from the TiO2 cap. The catalytic caps are oriented randomly without light from the bottom. Upon UV illumination with sufficient intensity from the bottom, the micromachines will reorient and swim upward against gravity (Fig. 5C). Different from the orientation resulting from bottom heaviness, the orientation of the cap is governed by the position of the light source and photocatalytic activity. With light intensity above a threshold, the orientation of the cap occurs and the threshold is dependent on the size of the micromachines.
3.2 Collective directional motion in response to shear flow
Rheotaxis is a behavioral response of organisms to shear flow. It is a common phenomenon observed in many aquatic organisms. Many organisms are able to sense and align themselves along or against the direction of flow. Zebra fish position themselves facing the oncoming stream of water, exhibiting positive rheotaxis to help them to hold the position instead of being swept downstream. Certain fish species, such as salmon, even migrate against the water current to reach spawning sites. Other positive rheotaxis examples include the continuous upstream movement of sperm cells and E. coli bacteria. On the other hand, some aquatic species choose to go with the flow, displaying negative rheotaxis. Most studies on the motion of synthetic micro/nanomachines have been conducted in a static fluid environment, ignoring the need of practical applications. For in vivo biomedical applications, micro/nanomachines have to navigate in the shear flow of blood circulation to reach the desired locations to perform tasks. For environmental applications, the current of natural water is also an important factor of influence that needs to be considered for the motion of micro/nanomachines. In addition to the complex biological sensing mechanism, physical mechanisms are also involved in the rheotaxis behavior of organisms. Artificial rheotaxis of synthetic micro/nanomachines takes advantage of the interplay between the intrinsic polarity of the structure and their alignment by the viscous torque.
Palacci et al. demonstrated the positive rheotaxis of composite particles with hematite cubes partly embedded in polymer spheres.54 With hematite catalyzing the decomposition of H2O2 upon blue-light illumination, the particles can exhibit self-propelled motion toward the hematite cube as a result of osmotic effects induced by the generated chemical gradients. To build polarity, the micromachines underwent thermal treatment to make the hematite cubes protrude out of the polymeric matrix. In the presence of an external flow, the active micromachines orientate themselves with the hematite protrusion facing the imposed flow and, consequently, migrate upstream. The alignment of the micromachines’ polar heads with the flow is attributed to drag anisotropy. When activated by blue light, the osmotic flow developed from the hematite-catalyzed H2O2 decomposition pulls the hematite cube toward the surface with the polymer sphere lagging behind. The imposed flow exerts a viscous drag on the polymer body, resulting in a torque to align the micromachines with the flow (Fig. 5D). To induce rheotaxis, anisotropic drag exerted by the flow on micro/nanomachines is essential for the alignment, which demands a shape anisotropy of the micro/nanomachines or attraction between part of the micro/nanomachines and the solid substrate.
Similarly, bimetallic nanorods in the presence of H2O2 exhibit a tilt angle between the rod axis and the surface owing to a balance of electrostatic, gravitational, and hydrodynamic forces developed during chemical propulsion.55 Bimetallic nanorods can display both chemically and acoustically propelled motion. The oxidation and reduction of H2O2 occur, respectively, at the two metallic segments of the nanorods and generate a self-induced electric field that drives the movement of the negatively charged nanorods toward the anode. In the absence of the flow, the nanorods are propelled in random directions in H2O2, whereas in shear flow, the nanorods collectively orientate themselves with their anode facing against the flow and can even move upstream at a moderate shear flow rate. The orientation of the nanorods originates from the larger drag force experienced by the tails of the tilted nanorods compared with the heads in the flow and consequent alignment of the nanorods with the flow (Fig. 5E). In the presence of ultrasound, the nanorods are propelled with the less dense end as the leading end due to the acoustic streaming propulsion mechanism. Acoustic propulsion is more powerful than chemical propulsion, but lacks control over the micromachines’ orientation. Combining the merits of the two propulsion modes, both positive and negative rheotaxis of the hybrid-powered bimetallic nanorods can be achieved by tuning the composition of the nanorods. In chemical–acoustic hybrid fields, the nanorods with lighter anode ends display enhanced positive rheotaxis while the nanorods with heavier anode ends exhibit negative rheotaxis.
3.3 Collective directional motion in response to physical contact
Thigmotaxis refers to the movement of an organism relative to the mechanical stimulus of physical contact. It has been demonstrated that artificial micro/nanomachines can sense, align, and propel along topographic features, which can be recognized as a primitive form of thigmotaxis. The alignment interaction between micromachines and topographical features offers a way for temporal and spatial control over the distribution of the micromachines. In close proximity of solid surfaces, spherical Janus micromachines half-coated with platinum exhibit directed motion along the geometric boundaries.56 The steering of Janus micromachines by geometric constraints is through lowering the effective dimensionality on the trajectories of micromachines and the resultant quenching of the Brownian rotational motion. Boundaries with two perpendicular surfaces constrain the motion of Janus micromachines to one dimension, thus allowing their arbitrary trajectories along the geometric boundaries. This behavior is attributed to the hydrodynamic interaction of the micromachines with the wall.
Taking advantage of the intrinsic tendency of active spherical Janus micromachines to move along boundaries, step-like topographical features can be used for the docking and guiding of these micromachines.57 In the presence of H2O2, the micromachines move in random directions until they encounter steps with sufficient height. Upon collision, the micromachines re-orientate and align along the steps to follow them (Fig. 6A). It has been demonstrated that micromachines can be restricted by topographical features including rectangular strips, cylindrical posts, square posts, and wells, and proceed along the patterns. It is noteworthy that increased fuel concentration leads to an increase in the retention time of the micromachines at the cylindrical posts, which demonstrates that the activity of micromachines is directly related to the confining effect of boundaries. This conclusion has also been proved by photoactivated hematite micromachines relying on the photocatalytic decomposition of H2O2.58 Before exposure to light, groove patterns display no influence on the hematite micromachines, whereas the micromachines will align along the channels upon activation by light.
 Fig. 6  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to physical contact and magnetic fields. (A) Reorientation of a Janus micromachine upon encountering a step. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 under the CC-BY license. (B) Accumulation of Janus micromachines in linear ratchet structures. Left: t = 0 s. Right: t = 60 s. Reproduced from ref. 59. (C) Docking of Janus micromachines to propel the microgear. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Reversed motion of magnetized microtubes upon switching the direction of magnetic fields. The scale bars are 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Utilizing the alignment effect of the micromachines with topographical patterns, direct flows of micromachines could be realized. The rational use of asymmetrical patterns has been demonstrated to direct the macroscopic flows of micromachines.59 Janus micromachines in ratchet-like patterns exhibit directional flows and are finally concentrated in the final cell of the structure (Fig. 6B). The self-assembly of active Janus micromachines with passive larger microgears has also been investigated for the purpose of formulating autonomous microgears. Collision of self-propelled micromachines with the gear is followed by alignment of their propulsion direction along the side of the gear (Fig. 6C).60 Among these micromachines, some are stuck on the corners of the gear and serve as self-assembling actuators to power the microgear. The influence of orientation and number of gathered micromachines on the rotation speed of the microgear has also been studied.
3.4 Collective directional motion in response to magnetic fields
Magnetotactic bacteria orient and migrate along geomagnetic field lines due to the presence of contained magnetic particles with a permanent magnetic dipole. These magnetic nanoparticles are arranged in chains (“magnetosomes”) that behave like a compass needle to align the bacteria to magnetic field lines. Flagellated magnetotactic bacteria combine flagellar propulsion and magnetic responses to provide an ideal controllable bioactuator for constructing more complex micromachines. This adaptability has been validated by the successful navigation of these bacteria in the human microvasculature.61 Furthermore, the bacteria can be tracked and monitored by clinical magnetic resonance imaging systems. Integrating magnetotactic bacteria with drug-loaded mesoporous silica microtubes offers controllable micromachines capable of delivering antibiotics to target sites.62
Despite the extensively studied magnetic guidance of micro/nanomachines, research on the orientation of micro/nanomachines in more complex magnetic environments is still very limited. In this part, we focus on synthetic micro/nanomachines with permanent magnetic dipoles and that can change alignment and propulsion direction upon switching the direction of the magnetic field. Ferromagnetic objects containing randomly oriented magnetic domains can be attracted by a magnet, but cannot be repulsed by it. Magnetization of ferromagnetic objects is the re-alignment of their magnetic domains by exposure to a strong magnetic field, which results in their transition to magnetic objects with defined magnetic dipoles able to be aligned with external magnetic fields. The axis of magnetization is along the longest dimension of an object and the distinct behaviors of microtubes with inserted Fe layers in the presence of an external magnetic field before and after magnetization are consistent with that deduction.63 Non-magnetized micromachines always display bubble-propelled motion toward the magnet in H2O2, regardless of the magnet's polarity. On the other hand, upon magnetization by a strong magnetic field, the microtubes are magnetized longitudinally. As a result, their orientation and propulsion direction will be reversed once the external magnetic field is reversed; that is, the microtubes exhibit magnetotaxis like magnetotactic bacteria (Fig. 6D). Similarly, segmented nanotubes with a built-in nickel part can sense the orientation of the magnetic field and move accordingly, either toward or away from the magnet depending on its orientation.64
3.5 Collective directional motion in response to chemical gradients
Chemotaxis is the directional locomotion of organisms in response to concentration gradients of a chemical stimulus. Single-cell organisms like bacteria utilize chemotaxis to find food and escape from poisons, while for multicellular organisms, chemotaxis plays a critical role in many body functions such as fertilization, immune responses, and wound healing. Depending on an organism's direction of motion relative to chemical gradients, chemical stimuli can be divided into chemoattractants and chemorepellents. Different from the complex signal transduction regulated by physiological processes, the chemotactic behavior of artificial micro/nanomachines originates from changes in their propulsion speed due to the inhomogeneous distribution of fuel or reaction catalyst. Chemically propelled micro/nanomachines convert the chemical energy of fuels into mechanical energy and exhibit faster diffusion in the case of promoted reactions, e.g., higher substrate concentrations or in the presence of a positive catalyst, thus driving them along the concentration gradient of these positive stimuli. Reaction substrates or positive catalysts can be used as chemoattractants to attract the micro/nanomachines propelled by chemical reactions.
As one of the most common fuels to power micromachines, H2O2 presents a prime example to study the chemotactic behavior of synthesized micro/nanomachines. The chemotaxis of micro/nanomachines toward H2O2 was first demonstrated using bimetallic nanorods (Fig. 7A).65 Pt/Au nanorods, which can exhibit self-propulsion in the presence of H2O2, have been proved to swim toward a hydrogel filled with H2O2. Another experimental setup used to verify the chemotaxis of nanorods is four capillaries containing different concentrations of H2O2. Over time, the capillary with the highest concentration of H2O2 gathered the most nanorods, as it creates the strongest concentration gradient of H2O2 due to diffusion. Subsequently, the chemotactic behavior of Janus micromachines and tubular micromachines toward H2O2 fuel was also demonstrated using microfluidic devices that can provide spatially localized H2O2 regions (Fig. 7B).66 Upon entering the intersection district, the micromachines can sense the gradient of H2O2 and exhibit biased motion toward higher fuel concentrations. It has also been shown that matchstick-like silica–manganese oxide micromachines able to be self-propelled in H2O2 can exhibit directed motion toward the fuel source.67 The chemotactic behavior of polymeric stomatocytes loaded with platinum nanoparticles toward H2O2 was examined using specially designed static glass chambers and dynamic microfluidic channels. In addition to the artificially added chemical source, activated neutrophils secreting hydrogen peroxide can serve as chemoattractants to direct the motion of stomatocyte nanomachines.68
 Fig. 7  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to chemical gradients. (A) Experimental setup for studying the chemotaxis of bimetallic nanorods toward H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2007 The American Physical Society. (B) Chemotaxis study of catalytic microtubes and Janus micromachines toward H2O2 using microfluidic devices. H2O2, micromachines and water are introduced through inlets i1, i2, and i3, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2013 The Authors. (C) pH taxis of Pd-based micromachines in H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (D) Chemotactic behavior of bacteriobots toward egg cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (E) Chemotactic behavior of hybrid neutrophil micromachines toward E. coli in a microfluidic channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. 
Through these studies, we can see that chemotaxis is not restricted by the form of micro/nanomachines. It is a general nature of chemically propelled micro/nanomachines to move toward higher concentrations of substrates (fuel) involved in the chemical reactions to power the micro/nanomachines. Apart from chemotaxis toward H2O2, micro/nanomachines powered by chemical reactions other than H2O2 decomposition exhibit chemotactic behavior toward their corresponding fuel. Examples of using other chemicals as chemoattractants have been reported. Self-propelled oil droplets show chemotaxis toward their fuel surfactant due to the Marangoni effect.69 The oil droplets contain catalysts to catalyze the hydrolysis of a surfactant into lipophilic and hydrophilic molecules. The lipophilic products form tiny oil droplets in the surroundings and cause surface tension imbalance to propel the droplet. The self-propelled oil droplets have the tendency to move toward higher concentrations of the fuel surfactant. Another example is Janus particles with catalyst immobilized on one side to catalyze polymerization reactions.70 The concentration gradient resulting from the micromachine-catalyzed reactions creates a net fluid flow in the surroundings, leading to the motion of the micromachines. The polymerization-powered micromachines exhibit chemotaxis when moving up a gradient of monomer substrates.
Apart from using fuel as a chemoattractant, catalysts can change the reaction rate and, thus, change the diffusion rate of micro/nanomachines, which offers another option for chemoattractants. As the decomposition rate of H2O2 increases with pH, higher pH leads to faster diffusion of micro/nanomachines using H2O2 as fuel. Therefore, the micro/nanomachines powered by the decomposition of H2O2 should move up the pH gradient. This hypothesis was verified by polymeric micromachines with catalytic palladium nanoparticles randomly distributed on the surface (Fig. 7C).71 A pH gradient was imposed in aqueous H2O2 fuel by continuously dripping NaOH in the center from a thread connected to a reservoir above. The pH gradient could be sensed by micromachines located a centimeter away from the thread and guided the migration of the micromachines toward the thread. Similarly, the chemotaxis of iMushbots, which are mesoporous mushroom fragments loaded with catalytic magnetite nanoparticles, was investigated using the same experimental setup.72 Higher pH accelerates the catalytic decomposition of H2O2 while lower pH decreases the decomposition rate. As a result, the iMushbots will spontaneously migrate toward the thread dripping positive catalyst NaOH, whereas they will move away from the thread in the case of dripping negative catalyst HCl. Besides, the pH taxis of micromachines propelled by the Marangoni effect can be induced by the solubility changes of substrates with pH.73 Metal organic framework (MOF) machines release loaded diphenylalanine (DPA) peptides upon partial dissolution in the presence of EDTA. The reassembly of the released DPA generates surface tension gradients, leading to the motion of MOF machines. Owing to the increased solubility of DPA at higher pH, the MOF machines display directed motion toward the high pH area.
Although the biological process of chemotaxis in nature is difficult to imitate artificially, hybrid micromachines integrating chemotactic microorganisms or cells with synthetic components provide a way to construct intricate micromachines with more advanced functions. Taking advantage of the natural merits of bacteria, neutrophils, and sperm cells, hybrid micromachines inherit their chemotactic behavior toward corresponding targets. A bacteria-based micromachine was constructed by attaching flagellar bacteria on one side of polystyrene (PS) microbeads.74 Selective patterning of the bacteria is achieved by coating one side of the microbeads with bovine serum albumin (BSA) to prevent the adhesion of bacteria on this side while the bacteria can attach to the hydrophobic PS surface easily. The prepared bacteriobots maintained the chemotaxis of bacteria nanoparticles with their chemoattractants and chemorepellents. Natural sperm biomachines, loaded with functional nanoparticles via endocytosis, maintain their instinct to exhibit chemotactic behavior toward egg cells (Fig. 7E).75 As a type of immune cell, neutrophils have intrinsic chemotaxis ability to move toward pathogens, such as bacteria and viruses, and eliminate them by phagocytosis. To build hybrid micromachines with drug delivery ability, neutrophils are combined with drug-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles camouflaged by the E. coli membrane.76 The camouflaging strategy prevents the leakage of encapsulated drugs and, moreover, facilitates the uptake of nanoparticles by the neutrophils via phagocytosis. The integrated hybrid neutrophil micromachines sense the chemoattractant gradients generated by E. coli and spontaneously transport drugs to the bacteria (Fig. 7E).
3.6 Collective directional motion in response to light
Phototaxis is the ability of organisms to display motile responses to the stimulus of light. Many organisms acquire energy and information about surroundings from light. Accordingly, phototactic behaviors are commonly observed in a variety of organisms as they seek optimal light conditions for living and photosynthesis. Different from the phototaxis of organisms based on photoreceptors involved in the signal transduction cascade processes, the phototaxis of synthetic micro/nanomachines generally originates from photogenerated chemical gradients. The concentration gradients of non-electrolyte chemicals will induce a fluid flow around the particles and consequent propulsion of the particles toward areas of lower chemical concentration, which is the so-called “self-diffusiophoresis mechanism.” On the other hand, the concentration gradients of electrolytes build an electric field and drive the motion of particles due to a “self-electrophoresis mechanism.” The swimming direction of the micro/nanomachines is related to their overall zeta potential. By tuning their zeta potential through chemical modification, the swimming direction of the micro/nanomachines can be switched.
Phototactic micro/nanomachines are usually made of photocatalytic materials that can create electron–hole pairs upon illumination by light. A Janus TiO2/Si nanotree structure, capable of exhibiting either positive or negative phototaxis in H2O2, contains an array of TiO2 nanowires grown on a silicon nanowire (Fig. 8A).77 With the silicon nanowire as the photocathode and TiO2 nanowires as the photoanode, anions and cations will be generated by the photoelectrochemical reaction upon illumination, leading to the formation of a self-generated electric field pointing from the head to the tail. As the overall zeta potential of the nanotree decides its motion direction in the electric field, the swimming direction of the nanotree can be modulated by changing its zeta potential via chemical modification. Positive overall zeta potential results in movement in a tail-forward direction, whereas negative zeta potential leads to migration in a head-forward direction. Moreover, uneven illumination on the 3D structure of the Janus nanotree will generate an asymmetric distribution of chemical products and create an electric field away from its body axis around the TiO2 head. Depending on the zeta potential of the TiO2 head, the nanotree will align accordingly due to the electric torque, either along or against the illumination direction. The phototactic behavior of the nanotree can be programmed by reasonable arrangement of the surface charge of different parts. The micromachines exhibit positive phototaxis if the overall nanotree and its TiO2 head have the same charge. Negative phototaxis will be exhibited when the overall nanotree and its TiO2 head are charged differently. Similarly, a spherical phototactic micromachine consisting of graphite-like carbon nitride and platinum nanoparticles (Pt–g-C3N4) can exhibit positive or negative phototaxis in water through surface modification.78 As an efficient photocatalyst, the holes and electrons generated due to charge separation induce different redox reactions occurring, respectively, at g-C3N4 and Pt nanoparticles. The ionic products form an electrical field as a result of their different diffusion rates. By chemically modifying the surface charge, the micromachines are able to move either toward or away from the light source.
 Fig. 8  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to light. (A) Schematic diagrams illustrating the propulsion and orientation of Janus TiO2/Si nanotrees. The lower left is the SEM image of the nanotrees. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Negative and positive phototaxis of isotropic semiconductor micromachines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. 
The asymmetry required for the light-steered motion of micro/nanomachines can be built either by the intrinsic structure asymmetry of the micro/nanomachines described above or from the aspect of light. The intensity of light decreases dramatically with penetration depth, which offers a way to create the desired asymmetry. Isotropic semiconductor micromachines have been developed on the basis of the limited penetration depth of light in semiconductors.79 When the size of the semiconductor microsphere is much larger than the penetration depth of light, photochemical reactions will occur asymmetrically on the microsphere, resulting in concentration gradients of the chemical products. With this strategy for isotropic micromachines, positive and negative phototaxis can be achieved by employing micromachines made of different semiconductors (Fig. 8B). In the case of TiO2 and Ag3PO4 in H2O2, the non-electrolyte O2 molecules formed on the illuminated side induce a fluid flow that propels the micromachines to the opposite side, that is, away from the light source. For ZnO and CdS microspheres undergoing photocorrosion under UV illumination, the produced electrolytes form an electrical field pointing inward of the microspheres due to the different diffusion rates of the ionic products. The negatively charged CdS or ZnO microspheres move toward the light source accordingly in the self-generated electric field. In addition, an inhomogeneous light field can also induce phototactic behavior of micro/nanomachines. Transparent silica microspheres with a light-absorbing carbon cap are capable of moving under laser illumination because heating of the cap causes local demixing of the binary solvent. When exposed to an inhomogeneous laser field, the inhomogeneous illumination breaks the axial symmetry of the velocity field around the particle, resulting in alignment of the particle and directed motion within a light gradient.80
4. Conclusions
After more than 10 years of research, the development of micro/nanomachines has come to the point where swarm-level behavior needs to be emphasized instead of only individual-level performance. Coordinated behaviors possess a variety of advantages over individual acts. The coordinated parallel operation of swarms allows the efficient completion of tasks largely beyond the capacity of individual micro/nanomachines. The collective behavior of swarms emerges from the interactions of micro/nanomachines with their peers and the environment in which they act. By reviewing current research on these interactions, we hope to provide a perspective for the design and fabrication of micro/nanomachines with coordinated behaviors. Singling out and understanding these interactions enable better control of the system for coordinated actions as a whole.
In spite of the considerable efforts toward swarm behavior, research on the coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines is still at an embryonic stage. To design a micro/nanomachine swarm with precise control, each unit in the swarm should be capable of sensing, information processing, locomotion and communication. Programmable self-assembly of complex two-dimensional shapes with a swarm of mechanical robots has been demonstrated.81 However, due to the challenges in shrinking component sizes, the micro/nanomachines are not intelligent enough as macroscale mechanical robots. Restricted by current micro/nanofabrication technologies, the structures of micro/nanomachines are limited to micro/nanoobjects with simple geometric shapes and components. There are huge margins for improvement in many aspects in order to achieve swarm-level behaviors. In the aspect of design and fabrication, the cost of micro/nanomachine fabrication and propulsion should be kept low to allow scalability. Utilizing a large population of micro/nanomachines demands their inexpensive mass production and energy-efficient design. In the aspect of peer interactions, the existing simplified interactions between micro/nanomachines cannot satisfy the requirements for coordinated behaviors. The randomness in the interaction process poses challenges with regard to precise control over the swarms. More detailed studies on regulating the number and size of swarms are needed to fill the gap. Moreover, most of the interactions between micro/nanomachines lead to only assembly instead of information transmission and, thus, the majority of reported swarms lack the ability of reconfiguration. Accurate temporal, spatial, and strength control of the interactions is indispensable to construct systems with coordinated behaviors. In this sense, interactions regulated by an external field have an advantage over spontaneous interactions. Lastly, in the aspect of interactions with the environment, notwithstanding excellent stimulus–response behaviors, the interactions of micro/nanomachines with the environment and with their peers are isolated without proper coordination. Future efforts to bridge the two types of interactions are essential to push forward the coordinated behaviors of micro/nanomachines. Although we are still far away from mature swarm micro/nanomachines, we believe that unremitting efforts will lead us into a new era of nano-innovation. We have witnessed a lot of extraordinary progress in micro/nanomachines at an individual level and expect that their coordinated behaviors on a large scale may further amplify human creativity.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
H. Wang thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21905303), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20180635) and the Six Talent Peaks Project in Jiangsu Province (XCL-073) for funding support. M. P. was supported by the project Advanced Functional Nanorobots (reg. no. CZ.02.1.01/0.0/0.0/15_003/0000444 financed by the EFRR).
References

          J. Wang, Nanomachines: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York, USA,  2013 Search PubMed .
H. Wang and M. Pumera, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 8704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, W. Gao, L.-P. Xu, X. Zhang and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603250 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Lin, Z. Wu, Y. Wu, M. Xuan and Q. He, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, A. C. Hortelão, T. Patiño and S. Sánchez, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and M. Pumera, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705421 CrossRef .
J. Parmar, D. Vilela, K. Villa, J. Wang and S. Sánchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 9317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, B. E.-F. de Ávila, W. Gao, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Sci. Robot., 2017, 2, eeam6431 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Gracias, J. Tien, T. L. Breen, C. Hsu and G. M. Whitesides, Science, 2000, 289, 1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo and G. Theraulaz, Swarm Intelligence: From Natural to Artificial Systems, Oxford University Press, Oxford, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
M. You, C. Chen, L. Xu, F. Mou and J. Guan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 3006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Duan, S. Ahmed, A. Sen and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 1938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Solovev, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1284 RSC .
W. Wang, W. Duan, S. Ahmed, T. E. Mallouk and A. Sen, Nano Today, 2013, 8, 531 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kagan, P. Calvo-Marzal, S. Balasubramanian, S. Sattayasamitsathit, K. M. Manesh, G.-U. Flechsig and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 12082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, S. Balasubramanian, D. Kagan, K. M. Manesh, S. Campuzano and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2010, 1, 36 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Chang, H. Teymourian, D. E. Ramírez-Herrera, B. E.-F. de Ávila, X. Lu, J. Li, S. He, C. Fang, Y. Liang, F. Mou, J. Guan and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Ibele, P. E. Lammert, V. H. Crespi and A. Sen, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, H. Zhang, Z. Li and W. Wang, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 1797 RSC .
D. Kagan, S. Balasubramanian and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Duan, R. Liu and A. Sen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1208 Search PubMed .
R. Niu, A. Fischer, T. Palberg and T. Speck, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Solo and R. Golestanian, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 068301 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, R. Dong and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2276 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. P. Steinberg, D. J. Pine and P. M. Chaikin, Science, 2013, 339, 936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, M. Diaz, U. M. Córdova-Figueroa and A. Sen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1568 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Keya, R. Suzuki, A. M. R. Kabir, D. Inoue, H. Asanuma, K. Sada, H. Hess, A. Kuzuya and A. Kakugo, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 453 CrossRef PubMed .
T. L. Derrien, S. Hamada, M. Zhou, D.-M. Smilgies and D. Luo, Nano Today, 2020, 30, 100823 CrossRef .
S. Hamada, K. G. Yancey, Y. Pardo, M. Gan, M. Vanatta, D. An, Y. Hu, T. L. Derrien, R. Ruiz, P. Liu, J. Sabin and D. Luo, Sci. Robot., 2019, 4, eaaw3512 CrossRef .
W. Wang, W. Duan, A. Sen and T. E. Mallouk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 17744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ma, S. Wang, D. T. Wu and N. Wu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 6307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, M. Han, J. Zhang, C. Xu, E. Luijten and S. Granick, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Ding, S.-C. S. Lin, S. Yang, P.-H. Huang, N. Nama, Y. Zhao, A. A. Nawaz, F. Guo, W. Wang, Y. Gu, T. E. Mallouk and T. J. Huang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mou, L. Kong, C. Chen, Z. Chen, L. Xu and J. Guan, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4976 RSC .
Y. Gao, F. Mou, Y. Feng, S. Che, W. Li, L. Xu and J. Guan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Driscoll, B. Delmotte, M. Youssef, S. Sacanna, A. Donev and P. Chaikin, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 375 Search PubMed .
J. G. Gibbs and Y. Zhao, Small, 2010, 6, 1656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed, D. T. Gentekos, C. A. Fink and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tottori, L. Zhang, K. E. Peyer and B. J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 4263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xie, M. Sun, X. Fan, Z. Lin, W. Chen, L. Wang, L. Dong and Q. He, Sci. Robot., 2019, 4, eaav8006 CrossRef .
D. Jin, J. Yu, K. Yuan and Li. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Driscoll, B. Delmotte, M. Youssef, S. Sacanna, A. Donev and P. Chaikin, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 375 Search PubMed .
A. Bricard, J.-B. Caussin, N. Desreumaux, O. Dauchot and D. Bartolo, Nature, 2013, 503, 95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, F. Soto, W. Gao, R. Dong, V. Garcia-Gradilla, E. Magaña, X. Zhang and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. A. Castro, M. Hoyos and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huang, L. J. Martínez, E. Jaquay, A. Nakano and M. L. Povinelli, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, A. Pei, X. Feng, C. Hennessy and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Solovev, Y. Mei and O. G. Schmidt, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. I. Campbell and S. J. Ebbens, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 14066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, X. Chen, Z. Han and W. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 4064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhou, H. P. Zhang, J. Tang and W. Wang, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 3289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. ten Hagen, F. Kümmel, R. Wittkowski, D. Takagi, H. Löwen and C. Bechinger, Nat. Commun., 2013, 5, 4829 CrossRef PubMed .
D. P. Singh, W. E. Uspal, M. N. Popescu, L. G. Wilson and P. Fischer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706660 CrossRef .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Abramian, J. Barral, K. Hanson, A. Y. Grosberg, D. J. Pine and P. M. Chaikin, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1400214 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ren, D. Zhou, Z. Mao, P. Xu, T. J. Huang and T. E. Mallouk, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, A. Garg, A. I. Campbell, J. Howse, A. Sen, D. Velegol, R. Golestanian and S. J. Ebbens, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Simmchen, J. Katuri, W. E. Uspal, M. N. Popescu, M. Tasinkevych and S. Sánchez, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Palacci, S. Sacanna, A. Vatchinsky, P. M. Chaikin and D. J. Pine, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Katuri, D. Caballero, R. Voituriez, J. Samitier and S. Sanchez, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Maggi, J. Simmchen, F. Saglimbeni, J. Katuri, M. Dipalo, F. De Angelis, S. Sanchez and R. Di Leonardo, Small, 2016, 12, 446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Martel, M. Mohammadi, O. Felfoul, Z. Lu and P. Pouponneau, Int. J. Robot. Res., 2009, 28, 571 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Santon, B.-W. Park, D. Vilela, K. Bente, D. Faivre, M. Sitti and S. Sánchez, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9968 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, S. Sanchez, O. G. Schmidt and M. Pumera, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10090 RSC .
G. Zhao and M. Pumera, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 7411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hong, N. M. K. Blackman, N. D. Kopp, A. Sen and D. Velegol, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 178103 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Baraban, S. M. Harazim, S. Sanchez and O. G. Schmidt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Morgan, A. B. Dawson, H. S. Mcknzie, T. S. Skelhon, R. Beanland, H. P. W. Franks and S. A. Bon, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 65 RSC .
F. Peng, Y. Tu, J. C. M. van Hest and D. A. Wilson, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 11828 CrossRef .
T. Toyota, N. Maru, M. M. Hanczyc, T. Ikegami and T. Sugawara, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Pavlick, S. Sengupta, T. McFadden, H. Zhang and A. Sen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 9374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Dey, S. Bhandari, D. Bandyopadhyay, S. Basu and A. Chattopadhyay, Small, 2013, 9, 1916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bhuyan, A. K. Singh, D. Dutta, A. Unal, S. S. Ghosh and D. Bandyopadhyay, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 3, 1627 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ikezoe, J. Fang, T. L. Wasik, M. Shi, T. Uemura, S. Kitagawa and H. Matsui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 4019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Park, S. J. Park, S. Cho, Y. Lee, Y. K. Lee, J.-J. Min, B. J. Park, S. Y. Ko, J.-O. Park and S. Park, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2014, 111, 134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, X. Chang, P. Angsantikul, J. Li, E.-F. de Ávila, E. Karshalev, W. Liu, F. Mou, S. He, R. Castillo, Y. Liang, J. Guan, L. Zhang and J. Wang, Adv. Biosyst., 2017, 2, 1700160 CrossRef .
J. Shao, M. Xuan, H. Zhang, X. Lin, Z. Wu and Q. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dai, J. Wang, Z. Xiong, X. Zhan, W. Dai, C.-C. Li, S.-P. Feng and J. Tang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 1087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ye, Y. Sun, H. Zhang, B. Song and B. Dong, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18516 RSC .
C. Chen, F. Mou, L. Xu, S. Wang, J. Guan, Z. Feng, Q. Wang, L. Kong, W. Li, J. Wang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603374 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lozano, B. ten Hagen, H. Löwen and C. Bechinger, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo and R. Nagpal, Science, 2014, 345, 795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Hong Wang
	Hong Wang received her BSc from Tianjin University, China, in 2012, and the PhD degree in Division of Chemistry & Biological Chemistry, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, in 2017. She completed her thesis work on preparation and applications of micro/nanomotors with Prof. Martin Pumera as her thesis advisor. She is currently a professor in College of Chemical Engineering at China University of Mining and Technology, Xuzhou. Her research interests include micro/nanomachines, nanomaterials, and electrochemistry.

Martin Pumera
	Martin Pumera is the Director of the Center for the Advanced Functional Nanorobots and a tenured faculty member at the University of Chemistry and Technology, Prague. He received his PhD from Charles University, Czech Republic, in 2001. After two postdoctoral stays (in the United States and Spain), he became tenured group leader at the National Institute for Materials Science, Japan, in 2006. In 2010 Martin joined Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, where he worked as tenured associate professor for almost a decade. Prof. Pumera has broad interests in nanomaterials and microsystems, in the specific areas of electrochemistry and synthetic chemistry of 2D nanomaterials, nanotoxicity, micro and nanomachines, and 3D printing. Martin is “2017–2019 Highly Cited Researcher” by Clarivate Analytics.

Mutual interactions	Chemical signalling	Silver ions	Speed acceleration	Enhanced fuel decomposition due to silver deposition
Electrolyte gradients	Reversible swarming/assembly into active clusters	Electrophoretic, electroosmotic and chemophoretic effects
Non-electrolyte gradients	Reversible swarming/dynamic assembly into active clusters	Diffusiophoretic and osmotic effects
DNA	Reversible swarming	DNA hybridization
Electrostatic forces	Self-generated electrostatic imbalance	Random assembly	Electric fields generated from self-electrophoretic propulsion
Induced polarization by an external electric field	Directed assembly into multimers/various collective active states	Induced dipoles arising from shape asymmetry or differential dielectric response of materials
Photogenerated charge separation	Light-reversible assembly of active clusters	Light-switchable electrostatic interactions
Magnetic forces	Magnetization	Random assembly into structures with multicomponents	Magnetic dipole interactions in the absence of magnetic fields
Magnetic control by an external magnetic field	Precise assembly and disassembly, reconfigurable swarming	Magnetic dipole interactions in the presence of magnetic fields
Hydrodynamics	Motion of particles in viscous fluids	Fingering instability and clustering, macroscopic directed motion	Hydrodynamic disturbance mediated by solvent
Acoustic radiation force, van der Waals force, optical force, hydrophobic force, capillary force	Applying acoustic/optical fields, hydrophobic surface modification, bubble attachment, etc.	Swarming, assembly into active clusters, patterning, etc.	Interactions due to corresponding interparticle forces


Interactions with the environment	Gravity	Inhomogeneous mass distribution	Gravitaxis	Alignment due to bottom heaviness
Shape asymmetry	Alignment due to fore–rear asymmetry
Light propulsion under upward light	Alignment induced by sufficient light propulsion
Shear flows	Shape/mass anisotropy, partial attraction to the substrate	Rheotaxis	Drag anisotropy exerted by the flow
Physical contacts	Motion along geometric boundaries	Thigmotaxis	Constraint of the motion by two perpendicular surfaces to one dimension
Magnetic fields	Incorporation of permanent magnetic dipoles	Magnetotaxis	Magnetic dipole interactions with external magnetic fields
Chemical gradients	Inhomogeneous distribution of fuel or reaction catalyst	Chemotaxis	Changes in propulsion speed
Light	Asymmetric distribution of photocatalytic materials	Phototaxis	Chemical gradients formed from asymmetric photocatalytic reactions
Isotropic photocatalytic materials with limited light penetration
Light gradients	Solvent demixing by the heating effect of inhomogeneous illumination

 	Fig. 1  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via chemical signaling. (A) Schematic diagram illustrating the interaction between a PS/Ni/Au/Ag nanomachine (activator) and a SiO2/Pt nanomachine (activated machine). The control machine is a SiO2/Pt nanomachine. Reprinted with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (B) Collective oscillations of AgCl particles due to the generation of ionic reaction products. Reprinted with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (C) Transition between exclusion and schooling behaviors of Ag3PO4 particles through chemical reactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Snapshots of clusters formed by cationic–anionic ion-exchange particles. Cationic ion-exchange particles appear red and anionic ion-exchange particles appear blue. The red arrows indicate the motion direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (E) Living crystals formed by polymeric spheres with protruding hematite cubes under blue light illumination (left) and dissolution of crystals upon extinguishing the light (right). The scale bars are 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2013 AAAS. (F) Association and disassociation of microtubes through DNA hybridization. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27 under the CC-BY license.	 

 	Fig. 2  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via electrostatic forces. (A) Interactions between self-electrophoretic nanorods moving in the same direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences. (B) Chiral clusters formed by polystyrene dimers under electric fields. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2015 National Academy of Sciences. (C) Collective states formed by spheres with off-centered charges under electric fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (D) Assembly and disassembly of TiO2/Pt Janus micromachines through light-switchable electrostatic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2016 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Microscopic images illustrating the assembly and disassembly of a TiO2/Pt Janus micromachine with colloidal particles in the presence and absence of UV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via magnetic forces. (A) Self-assembly of helicopter-like nanomachine systems through magnetic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. (B) Dynamic assembly of ultrasound-propelled nanorods into multimers through magnetic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (C) Microscopic images and schematic diagrams illustrating the assembly of helical micromachines into the chain configuration and other configurations. Fl and Fs are the propulsion forces exerted on the helical micromachines with different sizes. FT is the towing force. Dl and Ds are the drag forces. The scale bars are 20 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (D) Four collective formations formed by peanut-shaped hematite micromachines under magnetic fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 40. Copyright AAAS. (E) Ant bridge-mimicking microswarms of conductive nanomachines controlled by magnetic fields. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Interactions between micro/nanomachines via hydrodynamics and other forces. (A) Fingering instability of magnetic microrollers arising from hydrodynamic interactions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Transition of Quincke rollers to directed collective motion. From left to right are isotropic gas, propagating band, and homogeneous polar-liquid, respectively. The scale bar is 500 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) Microscopic images illustrating the swarming behavior of bimetallic nanorods in the presence of ultrasound. The scale bar is 10 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (D) Chain and ring patterns formed by ultrasound-propelled nanorods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (E) SEM image of the spinning dimer formed by two tadpole nanomachines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH. (F) Assembly of micromachines through hydrophobic forces. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (G) Schematic diagram and microscopic image of assembled microtubes through capillary forces between bubbles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to gravity and shear flow. (A) Negative gravitaxis of PMMA–AgCl micromachines under light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (B) Experimental trajectories of L-shaped micromachines under increasing illumination intensity. The illumination intensity gradually increases from 1 to 6. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (C) The negative gravitaxis of TiO2/SiO2 micromachines under light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (D) Positive rheotaxis of polymer spheres with hematite protrusions. The viscous drag Fs exerted by the flow on the particle generates a torque MF, which aligns the particle with the flow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 AAAS. (E) Self-electrophoresis mechanism of bimetallic nanorods and their orientation by shear flow. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to physical contact and magnetic fields. (A) Reorientation of a Janus micromachine upon encountering a step. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 under the CC-BY license. (B) Accumulation of Janus micromachines in linear ratchet structures. Left: t = 0 s. Right: t = 60 s. Reproduced from ref. 59. (C) Docking of Janus micromachines to propel the microgear. The scale bar is 5 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 60. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (D) Reversed motion of magnetized microtubes upon switching the direction of magnetic fields. The scale bars are 100 μm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to chemical gradients. (A) Experimental setup for studying the chemotaxis of bimetallic nanorods toward H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 65. Copyright 2007 The American Physical Society. (B) Chemotaxis study of catalytic microtubes and Janus micromachines toward H2O2 using microfluidic devices. H2O2, micromachines and water are introduced through inlets i1, i2, and i3, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2013 The Authors. (C) pH taxis of Pd-based micromachines in H2O2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2013 Wiley-VCH. (D) Chemotactic behavior of bacteriobots toward egg cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (E) Chemotactic behavior of hybrid neutrophil micromachines toward E. coli in a microfluidic channel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  Collective directional motion of micro/nanomachines in response to light. (A) Schematic diagrams illustrating the propulsion and orientation of Janus TiO2/Si nanotrees. The lower left is the SEM image of the nanotrees. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Negative and positive phototaxis of isotropic semiconductor micromachines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
