Heterogeneous nanocarbon materials for oxygen reduction reaction  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE43463J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE43463J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 576-591Heterogeneous nanocarbon materials for oxygen reduction reaction

        
          
            Da-Wei 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Dangsheng 
            Su
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Chemistry and Molecular Biosciences, The University of Queensland, Australia. E-mail: d.wang6@uq.edu.au
bShenyang National Laboratory of Materials Science, Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China. E-mail: dssu@imr.ac.cn
Received 
      18th October 2013
    , Accepted 29th November 2013First published on 2nd December 2013AbstractHeterogeneous nanocarbon materials are being increasingly investigated and deployed in numerous new technologies and devices for sustainable energy conversion and storage. Nanocarbons often consist of fullerene, graphene and carbon nanotubes. Their derivatives include quantum dots, nanofibres, nanoribbons, nanospheres/capsules and other nanostructured morphologies. The heterogeneous forms of these nanocarbons stem from the implantation of alien atoms into the aromatic carbon lattice or the covalent grafting of functional groups onto the carbon basal plane or edge sites. Heterogeneous nanocarbons have shown remarkable advantages in solar cells, water splitting, supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries and catalysis. This review focuses on recent progress in the experimental and computational studies of the roles of heteroatoms in heterogeneous nanocarbons for electrocatalytic oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). Critical perspectives are devoted to the ambiguous phenomena in this emerging research area. The long standing debate about the active sites is discussed with an emphasis on more rational development of advanced nanocarbon-based electrocatalysts for ORR.Da-Wei WangDa-Wei Wang completed his Bachelor's studies at Northwestern Polytechnic University (China) in 2003 and his Ph.D. at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. He started postdoctoral research in collaboration with Professor Max Lu and Professor Ian Gentle at the University of Queensland (UQ) in 2009. He is interested in carbon materials and their energy applications. He received a 2012 UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award and a 2013 Scopus Young Researcher of the Year Award. He has published 38 peer-reviewed journal papers with an h-index of 20, and total citations of over 2000.Dangsheng SuDang Sheng Su completed his physics studies at Jilin University (PR China) in 1986 and his Ph.D. at the Technical University of Vienna (Austria) in 1991. He moved to the Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft as a post-doctoral worker in the Department of Electron Microscopy. After a short stay at Hahn-Meitner Institut GmbH and Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin (Germany) he joined the Fritz-Haber-Institute in 1999, where he worked on nanomaterials in heterogeneous catalysis and electron microscopy. He is now a Professor at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang (PR China). His research interests are nanocarbons, nanocatalysis, chemical energy conversion and storage, and electron microscopy. He has published about 300 peer-reviewed papers, several book chapters and edited several special issues in international journals.

Broader context
The emerging demand for next generation renewable and sustainable energy conversion technologies requires diverse catalytic and electrochemical methods and reactors. In terms of energy density, metal–air batteries exhibit the greatest promise for delivering compact energy by reducing oxygen from the air and oxidizing the implanted metal electrodes. Compared with metal oxidation, the kinetics of oxygen reduction is rather slow and inhibits the overall power capability of these promising devices. Platinum is the most active electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and its high cost is urging the development of non-noble oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. Metal-free heterogeneous carbon nanotubes and many other nanocarbons have been increasingly studied in recent years. It has been greatly expected that by modifying the heteroatoms in nanostructured carbon materials their electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen reduction can be potentially increased to approaching that of platinum. However, many fundamental issues, particularly the specific functions of the heteroatoms in the oxygen reduction reaction on heterogeneous nanocarbons, are unclear. We expect to address some of these questions in this review and to propose some ideas for future research.

1. Introduction
Fossil fuels are the dominant energy sources of our modern society. But it is undoubted that the fossil fuels will be depleted in the near future and the demand for groundbreaking sustainable energy solutions has become urgent. Among various potential technologies, there is a consensus that advanced energy solutions will require sustainable catalysis and electrochemistry. This research focus is highly relevant to the use of novel nanomaterials in diversified catalytic and electrochemical technologies and devices. Nanocarbon electrode materials have an emerging impact in this perspective.
Numerous carbon materials (such as boron-doped diamond, fullerene, vapour deposited carbon films) have been applied as electrode materials since the historical use of graphite for electrochemical production of alkali metals.1 The general advantages of carbon electrodes include low cost, abundant structural variety, tailorable surface chemistry, stability within a relatively wide potential window, and good conductivity and strength. Carbon materials with at least one dimension tailored at the nanometre scale are attracting increasing attention because of their new electrochemical properties demonstrated at the nanoscale.2 Nanostructured carbon materials, termed as nanocarbons, include fullerene, carbon nanoparticles/capsules/spheres, carbon nanotubes (CNTs)/fibres (CNFs), graphene, and nanoporous carbons. The state-of-the-art major applications of nanocarbon electrodes are for energy storage in supercapacitors and lithium ion batteries,2–10 for metal-free catalysts or catalyst supports in fuel cells,11–14 and for electron acceptors/conductors in solar cells.14–17 Lithium ion intercalation and double layer charging are correlated with the surface area, graphitization degree and defects of nanocarbons, and the electronic structure of nanocarbons is a critical parameter for photoelectrochemistry. A number of reviews have been published in recent years regarding the synthesis, properties and advantages of nanocarbon electrodes in supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries and photoelectrochemical devices.2–16 On the other hand, air cathodes of fuel cells and metal–air batteries require high quality nanocarbon electrodes.18 The role of nanocarbons in air cathodes is to facilitate the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). The surface chemical structures of nanocarbons play a key role in electrocatalyzing this kinetically sluggish reaction. The aim of this contribution is to review the roles of heteroatoms or surface functional groups of heterogeneous nanocarbons in ORR.
Oxygen gas molecule can be reduced either in aqueous or in non-aqueous aprotic electrolytes with distinct reaction pathways and products. In aqueous electrolytes, the ORR occurs mainly by two pathways: the 4-electron reduction of O2 to H2O in acidic electrolytes or to OH− in basic electrolytes, and the 2-electron reduction of O2 to H2O2 in acidic electrolytes or to HO2− in basic electrolytes. In non-aqueous aprotic electrolytes, aside from the 4-electron and 2-electron pathways, O2 can also be reduced to superoxide (O2−) involving one electron transfer. The principal ORR processes are listed in Table 1. Note that the potentials should depend on the actual electrolyte pH. The practical reaction sequences associated with the ORR are rather complicated, involving many intermediates and elementary steps (electron transfer or chemical reaction) depending on the natures of the catalysts and electrolytes.
Table 1 Reaction pathways of ORR in aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes19,20




Electrolyte
Reaction pathway
Reaction potential/V
Reference electrode




Aqueous alkaline electrolyte

4e pathway: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−;
0.401
NHE



peroxide pathway: O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−;
−0.065


HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−
+0.867


or 2HO2− → 2OH− + O2
decomposition


Aqueous acid electrolyte

4e pathway: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O;
1.229
NHE



peroxide pathway: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2;
0.67


H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O
1.77


or 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2
decomposition


Non-aqueous aprotic electrolyte (Li+)
O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2
—
Li0/Li+ (−3.04 V vs. NHE)


O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2O2
2.96


O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O
2.91


Non-aqueous aprotic electrolyte (Na+)
O2 + Na+ + e− → NaO2
2.27
Na0/Na+ (−2.71 V vs. NHE)


O2 + 2Na+ + 2e− → Na2O2
2.33


O2 + 4Na+ + 4e− → 2Na2O
1.95




The ORR in alkaline electrolytes is of critical importance to meet the increasing interest in alkaline and hybrid metal–air batteries.21–23 Unless otherwise stated, the ORR properties of heterogeneous nanocarbons discussed in this review are tested in alkaline electrolytes. Only Pt and its alloys display the best ORR activity in an acidic electrolyte,24 whereas nanocarbon-supported non-noble metal/metal oxides have shown equivalent or competitive electrocatalytic properties to Pt in alkaline electrolytes.24,25 The thermodynamic origin of the easier kinetics for ORR in alkaline electrolytes is the lower overpotential (0.7 V @ pH = 14 vs. 1.53 V @ pH = 0) for the first electron transfer to chemisorbed O2 (O2 → O2˙−).26 Compared to nanocarbon-metal/metal oxide electrocatalysts,12,27 metal-free nanocarbon electrocatalysts are unique with a covalent structure which renders stable and durable performance.12–14 Nanocarbon electrocatalysts can be engineered without significant changes to the overall composition and as such, organic chemistry provides a large number of models and tools to modify the surface chemistry and thus the electrocatalytic behavior.14
The electrocatalytic ORR process involves multistep and multiple adsorbed intermediates and proceeds via an inner-sphere electron transfer mechanism, which means the activity and the overall ORR pathways are closely related to the catalyst surfaces.28,29 The ORR occurs on a large variety of carbon electrocatalysts in alkaline electrolytes, like graphite, glassy carbon (GC), active carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene and other nanostructured carbons.12,27,30 The ORR conducted on carbon electrocatalysts without doping, functionalization or lattice substitution usually exhibits the two-plateau peroxide pathway rather than the one-plateau 4e pathway observed on Pt/C, a commercial electrocatalyst (Fig. 1).30 In order to render the high voltage and high power performance of alkaline fuel cells or metal–air batteries, the ORR catalysts are usually required to conduct the 4e pathway that can deliver large current density and high onset potential. However, the two-plateau peroxide pathway of ORR often is associated with small current and low onset potential. Therefore one major goal of the heterogeneous carbon ORR research is to explore efficient carbon catalysts favourable for the 4e ORR behaviour. Carbon materials can be alternatively used as catalyst supports to provide good electron transfer to less-conducting ORR catalysts.12,25,31–33 The interface structure between the carbon support and the catalyst can be engineered by modifying the carbon surface.34 Regardless of the carbon-supported hybrid ORR catalysts, enhancing the ORR activity of carbon catalysts through effective surface modifications has attracted tremendous attention.12–14,27 In principle, properties of the nanocarbon surface, such as functional groups, heteroatoms, basicity/acidity, and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity, are major parameters influencing the ORR behaviour. Before discussing all these important factors, three points of fundamental importance must be mentioned or clarified:
 Fig. 1  Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (10 mV s−1) for carbon nanotubes (CNT) and Pt/C on a rotating ring-disk electrode (1600 rpm) in an O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. 
(1) Despite various doping with all possible elements (N, O, B, P, S etc.), the idea to use heterogeneous carbon materials for ORR is simply based on (i) breaking the electroneutrality of nanocarbons to create charged sites favourable for O2 adsorption, regardless of whether the dopants are electron-rich or electron-deficient, and (ii) effective utilization of carbon π electrons for O2 reduction.35
(2) There is a difference between “doping” and “functionalization”. The former is used when the “dopant” is implanted in the carbon material as an element, and the latter is associated with covalently bonded functional groups (if necessary, often containing O and H that saturate the dangling bonds in N, S, B or P) on carbon basal surfaces or edge planes. “Doping” does not necessarily incorporate foreign atoms in the sp2 network (or in the lattice) of graphitic carbon, while “substitution” means replacing a sp2 bonded carbon atom with a heteroatom.
(3) Many published works believe or assume that N, B, S, P etc. can substitute carbon atoms and incorporate in the sp2 network of carbon (doping). Sulfur is present in carbonaceous materials as elemental sulfur, inorganic species, organosulfur compounds, or on the surface of carbonaceous materials as sulfur-containing groups.36,37 Phosphorus is present in carbon matrices as red phosphorus, phosphates and/or in chemically bonded forms, such as –C–P– bonds or –C–O–P– bonds.38–40 It is not clear whether these elements can substitute carbon atoms in the sp2 network and there is no experimental evidence for substitution. The argument, that S or P could substitute a carbon atom in a sp2 network since they, like carbon, also have π electrons, is not valid because O has π electrons but there is obviously no “graphitic” or “quaternary” oxygen in carbon materials! V. Strelko pointed out that phosphorus atoms are unlikely to be π-conjugated with the graphene plane since they are not coplanar with it.41 We review in the following also the published works in which heteroatoms (like S, P, etc.) were suggested to substitute carbon atoms, but it does not necessarily mean that we agree with the ideas of “substitution”.
We structure this review by the different ORR behaviours of N, O, B, S, and P elements, rather than that of the different nanocarbon morphologies (carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc.), for the following reasons: (1) surface heterogeneity of nanocarbon materials is one major topic in recent studies; however the understanding and explanation of some results are contradictory and a review may help to elucidate the situation; (2) the challenge to control the concentration and structure of heteroatoms in nanocarbons limits a reliable comparison of the ORR properties of the different nanocarbon forms modified with the same heteroatom; (3) the participation of nanocarbon electronic structures in the ORR is recognized; however among different nanocarbon forms the efficacy of heteroatoms for improving ORR activity appears phenomenologically similar. In some instances, the nitrogen heteroatoms transform the ORR activity of carbon nanotubes,42 carbon nanospheres,43 mesoporous carbons44 and graphene sheets45 from a peroxide pathway to a 4e pathway. We notice that more systematic studies are necessary to unravel the actual roles of the nanocarbon structure and heteroatoms in the heterogeneous carbon-catalyzed ORR. As much as possible, this review attempts to understand the separate and synergistic effects of heteroatoms/functional groups on ORR with a focus on several most interesting elements (N, O, B, P, S).
2. Nanocarbons with N-functionalities
N-functionalized CNTs and graphene materials are typical heterogeneous nanocarbon electrocatalysts for ORR.24,42,45–71 N-functionalized ordered mesoporous carbons are attractive because of their well-organized porosity for efficient mass transfer and high surface area for active site exposure.72–74 Nitrogen functionalization of nanocarbons can be conducted by several methods, such as chemical vapour deposition, heat-treatment with nitrogen sources, hydrothermal or direct carbonization of N-containing organic precursors.43,45,53,55,61,62,64,74,75 Molecular structures of N-functionalities in nanocarbons vary depending on the synthesis temperature and nitrogen precursors. The common N-containing structures and their corresponding binding energies are illustrated in Fig. 2. These different N-functionalities often coexist and their concentrations are practically adjustable. But, until now, there is no virtually efficient approach to selectively tailor the N-functionalities. To selectively control N-groups, one possible way is to start from organic precursors with well defined uniform N-containing structures.42,66,76 However, the post heat-treatment is prone to transform the aliphatic or aromatic structures in the organic precursors into sp2 carbon structures during which the N atoms migrate on the carbon surface and easily form different N-functionalities.42,66,76 The reconstruction of N-functionalities from organic precursors to nanocarbons is common43,47,53,60,62,66,73,77 and is the critical barrier towards selective N-functionalization.78
 Fig. 2  Typical structure and binding energy given for quarternary, pyrrolic, pyridinic and pyridinic-oxide groups.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Elsevier. 
Nitrogen functionalization changes not only the carbon surface chemistry79 like basicity and hydrophilicity/oleophilicity but also the electronic structure by donating a lone pair of electrons and shifting the neutralized charge distribution on the undoped graphene lattice. Strelko, Kuts and Thrower suggested that N atom can lower the band gap and increase the charge mobility of the graphitic lattice and showed from their quantum chemical calculations that the pyrrole groups at the edge sites and those in combination with valley N atoms (quaternary N) have the highest charge mobility.80 These changes in the carbon band structure would eventually lower the electron work function at the interface of carbon with a liquid or gas compared with pure carbon surfaces.80 Very recently it was hypothesized that the altered distribution of charge density and spin density of carbon atoms and heteroatoms plays a critical role in the chemisorption of oxygen molecule or peroxide anion and the first electron transfer (the rate determining step in ORR).81,82,83
The ORR catalyzed by the N-functionalized nanocarbons is affected by the pH value of the electrolytes. For instance, a peroxide pathway is more preferable in the pH = 1 electrolytes compared to a 4e pathway in the pH = 13 electrolytes (Fig. 3).44,73 However, the experimental results are very divergent, and the electrolyte pH is not the only factor that induces the different ORR pathways on the N-functionalized nanocarbons. It is noticeable that the N-functionalized CNTs can exhibit two distinctly different ORR mechanisms even in the same pH = 13 electrolyte (0.1 M KOH).46,51 The N-functionalized aligned CNT array electrode with a trace amount of metal impurities showed the 4e ORR behavior which was even superior to that of the commercial Pt/C catalysts,46 whereas the N-functionalized bamboo-like CNTs exhibited a 2e peroxide pathway.51 Possible reasons for these contradictory results are (1) the metal impurities, in spite of the extremely low content, could participate in the ORR process and dramatically promote the catalytic sequences,24 (2) metals are known to change the carbon structure (e.g. edge exposure, graphitization level) and hence result in different N-groups whose ORR activities differ,85 (3) Fe(III) in acid electrolytes as a Fenton reagent can chemically decompose peroxide,86,87 and (4) the porous textures could lead to complex three-phase regions in the oxygen diffusion electrode.75,88 As a consequence, the determination of electrocatalytic activity of N-functionalized nanocarbons for ORR might become a bias if the relevant structural factors are not carefully examined. It is also noteworthy that the effects of the surface wettability and double layer charging on cathodic current evaluation (commonly the basis to calculate the electron transfer number) need to be considered or excluded to justify the virtual electrocatalytic properties of the N-functionalized nanocarbons.
 Fig. 3  (a) Koutecky–Levich plot for the determination of the number of electrons transferred during the oxygen reduction on a N-functionalized mesoporous carbon in O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4.73 Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Koutecky–Levich plot for oxygen reduction on a N-functionalized mesoporous carbon in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH.44 Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
Considerable efforts have been devoted to developing N-functionalized nanocarbons showing equivalent ORR activity to Pt.43,45,49,50,54,64,65,69,89,90 Herein we will discuss the mechanistic origin of the kinetically favourable ORR on the N-functionalized nanocarbons from the following two aspects: (1) N-containing structures and (2) carbon nanostructures.
(1) ORR active N-containing structures
Until recently, the actual ORR active N-group remains elusive and is still a topic of debate. Either pyridinic-N48,72,77,91 or graphitic-N53,60,71,92,93 was proposed as the active sites. Some studies suggested that both graphitic and pyridinic-N were ORR active.55,62,94 Pyrrolic-N was also present in some ORR-active N-functionalized carbons.66 Note that the peak fitting method is generally adopted as the primary approach to quantify the N groups measured by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS).48,53,55,60,62,66,71,72,77,91–94 However, it is quite possible that some arbitrary errors might be introduced during data fitting and likely lead to the different populations of N-containing structures. Compared with XPS, X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) is able to more accurately determine the N structures in the π states which could provide direct information on the correlation of the N structures with the ORR activity.93 The analyses revealed the higher ORR activity of the samples containing more graphitic-N structures.93 Thermal annealing selectively transformed part of the pyridinic-N groups to the graphitic-N groups and increased the ORR reaction current; however, no clear 4e pathway was observed.71 This suggests that although graphitic-N can enhance the ORR reaction rate, it need not necessarily result in 4e reduction of the oxygen molecule to OH−. When identifying ORR active sites, there is a widely accepted assumption that the ORR activity is monotonously determined by the type or content of N-containing structures. Unfortunately, since there is no method that could recognize the individual contribution from a specific N-group to the ORR process, the observed ORR activity virtually represents a collective property. Technically speaking, correlation of the ORR activity with a specific N-group is questionable unless the actual activity of the particular N-groups can be exclusively measured.
Molecular simulation has been used to predict the adsorption and reduction of oxygen molecules on the N-functionalized nanocarbons, where the N-containing structures are specifically designed. Sidik et al. constructed a model with a N atom doped in the centre of a graphene sheet and found that the reduction of O2 to H2O2 was facilitated on the in-plane carbon atom adjacent to the substitutional N atom compared to the H-terminated carbon atom on the edge.95 Ikeda et al. reported that the graphitic N dopant on the zigzag edge (the valley graphitic-N) appeared to be more active than the pyridinic-N on the same zigzag edge.96 This is in agreement with experimental results.55 The content of nitrogen was also proposed as a factor that affected ORR, and more N dopants around the CC bonds resulted in a higher ORR activity.97 Kim et al. compared different N dopants and the structures are reproduced in Fig. 4a.82 The results showed that the O2 adsorption on the N-doped sites had a much lower barrier compared to the non-doped sites and the end-on adsorption mode (Pauling model) is more favourable than the side-on mode (Yeager model).82 One noticeable result in this work is that the edge-site graphitic-N is more active than the in-plane graphitic-N and pyridinic-N.82 For the formation of OH−, it is important that the O–O bond is easier to cleave than the C–O bond. Kim et al. found that the remaining oxygen adatom initiated the inter-conversion between the graphitic-N and the pyridinic-N on the edge sites (Fig. 4b).82 It is thus hypothesized that the chemisorbed oxygen on the N-doped carbon surface may exist in the form of mode IV (Fig. 4b), where the oxygen adatom sits next to a bond-breaking pyridinic-N. This kind of ring-opening N-groups can restore the original valley-type graphitic-N after the 4e reduction of the chemisorbed oxygen.82 Zhang et al. proposed that any kind of N-group or chemisorbed species that could induce asymmetric spin density and atom charge density is beneficial for higher ORR activity.81 A nitrogen-defect synergistic effect was considered and the Stone–Wales defect was suggested as an active component in the N-functionalized graphene catalysts.98 Yu et al. derived an overall ORR route based on a N-functionalized graphene model.29 Both associative and dissociative adsorption of O2 were considered and the former was more energetically favourable (Fig. 5).29 The calculation confirmed the easier scissoring of the O–O bond while the removal of the remaining adsorbed O from the C–O bond was identified as the rate determining step.82 Although many calculations showed that different kinds of N-functionalized graphene catalysts are ORR active,29,81,82,95,96,98,99 it is important to point out that the virtually stable nanocarbon structures in the ORR catalyst are often distinct from the adopted graphene or nanotube models. The deviation of the structural geometry needs to be considered, and a consistent structure description is required for accurate calculations to reduce the inconsistency between experiment and theory.
 Fig. 4  (a) The model structures with various geometries, N-containing sites, and edge states. The oxygen molecule is adsorbed at Cad (yellow atom). The nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen atoms are colored blue, red, and white, respectively, and the dotted line denotes a periodic boundary. (b) The proposed ORR catalytic cycle for the N0 structure, showing only the catalytically active part of the graphene nanoribbon edge in (a). Arabic numerals next to the arrows in parentheses denote the reaction steps described in the text.82 Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 5  Reaction scheme of ORR on N-graphene in alkaline solution, where 1 presents an associative mechanism and 2 a dissociative mechanism.29 Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier. 
Kiuchi et al. compared the adsorption capacity of N2 and O2 on the N-functionalized and the N-free carbon surfaces.100 The significantly higher adsorption capacity of O2 than that of N2 indicated the chemisorption nature of O2 on both carbon surfaces. Meanwhile, the much higher adsorption capacity of O2 on the N-functionalized carbon surface indicated the remarkable effect of the N-groups on facilitating the chemisorption of O2. Direct evidence for the chemisorption of O2 on the N-functionalized carbon surface was acquired by using an in situ XPS technique.100 The evolution of the O 1s high-resolution spectra revealed the formation of CO after O2 chemisorption which was removed by thermal annealing (Fig. 6a).100 A detailed analysis of the N 1s spectra indicated that the CO was selectively formed next to the graphitic-N sites, which decreased graphitic-N but increased pyridinic/pyrrolic-N (Fig. 6b).100 The overall mechanism of O2 chemisorption on the N-functionalized carbon surface was suggested as: the oxygen molecule was prone to be adsorbed by the neighbouring carbon atoms to the graphitic-N group and was incorporated as a ketone, which was considered ORR active and reversibly removable.100 However, it is worth pointing out that the transformation of an O2ad molecule to a ketone requires the dissociation of the O–O bond in the O2ad molecule, and this is less favourable according to Yu's simulation.29 Nonetheless, it is helpful to use in situ XPS to characterize the surface structures of chemisorbed oxygen molecules and to elucidate the possible active sites for ORR. One advanced approach is using in situ ambient pressure XPS to study the surface of nanocarbon electrocatalysts exposed to an electrocatalytic environment. We expect that such kinds of in situ surface analysis techniques can be deployed to study the ORR mechanism of heterogeneous nanocarbons.
 Fig. 6  (a) O 1s XPS spectra of (I) polyamide (PA) derived and (II) phenolic resin (PhRs) derived carbon alloy catalysts (CACs). (a) and (d) Annealed samples before oxygen adsorption. (b) and (e) Oxygen adsorbed samples. (c) Reannealed sample after oxygen adsorption. Red, blue and green solid lines are CO groups; C–OH and C–O–C groups; and chemisorbed oxygen or water components, respectively. (b) N 1s XPS spectra of the PA derived CAC (a) before and (b) after oxygen adsorption. (c) Reannealed sample after oxygen adsorption. Red, blue, green and orange solid lines are pyridine-like; pyrrole-like or amide-like; graphite-like; and oxide nitrogen components, respectively.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier. 
One important, but sometimes ignored, function of the nitrogen heteroatoms is facilitating the chemical decomposition of peroxide.101 Although the N-enhanced dismutation of peroxide gives rise to an apparent one-plateau 4e reduction of O2, it virtually consists of two steps: (1) the reduction of O2 to peroxide and (2) the rapid decomposition of peroxide to hydroxide and O2.34 The consecutive decomposition of peroxide bypasses the kinetically unfavourable electrochemical reduction of peroxide and hence effectively reduces the overpotential of the overall reaction.34
(2) Effects of carbon nanostructures
It is suggested that the carbon atom adjacent to the N atom is the active site that adsorbs O2 molecules.46,96 On the other side, the diverse carbon nanostructures could impact on the ORR catalysed by the N-groups.
A one-plateau 4e reduction of oxygen was measured on a N-functionalized graphene film which had both large lateral size and high crystallinity.45 Interestingly, when the lateral size of N-containing graphene was reduced to the nanometre scale, i.e. the graphene quantum dots (QDs), a significantly enhanced production of peroxide was detected at a plateau potential around −0.5 V vs. SCE prior to the approximate 4e ORR at more negative potentials (−0.6 to −0.8 V) (Fig. 7).63 N-groups still played a vital role in reducing the adsorption barrier and increasing the ORR current (comparing samples 3 with 2 in Fig. 7). Note that reducing the size of the N-functionalized graphene quantum dots led to a more negative onset potential and a smaller reaction current (samples 11, 2, 1 in Fig. 7). It was proposed that by increasing the lateral size of graphene QDs, the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) level was elevated and the N-functionalized graphene QDs became more affinitive to oxidation.63 This study suggests that the size of the sp2 lattice in the N-functionalized nanocarbons could influence the ORR behaviour. It may explain the different ORR activities of different forms of N-containing nanocarbons. Note that the ORR on the N-functionalized graphene QDs is more like a two-plateau peroxide pathway, which may imply that the substitutional N heteroatoms do not necessarily lead to the 4e pathway even in alkaline electrolytes.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structures of N-functionalized graphene quantum dots (QDs) 1, 2 and an N-free QD 3 for comparison studies. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (10 mV s−1) for 1–3 and Pt/C on a RDE (1600 rpm) in an O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. Also shown is the LSV curve for 11, a much smaller N-substituted heterocycle with the structure shown in the inset.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society. The sizes of N-containing QDs 1, 2 and 11 are in the order of 1 > 2 > 11. 
Metal impurities were found to alter the final carbon nanostructures of N-functionalized CNT catalysts for ORR.85,102 For instance, Fe and Co impurities fostered the growth of stacked cup structures, i.e. the higher exposure of edge planes, while Ni impurity mostly resulted in bamboo-like CNTs.85,102 The abundant N-functionalized edge planes were believed to be ORR active. Note that the effects of metal impurities can be excluded by using CN− as a poisoning agent to deactivate the ORR active metal–N complexes.43
It should be mentioned here that in the fuel cell community there are long-term attempts to develop nonprecious-metal catalysts for low-cost fuel cells – an effort to make the fuel cell application realistic.103 Since the pioneering work of Jasinski in 1964 reporting that a N4–chelate complex with a non-noble metal core could be used to electrochemically reduce oxygen,104 it has been well established that, after nearly 50 years study, the active catalysts often contain (i) (a trace amount of) transition metals (mainly Fe), (ii) nitrogen and (iii) a high graphitic degree.105–107 While the Fe–N complex acts as the active sites for the ORR, the catalyst stability and corrosion resistance are guaranteed by the high graphitization degree of the carbon matrix.
The authors may believe that metal-free N-containing carbon structures do show some ORR activity, due to the associative adsorption of oxygen molecules on carbon atoms next to nitrogen atoms in the sp2 carbon network. However, this oxygen–carbon interaction could be much weaker than the oxygen–metal interaction since the charge transfer from the electron-rich metal centre to the O2 π* orbital leading to an overall weakening of the O–O bond108 and thus the reduction of O2 is much stronger. The recent work of Dai's group showed the important role of Fe again in the ORR process on N-containing CNTs.24 Based on this fact, one question must be answered: are the above-discussed N-containing nanocarbons with high ORR activity really metal free? If there are trace amounts of metal impurities, we will need to answer why metal species can boost the ORR activity of N-groups and what is the intrinsic ORR activity of N-containing structures. Further theoretical and experimental work will be needed to elucidate the open questions.
3. Nanocarbons with O- and O–N functionalities
ORR was found to be inhibited on the cleavage basal plane of highly ordered pyrolytic graphite due to the lack of the active adsorption sites for molecular O2 and intermediates, like HO2−,109 whereas the functional groups prevailing on the edge planes enhance the interaction of edge sites with molecular O2 and produce much larger ORR current.19,110 Yeager reproduced the Garten and Weiss mechanism which proposed the participation of surface quinone groups in the reduction of O2 to peroxide (Fig. 8).19 The ORR activity of quinone on modified GC electrodes was confirmed by other studies.111–113 Decorating quinone on layer-by-layer assembled CNTs can also increase the ORR activity, i.e. smaller onset overpotential and larger cathodic current.114 Note that the quinone group often leads to the peroxide ORR pathway. This feature differentiates it from nitrogen functionalization.
 Fig. 8  Garten and Weiss mechanism for O2 reduction on carbon surfaces.19 Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Elsevier. 
It is worthwhile to clarify whether the anchoring position of O-functionalities on nanocarbons affects the ORR activity. Site-selective oxidation of CNTs at the edge sites (open end of the nanotube) and at the hole defects was conducted to evaluate the ORR activity.115 The excess O-functionalities on the CNT surface inhibited the electron transfer and occupied the adsorption sites for molecular O2, which eventually caused additional resistance and adsorption overpotential to the overall ORR.115 After removing the O-functionalities from the non-defective sites but preserving those on defects the overall overpotential was decreased by 0.19 V.115 The catalytic effect of the O-groups was confirmed in a blend consisting of graphene oxide (GO) and CNTs.116 An improved ORR performance was observed on small graphene sheets which had higher oxygen content and more exposed edges (Fig. 9).117 In this work, high energy ball milling of graphene sheets in air was conducted to simultaneously reduce the lateral size and increase the oxygen content. Calculation results showed that hydroxyl and epoxy groups sitting on the basal plane of graphene sheets were ORR inactive, which is attributed to the repulsion of the lone pair electrons in O atom from the delocalized π bonding of graphene due to the mismatched orbital orientation.117 The calculation further demonstrated the selective ORR activity on armchair and zigzag edges of oxygenated graphene sheets, where the former was inactive but the latter was active.117
 Fig. 9  (a) A schematic diagram of nanographene showing armchair and zigzag edges with oxygen-containing groups. The grey, red and white balls represent C, O and H atoms, respectively. (b) Oxygen reduction voltammogram of pristine and ball-milled samples resulting from ball milling for different durations.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The synergy of O- and N-functionalities in ORR is intriguing. The O-/N-containing fluorescent carbon nanodots prepared from a hydrothermal treatment of soy milk demonstrated a two-plateau 2e reduction of O2 to HO2−.118 Carbon nanofibres (CNFs) with different O- and N-functionalities were prepared in two steps consisting of oxidation and nitridation.119 N functionalization was found to convert the ORR activity of oxidized CNFs from the two-plateau 2e reduction pathway to the one-plateau 4e reduction pathway.119 This work compared the ORR activity of CNFs modified by different routes: air oxidation, HNO3 oxidation and LiAlH4 reduction of CO.119 Results showed the relatively worse ORR activity of air-oxidized CNFs compared to the other two samples both of which had similar behaviours.119 The changed charge distribution of carbon atoms bonded with different O-functionalities could be a reason, while the effects of the oxygen anions cannot be easily excluded.119 Nevertheless it was evident that the ORR on the nanocarbon surface can be modulated by tailoring the O-/N-functionalities.
4. Nanocarbons with B- and B–N functionalities
There is a general idea that the electronegative N (electron negativity: 3.04) and O (electron negativity: 3.44) heteroatoms break the charge neutrality of C (electron negativity: 2.55) atoms in the sp2 carbon lattice and form the adsorption sites for oxygen molecules. Electron-deficient elements like boron (electron negativity: 2.04) can also break the uniform charge density of the sp2 carbon lattice and thus could potentially induce efficient ORR. Boron atoms can substitute carbon atoms in the sp2 lattice and accept electrons from carbon because of their three valence electrons, which shifts the Fermi level to the conducting band. These changes in the band structure and electronic states can help with the ORR.
Boron modification is usually performed by the heat treatment of carbon precursors with boron120 or boric acid,121 or by direct chemical vapour deposition of gas phase carbon and boron sources.122 B-containing CNTs were prepared by using benzene, triphenylborane and ferrocene as precursors.122 As the boron content increased from 0 at% to 2.24 at%, the ORR peak current density increased by 5.2 mA mg−1 and the peak potential shifted positively by 0.08 V, though the onset potential was still lower than that of Pt/C by around 0.15 V.122 Higher concentration of boron in carbon was obtained by direct pyrolysis of tetraphenylboron sodium as a single precursor for both carbon and boron.123 The ORR activity of this B-containing carbon was dependent on the pyrolysis temperature. By increasing the temperature the kinetic current was increased greatly, which was attributed to the more abundant sites of BC3 and B4C that were assumed to be ORR active, but the onset potential only exhibited a tiny positive shift by 0.012 V and was 0.155 V lower than that of Pt/C.123 It was noteworthy that the onset potentials of the two different B-containing carbons were close, which indicated the similar conductivity and adsorption barrier for oxygen molecules.
The active sites in B-containing carbons, however, are not well understood. Boron atoms have been studied for its ability to promote or inhibit the oxidation of graphite at low or high concentrations, respectively.120 Boron atoms at low concentrations show a catalytic effect to facilitate oxygen chemisorption on carbon, which was electrochemically identified.124 Boron can substitute carbon atom at the trigonal sites.125 The electron accepting nature makes boron more affinitive to oxygen compared to carbon. In fact boron itself was oxidized when the B-containing nanocarbons were exposed in air according to XPS analysis.122,123 The chemisorbed O can occupy the active sites on these B-containing carbons prior to the reduction of oxygen in an electrochemical environment. The possible effects of these existing B–O species in the ORR have not been investigated. Chemisorption of the oxygen molecule was found to be site-dependent: the substitution position and the saturated/unsaturated zigzag or armchair edges.126 One interesting result is that boron substitution could weaken the C–O bond,126 which means that, if the molecular oxygen was dissociated on a carbon atom forming a single C–O bond, the boron could make the desorption of O from C easier.
Nitrogen as an electron-rich atom was introduced into the B-containing carbon to further disturb the charge neutrality. An early study revealed the better performance of ORR on a B–N co-functionalized carbon electrode compared to a sole N-containing carbon electrode with an increase of onset potential by 0.14 V.127 The B–N–C and edge-N surface structures were believed to synergistically contribute to the overall activity.128 A significantly enhanced performance was obtained on a B/N co-functionalized vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VA-CNT) electrode (Fig. 10a).129 The ORR activity of VA-CNT without heteroatoms and with B (VA-BCNT), N (VA-NCNT) and binary B–N (VA-BCN) functionalities was compared with that from a Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 10b).129 In spite of the slightly lower onset potential compared to Pt/C, both the N-containing samples (VA-NCNT and VA-BCN) showed higher limiting current compared to the N-free samples (VA-CNT and VA-BCNT). It seemed that N-groups were more advantageous for increasing the onset potential and the limiting current, while the B-groups appeared only active for increasing the limiting current rather than the onset potential. Optimization of the B and N contents in graphene resulted in a better ORR performance (Fig. 10c).130 Higher concentration of boron in the B38C28N34 sample led to the enlarged HOMO–LUMO gap and the reduced conductivity, both of which deteriorated the chemical reactivity and electron transfer kinetics. The reduced content of boron in the B7C87N6 and B12C77N11 samples gave rise to the smaller HOMO–LUMO gap and the higher limiting current (Fig. 10d).130 The chemisorption of molecular oxygen has a stronger affinity to the atoms with a positive spin density.98 A statistical analysis of the atom spin density in these co-functionalized samples demonstrated the largest number of carbon atoms with suitable spin density and charge density in the B12C77N11 sample, which offered an explanation for the superior catalytic activity.130 By the stepwise use of ammonia and boric acid as the N and B sources, B–N co-functionalized graphene sheets were developed as ORR catalysts, in which, again, the B-group slightly changed the onset potential but largely increased the limiting current.131 The synthesis sequence was important for the formation of different B–O structures, and the increased amount of B–C–O species was suggested harmful for the ORR activity.131 By using benzylamine as the N source, the N–B–C structure was preferably formed, compared to the case when ammonia was the N source.132 By fixing the nitrogen concentration within a small range (1.39–1.57 at%), it was possible to reveal the adverse effect of increasing boron concentration (from 0.35 to 1.68 at%) on the ORR activity.132 This implied that the performance improvement in B–N co-functionalized samples came from the separate N-groups, not the bonded N–B–C structures.
 Fig. 10  (a) The schematic structure of VA-BCN, and (b) LSV curves in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1000 rpm.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) LSV curves of ORR on BCN graphene with different compositions in oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at 10 mV s−1 and compared with the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. (d) Experimental ORR activities vs. DFT-predicted HOMO–LUMO energy gap for BCN graphene sheets.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The simultaneous addition of boron and nitrogen resulted in the rather complicated surface structures of the heterogeneous nanocarbons. These surface structures have not been well characterized and they easily transform depending on the synthesis recipes like the temperature, the B or N sources, and the sequence. Except for a few extraordinary performances,130 most kinds of B–N co-functionalized CNTs or graphene sheets rarely demonstrated competitive activity particularly regarding the onset potential in comparison with Pt/C or N-containing CNTs.127–129,131,132 Besides, we noticed that ferrocene was used sometimes for the growth of B–N modified CNTs.132 It is thus worth investigating how the iron species affect the structures of the B–N co-modified nanocarbons and their ORR activity. In addition, regarding the sequence of implanting heteroatoms, how the secondary element changes the structure of the first element and its effect on ORR efficiency are unknown. For example, iron species increased the edge sites, boron led to the preferential formation of pyridinic nitrogen, whereas nitrogen promoted the formation of the B–C–O structure.131,133 The heterogeneous nanocarbon structures modified by either the sole B-functionalization or the binary B–N functionalization are also ambiguous. A thorough knowledge about the active sites must rely on the accurate characterization of these heterogeneous structures.
First principle calculation is useful for screening active surface structures.99,134,135 The calculation of O2 adsorption on the B–N co-functionalized zigzag edges demonstrated that the boron atoms in the C–N–B–C (Fig. 11a and b) and the C–N–B–N–C (Fig. 11c) were the most energetically favourable oxygen adsorption sites.135 However, when the B–N unit was placed in the basal plane, the oxygen adsorption became unfavourable (Fig. 11d).135 Once the O2 was chemisorbed on B, the –B–O–O adduct formed. It was speculated that the hydrophobicity of the –CH group on the substrate inhibits the solvation of the middle O in the –B–O–O adduct, and thus the terminal O in –B–O–O was the one to be reduced.135 Interestingly, once the terminal O is removed, the remaining O atom can be reduced further in a barrierless way if on a zigzag-edged surface or with a small barrier (3 kcal mol−1) if on a zigzag-shaped step edge.135 Inspired by these results,boron functionalization of edge sites is worth studying.
 Fig. 11  Model structures of CACs for O2 adsorption. A B–N pair is included at (a) a zigzag-edged plane, (b) a zigzag-shaped step edge, and (d) a basal plane. Model (c) contains a N–B–N complex at a zigzag edge. Atom colors are white for H, gray for C, green for B, and blue for N.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
5. Nanocarbons with P, P–N and P–N–B functionalities
Phosphorus has a smaller electronegativity (2.19) and a bigger atom size than carbon. These characteristics are of interest when the catalytic ORR activity of P is considered. Extensive studies are worthwhile for answering questions like (1) is P active for ORR, (2) is the catalytic effect of P similar to that of B considering its smaller electronegativity than carbon, and (3) can the larger P atom, if it can substitute a sp2 C atom, severely disturb the geometry of the carbon lattice, and thus the electronic structure.
A theoretical calculation suggested that “P-substitution” in a graphene lattice can distort the sp2 lattice and impair the spin density which was harmful for the ORR activity.134 However it is doubtful whether the P atom can substitute the C atom in the graphene lattice.41 This means the simulation model might be inconsistent with the real material structure. P-containing graphite layers, that were fabricated by pyrolysis of toluene and triphenylphosphine, showed an improved ORR performance compared with the P-free sample.136 The P–C bond in the P-containing CNTs and OMCs was identified by high resolution XPS P 2p spectra, but this does not necessarily mean that the P atom is inserted into the sp2 carbon lattice.137,138 The better activity was attributed to the positive charge of the P atom (0.652) in the P–C bond in which the C atom had a negative charge (−0.298).136 However the ORR pathway on these P-containing nanocarbons is a two-plateau pathway with an evident production of HO2− as indicated by the ring current (Fig. 12a).136 Usually the adsorption of oxygen is believed to be the rate determining step and the adsorption of HO2− can promote its reduction to OH−. Note that the P groups also existed as P–O bonds,137 and this indicated the favourable adsorption of the oxygen molecule on the P atoms. The ORR active P species are often located on the edges. Therefore a consistent simulation model should be based on the bonding of P with a peripheral C atom (edge decoration), rather than the in-plane graphitic C atom (lattice substitution).
 Fig. 12  (a) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) LSV and the corresponding amperometric response for oxygen reduction in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the P-containing graphite/GC at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. 1 stands for the disk current and 1′ stands for the ring current collected from the P-modified graphite catalyst. The Pt ring electrode was poised at 0.5 V.136 Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Calculated H2O2 production yields of the prepared catalysts during the ORR. N and P content in samples (a)–(e): (a) N 3.7 at%, P 0, (b) N 3.0 at%, P < 1.0 at%, (c) N 5.0 at%, P < 1.0 at%, (d) N 5.0 at%, P 1.4 at% and (e) N 7.0 at%, P 2.3 at%.139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A superior ORR activity was observed when the N and P heteroatoms were simultaneously incorporated in the CNTs.140 Compared with the solely N- or P-containing CNTs, the P–N co-modified CNTs exhibited larger limiting currents and slightly higher onset potentials.140 The mechanism of this synergistic effect was investigated.139 Tailoring the P content in P–N co-modified CNTs showed that P promoted the reduction of HO2− within the overall potential range (Fig. 12b).139 The P–N co-modification generated more edges and wrinkled surfaces.139 These uneven surface structures could disturb the distribution of uniform charge density and spin density and thus improve the ORR performance. However the local chemical interaction between P and N heteroatoms in the CNT matrix was not fully understood. For example, it is not clear whether the P atoms bond with the N atoms. Besides, a ternary P–N–B co-modified catalyst showed higher limiting currents which is ascribed to the presence of the B atoms.141
It should be mentioned that phosphorus is used in carbon industry as an oxidation protector and fire retardant. Phosphorus atoms inhibit electron withdrawal from the carbon matrix. Since phosphorus is unlikely to be conjugated with sp2 carbon atoms,41 the effect of P-functionalization or “doping” could be fundamentally different from the N-functional groups or dopants. Theoretically, the ORR mechanism of the exocyclic P atoms should be different from that of the endocyclic N atoms.
6. Nanocarbons with S and S–N functionalities
Sulfur has a very close electron negativity to carbon (S: 2.58, C: 2.55) but a bigger atom, which means S, if it can be incorporated into the sp2 carbon lattice, could induce strain and stress which may eventually change the charge distribution and facilitate oxygen chemisorption. Many S-containing nanocarbons, such as carbon nanoparticles,142 graphene sheets,143–148 and nanoporous carbons149,150 were prepared. In some cases, oxygen144,145 and nitrogen147,148,151 were deliberately introduced, and it appeared that the N-group was capable of transforming the ORR pathway from the 2e behaviour on solely S-containing carbons to the 4e behaviour (Fig. 13a, curves SGL and SNGL-20).147 However, there was no apparent difference between the S–N co-containing and solely N-functionalized samples, which made it difficult to infer the catalytic effect of S-functionalities.
 Fig. 13  (a) RDE voltammograms of the undoped CNTs, SGL, NGL, SNGL-20, and Pt/C supported on GCEs at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm.147 Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) LSVs of different S and N modified graphene samples.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The ORR behaviours of S-modified samples were compared with the non-modified samples.143,146–148 The S-functionalities showed the two-plateau peroxide pathway and increased the disk current density which indicated that more chemisorbed oxygen molecules were reduced to peroxide. But the S-functionalities rarely increased the onset potential (Fig. 13a: curves CNT and SGL, Fig. 13b: curves G and S-G).148 Many studies demonstrated that the solely S-modified nanocarbons often showed two plateaus (plateau I: −0.3 to −0.8 V; plateau II: −0.8 V to −1.2 V, vs. Ag/AgCl) which suggested the peroxide production.142,143,146–149 These results suggest that the S-functionalities are distinct from the N-groups where the latter usually result in a 4e ORR behaviour.
Sulfur in the carbon lattice is often in the form of a thiophene-like structure at the edge sites,146 because the S atoms cannot substitute the sp2 carbon atoms,36,37 although this was proposed by some simulation results.148 The insertion of a S atom into a carbon ring (which can be a 5-member ring like thiophene and not necessarily a 6-member ring) would change the bond length and increase the structural strain. Since the electron negativity of S is close to C, S atoms are unlikely able to significantly break the charge neutrality, although the spin density can be changed. Calculation results showed that the S–N co-modified graphene lattice had higher spin density on the C atoms adjacent to the N atoms, while the C atoms connected with the S atoms had relatively smaller spin density.148 This difference of spin density was speculated to be a cause of the different ORR activity. However since the N atoms alter the spin density,98 whether the S atoms play a critical role in the synergistic effect needs more studies. Moreover, the other forms of sulfur,36 such as sulfate and sulfoxide, may also influence the ORR process on the S-containing nanocarbons, but this has not been studied yet.
The disturbance to the charge density and spin density is often used to explain why the heteroatoms reduce the oxygen adsorption barrier and facilitate the apparent ORR activity.98,134 This has also been acknowledged in the studies of S-containing carbons.143,147–149 Meanwhile, the importance of the homogeneous distribution of sulfur atoms in the carbon lattice was proposed as a promising approach towards the better S-catalyzed ORR activity.146 A more interesting mechanistic hypothesis of the S-mediated ORR considered both the geometrical distortion and the polarizability caused by the S atoms.150 The strain-induced charge localization and the lone pairs in the S atoms might be good for oxygen chemisorption; and the latter can be more pronounced than nitrogen for its large polarizability.150
Sulfonic acid can be grafted onto CNTs or graphene sheets by both covalent decoration or mechanical chemical methods.144,145 Sulfonic acid could make the intrinsically hydrophobic pure carbon surface hydrophilic and render a strong affinity towards oxygen, which led to an improved ORR activity.144,145 This alternative hydrophobic–hydrophilic surface on nanocarbons can be efficiently combined with other heteroatom modifications.
7. Concluding remarks and perspectives
In light of the fast growing knowledge of the heterogeneous nanocarbon catalysts, it is now clear that all kinds of heteroatoms (N, O, B, P, S) can more or less change the catalytic reactivity of parent carbon surfaces for the ORR. Depending on the nature of the heteroatoms and the local surface structures, the surface modification could usually either increase the reduction current or decrease the onset overpotential. All these heteroatoms are active to some extent for (i) facilitating the O2 adsorption; (ii) increasing the total number of active sites (affinitive to either the peroxide pathway or the 4e pathway); and (iii) improving the surface hydrophilicity. On account of the ORR pathways catalyzed by these heteroatoms, nitrogen is unique as it can foster the one-plateau 4e reduction of oxygen. However, boron heteroatoms or functional groups containing oxygen, sulfur or phosphorus are more affinitive to enhancing the production of peroxide. The similar electrocatalytic effects of B, O, S and P-groups on ORR are not clearly interpreted. Different mechanisms may rely on their different natures and bonding with carbon atoms. Interestingly, the addition of B, O, S, or P to the N-modified nanocarbons often induces notable improvements to the ORR activity, by either reducing the onset overpotential (although not significantly) or increasing the limiting current (sometimes quite obvious). The underlying synergistic effect between N and other heteroatoms might be related to the strengthened disturbance to the homogeneous electronic structures of clean nanocarbon surfaces. However, more intensified research has to be devoted to explaining the nature of the active sites and the ORR mechanisms on these distinct heterogeneous metal-free electrocatalysts.
The emerging application of heterogeneous nanocarbons for the metal-free electrocatalytic reduction of oxygen is highly dependent on (i) the advance in synthesis chemistry in terms of site-specific engineering of the heterogeneous nanocarbon surfaces (e.g. molecular structures of heteroatoms, local carbon nanostructures, distribution and amount of active sites) and in the surface analysis approaches for complete identification of the nature of the active sites; (ii) the profound understanding of the catalytic electrochemistry associated with the activity for oxygen adsorption and the selectivity to reduction intermediates/products; (iii) the use of in situ or in operando surface characterization techniques to reveal the real time structural evolution of the surface active sites; (iv) the rational correlation of the theoretical calculation with the practical catalyst surface structure; and (v) the correct performance evaluation of highly porous nanocarbons (e.g. the effects of mass transport and the large surface area of nanoporous carbons have to be excluded).
We remark that the correlation between the nature of active sites and the reactivity of the nanocarbon catalysts is still limited to a large extent. Electrochemical determination of the active sites in nanocarbons remains challenging. For instance, the ORR active N-containing groups have not been totally determined. The difficulty lies in the complex properties (electron donator and acceptor, basicity and acidity, hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity, polarity and nonpolarity, etc.) of heterogeneous carbon surfaces which are closely dependent on the synthesis chemistry and post-treatment. The reactivity of active sites is also related to the edge/basal planes, topological defects and the synergistic interactions among them. More insight into the structural change of active sites exposed in the electrochemical environment would be very helpful. Coupled in situ/in operando electrochemical–spectroscopic systems will become much more popular and important in this exciting research area than ever before. We expect that, aside from the morphology/composition control of the heterogeneous nanocarbon catalysts, future research can be refined and focused on this direction.
The combination of characterization and simulation in the analysis of the nanocarbon ORR catalysts promises the rational design of advanced metal-free electrocatalysts. Continuous efforts should be devoted to enhancing the accuracy of theoretical simulation, typically the use of geometry models, by adopting high resolution electron microscopy and spectroscopy technologies to correctly reconstruct the atomic structures of the heterogeneous catalysts. Meanwhile, it is still noteworthy that the high resolution characterization of nanocarbon structures should be linked with the in situ/in operando expression of active sites.
We emphasize that a standard protocol needs to be established to justify the performance of heterogeneous nanocarbon ORR catalysts, particularly to compare these in-house catalysts with the commercial Pt/C catalysts. The evaluation procedure of nanocarbon electrocatalysts is still under development and needs to be corrected and optimized. To the best of our knowledge, these experimental parameters need to be controlled: (1) concentration of catalyst in the binder ink, (2) catalyst weight loading, (3) catalyst loading manner: one layer of mixed catalyst and binder or two layers consisting of a bottom catalyst layer covered by a top binder layer, (4) when the catalyst is highly porous, the mass transport in the bulk nanopores needs to be compensated. Improper electrode preparation and data analysis may result in incorrect performance data. For instance, a limiting current density (mA cm−2) higher than a theoretical limit (∼7 mA cm−2) is not theoretically correct. In these circumstances, the gravimetric current density (mA mg−1) can be used as another criterion for the performance comparison. Furthermore, the test of heterogeneous nanocarbons is often in weak alkaline electrolytes (0.1 M KOH). In industry, concentrated 10 M KOH is used. Whether the in-house nanocarbon catalysts can perform equally well in an industrial environment is unknown. It should be also admitted that only N-containing nanocarbons have demonstrated promising potential as alternatives to the commercial Pt/C catalysts. Sole functionalization using O, B, S or P usually results in less efficient two-plateau oxygen reduction. Moreover, none of the heterogeneous nanocarbon catalysts can show competitive activity in acid compared to the commercial Pt/C catalysts. Although the industrial application of heterogeneous nanocarbon catalysts is uncertain, the study of heterogeneous nanocarbon catalysts can contribute fundamentally to this area.
This review aims to provide an update on the emerging growth of studies of the nanocarbon ORR catalysts in recent years, with special emphasis on the phenomenological knowledge and the topics under debate. We look forward to the bright future of nanocarbon ORR electrocatalysts and are keen to see breakthroughs in the understanding of the nature of the ORR on these metal-free nanocarbon catalysts. We hope that the coming groundbreaking advancements will bring forward conceptually different scope to this active area.
Notes and references
R. L. McCreery, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Su and R. Schlogl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Frackowiak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1774 RSC .
A. Ghosh and Y. H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Inagaki, H. Konno and O. Tanaike, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishihara and T. Kyotani, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, Y. Q. Dou, D. Y. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520 RSC .
N. A. Kaskhedikar and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2664 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, A. Holmen and D. Chen, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 378 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. G. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, E. Nagelli, F. Du and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, J. Zhang, B. Frank, A. Thomas, X. C. Wang, J. Paraknowitsch and R. Schlogl, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Brennan, M. T. Byrne, M. Bari and Y. K. Gun'ko, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 472 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Dillon, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, S. Ikeda, M. Matsumura and R. Amal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9307 CAS .
Z. L. Wang, D. Xu, J. J. Xu, L. L. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yeager, J. Mol. Catal., 1986, 38, 5 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hartmann, C. L. Bender, M. Vracar, A. K. Durr, A. Garsuch, J. Janek and P. Adelhelm, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, J. S. Lee, M. L. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 816 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Lee, J. S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34 CrossRef .
Y. G. Li, W. Zhou, H. L. Wang, L. M. Xie, Y. Y. Liang, F. Wei, J. C. Idrobo, S. J. Pennycook and H. J. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, Y. G. Li, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Blizanac, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Zhu and S. J. Dong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1753 RSC .
A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yu, X. L. Pan, X. M. Cao, P. Hu and X. H. Bao, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Song and J. Zhang, in PEM fuel cell electrocatalysts and catalyst layers, ed. J. Zhang, Springer, London,  2008, p. 89 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Zheng, J. Chen, J. Liu, D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, X. C. Wang and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. M. Zhang, Z. H. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maldonado and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Feng, E. Borguet and R. D. Vidic, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. G. Feng, E. Borguet and R. D. Vidic, Carbon, 2006, 44, 2990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bourbigot, M. Lebras, R. Delobel, P. Breant and J. M. Tremillon, Carbon, 1995, 33, 283 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jagtoyen and F. Derbyshire, Carbon, 1998, 36, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
R. Imamura, K. Matsui, S. Takeda, J. Ozaki and A. Oya, Carbon, 1999, 37, 261 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Strelko, J. Energy Chem., 2013, 22, 174 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Higgins, J. Wu, W. M. Li and Z. W. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Ai, Y. L. Liu, C. P. Ruan, L. H. Lu and G. Q. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, T. P. Fellinger and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Tang, B. L. Allen, D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 13200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao, C. R. Cabrera and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2622 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Yu, Q. Zhang and L. M. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Ma, L. Y. Sun, W. Huang, L. R. Zhang, J. Zhao and Q. L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24592 CAS .
Z. J. Wang, R. R. Jia, J. F. Zheng, J. G. Zhao, L. Li, J. L. Song and Z. P. Zhu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wiggins-Camacho and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20002 CAS .
A. Morozan, P. Jegou, M. Pinault, S. Campidelli, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Rao and Y. Ishikawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4340 Search PubMed .
T. Sharifi, G. Hu, X. E. Jia and T. Wagberg, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Vazquez-Arenas, D. Higgins, Z. Chen, M. Fowler and Z. W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2012, 205, 215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Wong, W. R. W. Daud, A. B. Mohamad, A. A. H. Kadhum, E. H. Majlan and K. S. Loh, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2012, 22, 12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dorjgotov, J. Ok, Y. Jeon, S. H. Yoon and Y. G. Shul, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2013, 43, 387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. R. Lee, K. U. Lee, J. W. Lee, B. T. Ahn and S. I. Woo, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. G. Chen, Y. L. Li, R. Y. Li, X. L. Sun, S. Y. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760 CAS .
Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. F. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. H. Tang, H. Gong, Z. X. Shen, L. Y. Jianyi and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936 CAS .
Q. Q. Li, S. Zhang, L. M. Dai and L. S. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Q. Shi, L. M. Dai and L. T. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Sun, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12810 RSC .
S. M. Unni, S. Devulapally, N. Karjule and S. Kurungot, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23506 RSC .
Y. J. Zhang, K. Fugane, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. H. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6575 RSC .
Z. F. Hou, X. L. Wang, T. Ikeda, K. Terakura, M. Oshima and M. Kakimoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 165401 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Lin, G. H. Waller, Y. Liu, M. L. Liu and C. P. Wong, Carbon, 2013, 53, 130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang and B. R. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zheng, J. Wang, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 28, 24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Park, J. H. Jang, J. E. Hong and Y. U. Kwon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16848 CAS .
T. P. Fellinger, F. Hasche, P. Strasser and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Liu, D. Q. Wu, X. L. Feng and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Y. Bi, Y. Zhao, L. J. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. W. Ma, Q. Wu, X. Z. Wang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xia, J. Masa, M. Bron, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Li, W. J. Kang, L. Wang, Q. L. Yue, S. L. Xu, H. S. Wang and J. F. Liu, Carbon, 2013, 54, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Pels, F. Kapteijn, J. A. Moulijn, Q. Zhu and K. M. Thomas, Carbon, 1995, 33, 1641 CrossRef CAS .
R. Arrigo, M. Havecker, S. Wrabetz, R. Blume, M. Lerch, J. McGregor, E. P. J. Parrott, J. A. Zeitler, L. F. Gladden, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlogl and D. S. Su, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Strelko, V. S. Kuts and P. A. Thrower, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1499 CrossRef CAS .
L. P. Zhang and Z. H. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11170 CAS .
H. Kim, K. Lee, S. I. Woo and Y. Jung, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 17505 RSC .
X. B. Hu, Y. T. Wu, H. R. Li and Z. B. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9603 CAS .
P. H. Matter, L. Zhang and U. S. Ozkan, J. Catal., 2006, 239, 83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. H. Matter, E. Wang, M. Arias, E. J. Biddinger and U. S. Ozkan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 264, 73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun and A. C. C. Tseung, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun and A. C. C. Tseung, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, L2 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, F. Li, K. H. Chang, C. C. Hu and T. Ohsaka, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Liu, H. M. Zhang, Z. Xu, H. X. Zhong and H. Jin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 19065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. McClure, J. D. Thornton, R. Z. Jiang, D. Chu, J. J. Cuomo and P. S. Fedkiw, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, F733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jeyabharathi, P. Venkateshkumar, M. S. Rao, J. Mathiyarasu and K. L. N. Phani, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 74, 171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chokai, M. Taniguchi, S. Moriya, K. Matsubayashi, T. Shinoda, Y. Nabae, S. Kuroki, T. Hayakawa, M. Kakimoto, J. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 5947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Niwa, K. Horiba, Y. Harada, M. Oshima, T. Ikeda, K. Terakura, J. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187, 93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, T. T. Li, M. Yao and S. Q. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10911 RSC .
R. A. Sidik, A. B. Anderson, N. P. Subramanian, S. P. Kumaraguru and B. N. Popov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ikeda, M. Boero, S. F. Huang, K. Terakura, M. Oshima and J. Ozaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 14706 CAS .
Y. Okamoto, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 256, 335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. P. Zhang, J. B. Niu, L. Dai and Z. H. Xia, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Huang, K. Terakura, T. Ozaki, T. Ikeda, M. Boero, M. Oshima, J. Ozaki and S. Miyata, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235410 CrossRef .
H. Kiuchi, H. Niwa, M. Kobayashi, Y. Harada, M. Oshima, M. Chokai, Y. Nabae, S. Kuroki, M. Kakimoto, T. Ikeda, K. Terakura and S. Miyata, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Kinoshita, Carbon: electrochemical and physicochemical properties, John Wiley&Sons,  1988 Search PubMed .
P. H. Matter and U. S. Ozkan, Catal. Lett., 2006, 109, 115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Su and G. Q. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jasinski, Nature, 1964, 201, 1212 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefevre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wu, K. L. More, C. M. Johnston and P. Zelenay, Science, 2011, 332, 443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Proietti, F. Jaouen, M. Lefevre, N. Larouche, J. Tian, J. Herranz and J. P. Dodelet, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 416 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Tanaka, C. Fierro, D. Scherson and E. B. Yeager, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 3799 CrossRef CAS .
I. Morcos and E. Yeager, Electrochim. Acta, 1970, 15, 953 CrossRef CAS .
C. Paliteiro, A. Hamnett and J. B. Goodenough, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1987, 233, 147 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Hossain, D. Tryk and E. Yeager, Electrochim. Acta, 1989, 34, 1733 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarapuu, K. Vaik, D. J. Schiffrin and K. Tammeveski, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2003, 541, 23 CrossRef CAS .
K. Vaik, A. Sarapuu, K. Tammeveski, F. Mirkhalaf and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 564, 159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. N. Zhang, Y. M. Yan, K. P. Gong, L. Q. Mao, Z. X. Guo and Y. Chen, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 8781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Matsubara and K. Waki, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, F7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, S. M. Dong, J. Wang, L. X. Zhang, P. X. Han, C. J. Zhang, X. G. Wang, K. J. Zhang, Z. G. Lan and G. L. Cui, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 21051 RSC .
D. H. Deng, L. Yu, X. L. Pan, S. Wang, X. Q. Chen, P. Hu, L. X. Sun and X. H. Bao, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10016 RSC .
C. Z. Zhu, J. F. Zhai and S. J. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9367 RSC .
R. S. Zhong, Y. H. Qin, D. F. Niu, J. W. Tian, X. S. Zhang, X. G. Zhou, S. G. Sun and W. K. Yuan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. R. Radovic, M. Karra, K. Skokova and P. A. Thrower, Carbon, 1998, 36, 1841 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Zhong, H. Sano, Y. Uchiyama and K. Kobayashi, Carbon, 2000, 38, 1199 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Yang, S. J. Jiang, Y. Zhao, L. Zhu, S. Chen, X. Z. Wang, Q. Wu, J. Ma, Y. W. Ma and Z. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jo and S. Shanmugam, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, F. Li, Z. G. Chen, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7195 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Lowell, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1967, 50, 142 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Wu and L. R. Radovic, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 9180 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ozaki, T. Anahara, N. Kimura and A. Oya, Carbon, 2006, 44, 3358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ozaki, N. Kimura, T. Anahara and A. Oya, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. H. Xue, D. S. Yu and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. Ge, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. J. Yang, S. Chen, X. Z. Wang, Y. W. Ma, Q. Wu, Y. F. Jiang, W. J. Qian and Z. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chisaka, T. Iijima, Y. Ishihara, Y. Suzuki, R. Inada and Y. Sakurai, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Kong, Q. W. Chen and Z. Y. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 14, 514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ikeda, M. Boero, S. F. Huang, K. Terakura, M. Oshima, J. Ozaki and S. Miyata, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 8933 CAS .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, W. X. Zheng and J. A. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3257 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Liu, F. Peng, H. J. Wang, H. Yu, J. Tan and L. L. Zhu, Catal. Commun., 2011, 16, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, S. Inamdar, J. Park and J. S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12107 RSC .
D. S. Yu, Y. H. Xue and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2863 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, S. H. Park and S. I. Woo, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Inamdar, H. S. Choi, P. Wang, M. Y. Song and J. S. Yu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 30, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. F. Li, G. Y. Fang, H. G. Nie, Z. Liu, X. M. Zhou, X. Chen and S. M. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Sohn, H. J. Choi, I. Y. Jeon, D. W. Chang, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Yang, L. J. Zhi, K. Tang, X. L. Feng, J. Maier and K. Mullen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3634 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Xu, G. F. Dong, C. H. Jin, M. H. Huang and L. H. Guan, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, H. G. Nie, Z. Yang, J. Zhang, Z. P. Jin, Y. Q. Lu, Z. B. Xiao and S. M. Huang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3283 RSC .
S. A. Wohlgemuth, R. J. White, M. G. Willinger, M. M. Titirici and M. Antonietti, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1515 RSC .
Q. Shi, F. Peng, S. Liao, H. Wang, H. Yu, Z. Liu, B. Zhang and D. S. Su, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14853 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Da-Wei Wang	Da-Wei Wang completed his Bachelor's studies at Northwestern Polytechnic University (China) in 2003 and his Ph.D. at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2009. He started postdoctoral research in collaboration with Professor Max Lu and Professor Ian Gentle at the University of Queensland (UQ) in 2009. He is interested in carbon materials and their energy applications. He received a 2012 UQ Foundation Research Excellence Award and a 2013 Scopus Young Researcher of the Year Award. He has published 38 peer-reviewed journal papers with an h-index of 20, and total citations of over 2000.
Dangsheng Su	Dang Sheng Su completed his physics studies at Jilin University (PR China) in 1986 and his Ph.D. at the Technical University of Vienna (Austria) in 1991. He moved to the Fritz-Haber-Institut der Max-Planck-Gesellschaft as a post-doctoral worker in the Department of Electron Microscopy. After a short stay at Hahn-Meitner Institut GmbH and Humboldt Universitat zu Berlin (Germany) he joined the Fritz-Haber-Institute in 1999, where he worked on nanomaterials in heterogeneous catalysis and electron microscopy. He is now a Professor at the Institute of Metal Research, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenyang (PR China). His research interests are nanocarbons, nanocatalysis, chemical energy conversion and storage, and electron microscopy. He has published about 300 peer-reviewed papers, several book chapters and edited several special issues in international journals.

Broader context
The emerging demand for next generation renewable and sustainable energy conversion technologies requires diverse catalytic and electrochemical methods and reactors. In terms of energy density, metal–air batteries exhibit the greatest promise for delivering compact energy by reducing oxygen from the air and oxidizing the implanted metal electrodes. Compared with metal oxidation, the kinetics of oxygen reduction is rather slow and inhibits the overall power capability of these promising devices. Platinum is the most active electrocatalyst for oxygen reduction and its high cost is urging the development of non-noble oxygen reduction electrocatalysts. Metal-free heterogeneous carbon nanotubes and many other nanocarbons have been increasingly studied in recent years. It has been greatly expected that by modifying the heteroatoms in nanostructured carbon materials their electrocatalytic activity towards oxygen reduction can be potentially increased to approaching that of platinum. However, many fundamental issues, particularly the specific functions of the heteroatoms in the oxygen reduction reaction on heterogeneous nanocarbons, are unclear. We expect to address some of these questions in this review and to propose some ideas for future research.


Aqueous alkaline electrolyte	
4e pathway: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− → 4OH−;	0.401	NHE

peroxide pathway: O2 + H2O + 2e− → HO2− + OH−;	−0.065
HO2− + H2O + 2e− → 3OH−	+0.867
or 2HO2− → 2OH− + O2	decomposition
Aqueous acid electrolyte	
4e pathway: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O;	1.229	NHE

peroxide pathway: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O2;	0.67
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− → 2H2O	1.77
or 2H2O2 → 2H2O + O2	decomposition
Non-aqueous aprotic electrolyte (Li+)	O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2	—	Li0/Li+ (−3.04 V vs. NHE)
O2 + 2Li+ + 2e− → Li2O2	2.96
O2 + 4Li+ + 4e− → 2Li2O	2.91
Non-aqueous aprotic electrolyte (Na+)	O2 + Na+ + e− → NaO2	2.27	Na0/Na+ (−2.71 V vs. NHE)
O2 + 2Na+ + 2e− → Na2O2	2.33
O2 + 4Na+ + 4e− → 2Na2O	1.95

 	Fig. 1  Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (10 mV s−1) for carbon nanotubes (CNT) and Pt/C on a rotating ring-disk electrode (1600 rpm) in an O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH solution.	 

 	Fig. 2  Typical structure and binding energy given for quarternary, pyrrolic, pyridinic and pyridinic-oxide groups.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Koutecky–Levich plot for the determination of the number of electrons transferred during the oxygen reduction on a N-functionalized mesoporous carbon in O2 saturated 0.1 M HClO4.73 Reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from the American Chemical Society. (b) Koutecky–Levich plot for oxygen reduction on a N-functionalized mesoporous carbon in O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH.44 Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The model structures with various geometries, N-containing sites, and edge states. The oxygen molecule is adsorbed at Cad (yellow atom). The nitrogen, oxygen and hydrogen atoms are colored blue, red, and white, respectively, and the dotted line denotes a periodic boundary. (b) The proposed ORR catalytic cycle for the N0 structure, showing only the catalytically active part of the graphene nanoribbon edge in (a). Arabic numerals next to the arrows in parentheses denote the reaction steps described in the text.82 Reproduced from ref. 82 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  Reaction scheme of ORR on N-graphene in alkaline solution, where 1 presents an associative mechanism and 2 a dissociative mechanism.29 Reproduced from ref. 29 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) O 1s XPS spectra of (I) polyamide (PA) derived and (II) phenolic resin (PhRs) derived carbon alloy catalysts (CACs). (a) and (d) Annealed samples before oxygen adsorption. (b) and (e) Oxygen adsorbed samples. (c) Reannealed sample after oxygen adsorption. Red, blue and green solid lines are CO groups; C–OH and C–O–C groups; and chemisorbed oxygen or water components, respectively. (b) N 1s XPS spectra of the PA derived CAC (a) before and (b) after oxygen adsorption. (c) Reannealed sample after oxygen adsorption. Red, blue, green and orange solid lines are pyridine-like; pyrrole-like or amide-like; graphite-like; and oxide nitrogen components, respectively.100 Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structures of N-functionalized graphene quantum dots (QDs) 1, 2 and an N-free QD 3 for comparison studies. (b) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves (10 mV s−1) for 1–3 and Pt/C on a RDE (1600 rpm) in an O2 saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. Also shown is the LSV curve for 11, a much smaller N-substituted heterocycle with the structure shown in the inset.63 Reproduced from ref. 63 with permission from the American Chemical Society. The sizes of N-containing QDs 1, 2 and 11 are in the order of 1 > 2 > 11.	 

 	Fig. 8  Garten and Weiss mechanism for O2 reduction on carbon surfaces.19 Reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) A schematic diagram of nanographene showing armchair and zigzag edges with oxygen-containing groups. The grey, red and white balls represent C, O and H atoms, respectively. (b) Oxygen reduction voltammogram of pristine and ball-milled samples resulting from ball milling for different durations.117 Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The schematic structure of VA-BCN, and (b) LSV curves in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH electrolyte at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1000 rpm.129 Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (c) LSV curves of ORR on BCN graphene with different compositions in oxygen-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution at 10 mV s−1 and compared with the commercial Pt/C electrocatalyst. (d) Experimental ORR activities vs. DFT-predicted HOMO–LUMO energy gap for BCN graphene sheets.130 Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  Model structures of CACs for O2 adsorption. A B–N pair is included at (a) a zigzag-edged plane, (b) a zigzag-shaped step edge, and (d) a basal plane. Model (c) contains a N–B–N complex at a zigzag edge. Atom colors are white for H, gray for C, green for B, and blue for N.135 Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) LSV and the corresponding amperometric response for oxygen reduction in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at the P-containing graphite/GC at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 with a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. 1 stands for the disk current and 1′ stands for the ring current collected from the P-modified graphite catalyst. The Pt ring electrode was poised at 0.5 V.136 Reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) Calculated H2O2 production yields of the prepared catalysts during the ORR. N and P content in samples (a)–(e): (a) N 3.7 at%, P 0, (b) N 3.0 at%, P < 1.0 at%, (c) N 5.0 at%, P < 1.0 at%, (d) N 5.0 at%, P 1.4 at% and (e) N 7.0 at%, P 2.3 at%.139 Reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) RDE voltammograms of the undoped CNTs, SGL, NGL, SNGL-20, and Pt/C supported on GCEs at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm.147 Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Wiley-VCH. (b) LSVs of different S and N modified graphene samples.148 Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
