High performance 2D MXene based conducting polymer hybrids: synthesis to emerging applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02240G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02240G
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 10193-10215High performance 2D MXene based conducting polymer hybrids: synthesis to emerging applications

        
          
            Md. Omar 
            Faruk
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Abbas 
            Ahmed
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bapan 
            Adak
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Maliha 
            Marzana
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Md. Milon 
            Hossain
          
          
        
      *ef and 

        
          
            Samrat 
            Mukhopadhyay
          
          
        
      *g
aNational Institute of Textile Engineering and Research, University of Dhaka, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh
bPolymer Program, Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, Storrs, CT 06269, USA
cProduct Development Department, Kusumgar Corporates Pvt. Ltd, Vapi, Valsad, Gujarat 396195, India. E-mail: bapan.iitd15@gmail.com
dDepartment of Plant and Soil Science, Fiber and Biopolymer Research Institute, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, TX 79403, USA
eDepartment of Textile Engineering, Chemistry and Science, North Carolina State University, North Carolina 27606, USA. E-mail: mhossai5@ncsu.edu
fDepartment of Textile Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering and Technology, Khulna 9203, Bangladesh
gDepartment of Textile and Fiber Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology, New Delhi 110016, India. E-mail: Samrat@textile.iitd.ac.in
Received 
      14th May 2021
    , Accepted 28th July 2021First published on 4th August 2021AbstractThe advances in the nanotechnology and materials chemistry research has revolutionized the field of stretchable, flexible, and wearable electronics for next-generation applications. Specifically, the exploration and progress of MXene have made a remarkable breakthrough in modern materials chemistry research to fabricate and design high-performance wearable electronics. MXene has been extensively studied to design flexible and wearable devices by integrating them with highly flexible conducting polymers to improve their performance and impart new functionalities. This review summarizes the recent advances of MXene integrated conducting polymers (MXCP) to design composite structures for wearable electronics. Synthesis of MXene and strategies to fabricate MXCP composites are highlighted along with their mechanical and electrical properties. Different applications of MXCP in energy storage, electromagnetic shielding, personal thermal management, sensors and bioelectronics are discussed. The review also suggests the routes towards exploring the vast potential of MXCP composites for wearable electronic applications.
Md. Omar Faruk
Md Omar Faruk received his Bachelor's degree in Textile Engineering from the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. Currently, he is a PhD student in Materials Science and Engineering at Binghamton University, The State University of New York, USA. His primary research interests are advanced nanostructured and bio-inspired materials integrated flexible and smart wearable devices for healthcare monitoring, energy harvesting and storage, safety, and protection.
Abbas Ahmed
Abbas Ahmed is a PhD student in Polymer Program at the Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, USA. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Textile Engineering from the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. His research focuses on nanostructured and bioinspired materials enabled flexible nanoelectronics and soft-robotics for smart-textiles, healthcare and energy-related applications.
Bapan Adak
Bapan Adak is a R&D Manager at Kusumgar Corporates Pvt. Ltd, India. He received his BTech degree (in 2010) from West Bengal University of Technology, India in Textile Technology. He received his MTech degree in Fibre Science & Technology (in 2015) and PhD degree in Technical Textile/Polymer nanocomposite (in 2019) both from Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. Before taking admission in MTech, he worked more than three years at Arvind Ltd., India as Manufacturing Manager. His primary research interests focus on polymer nanocomposites, single-polymer composites, biocomposites, functional and smart technical textiles.
Md. Milon Hossain
Md Milon Hossain is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Textile Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Bangladesh. He received his Bachelor's and Masters from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University. Currently, he is a Research Assistant and Instructor at North Carolina State University. He is working on nano textiles for multifunctional applications. His research interest includes wearable and flexible electronics, bioelectronics and energy storage.
Samrat Mukhopadhyay
Samrat Mukhopadhyay is an Associate Professor at the Department of Textile and Fiber Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi. He received his BSc (Tech) from the University of Kolkata, and subsequently did his Masters and PhD from IIT Delhi, India. He was with the Fibrous Materials Research Group at the University of Minho, Portugal as a Post-Doctoral Scientist before joining the Department. He has been working with synthetic and natural fibers, composite materials, sustainable approaches in textiles and in the revival of traditional textiles.
1. Introduction
Smart, stretchable, interactive, and wearable devices have found unprecedented interest in flexible electronics for augmented benefits in terms of material performance, device integration, structural reliability, and so forth. Recent advances in nanotechnology and modernization in various aspects of electronics have created a boom in wearable technology which has led the innovation a step forward, contributing in the field of modern healthcare,1–5 energy storage and harvesting6–11 virtual and augmented reality,12,13 portable electronics,14–18 protective shielding,19–21 and smart-clothing.22–25 These profound advancements in flexible electronics have been significantly enabled by nanoscale materials, and their integration into various substrates has been quite intriguing. Nano-scale material enabled devices are flexible, lightweight, and ideally suited to work in conjunction with the curves of the body, and hence largely exploited in wearable electronic platforms.26,27 Several organic and inorganic nanomaterials from zero to two-dimensions, carbonaceous, conducting polymers (CPs), and metallic nanoparticles have widely been explored in designing wearable electronics for numerous applications.28–44
The 2D transition metal carbides and nitrides (MXene) emerged as a new frontier nanomaterial in the fabrication of flexible and stretchable electronics due to its outstanding electronic and metallic conductivity, enriched surface functionalities, superior electrochemical, and optoelectrical properties.45–47 Besides, the excellent opportunity of tuning MXene's surface chemistry has rendered its amazing prospects throughout diverse fields of application. The structural formula of MXene is Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where n + 1 layers of transition metals M refers to an early transition metal (e.g., Ti, Zr, V, Nb, Ta, or Mo), X is carbon and/or nitrogen, and Tx stands for the functional groups (e.g., –O, –OH, –F, –Cl) on the surface of MXene.48–52 Because of the variety of three different elements in the structure, so far MXene with thirty different structural compositions have been synthesized and various unique compositions are yet to be unveiled. Inherently, being a large family in constituents with diverse, and cutting edge material performance, MXene has received widespread attention among researchers and industrial experts. Early research on MXene had focused extensively on understanding its electrochemical attributes, and in this case, it has continuously demonstrated superiority among other nanomaterials.53–55 However, it is MXene's incomparable electrical conductivity that makes MXene particularly highly desired materials for electronic applications. To this end, MXene has revolutionized wearable and flexible electronic technologies thus serving in platforms like smart-healthcare monitoring,56–59 electromagnetic shielding interference (EMI) shielding,60–62 thermal management,63–65 flexible sensing66–69 and biomedicine.70,71 Furthermore, the tailorable surface chemistry of MXene allows it to couple with other nanomaterials, resulting in a better material performance for device applications. MXene has shown its potential to be integrated with graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNT), metallic nanomaterials, and conducting polymers for various applications.
Research on MXene functionalized conducting polymers (MXCP) such as (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid)) (PEDOT:PSS), polyaniline (PANI), polypyrrole (PPy) exceptionally progressed over the past few years.72–74 Due to the exceptional synergies between these two materials ascribed from their intrinsic material characteristics and ease in processing, it is possible to design high-performance nanostructured materials. To fabricate hybrid functional nanostructures from MXene and conducting polymers, several strategies have been explored which include coating, vacuum-assisted filtration (VAF), in situ polymerization, electrochemical deposition (ED),74–76 etc and the resultant devices found their applications in energy-storage,77,78 smart-textiles,77,79–81 sensing,80 personal thermal management79,80 and electromagnetic shielding (EMI).79,81,82 In the MXCP composite system, the function of CPs has been found multitudinous, for instance, PEDOT:PSS acts as a binder to improve the adhesion and flexibility of MXene functionalized cotton textiles, coated directly with large MXene flakes. In essence, to accentuate the progress in MXene functionalized CPs, a comprehensive understanding is required in terms of their rational design and processing, and above all, realizing new functional attributes for advanced applications.
Herein, this review intends to summarize the most recent progress that has been made in the field of MXCP based nanostructured devices for wearable and flexible electronic applications. Currently, there is no comprehensive review highlighting MXCP based devices for functional purposes. The review begins with summarizing the chemistry of 2D MXenes, as well as outlining the widely explored and scalable synthesis techniques. Then various MXCP processing techniques are highlighted, followed by analyzing their respective merits and demerits. Two general properties (mechanical and electrical) of MXCP are also deliberated. The emerging and potential applications of MXCP in various electronic fields are discussed, and while reviewing, different performance parameters are critically compared. At the end, the future scope of research and development in this field are outlined in detail.
2. Synthesis of MXene
2.1. Synthesis from MAX phases
MXenes have been one of the newest discoveries in the field of 2D advanced nanomaterials. They have proven their merit in diverse applications since their discovery back in 2011 at Drexel University.83 Generally, MXenes are synthesized by selectively removing certain atomic layers from their precursors MAX phases (top-down approach), which are denser than MXenes.22,83–85 Since the first discovery of MXene, this route was extensively studied to synthesize MXenes and became a popular one.22,83,84 Such dominant MAX phases are usually hexagonally layered (space group P63/mmc) and a very large family of ternary carbides and nitrides, Fig. 1a.83,85,86 These transition metal carbides and nitrides (MAX phases) are denoted by Mn+1AXn (n = 1, 2, or 3), where M symbolizes the transition metals, A represents the elements of groups A of the periodic table (mostly elements of group 13 and 14), and X stands for nitrogen (N) and/or carbon (C) atoms.83–86 Near-close-packed M-layers of MAX phases are incorporated with the layers of A-group elements, where X-atoms have filled the octahedral sites between the former.83,85 Till now more than 150 MAX phase precursors are available, Fig. 1b.22,84,87,88 Because of the availability of various M elements with three different atomic constructions, it was possible to experimentally synthesize more than 30 stoichiometric MXenes with different chemical compositions.22,86,89–91 Besides, it was also possible to theoretically predict more than 25 different ordered MXenes using Density functional theory (DFT).85,92
 Fig. 1  (a) Structures of MAX phases and MXene. Reproduced with permission.86 (b) Compositions of updated MAX phases are represented in the Periodic table. Reproduced with permission.87 

2.1.1. Etching with hydrofluoric acid. 
The strong metallic bonds between the “M” and “A” elements precluded them to isolate the layers of MAX phases (Mn+1AXn) to synthesize MXene using mechanical exfoliation or shearing like the synthesis of graphene or black phosphorus.84,85 However, it is possible to separate the layers of A-element of the MAX phases through selective etching owing to the comparatively chemically active M–A bond than the M–X bond (mixed covalent/metallic/ionic character), resulting in a loosely stacked and multilayer structure of MXenes.22,49,85–87,93 Therefore, highly selective etching significantly influences the synthesis of MXenes from their MAX precursors.85
In this regard, hydrofluoric acid (HF) is predominantly used to selectively etch the layers of A-elements presented in the MAX precursors, especially to synthesize carbide MXenes.22,84,85 The concentration and the treatment time with HF solution have been considered as the important parameters of MXenes synthesis.22 In this process, powders of the MAX phase precursors are agitated in aqueous HF with a specific concentration, subsequently, the solid from the supernatant is separated by filtrating the mixture of the agitated solution.86 Then the pH of the suspension is maintained between 4 and 6 by washing off the separated solid using deionized water. Consequently, a loosely packed accordion-like structure is formed resembling exfoliated graphite.86 For the first time, Naguib and co-workers have selectively etched the layers of A elements (Al layers) of the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase precursor to synthesize Ti3C2 MXene, which was done by mixing the powder of MAX phase precursor in concentrated (50%) HF solution at room temperature and stirred for 2 hours.83 The formation of MXenes (Fig. 2a) by selective etching of layers of the A elements of MAX phases follows the etching reactions given below:87 Ti3AlC2 + 3HF = AlF3 + 3/2H2 + Ti3C2(1) Ti3C2 + 2H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2(2) Ti3C2 + 2HF = Ti3C2F2 + H2(3)Reaction (1) is crucial for the formation of MXenes where highly reactive Ti atoms are exposed through etching of Al to form Ti3C2, which then reacts with H2O (reaction (2)) and HF (reaction (3)) molecules to form terminal groups (OH, F, O, H, etc.) on the surface of MXenes.22,84 Later, these terminal groups are substituted to modify the properties of MXenes including tuned bandgap, higher electron mobility (at room temperature), half metallicity, and 2D ferromagnetism.22 This technique was thoroughly studied by the researchers to synthesize different kinds of MXenes including Ti2C, V2C, Nb2C, Nb4C3, Ta4C3, and so on.84,94–96
 Fig. 2  (a) Selective etching of Ti3AlC2 MAX phases with HF to synthesize MXene (Ti3C2Tx). Reproduced with permission.87 (b) Etching of A elements of MAX phase precursors with molten salt to synthesize of MXene. Reproduced with permission.49 (c) Illustration of the synthesis process of Mo2CTx MXenes flakes from non-MAX Mo2Ga2C. Reproduced with permission.94 (d) Schematic of the synthesis process of the Hf contained 2D Hf3C2 MXene from Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6 compound. Reproduced with permission.97 


2.1.2. Etching with fluoride salts. 
HF is very dangerous because of its high toxicity and corrosiveness. Therefore alternative methods were developed including mixing of hydrochloric acid (HCl) with fluoride-containing compounds.22,98 Synthesis of MXene using the HCl and fluoride salt mixture has a great advantage as it produces MXene with fewer defects and increases the overall conductivity.22 This process has been considered much safer than the straight use of HF.22 For example, Ghidiu et al.99 have approached for etching of Ti3AlC2 MAX precursor with hydrochloric acid (HCl) and lithium fluoride (LiF) to synthesize MXenes, where in situ HF was generated via the following reactions: LiF + HCl = HF + LiCl(4) NH4F + H2O = NH3·H2O + HF(5)This in situ produced HF further follow the reactions (1)–(3) and the surface functional group endows hydrophilic properties to MXene.22,100


2.1.3. Synthesis of nitride-based MXene. 
Synthesis of nitride-based MXene (Tin+1Nn) by etching MAX precursors with an acidic solution is challenging because of high energy requirements.22 It has been found that when nitrogen-containing MXene has been produced through etching with HF solutions, the produced MXene is less stable due to the lower cohesive energy of nitride.22,101 In this regard, molten fluoride salt has been extensively studied to etch “A” elements of various MAX phases and successfully synthesize nitride MXenes (Ti4N3) and considered as the most effective way. However, further investigations are desirable towards the synthesis of new MXenes.22,84,102,103 For instance, Urbankowski and co-workers have first approached to etch MAX phases (Ti4AlN3) using molten salt mixtures (KF, LiF, and NaF) to synthesize nitride MXene (Ti4N3) at high temperature (550 °C) in the presence of Ar atmosphere, Fig. 2b.49

2.2. Synthesis from non-MAX phases
Apart from the synthesis of MXenes from MAX phase precursors, several studies have been conducted to synthesize MXerne from non-MAX phases. For instance, Meshkian and his co-workers have firstly synthesized the Mo2C MXene by selectively etching layers of gallium (Ga) from Mo2Ga2C precursor with 50% solution of HF.84,85,104 Such non-MAX Mo2Ga2C phase has a similar composition as MAX phase, unlikely, the structure of this phase dissimilar from any known MAX phases, as it has two A layers (Ga) which are separated by the carbide layers.84,85 The synthesis of Mo-based MXenes from non-MAX phases (Mo2Ga2C) has become promising when Halim et al.94 revealed the way to synthesize large-scale Mo2C MXenes flakes from the powder of non-MAX Mo2Ga2C using the etchants (HF and LiF/HCl solutions), Fig. 2c.84 Moreover, instead of etching Al layers,85 Zhou et al.105 have approached for etching Al3C3 layers from another non-MAX phase precursor Zr3Al3C5 to synthesize Zr3C2Tx MXene, which can be described by the following equations: Zr3Al3C5 + HF = AlF3 + CH4 + Zr3C2(6) Zr3C2 + H2O = Zr3C2(OH)2 + H2(7) Zr3C2 + HF = Zr3C2F2 + H2(8)With the similar reactions (eqn (2) and (3)) that occurred by selective etching of Ti3AlC2 with HF, the formed Zr3C2 in eqn (6), will then react with the H2O and HF in eqn (7) and (8) to form different terminal groups in the synthesized MXenes Zr3C2.84,105 In a different study, Zhou and his co-workers97 have fabricated Hf contained 2D Hf3C2 MXene from Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6 compound by selectively etching of [Al(Si)]–C sublayer with concentrated HF, Fig. 2d. The first-principles density functional calculations have confirmed that compared to the Al, valence electrons of Si have deteriorated the adhesive energy of the etching interface.97 As a result, the interfacial adhesion between Hf–C and Al(Si)–C sublayers was weakened through the substitution of Si on Al, which was then enabling succeeding etching.84,97 These non-MAX phases (Zr3Al3C5 and Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6) are members of layered ternary transition metal carbides with a general formula of MnAl3Cn+2 and Mn[Al(Si)]4Cn+3, where, M represented the transition metal, especially Zr or Hf and n = 1–3.84,85 Herein, each metal layer is separated by a carbon layer, and therefore, M2C or M3C2 layers are separated by Al–C units.84,85 Thus, it is possible to fabricate new kinds of MXenes by etching aluminum carbide (Al–C layers) from these non-MAX phases.22,85 For instance, U2CTx MXene can be synthesized from U2Al3C4 through etching of Al3C3 layers.84,85,106
3. Strategies for fabrication of MXCP composites
3.1. Vacuum-assisted filtration (VAF)
VAF is a separation technique used to isolate a solid that is dissolved in a solution using a vacuum pump by forcefully passing the liquid through a filter. VAF is one of the widely used filtration techniques in materials chemistry especially to synthesize nano-sized materials and this technique has been extensively studied to integrate MXene into polymer matrix while fabricating MXCP composites. In this technique, the desired amount of polymers and MXenes are vigorously agitated or sonicated in a polar solvent before proceeding for vacuum filtration.84 For example, Liu et al.82 selectively etched the Al layers of Ti3AlC2 MAX phase precursors with fluoride salts to synthesize MXene. The fabricated MXene was then integrated with conductive PEDOT:PSS via VAF routes to fabricate MXCP composite structure for EMI shielding application. Besides, Wang et al.75 fabricated ultra-thin Ti3C2Tx/Fe3O4@PANI composite based sandwich intercalated structure using Ti3C2Tx as a matrix by VAF approach. In this study, the variation of the film thickness was minimized by increasing the content of Fe3O4@PANI and then continuously stirred followed by VAF to distribute Fe3O4@PANI composites evenly in the stalked Ti3C2Tx and formed a sandwich intercalated structure. Similarly, PEDOT:PSS polymer was mixed with Mo1.33C MXene to fabricate MXene/PEDOT:PSS films followed by VAF.107 The fabricated film was further treated with H2SO4, which led the PEDOT nanofiber network to align among the MXene sheets that resulted in high flexibility and enhanced device performance. The treatment of prepared films with concentrated H2SO4 helps in the formation of crystalline nanofibril structure amid the PEDOT networks as a result of the removal of superfluous uncoupled PSS acid. The nanofibril network of PEDOT was responsible for increasing the interlayer spacing among the MXene flakes and thereby enhanced the device performance. Besides, the expanded interlayer spacing of MXene was found to facilitate charge transport in supercapacitor applications.108–110 Such a facile solution-processed VAF technique was also studied by others to design MXCP composites.111 In parallel with the solution mixing approach, the VAF technique was also used to fabricate MXCP composites right after in situ polymerization of CP with the MXene as a matrix for diverse applications. This in situ polymerization-based VAF approach has been explored extensively because CPs are easily polymerized with the MXene flakes as the enormous hydrophilic ends of the MXene flakes are disseminated easily in the polar solvent. In one such example, Boota and co-workers108 fabricated pseudocapacitive electrodes based volumetric supercapacitors through polymerizing metal-free conductive PPy between the layers of Ti3C2Tx Mxene through the VAF technique. The intercalation of PPy has facilitated rapid charge transport and introducing a conductive pathway for charge percolation through expanding spaces between the MXene layers, which was responsible for high gravimetric and volumetric capacitances with excellent cycling stability. The fabrication of MXCP using the VAF method has several advantages for diverse applications, however, controlling the weight percentage of monomer, while fabricating MXCP composites is very difficult, as there is a risk to get rid of the water-soluble polymer that might compromise the properties, composition, and applications of the composites.22,84
3.2. 
          In situ polymerization

In situ polymerization is a chemical encapsulation process in material chemistry used to synthesize nanocomposites since it provides a direct amalgamation of evenly dispersed nanoparticles and distributes the synthesized material uniformly in bulk polymer composites.112,113 This technique creates a strong interaction between the polymer matrix and the fillers, since it disperse the filler materials evenly throughout the matrix, while the monomers and fillers are mixed in a solvent forming a homogeneous mixture.114 However, this method is not eco-friendly, as different harmful solvents are used while integrating filler materials with the polymer matrix. In this process, macromolecules are synthesized by mixing of monomers of small molecule, initiators, or curing agents with the 2D MXene using wet method to uniformly distribute the MXenes in the polymer matrix.98 This blending process is widely accepted to synthesize MXCP composites as it improves the quality of MXene dispersion significantly in the host polymer matrix.98In situ-polymerization of CP with MXene nanosheets has been studied widely to fabricate devices for energy harvesting and storage, EMI shielding, and other smart devices wearable applications.107,115,116 For example, Wu et al.76 have taken an approach for a low-cost and convenient way to fabricate large-scale organ-like MXCP structures for supercapacitor applications using in situ polymerization technique. This organ-like framework of Ti3C2 enabled the structural stability of the fabricated Ti3C2/PPy nanocomposite by limiting and preventing the growth and stacking of PPy, which is a promising prospect for designing next-generation electrodes for advanced wearable energy storage systems. It is proven that in situ polymerization of CPs with MXene could improve the physical and electrical properties of the composites structures that are vital for designing wearable devices. For instance, Boota et al.108in situ polymerized PPy onto Ti3C2Tx MXene for pseudocapacitive electrodes to fabricate wearable energy storage devices without using hazardous oxidative agents. In this study, intercalation of PPy within the MXene layers has expanded the space between them, which was responsible for rapid ion transport and provided the favorable architecture for high pseudocapacitive performance. Similarly, VahidMohammadi and co-workers117 developed an energy storage system by in situ polymerization of PANI onto the surface of the MXene sheets Fig. 3(a and b). They designed a hybrid electrode structure with high ion transport for high-performance electrochemical devices by minimizing the amount of polymer during the polymerization process. Moreover, Wei et al.118 deposited PPy nanospheres on Ti3C2 MXene sheets through in situ polymerizations of pyrrole monomers to synthesize heterostructure MXCP composites for high-performance supercapacitors. The as fabricated MXCP composites provide an adequate environment for fast electron transfer by preventing agglomeration and stacking of Ti3C2 layers. In another study an EMI shielding system was developed by synthesizing a heterogeneous microstructure of Ti3C2Tx/PPy hybrids using an in situ polymerization technique, wherein multilayer Ti3C2Tx and PPy acted as an active substrate and a surface modifier, respectively.119 Here, the authors have shown that in situ polymerization of PPy formed an overall conductive network and the synergistic effect between them, which was responsible for weakening the incident electromagnetic wave (EMW). Apart from synthesizing MXCP composites for energy storage and/or EMI shielding, Zhao et al.120 designed a composites structure for flexible sensing application. In this study, they have approached for in situ polymerization technique to incorporate PANI with Ti3C2Tx MXene (Fig. 3c). Fabricated hybrid structures showed high mechanical stability and stable sensing towards ethanol gas molecules at a bending range of 0–120° at room temperature.
 Fig. 3  (a and b) Graphical representation of the preparation of MXene from layered Ti3AlC2 MAX phases and the in situ polymerization of PANI onto the MXene surface, respectively. Reproduced with permission.117 (c) Schematic of the incorporation of PANI with the Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets. Reproduced with the permission.120 
3.3. Electrochemical deposition (ED)
ED is one of the most cost-effective and an eco-friendly ways to fabricate polymer membranes and can easily control the morphology of the fabricated composites by regulating the deposition current/potential.74,121–124 This method permits the homogeneous coating of micro and nanoparticles as well as helps to deposit more than one materials on a substrate.123 Homogeneity and morphology of the coating are dependent on the polymerization pattern or polymer used.122 The synthesis process of the polymer membrane by ED is very simple, as no capping reagent, surfactant, and/or other dispersion agents are required in this method.125 Moreover, ED enhances the interfacial bonding between the coating material and the substrate before heat treatment or sintering.122 However, sometimes the process results in large-sized nanoparticles ranging from tens to hundreds of nanometers and a poor distribution, leading to compromise in the properties of the composites.126 It is possible to control the size and densities of fabricated nanoparticles along with their distributions in the polymer matrix by changing the deposition potential, time, and/or composition of the electrolytes.126 Among the other preparation techniques used for preparing polymer membranes, ED has drawn enormous attention to fabricating MXCP composites using in situ polymerization because of the above advantages. For instance, Tong et al.74 had taken an ED approach to fabricate flexible and freestanding MXCP composites (PPy/Ti3C2Tx film) via polymerizing the PPy onto the freestanding MXene film. Herein, Ti3C2Tx was firstly immersed into a solution comprising of pyrrole monomer followed by infusion of PPy at the gaps inside the MXene (Ti3C2Tx) layers and then polymerization to form PPy at the surfaces of MXene (Fig. 4a), which was similar to the polymerization process of PPy onto CNT.127,128 With a diameter ranges from 10 to 30 nm, the coral-like PPy particles have enclosed in the MXene film and their uneven surface with a large specific surface area has aided for capacitive properties. The fabricated composite film has three layers with only crystalline Ti3C2Tx microstructure in the middle, which a region completely different in texture from the MXene matrices, Fig. 4b. The hydrogen bond among the N–H group of the pyrrole ring and the functional groups (oxygen and fluorine) of the MXene has been found responsible for the alignment of the PPy among the MXene layer. Such well-aligned PPy has high conductivity which led to higher ion transport for rapid charge storage.
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the ED procedure of PPy on the Ti3C2Tx films. (b) TEM image of the thin lamella sample of the MXCP. Reproduced with the permission.74 (c) ED process of PPy onto MXene to synthesis 3D carambola-like structures of MXCP composite film. (d) SEM images of 3D carambola-like structures of the as fabricated MXCP film. Reproduced with the permission.129 
Besides, Jian et al. approached a one-step co-electrodeposition method to fabricate MXene/PPy composites electrode, Fig. 4c.129 In this process, etching of A elements layers with HF from the Ti3AlC2 MAX phase precursors led to well-formed stacked multilayered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. Here, the radical cations of pyrrole monomers were found to polymerize on the surface of the core inorganic filler i.e. MXene nanosheets, and formed 3D carambola-like MXene/PPy films, Fig. 4d. The as-fabricated composites provided enhanced electrochemical performance due to their 3D architectures which has improved ionic diffusion and electron transport. This was followed by the lack of restacking of MXene nanosheets as well as improved electrochemical performance.
Likewise, in another study, MXene nanosheets were coated on the cotton textile using dipping and drying method to fabricate flexible supercapacitor followed by electrical deposition of pseudocapacitance materials, PPy, to avoid oxidation of coated MXene while fabricating the textile electrodes.77 Herein, Yan and co-workers77 selectively synthesized Ti3C2Tx nanosheets by etching out the Al layer from the precursor Ti3AlC2 using HCl + LiF solution and then wrapped around the whole textile. The presence of hydroxyl group and O2 on the Ti3C2Tx nanosheets is considered as responsible for oxidizing the partial edge of as synthesize MXene nanosheet into TiO2,130 which would further reduce the electrochemical performance by compromising the electrical conductivity of the fabricated composite. In this context, to preclude oxidation of MXene's by direct interaction with hydroxyl groups and O2 molecules, they introduced PPy onto the surface of MXene through electroplating of PPy, which was then firmly coated on the MXene layer enhancing the performance of the device. Further, freestanding MXene/PPy electrode has been developed by forming layered Ti3C2 (l-Ti3C2) through electrophoretic deposition and then PPy was deposited onto the surface of l-Ti3C2via electrochemical polymerization of ref. 131. This facile strategy has been studied extensively to design and fabricate MXene–CP composites in a unique way with an outstanding electrochemical performance for energy harvesting and storage.116,132 There are many advantages of MXene in terms of synthesis and performance of MXCPs over the other two-dimensional materials such as graphene coupled conductive composites, which includes
• MXenes do not require chemical and thermal reduction processes, thus facilitating easier synthesis of MXenes when compared to graphene coupled conducting polymer composites.
• It is possible to synthesize wide variety of composites by integrating electrochromic and plasmonic properties of various MXenes compositions.
• Having huge numbers of surface terminal groups, it allows for fabrication of highly sensitive strain sensors, which allow crack propagation to dominate the sensing phenomena and reduce the electrical resistance under applied strains drastically.
• Having a variety of functional groups in the MXene structures allow them to adhere to CPs better than graphene, improving the electrical conductivity of MXCP significantly.
4. Mechanical and electrical properties of MXCP composites
4.1. Mechanical property
Mechanical property is considered a vital parameter for polymer and their composites, which can be further enhanced by integrating inorganic filler materials like 2D MXene.84 MXenes are one of the most promising inorganic fillers having excellent flexural properties with good rigidity.98,133,134 However, Ti3C2Tx MXene film has much lower tensile strength compared to the graphene and their derivatives like graphene oxide (GO) paper due to the presence of impurity generated during synthesis as well as a result of weaker interaction between Ti3C2Tx sheets.135,136 Some polymers, especially those that have polar groups are closely linked with MXene because of the terminal groups that are existed in the surface of MXene, which could dramatically enhance the mechanical properties of the fabricated composites, including yield strength, Young modulus, tensile strength, elongation at break, and hardness.98 For instance, Liu et al.82 have reported a nacre-like MXCP composite and the interlocking “brick-and-mortar” structure of the fabricated MXCP composite hold tremendous mechanical potential (tensile strength and tensile fracture strain of 30.18 MPa and 1.51%, respectively). They showed that incorporation of PEDOT:PSS with Ti3C2Tx film improved the mechanical strength and toughness of the fabricated MXCP composites significantly, compared with the primeval Ti3C2Tx film. When the ratio of the Ti3C2Tx to PEDOT:PSS was 7:1 (thickness and the density of the composite were 11.1 μm and 1.94 g cm−3 respectively), the MXCP exhibited a minimum tensile strength of 13.71 MPa with a tensile fracture strain of 0.29%. By increasing the ratio of Ti3C2Tx to PEDOT:PSS to 3:1 (thickness and the density of the composite were 15.2 μm and 1.65 g cm−3, respectively), both the tensile strength and tensile fracture strain could be maximized to 30.18 MPa and 1.51%, respectively. Interestingly, the composite film exhibited nearly 5.4 and 8.4 times higher tensile strength and tensile fracture strain than that of pure Ti3C2Tx film. Recently, Wan et al.135 have integrated MXene with PEDOT:PSS to fabricate mechanically robust composites for EMI shielding. The non-conductive PSS of the fabricated MXCP composites was removed by post-treating of MXCP with concentrated sulfuric acid, which has further enhanced the mechanical properties of the composites. It was reported that it is possible to increase the tensile strength by adding only a small amount of PEDOT:PSS and subsequent treatment with concentrated sulfuric acid. The inclusion of PEDOT:PSS with MXene has increased the tensile strength of the fabricated MXCP composites (70 wt% of MXene/PEDOT:PSS film) to 38.55 ± 2.75 MPa, which is almost double the tensile strength of MXene film (22 ± 2 MPa).110 This is mainly due to the formation of a more dense structure inside the MXene/PEDOT:PSS composites. Notably, when the prepared MXCP post-treated with concentrated sulfuric acid, the elongation at break and the tensile strength significantly increased by 0.283% and 155%, respectively. After treating with a concentrated acid solution, the degree of alignment of the MXene sheets in the composite film was improved. Such aligned structures of the MXene sheets positively affected the mechanical behavior of the fabricated composites. Though more than 30 varieties of MXenes have been synthesized, till now only Ti3C2Tx MXene has been extensively studied.22 Recently, Qin and co-workers107 have utilized Mo1.33C MXene to fabricate ultra-thin wearable supercapacitor through coupling with conducting PEDOT:PSS. The authors have reported that pristine Mo1.33C has showed nano hardness and Young's modulus of 0.47 ± 0.15 and 6 ± 1.8 GPa, respectively. When PEDOT:PSS with Young's modulus of 3.3 ± 0.1 GPa was added, it was found that overall nano hardness and Young's modulus of the fabricated MXCP has reduced to 0.11 ± 0.006 and 4.9 ± 0.17 GPa, respectively.
4.2. Electrical property
Since the first report of MXene, it has extensively studied and integrated with other materials. MXenes have an outstanding electrical conductivity within a single sheet (around 10000 S cm−1), close to graphene and therefore in combination with other materials showed a remarkable electrical conductivity.22,98,137 However, it was reported that MXenes have exhibited poor electrical conductivity among the sheets.22 Therefore, desired electrical conductivity and resistance of the MXene and MXene based composites can be easily tuned through controlling interlayer spacing and size, as well as reducing the defect degree of the MXene flakes.22 In this regard, the incorporation of MXene into the highly conductive CPs has dramatically improved the electrical conductivity, which has opened new avenues to develop highly conductive structures for wider applications, including wearable electronics. It has been found that the loading of MXene and the intrinsic electrical properties of MXene influence the overall electrical properties of the composite.98,138,139 When the electrical conductivity of the MXene increases, the composites show a corresponding improvement in the electrical conductivity.98 For instance, Bai et al.140 have coated silver nanowires (AgNWs) onto MXene integrated PEDOT:PSS (MP) to fabricate a hybrid AgNWs-MP structure for flexible transparent electrodes (FTE) based organic light-emitting diodes. The authors have shown that with the 0.4 mg mL−1 loading of MXene, the AgNWs–MXene composites showed a sheet resistance of 25 Ω sq−1. Alternatively, when fabricated AgNWs FTEs were integrated with PEDOT:PSS with a mass loading of 1.6 mg mL−1, their junction resistance achieved an unfavorable value of 33 Ω sq−1. Such unacceptable value related to the conductivity was improved by synergistic nanowelding process, which was done by filling the holes of AgNW percolation networks using MP. However, the sheet resistance of the fabricated FTEs was first decreased and subsequently increased with higher PEDOT:PSS loading. Initially with small loading of PEDOT:PSS (mass ratio of MXene to PEDOT:PSS is 4:1), the AgNWs and MXene nanosheets were packed forming a smooth surface, with a slight reduction of sheet resistance to 23 Ω sq−1.140 When the ratio of MXene and PEDOT:PSS was 2:1, the conductivity of the fabricated AgNWs-MP increased as a result of a decrement in the resistance values from 25 to 17 Ω sq−1. Such outstanding improvement was due to transformation of PEDOT:PSS from benzoid to a more conductive quinoid state. Moreover, the capillary force-induced stiction of the conducting polymer solution increased the contact area as well as binding of nanowires and nanosheets.140–142 Such behavior of the fabricated composites enhanced the overall conductivity. However, when the mass ratio of MXene and PEDOT:PSS was over 1:1, the junction resistance was found to increase as a result of aggregation of poorly conductive PEDOT:PSS particles on the surface of AgNWs.72,140 Besides, the fabricated FTEs showed a stable electrical conductivity even after 100% bending ratio and the sheet resistance was found to increase about 86% after 5000 cycles of bending (curvature radius about 2 mm) when the ratio of PEDOT:PSS was half to the MXene. AgNWs based FTEs were also fabricated to exhibit superior structural and chemical stability in H2S environments due to synergistic nanowelding of PEDOT:PSS and MXene which served as conductive adhesion promoters and protective layers. It was also reported that the loading of the polymer matrix influence the overall conductivity of the composites. As reported in many studies a good conductivity was found to be maintained at lower polymer loading.108,110,138 For instance, it was reported that with an increase of PEDOT:PSS loading from 4.29 to 10 mg mL−1, the electrical conductivity of fabricated MXene/PEDOT:PSS composites decreased markedly from 340.5 to 20.4 S cm−1.82 Such behavior might be resulted from the expansion of Ti3C2Tx by the displacement of intercalated PEDOT:PSS molecules. Recently, Bora et al.143 have integrated MXene with divinylsulfone (DVS) cross-linked PEDOT:PSS for EMI shielding. With a 0.5 mg mL−1 loading of MXene, the fabricated MXCP showed significant enhancement in electrical conductivity ranging between 299 ± 2 and 388 ± 2 S cm−1, which was much higher than that of the conductivity of primeval PEDOT:PSS film (0.15 S cm−1). Interestingly, when the MXene with highest volume (100 μL), has been incorporated with the DVS cross-linked PEDOT:PSS, the composites showed a minimum conductivity of 299 ± 2 S cm−1, which might be attributed to the presence of a large amount of MXene that affected the crosslinking. It was also possible that the agglomeration of the Ti3C2Tx could hinder the creation of a well-organized network, which affected the electrical conductivity. However, MXCP composites achieved maximum conductivity of 388 ± 2 S cm−1 when the volume of MXene was reduced to 50 μL. The above discussion shows that Ti3C2Tx MXene greatly contributes to the enhancement of the electrical conductivity of DVS crosslinked PEDOT:PSS film.
5. Application of MXCP composites
5.1. Energy storage
Flexible supercapacitors (SCs) have been widely used to store energy while designing highly flexible devices for self-powered next-generation electronics due to the excellent electrochemical characteristics, and long cycle life of SCs.8,77,84,144 Compared to the traditional batteries and capacitors, these SCs possess high power density by forming double charge layers to store energy through ion-adsorption or redox reaction.8,77,84,144 Nowadays, 2D MXene integrated conductive polymer electrodes have been extensively studied to design supercapacitors utilizing the flexibility, lightweight characteristics, high capacitance and conductivity, improved chemical, and mechanical properties of MXene.118,145Table 1 summarizes the performance of some MXCP energy storage devices.
Table 1 Current states of electrochemical performances of MXCP based energy storage devices




Electrode
Electrolyte
Energy storage parameters
Capacitance retention @ cycles
Ref.




Note: PPy-polypyrrole; PANI-polyaniline; rGO-reduced graphene oxide; NWs-nanowires; PEDOT:PSS-poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrenesulfonic acid); CNT-carbon nanotubes; PVA-polyvinyl alcohol.




MXene/PPy
1 M H2SO4
The gravimetric capacitance of 416 F g−1
86.4%@5000

129



Ti3C2Tx/PANI
3 M H2SO4
Volumetric capacitance of 1682 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 503 F g−1, energy density of 79.8 W h L−1 at power density 575 W L−1
98.3%@10000

117



MXene/PANI
1 M H2SO4
Volumetric capacitance of 1167 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 560 F g−1, energy density of 65.6 W h L−1 at power density 1687.3 W L−1
87.5%@5000

146



MXene/PPy
1 M H2SO4
Volumetric capacitance of ≈1000 F cm−3 and gravimetric capacitance of 460 F g−1
92%@25000

108



MXene/PPy textile
H2SO4/PVA
Gravimetric capacitance of 343.20 F g−1, energy density of 1.30 mW h g−1 at power density 41.1 mW g−1
—

77



PANI/rGO/MXene
3 M H2SO4
Gravimetric capacitance of 57 F g−1
88%@20000

78



MXene/PPy NWs
3 M KOH
Gravimetric capacitance of 610 F g−1
100%@14000

147



MXene/PPy
H2SO4/PVA
Gravimetric capacitance of 420.2 F g−1, energy density of 10.82 μW h mg−1 at power density 0.11 mW mg−1
86.5%@10000

74



MXene/PANI
7 M KOH
Gravimetric capacitance of 563 F g−1, energy density of 22.67 W h kg−1 at power density 0.217 kW kg−1
95.15%@10000

148



MXene/PEDOT:PSS
1 M H2SO4
Volumetric capacitance of 1065 F cm−3, energy density of 23 mW h cm−3 at power density 7659 mW cm−3
80%@10000

111



MXene/PPy
1 M Na2SO4
Gravimetric capacitance of 184.36 F g−1
83.33%@4000

76



MXene//rGO/CNT/PANI
3 M H2SO4
Volumetric capacitance of 286 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 116.9 F g−1, energy density of 70 W h L−1 at power density 111 kW L−1
80%@10000

149



MXene/PPy
1 M H2SO4
Gravimetric capacitance of 458 F g−1, energy density of 21.61 W h kg−1 at power density 499.94 W kg−1
73.68%@4000

118



MXene/PANI/TiO2
1 M KOH
Gravimetric capacitance of 108.9 F g−1
94%@8000

73



MXene/PANI
1 M Na2SO4
Gravimetric capacitance of 164 F g−1
∼96%@3000

150





Song et al.151in situ polymerized the PPy on bacterial cellulose (BC) nanofibers followed by assembling extremely conductive MXene (Ti3C2Tx) flakes via strong interfacial interactions (Fig. 5a) to construct PPy@BC/MXene (PBM) electrodes for asymmetric SCs. The close interaction of PPy@BC and Ti3C2Tx nanoflakes prevents the restacking of MXene nanoflakes through the formation of hydrogen bonds between the functional group of PPy@BC and the Ti3C2Tx. The interaction and uniform distribution of MXene nanoflakes facilitated formation of a continuous conductive pathway and increased the long-range electrons transport channels (Fig. 5b). Such behavior has dramatically increased the electrical conductivity of MXCP composites to 14245 S m−1, which was more than 30 times higher than the PPy NW/graphene composite152 and responsible for outstanding electrochemical performance. Fig. 5c shows that incorporation of PPy with the BC/Ti3C2Tx loading of 8.16 mg cm−2 has dramatically enhanced the gravimetric capacitance from 255 F g−1 to 550 F g−1 within the potential range of 0–0.8 V. Moreover, the fabricated PBM electrode maximized the areal capacitance up to 879 mF cm−2 by increasing the loading of active materials from 2.27 mg cm−2 to 3.21 mg cm−2 and achieved desirable energy and power density of 33.1 W h kg−1 and 243 W kg−1, respectively (Fig. 5d). From Fig. 5e, it can be seen that the capacity retention of fabricated PBM film electrode is 16.2% higher than the PPy@BC composites (67.3%) after 10000 cycles at 20 mV s−1.151
 Fig. 5  (a) Polymerization of PPy@BC onto MXene to fabricate flexible PBM electrode. (b) Schematic of ions and electrons transport system in the fabricated PBM electrode. (c) Electrochemical performance of fabricated electrodes at 5 mV s−1. (d) Comparison of the energy density versus power density of the PBM electrode with other PPy-based symmetric supercapacitors. (e) Long cycling stability of PBM and PPy@BC electrode with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. Reproduced with the permission.151 
One major deficiency of electrodes is that they can retain much lower capacitance at higher charging–discharging cycles. To mitigate such limitations for electrochemical performance, Zhu et al.131 have interlaced PPy into layered Ti3C2 (l-Ti3C2) particle film and designed freestanding film (PPy/l-Ti3C2) based all-solid-state SCs through electrochemical polymerization. The freely distributed l-Ti3C2 formed a porous film structure (Fig. 6a) by the prevention of dense stalking of PPy during polymerization thereby enabling the penetration of electrolytes during charging/discharging. Likewise, the acidic character of the l-Ti3C2 assisted in the strong integration of PPy with Ti3C2 flakes via hydrogen bonding among the N–H groups of the pyrrole rings and functional (oxygen or fluorine) groups of Ti3C2 MXene, Fig. 6b. Such effects of l-Ti3C2 significantly enhanced the electrochemical performance of PPy/l-Ti3C2 film-based SCs. Fig. 6c represents the PPy/l-Ti3C2 based paper-like ultra-thin electrode with a thickness of 149 μm for flexible all-solid-state SC (PVA–H2SO4 acted as a solid-state electrolyte), which can be bent freely. The PPy/l-Ti3C2 film showed around 30% higher capacitance (203 mF cm−2) compared to the rGO/PANI composite.153 Notably, the fabricated composite film retained the complete initial capacitance after 20000 charging/discharging cycles, Fig. 6d. The ultra-stable cycling stability of the PPy/l-Ti3C2 film was ascribed to the porous structure of the PPy/l-Ti3C2 film as well as the rigid Ti3C2 sheets in l-Ti3C2 particles which assisted formation of stable intercalated PPy backbones. Furthermore, the fabricated SC showed a high capacitance of 35.6 mF cm−2, which was almost 14% higher than the PPy/graphene based composite.154 Besides, as fabricated SC showed almost no decay of its performance under different bending states and even after 10000 charging/discharging cycles, Fig. 6(e and f).
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration showing the interpolated PPy in the interlayered l-Ti3C2. (b) Atomic-scale schematic of intercalated PPy in the interlayers of l-Ti3C2. (c) Image of the MXCP based paper like ultra-thin solid-state flexible electrode for SC. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the MXCP and PPy films. (e) Electrochemical performance of as-prepared solid-state SC. (f) Cyclic performance of the solid-state SC at 0.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with the permission.131 
Apart from PPy, other CPs were also extensively studied to develop super flexible electrodes and SC for energy storage applications. Li et al.137 casted a homogenous PANI layer onto 3D macroporous Ti3C2Tx (3D M-Ti3C2Tx) to develop a PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx positive electrode, Fig. 7a. The coating of MXene with PANI layer protected the MXenes, which was confirmed by the cyclic voltammetry profiles (Fig. 7b and c) of fabricated electrodes and all of the fabricated PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx electrodes could operate up to 0.55 V. Here, the authors revealed that integration of PANI (work function (WF) of 3.46 eV) with Ti3C2(OH)2 MXene, the fabricated PANI@Ti3C2(OH)2 composite showed a larger WF of 1.97 eV. Such behavior of fabricated composites suggested a great resistance toward dropping of electrons and therefore, could withstand the anodic and larger positive operating potentials compared with pure MXene. The fabricated electrode demonstrated a higher volumetric capacitance of 1632 F cm−3 at 10 mV s−1 (Fig. 7d) with a mass loading of PANI of 0.16 mg cm−1. Further, when an asymmetric SC was assembled using positive PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx (2.6 mg cm−2) and negative M-Ti3C2Tx electrodes, the fabricated SC showed an energy density of 50.6 W h L−1, which was further enhanced to 57.3 W h L−1 by reducing the mass loading of the cathode to 0.45 mg cm−2, Fig. 7e. The fabricated device showed much higher electrochemical performance than other reported devices,155 which has the potential to unlock exciting opportunities towards designing high-performance devices for energy storage and harvesting. Moreover, a solid-state SC exhibited a capacitance up to 568 F cm−3, with excellent energy and power density of 33.2 mW h cm−3 and 19470 mW cm−3, respectively, which was assembled by integrating PEDOT:PSS onto Mo1.33C MXene.107 Dual fast pseudocapacitive behavior of both the Mo1.33C and PEDOT:PSS was responsible for such incredible electrochemical performance. In the fabricated devices, H2SO4-treated PEDOT:PSS nanofibril structure separated MXene sheets have maintained pseudocapacitive charge-storage mechanisms, which eased to promoting electron and ion transport during the charge/discharge cycle and thus enhanced charge storage (active surface area). In another study, Li et al.132 electrochemically integrate PEDOT with titanium carbide and fabricated hybrid microsupercapacitors (MSC). As fabricated MSC has achieved an aerial capacitance of 2.4 mF cm−2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and retained 90% of initial capacitance after 10000 cycles.132
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustrations showing the preparation techniques of compressed PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx electrode. (b and c) Cyclic voltammetry profiles of fabricated MXCP film with the loading of 40 wt% and 20 wt% of PANI at various scan rates, respectively. (d) Electrochemical performance (volumetric capacitance) of MXCP films with different mass loadings. (e) Volumetric energy and power densities for M-Ti3C2Tx/PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx full cells with different PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx loadings. Reproduced with the permission.137 
In an interesting study, Fu et al.156 approached for encapsulation of graphene into the accordion-like Ti2CTx MXene integrated polyaniline-based MXCP composite to design a hybrid electrode namely GMP for flexible energy storage devices, Fig. 8a. In this study, MXCP composite was prepared by polymerization of radical-cationic aniline monomers onto the surface of Ti2CTx MXene, which was then treated with cationic surfactant cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB). This CTAB treated MXCP (CTAB–MXCP) was firmly adhered with chemically converted graphene (CCG) sheets to synthesize hierarchical GMP structure. The well-tuned zeta potentials by CTAB treatment aided for ion/electron transfer, as a result, GMP electrode showed superior electrochemical performance with an electrical conductivity of 4500 S cm−1. As a result, this hierarchical GMP composite led to a high specific capacitance of 635 F g−1 (1143 F cm−3) at 1 A g−1 (Fig. 8b) with long-term cycling stability (could retain 97.54% of initial capacitance after 10000 cycles). It indicates an outstanding electrochemical performance and the obtained specific capacitance value was much higher than the electrode fabricated with reduced graphene oxide (rGO) coupled PEDOT:PSS composite (102 F g−1 at 1 A g−1),157 graphene oxide (GO) coupled PPy (48 F g−1 at 5 A g−1),158 PPy NW/graphene composite (434.7 F g−1 at 1 A g−1),152 and rGO–PANI (323 F g−1 composite at 1 A g−1).157 This was achieved by increasing the specific surface area to access large amounts of electrolyte ions (1 M H2SO4 was used as electrolyte). This highly conductive GMP was later used as a positive electrode to design a pouch-type asymmetric SC (p-ASC) by assembling GMP with a graphene-based negative electrode using1 M H2SO4 as electrolyte, Fig. 8c. As fabricated p-ASC showed a specific capacitance of 67.5 F g−1 and retained 94.25% of the capacitance after 10000 cycles at 10 A g−1. As shown from Fig. 8d, the p-ASC has also the energy densities of 42.3 and 25 W h kg−1 at power densities of 950 W kg−1.
 Fig. 8  (a) Graphical illustration of the synthesis of GMP. (b) Electrochemical performance (specific capacitance) of fabricated electrodes MXene, MXCP, and GMP at different current densities. (c) Schematic of the assembling of GMP//graphene based p-ASC. (d) Cycling performance of p-ASC along with the coulombic efficiency at a current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with the permission.156 
5.2. Personal thermal management
Personal thermal management (PTM) is the state of the psychological perception towards an individual's feelings of warmth or cold in a colder or hotter environment.159,160 To maintain the individual physiological and/or psychological well-being, it is important to ensure the balancing of thermal comfort. Advanced thermoregulation technologies i.e. heating and/or cooling textiles can provide adequate thermal comfort by forming near skin microclimate along with providing specific functionality to measure/change the surrounding environment by modifying the thermal conditions.159–163 Textiles with advanced thermal comfort systems can balance the optimum body temperature even in an extreme atmosphere, which is vital for both physiological and psychological wellbeing.159,160 So far, various functional materials and polymers have been studied separately or combined with flexible structures like textiles to fabricate wearable thermal devices for maintaining thermal comfort at individual levels.31,43,164–166 Among them, MXene is the most promising 2D material, which has been studied extensively for designing PTM devices.167–172 However, there are only a few reports on MXCP composites focusing on the devices for personal thermal comfort. For instance, Wang et al.79 have deposited silicon onto PPy/MXene-decorated textile, where the PPy was in situ polymerized with the MXene, which was then integrated into poly (ethylene terephthalate) (PET) textiles for Joule heating. The fabricated composite textiles showed a high conductivity up to 1000 S m−1 (2.33 Ω sq−1) and maintained an excellent conductivity even after 1000 bending cycles (e.g. relatively small increase in the resistance was observed from 39 to 61 Ω). Such an outstanding performance was then utilized to design self-heating garments for personal heat management showed that the silicon-coated textiles maximized the Joule heating performance of the fabricated textiles from 40 °C to 79 °C by increasing the applied voltage from 2 V to 4 V, which was comparable to the Joule heater fabricated with MXene coupled montmorillonite.171 Interestingly, the long term performance of the fabricated heater was confirmed as it was able to maintain a steady temperature of around 57 °C for an extended duration of 3600 s after reaching the saturated temperature. Such an outstanding heating performance at a low driven voltage would be promising for designing smart and wearable heating systems. Recently, Zheng and his co-workers80 designed PEDOT and Ti3C2Tx MXene integrated multifunctional cotton fabrics, especially for personal heating applications using simple vapor phase polymerization (VPP) and spray-coating strategy, Fig. 9(a and b). The conductive linkages among the PEDOT and MXene flakes of the smart fabric showed the lowest electrical resistance of 3.6 ± 0.7 Ω sq−1. Such behavior of the fabricated MXCP composites resulted in enhanced electron transport and thereby improved the electrical conductivity of fabrics. When the applied voltage was 9 V, the surface temperature of fabricated fabric structures was increased from 71.2 to 78.8 °C and it can be dramatically increased to 193.1 °C with the applied potential voltage of 12 V, Fig. 9c.
 Fig. 9  (a and b) Fabrication and assemble of MXCP coated multifunctional textiles, respectively. (c) Heating performance of fabricated textiles at various applied voltage. Reproduced with permission.80 
In another study, the conducting PANI and 2D MXene flakes were assembled alternatively onto the carbon fabric (CF) utilizing layer-by-layer fabrication technique to fabricate composite devices (PANI/MXene/CF fabrics) for multifunctional applications including PTM devices.81 The as fabricated composite showed an electrical conductivity of 24.57 S m−1, which was then utilized to design advanced heating textiles for wearable PTM application. The smart textiles showed no temperature increases with a voltage supply of 1 V at room temperature (25 °C). It was showed that the fabricated heating textiles achieved a saturated temperature of 45 °C with the voltage supply of 2 V, which was further elevated to 66 °C and 87 °C at 3 V and 4 V, respectively. Interestingly, the PANI/MXene/CF fabrics demonstrated a stable electrothermal behavior at 3 V for 6 minutes and dropped to 30 °C within 10 seconds. It is also noted that the fabricated textiles could reached room temperature within 5 minutes. Such electrothermal behavior of the fabricated PANI/MXene/CF Fabrics indicated its fast heating and dissipation capability, which could be ideal to design PTM devices for wearable applications.
5.3. EMI shielding
The rapid expansion of wireless communication technologies, more specifically fourth and fifth-generation (5G) wireless communication working in diverse frequency ranges that generate and emit EMW interrupt the proper functioning of other electronic gadgets and devices.173 This unexpected interference damaging the lifetime as well as disturbing the functioning of the highly sensitive devices and networking systems that are used for a wide range of applications including navigation control systems in aerospace, military application, and other emergency conditions.61,174 This continuous EMW radiation threatens the electronics and their long-term exposure is detrimental to human tissue and even deleterious to the infant brain development.175 Therefore, the shielding of this electromagnetic interference (EMI) or EMW pollution caused by high-frequency and high-power electronic technologies is demanding serious attention. Such shielding can be maintained by integrating highly conductive shield materials, which can work by reducing the interfacial action among the electromagnetic field and the intrinsic charge carriers.84,176 In this regard, the fabrication of devices with highly conductive 2D MXene is the promising option as MXene has proven its efficacy for EMI shielding since its first appearance just a few years ago, attributed to its layered structures.138,171,173,177–180 Consequently, MXene has integrated with other promising materials, more specifically polymer membrane due to their good conductivity even at much lower loading of MXene. The enhanced shielding efficiency can be ascribed to the multilayer architectures of MXene/polymer membrane.84 Among different polymers, CPs are studied extensively to integrate with MXene as high electrical conductivity is a crucial factor for enhancing EMI shielding. A summary of the EMI shielding performance of MXCP is given in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of EMI shielding performance of MXCP based devices




Materials
Fabrication method
Electrical properties
EMI SE (dB)
Specific EMI (SSE)
Frequency (GHz)
Thickness (mm)
Ref.




Note: VPP-vapor phase polymerization; PET-polyethylene terephthalate; SE-shielding effectiveness; SSE-specific shielding effectiveness.




MXene/PEDOT:PSS
VAF
67520 S m−1
40.5
—
∼12.5
∼0.0066

135



MXene/PANI
Mechanical blending
—
22.7
—
10.8
1.5

181



PANI/MXene/CF fabrics
Layer-by-layer
24.57 S m−1
26
135.5 dB cm3 g−1
—
0.55

81



MXene/PEDOT:PSS
VAF
340.5 S cm−1
42.10
19497.8 dB cm2 g−1
8.2
0.011

82



MXene/PET/PPy textile

In situ polymerization
∼1000 S m−1
∼90
—
—
0.43

79



MXene/PEDOT:PSS textile
VPP/spray-coating
3.6 Ω sq−1
36.62
—
—
—

80





For instance, Zhang et al.182 have designed co-doped PANI with layered Ti3C2Tx (Ti3C2Tx/c-PANI) composites through the VAF technique for EMI shielding. The electrical conductivity of the composite films reached 24.4 S cm−1 with increasing the ratio of Ti3C2Tx to c-PANI up to 7:1, which has a positive correlation with the EMI shielding effectiveness (EMI SE). As a result, the fabricated composites with a thickness of 40 μm dramatically increased the total EMI SE (SET) to 36 dB at ∼12.5 GHz which was much higher than the practical value (20 dB). Moreover, the introduction of dielectric and magnetic materials effectively enhanced microwave absorption through increasing magnetic loss. In this regard, recently a study has incorporated PANI-coated Fe3O4 composites with the Ti3C2Tx to improve the dielectric loss of the MXene using VAF,75 which showed improved EMI SE and microwave absorption than the previously reported Ti3C2Tx/c-PANI composite film.182 The composite films (Ti3C2Tx/Fe3O4@PANI) with a weight ratio of Ti3C2Tx to Fe3O4@PANI of 12:5 demonstrated the lowest reflection and the highest absorption, resulting in a maximum EMI SE of 58.8 dB at a thickness of 12.1 μm. Moreover, increasing the loading of MXene might enhance the conductivity and EMI efficiency, but, would also lead to a reduction in EMW absorption. The incorporation of Fe3O4@PANI into the composites increased the magnetic loss along with balancing the impedance matching of the MXenes. The formation of heterogeneous interfaces, surface defects, and interlayer structures of the composites increased the micro dipole effects. An increased dielectric loss resulted in improved microwave absorption.
In another study, Tong et al.119 have modified the surface of Ti3C2Tx MXene through in situ polymerization of PPy to design multilayers Ti3C2Tx/PPy heterogeneous microstructure hybrids for EMW absorption. PPy was deposited on the surface and interlayer of the Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets to form a sandwich-like heterostructure composite. Though there are no magnetic materials in the composites, the dielectric loss played a vital role in increasing the EMW absorption. As a result, the fabricated MXCP composites could minimize the reflection loss (RL) to −49.2 dB at 8.5 GHz with thicknesses of 3.2 mm when the loading of optimal filler (paraffin matrix) is 25 wt%. Besides, by varying the thickness of the absorbing layer in a range of 1.5–5.0 mm, an effective tunable bandwidth of 13.7 GHz in the range of 4.3–18 GHz was achieved. Additionally, the fabricated composites enhanced the EMW absorption by converting the incident EMW into heat or other kinds of energy, which was attributed to the synergistic effect among the coated Ti3C2Tx and conductive PPy.
Apart from PANI and PPy, Bora et al.143 fabricated an MXCP composite by crosslinking the PEDOT:PSS with Ti3C2Tx MXene (XPM) for EMI shielding applications. The EMI SE of fabricated MXCP composites was recorded in the frequency of 8.2–12.4 GHz and it was found that the MXCP composite (thickness: 6 ± 1 mm) with the MXene suspension of 50 μL exhibited highest EMI SE of ∼41 dB (99.99% shielding). On the other hand, the composite with 100 μL of MXenes embedded the highest quantity of the Ti3C2Tx MXene onto the cross-linked PEDOT:PSS though it showed lower EMI SE than the MXCP composites with 50 μL. Such behavior might be attributed to the accumulation of MXene, which could hamper the formation of a well-organized network and negatively affected the EMI SE. They proposed that when the incident EMW strikes the MXCP composites, the first layer of the XPM reduces the immediate reflection of the incident EMW resulted in the dropping of the incident EMW's energy. Such behavior attributed to the interconnection of MXene flakes with the coagulated particles of cross-linked PEDOT:PSS, which enhanced the electrical conductivity across the MXene layer. Similarly, the rest of the EMWs were diminished continuously after crossing the first layer.
In case of flexible and wearable EMI shielding devices, it is crucial to maintain the structural stability and long-term EMI shielding performance of the fabricated devices. In this regard, Yin and co-workers conducted the water washing and bending test for multifunctional textiles (PANI/MXene/CF Fabrics).81 After ultrasonic washing and bending test, the fabricated EMI devices showed almost a stable surface resistance with only 30% decrement (surface resistance was 73.6 Ω sq−1), which was much better than the previously reported EMI shielding device.183 Besides, there was no obvious morphological changes observed in the fabric structure even after 60 min water washing and 1000 times’ bending. It also showed a good adhesion fastness between PANI/MXene layer and CF substrate as there was no residual particles observed on the tape after stripping the tape away in the peeling test, which showed incredible adhesion stability. The strong interfacial interaction within the MXene and PANI layers provided the robustness and stability to the excellent EMI shielding performance, which is a very crucial factor for practical applications.
5.4. Pressure sensors
Among different types of wearable electronics, wearable pressure/strain sensors have been extensively studied to design smart devices for a wide range of applications including intelligent robotics, flexible touch screens, smart electronic skin, physiological signal monitoring, and human-machine interfacing.184–189 Such notable advancements in flexible sensors have been predominately enabled by the progress in materials chemistry research. For instance, the discovery of MXenes has played a vital role in the advancement of smart sensing devices for wearable applications, as MXenes have been integrated with various substrates to design stretchable structures for wearable sensing.69,190–193 Though highly conductive CPs are widely integrated with other nanomaterials (e.g. graphene), there are only a few studies on their integration with MXene to design wearable sensing platforms for smart applications. For instance, Sharma et al.66 have integrated MXene with poly(vinylidene fluoride–trifluoroethylene) (PVDF–TrFE) to fabricate composite nanofiber scaffolds (CNS), which was then inserted between the PEDOT:PSS/PDMS (polydimethylsiloxane) electrodes to develop a CNS-based pressure sensor, Fig. 10a. When MXene was blended with PVDF–TrFE to fabricate CNS using electrospinning process, mechanical properties of the nanofibers were changed synergistically as the α-phase crystallization was converted into β-phase crystallization, Fig. 10b. With the increase of the concentration of MXene (loading range 0–13 wt%), the dielectric constant of the fabricated CNS sensor raised from 10 to 40 because of the formation of microscopic dipole and microcapacitor network. It was also reported that when the loading of MXene was increased to 5%, the compression modulus of CNS sensor reduced by 58%. Such behavior might be attributed to the softening of polymer fibers due to the reduction of polymer crystallinity with the increase of MXene loading and the introduction of certain free volumes within the polymer chains. All these factors greatly influenced the enhancement in the sensitivity of MXCP based CNS sensor, exhibiting maximum sensitivity of 0.51 kPa−1 with a minimum detection limit of 1.5 Pa. At a very high pressure of around 167 kPa, the CNS sensor has proven its superior stability, long-term functioning capability, and durability over 10000 loading/unloading cycles as well as facilitated linear sensing within a wide pressure range (0–400 kPa). The fabricated sensor was then exploited to monitor and identify different physiological signals including pulse rate (Fig. 10c and d), respiration (Fig. 10e), eye twitching (Fig. 10f), etc. Importantly, this CNS sensor could be exploited to detect early signs of Parkinson's as the fabricated device was able to identify low-frequency changes at a static tremor frequency of 4.8 Hz, Fig. 10(g and h). In a recent study, Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets and PEDOT:PSS film were assembled together and then the assembled structure was integrated with cotton fabric to fabricate multifunctional wearable systems including strain sensor.80 As fabricated smart textile showed a low sheet resistance of 3.6 Ω sq−1 and high sensitivity towards human motion and physiological signal monitoring. The fabricated strain sensor was capable of monitoring human finger movement (bending and recovering) and with the increase of bending strain it showed a distinguishing negative resistance variation as the resistance of the sensor was reduce with the finger bending. It was also reported to monitor the movement of wrist, elbow, and knee with an extraordinary negative strain sensing performance. Such behavior was attributed to the tightly contacted warp and weft yarn during the stretching and/or bending process.
 Fig. 10  (a) Fabrication process of the CNS pressure sensor. (b) Surface modification of the CNS by altering the α-phase crystallization into β-phase crystallization to a synergistic effect. (c and d) Radial artery pulse wave monitoring by attaching the sensor to the wrist's dermal areas of a volunteer and the enlarged view of the characteristic peaks of the single pulse waveform such as diastolic (D) wave, tidal (T) wave, and percussion (P) wave, respectively, (e) Monitoring of pre and post-exercise breathing by attaching the sensor to mask worn by a volunteer. (f) Monitoring of eye twitched ocular muscle vibrations by attaching the CNS sensor near to the eye dermal area. (g and h) Schematic of imitating the finger knocking ability of the sensor to detect early signs of Parkinson's disease at a static tremor frequency of 4.8 Hz and the enlarged view of a finger with tremor at 4.8 Hz, respectively. Reproduced with permission.66 
5.5. Bio-electronics
Among other conductive materials, 2D MXenes have emerged as ideal candidates for bioelectronics applications because of their excellent mechanical and electronic properties. Although MXenes have outstanding properties to fabricate bioelectronic devices, self-restacking, and agglomeration of MXenes decrease both specific surface area and stability of MXenes, which hindered their usages in biomedical applications.194,195 Transformation of 2D MXene into 3D MXenes is the most effective way to address such issues.195,196 It was reported that conversion of accordion-like Ti3C2 MXene into urchin-like sodium titanate (M-NTO) through the treatment of oxidation and alkalization can avoid the self-stacking of MXene effectively.195,197 However, because of the large bandgap of sodium titanate (3.7 eV), the obtained M-NTO tends to reduce the conductivity,195,198 and such challenges could be effectively controlled by introducing other conductive materials into M-NTO.195 Among various conductive materials and/or polymers, CPs are studied extensively because of their good electrical conductivity, easy preparation, and lightweight.195 The excellent stability, good biocompatibility, and electrochemical catalytic activity of PEDOT made it an automatic choice for bioelectronics.195 Incorporation of such conductive PEDOT with advanced nano-materials could generate possible synergistic effects and improve their electrochemical sensitivity as well as maintain the morphologies of the base substrates.195,199–201 All of these have made PEDOT an ideal candidate for accommodating M-NTO to improve the electrical conductivity. Such biocompatible hybrid structures (M-NTO-PEDOT) result in a large specific surface with fast electron transferability, which can be utilized to design biomedical devices.195 For example, Xu et al.195 have fabricated a gold nanoparticle (AuNPs) integrated M-NTO-PEDOT based electrochemical label-free immunosensor (AuNPs/M-NTO-PEDOT) to detect prostate-specific antigen (PSA). In this study, macroporous M-NTO was prepared by oxidation and alkalization of HF-etched Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets followed by in situ oxidation to integrate PEDOT with M-NTO. Further, they have deposited AuNPs on the surface of M-NTO-PEDOT to accommodate more binding sites for PSA antibody immobilization. As a result, the as prepared AuNPs/MNTO-PEDOT composite with large surface area and high electrical conductivity permitted high loading of PSA antibodies along with fast charge transfer of modified electrode. Such advantages of the fabricated immunosensor enhanced the sensitivity in electrochemical measurements as well as stimulated the amplification of detection signals. When PSA (concentration in the range of 0.01–10 ng mL−1) added into human serum samples (diluted with 0.1 M phosphate buffer saline (pH = 7.0) for 100 folds), it was found that the fabricated immunosensor could detect PSA within an acceptable range of 96.13% to 107.1% (relative standard deviation was 3.87% to 7.10%).
6. Summary and prospects
Research in materials chemistry and flexible materials have brought a great revolution in the modern wearable and flexible electronic devices since the beginning of the 21st century. One of the greatest breakthroughs, especially in materials chemistry and wearable electronics was the discovery of graphene back in 2004. In the subsequent decades, the discovery of 2D MXene has brought a great breakthrough in modern flexible materials research. The outstanding electrical and mechanical performance of 2D MXenes has appeared as the most promising candidates which have drawn the great attention of researchers to utilize them in a wide range of applications including wearable electronics. Though 2D MXenes have fascinating electrical and mechanical properties, several shortcomings including low flexibility, and poor stability have been revealed, which constrain the subsequent advances of MXenes for next-generation applications.84 Focusing on such complexities, MXene incorporated composites and/or hybrid structures have been extensively studied for the advancement of novel wearable electronics. So far, 2D MXenes have been incorporated into diverse materials and polymers for wearable electronic applications.202–209 Among these materials, CPs are extensively used with MXenes to fabricate highly conducting and flexible MXCP for wearable electronics. The MXCPs are widely investigated because of the low cost, easy fabrication processes, and tunable functionalities of CPs.84 Though there is a huge amount of literature available on MXCP based wearable electronics, there are still no reports on the overall progress of MXCP-based structures for wearable electronics. This review has attempted to give a short brief on the recent trends and progress of the incorporation of CP with 2D MXenes.
Even though scientists have extensively explored the MXCP to design wearable electronics systems, it is important to prioritize few fundamental issues for the advancement of wearable electronics based on MXCP. First of all, in recent years, several studies reported the cytotoxicity and adverse effect of MXene.210–212 Moreover, the synthesis of MXene involving HF has also been found to be very toxic and extremely dangerous.22 As MXenes are widely investigated to fabricate a variety of electronic devices which directly come in contact with the human body, these might have adverse reactions for human. Therefore, it is important to consider the biocompatibility of these inorganic filler materials while designing MXCP composites for wearable electronics, especially those are directly come in contact with the human body. Furthermore, only Ti3C2Tx is extensively incorporated with CP to fabricate MXCP though there are more than 30 MXenes have been synthesized successfully with diverse chemical configurations and several were theoretically predicted.22 There can be more research towards the diversification of the MXCP composites by integrating MXenes with different chemical compositions into the CPs, which might brought a remarkable breakthrough in flexible electronics research through diverse functionalities.
Fabrication strategies are considered a vital part of the flexibility, wearability, biocompatibility, and functionality of the fabricated devices. The effective performance of wearable devices is closely dependent on their fabrication strategies. There have been several facile approaches to MXCP design, but some are not effective for user satisfaction. Hence, it is also important to explore more facile and effective techniques to design MXCP for sensitive applications. Moreover, most of the devices based on MXCP composites are not able to simultaneously maintain flexibility, wearability, and optimum performance, which are strongly interrelated with the materials selection and the fabrication strategies. In this case, more endeavors are required to resolve such issues, which can be done by selecting the most favorable strategies and by functionalizing both the MXenes and CPs through controlling their surface chemistry.
Interestingly, it is already proven that MXenes can be integrated with textiles to design more effective wearable devices for diverse applications because of the lightweight, flexibility, wearability, high tensile strength, and low cost of textiles.22,77,79–81,159,202,209 Researchers have successfully demonstrated the use of MXene integrated textiles fibers or yarns into the most important textiles structures (e.g. woven and knit fabric). However, such endeavors are in a nascent state and need to be intensified and diversified with more advanced structures for large-scale commercial applications.22 Among other 2D flexible materials, the remarkable feature of MXene is obtaining a wide variety of colors by integrating electrochromic and plasmonic properties of various MXenes compositions.22 Therefore, MXene has the capabilities to fabricate more diverse shades of textiles for smart wearable display. Besides, the functionalization of such MXene integrated textiles with highly stretchable and conductive CPs could open up more opportunities to design highly smart and intelligent devices. Interestingly, only a few endeavors have been conducted to integrate MXCP with textiles.79–81 To maximize the effectiveness of MXCP-based wearable electronics, more research to be conducted to incorporate MXCP with textiles. However, there might be some complexities while incorporating textiles with MXene, MXCP, and/or using these devices, which are mainly related to friction, rubbing, and abrasion. Therefore, to maximize the performance of these devices, controlling the abrasion and scratches on the surface of the textiles should be regulated while fabricating and using these devices. Careless handling might result in damage to the functionality of these devices.
Diverse research directions in materials chemistry have opened more opportunities to design highly functional and wearable devices to harvest and store energy. In this regard, MXCP has been used extensively to fabricate highly flexible and mechanically robust, and high-performance energy storage systems (e.g. supercapacitors). However, MXCP-based triboelectric nanogenerators (TENG) are yet to be investigated. Endeavors in MXCP integrated wearable TENG might bring another breakthrough in the self-powered wearable electronics and sensing systems. Such TENG systems could convert different biomechanical power and human-emitted energy into electrical ones as well as harvesting energy from diverse renewable sources including solar and thermal energy. These endeavors might be a landmark to tackle down the indoor and outdoor energy consumption and the upcoming energy crisis.
Like other advanced functional materials, newly discovered highly functional MXenes have also been investigated for flexible sensing applications. High surface terminal groups of MXenes facilitate crack propagation mechanism to dominate sensing phenomena and thereby drastically increase the electrical resistance under applied strains.22 Such tendency led to the fabrication of strain sensors that operate on the crack propagation mechanism utilizing the high sensitivity.22,213 These wearable strain sensors integrated nano and micro devices are fabricated with great interest in personalized human motion monitoring for safety, protection, performance analysis, and communication. These stretchable microelectronics are directly attached or sewn together with the textiles and/or directly attached to the skin for real-time monitoring and communication. However, there is still less progress in MXCP-based strain sensors for multifunctional applications. Therefore, it can be assumed that there is a vast opportunity to develop highly smart and multifunctional sensor systems for real-time human motion monitoring for personal safety, protection, and communication.
Compared to the promising 2D materials, graphene, MXenes does not require chemical and thermal reduction processes, and their good adherence with CPs has dramatically improved the electrical conductivity.22 Therefore, high conductivity of MXene integrated CPs composites (MXCP) is suitable for designing electrical heaters. Besides, the easy adaptability of MXenes with textiles could lead to more wearable structures. In this regard, the functionalization of textiles with conductive MXCP enhances both the wearability and comfort of the fabricated devices, which can be used in the design of wearable electronics heaters. However, till now, only a few reports have been studied to design highly flexible wearable heaters for personal thermal comfort (PTC). Wearable heaters are highly essential, especially for thermotherapy, people living in the polar region, working in the extremely cold environment such as deep-sea diver, emergency services personnel, etc. Apart from heating for personal thermal comport, cooling is also an influential parameter for maintaining PTC. Still, there are no studies on MXCP integrated cooling textiles. Hence, MXCP-based smart textile for PTC devices (e.g. heating and cooling textiles) could be promising in near future.
In recent years, advanced materials have been extensively studied to design flexible and wearable bioelectronics for healthcare monitoring. Among these materials, MXenes have drawn mass attention to design and fabrication of bioelectronics for emergency healthcare monitoring, human safety, and protection. Similar to other applications, MXCPs have not been explored for healthcare monitoring. The MXCP has a huge potential for monitoring human health conditions.
As reviewed, MXCPs are extensively studied to design and fabricate devices for EMI shielding applications. The combination of these MXCP composites with other promising materials including 2D graphene, bionanomaterials (e.g. nanocellulose), and metallic nanomaterials diverse devices can be generated, which could be the most promising next-generation wearable application including soft robotics.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
References
H. Lim, H. S. Kim, R. Qazi, Y. Kwon, J. Jeong and W. Yeo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1901924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, S. Cai, Z. Han, X. Liu, F. Wang, Y. Cao, Z. Wang, H. Li, Y. Chen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khan, S. Ali and A. Bermak, Sensors, 2019, 19, 1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Herbert, J.-H. Kim, Y. Kim, H. Lee and W.-H. Yeo, Materials, 2018, 11, 187 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yu, N. Li and N. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2002646 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Y. Li, M. Bick and J. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 3668–3720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Huang, D. Wang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600783 CrossRef .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 1701827 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Bhatta, P. Maharjan, H. Cho, C. Park, S. H. Yoon, S. Sharma, M. Salauddin, M. T. Rahman, S. S. Rana and J. Y. Park, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105670 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bairagi, S. Banerjee, A. Chowdhury and S. W. Ali, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 4004–4013 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salauddin, S. M. S. Rana, M. Sharifuzzaman, M. T. Rahman, C. Park, H. Cho, P. Maharjan, T. Bhatta and J. Y. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 1–12 Search PubMed .
J. J. Kim, Y. Wang, H. Wang, S. Lee, T. Yokota and T. Someya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2009602 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Makhataeva and H. Varol, Robotics, 2020, 9, 21 CrossRef .
W. Gao, H. Ota, D. Kiriya, K. Takei and A. Javey, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 523–533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. O’Neill, C. M. McCann, C. J. Hohimer, K. Bertoldi and C. J. Walsh, Soft Robot., 2021 DOI:10.1089/soro.2020.0064 .
W. Yan, C. Dong, Y. Xiang, S. Jiang, A. Leber, G. Loke, W. Xu, C. Hou, S. Zhou, M. Chen, R. Hu, P. P. Shum, L. Wei, X. Jia, F. Sorin, X. Tao and G. Tao, Mater. Today, 2020, 35, 168–194 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, M. Pharr and G. A. Salvatore, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9614–9635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Fernandes, C. Majidi and M. Tavakoli, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 14035–14068 RSC .
Y. Bhattacharjee and S. Bose, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 949–972 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iqbal, P. Sambyal and C. M. Koo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2000883, 1–25 Search PubMed .
K. Raagulan, B. M. Kim and K. Y. Chai, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ahmed, M. M. Hossain, B. Adak and S. Mukhopadhyay, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 10296–10320 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Y. Li, P. Sharma, W. Shou, K. Wu, M. Foshey, B. Li, T. Palacios, A. Torralba and W. Matusik, Nat. Electron., 2021, 4, 193–201 CrossRef .
V. Sanchez, C. J. Walsh and R. J. Wood, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31 Search PubMed .
M. M. Hasan and M. M. Hossain, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 1–43 Search PubMed .
M. Amjadi, K. U. Kyung, I. Park and M. Sitti, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1678–1698 CrossRef CAS .

          M. M. Hossain and P. D. Bradford, Nanosensors and Nanodevices for Smart Multifunctional Textiles, Elsevier,  2021, pp. 27–53 Search PubMed .
T. Das, B. K. Sharma, A. K. Katiyar and J. H. Ahn, J. Semicond., 2018, 39, 011007 CrossRef .
S. Afroj, S. Tan, A. M. Abdelkader, K. S. Novoselov and N. Karim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000293 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, P. D. Bradford, Q. Zhou, Q. Jia, F.-G. Yuan and Y. Zhu, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 305502 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ahmed, M. A. Jalil, M. M. Hossain, M. Moniruzzaman, B. Adak, M. T. Islam, M. S. Parvez and S. Mukhopadhyay, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16204–16215 RSC .
D. Li, W.-Y. Lai, Y.-Z. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704738 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yuk, B. Lu, S. Lin, K. Qu, J. Xu, J. Luo and X. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kamyshny and S. Magdassi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1712–1740 RSC .
Y. Khan, A. Thielens, S. Muin, J. Ting, C. Baumbauer and A. C. Arias, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D.-H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I.-D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141–3150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, T. G. Yun, C. Kang, M.-J. Son, J.-G. Kang, I.-H. Kim, H.-J. Lee, C.-H. An and B. Hwang, Mater. Des., 2018, 151, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, D. Kim, S.-M. Kim, I.-D. Kim, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800064 CrossRef .
T. G. Yun, J.-S. Jang, J. Y. Cheong and I.-D. Kim, Nano Energy, 2021, 82, 105776 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jung, J.-S. Jang, T. G. Yun, K. R. Yoon and I.-D. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 6531–6540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Baima and T. Andrew, Fibers, 2018, 6, 41 CrossRef .
L. Allison, S. Hoxie and T. L. Andrew, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7182–7193 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. Baima and T. L. Andrew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32299–32307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Viola and T. L. Andrew, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36834–36840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, L. Hu, Y. Tang, Z. Xie and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005223 CrossRef CAS .
G. P. Neupane, T. Yildirim, L. Zhang and Y. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2005238 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, R. Jiang, Y. Feng, H. Ouyang, N. Zhou, X. Zhang and Y. Wei, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 1325–1338 RSC .
J. Zhang, N. Kong, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, S. Seyedin, P. A. Lynch, S. Qin, M. Han, W. Yang, J. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 RSC .
C. E. Shuck and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 401, 125786 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 3480–3488 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. Levitt, Y. Zhu, S. Uzun, V. Balitskiy, V. Zahorodna, O. Gogotsi and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2020, 22, 1901241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, M. Salari, D. Jiang, J. Chapman Varela, B. Anasori, D. J. Wesolowski, S. Dai, M. W. Grinstaff and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 787–808 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shekhirev, C. E. Shuck, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 100757 Search PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 1151–1163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Sreenilayam, I. Ul Ahad, V. Nicolosi and D. Brabazon, Mater. Today, 2021 DOI:10.1016/j.mattod.2020.10.025 .
X. Zhao, L. Y. Wang, C. Y. Tang, X. J. Zha, Y. Liu, B. H. Su, K. Ke, R. Y. Bao, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8793–8805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, L. He, Y. Li, M. Chao, M. Li, P. Wan and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(4), 7765–7773,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.1c01751 .
M. Sharifuzzaman, A. Chhetry, M. A. Zahed, S. H. Yoon, C. I. Park, S. Zhang, S. Chandra Barman, S. Sharma, H. Yoon and J. Y. Park, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2020, 169, 112637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Song, B. Liu, H. Qiu, X. Shi, D. Cao and J. Gu, Compos. Commun., 2021, 24, 100653 CrossRef .
L. Wang, P. Song, C.-T. Lin, J. Kong and J. Gu, Research, 2020, 2020, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Z. Fan, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu and Z. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122696 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, J. Chen, H. Wang and X. Xiao, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8, 607 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Gao, H. Luo, L. Wang, X. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Lai, L. Lin, R. K. Y. Li and J. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126898 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, X. Lai, H. Li, C. Jiang, J. Gao and X. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 23020–23029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma, A. Chhetry, M. Sharifuzzaman, H. Yoon and J. Y. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22212–22224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pei, X. Zhang, Z. Hui, J. Zhou, X. Huang, G. Sun and W. Huang, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 3996–4017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sinha, Dhanjai, H. Zhao, Y. Huang, X. Lu, J. Chen and R. Jain, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 105, 424–435 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, L. Chen, X. Yang, X. Chen, Z. Zhang, T. Zhao, X. Li and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1022–1027 RSC .
M. Soleymaniha, M. A. Shahbazi, A. R. Rafieerad, A. Maleki and A. Amiri, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2019, 8, 1801137 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800518 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang, S. Bai, T. Chen, Y. Zhang, H. Wang and X. Guo, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6, 086315 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, J. Zhu, W. Wu and B. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 228, 282–289 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tong, C. Jiang, K. Cai and P. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2020, 465, 228267 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Cheng, L. Xie, X. Hou and C. Fang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 5747–5757 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wu, D. Wei, J. Zhu, D. Niu, F. Wang, L. Wang, L. Yang, P. Yang and C. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 7328–7337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, Y. Ma, C. Zhang, X. Li, W. Liu, X. Yao, S. Yao and S. Luo, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 39742–39748 RSC .
M. Boota and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802917 CrossRef .
Q. W. Wang, H. Bin Zhang, J. Liu, S. Zhao, X. Xie, L. Liu, R. Yang, N. Koratkar and Z. Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806819 CrossRef .
X. Zheng, J. Shen, Q. Hu, W. Nie, Z. Wang, L. Zou and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 1832–1841 RSC .
G. Yin, Y. Wang, W. Wang and D. Yu, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 601, 125047 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, M. Miao, Y. Li, J. Zhang, S. Cao and X. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44787–44795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4207 CrossRef .
L. Gao, C. Li, W. Huang, S. Mei, H. Lin, Q. Ou, Y. Zhang, J. Guo, F. Zhang, S. Xu and H. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1703–1747 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2(2), 1–17 Search PubMed .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lin, H. Shao, K. Xu, P. L. Taberna and P. Simon, Trends Chem., 2020, 1–11 Search PubMed .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dahlqvist, J. Lu, R. Meshkian, Q. Tao, L. Hultman and J. Rosen, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700642 CrossRef PubMed .
N. C. Frey, J. Wang, G. I. Vega Bellido, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3031–3041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Rajan, A. Mishra, S. Satsangi, R. Vaish, H. Mizuseki, K. R. Lee and A. K. Singh, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4031–4038 CrossRef CAS .
B. Anasori, Y. Xie, M. Beidaghi, J. Lu, B. C. Hosler, L. Hultman, P. R. C. Kent, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9507–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, W. Han, H. Li, W. Zhang and B. Zhang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 344–363 CrossRef .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, O. Mashtalir, J. Carle, V. Presser, J. Lu, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1322–1331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Naguib, J. Halim, J. Lu, K. M. Cook, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15966–15969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, X. Zhou, F. Chen, G. Gao, S. Wang, C. Shen, T. Chen, C. Zhi, P. Eklund, S. Du, J. Xue, W. Shi, Z. Chai and Q. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3841–3850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Zhao, L. Li, Y. Wang, J. Wang, J. Xiong, S. Du, P. Zhang, X. Shi and J. Yu, Polym. Rev., 2021, 61, 80–115 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghidiu, M. R. Lukatskaya, M.-Q. Zhao, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Nature, 2014, 516, 78–81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Cao, Y. Z. Cai, P. He, J. C. Shu, W. Q. Cao and J. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 359, 1265–1302 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Z. Zhang and Z. Zhou, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 73–85 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Shao, Z. Lin, J. Lu, L. Liu, B. Duployer, P. O. Å. Persson, P. Eklund, L. Hultman, M. Li, K. Chen, X. H. Zha, S. Du, P. Rozier, Z. Chai, E. Raymundo-Piñero, P. L. Taberna, P. Simon and Q. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2020, 6, 312 Search PubMed .
A. Djire, H. Zhang, J. Liu, E. M. Miller and N. R. Neale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11812–11823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Meshkian, L.-Å. Näslund, J. Halim, J. Lu, M. W. Barsoum and J. Rosen, Scr. Mater., 2015, 108, 147–150 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Zha, F. Y. Chen, Q. Ye, P. Eklund, S. Du and Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5008–5013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Gesing and W. Jeitschko, J. Solid State Chem., 1998, 140, 396–401 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Q. Tao, A. El Ghazaly, J. Fernandez-Rodriguez, P. O. Å. Persson, J. Rosen and F. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1703808 CrossRef .
M. Boota, B. Anasori, C. Voigt, M. Q. Zhao, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1517–1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M. Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, N. Zhang, M. Zhang, X. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 1747–1756 RSC .

          J. Grothe, S. Kaskel and A. Leuteritz, Polymer Science: A Comprehensive Reference, Elsevier,  2012, vol. 8, pp. 177–209 Search PubMed .

          G. Nelson, Advances in the Dyeing and Finishing of Technical Textiles,  2013, pp. 78–104 Search PubMed .

          L. C. Tang, L. Zhao, F. Qiang, Q. Wu, L. X. Gong and J. P. Peng, Carbon-Based Nanofillers and Their Rubber Nanocomposites: Fundamentals and Applications,  2019, pp. 367–423 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Han, T. Li, X. Zhang, T. Wang and Z. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 220, 305–308 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, Q. Tao, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, J. Halim, P. O. Å. Persson, J. Rosen and F. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 734–742 CrossRef CAS .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Moncada, H. Chen, E. Kayali, J. Orangi, C. A. Carrero and M. Beidaghi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22123–22133 RSC .
D. Wei, W. Wu, J. Zhu, C. Wang, C. Zhao and L. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 877, 114538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, M. He, Y. Zhou, X. Zhong, L. Fan, T. Huang, Q. Liao and Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 283–293 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. Wang and W. Han, InfoMat, 2019, 1, 407–416 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Lu, G.-R. Li, W.-X. Zhao and Y.-X. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5180–5185 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Augello and H. Liu, Surface Modification of Magnesium and Its Alloys for Biomedical Applications,  2015, vol. 2, pp. 335–353 Search PubMed .

          U. Gunputh and H. Le, Biomedical Composites, Elsevier,  2017, pp. 111–138 Search PubMed .

          S. Arulmani, S. Anandan and M. Ashokkumar, Nanomaterials for Green Energy, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 1–53 Search PubMed .

          L. Feng, X. Sun, S. Yao, C. Liu, W. Xing and J. Zhang, Rotating Electrode Methods and Oxygen Reduction Electrocatalysts,  2014, pp. 67–132 Search PubMed .

          K. Kakaei, M. D. Esrafili and A. Ehsani, Interface Science and Technology, Elsevier B.V.,  2019, vol. 27, pp. 253–301 Search PubMed .
H. Song, K. Cai, J. Wang and S. Shen, Synth. Met., 2016, 211, 58–65 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, K. Cai, S. Shen and J. Yin, Synth. Met., 2014, 195, 132–136 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jian, M. He, L. Chen, M. Zhang, R. Li, L. Gao, F. Fu and Z. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 820–827 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov, D. Krishnan, C. Morant, X. Liu, G. S. Duesberg, Y. Gogotsi and V. Nicolosi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Q. Deng, J. Zhou, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Li, Q. Huang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600969 CrossRef .
J. Li, A. Levitt, N. Kurra, K. Juan, N. Noriega, X. Xiao, X. Wang, H. Wang, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 455–461 CrossRef .
M. Kurtoglu, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, MRS Commun., 2012, 2, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Borysiuk, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2018, 143, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wan, X.-M. Li, P.-L. Zhu, R. Sun, C.-P. Wong and W.-H. Liao, Composites, Part A, 2020, 130, 105764 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Dikin, S. Stankovich, E. J. Zimney, R. D. Piner, G. H. B. Dommett, G. Evmenenko, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Nature, 2007, 448, 457–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, X. Wang, S. Li, P. Urbankowski, J. Li, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, Small, 2020, 16, 1906851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. M. Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Mayerberger, O. Urbanek, R. M. McDaniel, R. M. Street, M. W. Barsoum and C. L. Schauer, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2017, 134 DOI:10.1002/app.45295 .
S. Bai, X. Guo, T. Chen, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Yang and X. Zhao, Composites, Part A, 2020, 139, 106088 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, S. I. Han, D. Kim, T. Hyeon and D.-H. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1566–1595 RSC .
J. Lee, P. Lee, H. B. Lee, S. Hong, I. Lee, J. Yeo, S. S. Lee, T.-S. Kim, D. Lee and S. H. Ko, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4171–4176 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Bora, A. G. Anil, P. C. Ramamurthy and D. Q. Tan, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 177–183 RSC .
L. Li, Z. Lou, D. Chen, K. Jiang, W. Han and G. Shen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702829 CrossRef PubMed .
G. S. Gund, J. H. Park, R. Harpalsinh, M. Kota, J. H. Shin, T. il Kim, Y. Gogotsi and H. S. Park, Joule, 2019, 3, 164–176 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, X. Li, Y. Bai, H. Xiao, Y. Liu and G. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 405, 126664 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Le, N. Q. Tran, Y. Hong and H. Lee, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 1037–1043 CAS .
Y. Li, P. Kamdem and X. J. Jin, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 850, 156608 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, X. Wang, X. Wang, M. Liang, V. Nicolosi, Y. Xu and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2020, 75, 104971 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, J. Zhu, L. Wang, H. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Wu and F. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2018, 214, 84–87 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Song, Z. Zhan, B. Chen, Z. Zhou and C. Lu, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 7475–7488 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yu, P. Ma, X. Zhou, A. Wang, T. Qian, S. Wu and Q. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17937–17943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, P. Wan, H. Xu and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17865–17871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Han, Y. Tang, J. Bao, S. Li, Y. Lan and Z. Dai, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 12377–12380 RSC .
J. Li, N. Kurra, M. Seredych, X. Meng, H. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, J. Yun, S. Wu, L. Li, L. Yu and K. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34212–34221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 5420–5426 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, P. Tammela, M. Strømme and L. Nyholm, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 3418–3423 RSC .
M. O. Faruk, A. Ahmed, M. A. Jalil, M. T. Islam, A. M. Shamim, B. Adak, M. M. Hossain and S. Mukhopadhyay, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 23, 101025 CrossRef .
J. Tabor, K. Chatterjee and T. K. Ghosh, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 5 Search PubMed .
E. Pakdel, M. Naebe, L. Sun and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 13039–13057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Castano and A. B. Flatau, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 053001 CrossRef CAS .
P.-C. Hsu and X. Li, Science, 2020, 370, 784–785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng and Y. Cui, Joule, 2020, 4, 724–742 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hsu, X. Liu, C. Liu, X. Xie, H. R. Lee, A. J. Welch, T. Zhao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 365–371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhou, P. Li, Z. Fan, D. Du and J. Ouyang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1544–1551 RSC .
X. Jia, B. Shen, L. Zhang and W. Zheng, Composites, Part B, 2020, 198 DOI:10.1016/j.compositesb.2020.108250 .
C. Liang, K. Ruan, Y. Zhang and J. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18023–18031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, Q. Yuan, H. Du, M.-G. Ma, C. Si and P. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 34226–34234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Wang, Z. Lei, L. Wang, M. Tian, S. Zhu, H. Xiao, X. Tang and L. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14459–14467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Cao, X. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Yang and W. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 27350–27360 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, X. Jin, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cao and W. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12526–12537 RSC .
M. Han, C. E. Shuck, R. Rakhmanov, D. Parchment, B. Anasori, C. M. Koo, G. Friedman and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5008–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-M. Weng, J. Li, M. Alhabeb, C. Karpovich, H. Wang, J. Lipton, K. Maleski, J. Kong, E. Shaulsky, M. Elimelech, Y. Gogotsi and A. D. Taylor, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803360 CrossRef .
A. Siriwitpreecha, P. Rattanadecho and T. Wessapan, Int. J. Heat Mass Transfer, 2013, 65, 423–434 CrossRef .
N. C. Das, Y. Liu, K. Yang, W. Peng, S. Maiti and H. Wang, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2009, 49, 1627–1634 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, X. Yin, H. Wu, Z. Hou, C. Song, X. Li, L. Zhang and L. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 21011–21019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Wu, J. He and L. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 205, 261–263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qing, W. Zhou, F. Luo and D. Zhu, Ceram. Int., 2016, 42, 16412–16416 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, J. Wang, L. Dai, X. Liu, L. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Cao, W. Wang, H. Wu and S. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122475 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, Arti, P. Kumar, N. Singh and V. Verma, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2019, 488, 165364 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, P. Song, Z. Xiao, C. Liang, H. Qiu, J. Kong and J. Gu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 183, 107833 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ding, Y. Wang, R. Xu, Q. Qi, W. Wang and D. Yu, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 8209–8223 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Lu and K. Zhang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 3, 80–100 CrossRef .
Z. Zhan, R. Lin, V. T. Tran, J. An, Y. Wei, H. Du, T. Tran and W. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 37921–37928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yao, J. Yang, F. R. Poblete, X. Hu and Y. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 31028–31037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Montazerian, A. Rashidi, A. Dalili, H. Najjaran, A. S. Milani and M. Hoorfar, Small, 2019, 15, 1804991 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cheng, R. Wang, J. Sun and L. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7365–7371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiao, X. Li, T. Hirtz, G. Deng, Y. Wei, M. Li, S. Ji, Q. Wu, J. Jian, F. Wu, Y. Shen, H. Tian, Y. Yang and T.-L. Ren, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 18923–18945 RSC .
S. Sharma, A. Chhetry, S. Zhang, H. Yoon, C. Park, H. Kim, M. Sharifuzzaman, X. Hui and J. Y. Park, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(3), 4380–4393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and Z. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 45930–45938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seyedin, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, B. Anasori, G. Dion, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910504 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cao, C. Ma, D. Mao, J. Zhang, M. Ma and F. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905898 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, G. Cao, S. Yi, X. Zhang, C. Li, X. Sun, K. Wang and Y. Ma, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5906–5913 RSC .
Q. Xu, J. Xu, H. Jia, Q. Tian, P. Liu, S. Chen, Y. Cai, X. Lu, X. Duan and L. Lu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 860, 113869 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, X. Zhou, W. Deng, D. Lei and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 3634–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, Z.-S. Wu, S. Zheng, X. Wang, J. Qin, S. Wang, X. Shi and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4792–4800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hwang, H. Setiadi Cahyadi, W. Chang and J. Kim, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2019, 148, 116–129 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohmeyer, A. Schaate, B. Hoppe, H. A. Schulze, T. Heinemeyer and P. Behrens, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3367–3370 RSC .
S. Wang, C. Li, J. Han, L. Wang, Z. Lu, J. Wu and Y. Wang, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 456–461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. He, W. A. Haider, W. Yang, X. Hong, Y. Guo, X. Pan, H. Tang, Y. Li and L. Mai, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 7761–7770 RSC .
W. Shao, M. Tebyetekerwa, I. Marriam, W. Li, Y. Wu, S. Peng, S. Ramakrishna, S. Yang and M. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 683–690 CrossRef CAS .
C. Couly, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, N. Kurra, L. Gomes, A. M. Navarro-Suárez, B. Anasori, H. N. Alshareef and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700339 CrossRef .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703043 CrossRef .
J. Ren, W. Bai, G. Guan, Y. Zhang and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5965–5970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xie, F. Jia, L. Zhuo, Z. Lu, L. Si, J. Huang, M. Zhang and Q. Ma, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 23382–23391 RSC .
X. Shi, H. Wang, X. Xie, Q. Xue, J. Zhang, S. Kang, C. Wang, J. Liang and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 649–659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Cao and W. Wang, Composites, Part A, 2019, 127, 105649 CrossRef CAS .
N. He, S. Patil, J. Qu, J. Liao, F. Zhao and W. Gao, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 2949–2958 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rozmysłowska-Wojciechowska, A. Szuplewska, T. Wojciechowski, S. Poźniak, J. Mitrzak, M. Chudy, W. Ziemkowska, L. Chlubny, A. Olszyna and A. M. Jastrzębska, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2020, 111, 110790 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Alhussain, R. Augustine, E. A. Hussein, I. Gupta, A. Hasan, A.-E. Al Moustafa and A. Elzatahry, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2020, 16, 364–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jastrzębska, A. Szuplewska, T. Wojciechowski, M. Chudy, W. Ziemkowska, L. Chlubny, A. Rozmysłowska and A. Olszyna, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 339, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Pu, X. Zhao, X. J. Zha, L. Bai, K. Ke, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15913–15923 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Md. Omar Faruk
	Md Omar Faruk received his Bachelor's degree in Textile Engineering from the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. Currently, he is a PhD student in Materials Science and Engineering at Binghamton University, The State University of New York, USA. His primary research interests are advanced nanostructured and bio-inspired materials integrated flexible and smart wearable devices for healthcare monitoring, energy harvesting and storage, safety, and protection.

Abbas Ahmed
	Abbas Ahmed is a PhD student in Polymer Program at the Institute of Materials Science, University of Connecticut, USA. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Textile Engineering from the University of Dhaka, Bangladesh. His research focuses on nanostructured and bioinspired materials enabled flexible nanoelectronics and soft-robotics for smart-textiles, healthcare and energy-related applications.

Bapan Adak
	Bapan Adak is a R&D Manager at Kusumgar Corporates Pvt. Ltd, India. He received his BTech degree (in 2010) from West Bengal University of Technology, India in Textile Technology. He received his MTech degree in Fibre Science & Technology (in 2015) and PhD degree in Technical Textile/Polymer nanocomposite (in 2019) both from Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. Before taking admission in MTech, he worked more than three years at Arvind Ltd., India as Manufacturing Manager. His primary research interests focus on polymer nanocomposites, single-polymer composites, biocomposites, functional and smart technical textiles.

Md. Milon Hossain
	Md Milon Hossain is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Textile Engineering, Khulna University of Engineering & Technology (KUET), Bangladesh. He received his Bachelor's and Masters from Mawlana Bhashani Science and Technology University. Currently, he is a Research Assistant and Instructor at North Carolina State University. He is working on nano textiles for multifunctional applications. His research interest includes wearable and flexible electronics, bioelectronics and energy storage.

Samrat Mukhopadhyay
	Samrat Mukhopadhyay is an Associate Professor at the Department of Textile and Fiber Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology (IIT), Delhi. He received his BSc (Tech) from the University of Kolkata, and subsequently did his Masters and PhD from IIT Delhi, India. He was with the Fibrous Materials Research Group at the University of Minho, Portugal as a Post-Doctoral Scientist before joining the Department. He has been working with synthetic and natural fibers, composite materials, sustainable approaches in textiles and in the revival of traditional textiles.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Structures of MAX phases and MXene. Reproduced with permission.86 (b) Compositions of updated MAX phases are represented in the Periodic table. Reproduced with permission.87	 
Ti3AlC2 + 3HF = AlF3 + 3/2H2 + Ti3C2	(1)
Ti3C2 + 2H2O = Ti3C2(OH)2 + H2	(2)
Ti3C2 + 2HF = Ti3C2F2 + H2	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Selective etching of Ti3AlC2 MAX phases with HF to synthesize MXene (Ti3C2Tx). Reproduced with permission.87 (b) Etching of A elements of MAX phase precursors with molten salt to synthesize of MXene. Reproduced with permission.49 (c) Illustration of the synthesis process of Mo2CTx MXenes flakes from non-MAX Mo2Ga2C. Reproduced with permission.94 (d) Schematic of the synthesis process of the Hf contained 2D Hf3C2 MXene from Hf3[Al(Si)]4C6 compound. Reproduced with permission.97	 
LiF + HCl = HF + LiCl	(4)
NH4F + H2O = NH3·H2O + HF	(5)
Zr3Al3C5 + HF = AlF3 + CH4 + Zr3C2	(6)
Zr3C2 + H2O = Zr3C2(OH)2 + H2	(7)
Zr3C2 + HF = Zr3C2F2 + H2	(8)

 	Fig. 3  (a and b) Graphical representation of the preparation of MXene from layered Ti3AlC2 MAX phases and the in situ polymerization of PANI onto the MXene surface, respectively. Reproduced with permission.117 (c) Schematic of the incorporation of PANI with the Ti3C2Tx MXene sheets. Reproduced with the permission.120	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of the ED procedure of PPy on the Ti3C2Tx films. (b) TEM image of the thin lamella sample of the MXCP. Reproduced with the permission.74 (c) ED process of PPy onto MXene to synthesis 3D carambola-like structures of MXCP composite film. (d) SEM images of 3D carambola-like structures of the as fabricated MXCP film. Reproduced with the permission.129	 


MXene/PPy	1 M H2SO4	The gravimetric capacitance of 416 F g−1	86.4%@5000	
129

Ti3C2Tx/PANI	3 M H2SO4	Volumetric capacitance of 1682 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 503 F g−1, energy density of 79.8 W h L−1 at power density 575 W L−1	98.3%@10000	
117

MXene/PANI	1 M H2SO4	Volumetric capacitance of 1167 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 560 F g−1, energy density of 65.6 W h L−1 at power density 1687.3 W L−1	87.5%@5000	
146

MXene/PPy	1 M H2SO4	Volumetric capacitance of ≈1000 F cm−3 and gravimetric capacitance of 460 F g−1	92%@25000	
108

MXene/PPy textile	H2SO4/PVA	Gravimetric capacitance of 343.20 F g−1, energy density of 1.30 mW h g−1 at power density 41.1 mW g−1	—	
77

PANI/rGO/MXene	3 M H2SO4	Gravimetric capacitance of 57 F g−1	88%@20000	
78

MXene/PPy NWs	3 M KOH	Gravimetric capacitance of 610 F g−1	100%@14000	
147

MXene/PPy	H2SO4/PVA	Gravimetric capacitance of 420.2 F g−1, energy density of 10.82 μW h mg−1 at power density 0.11 mW mg−1	86.5%@10000	
74

MXene/PANI	7 M KOH	Gravimetric capacitance of 563 F g−1, energy density of 22.67 W h kg−1 at power density 0.217 kW kg−1	95.15%@10000	
148

MXene/PEDOT:PSS	1 M H2SO4	Volumetric capacitance of 1065 F cm−3, energy density of 23 mW h cm−3 at power density 7659 mW cm−3	80%@10000	
111

MXene/PPy	1 M Na2SO4	Gravimetric capacitance of 184.36 F g−1	83.33%@4000	
76

MXene//rGO/CNT/PANI	3 M H2SO4	Volumetric capacitance of 286 F cm−3, gravimetric capacitance of 116.9 F g−1, energy density of 70 W h L−1 at power density 111 kW L−1	80%@10000	
149

MXene/PPy	1 M H2SO4	Gravimetric capacitance of 458 F g−1, energy density of 21.61 W h kg−1 at power density 499.94 W kg−1	73.68%@4000	
118

MXene/PANI/TiO2	1 M KOH	Gravimetric capacitance of 108.9 F g−1	94%@8000	
73

MXene/PANI	1 M Na2SO4	Gravimetric capacitance of 164 F g−1	∼96%@3000	
150


 	Fig. 5  (a) Polymerization of PPy@BC onto MXene to fabricate flexible PBM electrode. (b) Schematic of ions and electrons transport system in the fabricated PBM electrode. (c) Electrochemical performance of fabricated electrodes at 5 mV s−1. (d) Comparison of the energy density versus power density of the PBM electrode with other PPy-based symmetric supercapacitors. (e) Long cycling stability of PBM and PPy@BC electrode with a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. Reproduced with the permission.151	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration showing the interpolated PPy in the interlayered l-Ti3C2. (b) Atomic-scale schematic of intercalated PPy in the interlayers of l-Ti3C2. (c) Image of the MXCP based paper like ultra-thin solid-state flexible electrode for SC. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the MXCP and PPy films. (e) Electrochemical performance of as-prepared solid-state SC. (f) Cyclic performance of the solid-state SC at 0.5 mA cm−2. Reproduced with the permission.131	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustrations showing the preparation techniques of compressed PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx electrode. (b and c) Cyclic voltammetry profiles of fabricated MXCP film with the loading of 40 wt% and 20 wt% of PANI at various scan rates, respectively. (d) Electrochemical performance (volumetric capacitance) of MXCP films with different mass loadings. (e) Volumetric energy and power densities for M-Ti3C2Tx/PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx full cells with different PANI@M-Ti3C2Tx loadings. Reproduced with the permission.137	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Graphical illustration of the synthesis of GMP. (b) Electrochemical performance (specific capacitance) of fabricated electrodes MXene, MXCP, and GMP at different current densities. (c) Schematic of the assembling of GMP//graphene based p-ASC. (d) Cycling performance of p-ASC along with the coulombic efficiency at a current density of 10 A g−1. Reproduced with the permission.156	 

 	Fig. 9  (a and b) Fabrication and assemble of MXCP coated multifunctional textiles, respectively. (c) Heating performance of fabricated textiles at various applied voltage. Reproduced with permission.80	 


MXene/PEDOT:PSS	VAF	67520 S m−1	40.5	—	∼12.5	∼0.0066	
135

MXene/PANI	Mechanical blending	—	22.7	—	10.8	1.5	
181

PANI/MXene/CF fabrics	Layer-by-layer	24.57 S m−1	26	135.5 dB cm3 g−1	—	0.55	
81

MXene/PEDOT:PSS	VAF	340.5 S cm−1	42.10	19497.8 dB cm2 g−1	8.2	0.011	
82

MXene/PET/PPy textile	
In situ polymerization	∼1000 S m−1	∼90	—	—	0.43	
79

MXene/PEDOT:PSS textile	VPP/spray-coating	3.6 Ω sq−1	36.62	—	—	—	
80


 	Fig. 10  (a) Fabrication process of the CNS pressure sensor. (b) Surface modification of the CNS by altering the α-phase crystallization into β-phase crystallization to a synergistic effect. (c and d) Radial artery pulse wave monitoring by attaching the sensor to the wrist's dermal areas of a volunteer and the enlarged view of the characteristic peaks of the single pulse waveform such as diastolic (D) wave, tidal (T) wave, and percussion (P) wave, respectively, (e) Monitoring of pre and post-exercise breathing by attaching the sensor to mask worn by a volunteer. (f) Monitoring of eye twitched ocular muscle vibrations by attaching the CNS sensor near to the eye dermal area. (g and h) Schematic of imitating the finger knocking ability of the sensor to detect early signs of Parkinson's disease at a static tremor frequency of 4.8 Hz and the enlarged view of a finger with tremor at 4.8 Hz, respectively. Reproduced with permission.66	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
