High-performance hybrid plastic films: a robust electrode platform for thin-film optoelectronics   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE24306K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE24306K
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1811-1817Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsHigh-performance hybrid plastic films: a robust electrode platform for thin-film optoelectronics†

        
          
            Jungho 
            Jin‡
ac, 
      
        
          
            Jaemin 
            Lee‡
bc, 
      
        
          
            Seonju 
            Jeong
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            SeungCheol 
            Yang
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ji-Hoon 
            Ko
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Hyeon-Gyun 
            Im
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Se-Woong 
            Baek
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Jung-Yong 
            Lee
          
        
      *bc and 

        
          
            Byeong-Soo 
            Bae
          
        
      *ac
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering (MSE), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Rep. of Korea. E-mail: bsbae@kaist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 42 350 3310;   Tel: +82 42 350 5119
bGraduate School of Energy, Environment, Water, and Sustainability (EEWS), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Rep. of Korea. E-mail: jungyong.lee@kaist.ac.kr;  Fax: +82 42 350 2248;   Tel: +82 42 350 1722
cKI for the NanoCentury, Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Daejeon, Rep. of Korea
Received 
      9th December 2012
    , Accepted 23rd January 2013First published on 24th January 2013AbstractWe report a novel flexible hybrid plastic film that can be used as a robust electrode platform for typical thin-film optoelectronic devices. Silver nanowires (AgNWs) were embedded on the surface of a glass-fabric reinforced transparent composite (GFRHybrimer) film to form a flexible transparent conducting substrate with excellent opto-electrical properties, superior thermal stability, and impressive mechanical flexibility. A highly efficient and flexible inverted organic solar cell with a power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 5.9% under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination was fabricated on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. The AgNW–GFRHybrimer film exhibits potential as an excellent transparent electrode for low cost flexible optoelectronic devices.

Broader context
Flexible optoelectronic devices need high performance flexible substrates, but typical plastic substrates are not appropriate especially due to their low glass transition temperature. Here, we propose a highly transparent, mechanically and thermally robust electrode platform for thin-film optoelectronic devices. Utilizing the platform, an organic solar cell (OSC) showing the power conversion efficiency as high as 5.9% was achieved. The newly suggested material composite would open up practical uses of flexible substrates for high performance thin-film optoelectronic and energy conversion devices.

Introduction
A transparent conducting electrode (TCE) is a salient component of thin-film optoelectronic devices such as thin-film solar cells and displays.1 Highly flexible transparent conducting electrodes are especially demanded for the next generation of such devices. Recently, conventional transparent conductors based on metal oxides typified by indium tin oxide (ITO) have faced challenges from several potential contenders such as those based on carbon nanotubes (CNT),2,3 graphenes,4–6 conducting polymers,7,8 and metal nanowires (NWs).9,10 For a viable and progressive replacement of ITO, these emerging conductors must be equipped with excellent mechanical flexibility and also compatibility with low-cost fabrication while properly realizing excellent opto-electrical performances of ITO.
Random networks of silver nanowires (AgNWs) are considered one of the most promising alternatives particularly for transparent electrodes used in organic solar cells (OSCs) and organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs).11–15 Rationales for this trend include the high ‘percolative figure of merit’ of AgNW films compared to the carbon-based systems (i.e., CNTs and graphene) as reported by Coleman et al.16,17 Especially, the relatively large haze of AgNW electrodes is even advantageous in obtaining higher power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of OSCs as reported by Peumans and Cui et al.18 However, the rough surface topology of AgNW electrodes has posed a major obstacle in the advancement of thin-film optoelectronic devices, because the roughness is likely to cause short circuits in the devices. The roughness of the deposited AgNW networks on a flat substrate is intrinsically large; the peak-to-peak is more than double the diameter of the wires, because the random networks are arranged through stacking of the wires. Several proof-of-concept strategies have been reported for manipulating the rough surface topology of AgNW electrodes: for example, applying high pressure (∼103 kgf cm−2) to mechanically flatten deposited AgNWs,12 embedding AgNWs on polymer matrices such as polyvinyl alcohols and poly acrylates,15,19 and a combination thereof.20
The thermal stability of the flexible substrate is another issue to be addressed. After the deposition of AgNWs, the networks of AgNWs generally undergo heat-treatment to ensure better NW–NW contacts, allowing effective reduction of the sheet resistance.13,21 In addition, in the case of typical bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OSCs, subsequent heat-treatment up to 200 °C (ref. 22 and 23) may also be required for the formation of organic layers – such as metal oxide interfacial layers and active organic layers. Common plastic substrates, such as polyethylene terephthalate (PET), which have poor thermo-mechanical properties,24 impose an upper limit on the process temperature during device fabrication, which would in turn degrade the overall device performance.25
Based on the considerations noted above and industrial demands, the following characteristics of a flexible TCE are required for realizing highly efficient flexible optoelectronic devices: (1) the sheet resistance must not be compromised for higher optical transmittance; (2) the performance has to be mechanically reliable; (3) the surface roughness has to be extremely low (∼a few nanometers are preferred); and (4) the TCE should be able to withstand high temperature as dictated by the optimal conditions for device fabrication.
Herein, we report a high-performance transparent conducting plastic film that can work as a robust electrode platform for typical thin-film optoelectronic devices. Our hybrid plastic film (hereafter, AgNW–GFRHybrimer film) is composed of a high-performance glass-fabric reinforced transparent composite (GFRHybrimer) film26 as a base film and random networks of AgNWs with excellent opto-electrical properties monolithically embedded on the surface as an electrode. The resulting monolithic hybrid structure of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film simultaneously provides a very smooth surface topology (<2 nm) and excellent thermo-mechanical performance including a low CTE (∼15 ppm °C−1) with an almost Tg-less character (Fig. S1†). We demonstrate highly efficient inverted OSCs with a PCE of 5.9% under AM 1.5G illumination at 100 mW cm−2 on the novel high-performance plastic films. In this study, we discuss the fabrication and basic properties of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film, and also elaborate on the performance of an OSC employing an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film as the device platform.
Results and discussion
The AgNWs used in this study were prepared with a modified recipe reported by Yang et al.27 (Experimental section), and the average diameter and length of the AgNWs were 70.3 nm and 11 μm, respectively (Fig. S2†). Fig. 1a illustrates the fabrication procedure to create the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film: (I and II) while spray-coated AgNWs on a glass donor substrate were prepared (refer to ESI†), woven glass-fabrics (Fig. 1b) were placed on another pre-cleaned glass substrate and the glass-fabrics were impregnated with a UV-curable thermoset resin consisting of a sol–gel derived cyclo-aliphatic epoxy hybrid material (hybrimer) as a base resin, bis[1-ethyl(3-oxetanyl)]methyl ether (DOX) as a cross-linker, and triarylsulfonium hexafluoroantimonate salt as an initiator for cationic photo-polymerization (Fig. S4†);26,28 (III) the impregnated sample was covered with the pre-formed AgNWs on glass; (IV) this sandwiched sample was then compressed and irradiated under UV light (λ = 365 nm, He-lamp) to cure the matrix resin; and finally, (V) an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was obtained after separating the two donor glasses.
 Fig. 1  Fabrication of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (a) Schematic illustration of the procedure to fabricate the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film: (I and II) the AgNW solution is spray-coated on a donor glass and, meanwhile, woven glass fabrics are settled on another pre-cleaned donor glass and impregnated with the hybrimer resin; (III) the two donor glasses are sandwiched and pressed in a vacuum bag molding instrument; (IV) after UV-curing the sample, (V) the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film can be obtained by removing both donor glass substrates. (b) SEM image of the woven glass fabric (E-glass). (c and d) SEM surface images of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (tilted and top view, respectively), showing monolithically embedded AgNWs on the film surface. (e) AFM image (scan area: 10 × 10 μm2) of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. The right graph shows the contour profile of embedded AgNWs along the dashed line from the AFM image. The Rrms and peak-to-peak values are 1.4 nm and 12 nm, respectively. (f) A photograph of a 13 × 13 cm2 AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (the inset photograph is taken at outdoors). 
The exceptionally smooth surface topology is a distinct feature of embedded AgNW electrodes prepared via the monolithic transfer process described above.11,15,19 The most plausible explanation for the transfer mechanism is that the matrix physically seizes AgNW networks, provided that there are no chemical interactions at the AgNW–matrix interface. In the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film fabrication, extremely few AgNWs remained on the original donor glass substrate after the transfer process (ESI, Fig. S5†). In addition, the tightening effect provided by the hybrimer matrix allows improved NW–NW contact, resulting in a slightly decreased Rsh compared to the original Rsh of pre-formed AgNWs on the donor glass substrate prior to transfer. The reduction of the Rsh value suggests that the highly cross-linked network structure of the hybrimer provides sufficient matrix rigidity,29 which in turn enables almost complete transfer of AgNWs and tight anchoring of the AgNW networks (Tables S2 and S3†). In a control experiment, we tested the transfer of AgNWs using a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) matrix. However, we found that the transfer of the AgNWs was unfeasible, which could be possibly due to the inherent softness of the PDMS (Table S3†) given that there are no predominant interactions at the matrix–AgNW interface in terms of chemical bonding.
The direct transfer of the AgNW networks during the film production allows the networks to be monolithically embedded at the surface of the final composite film, providing an extremely smooth surface topology. Fig. 1c and d show scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the surface of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film; AgNW networks are well embedded at the surface. Fig. 1e shows an atomic force microscopy (AFM) image of the film and a contour profile of embedded AgNWs along the dashed line (right graph). Note that the root-mean-square surface roughness (Rrms) was merely 1.4 nm and the maximum peak-to-peak range of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was 12 nm. Fig. 1f shows a photograph of a 13 × 13 cm2 AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (Rsh = 20 Ω sq−1 and T = 93%). The resulting thickness of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was approximately 60 μm.
As illustrated in Fig. 2a, SEM analyses revealed that some AgNW strands protruded on the surface of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. Conceivably, the protruded AgNWs were generated during the donor glass separation, primarily when a part of the AgNWs is being strained at the glass surface.20 The height of the protrusion can reach a few microns. This can cause device failure such as short-circuit, even with a low level of such protrusions. In order to trim the protrusions, we developed a facile method to eliminate the surface defects and retrieve a smooth surface: the protrusions of AgNW could be effectively removed by simply scrubbing the surface with a soft microfiber cloth, as shown in Fig. 2b. The scrubbing process is straightforward, pressure-free, and thus fully process-compatible.
 Fig. 2  Surface SEM analyses of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. In some occasions where there is unbalanced separation of the donor glasses, protrusion of AgNWs can occur on the film surface. These defects can be tractably removed by gently scrubbing the surface. (a) Protrusion of AgNWs on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (b) After scrubbing the surface with a microfiber cloth. 
Among all factors, the opto-electrical property of the TCE is the integral figure of merit to determine the applicability of the TCE in typical optoelectronic devices. Total optical transmittances (Ttot) of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films with various Rsh values (15, 22, and 200 Ω sq−1) were assessed using a UV-visible spectrometer (UV-vis) equipped with an integrating sphere. Fig. 3a shows the UV-vis spectra of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films measured under ambient baseline conditions, and the transmittances at 550 nm vs. the sheet resistance are listed in Table S1.† We confirmed that the optical and electrical characteristics of the AgNW TCE on the GFRHybrimer film are consistent with those from glass substrate counterparts reported previously,13,18 showing comparable performance to ITO. The slightly lower transmittance at the same Rsh is attributed to the lower transmittance of the neat GFRHybrimer film (∼90%)26 compared to that of glass.
 Fig. 3  Optical and mechanical properties of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films. (a) UV-vis spectra of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films with different Rsh (15, 22, and 200 Ω sq−1). The spectra were obtained with respect to air baseline. (b) Bending test results of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (Rsh = 46 Ω sq−1). An ITO/PEN film was tested for comparison (the top and right axes are for ITO/PEN). The inset illustrates the experimental setup for the bending test (bending radius: 5 mm). 
The mechanical durability of a TCE is of prime importance in flexible optoelectronic devices. The bending durability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was assessed using a bending test tool (Fig. 3b inset). For comparison, a commercial polyethylene naphthalate (PEN) film with a sputtered ITO electrode was also tested. As shown in Fig. 3b, the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film tolerated 105 bending cycles (bending radius: 5 mm) and completely retained its initial electrical performance after the test, thus indicating that the hybrid conducting films have excellent flexibility. In contrast, the Rsh of the ITO/PEN film (thickness: 200 μm) degraded catastrophically even after only a few bending cycles. Also, the mechanical abrasion resistance of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was checked via a tape test and an eraser test (under sufficient finger-pressure conditions), and we confirmed that the Rsh of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer films was preserved after both tests (Fig. S6†). Considering its excellent mechanical robustness, as demonstrated above, the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film has a strong potential to find application as a TCE platform in flexible thin-film optoelectronic devices.
As outlined earlier, flexible conducting films should be able to withstand high temperature in post-processing steps in order to guarantee high device performance. The thermo-mechanical stability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was also evaluated by directly measuring Rsh while the samples were placed on a hot plate (Fig. 4a); the temperature of the hot plate was set to 250 °C. To perform the in situ Rsh-measurement, two separate electrical contacts of silver paste were formed on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (Rsh = 23 Ω sq−1) and the resistance between the two contacts was checked using a multimeter. Conducting films of AgNWs/PEN (Rsh = 24 Ω sq−1) and ITO/PEN (Rsh = 15 Ω sq−1) were also tested for comparison. As shown in Fig. 4a, severe deformations were observed in the AgNWs/PEN and ITO/PEN films during (and even after) the test, while the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film maintained its original shape and dimensions. In addition, as shown in Fig. 4b, the in situ Rsh measurements revealed that the Rsh of both the AgNWs/PEN and ITO/PEN films significantly increased, primarily due to the deformation of the base PEN film. In contrast, the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film showed stable electrical performance, reflecting the excellent thermo-mechanical stability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. Intriguingly, the Rsh of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film further decreased by 17% (from 23 Ω sq−1 to 19 Ω sq−1) even after 30 min of heat-treatment. This phenomenon can be considered in light of our observation that the Rsh of the AgNW TCE on a bare glass substrate increases past the optimal annealing conditions (250 °C, 20 min), primarily due to disconnection of the AgNWs. We presume that the decrease of the Rsh of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film can be attributed to the thermal-stable rigid hybrimer matrix, which prevents disconnection of the AgNWs and thus renders better NW–NW contact, even at high temperature.
 Fig. 4  High-temperature thermo-mechanical stability test of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (a) Photographs showing AgNW–GFRHybrimer (23 Ω sq−1), AgNWs/PEN (24 Ω sq−1), and ITO/PEN (15 Ω sq−1) films before, on a hot plate (250 °C), and after the test. Note that both AgNWs/PEN and ITO/PEN films showed significant deformation. (b) In situ Rsh measurement of AgNW–GFRHybrimer, AgNWs/PEN, and ITO/PEN films. Both PEN-based conducting films show constant degradation of their electrical properties, primarily due to severe deformation of the base PEN film. 
To verify the potential of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film as a flexible TCE film for optoelectronic devices, inverted BHJ OSCs using poly[[9-(1-octylnonyl)-9H-carbazole-2,7-diyl]-2,5-thiophenediyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl-2,5-thiophenediyl] and phenyl-c71-butyric acid methyl ester (PCDTBT:PC71BM) were fabricated on AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (T = 81% at 550 nm, haze = 22.7%, and Rsh ≈ 13 Ω sq−1) substrates. The inverted structure was chosen because it exhibits better lifetimes compared to normal structure OSCs as a result of the elimination of acidic PEDOT:PSS and the use of air-stable high work function metals. From a manufacturing point of view, inverted OSCs are also advantageous in that they facilitate implementation of an all-solution process and roll-to-roll production using flexible substrates. It is worth noting that the weight per unit area of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer was 0.127 mg mm−2, which is approximately 2.6-fold lighter than that of PET. As shown in Fig. 5a, the flexible device structure was AgNW–GFRHybrimer/ZnO/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag, and a control device was fabricated on an ITO/glass substrate (T = 88.8% at 550 nm, haze < 1% and Rsh = 20 Ω sq−1). In the inverted BHJ OSCs, the sol–gel derived ZnO film required annealing at a high temperature exceeding 200 °C so that it would properly function as an efficient electron transport layer. Note that the excellent thermo-mechanical stability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film enabled such high-temperature annealing during device fabrication, which is not a simple task with typical plastic films such as PET and PEN, which possess high CTE and low Tg.
 Fig. 5  Inverted organic solar cell device fabrication. (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure and (b) current density–voltage characteristics of inverted OSCs on an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (circles) and on ITO/glass (squares) under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. Inset: a photograph of the OSC on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. 
Representative current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the device on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film and the ITO/glass substrate under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination are shown in Fig. 5b. The ITO/glass control device showed a PCE of 5.99% with an open circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.87 V, a short circuit current density (Jsc) of 11.29 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 61%. The device on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film showed similar performance, exhibiting a PCE of 5.90% with a Voc of 0.85 V, a Jsc of 11.51 mA cm−2 and a FF of 60%. As evidenced by the haze of 22.7%, efficient light scattering induced at the AgNW–hybrimer matrix interfaces led to a slightly higher Jsc compared to the control device. The Voc of the device on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was slightly lower than that of the control device, possibly due to the higher work function of AgNWs (5.02 eV) compared to that of ITO (4.95 eV), which might have caused a relatively difficult electron collection in the inverted OSCs.30,31Table 1 summarizes the device performance of the inverted OSCs on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film and ITO/glass.
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance of the inverted OSCs on an AgNW–GFRHybrimer and on ITO/glass under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination




Device

V
oc [V]

J
sc [mA cm−2]
FF
PCE [%]




On AgNW–GFRHybrimer
0.85
11.51
0.60
5.90


On ITO/glass
0.87
11.29
0.61
5.99




To the best of our knowledge, the PCE of 5.9% has been the highest value amongst the reported inverted OSCs fabricated on flexible substrates. We believe that the unprecedented device performance with high yield and reproducibility benefited from (1) the extremely smooth surface, (2) excellent thermal stability, and (3) superb opto-electrical properties of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer films, thus demonstrating the potential of this film as an attractive flexible TCE platform.
The air stability of the inverted OSC on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was investigated as a function of storage time in air and a glove box, as shown in Fig. S7a.† The non-passivated devices exhibited remarkable air stability, comparable to the device performance when stored in N2, owing to the durability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film and the silver electrode. The PCE remained at approximately 40% of the initial value even after storage in air for 25 days. Although the inverted OSC on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film exhibited air stability, as generally known, silver forms a thin oxide layer upon long-term exposure to air, resulting in degradation of device performance over the long term. Therefore, the study of effective passivation methods in devices on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film to enhance long-term stability is underway.
The mechanical flexibility of the inverted OSCs on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film was briefly investigated by calculating the PCE in repeated bending cycles with a bending radius of 5 mm. The PCE of the devices remained almost constant during and after the bending test up to ∼200 cycles, resulting from the superior flexibility of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film.
In summary, we demonstrated highly efficient, air-stable inverted BHJ OSCs using a novel, high-performance composite film with a monolithically embedded AgNW TCE. The OSC fabricated on the flexible AgNW–GFRHybrimer film showed a PCE of 5.90% under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination, which was comparable to that of a device fabricated on ITO/glass. Furthermore, the flexible OSC on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film showed superior mechanical stability in the bending test. Given the excellent opto-electrical properties, high flexibility, and thermal stability of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film, we believe the present work will open up a new route for fabricating highly efficient optoelectronic devices via cost effective and scalable roll-to-roll processes by employing the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film as a flexible TCE.
Experimental
AgNW synthesis
AgNW solutions were prepared based on a modified polyol process.27 Briefly, 5.86 g of PVP (polyvinylpyrrolidone) (Mw: 55000) was dissolved in 190 ml of glycerol and was heated at 100 °C for 1 hour to remove the moisture remaining in PVP. The solution was then cooled to room temperature. A mixture of sodium chloride (Sigma Aldrich, 0.059 g), deionized water (0.5 ml), and glycerol (10 ml) was added into the previously prepared solution with the addition of 1.58 g of silver nitrate. The suspension was gradually heated to 160 °C over a period of 30 min and left for 1 hour for additional reaction. The final production was filtered using glass filters with pore sizes of 10–16 μm and stored in methanol.
Spray-deposition of AgNWs
The back pressure (nitrogen) was 0.1 MPa and the flow rate of the AgNW suspension was 3 ml min−1. The substrate-to-nozzle distance was fixed to 13 cm for uniform distribution of NWs. The substrate temperature was 100 °C to evaporate the solvent immediately. The scan speed of the nozzle was 4000 inch per min and the moisture in the spray booth was maintained at 30%. The concentration of the suspension was 0.6 mg ml−1.
The matrix resin cyclo-aliphatic epoxy hybrid resin (hybrimer), the base resin, was synthesized by a method described elsewhere.29 In brief, 2-(3,4-epoxycyclohexyl)ethyltrimethoxysilane (ECTS, Gelest) and diphenylsilanediol (DPSD, Gelest) were mixed in a two-neck flask with a molar ratio of 1:1.5, and barium hydroxide monohydrate (Sigma Aldrich) was added in an amount of 0.2 mol% of the total silane precursors (refer to Fig. S4† for chemical structures). A clear viscous resin was obtained after 4 hours of sol–gel reaction under N2 purging. Then, 3-ethyl-3[(3-ethyloxetane-3-yl)methoxy]methyl oxetane (DOX; Toagosei, Japan) of varying amounts was mixed, and triarylsulfonium hexafluoroantimonate salt was added as a photo-initiator in an amount of 2 wt% of the total resin mixture.
Measurement of Rsh
The Rsh of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer films was measured with a 4-point probe sheet resistance meter, and the measured Rsh values were also crosschecked using a multimeter. Fig. S6b† illustrates the experimental setup for the Rsh-measurement, where the 4-point probe system measures the standard Rsh of the samples while the resistance between two electrical contacts made of silver paste – the area between them is square-shaped – is checked using the multimeter (Fig. S6b†). As is shown, the Rsh values determined by both methods are almost identical. This indicates that the electrical performance of the embedded AgNW electrode is homogeneous over a large area. The spatial uniformity of the sheet resistance values was ca. 2.6% throughout the film.
Device fabrication
First, an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film with a patterned AgNW electrode was produced and attached to a glass substrate. The formation of a patterned AgNW electrode can be achieved simply by transferring pre-formed AgNWs with desired patterns on glass. We confirmed that the definition of the pattern does not collapse during the transfer process. The AgNW–GFRHybrimer films (or glass/ITO) were cleaned by ultrasonic treatment in detergent, de-ionized water, and isopropyl alcohol sequentially and then dried in a vacuum oven. Next, UV-ozone treatment of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer films was conducted for 15 min. A 30 nm-thick sol–gel derived ZnO layer was spun on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer (or glass/ITO) and annealed at 200 °C for 1 h in air. After the substrate was transferred into a nitrogen-filled glove box, 80 nm-thick BHJ layers were spin-coated from a solution of PCDTBT:PC71BM (35 mg ml−1, 1:4 v/v) in o-dichlorobenzene and dried at 70 °C for 20 min in the glove box. A MoO3 layer (10 nm) and an Ag layer (100 nm) were sequentially deposited on top of the BHJ layer through a shadow mask by thermal evaporation at 7 × 10−7 Torr. The active area of the fabricated devices was in a range of 0.10–0.15 cm2. Current density–voltage (J–V) curves were measured using a solar simulator (PEC-L12, Peccell Technologies) under 100 mW cm−2 from a 150 W Xe short arc lamp filtered by an AM 1.5G filter.
Acknowledgements
We sincerely appreciate the financial support of the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST) (2012-0003991). We also gratefully acknowledge support from the Center for Inorganic Photovoltaic Materials (2012-0001172) through a grant funded by the MEST, a National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the MEST (2012-0000822), grant no. EEWS-2012-N01120012 from the EEWS Research Project of the office of the KAIST EEWS Initiative, KAIST Institute for the NanoCentury, and Samsung Display Co. J. Lee and S. Jeong acknowledge financial support from the Global Ph.D. Fellowship Program, bestowed by the NRF.
Notes and references
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cao, Z. T. Zhu, M. G. Lemaitre, M. G. Xia, M. Shim and J. A. Rogers, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 113511 CrossRef .
L. B. Hu, J. F. Li, J. Liu, G. Gruner and T. Marks, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 155202 CrossRef .
J. K. Wassei and R. B. Kaner, Mater. Today, 2010, 13, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. Park, P. R. Brown, V. Buloyic and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 133–140 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Hwang, J. S. Park, D. S. Choi, J. Y. Kim, S. H. Lee, K. E. Lee, Y. H. Kim, M. H. Song, S. Yoo and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kirchmeyer and K. Reuter, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2077–2088 RSC .
A. Elschner and W. Lovenich, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 794–798 CrossRef CAS .
J. Krantz, M. Richter, S. Spallek, E. Spiecker and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4784–4787 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hu, H. Wu and Y. Cui, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 760–765 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. B. Yu, W. L. Hu, C. H. Chang, Q. Chen and Q. B. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5563–5567 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1276–1279 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lee, S. T. Connor, Y. Cui and P. Peumans, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 689–692 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, T. M. Higgins, P. E. Lyons, E. M. Doherty, P. N. Nirmalraj, W. J. Blau, J. J. Boland and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1767–1774 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Yu, Q. W. Zhang, L. Li, Q. Chen, X. F. Niu, J. Liu and Q. B. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 664–668 CrossRef CAS .
S. De and J. N. Coleman, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 774–781 CrossRef CAS .
S. De, P. J. King, P. E. Lyons, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7064–7072 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Hu, H. S. Kim, J. Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Zeng, Q. K. Zhang, R. M. Yu and C. Z. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4484–4488 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gaynor, G. F. Burkhard, M. D. McGehee and P. Peumans, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2905–2910 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tokuno, M. Nogi, M. Karakawa, J. T. Jiu, T. T. Nge, Y. Aso and K. Suganuma, Nano Res., 2011, 4, 1215–1222 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Tan, W. Q. Zhang, Z. G. Zhang, D. P. Qian, Y. Huang, J. H. Hou and Y. F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1476–1481 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS .
V. Scardaci, R. Coull, P. E. Lyons, D. Rickard and J. N. Coleman, Small, 2011, 7, 2621–2628 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Yang, T. Zhang, H. X. Zhou, S. C. Price, B. J. Wiley and W. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4075–4084 CAS .
J. H. Jin, J. H. Ko, S. Yang and B. S. Bae, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4510–4515 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, H. W. Gu, W. Lin, M. M. Yuen, C. P. Wong, M. Y. Xiong and B. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3052–3056 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Yang, J. H. Jin, S.-Y. Kwak and B.-S. Bae, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 126, E380–E386 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jin, S. Yang and B. S. Bae, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 168–174 RSC .
V. D. Mihailetchi, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen and M. T. Rispens, J. Appl. Phys., 2003, 94, 6849–6854 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci and E. Ehrenfreund, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 223519 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fabrication of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films, stability of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24306k‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Flexible optoelectronic devices need high performance flexible substrates, but typical plastic substrates are not appropriate especially due to their low glass transition temperature. Here, we propose a highly transparent, mechanically and thermally robust electrode platform for thin-film optoelectronic devices. Utilizing the platform, an organic solar cell (OSC) showing the power conversion efficiency as high as 5.9% was achieved. The newly suggested material composite would open up practical uses of flexible substrates for high performance thin-film optoelectronic and energy conversion devices.


 	Fig. 1  Fabrication of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (a) Schematic illustration of the procedure to fabricate the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film: (I and II) the AgNW solution is spray-coated on a donor glass and, meanwhile, woven glass fabrics are settled on another pre-cleaned donor glass and impregnated with the hybrimer resin; (III) the two donor glasses are sandwiched and pressed in a vacuum bag molding instrument; (IV) after UV-curing the sample, (V) the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film can be obtained by removing both donor glass substrates. (b) SEM image of the woven glass fabric (E-glass). (c and d) SEM surface images of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (tilted and top view, respectively), showing monolithically embedded AgNWs on the film surface. (e) AFM image (scan area: 10 × 10 μm2) of the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. The right graph shows the contour profile of embedded AgNWs along the dashed line from the AFM image. The Rrms and peak-to-peak values are 1.4 nm and 12 nm, respectively. (f) A photograph of a 13 × 13 cm2 AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (the inset photograph is taken at outdoors).	 

 	Fig. 2  Surface SEM analyses of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. In some occasions where there is unbalanced separation of the donor glasses, protrusion of AgNWs can occur on the film surface. These defects can be tractably removed by gently scrubbing the surface. (a) Protrusion of AgNWs on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (b) After scrubbing the surface with a microfiber cloth.	 

 	Fig. 3  Optical and mechanical properties of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films. (a) UV-vis spectra of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films with different Rsh (15, 22, and 200 Ω sq−1). The spectra were obtained with respect to air baseline. (b) Bending test results of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (Rsh = 46 Ω sq−1). An ITO/PEN film was tested for comparison (the top and right axes are for ITO/PEN). The inset illustrates the experimental setup for the bending test (bending radius: 5 mm).	 

 	Fig. 4  High-temperature thermo-mechanical stability test of an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film. (a) Photographs showing AgNW–GFRHybrimer (23 Ω sq−1), AgNWs/PEN (24 Ω sq−1), and ITO/PEN (15 Ω sq−1) films before, on a hot plate (250 °C), and after the test. Note that both AgNWs/PEN and ITO/PEN films showed significant deformation. (b) In situ Rsh measurement of AgNW–GFRHybrimer, AgNWs/PEN, and ITO/PEN films. Both PEN-based conducting films show constant degradation of their electrical properties, primarily due to severe deformation of the base PEN film.	 

 	Fig. 5  Inverted organic solar cell device fabrication. (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure and (b) current density–voltage characteristics of inverted OSCs on an AgNW–GFRHybrimer film (circles) and on ITO/glass (squares) under 100 mW cm−2 AM 1.5G illumination. Inset: a photograph of the OSC on the AgNW–GFRHybrimer film.	 

On AgNW–GFRHybrimer	0.85	11.51	0.60	5.90
On ITO/glass	0.87	11.29	0.61	5.99
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Fabrication of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films, stability of AgNW–GFRHybrimer films. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee24306k
‡ These two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
