Synthesis of thin film AuPd alloys and their investigation for electrocatalytic CO 2 reduction   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA04863J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04863J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20185-20194Synthesis of thin film AuPd alloys and their investigation for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction†

        
          
            Christopher 
            Hahn
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            David N. 
            Abram
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Heine A. 
            Hansen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Toru 
            Hatsukade
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ariel 
            Jackson
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Natalie C. 
            Johnson
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Thomas R. 
            Hellstern
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kendra P. 
            Kuhl
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Etosha R. 
            Cave
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jeremy T. 
            Feaster
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Thomas F. 
            Jaramillo
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Stanford University, California 94305, USA. E-mail: jaramillo@stanford.edu
bSUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis, SLAC National Accelerator Laboratory, Menlo Park, California 94025, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Stanford University, California 94305, USA
dDepartment of Geological and Environmental Sciences, Stanford University, California 94305, USA
eDepartment of Chemistry, Stanford University, California 94305, USA
fDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Stanford University, California 94305, USA
Received 
      1st July 2015
    , Accepted 28th August 2015First published on 11th September 2015AbstractWe synthesize and investigate AuPd alloys for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2. Thin films of AuPd were synthesized using an electron-beam co-deposition method, which yields uniform, phase-pure metal alloys with composition control. Scanning electron microscope images show that the thin films are relatively uniform and flat in morphology. X-ray diffraction showed alloying and phase homogeneity within the AuPd thin films. Elemental mapping of Au and Pd with scanning transmission electron microscopy shows that AuPd thin films are uniform in composition on the nanometer scale. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy characterization indicates that AuPd alloys are slightly Au-rich on the surface and follow a similar trend to the bulk composition as determined by Vegard's Law. CO2 reduction activity and selectivity were investigated across the AuPd system. All AuPd alloys were found to be more active and selective for formate production than either of the pure metals, indicating that Au and Pd can act synergistically to yield new electrocatalytic properties.
Introduction
Anthropogenic climate change resulting from a global dependence on fossil fuels as an energy source has necessitated the investigation of renewable energy sources for the future. Of the renewable energy technologies, wind and solar energy are particularly promising sources for the mitigation of CO2 emissions.1 However, their inherent intermittency presents issues with supplying a stable energy source. Storage of electrical energy in the form of chemical bonds may provide a solution to stabilize the renewable energy grid.2 In particular, the electrochemical fixation of CO2 into fuels is promising because of the possibility of a carbon neutral energy cycle through CO2 recycling.3
Many technical challenges remain to design active and selective CO2 electroreduction catalysts.4,5 Previous studies by Hori et al. on the electrochemical CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) in aqueous electrolyte have shown that most metal electrodes can be classified as being selective for CO, HCOO−, or H2, all of which are 2e− products.5 Only Cu has shown a propensity to form hydrocarbons and C–C coupled products with reasonably high selectivity. However, Cu electrodes produce a wide array of major and minor products6 that would require separation, and operate using a prohibitively large overpotential to drive the CO2RR.5 Recent theoretical work has indicated that trends for the binding energy of intermediates during the overall reduction of CO2 to CH4 severely limit the activity of transition metal catalysts.7 These studies show that although Cu requires a relatively large overpotential for the CO2RR, it already sits close to the top of the activity volcano for elemental transition metals, the intersection of CO* to CHO* and CO2* to COOH*, for >2e− transfer products. Therefore, it is suggested that the binding energies of CO and CHO must be decoupled, i.e. the scaling relations must be broken to design an active CO2RR catalyst.8
One proposed method of decoupling the binding energy of these intermediates is to alloy a metal with one that has a higher oxygen affinity.7 For example, Pd has a greater affinity to oxygen than Au,9 which could allow for bidentate binding of reaction intermediates such as COOH* on neighboring Au and Pd sites. A bidentate interaction is one way to potentially break scaling relations by strengthening the bonding of these carbonyl intermediates to the alloy surface. Similar interactions are proposed for the catalytically active sites of CO dehydrogenase enzymes as a method to stabilize carbonyl molecules and to activate CO2.4,8 Also, while Au is one of the most active and selective catalysts for CO2 reduction to CO,5 the weak binding energy of CO to Au inhibits further reduction to higher electron products due to CO desorption from the surface.7 Unlike Au, Pd binds CO strongly, which can poison catalytically active sites during CO2 reduction. Recent experimental work on AuPd alloys shows that Au and Pd have a strong ligand effect which can cause an “averaging” of their binding energies to CO in vacuum.10 Therefore, alloying Au and Pd can strengthen the binding energy of CO to Au sites while simultaneously weakening the binding energy of CO to Pd sites. Destabilization of CO on the Pd sites is also expected to facilitate reduction of CO* to CHO*. While AuPd alloys have been used to explore many thermal and electrochemical catalytic reactions,11 there have been no previous reports of using AuPd for the electrochemical CO2RR. However, electrochemical studies indicate that AuPd alloys are active for reverse reactions such as the oxidation of formate12,13 and alcohols,14,15 another indication that they could be active for the CO2RR as well. These combined factors suggest that AuPd alloys could be promising catalysts to examine for the CO2RR.
To investigate AuPd alloys and understand their activity trends for the electrochemical CO2RR, it is necessary to produce samples of high purity with composition control. Although Au and Pd have a lattice mismatch of 4.7%, they are fully miscible face-centered cubic (FCC) metals and form thermodynamically stable alloys throughout the entire composition range.16 There are numerous ways to synthesize metal films; in this work we employ electron beam (e-beam) evaporation, a commonly used physical vapor deposition (PVD) technique. As the deposition rate can be monitored in situ by using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), control over the composition of AuPd alloys can be achieved by changing the power applied to the Au and Pd sources while monitoring each source with its own QCM. Also, since e-beam deposition is an ultra-high vacuum PVD technique, the resulting alloy thin films are relatively free of contaminants. In this work, we investigate the utility of a dual e-beam co-evaporation method to synthesize a broad composition range of AuPd alloys. Bulk and surface compositions of AuPd thin films were measured using X-ray diffraction (XRD) and spectroscopic techniques. After physical characterization, we examined the effect of composition on the activity and selectivity of AuPd catalysts for CO2 electroreduction.
Results and discussion
Morphology and crystallinity
Thin films were synthesized by co-depositing Au and Pd within a previously described dual e-beam evaporation system.17 Before depositing AuPd, approximately 50 nm of Ti was deposited as an adhesion layer to a quartz substrate. A subsequent layer of 100–150 nm AuPd alloy was co-deposited on top of the Ti thin film without breaking vacuum to ensure a clean interface. Since each QCM was not entirely isolated to its evaporation source, an initial calibration layer of about 10 nm was deposited to account for the cross-talk between sources. In total, nine different AuPd compositions were deposited ranging from pure Au to Pd.
Surface morphologies of AuPd thin films were examined using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and atomic force microscopy (AFM). Representative SEM images show qualitatively that all compositions are relatively flat and have similar morphologies with grain sizes on the order of tens of nanometers (Fig. 1). To quantitatively examine surface areas, AFM was used to extract a surface root mean square (RMS) roughness for AuPd thin films (Fig. S1†). A comparison of AFM images for pure Au, AuPd, and pure Pd thin films shows that all samples have similar RMS roughness values, which corroborates the qualitative conclusions drawn from SEM images. The low and similar RMS roughness values of e-beam deposited thin films across the various compositions facilitates understanding the composition dependence of AuPd electrocatalyst activity, since changes in catalyst surface area are negligible.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of AuPd thin films, revealing their morphologies. The samples are ordered (A–I) from pure Au to pure Pd, showing that all AuPd thin films are uniform in morphology. Magnified images in the insets show that the films are comprised of nanometer sized domains. 
The AuPd thin film samples were further analyzed using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) to examine their crystallinity. A Ga+ focused ion beam (FIB) equipped with a nano-manipulator was used to cut and transfer a cross-section of sample F to a Cu grid. The bright field cross-sectional TEM image in Fig. 2A shows the final geometry of the multilayer on quartz. A closer examination of both the Ti and AuPd layers using high resolution TEM (Fig. 2B and C) shows Moiré fringes (arrows) from the superposition of nanometer-sized domains which are oriented in different directions. Therefore, as-deposited thin films are polycrystalline without the need for post-treatment. This isotropic orientation could be advantageous for CO2RR catalysis by providing a statistical distribution of surface reactive sites for testing. These results indicate that e-beam co-deposition is a robust technique for the synthesis of polycrystalline alloy thin films and multilayers.
 Fig. 2  Bright-field TEM cross-section images of a thin film multilayer. (A) A bright-field TEM image shows the cross-section of a representative multilayer thin film (sample F). HRTEM images of the (B) Ti and (C) Au1−yPdy thin films show Moiré fringes, indicating that the layers are polycrystalline. 
Bulk and surface compositions
The degree of alloying and tunability of bulk compositions of Au1−yPdy are demonstrated from XRD characterization (Fig. 3). As shown in the X-ray diffractograms, all compositions of AuPd adopt the FCC crystal structure and have a strong (111) diffraction peak. The major (111) peak is normalized for all compositions to facilitate comparison. Additional peaks are attributed to the (111) plane of the AuPd calibration layer and the (002) and (101) planes of the hexagonal close-packed Ti adhesion layer. As the (111) peak gradually shifts to larger 2θ angles with increasing Pd composition, alloy formation is confirmed. It is expected that Pd incorporation will increase 2θ (decrease the lattice constant of AuPd alloys) since Pd has a smaller lattice constant than Au. Pure Au and Pd thin films were calculated to have lattice constants of 4.08 and 3.88 Å, respectively, which match closely with previously reported values.18 For alloy samples, Gaussian fitting was necessary to deconvolute the (111) peak of the sample from the calibration layer. After calculating peak positions, Vegard's law was used to determine the bulk compositions of Au1−yPdy thin films (Table 1). The XRD results indicate that e-beam co-deposition has the versatility to synthesize AuPd alloys across the full composition range.
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffractograms of AuPd thin films. Normalized XRD patterns show an increase in lattice constant with Au composition. The vertical lines correspond to the peak positions and predicted powder diffraction intensities for FCC Au (111) [black], HCP Ti (002) and (101) [red], and FCC Pd (111) [violet]. 
Table 1 XRD lattice constants and Vegard's Law compositions of Au1−yPdy thin films




Sample
XRD lattice constant (Å)
Vegard's law Au (1 − y)
Vegard's law Pd (y)




A
4.076
1.00
0.00


B
4.062
0.93
0.07


C
4.028
0.75
0.25


D
3.990
0.55
0.45


E
3.939
0.28
0.72


F
3.923
0.20
0.80


G
3.905
0.11
0.89


H
3.896
0.06
0.94


I
3.885
0.00
1.00




Composition uniformity of a representative AuPd film (sample F) was examined at the nanometer scale by using scanning TEM (STEM) coupled with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). An EDS line scan reveals the spatial distribution of phases along the cross-section (Fig. 4A and B). The blue line overlaid on the dark-field (DF) STEM image corresponds to the region, from left to right, that was scanned with the STEM probe (Fig. 4A). Measured signal intensities for Ti-K (black), Au-L (blue), Pd-L (green) transitions indicate that there is a sharp interface between the Ti and AuPd layers (Fig. 3B). While it appears that there is some Ti-K signal in the AuPd layer, a separate EDS scan confirms that there is no Ti in the AuPd layer (Fig. S2†) and that the apparent Ti-K signal in the line scan in Fig. 4B is simply from an increase in background signal intensity. The absence of Ti in the AuPd layer indicates that interdiffusion of Ti atoms is likely not an issue for e-beam co-deposited samples. This is in agreement with the absence of mixed Au, Pd, and Ti phases in the XRD spectra (Fig. 3). Sharp increases in Pd-L and Au-L signal are seen at the onset of the AuPd layer, reaching initial peaks at line positions of 77 and 90 nm, respectively (Fig. 4B). The peaks in intensity represent the AuPd calibration region where a Pd-rich and a Au-rich phase were co-deposited while calibrating the QCMs for crosstalk. Mapping of a small square cross-section of AuPd shows that Au (L and M transitions) and Pd (K and L transitions) are evenly distributed outside of the calibration region on the nanometer scale (Fig. 4C and D). Therefore, additional (111) peaks in the XRD spectra of Fig. 3 are detected from AuPd phases in the calibration layer rather than phase separation. In summary, these results indicate that e-beam co-deposition can be used to deposit phase pure alloy thin films.
 Fig. 4  STEM EDS mapping of a representative AuPd thin film (sample F). (A) A DF STEM image shows the region (blue) where an EDS line scan was conducted from left to right. (B) The corresponding EDS signals for Ti-K, Au-L, and Pd-L show the spatial distribution of layers. (C and D) EDS maps collected from the region in blue show that Au and Pd are distributed homogeneously in AuPd alloys on a nanometer scale. 
Surface composition tuning of AuPd thin films is demonstrated by using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) (Fig. 5). As the bulk Pd composition determined from XRD increases, so does the surface composition as measured by the Pd (3p and 3d) and Au (4p, 4d, and 4f) XPS lines (Fig. 5A). Peak intensities for Pd (3p3/2) and Au (4f5/2 + 4f7/2) were integrated and compared to bulk compositions measured by XRD (Fig. 5B). The comparison shown in Fig. 5B reveals the qualitative correspondence between surface and bulk compositions. As catalysis is a surface phenomenon, the ability to tune surface composition is necessary to understand trends in the CO2RR on AuPd alloys. All alloy samples are above the parity line (surface to bulk Au composition ratio of 1), shown in blue, demonstrating that AuPd alloys are slightly enriched with Au at the surface. This result could be due to the lower surface energy of Au vs. Pd in vacuum; as a result, Au would be expected to preferentially segregate to the surface under measurement conditions.19 Angle-resolved XPS (ARXPS) was used to further probe surface segregation, and confirmed that the first few monolayers of AuPd are Au-rich (Table 2). The ratio of Au to Pd (sample D) clearly increases with a decrease in θ, confirming that the Au composition increases as the sampling depth approaches the first several monolayers of AuPd. This Au-enrichment at the surface is similar to conclusions from low-energy ion scattering spectroscopy experiments on AuPd thin films20 and single crystals19 annealed in vacuum. We note, additionally, that as the collection angle (θ) decreases, an increase in C 1s composition is seen indicating that the sampling depth is being reduced. Ultimately, the XPS measurements demonstrate that e-beam co-deposition can be used to synthesize AuPd thin films of different surface compositions.
 Fig. 5  A comparison between surface and bulk compositions of Au1−yPdy alloys. (A) XPS spectra show a gradual increase in Pd (3p and 3d) peak intensities and decrease in Au (4p, 4d, 4f) peak intensities as the bulk Pd composition is increased. (B) A comparison of bulk and surface compositions measured by XRD and XPS, respectively, show that AuPd alloys are slightly Au-rich on the surface. 
Table 2 Angle-resolved XPS of a AuPd thin film (sample F). A gradual increase in C 1s signal with a decreasing collection angle (θ) indicates that the sampling depth is being reduced. Compositions excluding C from the total (inside the brackets) show that the first several monolayers are Au-rich





θ (°)
Au 4f (%)
Pd 3p1/2 (%)
C 1s (%)




5
5.5 [30.4]
12.5 [69.6]
82.1


15
6.4 [27.2]
17.1 [72.9]
76.6


25
7.3 [26.4]
20.2 [73.6]
72.5


35
7.5 [25.5]
22.0 [74.5]
70.5


90
10.3 [22.5]
35.5 [77.5]
54.2




Electrochemical CO2 reduction
Electrochemical studies were conducted within a previously described three electrode compression flow cell to determine the activity and selectivity of AuPd thin films for CO2 reduction.6 First, cyclic voltammetry (CV) was used to examine the electrochemical characteristics of AuPd working electrodes (WE) at reducing potentials in CO2 purged 0.1 M KHCO3 electrolyte. The first reductive sweep shows a peak for all Pd-containing electrodes (Fig. 6A), which was attributed to hydrogen intercalation into the lattice. Hydrogen intercalation is a well-known phenomenon for Pd and its alloys, which has led to their use as hydrogen-permeable membranes in petrochemical industries.21 As the Pd composition decreases, the peak shifts gradually towards more cathodic potentials indicating that the addition of Au in the lattice makes it progressively more difficult to intercalate hydrogen. This is in agreement with studies which show that the diffusivity of hydrogen in AuPd alloys decreases with the addition of Au because hydrogen diffuses through a Pd site hopping mechanism.22,23 This is also reflected in the peak current density, which decreases with increasing Au composition because there are fewer total sites for hydrogen to intercalate. After cyclic voltammetry, chronoamperometry (CA) measurements held the WE at a fixed potential to examine the activity and selectivity of Au1−yPdy alloys over the course of one hour. Amongst the Au1−yPdy alloys, a trend is observed that the average current density at a given voltage decreases as the Pd composition increases (Fig. 6B). Therefore, the overall activity of Au1−yPdy in a CO2 purged environment decreases from Pd incorporation into the lattice. To examine selectivity, products were quantified using a combination of gas chromatography (GC) and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy for the gas phase and liquid phase, respectively.
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical measurements of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. (A) The first reductive sweeps of CV scans (50 mV s−1) for different Au1−yPdy compositions show peaks attributed to hydrogen intercalation for Pd containing alloys. The peaks shift to more cathodic potentials with increasing Au composition indicating that it becomes more difficult to intercalate hydrogen. (B) Average current densities plotted for one hour CA scans show a decrease in total activity with increasing Pd composition. 
Current efficiencies for detected products are plotted vs. RHE (Fig. 7) to show the product selectivity of Au1−yPdy electrodes at different bias voltages. All compositions produce the 2e− reaction products CO (black), HCOO− (blue) and H2 (red), except Pd for which HCOO− was not detected in this voltage range. One trend observed from the data is that the CO2RR current efficiency to CO increases with increasing Au composition. This could be expected because, to date, Au is the most active transition metal catalyst for electrochemical CO2 to CO conversion.5 While alloying does not improve current efficiencies to CO beyond that of pure Au, the CO2 to HCOO− conversion current efficiencies are clearly improved by alloying. All alloys are more selective for HCOO− than either pure Au or pure Pd, with Au0.20Pd0.80 being the most selective with a current efficiency of 10.0% at −0.88 V vs. RHE.
 Fig. 7  Current efficiencies of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. All compositions make the CO2RR product CO (black). HCOO− (blue) is detected from all catalyst systems except for Pd. Samples show a decrease in CO current efficiency with increasing Pd composition. Pure Pd shows the least current efficiency for CO2 reduction products and is the most selective for making H2 (red). All Au1−yPdy alloys are more selective for HCOO− than either pure Au or Pd, indicating that there is synergy between Au and Pd sites on the surface. 
Theoretical studies have shown that on Cu, CO2 electroreduction to CO proceeds through a COOH* intermediate, whereas the electroreduction to HCOO− could proceed through either the COOH* intermediate or an OCHO* intermediate.24,25 Compared to pure Au, the stability of hydrogen intercalation on Pd sites within AuPd alloys could increase the local coverage of adsorbed hydrogen (H*). This increase in coverage could facilitate hydrogen transfer to a neighboring COOH* (or COO−*) adsorbate in a Langmuir–Hinshelwood type of bimolecular mechanism, leading to an increase in HCOOH* (or HCOO−*) production from AuPd alloys. Since pure Pd does not produce any HCOO− in this voltage range, we suggest that CO* poisoning reduces the probability of H* being adjacent to COOH* (or COO−*) in this mechanism. Studies show that AuPd alloys have an increased tolerance to CO dosage compared to pure Pd because alloying reduces the binding energy of Pd sites to CO.10 Therefore, AuPd alloys are more likely to desorb CO* and have a higher probability of H* adjacent to COOH* (or COO−*) for HCOO− production. Regardless of the mechanism, the measured increases in selectivity for HCOO− production show that Au and Pd in AuPd alloys can act synergistically during the CO2RR.
Total current efficiencies for CO, HCOO−, and H2 are plotted in stacked column graphs to investigate the effect of bulk Pd composition on the faradaic efficiency of WEs (Fig. 8). All compositions which contain Pd have faradaic efficiencies below 100% indicating that part of the current is driving another process. Similar to what was concluded from CV measurements, this current was attributed to hydrogen intercalation into Pd sites within the lattice. A general trend of decreasing total faradaic efficiency with increasing Pd composition is observed at all voltages. This trend is consistent with hydrogen intercalation losses because the maximum amount of absorbed hydrogen should scale with the total number of Pd atoms in the thin film. However, the total charge unaccounted for by our product detection methods exceeds the maximum hydrogen absorption capacity of Pd assuming an electrode area of 5.87 cm2, a density of 12.02 g cm−2, and a film thickness of 100 nm.26 Additional charge could be going towards diffusion of hydrogen through AuPd alloys and absorption in Ti, which can form a stable hydride phase at reducing potentials.27 While nearly 30% of the charge is lost to hydrogen absorption in Pd thin films, faradaic efficiencies are ∼10–20% higher than those reported by Hori et al. for polycrystalline Pd electrodes.28 Therefore, we suggest that using a thin film geometry for AuPd alloys could be advantageous for increasing the total faradaic efficiency because there are fewer sites for hydrogen intercalation.
 Fig. 8  Total faradaic efficiencies of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. AuPd alloys show a general trend of decreasing total faradaic efficiencies with increasing Pd composition. 
Since Au1−yPdy WEs have very different total current densities (Fig. 6B), it is useful to compare partial current densities to compare the rates of formation for each product. For each product, partial current densities are compared to the corresponding current efficiencies as a function of voltage (Fig. 9). Partial current densities were calculated at each potential by multiplying the total current density by the current efficiency for each product. All AuPd alloys are significantly better than pure Au or Pd at producing HCOO− (Fig. 9) which matches what is observed with the current efficiencies. Sample y = 0.45 produces the most HCOO− with a partial current density of 0.33 mA cm−2 at −1.00 V vs. RHE, which is 17 times greater than the partial current density that Au produces at the same voltage (recall that pure Pd produces no detectable HCOO− in our study). Amongst the Au1−yPdy alloys, a trend is observed that partial current densities for CO production decrease with increasing Pd composition, similar to that observed with current efficiency. In addition, Au1−yPdy WEs show similar Tafel slopes suggesting that the mechanism of the CO2RR to CO is similar for all compositions. Surprisingly, Pd produces lower partial current densities for H2 than the alloys although it has a higher current efficiency for H2. As discussed in the previous section on current efficiency, one reason for the lower partial current densities could be CO poisoning of active sites29 since Pd binds CO stronger than Au does.10 Since the strong ligand effect for AuPd alloys will weaken the binding energy of CO to Pd, and there are fewer total Pd sites on the surface,10 as the Au composition increases the total current density of the alloy samples should be less affected by CO poisoning. This trend is reflected in the total current densities of Au1−yPdy alloys since they increase with Au composition (Fig. 6B). While an increase in HCOO− indicates that there is synergy between Au and Pd in AuPd alloys, the absence of CO2 reduction products which require greater than 2e− indicates that there is still a bottleneck to produce such products. Recent theoretical work suggests that Pd's rate-limiting step for the CO2RR to CH4 is the conversion of CO* to CHO*.7 Therefore, once CO* is formed on the surface it is difficult to reduce on Pd active sites. Since only 2e− products were detected from AuPd alloys in this voltage range, our results imply that the conversion of CO* to CHO* is still a limiting step to further reduce CO2. While it was expected that alloying with Pd would increase the binding energy of CO to Au, these results suggest that facile CO* desorption from Au sites in AuPd alloys could still be hindering the formation of larger multi e− products.
 Fig. 9  A comparison of current efficiencies and partial current densities of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. Similar to trends with current efficiency, Au-rich alloys have the highest partial current densities for CO. Although Pd has the highest current efficiency for H2, it has the lowest partial current density for H2. All alloy compositions have higher partial current densities for HCOO− than either pure Au or Pd. 
After CO2 reduction, samples were examined to observe any influence of electrochemical testing on the morphology, structure, and composition of the Au1−yPdy alloys. For comparison, electrochemically “Tested” regions were compared to “Untested” regions of the sample that were not exposed to electrolyte. SEM images from both regions show that testing does not cause any roughening or sintering of the grains (Fig. 10A and B). Quantitative analysis using AFM confirms that the RMS roughness of a representative AuPd sample is similar after electrochemical testing (Fig. S3†). Therefore, we suggest that samples maintain similar surface areas during testing and are comparable to one another in electrochemically active surface area. No shift in diffraction angle is observed in XRD patterns for the FCC (111) peak of Au1−yPdy (Fig. 10C), indicating it is unlikely that large amounts of Au or Pd ions are leaching into solution from corrosion. While hydrogen intercalation should cause lattice expansion, after the measurement hydrogen desorbs from the lattice so there is no shift in diffraction angle. In addition, no phase separation of AuPd is observed in the X-ray diffractogram after testing. Therefore, strain from lattice expansion and contraction caused by hydrogen intercalation has little effect on the bulk phase purity of AuPd alloys, so pre-reaction measurements provide a good indication of the distribution of bulk Au and Pd atoms during catalysis.
 Fig. 10  SEM images and XRD measurements of AuPd alloys before and after electrochemical testing. SEM images of (A) “Untested” and (B) “Tested” regions of an AuPd WE show that the morphology is unchanged. (C) XRD spectra show no changes in the FCC (111) peak of AuPd between the “Untested” (black) and “Tested” (red) regions, indicating that the samples are stable in composition and phase. 
Unlike the FCC (111) peak of AuPd, the hexagonal (002) peak of Ti does shift to a smaller diffraction angle (34.1° 2θ) indicating that hydrogen intercalation has a lasting effect on the Ti adhesion layer. To examine changes in surface composition, XPS spectra were collected at three different points in both “Tested” and “Untested” regions to give an average composition with its standard deviation (Table 3). While XRD shows that the bulk composition of AuPd is unchanged, XPS measurements show a clear increase in surface Pd composition after testing. Adsorption-induced surface segregation of Pd was observed by Gao et al. from CO oxidation studies on an AuPd (100) surface in vacuum.10 Similarly, we suggest that the strong binding energy of CO to Pd sites is the driving force for surface segregation during electrochemical CO2 reduction.
Table 3 XPS of AuPd alloys before and after electrochemical testing. An increase in Pd surface composition is observed after testing




Sample
Untested
Tested




Au (%)
70.7 ± 0.1
62.7 ± 2.4


Pd (%)
29.3 ± 0.1
37.3 ± 2.4




Conclusions
In conclusion, AuPd alloy thin films were synthesized using an e-beam co-deposition method. SEM images show that all alloy compositions have comparably flat morphologies, indicating that samples have similar surface areas. Bulk alloy composition tuning was accomplished by in situ deposition rate monitoring and is shown by lattice constant changes in X-ray diffractograms. Elemental mapping using STEM EDS shows that Au and Pd are distributed uniformly on the nanometer scale. XPS measurements indicate the surface compositions follow a similar trend as the bulk composition, although AuPd surfaces are slightly Au-rich compared to the bulk, likely due to the lower surface energy of Au compared to Pd. These measurements demonstrate the utility of e-beam co-deposition for the synthesis of uniform alloy thin films with control of the composition. We suggest that the versatility of this PVD technique could be used to synthesize not just AuPd but a large library of materials for fundamental studies.
To examine the effect of composition on the activity, selectivity, and stability of AuPd thin films, AuPd WEs were analyzed using standard electrochemical techniques and product detection methods. The alloys were found to produce only the 2e− products H2, CO, and HCOO−. Interestingly, all AuPd WEs in this study were clearly more active and selective for HCOO− production than either pure Au or Pd. Post reaction characterization of the AuPd alloys reveals that they are stable in bulk composition before and after electrochemical testing, although adsorption-induced surface segregation of Pd is observed likely due to its strong binding energy to CO. Our results indicate that Au and Pd act synergistically in AuPd alloys, engendering new behavior not predicted by a simple addition of its components.
Experimental
Double-sided polished 1/16′′ × 6′′ × 6′′ quartz plates (GM Associates, Inc.) were cut into large (1.06′′ × 2.01′′) and small (0.49′′ × 0.49′′) pieces using a K&S 775 wafer dicing saw. Kapton tape was used to mount 4 large pieces and 8 small pieces onto the polished side of a Si wafer. Co-deposition was conducted inside a Temescal VES2550 evaporator equipped with 2 e-guns to simultaneously evaporate Au and Pd. An Inficon IC/5 programmable controller is coupled with two QCMs to monitor the deposition rate of each source. The chamber is equipped with a load-lock, allowing for deposition of many alloy compositions with a quick turnaround. During a typical deposition, a quartz-mounted Si wafer was placed into the load-lock and pumped down before lowering into the main chamber. First, a Ti adhesion layer was deposited onto quartz using an initial rate of 0.5 Å s−1 for 10 nm and 2.0 Å s−1 for the final 40 nm. Next, pocket rotation was used to switch between the Ti and Au source to keep the chamber under vacuum and ensure a clean interface for the deposition process. Au and Pd sources were calibrated for cross-talk by evaporating the metals at a desired rate and determining the influence of each source on the other source's QCM. Therefore, all samples have a calibration layer ∼10 nm thick consisting of a Au-rich and Pd-rich phase. A total deposition rate of 2.0 Å s−1 was used to deposit ∼100 nm of Au1−yPdy alloy on top of the calibration layer. Finally, samples were removed from the load-lock and characterized.
Small quartz samples were used for all materials characterization besides the comparison of “Untested” and “Tested” regions. SEM images were taken using a FEI XL30 field emission scanning electron microscope. XRD patterns were taken with a PANanalytical X'Pert diffractometer, which used an incident Cu Kα radiation of 1.54056 Å. Spectra were collected on samples fixed onto a flat glass slide in locked coupled mode with a goniometer resolution of 0.001°. The unmasked beam size was large enough to cover an entire small quartz sample. A 5 mm mask was used to reduce the slit size of the beam to increase spatial resolution for “Untested” and “Tested” measurements on large quartz samples. XPS spectra were taken using a SSI S-Probe XPS spectrometer, which used an incident Al Kα radiation of 1486 eV. Survey scans were acquired over a binding energy range of 0–600 eV with a spot size of 1000 × 250 μm and a resolution of approximately 1 eV. Samples were cut with a Ga+ ion beam and bonded to a Cu TEM grid with Pt using a FEI Helios NanoLab 600i DualBeam FIB/SEM equipped with an Omniprobe AutoProbe 200 Nano-Manipulator. Cross-section TEM and DF STEM images were taken using a FEI Tecnai G2 F20 X-Twin field emission microscope operated at 200 kV. EDS spectra were collected using an EDAX super ultra-thin window analyzer with a 0.3 sr EDS solid angle.
Samples were loaded into a previously described compression cell geometry designed to maximize the WE area (5.89 cm2) to electrolyte volume ratio.6 An anion exchange membrane (Selemion AMV, AGC Inc.) was used to separate the WE (Au1−yPdy) and CE (Pt) compartments. Aluminum foil was used to make top and bottom contacts to the WE and CE, respectively. After cell assembly, 10.0 ml and 11.0 ml of 0.1 M KHCO3 (Sigma-Aldrich, 99.99% metals basis) were pipetted into the WE and CE compartments, respectively. CO2 (5.0 N, Praxair) was bubbled through the cell at 20 sccm using a mass flow controller (MKS Instruments) to regulate the flow rate. The CO2 saturated KHCO3 electrolyte equilibrates at a pH of 6.8. Electrochemical data was collected using a three electrode configuration (Ag/AgCl reference, Accumet) with a Biologic VMP3 potentiostat capable of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Potentiostatic EIS measurements indicated that a frequency range of 0.5–2.5 kHz were appropriate to measure the uncompensated solution resistance (Ru) of the cell. For all electrochemical measurements, 85% and 15% of Ru were compensated using a ZIR measurement with the potentiostat and post-correction, respectively.6 Typical values of Ru ranged from 13–15 ohms. A typical test in EC-Lab consisted of: ZIR at VOC, a CV between −0.75 to −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl beginning at VOC using a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, ZIR at the CA potential (VCA), a CA at VCA for 1 h interrupted every 3 min for a ZIR measurement (19 times total), ZIR at VCA, and a final CV between −0.75 to −1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl beginning at VCA.
During CA measurements, 1 ml of reactor exhaust was injected into a GC (SRI 8610C) at 5, 23, 41, and 59 min to analyze gas phase products at each voltage. The average current density for the 1 min before each GC injection was used for analysis. All injections were used to obtain average current efficiencies and partial current densities over the course of one hour. Liquid phase products were analyzed after electrochemical testing by using solvent suppression 1D 1H NMR (600 MHz, Varian Inova). A 700 μl aliquot of post measurement electrolyte was mixed with 35 μl of internal standard (10 mM DMSO and 50 mM phenol solution) for quantification. Further measurement and product quantification details can be found within a publication by K. P. Kuhl et al.6
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by the Department of Energy, Laboratory Directed Research and Development funding, under contract DE-AC02-76SF00515, as part of the SUNCAT Center for Interface Science and Catalysis, supported by the U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science. We thank the Global Climate Energy Project (GCEP) for supporting the CO2 electrolysis studies, as well as the UCSB Nanofabrication Facility, Stanford Nanofabrication Facility, Stanford NMR Facility, and Stanford Nanocharacterization Laboratory for use of their shared facilities for synthesis, microscopy and spectroscopy.
References
B. K. Sovacool, P. Parenteau, M. V. Ramana, S. V. Valentine, M. Z. Jacobson, M. A. Delucchi and M. Diesendorf, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 6715–6717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Graves, S. D. Ebbesen, M. Mogensen and K. S. Lackner, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 1–23 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .

          Y. Hori, in Modern Aspects of Electrochemistry, ed. C. G. Vayenas, R. E. White and M. E. GamboaAldeco, Springer, New York,  2008, vol. 42, pp. 89–189 Search PubMed .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7050–7059 Search PubMed .
A. A. Peterson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Norskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, Y. L. Wang and D. W. Goodman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14993–15000 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ferrando, J. Jellinek and R. L. Johnston, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 845–910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. M. Yan, H. L. Wang, Y. Ping and Q. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12721–12725 RSC .
Y. Ohkubo, M. Shibata, S. Kageyama, S. Seino, T. Nakagawa, J. Kugai, H. Nitani and T. A. Yamamoto, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 2142–2150 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Hou, N. A. Dehm and R. W. J. Scott, J. Catal., 2008, 253, 22–27 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hirano, K. Enokida, K. Okazaki, S. Kuwabata, H. Yoshida and T. Torimoto, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 7286–7294 RSC .
H. Okamoto and T. B. Massalski, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 1985, 6, 229–235 CrossRef CAS .
T. F. Jaramillo, A. Ivanovskaya and E. W. McFarland, J. Comb. Chem., 2002, 4, 17–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. M. Haynes, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 94th edn, Taylor & Francis Limited,  2013 Search PubMed .
J. L. Rousset, J. C. Bertolini and P. Miegge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 4947–4957 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Yi, K. Luo, T. Wei and D. W. Goodman, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18535–18540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Paglieri and J. D. Way, Sep. Purif. Methods, 2002, 31, 1–169 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Sonwane, J. Wilcox and Y. H. Ma, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125 Search PubMed .
Y. Sakamoto, S. Hirata and H. Nishikawa, J. Less-Common Met., 1982, 88, 387–395 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Peterson, F. Abild-Pedersen, F. Studt, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Norskov, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1311–1315 Search PubMed .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Norskov, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605, 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Manchester, A. San-Martin and J. M. Pitre, J. Phase Equilib., 1994, 15, 62–83 CrossRef CAS .

          M. J. Donachie, Titanium: A Technical Guide, ASM International,  2000 Search PubMed .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39, 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
S. Taguchi, A. Aramata and M. Enyo, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1994, 372, 161–169 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04863jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of AuPd thin films, revealing their morphologies. The samples are ordered (A–I) from pure Au to pure Pd, showing that all AuPd thin films are uniform in morphology. Magnified images in the insets show that the films are comprised of nanometer sized domains.	 

 	Fig. 2  Bright-field TEM cross-section images of a thin film multilayer. (A) A bright-field TEM image shows the cross-section of a representative multilayer thin film (sample F). HRTEM images of the (B) Ti and (C) Au1−yPdy thin films show Moiré fringes, indicating that the layers are polycrystalline.	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffractograms of AuPd thin films. Normalized XRD patterns show an increase in lattice constant with Au composition. The vertical lines correspond to the peak positions and predicted powder diffraction intensities for FCC Au (111) [black], HCP Ti (002) and (101) [red], and FCC Pd (111) [violet].	 

A	4.076	1.00	0.00
B	4.062	0.93	0.07
C	4.028	0.75	0.25
D	3.990	0.55	0.45
E	3.939	0.28	0.72
F	3.923	0.20	0.80
G	3.905	0.11	0.89
H	3.896	0.06	0.94
I	3.885	0.00	1.00

 	Fig. 4  STEM EDS mapping of a representative AuPd thin film (sample F). (A) A DF STEM image shows the region (blue) where an EDS line scan was conducted from left to right. (B) The corresponding EDS signals for Ti-K, Au-L, and Pd-L show the spatial distribution of layers. (C and D) EDS maps collected from the region in blue show that Au and Pd are distributed homogeneously in AuPd alloys on a nanometer scale.	 

 	Fig. 5  A comparison between surface and bulk compositions of Au1−yPdy alloys. (A) XPS spectra show a gradual increase in Pd (3p and 3d) peak intensities and decrease in Au (4p, 4d, 4f) peak intensities as the bulk Pd composition is increased. (B) A comparison of bulk and surface compositions measured by XRD and XPS, respectively, show that AuPd alloys are slightly Au-rich on the surface.	 

5	5.5 [30.4]	12.5 [69.6]	82.1
15	6.4 [27.2]	17.1 [72.9]	76.6
25	7.3 [26.4]	20.2 [73.6]	72.5
35	7.5 [25.5]	22.0 [74.5]	70.5
90	10.3 [22.5]	35.5 [77.5]	54.2

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical measurements of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. (A) The first reductive sweeps of CV scans (50 mV s−1) for different Au1−yPdy compositions show peaks attributed to hydrogen intercalation for Pd containing alloys. The peaks shift to more cathodic potentials with increasing Au composition indicating that it becomes more difficult to intercalate hydrogen. (B) Average current densities plotted for one hour CA scans show a decrease in total activity with increasing Pd composition.	 

 	Fig. 7  Current efficiencies of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. All compositions make the CO2RR product CO (black). HCOO− (blue) is detected from all catalyst systems except for Pd. Samples show a decrease in CO current efficiency with increasing Pd composition. Pure Pd shows the least current efficiency for CO2 reduction products and is the most selective for making H2 (red). All Au1−yPdy alloys are more selective for HCOO− than either pure Au or Pd, indicating that there is synergy between Au and Pd sites on the surface.	 

 	Fig. 8  Total faradaic efficiencies of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. AuPd alloys show a general trend of decreasing total faradaic efficiencies with increasing Pd composition.	 

 	Fig. 9  A comparison of current efficiencies and partial current densities of Au1−yPdy alloys in a CO2 purged environment. Similar to trends with current efficiency, Au-rich alloys have the highest partial current densities for CO. Although Pd has the highest current efficiency for H2, it has the lowest partial current density for H2. All alloy compositions have higher partial current densities for HCOO− than either pure Au or Pd.	 

 	Fig. 10  SEM images and XRD measurements of AuPd alloys before and after electrochemical testing. SEM images of (A) “Untested” and (B) “Tested” regions of an AuPd WE show that the morphology is unchanged. (C) XRD spectra show no changes in the FCC (111) peak of AuPd between the “Untested” (black) and “Tested” (red) regions, indicating that the samples are stable in composition and phase.	 

Au (%)	70.7 ± 0.1	62.7 ± 2.4
Pd (%)	29.3 ± 0.1	37.3 ± 2.4
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04863j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
