Synergistic ligand exchange and UV curing of PbS quantum dots for effective surface passivation   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR07854A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR07854A
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22832-22840Synergistic ligand exchange and UV curing of PbS quantum dots for effective surface passivation†

        
          
            Hadi 
            Tavakoli Dastjerdi
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel 
            Prochowicz
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Pankaj 
            Yadav
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Mohammad Mahdi 
            Tavakoli
          
        
      *d
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: haditavakoli.nano@gmail.com; hadit@mit.edu
bInstitute of Physical Chemistry, Polish Academy of Sciences, Kasprzaka 44/52, 01-224 Warsaw, Poland
cDepartment of Solar Energy, School of Technology, Pandit Deendayal Petroleum University, Gandhinagar-382 007, Gujarat, India
dDepartment of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: mtavakol@mit.edu
Received 
      11th September 2019
    , Accepted 1st November 2019First published on 1st November 2019AbstractLead sulfide (PbS) quantum dots (QDs) are promising materials in solution-processed photovoltaic (PV) devices due to their tunable bandgap and low-cost processing. Replacing the long oleic acid ligands of the as-synthesized QDs with shorter ligands is a key step for making functional QD PVs with correctly tuned band energies and reduced non-radiative recombination centers. In this work, we study the effect of ultraviolet (UV) treatment of PbS QD layers on the QD surface states during ligand exchange. We demonstrate that this straightforward approach effectively reduces the surface trap states and passivates the surface of QDs. We find that UV treatment reduces the density of hydroxyl groups attached to the QD surface and improves the bonding of short ligands to the QD surface. Multiple analyses show the reduction of nonradiative recombination centers for the UV-treated sample. The power conversion efficiency (PCE) of our optimized PbS QD device reached 10.7% (vs. 9% for the control device) and was maintained above 10% after 230 h of constant illumination.
Introduction
PbS QD solar cells have led to many research studies in the field of thin film PVs over the past few years.1–9 This is thanks to their noticeable air-stability, size-dependent band gaps, solution processability and impressive certified PCE exceeding 12%.10–16 Towards developing industry-compatible large-scale device fabrication techniques, some of the more recent studies have been focused on facile deposition methods such as blade coating using QD inks.17–21 Currently, hot injection is the dominant synthesis approach for the preparation of PbS QD films, which mostly involves the use of oleic acid (OA) for surface passivation due to its great steric stability and uniformity in size distribution. However, coating by long chain OA ligands makes the PbS QD layers less conductive. Thus, the OA ligands are commonly replaced with short chain organic molecules such as benzenedithiol (BDT), 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT) and tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) during the ligand exchange process15,22–24 leading to QD films with high carrier mobility. Such surface passivating ligands control many of the fundamental properties of PbS QDs such as their energy band levels, stability and density of surface states, which are considered as nonradiative recombination centers and are therefore detrimental to PV performance.14,15,25 It has been shown that following the QD synthesis, the native hydroxyl groups (OH−) could attach to the surface of PbS QDs on the (111) facets and improve their stability during the synthesis.26 However, they can also act as surface traps leading to degradation in PV performance.14 The employment of controlled post-annealing of QD films reduces the density of hydroxyl groups on the surface and improves the PV performance up to 9.6%.14 The development of new strategies to reduce the amount of surface traps and improve the charge transfer is still desirable for further enhancement in device performance and stability.
Here, we report on a facile strategy to suppress the density of QD surface states including hydroxyl groups through ultraviolet (UV) light treatment of PbS QD films during the ligand exchange process. QDs have a large surface to volume ratio and their relatively large exposed surface area is full of non radiative recombination centers. Therefore an impactful passivation technique should effectively and ideally uniformly target the QD surface. In this regard, UV illumination is an effective tool that can target such carrier trap states/species on deposited QD thin films. This procedure reduces the trap-assisted recombination and effectively passivates the surface of PbS QDs. As a result, our optimized solar cells yield a high PCE of 10.7% (vs. 9% for the control device) and an open-circuit voltage (VOC) of 630 mV (vs. 610 mV for the control device).
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a and b show the schematic illustration and cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the PbS QD PV device consisting of an indium-doped tin oxide (ITO) cathode electrode, a ZnO electron transport layer (ETL), tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI)-capped PbS, 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT)-capped PbS and a Au anode electrode. A 30 nm polycrystalline ZnO layer was initially deposited on the pre-patterned ITO/glass substrates via the sol–gel process (see the Experimental section for more details). Using the layer-by-layer technique, PbS QDs were deposited on the ZnO-coated surface. For the first 10 layers of QDs, the OA ligands were exchanged using the solution of TBAI in methanol. The final two layers of PbS QDs were treated with the solution of EDT in acetonitrile (see the Experimental section for more details). After every ligand exchange step, the resulting films were exposed to UV irradiation for different time durations, i.e., 30 s, 60 s and 150 s followed by a rinsing step (Fig. 1c). A reference device without UV exposure was also fabricated for comparison purpose. Finally, the Au electrode was thermally evaporated using a shadow mask. The employed QDs in this study show the first absorption peak at 953 nm in solution (Fig. 1d).
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the PbS QD PV device structure. (b) FIB-milled cross-sectional SEM image of the QD PV device (scale bar is 200 nm). (c) Schematic of the fabrication steps for reference and UV-treated PbS QD PV devices. (d) PL and absorption spectra of PbS QDs. (e) J–V characteristics of the representative devices under different UV exposure durations measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and AM 1.5G conditions. The statistics of PV parameters for the six devices are shown in Table S1, ESI.† 

Fig. 1e and Table S1 (ESI†) show the current density–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the representative PVs, measured under simulated sun under 100 mW cm−2 and AM 1.5 MG conditions. Compared to the reference device (without UV treatment after the ligand exchange step) with a PCE of 9%, the devices exposed to 30 s and 60 s UV irradiation show a monotonically improved metric for all PV parameters, leading to maximum PCEs of 9.9% and 10.7%, respectively. We attribute the strikingly improved PV metrics of the UV-exposed devices to the noticeable reduction of hydroxyl groups on the QD surface (vide infra). The prolonged exposure to UV light for 150 s resulted in the degradation of PV performance to 9.6% (see Table S1, ESI†). Longer exposure to UV may result in surface drying and thus increased the difficulty of removing the excess ligand solution from the surface during the rinsing step.
XPS measurements were performed on PbS-TBAI and PbS-EDT films with and without 60 s UV exposure. Fig. 2a shows the S 2p peaks of the reference and UV-exposed EDT-treated QD films. The peak located at ∼160.5 eV corresponds to the sulphur signal in PbS, while the other peaks are attributed to bound (brown curves) and unbound thiolate ligands (the red dashed curve). We observed the reduction of unbound thiolates accompanied by increased bound thiolates as a result of exposure of the films to UV irradiation. The presence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the PbS-EDT films can be observed from the collected O 1s spectra, as shown in Fig. 2b. The O 1s peak at ∼531 eV is associated with the hydroxyl group, while the peaks at 531.2 eV and 529 eV correspond to the carboxylate group (oleate ligands) and Pb–O, respectively. We found that the O 1s spectrum of the UV-treated EDT-exchanged film shows noticeably suppressed peak intensity for Pb–OH bonding. We speculate that UV illumination likely deprotonates the unbound thiolate ligands which then react with the OH− groups forming water; a similar mechanism was previously reported for enhanced passivation upon post-annealing of the fabricated PbS QD PV device.14
 Fig. 2  XPS spectra of the reference and UV-treated (60 s) PbS QDs exchanged with EDT: signals from (a) S 2p and (b) O 1s spectra of the reference and UV-treated PbS-EDT layers. 
In addition, Fig. 3a shows the Pb 4f core level spectra of TBAI-exchanged PbS QDs of the reference and UV-exposed films. The measured Pb 4f doublet corresponds to PbS QDs and the two shoulder peaks at ∼139.6 eV and 144.1 eV can be associated with the Pb–I bonds.27,28 Compared to the reference PbS-TBAI film, the UV-treated PbS-TBAI film shows higher peak intensities for Pb–I bonds, which suggests the increased density of the attached TBAI ligands on the PbS QD surface upon UV exposure. Similarly, the O 1s spectrum of the PbS-TBAI film shows that the Pb–OH bond peak (at 531.5 eV) has lower intensity for the UV-treated film compared to the reference sample (Fig. 3b). The simultaneous decrease of the OH peak intensity (observed from the O 1s spectrum) and increase of the Pb–I peak intensity (observed from the Pb 4f spectrum) as a result of UV-treatment suggest that the OH− groups attached to the QD surface are possibly replaced with iodide ligands, leading to improved surface passivation. Compared to the 60 s-UV-exposed thin film, the 150 s-UV exposed film shows a weaker Pb–I bond (Fig. S1, ESI†), likely due to the fact that longer UV exposure can lead to surface drying and increased the difficulty of ligand attachment to the QD surface.
 Fig. 3  XPS spectra of the reference and UV-treated (60 s) PbS QDs exchanged with TBAI: signals from (a) Pb 4f and (b) O 1s spectra of the reference and UV-treated PbS-TBAI layers. 
To validate this point, the doping concentrations of PbS-TBAI and PbS-EDT films with and without exposure to UV during ligand exchange were extracted from Mott–Schottky capacitance–voltage measurements (Fig. S2 and S3, Note 1 and Table S2, ESI†). The doping concentrations of PbS-TBAI and PbS-EDT films increase from 1.96 × 1017 cm−3 and 3.07 × 1017 cm−3 for reference samples to 3.12 × 1017 cm−3 and 4.42 × 1017 cm−3 for UV-treated films, respectively.

Fig. 4a shows the external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra of the reference and 60 s-UV exposed devices and their corresponding integrated short-circuit current densities (JSC). The EQE results are in good agreement with the J–V measurements, where the JSC of the PbS QD device increased from 27.4 mA cm−2 for the reference to 28.7 mA cm−2 for the UV-treated device. The representative semi-log dark J–V characteristics of both the devices are shown in Fig. 4b. We attribute the noticeably lower leakage current of the UV-treated device to the reduced nonradiative recombination centers on the QD surface as a result of improved surface passivation. Moreover, the UV-treated device shows lower series resistance and higher shunt resistance than the reference device (Table S3, ESI†). The increased shunt resistance is likely due to the improved QD surface passivation after UV treatment that reduces the trap-assisted recombination. To evaluate the carrier recombination of the corresponding devices, the variations of VOCversus illuminated light intensity were measured according to the following relationship: , where q is the elementary charge, n is the diode ideality factor, T is the temperature and k is the Boltzmann constant.29,30 In general, typical PbS QD PVs show n values in the range of 1.5–2.31–33 The n values of the representative devices were extracted by fitting the VOC-light intensity curves as shown in Fig. 4c. The UV-treated PbS QD device shows an n value of 1.32, which is much lower than that of the reference device (1.75). The observed reduction in the n value indicates that the density of nonradiative recombination centers decreased as a result of improved QD surface passivation upon UV exposure. Moreover, we measured the electroluminescence (EL) spectra of the resulting devices at V = 1 (V) bias and found that the EL peak has higher intensity after UV treatment indicating the improved QD surface passivation (Fig. S5, ESI†). The increase in the built-in potential of the UV-treated devices is also confirmed by capacitance–voltage measurements (Fig. S4, ESI†). During device fabrication, it is possible for some of the irradiated UV photons to pass the QD layer and impact the underlying ZnO layer. However, given the high UV absorption of PbS QDs and the relatively short duration of UV exposure, we believe it is unlikely that the ZnO layer properties could be significantly affected.
 Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of the reference and UV-treated devices. (b) Semi-log dark J–V characteristics of the representative reference and UV-treated devices. (c) VOC as a function of light intensity for reference and UV-treated devices. (d) Transient photovoltage decay measurements of the reference and UV-treated devices under open-circuit conditions at 1 sun light bias. (e) Time-resolved PL decay of TBAI-exchanged PbS QD films with and without UV treatment. (f) Cole–Cole diagrams of impedance spectroscopy measurements at 0 (V) bias under dark conditions for the corresponding devices. The simple equivalent circuit of the PbS QD PV device is shown in the inset. The capacitor component and RS represent the energy storing capability of the photogenerated carriers and the device series resistance, respectively. 
To further validate the positive effect of UV treatment on film quality, we also performed transient photovoltage (TPV) characterization on both sets of devices as shown in Fig. 4d. Compared to the reference device (τ = 95.4 μs), the UV-treated device showed a noticeably slower voltage decay (τ = 116.7 μs), which is well-described by the effect of UV treatment on the enhanced VOC of the UV-treated device. Fig. 4e shows the time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) spectra of the reference and UV–treated PbS-TBAI films (for the TRPL of UV-treated EDT and fitting parameters of the corresponding films, see Table S4 and Fig. S6, ESI.†). In the case of the PbS-TBAI film, the carrier lifetime increased from 149 ps to 288 ps after UV treatment, which confirms the reduced density of QD surface trap states. A similar trend is also observed for the PbS-EDT film, where the EDT ligand exchange process is improved by the applied UV treatment. We believe that the enhanced carrier lifetimes observed from TPV and TRPL are a result of improved QD surface passivation following UV treatment (also confirmed by XPS data). The UV treatment could possibly re-arrange the ligands on the surface of QDs leading to the attachment of initially unbound ligands to the QD surface. Also, the detachment of hydroxyl groups from the QD surface could potentially leave some surface states behind which then can be occupied by desired short ligands during the ligand exchange process and eventually lead to improved QD surface passivation and overall PV performance. To get more information on the carrier recombination within the device, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS)34 measurements were performed and the results are shown in the form of a Cole–Cole plot in Fig. 4f (see the Experimental section for details). The exciton recombination is assessed by “recombination resistance (Rrec)”, which is proportional to the diameters of the semicircles of the Cole–Cole plots. The recombination resistances of the resulting devices measured under dark conditions at 0 V DC bias were extracted from Fig. 4f. The higher recombination resistance for the UV-treated device compared to the reference one is indicative of less carrier recombination likely due to the improved ligand exchange and QD surface passivation after UV treatment.
To assess the impact of UV-treatment during the ligand exchange process on the energy band levels of the exchanged PbS QD films, ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed on TBAI- and EDT-exchanged films without and with UV treatment (see Fig. S7 and S8, ESI†). The energy band diagrams of all the layers were calculated by extracting the Fermi levels and valence bands for the corresponding films (see Fig. S9, S10 and Note 2, ESI†). These results confirm the improved band alignment and facilitate the charge transfer between PbS-EDT/PbS-TBAI layers due to the lower band offset, leading to enhanced PV performance.
The stability measurement for a solar cell is a critical step in determining the scope for commercialization of the devices. As previously reported in the literature, the hydroxyl groups are responsible for the degraded photostability in various organic solar cells.35,36 Post-fabrication thermal annealing and the use of effective ligands for passivation have been shown to reduce the density of hydroxide groups on the QD surface and thereby increase the photostability of QD PVs.14 To evaluate the impact of UV treatment on the photostability of the devices, we performed photostability tests for reference and UV-treated devices under continuous illumination for 300 h in a N2-filled glovebox (Fig. 5). We found that the PCE of the reference cell drops from 9% to 6.3% after 230 h of illumination. In contrast, the PCE of the UV-treated device drops only from 10.6% to 10.2% after 230 h of constant illumination. The evolution of all the PV metrics for both device sets is shown in Fig. 5. These results confirm the remarkable impact of UV treatment during ligand exchange processes on the photostability of PbS QD PVs.
 Fig. 5  Photostability measurement of PbS QD solar cells. Evolution of (a) PCE, (b) VOC, (c) JSC, and, (d) fill factor (FF). The average and standard deviation values were calculated for six devices in each sample. 
Conclusion
In summary, we investigated the effect of UV treatment during thin film fabrication processes on the overall performance and photostability of PbS QD PVs. XPS analysis demonstrated the remarkable reduction of detrimental hydroxyl groups on the surface of QDs after UV treatment, and showed their effective replacement with desired halide and thiolate groups. Further film characterization results revealed longer carrier lifetimes and more favorable energy band alignments for the UV-treated PbS QD films. In contrast to the reference cell, the UV-treated devices showed a significant reduction in the dark saturation current and diode ideality factor. As a result, the optimized PbS QD device showed remarkably enhanced photostabilty after 250 h of constant illumination and an improved performance from 9% to 10.7%.
Experimental section
ZnO thin film preparation
After cleaning the pre-patterned ITO substrates in water, acetone and isopropanol, they were surface treated with oxygen plasma for 2 min (PDC 32G, Harrick Plasma). A 30 nm-thick ZnO layer was deposited on the cleaned substrate via spin-coating of a solution of zinc acetate dihydrate (0.3 M) and ethanolamine (0.3 M) dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol inside a N2 glovebox. The samples were then annealed at 220 °C for 10 min in dry air.
PbS QD device fabrication
PbS colloidal QDs capped with oleic acid (the first exciton absorption peak in solution at 953 nm) were synthesized as previously explained in the literature.37–40 The deposition of PbS QDs on ZnO-coated ITO/glass samples was performed using the layer-by-layer technique. A PbS QD solution of 50 mg mL−1 concentration in octane was spin-coated at 1700 rpm for 20 s, resulting in a QD thickness of ∼25 nm for each layer. For the reference device fabrication, ligand exchange was performed using a solution of TBAI (10 mg mL−1, Sigma Aldrich) in methanol (10 layers) and 1,2-EDT (Sigma Aldrich) in acetonitrile (last 2 layers); after waiting for 30 s for the exchange to happen, the sample was rinsed three times with methanol and acetonitrile, respectively, and spin-dried. The ligand exchange for UV-treated devices included exposure to the UV light source after the 30 s waiting time for ligand exchange followed by solvent rinse (3 times) and spin-drying. For UV irradiation, a UV lamp (Fisher Scientific) with an emission peak wavelength of ∼400 nm was used. The irradiated power density on the device was calculated to be 100 mW cm−2. Spincoating and ligand exchange steps were all performed under ambient conditions. Finally, Au electrodes (Kurt J. Lesker, 99.999%) were deposited using thermal evaporation through a shadow mask (1 Å s−1 and a base pressure of 10−6 Torr). The device area of the fabricated solar cells was 0.054 cm2.
Film characterization
A UV-VIS/NIR spectrometer (Lambda 1050) was used to record the optical absorbance spectrum of QDs. A SpectraPro 300i spectrometer with liquid nitrogen cooled InGaAs detector arrays was used to obtain the PL spectra. XPS spectra were recorded by using an X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (ESCALAB 250Xi, Thermo Fisher Scientific Inc., USA) with Al Kα radiation (hν = 1486.6 eV) as a source. A picosecond pulsed diode laser (EPL-405, with an excitation wavelength of λ = 405 nm and a pulse width of 49 ps) was used for lifetime characterization and the data were fitted using an exponential relationship (I(t) = a exp(−t/τ)), where a and τ are the amplitude and the lifetime, respectively. SEM imaging was performed using an FEI Helios NanoLab 600 at 5 kV. The device cross-section was prepared by Ga focused ion beam (FIB) milling (at 30 kV) with the same tool. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was performed in an Omicron ultrahigh vacuum system using the He I line (21.2 eV) of a helium discharge lamp to monitor the variations of the valence bands and Fermi levels of different films.
Device characterization
Current–voltage characterization was performed in a N2-filled glovebox using a semiconductor device analyzer (Agilent Technologies, B1500A). A150 W xenon arc-lamp (Newport 96000) with an AM1.5G filter was employed as the solar simulator illumination source (100 mW cm−2). The measured devices were initially light-soaked under illumination for 5–10 min before J–V characterization. EQE measurements were carried out using a 250 (W) tungsten halogen lamp source equipped with an Oriel Cornerstone 130 monochromator. To obtain the integrated photocurrent densities, the product of the EQE and the AM1.5G spectra over the wavelength range of 370–1100 nm was calculated. EL spectra were recorded on the same setup as for the PL characterization with a 2400 Keithley sourcemeter. A Tektronix TDS 3054B oscilloscope equipped with a pulse laser light source emitting at 532 nm was used for transient photovoltage decay measurements under light bias provided by a solar simulator. To perform light intensity dependence measurements, a series of neutral density filters were placed between the light source and the device under test. The impedance spectra were recorded using a Solartron analyzer by applying varied AC signals (1 Hz to 1 MHz range). Low AC oscillating amplitudes were used (20 mV, rms), to maintain the linearity of the response. The capacitance–voltage measurements were recorded using a Keithley 4200-CVU tool and a probe station (100 mV AC signal scanning in the −1 to 1 V range at a frequency of 50 kHz).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was in part supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) of Canada (award#: PDF-487850-2016). M. M. T. would like to acknowledge the Research Laboratory of Electronics (RLE) at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. D. P. acknowledges the financial support from the HOMING program of the Foundation for Polish Science co-financed by the European Union under the European Regional Development Fund (POIR.04.04.00-00-5EE7/18-00).
References
Z.-Z. Luo, S. Hao, S. Cai, T. P. Bailey, G. Tan, Y. Luo, I. Spanopoulos, C. Uher, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gao, A. F. Fidler and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8185 CrossRef .
G. H. Carey, L. Levina, R. Comin, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Dastjerdi, R. Tavakoli, P. Yadav, D. Prochowicz, M. Saliba and M. M. Tavakoli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26047–26052 CrossRef .
M. Liu, O. Voznyy, R. Sabatini, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, R. Munir, A. H. Balawi, X. Lan, F. Fan, G. Walters, A. R. Kirmani, S. Hoogland, F. Laquai, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 258 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lan, O. Voznyy, F. P. García de Arquer, M. Liu, J. Xu, A. H. Proppe, G. Walters, F. Fan, H. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Dastjerdi, D. Prochowicz, P. Yadav and M. M. Tavakoli, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 3128–3134 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, A. Simchi, Z. Fan and H. Aashuri, Chem. Commun., 2015, 52, 323 RSC .
J. W. Jo, Y. Kim, J. M. Choi, F. P. G. de Arquer, G. Walters, B. Sun, O. Ouellette, J. W. Kim, A. H. Proppe, R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Fan, J. X. Xu, C. S. Tan, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703627 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, M. H. Mirfasih, S. Hasanzadeh, H. Aashuri and A. Simchi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 12086–12092 RSC .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. Aashuri, A. Simchi and Z. Fan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 24412 RSC .
Y. Cao, A. Stavrinadis, T. Lasanta, D. So and G. Konstantatos, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16035 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. M. Chuang, P. R. Brown, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, O. Voznyy, M. Liu, A. R. Kirmani, G. Walters, R. Munir, M. Abdelsamie, A. H. Proppe, A. Sarkar, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, M. Wei, B. Sun, M. Liu, O. Ouellette, R. Quintero-Bermudez, J. Li, J. Fan, L. Quan, P. Todorovic, H. Tan, S. Hoogland, S. O. Kelley, M. Stefik, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Tavakoli, A. Simchi and H. Aashuri, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2015, 156, 163 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, V. A. Öberg, J. Du, J. Liu and E. M. Johansson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 354 RSC .
A. R. Kirmani, A. D. Sheikh, M. R. Niazi, M. A. Haque, M. Liu, F. P. G. de Arquer, J. Xu, B. Sun, O. Voznyy, N. Gasparini, D. Baran, T. Wu, E. H. Sargent and A. Amassian, Adv. Mater., 2018, 1801661 CrossRef .
H. Aqoma, M. A. Mubarok, W. T. Hadmojo, E.-H. Lee, T.-W. Kim, T. K. Ahn, S.-H. Oh and S.-Y. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605756 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, F. Che, B. Sun, O. Voznyy, A. Proppe, R. Munir, M. Wei, R. Quintero-Bermudez, L. Hu, S. Hoogland, A. Mandelis, A. Amassian, S. O. Kelley, F. P. G. de Arquer and E. H. Sargent, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1225–1230 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Crisp, D. M. Kroupa, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Miller, J. Zhang, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9945 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhitomirsky, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pradhan, A. Stavrinadis, S. Gupta, S. Christodoulou and G. Konstantatos, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1444 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zherebetskyy, M. Scheele, Y. Zhang, N. Bronstein, C. Thompson, D. Britt, M. Salmeron, P. Alivisatos and L.-W. Wang, Science, 2014, 344, 1380 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abargues, J. Navarro, P. J. Rodriguez-Canto, A. Maulu, J. F. Sanchez-Royo and J. P. Martinez-Pastor, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1978–1987 RSC .
B. S. Kim, J. Hong, B. Hou, Y. Cho, J. I. Sohn, S. Cha and J. M. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 063901 CrossRef .
K. Lu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, L. Han, G. Shi, H. Fang, J. Chen, X. Ye, S. Chen and F. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707572 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Speirs, D. N. Dirin, M. Abdu-Aguye, D. M. Balazs, M. V. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2916 RSC .
M. J. Speirs, D. M. Balazs, H.-H. Fang, L.-H. Lai, L. Protesescu, M. Kovalenko and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 3, 1450 RSC .
S. Pradhan, A. Stavrinadis, S. Gupta, Y. Bi, F. Di Stasio and G. Konstantatos, Small, 2017, 13, 1700598 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Jin, A. Wang, Q. Zhou, Y. Wang and J. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Y. Wang, B. He, W. Li, M. Sulaman, J. Xu, S. Yang, Y. Tang and B. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Razzell-Hollis, J. Wade, W. C. Tsoi, Y. Soon, J. Durrant and J.-S. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20189 RSC .
A. Rivaton, S. Chambon, M. Manceau, J.-L. Gardette, N. Lemaître and S. Guillerez, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2010, 95, 278 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, A. Tayyebi, A. Simchi, H. Aashuri, M. Outokesh and Z. Fan, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 1 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, L.-Y. Chang, S. M. Geyer, D. D. Wanger, M. T. Binda, A. C. Arango, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovič, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3743 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tayyebi, M. M. Tavakoli, M. Outokesh, A. Shafiekhani and A. Simchi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 7382 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tavakoli, H. Aashuri, A. Simchi, S. Kalytchuk and Z. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18886 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr07854aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the PbS QD PV device structure. (b) FIB-milled cross-sectional SEM image of the QD PV device (scale bar is 200 nm). (c) Schematic of the fabrication steps for reference and UV-treated PbS QD PV devices. (d) PL and absorption spectra of PbS QDs. (e) J–V characteristics of the representative devices under different UV exposure durations measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination and AM 1.5G conditions. The statistics of PV parameters for the six devices are shown in Table S1, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 2  XPS spectra of the reference and UV-treated (60 s) PbS QDs exchanged with EDT: signals from (a) S 2p and (b) O 1s spectra of the reference and UV-treated PbS-EDT layers.	 

 	Fig. 3  XPS spectra of the reference and UV-treated (60 s) PbS QDs exchanged with TBAI: signals from (a) Pb 4f and (b) O 1s spectra of the reference and UV-treated PbS-TBAI layers.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) EQE spectra of the reference and UV-treated devices. (b) Semi-log dark J–V characteristics of the representative reference and UV-treated devices. (c) VOC as a function of light intensity for reference and UV-treated devices. (d) Transient photovoltage decay measurements of the reference and UV-treated devices under open-circuit conditions at 1 sun light bias. (e) Time-resolved PL decay of TBAI-exchanged PbS QD films with and without UV treatment. (f) Cole–Cole diagrams of impedance spectroscopy measurements at 0 (V) bias under dark conditions for the corresponding devices. The simple equivalent circuit of the PbS QD PV device is shown in the inset. The capacitor component and RS represent the energy storing capability of the photogenerated carriers and the device series resistance, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photostability measurement of PbS QD solar cells. Evolution of (a) PCE, (b) VOC, (c) JSC, and, (d) fill factor (FF). The average and standard deviation values were calculated for six devices in each sample.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr07854a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
