Recent advances in dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells for solar hydrogen production based on molecular components  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4EE03565H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4EE03565H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 760-775Recent advances in dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells for solar hydrogen production based on molecular components

        
          
            Ze 
            Yu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fei 
            Li
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Licheng 
            Sun
          
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Institute of Artificial Photosynthesis, DUT-KTH Joint Education and Research Center on Molecular Devices, Dalian University of Technology (DUT), Dalian 116024, China
bDepartment of Chemistry, School of Chemical Science and Engineering, KTH Royal Institute of Technology, 100 44 Stockholm, Sweden. E-mail: lichengs@kth.se
Received 
      10th November 2014
    , Accepted 22nd December 2014First published on 22nd December 2014AbstractConceptually new research on dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (DS-PECs), through which solar-driven water splitting to generate solar fuel in the form of hydrogen is realized, has attracted growing interest in the past few years. DS-PECs are based on the configurations of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), but with an aim to drive the two half reactions of water splitting at physically separated two compartments (electrodes) rather than to generate electrical power. Herein, we review some of the recent advances in the design and construction of functional DS-PECs for visible light-driven water splitting together with some comments on the performance of these devices. Future challenges towards the development of more efficient dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical devices are addressed in the end.Ze YuZe Yu received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2012. He then joined Prof. Udo Bach's group as a postdoctoral fellow (2012–2013) at Monash University, Australia. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Dalian University of Technology (DUT), China. His research interests mainly focus on dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical devices and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells.Fei LiFei Li is an associate professor at Dalian University of Technology, China. After his PhD from Dalian University of Technology and a short postdoctoral stay with Prof. Christina Moberg at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, he was an assistant professor at Dalian University of Technology until 2012. His research interests now include the development of efficient water oxidation catalysts and photocatalytic water splitting, with a particular focus on molecular-engineered electrodes and photoelectrodes.Licheng SunProf. Licheng Sun received his PhD in 1990 from the Dalian University of Technology (DUT). He went to Germany as a postdoc at Max-Planck-Institut für Strahlenchemie (now the name has been changed to Max-Planck-Institut für Schemische Energie konversion) with Dr Helmut Görner (1992–1993), and then as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow at Freie Universität Berlin (1993–1995) with Prof. Dr Harry Kurreck. He moved to the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm in 1995 and became an assistant professor in 1997, an associate professor in 1999 (at Stockholm University) and a full professor in 2004 (KTH). He is presently also a distinguished professor in DUT. His research interests cover artificial photosynthesis, molecular catalysts for water oxidation and hydrogen generation, functional devices for total water splitting, dye sensitized, quantum dot/rod sensitized solar cells, and perovskite solar cells. He has published more than 380 peer reviewed papers in the fields of solar cells and solar fuels with total citations of >15000, and an H-index of 63.

Broader context
Solar energy is unarguably the largest exploitable energy resource that potentially can be scaled up to meet our rising energy demands in the coming decades, and to address the environmental issues associated with the combustion of fossil fuels. In view of its intermittency, a very attractive strategy is to directly convert solar energy to storable solar fuels, such as hydrogen, methanol or other hydrocarbon species derived from the reduction of water or carbon dioxide. These solar fuels can be used by the end user when and where they are required. Inspired by the architectures of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (DS-PECs), based on molecular sensitizer functionalized metal oxide semiconductors in association with water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) or hydrogen-evolving catalysts (HECs), are now being designed and tested as promising approaches to generate hydrogen via solar-driven water splitting. In this perspective article, we survey some recent progress on the design and construction of functional DS-PECs based on molecular components for hydrogen generation via visible light-driven water splitting.

1. Introduction
Global energy consumption is estimated to increase at least 2-fold by 2050 relative to the world energy consumption rate of 13.5 terawatt (TW) in 2001,1–3 due to the growth of world population and economic developments. The largest part of our primary energy (more than 80%) is currently provided by fossil fuels.4 However, in addition to the limited reserves of fossil fuels, the combustion of fossil fuels produces notorious green-house gases such as carbon dioxide, which are considered to impose a significant impact on global warming and climate change. The rising energy demand, together with environmental concerns, has raised increasing public awareness that our society must urgently explore alternative, renewable and carbon-neutral energy sources to replace fossil fuels.
Among the various renewable energy sources, solar energy is by far the largest utilisable source that potentially could be scaled up to meet our future energy necessities. The supply of solar energy to our planet is gigantic: 3 × 1024 J per year.5 More solar energy strikes the earth in one hour than all of the energy currently consumed globally by mankind in an entire year, in other words, harvesting less than 0.02% of this solar energy would satisfy our present needs.4 One particularly attractive approach is to convert solar energy directly to storable energy-rich compounds (also known as solar fuels), such as in the form of hydrogen derived from the cleavage of abundant resource of water. Since the combustion of hydrogen only produces water as its product, hydrogen is regarded as the most desirable energy carrier in the future to cut the emissions of green-house gases associated with fossil fuels, and to address the issues of sustainability. A straightforward approach to use solar energy to split water is coupling stand-alone photovoltaic devices (PV) directly to electrolyzers.6–13 The overall solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency is defined as the product of the efficiencies of both the PV and the electrolyzer. High STH efficiencies (over 10%) have been achieved based on the PV–electrolyzer systems.14–16 Very recently, Grätzel and co-workers have combined a perovskite tandem solar cell and a NiFe-based electrolyzer, which yielded a water-splitting photocurrent density of ca. 10 mA cm−2 and a STH of 12.3%.17 Another attractive approach is to integrate the functions of light absorption and the electrolysis of water into a single photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) device, which resembles the natural photosynthesis (NPS) system in nature.
In nature, green plants, algae and cyanobacteria store solar energy in the form of chemical bonds through a NPS system, in which molecular oxygen and energy-rich carbohydrates are produced from water and carbon dioxide driven by sunlight.18–22 A simplified schematic illustration of the NPS process, also known as ‘Z-scheme’ according to the shape of the energy diagram,5 is depicted in Fig. 1. NPS involves two families of protein–cofactor complexes, coded as photosystem I (PSI) and photosystem II (PSII). The first water-splitting half reaction, water oxidation process, occurs in PSII. Solar energy is absorbed by chlorophylls and other pigments of the antenna complexes, and is transferred to the PSII reaction center where charge separation takes place. The excited states of P680, a tetrameric chlorophyll molecule, pump electrons to the acceptor side of PSI through a series of electron transfer reactions, resulting in P680+ with a highly oxidizing potential close to +1.2 V vs. NHE. The P680+ species then drive the oxidation of water molecules at the oxygen-evolving center (OEC), composed of a cluster of four manganese ions and a calcium ion. As described above, the reducing equivalents generated from the P680* are delivered to PSI, where P700 (chlorophyll molecules) are excited by absorption of additional photon energy. The excited states of P700 further transfer electrons through a side electron transport chain to a CO2 reduction center or a proton reduction center consisting of enzymes, known as hydrogenases.23–26 The second half water-splitting reaction is then fulfilled by reducing protons to nature's form of hydrogen, NADPH (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate). Three key elements of NPS therefore can be summarized as follows: (i) light-harvesting by chlorophylls; (ii) spatial charge separation after photoexcitation; (iii) catalytic water oxidation or reduction reactions.
 Fig. 1  Simplified schematic illustration of ‘Z-scheme’ in NPS. Mn: manganese calcium oxide cluster; Tyr: tyrosine; P680: chlorophyll in PSII; P680*: the excited state of P680; Pheo: pheophytin; PC: plastocyanin; P700: chlorophyll in PSI; P700*: the excited state of P700; A0: primary electron acceptor; FNR: ferredoxin nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reductase; NADP: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate. 
Inspired by the design of NPS in nature, photocatalytic or photoelectrochemical water splitting, also referred to artificial photosynthesis (APS), is an especially attractive approach to convert solar energy to chemical energy, i.e., hydrogen. APS is a bio-inspired chemical approach, aiming to emulate the general principles of NPS processes by using much simpler man-made materials. The basic design rule of an APS system should possess all of the three key features of NPS: light-harvesting processes, charge generation and separation processes, as well as catalytic water oxidation and reduction processes. In 1972, Fujishima and Honda demonstrated the feasibility of photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting under ultraviolet (UV) irradiation, using a semiconductor TiO2 anode coupled with a platinum (Pt) cathode.27 The fundamental principle of operation of a PEC cell based on an n-type semiconductor (SC) anode for water splitting is shown in Fig. 2. The photogenerated electrons in the conduction band (CB) migrate through the bulk of the SC and external circuit to the counter electrode, where water molecules are reduced to form hydrogen. On the other hand, the positive holes in the valence band (VB) are used to oxidize water molecules to oxygen. The overall water splitting is thus completed by using sunlight. Since then, a tremendous amount of effort has been devoted to developing efficient photocatalytic water splitting systems, which can be essentially divided into two categories. One approach is to disperse photocatalyst powders directly into a pool of water. The simplicity of this design is beneficial for large-scale future application of such a system. However, the separation of simultaneously produced H2 and O2 constitutes a big challenge. Another approach is the use of semiconductor photoelectrodes, especially those with narrow band-gaps, such as WO3, Fe2O3, BiVO4, etc., in PECs as demonstrated in the seminal work in the early 1970s. In PECs, H2 and O2 are generated at the physically separated cathode and anode, respectively, which allows for ease of collection for H2 gases. Since the seminal report of Fujishima and Honda, significant progress has been made on developing new SC materials and improving the solar water splitting performances, which is beyond the scope of this review. Readers interested in those topics please refer to the fruitful literature studies.28–37
 Fig. 2  Illustrative diagram of a PEC cell for the photo-electrolysis of water based on an n-type TiO2 photoanode. 
The requirements of suitable SC materials are rather stringent in the photocatalyst/PEC systems for light-driven water splitting. Ideally, the CB position should be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (−0.42 V vs. NHE, at pH = 7), whereas the VB position should be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (0.81V vs. NHE, at pH = 7). It means that the minimum band gap of a suitable SC should be at least larger than 1.23 eV, without considering the overpotentials that drive the oxygen and hydrogen evolution reactions. In order to utilise visible light, the band gap of a SC, on the other hand, has to be smaller than 3.0 eV (λ > 400 nm). One dilemma commonly occurring in the research of SC photocatalysts or photoelectrodes is that it is intrinsically difficult to develop an SC oxide that possesses both a sufficiently narrow band gap and suitable energy levels for catalytic reactions simultaneously, thus resulting in either poor absorption characteristic or use of additional undesirable external bias.37 Moreover, it is also intrinsically difficult to fine tune the band levels of these inorganic materials. One effective strategy to extend absorption into the visible light region for wide-band-gap SC oxides (e.g. TiO2) would be to employ molecular photosensitizers that are attached onto the surface of SC oxides, as demonstrated in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs).38–40 In stark contrast to inorganic SC oxides, it is much easier to fine tune the energy levels (lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) and highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO)) of organo–metal complexes and organic dyes through specific modifications of their molecular structures, thus readily adjusting their spectral responses. In this context, DS-PECs have been designed and tested in recent few years for light-driven water splitting. In this perspective article, we review some of the recent advances in the design and construction of functional DS-PECs for visible light-driven water splitting based on molecular components.
2. Dye-sensitized solar cells and dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs) were significantly improved by O'Regan and Grätzel in 1991.38 In contrast to conventional systems where the semiconductors take both the responsibilities of light absorption and charge carrier transport, these two functions are separated in DSCs. The light absorption is performed by a monolayer of dye molecules attached to a mesoporous layer of a wide-band-gap SC, typically TiO2. Charge separation occurs at the semiconductor/dye interface.41 Nanocrystalline DSCs have attracted a great deal of attention over the past two decades as promising low-cost alternatives to conventional solar cells.40,42–44 The highest efficiency of DSCs reported so far has reached 13% under 1 sun irradiation [100 mW m−2, air mass (AM) 1.5].45 Of particular interest is the low production cost for the fabrication of DSCs. The commonly used semiconductor, titania, is very cheap and is widely used as a pigment. Other advantages of DSCs also include ease of fabrication, lightweight, flexibility in the design, etc.40
A schematic presentation of the operational principle of a typical n-type DSC is shown in Fig. 3a. It mainly contains three major components: a working electrode (WE) consisting of a mesoporous n-type SC (typically TiO2) onto which dye molecules are attached, a redox electrolyte, and a counter electrode (CE). Upon solar irradiation, photoexcitation of a dye molecule results in the injection of an electron into the CB of TiO2. The oxidized dye molecule is then regenerated by the reduced component of a redox mediator in the electrolyte. The injected electron in the CB diffuses through the bulk of the nanocrystalline TiO2 film to the back contact of the conducting substrate, and then migrates through an external circuit to the CE, where the oxidized component of the redox mediator in the electrolyte is reduced to complete a whole circuit.
 Fig. 3  Operational principles of DSCs and DS-PECs: (a) n-type DSCs; (b) p-type DSCs; (c) tandem DSCs; (d) dye-sensitized photoanodes in DS-PECs; (e) dye-sensitized photocathodes in DS-PECs; (f) tandem DS-PECs. S1 and S2: photosensitizers; WOC: water oxidation catalyst; HEC: hydrogen-evolving catalyst; PEM: proton exchange membrane. 
Alternatively, dye-sensitization of a p-type metal oxide SC is also feasible, namely p-type DSCs.46–51 The p-type DSCs operate in an inverse fashion in contrast to conventional n-type DSCs, as presented in Fig. 3b. After photoexcitation, the excited state of a dye molecule injects a hole into the VB of a p-type SC (typically NiO). The injected hole diffuses to the back contact of the conducting substrate. The reduced dye molecule is restored to its ground state by delivering an electron to the oxidized component of a redox mediator in the electrolyte. The reduced form of a redox mediator finally passes an electron to an external load to complete a whole circuit. The efficiencies of p-type DSCs are expected to be equivalent to those of their n-type counterparts. However, the highest efficiency of p-type DSCs reported so far has only reached 1.30%, based on a mesoporous NiO film in conjunction with a donor–acceptor dye and a cobalt electrolyte.52 Such lower performances of p-type DSCs should be mainly attributed to some intrinsic characteristics of the commonly used p-type SC NiO: light absorption by NiO itself and poor electronic properties,53,54 which retard further enhancements of photocurrents.
Of particular interest is that such n-type and p-type DSCs can be combined to construct tandem DSCs (p–n junctions), in which both anode and cathode are photoactive.48,55 A tandem DSC consists of a dye sensitized TiO2 photoanode, a redox electrolyte and a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode. As shown in Fig. 3c, a tandem DSC operates in a similar fashion to n-type DSCs. The only difference is that the photoexcited dye molecule on the photocathode reduces the oxidized component of a redox mediator in the electrolyte instead of using a passive platinized cathode. As discussed previously, an intrinsic characteristic of dye-sensitization is that the energy levels of molecular sensitizers can be easily tuned through modification of their structures. It means that the absorption spectrum can be strategically manipulated by the choice of the dye molecules employed in these two photoelectrodes in tandem DSCs. The tandem device therefore can be designed in a way that, for instance, the sensitizer adsorbed on the photoanode absorbs blue part of the photon energy and the sensitizer adsorbed on the photocathode absorbs the red part of the photon energy. Hence, a large portion of the solar spectrum can be potentially harvested. The theoretical maximum efficiency of tandem DSCs could reach over 40%, which is well beyond that of a single device.40 However, the performance of tandem DSCs at the current stage has been much lower than expected. One major reason lies in the fact that the total photocurrent of such a device is determined by the poorer performing electrode. Current matching obviously constitutes a challenging issue for further improvement of the performance of tandem DSCs.
The concept of dye-sensitization extends to the field of photosynthetic cells, making the emergence of so-called dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (DS-PECs).56–61 A DS-PEC based on an n-type SC TiO2, as shown in Fig. 3d, operates in an analogous fashion to an n-type DSC except that two catalytic reactions take place in a DS-PEC. Instead of using redox mediators in DSCs, water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) are coupled to the dye molecules to serve as electron donors to regenerate the oxidized dye molecules to their ground states. Water molecules thereafter are oxidized to oxygen and protons at photoanodes. The photogenerated electrons migrate through an external circuit to the counter electrode, where proton reductions occur to generate hydrogen. In this way, overall cleavage of water is fulfilled by using sunlight.
Similar to DSCs, DS-PECs based on dye-sensitized p-type SCs are also possible, in conjunction with a passive platinum anode (Fig. 3e). As compared to p-type DSCs, hydrogen-evolving catalysts (HECs) rather than redox mediators are used as electron acceptors in DS-PECs based on a p-type SC, such as NiO, to restore the reduced forms of dye molecules to their ground states. Protons are then reduced to form hydrogen by the HECs. On the other side, water molecules are oxidized to form oxygen and protons at the anode.
3. Dye-sensitized photoanodes in DS-PECs
As essential parts in dye-sensitized photoanodes, the photosensitizer and WOC should fulfil some general requirements to make functional DS-PEC devices: (a) the photosensitizer should absorb visible light as much as possible, and even the near-infrared (NIR) part; (b) the photosensitizer should possess anchoring groups that provide robust linkages to the SC surface under aqueous conditions; (c) the LUMO level of the photosensitizer should be more negative than the CB edge of the n-type SC to facilitate efficient electron injection after photoexcitation; the HOMO level of the photosensitizer, on the other hand, should be positive compared to the catalytic onset potential of the WOC for oxygen evolution, as shown in Fig. 4; (d) the photosensitizer and WOC should be photo-stable and electrochemically stable. The design principles of photosensitizers and various types of WOCs have been extensively overviewed in the past years.21,40,59,60,62–69 The photosensitizers and WOCs that have been integrated into the photoanode systems in DS-PECs will be detailed in the following part (Fig. 5 and 6).
 Fig. 4  Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode in a DS-PEC. Eonset: the catalytic onset potential of the WOC for oxygen evolution. 
 Fig. 5  Molecular structures of sensitizers and sensitizer–catalyst dyads used in DS-PECs. 
 Fig. 6  Molecular structures of catalysts used in DS-PECs. 
Mallouk and co-workers in 2009 have demonstrated the first example of a functional DS-PEC for visible light-driven water splitting, in which the photoanode is a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline TiO2 electrode, as shown in Fig. 7a.70 A ruthenium-tris(bipyridyl) complex (S1) serves not only as a light absorber but also as a stabilizer for the nanoparticulate WOC, hydrated iridium oxides (IrO2·nH2O). Phosphonates on one bipyridine (bpy) ligand of the ruthenium (Ru) complex are chemically selective for binding to the TiO2 surface, while a malonate moiety on another bpy ligand of the Ru complex is selective for the attachment to IrO2·nH2O nanoparticles. This dye-sensitized photoanode was then connected to a Pt wire electrode to construct a PEC. Irradiation of this working electrode with visible light (λ > 410 nm) with a small bias, a measurable photocurrent (10–30 μA) was observed as presented in Fig. 7b, and the evolution of oxygen and hydrogen at the anode and cathode of the DS-PEC were confirmed by gas chromatography (GC). Upon irradiation with 450 nm light at an intensity of 7.8 mW cm−2, the cell produces a photocurrent density of 12.7 μA cm−2, corresponding to a quantum yield of ∼0.9% (Table 1). Such low quantum yield is attributed to a much faster back electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to the oxidized dye molecules than from IrO2·nH2O nanoparticles to the oxidized dye. It was also found that the decay in the photocurrent is always accompanied by bleaching of the sensitized film, likely resulting from nucleophilic attack of water on the oxidized dye molecule. On the basis of this TiO2–dye–IrO2 system, Mallouk and co-workers further modified the photoanode by coating a thin layer (1–2 nm thick) of ZrO2 or Nb2O5 onto TiO2.71 The introduction of the blocking layers slows the back electron transfer rate by a factor of 2–3 relative to the bare TiO2. Photoelectrochemical measurements also demonstrated that the Nb2O5 coated electrode exhibits a slightly enhanced and more stable photocurrent. A thicker blocking layer, however, lowers the quantum efficiency because of a decreased charge injection yield.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode based on TiO2/dye/IrO2 assembly. (b) Steady-state photocurrent as a function of anode potential. Inset shows a photocurrent transient measured at 0 mV vs. Ag/AgCl/saturated NaCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Table 1 A representative summary of photoelectrochemical properties and conditions used in the reported DS-PECsa




Dye
Catalyst
Photocurrent density (μA cm−2)
Maximum quantum yield
Faradic efficiency (oxygen generation)
Measured conditions
Ref.





a a and c. Sensitizer–catalyst dyad; b and d. Calculation based on hydrogen evolution.






S1

IrO2
12.7
0.9%
20%
Silicate buffer (pH 5.75), 7.8 mW cm−2 (450 nm), −0.325 V vs. Ag/AgCl

70




S2

[Mn4O4L6]+
31
1.7%
90%
Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.5), white light (290–750 nm), zero bias

72




S4
a

—
100
4.4%
86%b
pH 4.6 aqueous solution, 91 mW cm−2 (445 nm), 0.2 V vs. NHE

83




S5

WOC-2
480
4.1%
—
Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.4), 300 mW cm−2, 0.2 V vs. NHE

86




S7

IrOx
29.1
2.3%
85%
Silicate buffer (pH 5.8), 4.5 mW cm−2 (450 nm), zero bias

88




S3

WOC-4
1700
14.0%
83%
Phosphate solution (pH 6.8), 300 mW cm−2, 0.2 V vs. NHE

89




S10
c

—
9
1.0%
68%d
pH 7.0 aqueous solution, 300 W xenon lamp, 0.1 V vs. NHE

98





Spiccia and co-workers also demonstrated a DS-PEC system, in which a tetranuclear manganese (Mn) cluster catalyst [Mn4O4L6]+, where L = (MeOPh)2PO2−, imbedded in a proton-conducting Nafion membrane coated onto a [RuII(bpy)2(bpy(COOH)2)] (S2)-sensitized TiO2 photoanode (Fig. 8a).72 Upon visible light irradiation, this photoanode assembly coupled with a Pt counter electrode can oxidize water in a pH 6.5 aqueous electrolyte without an external bias and achieved a 90% Faradic yield for O2 evolution. The average peak photocurrent density is found to be about 31 μA cm−2, corresponding to a turnover frequency (TOF) of 47 ± 10 h−1 based on the cluster catalyst. A peak incident photon to electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 1.7% is obtained. A subsequent in-depth study of this TiO2-S2/Nafion-[Mn4O4L6]+ photoanode assembly by using in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy and transmission electron microscopy disclosed that the tetranuclear Mn cluster is not the real active species for the water oxidation catalysis.73 It dissociates into Mn(II) compounds in the Nafion membrane, which are then oxidized to form dispersed nanoparticles of a disordered Mn(II/IV)-oxide phase that is responsible for the observed photochemical water oxidation catalysis.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a titania layer sensitized with dye S2, and coated with a Nafion film doped with a Mn cluster catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a DS-PEC, consisting of an anode based on a S3-sensitized TiO2 film on a FTO conducting glass coated with a Nafion film penetrated with WOC-1+, an aqueous electrolyte, and a Pt cathode. (c) Oxygen evolution in PEC devices without applying any bias, operated in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution, detected by a Clark electrode, and illuminated by a 500 W Xenon lamp through a 400 nm cut off filter. Fig. 8c was modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2010. 
In parallel, Sun and co-workers developed an analogous dye-sensitized photoanode by incorporating a Ru-based WOC [Ru(II)L(pic)2]+(WOC-1+), where L = 2,2′-bpy-6,6′-dicarboxylic acid; pic = 4-picoline, into a pH-modified Nafion membrane, which was coated onto a Ru(II)(bpy)2[4,4′-(PO3H2)2bpy] (S3) sensitized TiO2 photoanode (Fig. 8b).74 Water oxidation by this type of photoanode in a PEC device was confirmed by the formation of molecular oxygen. In the presence of both photosensitizer S3 and WOC-1+, 140 nmol ml−1 oxygen was obtained after 60 min illumination, as shown in Fig. 8c. Based on the Ru-based catalyst, a turnover number (TON) of 16 is obtained, corresponding to a TOF of 27 per hour. The formation of hydrogen was also confirmed by GC, on the basis of this Ru-based photoanode assembly wired with a Pt counter electrode in a pH 7.0 phosphate aqueous electrolyte with a bias of −0.325 V vs. Ag/AgCl. Hill and co-workers have reported a S3-sensitized TiO2 photoanode assembly, onto which a polyoxometalate (POM) WOC[{Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4}(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− was adsorbed via a strong electrostatic interplay between the Ru2+ center of the dye molecule and the negatively charged POM catalyst.75 When illuminated with visible light (420–470 nm, 30 mW cm−2) in a pH 5.8 aqueous solution under zero bias, the TiO2/S3/[{Ru4O4(OH)2(H2O)4}(γ-SiW10O36)2]10− photoanode produces a current density of ca. 15 μA cm−2, corresponding to a merely ∼0.2% of quantum efficiency. This rather low quantum efficiency should be attributed to inadequate loading of the catalyst and its relatively poor activity towards oxygen evolution. This photoanode assembly was found unstable during photoelectrochemical experiments. Approximately 40% decay of the absorbance at 450 nm was observed during a course of 20 minutes illumination, due largely to the rapid desorption of dye molecules in an aqueous solution.
Constructing the sensitizer–catalyst dyads of covalently linked molecular WOCs and photosensitizers has proven to be an effective approache in order to facilitate faster electron transfer from the catalysts to the sensitizers in homogeneous systems.76–78 In order to integrate sensitizer–catalyst dyads into DS-PEC devices, anchoring groups such as phosphonates were introduced on auxiliary ligands of the sensitizers for covalent attachment onto the surface of nanoporous SC oxide. The sensitizer in this sense acts as a molecular bridge connecting the semiconductor surface and the catalyst as demonstrated in the TiO2–dye–IrO2 assembly system. Meyer and co-workers have carried out several attempts to immobilize supramolecular assemblies composed of Ru polypyridyl sensitizers and Ru-based WOCs onto the surface of nanoporous SC oxide.79–82 On the basis of this strategy, a sensitizer–catalyst dyad [((PO3H2)2bpy)2Ru(4-Mebpy-4-bimpy)Ru(tpy)(OH2)]4+ (S4) has been synthesized and anchored onto a core–shell nanostructured photoanode, in which a thin outer shell of TiO2 formed by atomic layer deposition (ALD) is coated onto the core of a high surface area conductive indium-tin-oxide (ITO) film, as illustrated in Fig. 9a.83 Nanosecond laser absorption measurements on the sensitizer–catalyst dyad S4 and the model photosensitizer [Ru(4,4′-(PO3H2bpy)(bpy)2)]2+ (RuP) modified on the core–shell nanoITO/TiO2 were carried out in 0.1 M HClO4 with excitation at 425 nm. As presented in Fig. 9b, the electron injection occurs within 20 ns after the laser pulse. Subsequently, a noticeably longer average timescale of the recovery of the bleach at 450 nm was observed for complex S4 as compared to the model RuP, which indicates that the electron transfer from the catalyst to the sensitizer intercepting the back electron transfer from the TiO2 to the oxidized sensitizer. When illuminated with 445 nm light, this core–shell photoanode in combination with a Pt wire cathode resulted in visible light-driven water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen in a pH 4.6 buffer with a bias of 0.2 V vs. NHE (normal hydrogen electrode). During a 30 second short-term measurement, the highest average stabilized photocurrent density is found to be ca. 100 μA cm−2 at an intensity of 91 mW cm−2 (Fig. 9c). Negligible photocurrents were observed under the same conditions for the assembly on the TiO2 photoanode. Based on the light absorbed by the assembly at the excitation wavelength, the photon conversion efficiency is 4.4% calculated at the peak photocurrent. The estimated Faradic efficiency for H2 evolution is ∼86%. A decay of the photocurrent during the photoelectrochemical measurement was observed in this core–shell photoanode, likely arising from the instability of the oxidized sensitizer in the assembly toward ligand substitution.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a Ru-based sensitizer–catalyst dyad (S4) attached onto core–shell nanoITO/TiO2. (b) Kinetics of absorbance changes probed at 450 nm following 3.2 mJ, 425 nm pulsed laser excitation for RuP (dark gray) and S4 (black) in nanoITO/TiO2 core–shell electrodes immersed in argon-degassed, aqueous pH 4.6 solutions, with the fits shown in blue and red, respectively; (c) current-density–time curves for a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a sensitizer–catalyst dyad (S4) attached onto core–shell nanoITO/TiO2 in a pH 4.6 buffer as a function of 445 nm light intensity: 91 mW cm−2 (red), 58 mW cm−2 (black), 7.8 mW cm−2 (blue). (b and c) were reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences. 
To date, most approaches explored for the construction of sensitizer–catalyst dyads suffer from complex synthesis and lack of versatilities. In order to address this problem, Meyer and co-workers developed a facile “layer-by-layer”, self-assembly approach, in which the sensitizer and the catalyst were synthesized independently and then bound to the nanoporous SC surface in a stepwise fashion via phosphonate/Zr4+ coordination linkages.84,85 With this method, Sun and co-workers have fabricated a functional photoanode by connecting a Ru polypyridyl sensitizer (S5) and a Ru-based catalyst (WOC-2) through a Zr4+ ion linkage on the surface of nanocrystalline TiO2, as shown in Fig. 10a.86 Upon illumination at an intensity of 300 mW cm−2 in a pH 6.4 aqueous buffer solution with a bias of 0.2 V vs. NHE, visible light-driven water splitting was realised on the basis of this type of photoanode, with a maximal IPCE of 4.1% at ∼450 nm and a stabilised photocurrent density of 480 μA cm−2 (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC with a dye-sensitized photoanode assembled with dye S5 and WOC-2 via Zr4+ ion on nanoporous TiO2, and a Pt wire cathode. (b) Light control photocurrent density measurement of the PEC with a dye-sensitized photoanode assembled with dye S5 and WOC-2 via Zr4+ ion on nanoporous TiO2 in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.4) with 0.2 V bias vs. NHE with a 300 W xenon lamp through a 400 nm long-pass filter (300 mW cm−2). (b) was reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Alternatively, WOCs can be co-adsorbed onto the surface of SC oxides together with sensitizers to facilitate intermolecular electron transfers. Brudvig and co-workers co-grafted a zinc porphyrin sensitizer (S6) together with an iridium-based catalyst (WOC-3) onto the nanoporous TiO2 surface.87 Photoelectrochemical results showed that the co-deposited photoanode coupled with a Pt wire counter electrode produces a photocurrent density of 30 μA cm−2 by applying a 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl bias potential under the irradiation of 200 mW cm−2 in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution. Unfortunately, data in terms of water oxidation efficiency and oxygen output of the PEC were not reported for this co-deposited photoanode.
Recently, Mallouk and co-workers further modified the TiO2–dye–IrOx dyad system by co-grafting a Ru polypyridyl sensitizer (S7) with ligand-capped iridium oxide nanoparticles onto a porous TiO2 electrode, as depicted in Fig. 11.88 A benzimidazole-phenol (BIP) electron transfer mediator was covalently bound to the IrOx particles, which mimic the function of the tyrosine–histidine mediator in PSII. The incorporation of the BIP mediator into the system increases the photocurrent density by almost a factor of three relative to the mediator-free catalyst. Under 450 nm light (4.5 mW cm−2) in a pH 5.8 silicate buffer solution at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl bias potential, it produces a photocurrent density of 29.1 μA cm−2, corresponding to an internal quantum yield of 2.3%. The Faradic efficiency for oxygen evolution is determined to be higher than 85%.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode based on sensitizer S7, BIP mediator and IrOx catalyst. 
Sun and co-workers fabricated a dye-sensitized photoanode, consisting of a Ru catalyst (WOC-4) co-adsorbed with a Ru sensitizer (S3) onto a nanoporous TiO2 electrode, as shown in Fig. 12a.89 Based on this co-deposited photoanode under visible light irradiation in a pH 6.8 phosphate aqueous solution with a 0.2 V bias potential vs. NHE, an unprecedentedly high photocurrent density of more than 1700 μA cm−2 has been achieved, with a maximal IPCE value of 14% at wavelength around 450 nm, as shown in Fig. 12b and c. The photocurrent density for dye-sensitized photoanodes reported thus far, for the first time, has reached the scale of milliampere per centimetre, with the possibility to easily observe the formation of oxygen and hydrogen bubbles on respective working and counter electrodes by naked eyes. Visible light-driven water splitting into hydrogen and oxygen was confirmed by GC, with a TON of 498 and an average TOF of 1.0 s−1 based on the catalyst. The Faradic efficiencies for O2 and H2 are 83% and 74%, respectively. An extended work was carried out recently to scrutinize the effect of the length of alkane chains between the anchoring group and the metal center of the catalyst.90 Photoelectrochemical results revealed that a longer alkane chain gives rise to a superior performance of visible light-driven water splitting, most likely originating from a decreased back electron transfer from the CB of TiO2 to the catalyst. On the basis of the co-adsorption strategy, a binuclear Ru-based WOC-5 has been recently synthesized and integrated into a photoanode in a DS-PEC device. The DS-PEC device based on this binuclear WOC exhibits a better performance in light-driven water splitting than that of its counterpart using mononuclear WOC, most likely due to a different bimolecular water oxidation mechanism at the interface.91
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC device with a dye-sensitized photoanode, consisting of a Ru-based WOC-4 co-adsorbed with sensitizer S3 on nanostructured TiO2, and a passive Pt cathode. (b) Light control photocurrent measurements in a three electrode cell using S3-sensitized nanostructured TiO2 co-adsorbed with WOC-4 as a working electrode in a phosphate buffer solution with 0.2 V vs. NHE bias; with a white-light source coupled to a 400 nm long-pass filter, 300 mW cm−2. For pH 5.8 (black line), pH 6.4 (red line), pH 6.8 (blue line), and pH 8.0 (green line). (c) IPCE spectra of the PECs in a pH 6.8 phosphate buffer solution with a 0.2 V vs. NHE external bias, with S3-sensitized TiO2 working electrodes with (black) and without (red) WOC-4. (b and c) were modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
4. Dye-sensitized photocathodes in DS-PECs
It is easily noticeable that all the dye-sensitized photoanodes discussed so far employed passive Pt cathodes to construct functional PECs. As described previously, like DSCs, the fabrication of photoactive cathodes is also feasible by dye-sensitisation of wide-band-gap p-type SC oxides to drive proton reduction reactions in water splitting cells. However, the studies regarding dye-sensitized photocathodes have been rather limited as compared to photoactive anodes. Similar to the dye-sensitized photoanodes, the photosensitizer and HEC should also fulfil some general requirements to make functional dye-sensitized photocathodes in DS-PEC devices. Besides the absorption and stability characteristics, the HOMO level of the photosensitizer should be more positive than the VB position of the p-type SC to facilitate efficient hole transfer after photoexcitation, as shown in Fig. 13. On the other hand, the LUMO level of the photosensitizer should be more negative than the catalytic onset reduction potential of the HEC where the reduction of proton starts. A great number of HECs have been designed and studied for proton reductions in homogeneous systems, which have been thoroughly reviewed in the past few years.61,92–95 The details of the photosensitizers and HECs incorporated in DS-PECs will be described in the following part.
 Fig. 13  Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photocathode in a DS-PEC. E′onset: the catalytic onset reduction potential of the HEC for proton reduction. 
In 2012, Sun and co-workers conducted the first example of dye-sensitized photocathode for visible light-driven proton reduction.96 The photocathode was composed of a nano-structured NiO electrode sensitized with an organic D–π–A dye (S8), which was then coupled with a cobaloximecatalyst (HEC-1), as presented in Fig. 14a. In connection with a Pt wire anode, this photocathode produces an initial photocurrent density of ca. 20 μA cm−2 under illumination with a light-emitting-diode by applying a −0.4 V bias potential vs. Ag/AgCl in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution (Fig. 14b). However, photocurrent decay was observed upon illumination with time, very likely due to the decomposition or desorption of the catalyst and organic dye from the surface of the electrode. In this work, light-driven hydrogen production was confirmed using a modified Clark-type electrode.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC, consisting of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on a dye S8 sensitized nanostructured NiO film coated with HEC-1, a Pt counter electrode and an aqueous electrolyte. (b) The transient current responses to on–off cycles of illumination on photocathodes with an applied potential of −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in the PEC with Pt as a counter electrode, operated in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution: NiO-S8 (black); NiO-HEC-1 (blue) and NiO-S8-HEC-1 (red). (b) was modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2012. 
Mozer and co-workers presented another example of dye-sensitized photocathode consisting of dye (S9) sensitized onto the nanoporous NiO electrode.97 It is interesting to note that no HEC was involved in this system. Photogenerated dye anions in this case directly reduce protons to hydrogen at the cathode. Irradiation of this dye-sensitized photocathode connected with a Pt wire anode in a pH 7 Na2SO4 buffer solution with zero bias, a photocurrent density of 1.7 μA cm−2 is initially generated, which increases to 3.9 μA cm−2 over a 4 h period. After 2 h illumination, the Faradic efficiency for H2 generation is calculated to be ca. 97%. The authors further explored the water splitting properties of a tandem PEC by a combination of this dye-sensitized NiO photocathode with a BiVO4 photoanode. A photocurrent density of 1.8 μA cm−2 is initially obtained upon illumination (>420 nm) of the tandem cell without any external bias in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution (pH = 7), which increases to 2.7 μA cm−2 during a 4 h testing period. H2 gas was detected during the measurements, with a calculated Faradic efficiency of ca. 80% for H2 evolution. Unfortunately, O2 evolution was not detected due to the low sensitivity of the GC detector used.
Wu and co-workers also developed a sensitizer–catalyst dyad assembly (S10), in which the Ru polypyridyl sensitizer serves as a molecular bridge between the alumina coated NiO and the cobaloxime HEC, as shown in Fig. 15a,98 analogous to the supramolecular assembly described in the photoanode section.83 On the one side of the sensitizer, it coordinates to the cobalt metal center of the HEC. On the other side, a carboxylic acid anchoring group is covalently attached onto the surface of the nanoporous NiO electrode. As depicted in Fig. 15b, the oxidation potential of the Ru-based sensitizer is 0.60 V (vs. NHE), which is positive compared to the VB of NiO (0.50 V). On the other hand, the first reduction potential of the sensitizer is −1.36 V (vs. NHE), which is more negative than the redox potential of cobaloxime HEC (−0.46 V). Therefore, both the hole injection from the sensitizer to NiO and the electron transfer from the sensitizer to the HEC are thermodynamically favourable. Irradiation with a 300 W xenon lamp on this sensitizer–catalyst dyad photocathode in a neutral aqueous solution, a stable photocurrent density of 9 μA cm−2 is obtained over a period of one hour by applying a 0.1 V bias potential vs. NHE (Fig. 15c). H2 generation was confirmed by GC, with a Faradic efficiency of 68% with a bias potential of 0.1 V for 2.5 hours.
 Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode based on a sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10. (b) Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on NiO and sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10. (c) Chronoamperogram of the alumina coated NiO electrode loaded with a sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10 as a working electrode at an applied bias of 0.1 V vs. NHE. (c) was reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
5. Concluding remarks and future perspectives
The proof-of-concept of DS-PEC has proven to be a feasible approach to realize solar-driven water splitting for hydrogen generation. Some encouraging developments have been achieved recently, but much more fundamental research is needed for this new technology to attain its full capability. DS-PECs structurally resemble the configurations of DSCs together with some of their advantageous features, such as the use of low-cost materials (i.e. TiO2), ease of fabrication, flexibilities (easily tunable molecular structures), etc. However, the quantum yields of DS-PEC systems reported so far remain much poorer, with the highest value being ∼10%, relative to their predecessors where the maximum quantum efficiencies can exceed 90% in DSCs. Such low quantum efficiencies observed, for instance, in the dye-sensitized photoanodes should be mainly attributed to the back electron transfer from the photogenerated electrons in the conduction band of TiO2 to the oxidized sensitizers or the oxidized catalysts. In DSC photovoltaic cells, the oxidized sensitizers are rapidly regenerated by electron donors in the electrolyte, for instance, in the microsecond time domain for a typical iodide electron donor. By contrast, the multi-electron chemistry of the two half reactions of water-splitting is thermodynamically demanding and kinetically slow, in particular for the water oxidation reactions. In other words, the dye regeneration rates in DS-PECs tend to be too slow to compete with back electron transfer from the semiconductor oxides. In this context, a deep molecular-level understanding of the underlying interfacial charge transfer dynamics at the SC/dye/catalyst interface is highly recommended for further improvement of this approach. A key element for enhancing the quantum efficiencies would be to develop novel sensitizer assemblies with long-lived charge-separated states. The sensitizer–catalyst supramolecular assembly approach appears to be an effective strategy to facilitate faster intramolecular electron transfer and to give long-lived charge-separated states, although the record quantum efficiency reported so far is based on a co-adsorption method where a sacrifice of dye loading has to be made. Very recently, organometal halide perovskite compounds have emerged as a novel class of light harvesters in solid-state heterojunction solar cells,99–102 with promising efficiencies reaching 19%.103–107 Perovskites possess several attractive characteristics required for a good sensitizer, such as a broad spectral absorption range (∼800 nm), large absorption coefficient, and more importantly, high charge carrier mobility and diffusion length.108,109 Perovskites, in this sense, would be a promising excellent candidate for absorbers in DS-PECs if they can be well encapsulated to prevent the dissolution of such compounds in aqueous solutions. On the other hand, semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) also represent another kind of suitable sensitizer for DS-PECs. The band gaps and energy levels of QDs can be easily tuned by varying the particle size, owing to the quantum confinement effect. Of particular importance is that the potential capability to generate multiple electron–hole pairs per photon might be beneficial to the improvement of quantum yields of DS-PEC devices.51,110,111 The exploration of more efficient WOCs/HECs with low overpotentials, on the other hand, is equally important for further enhancements of the quantum efficiencies of DS-PEC devices, albeit it remains a challenge. The use of a redox mediator as demonstrated by Mallouk et al.,88 analogous to the tyrosine-histidine pair in PSII, offers another possibility to accelerate dye regeneration, and thus achieving an increased charge separation lifetime.
Once the electrons–holes are injected into the CB/VB of the SCs from the excited states of the sensitizers, efficient charge collection of these photogenerated charges become crucial. One could easily notice that the studies of the dye-sensitized photoanode in DS-PECs reported so far have been dominated by nanoporous TiO2 electrodes, as they were used as photoanode materials from the very beginning of DSC studies and have remained the best performance to date. One-dimensional TiO2 nanostructures such as TiO2 nanotubes and nanorods, which improved the charge transport properties and thus charge collection efficiencies, are also worth testing as photoanode materials in DS-PECs. From an energy point of view, the exploration of alternative SC oxides with more negative CB energy levels to match the proton reduction potential is also highly needed. As for the photocathodes, NiO is by no means the optimal p-type semiconductor material because it absorbs a considerable amount of visible light and its hole mobility is relatively low. The search for alternative more transparent p-type SCs with high hole mobilities therefore is imperative.
The DS-PEC devices discussed so far only focused on a single light absorber. An undesired external bias was conventionally applied because the photopotential generated by a single photon is not sufficiently enough to drive the overall water splitting reaction. Another issue associated with a single light absorber is that only a limited portion of the solar spectrum can be harvested. Alternatively, like tandem DSCs, a dye-sensitized photoanode potentially could be coupled with a dye-sensitized photocathode to construct a tandem DS-PEC, as presented in Fig. 3f and 16. The configuration of a tandem DS-PEC is rather analogous to the ‘Z-scheme’ in NPS. The photoanode and photocathode in tandem DS-PECs, where the two half reactions of water splitting are separated, structurally mimic the functions of PSII and PSI in NPS. One advantage of the tandem design is that an undesired external bias is not needed. More importantly, the employment of dual absorbers in tandem DS-PECs, as nature does in NPS, could broaden the absorption wavelength to a wider range of solar spectrum through the choices of material combinations. Only one example of the research of tandem DS-PECs has been reported so far.112 Sun and co-workers constructed a tandem DS-PEC device, in which both the anode and cathode are photoactive, as shown in Fig. 16. In the photoanode, the Ru-based photosensitizer and WOC are co-adsorbed onto the nanoporous TiO2 electrode as demonstrated previously in ref. 89. The photocathode is constructed in a similar fashion by co-grafting a Ru-based photosensitizer and a cobalt-based HEC onto the nanoporous NiO electrode. A photocurrent density of only 25 μA cm−2 is obtained under 300 mW cm−2 illumination without any external bias.
 Fig. 16  Pt-free tandem molecular photoelectrochemical cells for water splitting driven by visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2014. 
The complete DS-PEC systems are obviously more complicated than the single absorber systems. Dynamic balance between these two photoelectrodes, for instance, would be a big challenge to overcome in order to properly match the photocurrents. More research effort, particularly in the lame photocathode part, is absolutely necessary.
Besides performance, the long-term durability of molecular components used in DS-PEC devices is another big concern. The phenomena of photocurrent decay were commonly observed in DS-PECs studied under illumination with time, largely due to the desorption and/or decomposition of the sensitizers and/or the catalysts. For practical use, the photosensitizer and catalyst should be active for at least millions of cycles in 20–30 years. The durability of current-state systems is thus far from optimized from the practical application point of view. The successful commercialization of DSCs with long operating lifetimes perhaps sets a good example for designing stable DS-PEC devices that incorporate molecular components. Future work on developing robust photosensitizers and catalysts, firm immobilization of sensitizer/catalyst assembly onto the surface of SC oxide as well as the integration of the robust individual components as a whole needs to be addressed.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science of China (21120102036, 91233201, 21361130020), the National Basic Research Program of China (973 program, 2014CB239402), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (grant number DUT13RC(3)103), the Swedish Energy Agency, and the K & A Wallenberg Foundation.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2005, 309, 548–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hammarström and S. Hammes-Schiffer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1859–1860 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Alibabaei, H. Luo, R. L. House, P. G. Hoertz, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4133–4145 CAS .
J. R. McKone, N. S. Lewis and H. B. Gray, Chem. Mater., 2013, 26, 407–414 CrossRef .
T. J. Jacobsson, V. Fjallstrom, M. Edoff and T. Edvinsson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2056–2070 CAS .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311–2320 RSC .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195–2202 Search PubMed .
L. Han, F. F. Abdi, P. Perez Rodriguez, B. Dam, R. van de Krol, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4220–4229 RSC .
L. Han, F. F. Abdi, R. van de Krol, R. Liu, Z. Huang, H.-J. Lewerenz, B. Dam, M. Zeman and A. H. M. Smets, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2832–2838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev, A. Bansal and J. A. Turner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2001, 26, 127–132 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, S. Mukerji, T. Soga, M. Umeno and H. Tributsch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8920–8924 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Grätzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593–1596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1861–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lubitz, E. J. Reijerse and J. Messinger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 15–31 CAS .
L. Duan, L. Tong, Y. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3296–3313 CAS .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Na, M. Gorlov and L. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6458–6467 RSC .
M. Wang and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 551–554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Lomoth and S. Ott, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9952–9959 RSC .
A. Magnuson, M. Anderlund, O. Johansson, P. Lindblad, R. Lomoth, T. Polivka, S. Ott, K. Stensjö, S. Styring, V. Sundström and L. Hammarström, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1899–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kitano and M. Hara, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 627–641 RSC .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
F. Wen and C. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2355–2364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Navarro, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, J. A. Villoria de la Mano, S. M. Al-Zahrani and J. L. G. Fierro, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1865–1882 CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2007, 20, 35–54 CrossRef .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2010, 11, 179–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yu, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Gorlov and L. Kloo, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10289–10303 RSC .
H. Tian and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, F. E. CurchodBasile, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, K. NazeeruddinMd and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8940–8943 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qin, H. Zhu, T. Edvinsson, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8570–8571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nattestad, A. J. Mozer, M. K. R. Fischer, Y. B. Cheng, A. Mishra, P. Bauerle and U. Bach, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Odobel, L. C. Le Pleux, Y. Pellegrin and E. Blart, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 1063–1071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Odobel, Y. Pellegrin, E. A. Gibson, A. Hagfeldt, A. L. Smeigh and L. Hammarström, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2414–2423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Odobel and Y. Pellegrin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2551–2564 CrossRef CAS .
S. Powar, T. Daeneke, M. T. Ma, D. Fu, N. W. Duffy, G. Götz, M. Weidelener, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, L. Spiccia and U. Bach, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 602–605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, G. Natu, Z. Ji and Y. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1074–1078 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, E. A. Gibson, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1759–1762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, H. Lindström, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 265–273 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1966–1973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Concepcion, R. L. House, J. M. Papanikolas and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15560–15564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, Z. Chen, C. R. K. Glasson, K. Hanson, H. Luo, M. R. Norris, D. L. Ashford, J. J. Concepcion, M. K. Brennaman and T. J. Meyer, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2882–2890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Young, L. A. Martini, R. L. Milot, R. C. Snoeberger Iii, V. S. Batista, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2012, 256, 2503–2520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Swierk and T. E. Mallouk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2357–2387 RSC .
S. Berardi, S. Drouet, L. Francas, C. Gimbert-Surinach, M. Guttentag, C. Richmond, T. Stoll and A. Llobet, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7501–7519 RSC .
R. Argazzi, N. Y. Murakami Iha, H. Zabri, F. Odobel and C. A. Bignozzi, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1299–1316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Polo, M. K. Itokazu and N. Y. Murakami Iha, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1343–1361 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Galoppini, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1283–1297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Wasylenko, R. D. Palmer and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 218–227 RSC .
D. G. H. Hetterscheid and J. N. H. Reek, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9740–9747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cao, W. Lai and P. Du, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8134–8157 CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Kobayashi, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, P. G. Hoertz, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 926–927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. A. Lee, Y. Zhao, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan, L. Blasdel, W. J. Youngblood and T. E. Mallouk, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 165–176 RSC .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892–2894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Hocking, R. Brimblecombe, L.-Y. Chang, A. Singh, M. H. Cheah, C. Glover, W. H. Casey and L. Spiccia, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 461–466 CAS .
L. Li, L. Duan, Y. Xu, M. Gorlov, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7307–7309 RSC .
X. Xiang, J. Fielden, W. Rodríguez-Córdoba, Z. Huang, N. Zhang, Z. Luo, D. G. Musaev, T. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 117, 918–926 Search PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Jiang, B. Zhang, F. Huang, Y. Gao and L. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2417–2420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kaveevivitchai, R. Chitta, R. Zong, M. El Ojaimi and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10721–10724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Frischmann, K. Mahata and F. Wurthner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1847–1870 RSC .
W. Song, C. R. K. Glasson, H. Luo, K. Hanson, M. K. Brennaman, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1808–1813 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Ashford, W. Song, J. J. Concepcion, C. R. K. Glasson, M. K. Brennaman, M. R. Norris, Z. Fang, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19189–19198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, D. L. Ashford, D. W. Thompson, T. J. Meyer and J. M. Papanikolas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24250–24258 CAS .
S. E. Bettis, D. M. Ryan, M. K. Gish, L. Alibabaei, T. J. Meyer, M. L. Waters and J. M. Papanikolas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6029–6037 CAS .
L. Alibabaei, M. K. Brennaman, M. R. Norris, B. Kalanyan, W. Song, M. D. Losego, J. J. Concepcion, R. A. Binstead, G. N. Parsons and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 20008–20013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hanson, D. A. Torelli, A. K. Vannucci, M. K. Brennaman, H. Luo, L. Alibabaei, W. Song, D. L. Ashford, M. R. Norris, C. R. K. Glasson, J. J. Concepcion and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12782–12785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Bettis, K. Hanson, L. Wang, M. K. Gish, J. J. Concepcion, Z. Fang, T. J. Meyer and J. M. Papanikolas, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2014, 118, 10301–10308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, Y. Gao, L. Zhang, Z. Yu, J. Liu and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 2347–2350 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Moore, J. D. Blakemore, R. L. Milot, J. F. Hull, H.-e. Song, L. Cai, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2389–2392 CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. R. Swierk, J. D. Megiatto, B. Sherman, W. J. Youngblood, D. Qin, D. M. Lentz, A. L. Moore, T. A. Moore, D. Gust and T. E. Mallouk, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15612–15616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, X. Ding, J. Liu, L. Wang, Z. Lu, L. Li and L. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4219–4222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, L. Zhang, X. Ding and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 12008–12013 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Gao, X. Ding, Z. Yu and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2801–2804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Dempsey, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1995–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Eckenhoff and R. Eisenberg, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 13004–13021 RSC .
S. Fukuzumi, Y. Yamada, T. Suenobu, K. Ohkubo and H. Kotani, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2754–2766 CAS .
M. Wang, L. Chen and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6763–6778 CAS .
L. Li, L. Duan, F. Wen, C. Li, M. Wang, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 988–990 RSC .
L. Tong, A. Iwase, A. Nattestad, U. Bach, M. Weidelener, G. Gotz, A. Mishra, P. Bauerle, R. Amal, G. G. Wallace and A. J. Mozer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9472–9475 CAS .
Z. Ji, M. He, Z. Huang, U. Ozkan and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11696–11699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Kim, C.-R. Lee, J.-H. Im, K.-B. Lee, T. Moehl, A. Marchioro, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, J.-H. Yum, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and N.-G. Park, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 591–597 Search PubMed .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 3623–3630 CrossRef CAS .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Liu and T. L. Kelly, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 133–138 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, H. G. Lee, Y. C. Kim, J. Seo, J. H. Noh, J. Lee and S. I. Seok, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7837–7840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-b. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Nozik, M. C. Beard, J. M. Luther, M. Law, R. J. Ellingson and J. C. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6873–6890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, M. Eck and M. Kruger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1851–1864 CAS .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, E. Gabrielsson and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25234–25240 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:
Ze Yu	Ze Yu received his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden, in 2012. He then joined Prof. Udo Bach's group as a postdoctoral fellow (2012–2013) at Monash University, Australia. He is currently a postdoctoral fellow at the Dalian University of Technology (DUT), China. His research interests mainly focus on dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical devices and organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells.
Fei Li	Fei Li is an associate professor at Dalian University of Technology, China. After his PhD from Dalian University of Technology and a short postdoctoral stay with Prof. Christina Moberg at the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden, he was an assistant professor at Dalian University of Technology until 2012. His research interests now include the development of efficient water oxidation catalysts and photocatalytic water splitting, with a particular focus on molecular-engineered electrodes and photoelectrodes.
Licheng Sun	Prof. Licheng Sun received his PhD in 1990 from the Dalian University of Technology (DUT). He went to Germany as a postdoc at Max-Planck-Institut für Strahlenchemie (now the name has been changed to Max-Planck-Institut für Schemische Energie konversion) with Dr Helmut Görner (1992–1993), and then as an Alexander von Humboldt fellow at Freie Universität Berlin (1993–1995) with Prof. Dr Harry Kurreck. He moved to the KTH Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm in 1995 and became an assistant professor in 1997, an associate professor in 1999 (at Stockholm University) and a full professor in 2004 (KTH). He is presently also a distinguished professor in DUT. His research interests cover artificial photosynthesis, molecular catalysts for water oxidation and hydrogen generation, functional devices for total water splitting, dye sensitized, quantum dot/rod sensitized solar cells, and perovskite solar cells. He has published more than 380 peer reviewed papers in the fields of solar cells and solar fuels with total citations of >15000, and an H-index of 63.

Broader context
Solar energy is unarguably the largest exploitable energy resource that potentially can be scaled up to meet our rising energy demands in the coming decades, and to address the environmental issues associated with the combustion of fossil fuels. In view of its intermittency, a very attractive strategy is to directly convert solar energy to storable solar fuels, such as hydrogen, methanol or other hydrocarbon species derived from the reduction of water or carbon dioxide. These solar fuels can be used by the end user when and where they are required. Inspired by the architectures of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs), dye-sensitized photoelectrochemical cells (DS-PECs), based on molecular sensitizer functionalized metal oxide semiconductors in association with water oxidation catalysts (WOCs) or hydrogen-evolving catalysts (HECs), are now being designed and tested as promising approaches to generate hydrogen via solar-driven water splitting. In this perspective article, we survey some recent progress on the design and construction of functional DS-PECs based on molecular components for hydrogen generation via visible light-driven water splitting.


 	Fig. 1  Simplified schematic illustration of ‘Z-scheme’ in NPS. Mn: manganese calcium oxide cluster; Tyr: tyrosine; P680: chlorophyll in PSII; P680*: the excited state of P680; Pheo: pheophytin; PC: plastocyanin; P700: chlorophyll in PSI; P700*: the excited state of P700; A0: primary electron acceptor; FNR: ferredoxin nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate reductase; NADP: nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustrative diagram of a PEC cell for the photo-electrolysis of water based on an n-type TiO2 photoanode.	 

 	Fig. 3  Operational principles of DSCs and DS-PECs: (a) n-type DSCs; (b) p-type DSCs; (c) tandem DSCs; (d) dye-sensitized photoanodes in DS-PECs; (e) dye-sensitized photocathodes in DS-PECs; (f) tandem DS-PECs. S1 and S2: photosensitizers; WOC: water oxidation catalyst; HEC: hydrogen-evolving catalyst; PEM: proton exchange membrane.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode in a DS-PEC. Eonset: the catalytic onset potential of the WOC for oxygen evolution.	 

 	Fig. 5  Molecular structures of sensitizers and sensitizer–catalyst dyads used in DS-PECs.	 

 	Fig. 6  Molecular structures of catalysts used in DS-PECs.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode based on TiO2/dye/IrO2 assembly. (b) Steady-state photocurrent as a function of anode potential. Inset shows a photocurrent transient measured at 0 mV vs. Ag/AgCl/saturated NaCl. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society.	 



S1
	IrO2	12.7	0.9%	20%	Silicate buffer (pH 5.75), 7.8 mW cm−2 (450 nm), −0.325 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
70


S2
	[Mn4O4L6]+	31	1.7%	90%	Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.5), white light (290–750 nm), zero bias	
72


S4
a
	—	100	4.4%	86%b	pH 4.6 aqueous solution, 91 mW cm−2 (445 nm), 0.2 V vs. NHE	
83


S5
	WOC-2	480	4.1%	—	Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.4), 300 mW cm−2, 0.2 V vs. NHE	
86


S7
	IrOx	29.1	2.3%	85%	Silicate buffer (pH 5.8), 4.5 mW cm−2 (450 nm), zero bias	
88


S3
	WOC-4	1700	14.0%	83%	Phosphate solution (pH 6.8), 300 mW cm−2, 0.2 V vs. NHE	
89


S10
c
	—	9	1.0%	68%d	pH 7.0 aqueous solution, 300 W xenon lamp, 0.1 V vs. NHE	
98


 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a titania layer sensitized with dye S2, and coated with a Nafion film doped with a Mn cluster catalyst. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic diagram of a DS-PEC, consisting of an anode based on a S3-sensitized TiO2 film on a FTO conducting glass coated with a Nafion film penetrated with WOC-1+, an aqueous electrolyte, and a Pt cathode. (c) Oxygen evolution in PEC devices without applying any bias, operated in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution, detected by a Clark electrode, and illuminated by a 500 W Xenon lamp through a 400 nm cut off filter. Fig. 8c was modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2010.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a Ru-based sensitizer–catalyst dyad (S4) attached onto core–shell nanoITO/TiO2. (b) Kinetics of absorbance changes probed at 450 nm following 3.2 mJ, 425 nm pulsed laser excitation for RuP (dark gray) and S4 (black) in nanoITO/TiO2 core–shell electrodes immersed in argon-degassed, aqueous pH 4.6 solutions, with the fits shown in blue and red, respectively; (c) current-density–time curves for a dye-sensitized photoanode consisting of a sensitizer–catalyst dyad (S4) attached onto core–shell nanoITO/TiO2 in a pH 4.6 buffer as a function of 445 nm light intensity: 91 mW cm−2 (red), 58 mW cm−2 (black), 7.8 mW cm−2 (blue). (b and c) were reprinted with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC with a dye-sensitized photoanode assembled with dye S5 and WOC-2 via Zr4+ ion on nanoporous TiO2, and a Pt wire cathode. (b) Light control photocurrent density measurement of the PEC with a dye-sensitized photoanode assembled with dye S5 and WOC-2 via Zr4+ ion on nanoporous TiO2 in a 0.1 M Na2SO4 solution (pH 6.4) with 0.2 V bias vs. NHE with a 300 W xenon lamp through a 400 nm long-pass filter (300 mW cm−2). (b) was reprinted with permission from ref. 86. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of a dye-sensitized TiO2 photoanode based on sensitizer S7, BIP mediator and IrOx catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC device with a dye-sensitized photoanode, consisting of a Ru-based WOC-4 co-adsorbed with sensitizer S3 on nanostructured TiO2, and a passive Pt cathode. (b) Light control photocurrent measurements in a three electrode cell using S3-sensitized nanostructured TiO2 co-adsorbed with WOC-4 as a working electrode in a phosphate buffer solution with 0.2 V vs. NHE bias; with a white-light source coupled to a 400 nm long-pass filter, 300 mW cm−2. For pH 5.8 (black line), pH 6.4 (red line), pH 6.8 (blue line), and pH 8.0 (green line). (c) IPCE spectra of the PECs in a pH 6.8 phosphate buffer solution with a 0.2 V vs. NHE external bias, with S3-sensitized TiO2 working electrodes with (black) and without (red) WOC-4. (b and c) were modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photocathode in a DS-PEC. E′onset: the catalytic onset reduction potential of the HEC for proton reduction.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagram of a PEC, consisting of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on a dye S8 sensitized nanostructured NiO film coated with HEC-1, a Pt counter electrode and an aqueous electrolyte. (b) The transient current responses to on–off cycles of illumination on photocathodes with an applied potential of −0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in the PEC with Pt as a counter electrode, operated in a pH 7.0 phosphate buffer solution: NiO-S8 (black); NiO-HEC-1 (blue) and NiO-S8-HEC-1 (red). (b) was modified and reprinted with permission from ref. 96. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2012.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Illustration of a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode based on a sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10. (b) Energy diagram of a dye-sensitized photocathode based on NiO and sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10. (c) Chronoamperogram of the alumina coated NiO electrode loaded with a sensitizer–catalyst dyad S10 as a working electrode at an applied bias of 0.1 V vs. NHE. (c) was reprinted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Pt-free tandem molecular photoelectrochemical cells for water splitting driven by visible light. Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2014.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
