Focused radiation heating for controlled high temperature chemistry, exemplified with the preparation of vanadium nitride nanoparticles   - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA41040D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA41040D
(Paper)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15337-15343Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsFocused radiation heating for controlled high temperature chemistry, exemplified with the preparation of vanadium nitride nanoparticles†

        
          
            Tristan C. M. 
            Corbiere
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Debora 
            Ressnig
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cristina 
            Giordano
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Markus 
            Antonietti
          
        
      
Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces, Colloids Department, Am Muehlenberg 1, 14476 Potsdam, Germany. E-mail: tristan.corbiere@mpikg.mpg.de
Received 
      1st March 2013
    , Accepted 12th June 2013First published on 13th June 2013AbstractA compact apparatus employing heating with concentrated light was designed for desktop laboratory application to run syntheses in the range 200–850 °C in short times under a satisfying control of the temperature, heating ramps, and adjustable chemical environments. The device is composed of 4 halogen lamps oriented to a centre point and allows fast heating rates up to 100 K min−1 of medium size scale samples (volume < 7 mL). This method can be proven to be more energetically efficient and allows for better temperature control over standard furnace methods. Herein we exemplify with a typical high temperature synthesis of non-oxide ceramic (vanadium nitride) nanoparticles. These nanoparticles can be obtained in different sizes and crystallinity ranges by varying the reaction conditions, following the urea glass route and applying the non-classical rapid heating method. Nanoparticles containing both carbon and nitrogen and showing the typical crystal structure of VN were obtained with sizes below 10 nm within a short reaction time (5 min at 750 °C) and in a fast heating procedure (50 K min−1). Moreover, quasi-quenching of samples through a fast cooling procedure allows the detection of various intermediate oxide species that otherwise were not observed.
Introduction
Using sunlight for heating is far from being new: since the Bronze Age, burning glasses were used for ritual purposes for torch or wood combustion.1 Unfortunately, the instability of sunlight power is a general issue for solar equipment such as sunlight concentrator ovens or solar cells which denote a lack of control.2
In the laboratory, solar heating can be emulated with ordinary heating lamps, thus providing a stable and controlled heating performance, as already applied for food warming or animal breeding. Using a focused beam approach, it is clear that very high temperatures can be reached without direct contact with the heating device. Typical high temperature industrial processes such as furnace sintering consume important amounts of energy regardless of the sample size. Therefore, muffle furnace can turn to be unreasonable for smaller samples.3–6 Solid state preparation therefore is often faced to various inconveniences when experimenting with a muffle furnace or a tubular oven. Unlike glassware chemistry where a sheer look into the reaction flasks allows adjustment of behavior, in ovens and for most of the cases, only the final products can be inspected. Many of the standard preparation methods suffer from various deficiencies, such as limited heating and cooling rate performance. From system to system, oven chemistry can encounter obstacles when gas flow or vacuum is needed. For instance, an applied gas flow can act as a cooling medium. To overcome the aforementioned difficulties, alternative heating systems have been considered, such as induction heating or focused beam heating. Focused radiation method such as solar thermal collector are currently mainly dedicated to heat-to-current conversion in solar thermal power plants or as floating zone devices are dedicated to crystal growth.7,8 The focused beam approach offers the possibility of direct observation. Therefore we have evaluated possible design for such an oven, including a solar concentrator device. A four halogen lamp set-up turned out to be a good compromise between heating performance, cost, simplicity, stability and size. A similar system was developed by Kriven et al. and is denoted as the quadrupole lamp furnace.9 Hence, the proposed set up allows a significant decrease of energy consumption compared to a typical tubular oven and fast heating procedures for medium size samples, as it will be detailed in a further paragraph. Furthermore, its compact design allows space-saving and easy transport so that it can find a place in every laboratory.
Herein, we exemplify the application of this new set-up via the synthesis of a ceramic nanomaterial, vanadium nitride VN. The typical industrial oven-based preparation of metal nitrides is highly energy consuming (VN, ∼1440 °C, NH3 usage5). Temperature-Programmed Reaction Synthesis (TPRS) was carried out by Claridge et al. on numerous metal nitrides.10 VN was prepared after a heat treatment at 800 °C (heating ramp 1 K min−1) for 3 h in a flow of 100 mL min−1 of NH3 over V2O5 powder.
Other solid state preparation methods can be mentioned such as high temperature propagation synthesis or solid state metathesis reaction (temperatures largely above 1400 °C).11
With the growing question around the reduction of energy costs, interest is given to a more sustainable preparation of these materials. For nanostructures, such as metal nitrides, some sol–gel strategies such as metal polyazane preceramic networks12,13 or such as the urea glass route have been already introduced to diminish the ecological impact of their preparation (<800 °C during 4 h, 5 K min−1, free of direct ammonolysis).14–17
However, alternative heating strategies (as shown in Fig. 1) to prepare metal nitrides and carbides materials are key towards sustainability and cost reduction and thereby allow a wider access onto those systems.18 We therefore combine an adaptation of focused radiation heating with the urea glass route for the successful preparation of VN nanoparticles.
 Fig. 1  Comparison between: (A) classical heating systems (e.g. standard muffle) and a (B) unconventional heating strategy. In Fig. (B) some examples of synthesis carried out by: (1) magnetic induction, (2) microwave, (3) focused heat, (4) focused radiation and (5) laser heating. 
Experimental section
Description of the heating apparatus
Four halogen lamps are mounted on a ring, as proposed by E. C. Bayer,19 the overall diameter of this ring of Bayer (RB) is ∼22 cm. Each lamp is run using a current of up to 150 W delivered by an individual power supply. Light shields and shaded safety eye glasses are mandatory for an appropriate usage and to avoid irreversible eye damages. Direct optical observation is possible by using quartz crucibles, but indirect heating is more efficient using metal crucibles than shaded quartz ones.
A quartz reactor system from MTI has been modified to allow for temperature measurements inside the reaction mixture (see Fig. 1). This set-up is very versatile and can be flipped from horizontal to vertical. Furthermore, the position of the lamps can be adapted according to the demand. A Labview© application tool is dedicated to the PID control of the heating through the control of the lamps power input as a function of the measured temperature (see Fig. 2). The temperature is measured with a high temperature thermocouple (Ni–Cr, type K, B + B©) coupled to National Instrument© modules.
 Fig. 2  A quartz crucible is placed into the reactor depicted on the left. It is kept in place using glass wool. The thermocouple is immersed in the reaction slurry. A PID-labview application regulates the power of the lamps as a function of the measured temperature and the desired temperature (see the scheme on the right). 
The set-up is similar to the one described by Kriven et al. (see Fig. 3), although the main purpose is different.9 Obviously, both light pathways are designed to make maximal use of the input energy. Kriven and coworkers designed a device for studying within a capillary of a diameter smaller than 0.5 mm the X-ray diffraction of metal oxides at very high temperatures (>1600 °C). Whilst, in our set-up, the light paths are designed to heat up homogeneously a relatively large reaction volume (up to 7 mL) to elevated temperatures. Our set-up is therefore dedicated to lab scale high temperature processing. This method takes advantage of the absorbance properties of the reaction mixtures; however, the quartz reactor walls can be damaged by corrosion in some cases and strategies such as coating the crucible inner walls or protecting the crucible with appropriate inlays must be considered. Consequently, employing inlays will cause a decrease of the efficiency of the set-up.
 Fig. 3  Scheme representing the quadrupole halogen lamp furnace developed by Kriven et al. on the left and the set up discussed herein, on the right. The coloured lines depicted the pathway of the light through the focus point. A mapping of the energy distribution was reported elsewhere.9 
The described set-up is space-saving, and the power consumption is reduced (600 W max) compared to a traditional furnace (>1.2 kW with slower heating). We originally intended to model devices employing solar concentrators for materials synthesis. It must be considered that sunlight’s power is known to be as high as < 1300 W m−2, for north European latitudes < 500 W m−2). Corresponding solar concentrator ovens obviously require a larger space to achieve the same results as our set-up. Nevertheless, we chose a lamp emission spectrum which is close to the solar spectrum (see Fig. 4); the proposed set up is therefore suited to simulate a solar heating process.
 Fig. 4  Experimental IR image of heat distribution, on the left, carried out on a white transversal glass frit disc (D: 80 mm, T: 4 mm) covered with silicon carbide powder. An Inconel ring is placed in the center, simulating the crucible position. The data were obtained using our set-up for a total power of 490 W. Below, the distribution of the various isothermal areas (successive black – yellow regions) is given. Red circles are placed at the heat maximum close to the supposed focus position. On the right part, the emission spectrum of the halogen lamp (courtesy of Osram AG) is compared to the solar irradiance (free NASA picture, author A. Ryzhkov). 
Materials and methods
The VOCl3–urea gels (with R = urea: V = 3, 5, 7) were prepared as previously reported.20 The corresponding gel (1 g, nV = 1.69 mmol for R = 3) was transferred to a quartz tube (diameter: 30 mm) and subsequently dried with a heat gun (set temperature: 160 °C) under nitrogen flow. The tube with the dried gel was transferred into the quartz reactor according to Fig. 2. The reactor was evacuated and refilled with N2. Gas exchange was repeated 3 times. The system employed allows working in a closed reaction flask under vacuum and pressure (<2 bars) or under gas flow. The constant flow configuration is exemplified here (3–4 L min−1) keeping a slight overpressure of 1.1 bars during the reaction. Reaction times of 5 and 30 min, heating rates of 50 and 100 K min−1, and maximum temperatures of 550, 650 and 750 °C were investigated.
Powder X-Ray Diffraction (PXRD) patterns were collected in reflection mode using a PMMA sample holder on a D-8 (Bruker) equipped with a copper anode (Kα 1.54 Å) and a scintillation detector. The PXRD data were collected in the range 10° to 90° (in 2θ) with a counting rate of 2.5 s and 0.05° per step.
The TEM images were obtained using copper grids sample holder on an Omega 912 (Zeiss). Estimation of particle size is carried out with ImageJ using the particles analysis tool after processing the images according to the method proposed by the EMEZ (Electron Microscopy ETH Zürich). To segregate single particles from aggregates using this automatized analysis, only the mean size of particles which represents 80% of the particles number is here reported (see ESI,†Fig. 3–5). This method is in good agreement with the non-automatized sizing procedure.
The IR images are collected on an IR dual camera PI200 from Optris. Elemental analyses were carried out on a Vario MICRO cube (Elementar).
Results and discussion
Heating performance
The RB heating device is very versatile and allows different configurations. Accessing high temperatures is a clear asset for high throughput processes, and continuous flow reactions where fast processing is an issue.21–23 In particular, printed support with pre-ceramic inks may be quasi instantly processed by radiation heat treatment.24,25 Further possible applications include high temperature photochemical reactions.26
In order to evaluate the heating behavior of our set up, IR imaging was carried out on a poor light-absorbing refractory glass frit disc illuminated by the lamps with 50% of maximal power (see ESI,†Fig. 2). Absorbing of light is improved by a simple coating with silicon carbide powder (see ESI,†Fig. 1). For comparison, a temperature of 600 °C is measured in the sample when a power of 250 W is set. As exemplified in Fig. 4, the heat is rather homogeneously (355 ± 5 °C) distributed within an area of 2–3 cm around the center (corresponding to the crucible position).
A slight increase of temperature (+15 °C) can be observed at the fringes of the inner crucible along the light path (see SI, for additional IR pictures at different powers). Thus, with the current smaller lamp design only a limited volume can be considered for heating and is experimentally estimated to be around 7 mL. Of course, scaling up the set-up can allow for the increase of the effective reaction volume. To understand how the reaction time and the temperature affects the reaction and particle formation, heating rates of 50 and 100 K min−1 for temperatures up to 750 °C were applied, with the maximal temperature held for 5 or 30 min. Faster heating rates exceeding 150 K min−1 and, in principle, temperatures above 800 °C can be reached. However, these conditions were not applied to allow for the optimal control over the experiments and to keep the device in its average performance region. Once the reaction is completed, the light is switched off causing an initial very rapid temperature decrease (approximately 450 °C in 3 min) through natural cooling. This can be understood as the maximal passive quenching rate, and this was applied to all samples. A more complex cooling protocol was not investigated; nevertheless a software control of the cooling rate and cooling steps seem to be possible down to 250 °C without extra cooling gas flow (natural radiation cooling). This feature may present an added value for other systems.
As shown in Fig. 5, the experimental temperatures curves are very close to the programmed temperature instruction curves: the temperature measured during the isothermal steps are very stable and corresponds to the given instructed temperature of 550 °C, 650 °C and 750 °C, maximal power uptake at 750 °C is achieved with ∼360 W only.
 Fig. 5  Chosen examples of the heating behavior of the RB heating device (left). The measured temperature follows well the set temperature. The heating curve is controlled by the PID application. The required power is then automatically chosen and recorded to reach the instructed temperature line (blue curve right). The power uptake in principle is useful to detect endothermic and exothermic processes in the sample. 
A good instrumental response (mainly below 30 s, see ESI,† Table 1) is observed between the measured temperature and the instructed temperature also for higher heating rates. Temperature instruction is defined through the Labview© application, and then the PID automatically regulates the power so that the measured temperature reaches the demanded temperature. The PID settings are identical for all the present investigations, partially explaining why at higher heating rates, an increased delay just before reaching the instructed final temperature was observed.
The device consumed less than 300 kJ, as determined after integration of the experimental consumption curve shown in Fig. 5. Using our standard muffle furnace for the same purpose consumes at least 4 times the amount of energy to reach the same temperature and to maintain it, however with far less control and dynamics. We determined the corresponding values for a tubular oven – from carbolite (1.5 kW) – with a heating rate of 10 K min−1, and found that it consumes around 1600 kJ to heat up the device to 800 °C and to hold the temperature for 5 min (for identical heating conditions the RB consumes 950 kJ only). Tubular furnaces suffer from an important dead volume that needs to be heated. This negative feature reduces drastically their efficiencies. For such a model, samples up to 4 mL or smaller can be typically placed in the hottest zone without significant decrease of the heating performance. For a given sample volume, the volumetric energy consumption is estimated around 400 kJ mL−1 for the tubular oven whereas this value for the proposed set up is estimated around 140 kJ mL−1.
Hence, our system is dedicated to heat up a small, localized volume using fast heating rates. A standard furnace is by principle simply less efficient but may be preferred for long processing times (several hours).4
As aforementioned the system also allows the detection of thermal events such as melting, evaporation, and exothermic reactions (not presented here in details). Such processes appear in the curve as a temperature-localized change of power consumption. For instance, a short isotherm plateau accompanied by fume release and increase in power consumption is observed in the metal nitride synthesis around 260 °C (endothermic event, see Fig. 5, right graph, blue curve). It corresponds most likely to the decomposition of free27,28 or metal-coordinated urea.29,30 This decomposition is followed by formation of a white layer on the upper part of the quartz reactor wall. This white layer has been investigated by PXRD and corresponds to ammonium chloride.
Vanadium nitride preparation: role of the reaction time and of the reactant ratio
Usually the control over the heating performance is a very important factor in solid state chemistry. Thermal decomposition, nucleation, or crystal growth are all affected by the temperature. We therefore further explored the heating performance of the RB within a real case study by varying various heating parameters such as the reaction time, the reaction temperature and the heating rates in the VN urea glass synthesis.
Various ratios R (urea:V) were investigated as a function of the reaction time. The products are usually obtained as porous nanoparticle agglomerates in a carbonaceous matrix with a pale brown metallic luster. The porosity is generated by the release of gas during the chemical reaction leading to VN, as reported elsewhere.31 The samples are characterized by PXRD, and the particles morphology is studied by TEM. All samples contain vanadium nitride (ICDD PDF: 04-004-7721) and stronger signal broadening is observed for samples with low R suggesting the presence of smaller crystallites.
According to Debye Scherrer equation using a shape factor K = 0.89 and applying it for the reflection [200] (43.7° in 2 theta) of the presented diffractograms (Fig. 6, a), increasing the R values is accompanied by an increase of crystallite size (R = 3, 5 and 7 show 6, 8 nm and 21 nm for 5 min reaction time, and 12 nm, 13 nm and 28 nm for 30 min reaction time at 750 °C). This can be confirmed by analyzing the mean particle size from the TEM images of the corresponding samples (see Fig. 7, a). The elemental analysis results (see ESI, Fig. 3) show that – as expected – fewer carbon side products are present for low R values than for high ones. The theoretical nitrogen content is around 21 wt% for pure VN. The experimentally obtained contents are however very close to the ones reported elsewhere (10–15 wt%),20 with the deviations being attributed to amorphous carbon side products, encapsulating the nanoparticles, as seen on the TEM images. Alternatively, the presence of carbon could be explained by the formation of a VN(C). Indeed, the observed nitrogen and carbon amounts in our samples are close to the theoretical values for VCxNy with N: 11 wt% and C: 9.3 wt% (if x and y = 0.5). Since, these systems and VN have similar structures it is difficult to determine the real chemical nature of the particles obtained.
 Fig. 6  Powder X-ray patterns of samples prepared under different conditions; (a) samples prepared at 750 °C and 50 K min−1 varying the reactant ratio and the reaction time, (b) samples prepared at 50 K min−1 for a reactant ratio of 5 varying the reaction temperatures (hold 30 min), and (c) samples prepared at 750 °C for a reactant ratio of 3 varying the reaction times (5 and 30 min) and the heating rates (50 and 100 K min−1). 
 Fig. 7  TEM imaging of samples prepared under different conditions; (a) samples prepared at 750 °C and 50 K min−1 varying the reactant ratio, (b) samples prepared at 50 K min−1 for a reactant ratio of 5 varying the reaction temperatures (hold 30 min), and (c) samples prepared at 750 °C for a reactant ratio of 3 varying the reaction time (5 and 30 min) and the heating rates (50 and 100 K min−1). 
It is obvious that crystal growth is also time dependent, which explains the difference in crystallite and particle size as a function of time. As expected, bigger crystallites are formed for longer reaction times. Longer reaction times also reduce the presence of defects. These defects/strains usually cause further broadening of the X-ray peaks.
Vanadium nitride preparation: role of the reaction temperature
The reaction temperature affects the chemical conversion, the particle nucleation, and the crystal growth. Samples are prepared using a ratio R = 5. The heating rate is set at 50 K min−1, and the investigated maximal temperatures are held for 30 min (reaction time): 550 °C, 650 °C and 750 °C. All the diffractograms show the presence of VN first as traces at 550 °C, and the signals become more prominent with higher temperatures (see Fig. 6, b).
The diffractogram of the sample prepared at 550 °C shows mainly the presence of vanadium oxide V2O5 (ICDD PDF: 01-072-5928). Typical V2O5 needle crystallites are also found in TEM pictures (not shown here). The sample prepared at 650 °C shows one very strong reflection attributed to V2O3 (ICDD PDF: 99-200-3858) at 33° in 2 theta [104]. At 750 °C, oxides compounds are not detected. The elemental analyses show a loss of carbon contents from 550 °C to 650 °C and then a relative conservation of the C/N amounts in the system between 650 °C and 750 °C.
Thus, these results are in agreement with a scenario where V2O5 forms first, and then this specie is converted into V2O3 and then VN by a carbothermal reduction process which consumes part of the available carbon. The release of COx species as the reaction by-product increases the nitrogen contents, as supported by elemental analysis (it does not however exclude a minor NOx release). The elevation of the maximal reaction temperature is followed by a strong increase of the amount of VN particles as estimated from the TEM imaging. The presence of oxides species were not reported before but the short reaction time and the quasi quenching of the system may hinder the completion of the reaction.
In the gel, VOCl3 may preliminary form a complex with urea and ethanol possibly releasing HCl. The solvent (ethanol) is evaporated upon early stage of heating, and a xerogel is obtained. Further heating leads first to an observed release of fumes that result from the decomposition of the urea. Decomposition of urea (from which NH3 is obtained) is suggested via the minor formation of NH4Cl (by reaction with leftover HCl) that can be collected in form of spurs from the quartz reactor wall1 at early stage of heating (<300 °C). An inorganic condensation of either part or entire vanadium species into V2O5 may precede its stepwise carbothermal reduction (first reduction specie: V2O3) and then its conversion into vanadium nitride. Sources of oxygen involved in the oxidation are present in the form of ethanol, urea decomposition product (cyanuric acid or ammeline, e.g.) and VOCl3 itself. At higher temperature, the carbothermal reduction and the conversion into nitride of the oxides intermediates results from the reaction with the C/N containing amorphous material which is accompanied by release of COx (and possibly NOx). Although we propose oxide intermediates formation prior to nitriding stage, further intermediates (such as VOxNy) were not identified and cannot be excluded. Alternatively, the oxide presence can be explained by a subsequent oxidation step of amorphous or poorly crystalline inorganic nanoparticles upon air exposure.
Vanadium nitride preparation: heating rate investigation
The heating rate can affect the particle formation especially at short reaction times. To test for such kinetic effects, a sample was heated to 550 °C during 9 min with a heating rate of 50 K min−1, then holding the temperature at 750 °C for 5 min.
This value is reduced to 7 min for a heating rate of 100 K min−1. The sample prepared at 50 K min−1 shows bigger particles than the one prepared at 100 K min−1. Applying the Debye Scherrer equation for the signal at 43.7° in 2 theta (on diffractograms shown on Fig. 6, c) using a shape factor K = 0.89 gave for the samples heated at 100 K min−1 to the maximum temperature (750 °C), then kept for 5 min and 30 min, particle sizes of 4 nm and 7 nm respectively. This is found to be 10 nm and 15 nm at 50 K min−1 (5, 30 min respectively, see Fig. 7, c).
Similar trends are observed for R = 5 and R = 7. This indeed means that faster heating rates result in higher nucleation rates and thereby significantly smaller particles.
Conclusions
A set-up for the rapid heating of a quartz reactor up to 850 °C by irradiation with concentrated light was presented. For small to medium sized samples of up to 7 mL, this apparatus surpasses traditional furnaces in terms of energy usage, of heating/cooling rates and it allows direct observation of the sample. In addition, an unmatchable control over temperature, temperature profiles, and gas phase could be achieved. A further improvement in terms of monitoring reactions by caloric uptake or employing flow chemistry is still possible and is currently under investigation.
This RB light oven was then applied to the synthesis of VN nanoparticles, where particle size and sample purity could be adjusted by composition and final reaction temperature, as well as heating rate. Furthermore, fast cooling rates and the consequent quasi-quenching was a key to detect the presence of intermediary oxides which enabled to propose a reaction pathway including oxides intermediates leading to the formation of the final VN.
Acknowledgements
R. Pitschke and J. Hartmann for the TEM pictures, S. Pirok and K. Tauer for the elemental analysis. Prof L. Bergström, MKK, Stockholm for all the discussion and valuable advices. The Max Planck Society for the financial support.
References
W. E. K. Middleton, Isis, 1961, 52, 533–543 Search PubMed .
D. Heide, L. von Bremen, M. Greiner, C. Hoffmann, M. Speckmann and S. Bofinger, Renewable Energy, 2010, 35, 2483–2489 CrossRef .
B. Vaidhyanathan and K. J. Rao, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1196–1200 CrossRef CAS .

          W. Trinks, M. H. Mawhinney, R. A. Shannon, R. J. Reed, J. R. Garvey, W. Trinks, M. H. Mawhinney, R. A. Shannon, R. J. Reed and J. R. Garvey, Industrial Furnaces, (John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA,  2003) Search PubMed .
B. Vaidhyanathan, D. K. Agrawal and R. Roy, J. Mater. Res., 2000, 15, 974–981 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Satapathy, P. D. Ramesh, D. Agrawal and R. Roy, Mater. Res. Bull., 2005, 40, 1871–1882 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kalogirou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2004, 30, 231–295 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Duffar, Crystal Growth Processes Based on Capillarity: Czochralski, Floating Zone, Shaping and Crucible Techniques, (John Wiley & Sons,  2010) Search PubMed .
P. Sarin, W. Yoon, K. Jurkschat, P. Zschack and W. M. Kriven, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2006, 77, 093906–093909 CrossRef .
J. B. Claridge, A. P. E. York, A. J. Brungs and M. L. H. Green, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 132–142 CrossRef CAS .

          I. P. Parkin,  1996, 25.

          Niederhauser and O. Donald, Preparation of metal nitride,U.S. Patent No. 3032397, 1 May  1962 Search PubMed .
J. Engering and M. Jansen, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2003, 629, 913–922 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. Yao, B. Milke and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5136–5144 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lancelle-Beltran, P. Prené, C. Boscher, P. Belleville, P. Buvat and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 2579–2582 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. Yao and M. Antonietti, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4659–4663 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano and M. Antonietti, Nano Today, 2011, 6, 366–380 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Patzke, Y. Zhou, R. Kontic and F. Conrad, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 826–859 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Bayer, Private Communication, 2012 Search PubMed .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. Yao, B. Milke and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5136–5144 CrossRef CAS .
R. Potyrailo, K. Rajan, K. Stoewe, I. Takeuchi, B. Chisholm and H. Lam, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 579–633 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sebastian Cabeza, S. Kuhn, A. A. Kulkarni and K. F. Jensen, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 7007–7013 CrossRef CAS .

          F. Bondioli, A. Bonamartini Corradi, A. M. Ferrari and C. Leonelli,  2008, 91, 3746–3748.
W. M. Sigmund, N. S. Bell and L. Bergström, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 83, 1557–1574 CrossRef .
W. D. Teng and M. J. Edirisinghe, Key Eng. Mater., 1997, 132–136, 337–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schubnell, I. Kamber and P. Beaud, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 1996, 64, 109–113 CrossRef .
J. P. Chen and K. Isa, J. Mass Spectrom. Soc. Jpn., 1998, 46, 299–303 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Schaber, J. Colson, S. Higgins, D. Thielen, B. Anspach and J. Brauer, Thermochim. Acta, 2004, 424, 131–142 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Lupin and G. E. Peters, Thermochim. Acta, 1984, 73, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qiu and L. Gao, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 87, 352–357 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. de Souza, C. A. Chagas, T. C. Ramalho and R. B. de Alencastro, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14381–14390 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SI Fig. 1 and 2 are additional IR imaging, Fig. 3 to 5 contain the elemental analysis details and TEM imaging calculated mean sizes. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41040dThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Comparison between: (A) classical heating systems (e.g. standard muffle) and a (B) unconventional heating strategy. In Fig. (B) some examples of synthesis carried out by: (1) magnetic induction, (2) microwave, (3) focused heat, (4) focused radiation and (5) laser heating.	 

 	Fig. 2  A quartz crucible is placed into the reactor depicted on the left. It is kept in place using glass wool. The thermocouple is immersed in the reaction slurry. A PID-labview application regulates the power of the lamps as a function of the measured temperature and the desired temperature (see the scheme on the right).	 

 	Fig. 3  Scheme representing the quadrupole halogen lamp furnace developed by Kriven et al. on the left and the set up discussed herein, on the right. The coloured lines depicted the pathway of the light through the focus point. A mapping of the energy distribution was reported elsewhere.9	 

 	Fig. 4  Experimental IR image of heat distribution, on the left, carried out on a white transversal glass frit disc (D: 80 mm, T: 4 mm) covered with silicon carbide powder. An Inconel ring is placed in the center, simulating the crucible position. The data were obtained using our set-up for a total power of 490 W. Below, the distribution of the various isothermal areas (successive black – yellow regions) is given. Red circles are placed at the heat maximum close to the supposed focus position. On the right part, the emission spectrum of the halogen lamp (courtesy of Osram AG) is compared to the solar irradiance (free NASA picture, author A. Ryzhkov).	 

 	Fig. 5  Chosen examples of the heating behavior of the RB heating device (left). The measured temperature follows well the set temperature. The heating curve is controlled by the PID application. The required power is then automatically chosen and recorded to reach the instructed temperature line (blue curve right). The power uptake in principle is useful to detect endothermic and exothermic processes in the sample.	 

 	Fig. 6  Powder X-ray patterns of samples prepared under different conditions; (a) samples prepared at 750 °C and 50 K min−1 varying the reactant ratio and the reaction time, (b) samples prepared at 50 K min−1 for a reactant ratio of 5 varying the reaction temperatures (hold 30 min), and (c) samples prepared at 750 °C for a reactant ratio of 3 varying the reaction times (5 and 30 min) and the heating rates (50 and 100 K min−1).	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM imaging of samples prepared under different conditions; (a) samples prepared at 750 °C and 50 K min−1 varying the reactant ratio, (b) samples prepared at 50 K min−1 for a reactant ratio of 5 varying the reaction temperatures (hold 30 min), and (c) samples prepared at 750 °C for a reactant ratio of 3 varying the reaction time (5 and 30 min) and the heating rates (50 and 100 K min−1).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: SI Fig. 1 and 2 are additional IR imaging, Fig. 3 to 5 contain the elemental analysis details and TEM imaging calculated mean sizes. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ra41040d

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
