Enhancing CZTSSe solar cells through electric field induced ion migration   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA10638D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA10638D
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 5642-5649Enhancing CZTSSe solar cells through electric field induced ion migration†

        
          
            A. 
            O'Neill‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Eunae 
            Jo‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Eunyoung 
            Choi
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jongsung 
            Park
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jin Hyeok 
            Kim
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            J. S. 
            Yun
          
        
      *ce and 

        
          
            J. 
            Seidel
          
        
      *af
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: jan.seidel@unsw.edu.au
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering and Optoelectronic Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University, 77, Yongbong-Ro, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 61186, South Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr
cAustralian Centre for Advanced Photovoltaics (ACAP), School of Photovoltaic and Renewable and Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia. E-mail: j.yun@surrey.ac.uk
dDepartment of Energy Engineering, Gyeongsang National University (GNU), Jinju, Gyeongnam 52849, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Advanced Technology Institute (ATI), University of Surrey, Guildford, Surrey GU2 7XH, UK
fARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET), UNSW Sydney, NSW 2052, Australia
Received 
      14th December 2021
    , Accepted 10th February 2022First published on 18th February 2022AbstractSolar cells made from Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS)-derived materials have been widely studied for their favourable material properties utilized in photovoltaic energy conversion. Drawbacks of the materials are associated with low open circuit voltage (Voc) resulting from non-radiative recombination at grain boundaries and interfaces. Considerable work has focused on the incorporation of sodium (Na), which is found to passivate trap states and reduce electronic losses. Here we present evidence that Na+ as well as several ionic species (Se2− and Zn2+), do not remain stationary after device fabrication, but in fact migrate under electrical biasing. Furthermore, this ionic migration can be manipulated at room temperature by exposing the device to an external electric forming field. We outline a novel procedure that can effectively control and adjust ionic movement and associated local distribution in fully fabricated devices. Our results show that this simple treatment leads to favourable improved device performance and provides insight into light-induced reduction in performance which may be partially reversible.
Introduction
The absorber material Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) has been investigated widely1 as an upcoming material for solar cell applications due to its tuneable band gap2,3 and high absorption coefficient.4 With advancements being made in fabrication techniques5–7 and a composition of earth-abundant non-toxic elements,8 CZTSSe is a prime candidate to replace the less sustainable, yet more efficient counterpart Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGS). For that reason, significant effort has been made to investigate and prevent electronic losses and low open-circuit voltages (Voc)9–11 that impede cell performance and reduce the overall device efficiency12,13 A successful attempt to reduce the voltage deficit has been made by incorporation of Na into the device. The addition of Na improves efficiency by increasing grain size14–16 and passivating trap states17 that result in charge carrier recombination, thus diminishing the cell performance.9,18,19 These improvements originate from the effect of Na on grain growth during the fabrication process and can provide further improved passivation using subsequent thermal treatments.20 It is therefore evident that Na distribution21 throughout the solar cell has a large influence over device performance. Although much work has been done on the best method to incorporate Na and optimized concentrations,22,23 little is known on the migration properties of Na+ ions once they are introduced into the absorber. Being charged particles, Na+ ion distribution throughout the cell post device fabrication will be determined by a contribution of both built-in potential and diffusion forces.24,25
Here, we study the nanoscale distribution of ion species in CZTSSe device structures and investigate their motion under external electric fields. To investigate the interaction between the ionic motion and device efficiency, Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) was utilized to measure the surface potential of CZTSSe samples with differing amounts of Na. The samples were examined after a simple biasing procedure, applied externally using two capacitor plates. In addition, a nanoscale bias application was applied using the scanning probe tip. The applied bias voltages induced significant motion of Na+ as well as Se2− and Zn2+ ions throughout the device. Significant changes can be seen both in the surface potential and in overall device efficiency. Importantly, these changes can be controlled through tailored external electric forming fields. In addition, the present work shows preferential motion of Na+ ions through grain boundaries (GBs) and presents possible insight into light-induced deficiency processes that occur in the device during operation.
Results and discussion
In order to investigate whether ions are mobile post device fabrication, CZTSSe based solar cells were deposited on a molybdenum substrate as described in detail in the methods section. The fabricated sample sets differ by the amount of Na incorporated into the cells. This is done by depositing layers of NaF of varying thickness prior to selenization shown in Fig. 1a–c. Na incorporation in CZTSSe absorbers is known to dramatically effect device performance, with a layer of 10 nm NaF showing the greatest improvement to overall efficiency.5 Three samples from each sample set (w/o NaF, 10 nm NaF and 30 nm NaF – Fig. 1a–c) were then subjected to different voltage biasing conditions for a period of 24 hours in order to study the effect of long-term electrical biasing on chemical changes in the cells. To induce ion migration and thus possible changes in elemental distribution, two of the samples are biased with either +10 V or −10 V by placing them between two metallic plates spaced 2.5 mm apart. The third sample was kept unbiased as a reference. Biasing setup and a side view illustration of the ionic motion can be seen in Fig. 1d and e.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of layered precursors composing each sample set: (a) sample with no NaF layer, (b) sample with 10 nm NaF layer, and (c) sample with 30 nm NaF layer. (d) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for applying the external bias to samples. (e) Side view illustration of ions moving under bias influence. The gray area represents grain boundaries (GBs) while the green area represents grain interior regions (GI). Na+ ions are found to move preferentially through GB's and will be discussed later. 
Samples from the optimized (10 nm NaF layer) device were then examined by Time of Flight Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) to study their depth-dependent chemical composition. Fig. 2 shows TOF-SIMS depth profiles for the three studied samples.
 Fig. 2  (a) TOF-SIMS depth profile of three samples from an optimized CZTSSe solar cell (10 nm NaF layer), 2 samples were biased (solid and dashed lines), the third sample remained unbiased (dotted line). (b) Difference of element concentrations between the positively biased sample labelled +10 V (positive voltage at cell surface) and the negatively biased sample labelled −10 V. 

Fig. 2a shows a TOF-SIMS depth profile of the optimized (10 nm NaF layer) CZTSSe solar cells (positive, negative and without biasing). Sputter time correlates to depth - 0 seconds being at the solar cell surface. The dashed lines show the relative concentration of Na, Se, Zn and Mo in the sample biased at +10 V, while the solid lines show the elemental concentration when biased at an opposite voltage, −10 V. The dotted lines represent the unbiased reference samples. To emphasises these changes, Fig. 2b shows the count difference between the +10 V and −10 V samples. Both Na and Zn have a similar profile with a decreased count in the CZTSSe layer and an increased count at the Mo substrate boundary, indicating that Na and Zn migrate towards the bottom when a positive bias is applied to the upper electrode (+10 V) and migrate towards the CZTSSe surface under negative voltages. The Na and Zn profiles exhibit similar behaviours while the Se profile differs. This correlates well with the ionic charges of the moving elements Na+ and Zn2+vs. Se2−. Se is known to diffuse into Mo substrates creating a MoSe2 layer.26 The changes to Mo distribution are substantially lower than Na, Zn and Se and might result from the concentration changes of the other elements, as the difference is seen where large changes to other elements is present. The main differences occur near the Mo/CZTSSe interface as it can be quite rough27 and in the Mo substrate where Se changes are large. All other elements that compose the CZTSSe absorber (Cu, S, and Sn) show no significant change and can be seen in Fig. S1 and S2.†
Na concentration and distribution is known to have a dominating effect on overall device performance.9,14–16,18,19 To better observe the changes to Na distribution, 2 samples from a partial device (CZTSSe on Mo substrate with no CdS emitter layer or contacts) containing high amounts of Na (30 nm NaF) were investigated using TOF-SIMS. The depth profile can be seen in Fig. S3 in the ESI† and exhibits a similar yet more distinct shift in Na distribution.
After establishing that ions are still mobile in the CZTSSe layer post device fabrication and their distribution can be influenced, e.g. with an electric field, further nanoscale measurements are performed to see how the migrating ions effect the grains and GBs. In particular, due to the accumulation of Na at the GBs which is known to have a prominent effect on overall device performance.9,14–16,18,19 To investigate the local electrical properties of CZTSSe with different Na concentrations, three sample sets were fabricated without the emitter and contact layers thus revealing the CZTSSe layer. The sample sets were investigated using Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM). KPFM measures surface potential by electrically connecting an atomic force microscope (AFM) conducting tip to the sample. Fermi level differences result in charge moving from the sample to the tip or vice versa and thus is a relative measurement. The AFM tip then deflects due to electrostatic interactions between the charge in the tip and sample surface. The deflection is nullified using a DC voltage that is recorded as an image. Surface potential changes can then be measured at a nanometric scale, revealing variations between GBs and grain interiors (GIs). Each sample was measured using a 2-pass KPFM scan. The first pass traces the sample's topography, the tip is then lifted 30 nm and follows the topography trace keeping a constant distance from the sample while simultaneously measuring the contact potential difference (CPD). During the initial topography scan, a bias voltage is applied between the tip and sample. This configuration enables detection of ionic motion by separating the bias application from the measurement of surface potential.28,29 Samples without mobile ions will show no change after applying the initial bias. Fig. 3 shows potential maps of the CZTSSe absorber surface for positive, negative and unbiased samples. A line scan going through a GB (indicated by the white dashed line) was selected in each image to exhibit the overall change that occurs to GB potential when compared with the GI potential.
 Fig. 3  2 × 2 μm CPD images of the samples containing varying amounts of Na. Different bias voltages were applied to the tip during the first scan: (a) no NaF +1 V (b) no NaF 0 V (c) no NaF −1 V (d) 10 nm NaF +1 V (e) 10 nm NaF 0 V (f) 10 nm NaF −1 V (g) 30 nm NaF +1 V (h) 30 nm NaF 0 V (i) 30 nm NaF −1 V. (j–l) Line profiles marked by the white dashed line through GB at different bias voltages (j) No NaF, (k) 10 nm NaF layer, and (l) 30 nm NaF layer. 
For the no NaF layer sample, very slight changes occur between the GBs and GIs when the bias voltage is changed from +1 V to −1 V, overall CPD does change as indicated by the maximum and minimum CPD measured as shown in Fig. 3a–c. Fig. 3j shows relative line profiles through a GB (white lines in Fig. 3a–c) and it is apparent that the CPD difference between the GB and GI does not vary due to the biasing. Fig. 3g–i in comparison shows the 30 nm NaF layer exhibits a large response to changes to the applied bias voltage. As the bias voltage becomes more negative GB-GI contrast increases in addition to revealing GI surface features this can be seen in an enlarged image in the ESI Fig. S5.† The optimized 10 nm NaF sample shows intermediate changes as seen in Fig. 3d–f. Fig. 3j–l show a line scan through GBs demonstrating said changes. Our results clearly shows that increases to NaF thickness, and with it the Na content of each sample, result in GB-GI contrast changes after a bias is applied. As mentioned earlier, CPD represents the potential difference between the tip and the sample surface. Changes in CPD indicate movement of charge towards or away from the surface, Na+, Se2− and Zn2+ ions, as determined by the TOF-SIMS measurements. An opposite voltage bias will result in a shift of the ions in the opposite direction. However, this will not change the CPD sign as it is a relative measurement of potential difference. These changes can clearly be seen in the 30 nm NaF sample (Fig. 3g–i) as well as more pronounced surface features that result from Na accumulation on the surface. Based on the above SIMS data (Fig. 1) when a negative tip bias is applied Na+ ions are drawn towards the KPFM tip. The ions accumulate and decorate the surface, revealing features that have different potential in addition to accentuating the GBs. However, a positive bias repels the Na+ ions and masks the differences in surface potential between the GBs and GIs. These changes strongly indicate that Na+ ions move preferentially through the CZTSSe GBs,10 as indicated by Fig. 3j–l.
Measurements of the samples with the applied bias were conducted at 0.5 V intervals and the average CPD of each image was recorded. A statistical analysis of the difference in CPD between the GBs and GIs was conducted. The method can be seen in Fig. S8 in the ESI† while the results can be seen below in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  (a) Average CPD changes as a function of bias applied to tip. (b) CPD difference between GBs and GI in CZTSSe samples as a function of bias applied to tip. 

Fig. 4a shows how the average CPD (GIs and GBs) changes with bias application. The grey no Na curve exhibits a linear change while the samples containing Na flatten when positive bias voltages are applied. Fig. 4b shows the difference between GI and GB as a function of the bias voltage applied to the sample. The largest difference in GB-GI values as a function of bias voltage occurs to the sample containing the highest amount of Na (∼30 mV between +1 V and −1 V), while the no Na sample shows little change (∼10 mV difference). While the no Na sample shows some changes in overall CPD when a bias is applied, the difference between GBs and GIs remains the same, thus indicating that Se2− and Zn2+ ions are moving in a uniform manner through the absorber. The Na containing samples with 10 nm and 30 nm NaF layers show a distinct change between GBs and GI when the bias voltage is changed. Preferential motion of Na+ ions through the GB's, creates a charge difference between the GBs and GIs as the local concentrations of Na change at the GB.
The addition of Na passivates the trap states that are inherent to the GBs and as a result reduces the surface potential of the GBs compared to the GI. Na is known to passivate GBs and contribute to a reduction of electronic losses that increase device efficiency.30 But as indicated by the “optimized” 10 nm NaF sample, more is not always better. Excess Na that accumulates at the GBs might cause electron recombination that can lower efficiency, once the existing traps are passivated. As Na distribution clearly varies in both GB's and GI's when an external voltage is applied, the influence of Na as a key factor in device efficiency is revealed. The large error bars are due to the abundance of different GB types31 that have dissimilar potentials resulting in large initial differences.
To determine the effect of the mobile ions, efficiency measurements were conducted on full device sample sets with varying amounts of Na, using a solar cell I–V testing system. Each sample was measured before biasing for 24 hours, and again immediately after the biasing at 24 hour intervals, in order to see if temporal changes occur. The samples were kept in the dark in N2 atmosphere between measurements. The results can be seen in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Solar simulator measurements of device efficiency for the three types of devices: solid lines represent the +10 V biasing while the dashed lines represent the −10 V biasing, the dotted lines are reference sample that were not biased. 
In order to study how the ion migration influences the device efficiency, I–V measurements were performed on 0 nm, 10 nm, and 30 nm NaF samples with +10 V and −10 V biasing for 24 hours shown in Fig. 5. Subsequent efficiency measurements were performed over time without any biasing in order to elucidate the long-term effect of the biasing. It is apparent that the efficiency variation of the sample without any Na is almost negligible, regardless of positive or negative biasing. In the meantime, the samples with NaF exhibit significant efficiency variation which implies that the Na movement has significant impact on the device performance. This clearly suggests that the movement of other ions, Zn2+ and Se2−, do not play a significant role for controlling electronic properties of the device. Corresponding open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), and fill factor (FF) are summarised in Fig. S9.† When comparing the efficiency with the I–V parameters, only the Jsc results seem to correlate to the efficiency trend. Variations of the FF and Voc results are within the fluctuation range of the reference sample, and thus, do not show significant impact or changes. In this sense, it is plausible to expect that only optical properties such as the bandgap have been changed due to the Na migration. One possible scenario is that Na+ ion migration towards the back contact changes the junction properties, particularly the depletion width, by changing charge carrier collection at the junction.
The results in Fig. 5 demonstrate that samples containing Na show a significant increase in device efficiency when biased for 24 h at either +10 V or −10 V. Additional measurements of Voc, FF, and Jsc can be seen in Fig. S9a–l.† The overall highest improvement can be seen in the 10 nm NaF sample biased at +10 V, with the greatest improvement taking place right after the sample has been biased. After 24 hours relaxation, the device efficiency remains at an elevated state compared to the −10 V sample. Both Na containing reference samples show a decrease in performance over time, while the performance of the sample containing no Na remains relatively constant. A possible explanation for this degradation might be due to the Na+ ionic motion that changes the band profile or a charge state at CdS/CZTSSe interface.32
Another possible explanation might be that the p–n junction (responsible for charge separation) formed in the device might affect the Na+ ionic distribution throughout the absorber material as illustrated in Fig. 6. When the sample is not illuminated (Fig. 6a), diffusion forces will disperse the Na+ ions (concentrated at the CZTSSe/Mo substrate interface originating from the NaF layer) until they reach equilibrium with the electrostatic built-in potential. The arrow length corresponds to the relative driving force magnitude. When the sample is illuminated, the separated charge carriers will migrate to opposite sides of the device and reduce the built-in potential. Ions that were at equilibrium will then be subjected to a reduced electrostatic force and will diffuse towards the surface changing their distribution, thus reducing the device efficiency. Each efficiency measurement involves exposing the device to light and in such inducing an internal biasing that will result in changes to ionic distribution and device performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) Na+ distribution in dark – distribution is balanced by diffusion and electrostatic potential due to built-in potential. (b) Charge separation after photon absorption reduces the built-in potential producing an overall force that moves Na+ ions away from the Mo substrate. 
Conclusion
Here, we have presented evidence of ionic motion occurring under an external bias in CZTSSe absorbers. TOF-SIMS data shows that by a simple external application of a bias voltage, several ionic species (Na+, Zn2+ and Se2−) are induced to migrate through the absorber post fabrication and at room temperature. For the Na incorporated absorbers, the Na+ ions show preferential motion through the GBs while Se2− and Zn2+ ions move in a more uniform manner through the CZTSSe absorber. By applying external bias voltages in a capacitor configuration, the ionic distribution of the absorber can be influenced. These influences directly affect cell efficiency. To achieve efficiencies that will enable commercial applications for CZTSSe based solar cells, Na+ distribution must be considered as dynamic when designing future structures and compositions. Our approach highlights the potential of possible in situ solar cell rejuvenation for light-induced deficiencies resulting from the Na redistribution. The rejuvenation process can be as simple as application of an external electric field. This concept could be further improved by combination with biasing at elevated temperatures, that might inhibit Na+ ions from migrating once the cell is cooled down to room temperature. More research is needed to determine the optimal combination of Na incorporation, concentration and biasing methods that when found could help design enhanced solar cell devices.
Methods
Absorber fabrication
A NaF layer was deposited on molybdenum foil substrates (0.1 mm thickness, a purity of 99.95%, Kojundo chemical laboratory Co. Ltd) using a thermal evaporator. Initially, the precursors for the metallic stack were prepared with a sequence of Zn/Sn/Cu on Mo foil deposited NaF. Metal targets with a purity of 99.999% were used, and an Ar gas flow and pressure of 30 sccm was used for all depositions. The depositions were conducted under a sputtering power of 30 W and a process pressure of 8mTorr. Afterwards, to achieve highly crystalline CZTSSe absorber layers, the stacked precursors were annealed using a two-step annealing process using a rapid thermal annealing (RTA) furnace. First, the precursors were subjected to a soft-annealing treatment at 300 °C using tube-type furnace under an Ar atmosphere at 1 atm. The temperature was raised to 300 °C over a period of 30 min and then maintained for 1 h. Finally, the soft-annealed precursors were reactively annealed to form highly crystallized CZTSSe absorber layers using a chamber-type RTA furnace. A graphite box (with a volume of ∼406 cm3) was used for the final annealing treatment to avoid metal element losses during annealing at higher temperatures. The soft-annealed precursors were placed in a graphite box at the center, and a mixture of Se and S at a ratio of 100:1 was placed in the center of the graphite box. The chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of 1.0 × 10−3 Torr and the annealing step was performed in a chamber-type RTA under an Ar atmosphere with a pressure of 475 Torr. The annealing temperature was varied from 530 °C; this step was maintained for 7.5 min at a heating rate of 10 °C s−1. Finally, the annealed absorber layers were naturally cooled to room temperature.
Device fabrication
The annealed absorber layers were then subjected to a KCN etching treatment for 1 min to remove the surface impurity phases. Further, a 20 nm-thin CdS buffer layer was deposited using the conventional chemical bath deposition method for 14.5 min at 60 °C followed by the deposition of a bilayer consisting of a 50 nm layer of i-ZnO and a 600 nm layer of highly Al-doped ZnO. Finally, we completed the device through a process in which a 1 μm Al grid pattern is sputtered through a shadow mask.
AFM measurements
AFM measurements were conducted using an AIST-NT SmartSPM 1000 AFM in air. A silicon tip with a 25 nm radius and Ti/Ir conductive coating (ASYELEC.01-R2) was used to measure the CPD in a 2-pass mode. The first pass scans the surface topography, the tip is then lifted 30 nm and re-traces the topography in the second pass, maintaining a constant height from the sample to acquire local CPD data.
Efficiency measurements
A solar cell IV testing system (Sun 3000, ABET technologies) was used to simulate 1 sun illumination (AM 1.5 G) with an intensity of 100 mW cm−2. The J–V curve of the devices was recorded using an ADCMT 6244 source meter unit with an active area of 0.3 cm2. Each cell was measured several times in forward and reverse bias (no significant changes were found) the measurements were averaged.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge support by the Australian Research Council through Discovery Grants and the ARC Centre of Excellence in Future Low Energy Electronics Technologies (FLEET). The authors also acknowledge the facilities and the scientific and technical assistance of Microscopy Australia at the Electron Microscope Unit (EMU) within the Mark Wainwright Analytical Centre (MWAC) at UNSW Sydney. Furthermore, this work was supported by the Human Resources Development Program (No. 20194030202470) of the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) grant funded by the Korean Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy.
References
W. Wang, 
            et al., Device Characteristics of CZTSSe Thin-Film Solar Cells with 12.6% Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 CrossRef .
K. J. Yang, 
            et al., A band-gap-graded CZTSSe solar cell with 12.3% efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10151–10158 RSC .
M. Minbashi, M. K. Omrani, N. Memarian and D. H. Kim, Comparison of theoretical and experimental results for band-gap-graded CZTSSe solar cell, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1238–1243 CrossRef .
J. He, 
            et al., Composition dependence of structure and optical properties of Cu 2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solid solutions: An experimental study, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 511, 129–132 CrossRef CAS .
E. Jo, 
            et al., 8% Efficiency Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTSSe) Thin Film Solar Cells on Flexible and Lightweight Molybdenum Foil Substrates, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23118–23124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, X. Kang, L. Huang, S. Wei and D. Pan, Facile and Low-Cost Sodium-Doping Method for High-Efficiency Cu2ZnSnSe4 Thin Film Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 22797–22802 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xue, 
            et al., Fabrication of Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−X)4 solar cells by ethanol-ammonium solution process, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 383, 90–97 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. R. Aaron Barkhouse, Prospects and performance limitations for Cu-Zn-Sn-S-Se photovoltaic technology, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 371, 20110432 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Li, V. Chawla and B. M. Clemens, Investigating the Role of Grain Boundaries in CZTS and CZTSSe Thin Film Solar Cells with Scanning Probe Microscopy, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Nisika, K. Kaur and M. Kumar, Progress and prospects of CZTSSe/CdS interface engineering to combat high open-circuit voltage deficit of kesterite photovoltaics: A critical review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21547–21584 RSC .
M. Azzouzi, 
            et al., Analysis of the Voltage Losses in CZTSSe Solar Cells of Varying Sn Content, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 2829–2835,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b00506 .
C. Neubauer, A. Samieipour, S. Oueslati, M. Danilson and D. Meissner, Ageing of kesterite solar cells 1: Degradation processes and their influence on solar cell parameters, Thin Solid Films, 2019, 669, 595–599 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Winkler, 
            et al., Optical designs that improve the efficiency of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1029–1036 RSC .
T. Ma, G. Jiang, W. Liu and C. Zhu, Sodium doping effects on the crystalline and electrical properties of Cu2ZnSnSe4 thin films, Sol. Energy, 2015, 115, 413–418 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sutter-Fella, 
            et al., Sodium Assisted Sintering of Chalcogenides and Its Application to Solution Processed Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 Thin Film Solar Cells, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1420–1425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed CZTSSe absorbers and influence of sodium on device performance, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 180, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, 
            et al., Effect of Na doping on the performance and the band alignment of CZTS/CdS thin film solar cell, Sol. Energy, 2020, 201, 219–226 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Altamura, et al., Influence of sodium-containing substrates on Kesterite CZTSSe thin films based solar cells. in Materials Research Society Symposium Proceedings, Cambridge University Press,  2013, vol. 1538, pp. 103–106 Search PubMed .
B. Duan, 
            et al., Highly efficient solution-processed CZTSSe solar cells based on a convenient sodium-incorporated post-treatment method, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 40, 196–203 CrossRef .
S. Grini, 
            et al., Dynamic Impurity Redistributions in Kesterite Absorbers, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2020, 257, 2000062 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, 
            et al., Impact of Na Dynamics at the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4/CdS Interface during Post Low Temperature Treatment of Absorbers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5017–5024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Yang, 
            et al., Sodium Effects on the Diffusion, Phase, and Defect Characteristics of Kesterite Solar Cells and Flexible Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 with Greater than 11% Efficiency, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chang, 
            et al., Synergistic incorporation of NaF and CsF PDT for high efficiency kesterite solar cells: Unveiling of grain interior and grain
boundary effects, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 413–422 RSC .
G. Y. Kim, 
            et al., Nanoscale investigation of surface potential distribution of Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 thin films grown with additional NaF layers, Nano Convergence, 2014, 1, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
W. L. Jeong, 
            et al., Impact of Na Doping on the Carrier Transport Path in Polycrystalline Flexible Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
N. Wakatsuki and Y. Sasaki, Kinetics and Diffusing Species of the High-Temperature Selenidization of Molybdenum, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1994, 67, 1290–1295 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bilger, P. O. Grabitz and A. Strohm, Copper-indium-gallium-diselenide/molybdenum layers analyzed by corrected SIMS depth profiles, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2004, 231–232, 804–807 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yun, 
            et al., Critical Role of Grain Boundaries for Ion Migration in Formamidinium and Methylammonium Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600330 CrossRef .
D. Kim, 
            et al., Light-and bias-induced structural variations in metal halide perovskites, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Haight, X. Shao, W. Wang and D. B. Mitzi, Electronic and elemental properties of the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 surface and grain boundaries, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 033902 CrossRef .
M. Wong, K. Tse and J. Zhu, New Types of CZTS Σ3 {112} Grain Boundaries: Algorithms to Passivation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7759–7770 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, 
            et al., Impact of Na Dynamics at the Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4/CdS Interface during Post Low Temperature Treatment of Absorbers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5017–5024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10638d‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of layered precursors composing each sample set: (a) sample with no NaF layer, (b) sample with 10 nm NaF layer, and (c) sample with 30 nm NaF layer. (d) Schematic illustration of the experimental setup for applying the external bias to samples. (e) Side view illustration of ions moving under bias influence. The gray area represents grain boundaries (GBs) while the green area represents grain interior regions (GI). Na+ ions are found to move preferentially through GB's and will be discussed later.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) TOF-SIMS depth profile of three samples from an optimized CZTSSe solar cell (10 nm NaF layer), 2 samples were biased (solid and dashed lines), the third sample remained unbiased (dotted line). (b) Difference of element concentrations between the positively biased sample labelled +10 V (positive voltage at cell surface) and the negatively biased sample labelled −10 V.	 

 	Fig. 3  2 × 2 μm CPD images of the samples containing varying amounts of Na. Different bias voltages were applied to the tip during the first scan: (a) no NaF +1 V (b) no NaF 0 V (c) no NaF −1 V (d) 10 nm NaF +1 V (e) 10 nm NaF 0 V (f) 10 nm NaF −1 V (g) 30 nm NaF +1 V (h) 30 nm NaF 0 V (i) 30 nm NaF −1 V. (j–l) Line profiles marked by the white dashed line through GB at different bias voltages (j) No NaF, (k) 10 nm NaF layer, and (l) 30 nm NaF layer.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Average CPD changes as a function of bias applied to tip. (b) CPD difference between GBs and GI in CZTSSe samples as a function of bias applied to tip.	 

 	Fig. 5  Solar simulator measurements of device efficiency for the three types of devices: solid lines represent the +10 V biasing while the dashed lines represent the −10 V biasing, the dotted lines are reference sample that were not biased.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Na+ distribution in dark – distribution is balanced by diffusion and electrostatic potential due to built-in potential. (b) Charge separation after photon absorption reduces the built-in potential producing an overall force that moves Na+ ions away from the Mo substrate.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta10638d
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
