Pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen production by solid oxide electrolyzer   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3EE00232B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D3EE00232B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 2090-2111Pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen production by solid oxide electrolyzer†

        
          
            Hua 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lasse Røngaard 
            Clausen
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Ligang 
            Wang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Ming 
            Chen
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Energy Conversion and Storage, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: minc@dtu.dk
bDepartment of Civil and Mechanical Engineering, Technical University of Denmark, 2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
cInstitute of Energy Power Innovation, North China Electric Power University, 100193, Beijing, China
Received 
      23rd January 2023
    , Accepted 17th March 2023First published on 20th March 2023AbstractSolid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC) is one way to regulate wind power by producing green hydrogen. However, degradation increases the resistance of SOEC, especially at high current density. This work simulates the heat balance and the degradation process at the system level and compares the Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) at different locations through three scenarios: heat integration, super grid connection, and SOEC development. Both heat source and wind power costs are involved in the analysis and optimization of a 5000 kg H2 per day SOEC recirculating system. The voltage and operating conditions of minimum LCOH are located with a two-stage stochastic optimization approach. As a result, SOEC generates extra ohmic heat and reduces the external heat demand from 29.9 MW to 1.8 MW after degradation. LCOH reduced to $3.60 per kg with heat integration. The super grid will cut the LCOH further to $2.59 per kg. SOEC development will break through the trade-off between current density and degradation, resulting in an LCOH of $2.18 per kg. By 2035, green hydrogen is expected to reach an LCOH of $1.40 per kg and outperform gray hydrogen.

Broader context
Green hydrogen is an essential renewable energy carrier that can be used as fuel, reserves, chemical feedstocks, etc. However, expensive production, storage, and transmission costs limit the development of the hydrogen market. Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (SOEC) is a promising candidate for producing hydrogen at high temperatures with high efficiency. Reducing SOEC green hydrogen production costs is not a solo operation but a systemic one. It requires equipment advances (like mass production, design/operation optimization, and SOEC breakthrough) and system support (like heat integration, super grid integration, and development of renewable energy capture techniques). This work quantifies the effect of each cost-reduction method through the stochastic optimization framework. The framework covers internal and external uncertainties, such as SOEC degradation, location-specific wind power production, and feedstock market prices. SOEC durability test data, system physics constraints, and other constraints are involved in a realistic simulation. The Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) is evaluated to identify technique bottlenecks and economic opportunities in each cost-reduction method. The prospects and benefits of SOEC will attract more investors and drive the development and promotion of green hydrogen. Moreover, the findings will also guide future SOEC designs and help avoid inefficient operations.

Introduction
With large-scale renewable energy harvesting projects, Europe is leading the world toward net zero carbon emissions. Wind farm capacity in the EU was 164 GW (onshore) and 19 GW (offshore) in 2018 and is expected to increase to 483 GW (onshore) and 215 GW (offshore) by 2050.1 Alternative fuels and batteries will work with wind energy as energy carriers. Hydrogen and hydrogen carriers will be applied where batteries are infeasible. Even though hydrogen (carriers) have poor round-trip electric efficiency and aren't ready, they have a higher volumetric and gravimetric energy density and might be more economical (depending on the carriers).2,3 Many potential application scenarios exist, especially those sensitive to weight and volume. Green hydrogen produced from renewable energy is garnering attention as an energy carrier or feedstock for transportation (marine fuel,4 heavy truck5), industry (steel making6), and agriculture (ammonia synthesis7). However, because of the fluctuation of Variable Renewable Energy (VRE) and the uncertainty of electric prices, it is challenging to produce hydrogen at a competitive cost. International Council on Clean Transportation (ICCT) estimates that hydrogen at the pump price will decrease by 30% in 2030 and 50% in 2050 since 2020.8 USA Department of Energy (DOE) estimates green hydrogen cost at $3.83 per kg in 2025.9 According to the EU natural gas price of 2–7 $ per GJ, gray hydrogen, the competitor, costs 0.91–2.73 $ per kg before 2020.10–12 However, the natural gas market has been highly volatile. In August 2022, natural gas hit $103.6 per GJ in the EU,12 making gray hydrogen production cost $40 per kg. Further, DOE aims to cut clean hydrogen costs to $1 per kg in a decade.13 Therefore, developing and investing in green hydrogen is imperative to substitute fossil fuels for sustainability.
A promising future for green hydrogen attracts more investors and players, but actions must be taken immediately. All options to promote the green hydrogen market must be investigated, including (1) integrating the hydrogen production system with existing industries for cost-reduction and risk-sharing, (2) overcoming intermittent power supply by energy storage or the super grid with VRE transmission, and (3) minimizing capital costs by developing next-generation technologies. This paper will discuss the potential and outcome of the above routine through detailed tech-economic analysis.
Green hydrogen is typically made through electrolysis of water. Three water electrolysis technologies are available on the market today: alkaline electrolysis (AEC), proton exchange membrane (PEMEC), and solid oxide electrolysis cell (SOEC).14 Each of them has pros and cons. SOEC operates at elevated temperatures with higher efficiency than the other two competitors. It is still in its early stages of commercialization, with some issues such as degradation, but it has the substantial advantage of thermodynamic efficiency and future hydrogen production costs.15,16 The thermoneutral operation of the SOEC has a cell electric efficiency of 100%,‡ which has been tested and operated by researchers and companies.19,20 Degradation increases resistance. Two operation approaches were proposed and tested on SOEC against degradation: potentiostatic and galvanostatic.21 The potentiostatic approach maintains voltage, resulting in simple heat management of the stack. However, the current density and hydrogen production rate decrease as the cell degrades and the resistance increases during long-term operation. A rapid drop in current density during the first 500 hours was recorded by a fuel electrode-supported SOEC.19 The galvanostatic strategy maintains the current density and hydrogen production rate, which is preferred for fuel production. Nevertheless, the voltage increases with resistance in the galvanostatic approach, and more power is converted into ohmic heat rather than chemical energy. Both electrolyte and fuel electrode-supported cells have been tested by the galvanostatic approach, revealing stable long-term performance.21,22
Degradation increases the cell voltage during galvanostatic operation, affecting the heat balance of the cell and that of the system.18 The electrolysis reaction evolves from endothermic to exothermic after long-term degradation. Heat duty may damage stacks or Balance of Plants (BoPs) and must be addressed at the system level by design and operation. Redundancy design in a heat exchanger network can enhance robustness against degradation uncertainties.23 Proper operation limits the temperature difference, reduces cell resistance, prevents the cell from delamination or cracking, and maintains efficiency at the system level.24,25 If the system were started with an endothermic voltage and operated by the galvanostatic approach, it would be more tolerant to degradation, but internal heat recovery is insufficient.26 External heat replenishes the heat demand at the system level as electric heat or hot fluid. While electric heat is an effective heat source, it increases the consumption of valuable VRE.27 Compensating the system with an external heat source will reduce power consumption and lower the hydrogen production cost.26 Many studies have examined heat integration with the SOEC system for higher thermal efficiency. The pinch point analysis suggests that feeding steam instead of water raises the system efficiency by 17.8 HHV% in theory.28 In this way, heat integration takes full advantage of the existing technology, inviting more players, and accelerating the progress toward the net zero carbon goal.
Heat integration must consider the impact downstream when the heat flow is in the middle of the heat source system. Rivera-Tinoco et al.29 draws off a portion of the steam from the upstream turbine outlet to feed the SOEC. Several operation strategies were discussed to counterbalance the drawing off and minimize the disruption of the downstream power generator. The hydrogen production process can be directly coupled with hydrogen users. For example, the fossil-free steel production process with SOEC has been investigated as intrusive design.30 Integrating with exhausts is non-intrusive and does not impact the heat source system. Samavati combined SOEC with the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) process for synthetic diesel.31 Heat recovery from exhaust gas enhances system thermal efficiency by 24.9%. In another case, the exhaust from a diesel engine produces steam for SOEC. With an organic rankine cycle recovering energy, the system efficiency ends up at 54%.32
Green hydrogen production costs are affected by the capacity factor (CF). If there is no grid connection, the cost of green hydrogen could be three times higher and vary almost 2.5 times from region to region.33 The fluctuation of renewable energy causes more flicker, harmonic distortion, voltage variations, dips, and unreliable blackouts that damage equipment.34 The idea of a super grid was proposed to overcome the challenges.35 Long-distance power transmission systems will connect more renewable energy sources to the grid. Multi-terminal high-voltage direct current (HVDC) grids can transport renewable energy long distances without sacrificing efficiency.36 Hydrogen produced by wind power could be of particular benefit. Wind turbines on a wind farm share the same airflow and keep the same pace. As the super grid connects renewable resources across continents, wind power output could be complemented and stabilized.37 This way, the super grid of renewable resources with high CF will reduce the cost of green hydrogen.
In long term, SOEC development would reduce the H2 cost. Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking (FCH 2 JU) target to 5‰ kh−1 degradation in 2030.38 The trade-off between current density and degradation rate is limiting the cost reduction. For fuel electrode supported cell, Ni in the active layer would aggregate or migrate while left less triple phase boundary behind.19 In the electrolyte supported cell, the YSZ in the electrolyte phase may transform from cubic to tetragonal and increase ohmic resistance, cause conduction decay.39 Significant work has been done to increase the operating current density and improve durability simultaneously. One good example reported by Ovtar et al.40 was that Ce1−xGdxO2−δ (CGO) nanoparticles were infiltrated into the Ni/YSZ electrode and boosted the SOEC cell performance and durability. Prolonged life will reduce the replacement frequency and therefore the capital cost.
Besides solving the degradation problem, scale up and technological learning will reduce the capital costs of SOECs even further.41 Cost reduction of SOFCs has proven to be a trend.42 Many changes have been made to reduce the degradation rate, including switching to LSCF anode and CGO nanoparticle infiltration.15,43 The genuine learning process is faster than PEMEC and AEC since SOEC is in the early commercial production stage.44 Scale economies and automation will lead to further cost reductions. Players across the world are competing in SOEC. For example, TOPSOE is constructing a SOEC plant of 500 MW year−1, expandable to 5 GW year−1.45
The cost of SOEC hydrogen production could be reduced by consolidating resources, increasing renewable energy, and technological advances, as shown in Fig. 1. Thermal energy is a resource that SOEC systems can integrate shortly. Renewable energy can be introduced into the SOEC system in the mid term when penetration increases and super grid construction is completed. Long-term technological developments are expected to break the current density and degradation trade-off and further reduce the cost of hydrogen production.
 Fig. 1  Three scenarios to reduce SOEC based hydrogen production cost. 
The paper is organized as follows. First is a description of the SOEC degradation model at the cell and system levels. Second, explain the economic analysis and two-stage stochastic optimization approach. Third, specify eight installation sites as case studies, including onshore and offshore locations, each with different wind turbines, CF, and heat sources nearby. After that, hydrogen production under three scenarios will be discussed. One with heat integration, one with super grid connection, and the last with SOEC development. The benefits of the three scenarios will be discussed and explored to determine which parameter is the most critical one. Guidelines will be provided regarding the optimal operation and design of the SOEC and its system. Finally, conclude the paper.
SOEC
Steam is fed into the SOEC and split into hydrogen and oxygen. SOEC stacks comprise cells with a cathode, electrolyte, anode, and interconnect. The barrier layer, contact layer, and binding layer could be involved. The cathode contains nickel (Ni) and yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ). Reaction in the cathode occurs at the triple phase boundary (TPB) between electrically connected electrocatalyst (Ni), electrolyte (YSZ), and pore (gas):46 H2O + 2e− → H2 + O2−(1)O2− ions transfer through YSZ electrolyte to anode. O2 is generated at anode by: (2)The material candidates for the anode are lanthanum strontium manganite (LSM), lanthanum strontium cobalt ferrite (LSCF), lanthanum strontium cobaltite (LSC), etc. Mixed ionic and electronic conductors (MIEC) of LSCF and LSC provide better performance by extending the reaction zone to the MIEC phase.14,47 Metallic interconnects combine the cells into the stack, provide electrical contact, and separate and distribute gases.
There are two major types of SOEC with different layer specifications: electrolyte-supported (ESC) and fuel electrode (cathode) supported (CSC). A thick YSZ electrolyte strengthens the ESC. The ESC must work at an elevated temperature (around 850 °C) to reduce the ohmic resistance caused by YSZ thickness and the long anion transport distance. Compared to ESC, CSC has a thin electrolyte with reduced ohmic resistance at the expense of fragility and potential leakage. It operates at 700–800 °C for economic concerns.
The degradation of ohmic resistance is more significant in ESC, while the degradation of polarization resistance is more critical in CSC.48,49 Degradation mechanisms include Ni migration,50 coarsening,51 poisoning,52 impurities,53 crack,54 and so on. The design and fabrication of SOEC have been improved over the last decade.14 A thin barrier layer of CGO is placed between the electrolyte and the anode to prevent formation of non-conducting phases, such as SrZrO3.55,56 CGO infiltration into the cathode could extend the reaction area by providing a double-phase boundary (DPB).57 ALD (atomic layer deposition) and PLD (pulsed laser deposition) create nanofilms with higher performance and lower resistance.58,59 Overall, SOEC has and will move toward stability, durability, and efficiency.
After improvements, SOEC is robust under harsh conditions. SOEC can handle the fluctuating power supply without failure or accelerating the degradation rate. Chen60 tested the CSC SOEC stack from TOPSOE with fluctuation by mapping the current density to measured wind power data. As a result, the degradation rate (DR) for wind power is similar to that for constant power supply. A CSC SOEC was tested for syngas production under wind power.61 The area-specific resistance (ASR) degradation rate is less than 1% kh−1. ESC SOEC stack from Sunfire GmbH was tested by SOFC/SOEC cycle for 2000 h.62 1.23% kh−1 of DR for electrolysis voltage was measured.
Numerical model
Based on experiment data, SOEC performance typically degrades rapidly at first and then stabilizes, ending with lifetime reductions.22,49,63 But in some well-performed long-term tests, the initial drop is distinctive, and their lifetime is improved.64–66 SOEC is started by Vinit. Voltage increases during the degradation process. When it reaches the end-of-life criterion VEoL, the stack needs to be replaced, and the voltage will return to its original value Vinit.64,67 The cell voltage appears periodically throughout the lifespan. The voltage V variation in one period is simulated using a Piecewise linear approximation (PLA):68,69 (3) Vcell(t) = E + JcellASR(t), Vinit = Vcell(t = 0)(4) (5)where Jcell is cell current density, E is equilibrium voltage, and p is partial pressure.
There are dozens of publications on SOEC durability tests and a few reviews.14,67 For further analysis, a practical long-term test is chosen for its excellent performance and long test time.66 The ESC was tested at 850 °C with a current density of −0.70 A cm−2. Details parameters are listed in Table 1. Vinit is 1.06 V, and the DR is 8.42 mV kh−1, 13 mΩ cm2 kh−1. The PLA approach accurately fitted the degradation process with an R2 of 0.992. In many cell tests, SOEC was stopped at 1.50 V to limit the ohmic heat and control the temperature.49,64 In the industry, the SOEC is replaced when it reaches VEoL, which should be determined based on safety and economic concerns. A high VEoL results in the overdesign of BoP components (heat exchanger network, blower, and AC/DC inverter), while a low VEoL results in poor utilization of SOEC cells. In this study, VEoL is the design variable to be optimized from a system-level economic perspective.
Table 1 Parameter of the current SOEC




Name
Unit
Value




Current density, J
A cm−2
−0.70


Temperature, T
°C
850


Initial voltage, Vinit
V
1.06


Initial resistance, ASRinit
Ω cm2
0.27


Degradation rate, DR
mΩ cm2 kh−1
13.0




mV kh−1
8.42


End of life voltage, VEoL
V
To be optimized




The heat and mass balance of SOEC cell defines the boundary conditions of the system. The mass balance is:69 (6) (7) (8)where ṅ is molar flow rate, SC is steam conversion ratio, cH2 is hydrogen concentration at the inlet, and A is active area. Subscripts in and out indicate inlet and outlet, respectively. The heat balance is: Qele + Qreact + Qin + Qout + Qplate = 0(9) Qele = JcellVcellAcell(10) (11)where Qele is the work done by the electrolyzer, Qreact is the reaction heat. Qin and Qin are inlet and outlet heat flow, respectively. Solving the above equations results in the outlet temperature and the cell temperature difference ΔT.
ΔT must be controlled within 10 K cm−1 to prevent cracks caused by excessive thermal stress.70 Without regulation, the high temperature difference in cells will cause a crack or delamination. The heat balance in SOEC is controlled by the anode ratio Rano and the hotplate duty per cell Qplate.18 Their lower boundary are five and 0 mW, respectively. Both variables are adjusted simultaneously with an appropriate control strategy to reduce ΔT.
The sweep gas in anode is the heat carrier to maintain the heat balance by bringing in heat at low voltage and take away ohmic heat at high voltage. Rano is the fraction between anode flow rate and the O2 generation flow rate. (12)With more sweep gas, the SOEC is more tolerant of heat variation. Rano is different but equivalent to Rair in ref. 18. The reference paper uses air as a sweep gas and heat carrier, while this paper uses recycled O2. O2 and N2 have similar heat capacity and similar heat carrier capability. Replacing N2 with O2 will increase the oxygen partial pressure pO2 and thus the equilibrium voltage and active overpotential.19 In the end, Rano is higher than Rair but achieves the similar outcome.
System model
SOEC produces hydrogen from high-temperature steam, with a system to supply heat and electric power. A modular design empowers the system with the flexibility to cope with large fluctuations in power supply and has been widely deployed.71 A 50000 kg H2 per day SOEC system is designed, as shown in Fig. 2. It consists of the SOEC modules and the BoP. The multiplier in the figure denotes the boundary of the module. Each module comprises 50 stacks, 50 cells each, together with two recuperators and two pre-heaters. Cell area is 100 cm2. The number of modules per system Nmps depends on the designed nominal molar capacity ṅH2,sys and current density J: (13)where I is current, Ncps is the number of cells per stack, and Nspm is the number of stacks per module. Subscripts sys, mod and cell represent system, module, and cell, respectively. If the current density is substantial, generating a given amount of hydrogen is possible with fewer cells and modules. Since the Nmps is an integer, the actual hydrogen production rate is slightly above nominal capacity ṅH2,sys. The recuperators in the module (E-104 and E-108) recover heat for the anode and cathode outlet. Pre-heaters (E-105 and E-109) contribute additional heat to regulate the inlet temperature by electric or fluid.
 Fig. 2  Flowchart of an SOEC system. 
Outside the module, six heat exchangers recover internal heat and receive external heat. E-101, E-102, and E-103 vaporize the feed water in sequence. In the first and second, low-grade heat is provided by the cathode and anode outlets, respectively. The third heat exchanger thoroughly vaporizes the water with electric or external heat. The E-106 elevates the temperature of concentrated hydrogen, which is used for steam dilution. E-107 cools down the cathode outlet to room temperature for the knockout. Balance of plants (BoPs) handles pressurization and purification. Pressure loss from heat exchangers and stacks can be compensated by pressurized equipment, including pumps, H2 compressors, and O2 blowers. The desiccant purifies hydrogen while the remaining water is recycled.
A portion of the anode outlet is recirculated as the anode inlet while the remaining O2 is exhausted. Recirculating the anode gas saves low-grade thermal energy that would heat air from room temperature to re-circulation temperature (125.8 °C). Based on our calculations, the design increases system efficiency by 10–20%, especially with extreme Rano operation at 1.00 V or 1.50 V. If air is used as the sweep gas to start the system, the O2 concentration of the sweep gas will keep increasing by circulation/exhaust. The SOEC equilibrium voltage will only rise by 33–39 mV by switching the sweep gas from air to pure oxygen. Air sweeping could introduce impurities or humidity that cause additional degradation of the SOEC cell or stack components, which are avoided by O2 recirculation.
Safety should be emphasized in O2 sweeping. The ignition temperature of H2 at 1 atm is 574 °C,72 much lower than the SOEC operating temperature. The Limiting Oxygen Concentration (LOC) is 4.3 vol%, and the explosion limit of H2 is 4.0–77.0 vol%. Using O2 instead of air would make it easier to reach LOC and cause H2 burning. Hot pure O2 could also ignite the grease or oil in gas pipelines. To ensure safe operation, the following approaches should be adopted: (1) improve SOEC sealing and prevent leakage or permeation; (2) monitor the temperature, hot spot, and leakage inside the module; (3) employ anti-corrosion materials for heat exchangers and pipelines; (4) install proper ventilation systems that can exhaust hydrogen as soon as possible. The safety measures concerning using pure oxygen as sweep gas are, however, totally manageable, as demonstrated in previous studies.73,74
Methodology
A techno-economic analysis and stochastic optimization approach evaluate the SOEC system from a macroscopic perspective. The SOEC system model of Aspen Hysys75 supports evaluation. Economic analysis and stochastic optimization are performed in MATLAB. LCOH, cost, and optimization will be discussed next.
LCOH
The cost and revenue of the hydrogen production system is estimated based on the simulation data. Net Present Value (NPV) is one of the financial metrics that turns future profits into present value. However, NPV relies on the hydrogen price, a region- and time-dependent parameter. Also, the hydrogen price is affected by the cost of storage or transportation. High-pressure storage or cryogenic storage is currently expensive and faces commercialization challenges.76 Several promising hydrogen storage methods are developing, like ammonia and liquid organic hydrogen carriers.77,78 As a result, hydrogen prices are difficult to predict in the future, but they are expected to fall. NPV metrics are thus difficult to evaluate due to the uncertainty of hydrogen prices.
The levelized cost of hydrogen (LCOH) is more reliable for judging the market value of green hydrogen since it does not count on sales. DOE developed and published the H2A spreadsheet for LCOH calculation.9 (14)where Ccap is the capital cost, Crep is the replacement cost, Coper is the operating cost, Cother covers the others, especially maintenance cost. The capital cost is scaled exponentially depending on the maximum size of the respective equipment during degradation. More detail in Appendix A1.
The system simulation data including the capacity and duty of each BoP unit, are used in discounted cash flow analysis. SOEC stacks are replaced when they run out of time, making them the most frequently replaced equipment. The voltage profile determines the number of replacements per year. Replacement capital costs are calculated annually, with 1% unplanned fee. Replacement operation costs are included in maintenance costs. Large-scale production and the fabrication innovations have and will reduce LCOH.42 The SOEC and other capital cost are decreasing by a learning rate of 27%.16 Assuming the plant life is 20 years, starting from 2025. The CF is estimated based on the install location and the wind power uncertainty, as elaborated in the Appendix A2. MACRS (Modified Accelerated Cost Recovery System) is applied to compute the depreciable table. Other assumptions are consistent with those in ref. 9.
Cost of wind power
The wind power cost is expected to decrease in the future, as estimated by Wiser and the community.41,79,80 Due to the intermittence, the electricity price consist of balance cost, grid cost, and profile cost beside wind power cost.81 Wind power cost was predicted by neutral, optimistic, and pessimistic expectation, with 50%, 25%, and 75% probability, respectively.79 Uncertainty of the wind power price is discrete by sampling procedure based on the gamma distribution (see Table 2). Two parameters for gamma distribution are fitted and interpolated through years. 100 samples are generated every year for stochastic optimization.
Table 2 Wind power price [$ per MWh] estimated by Wiser et al.79 Probability is fitted by Gamma distribution for sampling




Year
Neutral
Optimistic
Pessimistic
Sample




Onshore


2025
34.00
30.00
40.30

G(20.6, 1.70)


2035
28.96
23.71
34.90

G(12.5, 2.38)


2050
25.00
20.00
30.09

G(11.2, 2.28)






Fixed-bottom offshore


2025
60.00
50.37
75.10

G(11.4, 5.50)


2035
48.59
39.10
63.12

G(8.08, 6.38)


2050
39.18
33.58
50.00

G(11.2, 3.73)






Floating offshore


2025
96.27
78.36
120.7

G(9.97, 10.1)


2035
63.60
51.58
97.56

G(4.22, 17.6)


2050
46.46
38.62
69.40

G(4.89, 10.9)




Cost of thermal energy
Besides the wind power cost, the cost of thermal energy is included to evaluate the heat integration benefit. There is no consensus regarding the heating price, but it is not free. Heat recovery through power generation is the most promising method, but the potential profit is the primary concern for the heat supplier. The potential profit equal to the difference between the electricity market price and the Levelized Cost of Electricity (LCOE) of the thermal power generation. (15)Heat suppliers would be motivated to recover thermal energy for power generation when electricity prices are high, or LCOE is low. Otherwise, the thermal energy will support the user outside or be abandoned.
Based on the application background and temperature, the cost of thermal energy varies with thermal efficiency ηH2P. Fig. 3 illustrates the thermal efficiency at each temperature with different power generation technology. The figure is compiled from several ref. 82–88, with more detail in ESI.† The thermal efficiency is 65%, 50%, and 35% of the Carnot efficiency for optimistic, neutral, and pessimistic prospect, respectively. 100 samples is generated by uniformed probability distribution within optimistic and pessimistic price each year.
 Fig. 3  Heat to power efficiency ηH2P by temperature and technology. Detailed data is listed in the ESI.† The thermal efficiency is estimated at 35–65% of the Carnot efficiency. RC – Rankine cycle; ORC – organic Rankine cycle; KC – Kalina cycle; CO2 – supercritical CO2 cycle. 
For instance, assuming the SOEC system requires 100 MWh of external thermal energy, the actual heat supplied is 125 MWh with an 80% heat transfer efficiency. 125 MWh of waste heat at 200 °C can generate 22.4 MWh of electricity with a thermal efficiency of 18.0%. If the electricity price in the market is $87.5 per MWh41 and the heat to power LCOE is $30 per MWh,89 then the profit for constructing the waste heat power generator is $57.5 per MWh. Therefore, if the supplier uses waste heat to produce hydrogen instead of electricity, the SOEC plant would have to pay the supplier $1288 to meet the heat demand of 100 MWh.
Optimization
System optimization identifies the optimal sizing and operation strategy. Specifically, it comprises five steps. (1) Initialize design and operation variables; (2) push the variables and parameters to Hysys via the COM interface; (3) collect data after the simulation is complete and estimate the LCOH by the remastered H2A code in MATLAB;9 (4) update the variables by SQP algorithm; (5) repeat the step 2–4 until optimization converges to minimal LCOH.
The SOEC system has internal (degradation) and external uncertainty (wind and thermal power prices). A two-stage stochastic optimization procedure is deployed as detailed in the Appendix A3. In the inner stage, an optimal operation strategy is determined after considering internal uncertainty. The optimization is run over one degradation period and mapped to a lifetime by a time step dt. Intuitively, smaller time steps describe the degradation more precisely but are more computationally expensive. A time step of fifty hours preserves detail while saving computational costs. The outer stage optimizes the economic target by sizing the system under external uncertainty. Optimization of the outer stage is based on the results of the inner stage (operation and power consumption). The optimization approach will give the optimal system design, operation strategy, and optimal LCOH from uncertainty propagation.
Case study
Onshore wind turbine construction is limited by view sight, capacity factor, economic benefit, etc.90 Offshore wind power overcomes such shortcomings by being installed far away from the city. The water depth and distance to shore are the critical parameters to judge the possibility of offshore installation. It is easy to install a wind farm if the seabed is less than 60 m and the distance to shore is less than 50 km. A large amount of offshore wind power is available in the EU North sea. For instance, a 1000 MW offshore wind farm near Thoare will provide green power to Denmark and neighboring countries within the next five years.91
Choosing an SOEC installation site requires considering the cost of transporting feedstock (electricity and heat) and products (hydrogen). A wind farm is installed either onshore or offshore. The cost of power transport depends on where the wind turbine is. The onshore power transport technique is mature. Hydrogen production from offshore wind farms is attracting much attention today, and the cost of transmission is one of the critical factors.92 The high voltage alternating current (HVAC) cable is cheaper than the high voltage direct current (HVDC) cable but loses more electricity as the length increases. Therefore, HVAC is used for near-shore transmission and HVDC for distances. The breakeven distance is around 50–80 km.93 Thermal energy will dissipate into the environment quickly and is unsuitable for long-distance transportation. Heat flow at high temperatures results in significant heat losses, requiring thicker insulation. Hydrogen transport relies on pipelines, trucks, or cargo ships.94 Hydrogen production on-site at hydrogen refueling stations can avoid transportation costs.95 In general, the location selection of a hydrogen plant requires holistic consideration of local wind conditions, geographical characteristics, and distance to the supplier/customer.
As a case study, eight installation locations were chosen from around the EU: four onshore and four offshore. They were chosen because of the potential for wind and heat resources in the surrounding region. Fig. 4 depicts the installation site on a map, as well as the adjacent heat potential.96–98 In the background, the wind capacity factor is shown as a contour. Table 3 summarizes the installation locations and the CF fitting parameters for each case. The fitted figure is included in ESI† document.
 Fig. 4  Eight locations are denoted in the EU map. The heat potential is categorized by temperature and illustrated as circles. The radius of the circle is the heat potential of EU28.96–98 The contour line in the background is the local wind power capacity factor. 
Table 3 Parameters of the eight location for case study




Location
Lon.
Lat.
Wind farm
Height, m
CF, %
Heat source
Heat source type (temperature, °C)




Onshore


ON1
−0.62
41.5
Onshore
100
34.7
—
N-HI (−)


ON2
−4.38
56.0
Onshore
100
33.6
H2 compressor
LT-HI (70)


ON3
3.75
49.0
Onshore
100
30.1
Green methanol process
MT-HI (300)


ON4
10.0
52.5
Onshore
100
32.2
EAF steel making
HT-HI (1000)






Offshore


OFF1
7.50
56.0
Offshore-fixed
150
51.5
—
N-HI (−)


OFF2
−4.38
47.0
Offshore-fixed
150
47.6
H2 compressor
LT-HI (70)


OFF3
3.75
43.0
Offshore-float
150
38.3
Nuclear power plant99
MT-HI (300)


OFF4
16.9
39.0
Offshore-float
150
40.8
EAF steel making
HT-HI (1000)




The case study includes onshore locations in Spain (ON1), the United Kingdom (ON2), France (ON3), and Germany (ON4), and offshore locations in the North Sea (OFF1), the Loire-Atlantique (OFF2), the Gulf of Lion (OFF3), and the Gulf of Squillace (OFF4). All of them have or are planning wind farms. OFF3 and OFF4 are equipped with float offshore wind turbines since their water depth are deeper than 60 meters.
Scenario 1: heat integration
Since heating accounts for 10–16% of the total cost of the SOEC system,9,27 integrating the external heat source could reduce the hydrogen price. From a economic perspective, integrating SOEC into an existing process can spread the risk of a developing market with the others. In addition, converting thermal energy into more profitable hydrogen could push the traditional industry toward eco-friendly. Before describing the heat integration systems and their performance, the degradation of SOEC is analyzed at the system level to identify the mechanism and advantages of heat integration.
Potential of heat integration
The SOEC system is simulated at three voltages: 1.00 V (endothermic, Ven), 1.29 V (thermoneutral, Vth), and 1.50 V (exothermic, Vex). Heat demand variations are depicted by the Sankey diagram and the total grant composite curve (GCC) in Fig. 5. The Sankey diagram illustrates the heat flow, and the GCC shows heat flow vs. temperature and hot and cold duty deficits. Galvanostatic operation keeps the current density at a constant value. The Sankey diagram for standby mode can be found in ESI† document.
 Fig. 5  Heat balance variation of the SOEC system through degradation at three voltages, 1.00 V (endothermic, Ven), 1.29 V (thermoneutral, Vth), and 1.50 V (exothermic, Vex). Left is the Sankey diagram. The arrow denotes the variance with degradation, and the number nearby denotes the duty. Right-top is the total grant composite curve (GCC) at three voltages. Right-bottom is the system LHV efficiency at different voltages and integration systems. 
The energy supply comprises electricity, low temperature (LT) heat, and high temperature (HT) heat. They were distributed directly to the cathode, anode inlet, or SOEC. The inlet stream takes the recovered thermal energy before sending it to the SOEC. Most energy is converted into hydrogen, while the remaining is left in the outlet stream or dissipated into the surrounding environment.
When the voltage climbed from Ven to Vex, there were different responses from GCC above 600 °C. The system becomes auto-thermal when the voltage is raised because more ohmic heat is created and recovered internally. The heat demand from utilities decreased from 26.9 MW to 1.9 MW. Below 200 °C, the LT recuperators produced steam and recovered heat from the output. Since the GCCs are identical at low temperatures, the LT heat demand is stable, especially for steam generators.
At Ven, 56 MW of electricity is delivered into the SOEC, and 5.9 MW is discharged to the hotplate. The cathode inlet gets 19.5 MW of recovered heat and 7.2 MW of external heat. The external heat comprises 3.0 MW from the LT heat source and 4.2 MW from the HT heat source. Meanwhile, 16.8 MW of external heat is pre-heating the anode inlet. The anode flow is the energy carrier that distributes thermal energy from the SOEC and external heat sources. 11.5 MW is delivered to the cathode, while 42.2 MW is recovered to the anode inlet stream.
At Vth, the electricity for SOEC grows to 72 MW, and the hotplate is redundant. The heat demand for the cathode is almost identical to that for Ven operation, which validates the finding by GCC. However, the fraction of each duty has been changed. The LT external heat supply increases to 8.3 MW, and the HT heat demand decreases to 2.9 MW. Anode flow carries 17.9 MW, of which 15.5 MW is recycled. Meanwhile, 6.2 MW is recovered from anode to cathode, 54% compared to low voltage operation.
84 MW of power is delivered into the SOEC at Vex, while 74 MW becomes LHV. The excess ohmic heat is recovered to the feedstock through anode flow. The anode outlet carries 85.0 MW of thermal energy, 70.2 MW for the anode inlet, and 14.4 MW for the cathode inlet. External heat is supplied to the cathode pre-heater, while no heat is required for the anode stream. Because of excessive thermal energy, the external heat demand decreases to 1.8 MW.
In the standby operation, diluted steam and anode flow are fed to maintain temperature and reduce thermal stress. 833 kW of LT heat and 114 kW HT of external heat support the system when wind power is absent. The system recovered 877 kW from the outlet while distributing 655 kW to the cathode flow and 222 kW to the anode flow. The standby process consumes ∼1 MW and should be avoided as much as possible. Most high-grade external heat dissipates into the atmosphere as low-grade heat since no hydrogen is produced. It is also possible to use pure H2 as a protection gas to prevent Ni oxidation, which requires less energy.
Overall, the heat balance variation through the degradation period is non-linear and substantial. Anode recovery heat flow and steam generation duty increase with degradation initially and then decrease against it. Meanwhile, SOEC duty rises by 28 MW, while HT heat flow drops by 19 MW. The variation is significant, especially at the anode heat flow, whose duty expands four times. Other flows are also subject to considerable variation. Sometimes, they even reach zero (e.g., hot plate). It is challenging to design BoPs and heat exchanger networks because of their non-linearity and wide range of duty profiles.
Even with heat balance variations, the system efficiency decreases by around 1% through degradation. The excess SOEC duty is transferred to ohmic heat and recovered, resulting in a new heat balance. Integrating heat into the system improves efficiency, as shown in Fig. 5, bottom right. HT thermal energy could replace electric heat in steam generators and pre-heaters. Power consumption is reduced, especially at Ven. The system electric efficiency reduces from 108% to 93% from Ven to Vth. In the presence of a medium temperature (MT) heat source, the system electric efficiency can be increased to 87% at Ven. As a result, heat integration into the SOEC system improves its efficiency and minimizes power consumption. Low-voltage operations would benefit the most from this technology.
System with heat integration
Heat integration with SOEC poses challenges, and several factors must be considered. (1) Heat source type. Recovering heat from a solid or radiation source is difficult. When the heat carrier is a fluid, heat recovery is easy. (2) A disturbance in flow and temperature may result in additional local stresses, leakage, and cracks in the cell. Buffer tanks and phase change materials can smooth fluctuations and provide a reliable heat source.100,101 (3) Impurities in the gas flow could corrode the heat exchanger, causing heat loss and leakage. While SOEC tolerates impurities, excessive pollutants may block TPB.53,102 (4) Compact SOEC module design requires a small heat exchanger. It may be necessary to pressurize the hot fluid if its heat capacity is too low to reduce its volume flow rate.
There are three heat exchangers in the SOEC system where heat integration is possible: one LT heater (steam generator) and two HT heaters (preheaters for cathode and anode flow, respectively). The temperature of the heat source identifies where and how it can be integrated. Low-temperature heat integration (LT-HI) utilizes an auxiliary process to vaporize water. The medium temperature heat integration (MT-HI) evaporates water directly if the heat source is warmer than the boiling point. High-temperature heat integration (HT-HI) for preheaters when the heat source is hotter than the SOEC inlet. Electric heaters should be deployed when the external heat source is absent or insufficient near a SOEC plant as non-heat integration (N-HI).

N-HI. 
The heat source for the SOEC system is not always available. Denmark plans to build two energy islands in the middle of the ocean to produce green fuel from wind power.103 If the SOEC system is installed on that island, there is no thermal energy but electricity. Electrical power evaporates water and overheats the inlet streams exclusively. In this case, both LT and HT heaters are electric heaters.


LT-HI. 
Low-temperature heat sources are widespread in the wood production, mining and quarrying, paper industry, transport equipment, and geothermal resources.96,104,105 LT heat is challenging to recover because of poor exergy efficiency. Temperature upgrading methods include a vapor heat pump, absorption heat pump, and absorption heat transformer. The heat pump steam generator (HPSG) can overheat the steam to 160 °C with an LT heat source.106 Some refrigerants, like R245fa, have a high Global Warning Potential (GWP). The development of low-GWP refrigerants, such as R-1234ze and R-1234yf, is underway.
The hydrogen compressor is one of the potential low temperature heat sources. Hydrogen products are typically compressed and stored in a high-pressure tank. In the compression process, the intercoolers remove heat from hydrogen when it is too hot to compress. Here, the intercooler is a potential low-temperature heat source and needs an HPSG to elevate the temperature and vaporize water. An HPSG-based LT-HI process is shown on the left of Fig. 6. It comprises a compressor, condenser, expansion valve, flash, and evaporator. The refrigerant is vaporized in the evaporator (intercooler) and is compressed in succession. Next, the high-grade heat is transferred to the heat sink in the condenser. After that, the refrigerant is depressurized and partially vaporized by the first expansion valve before being separated by the flash. The liquid phase is depressurized, evaporated, mixed with flash gas, and recirculated to the compressor. The condenser in a heat pump process is the evaporator in the SOEC system, where the water receives high-grade heat and evaporates. Feeding with depressurized water beforehand can lower the boiling point and increase the heat transfer efficiency. The COP is 3.6, as suggested by ref. 106.
 Fig. 6  Heat integration example, the dash line represents the SOEC system boundary. Left: LT-HI with the hydrogen compression process. Middle: MT-HI with the green methanol synthesis process. Right: HT-HI with the EAF steel making process exhaust. 


MT-HI. 
Medium-temperature heat sources exist in the chemical, petrochemical, construction, iron, and steel industries.104,107 The steam generated by the MT heat source can feed processes or distribute thermal energy from site to site. Steam generation for SOEC is also possible. A depressurized operation can reduce the boiling point and enhance efficiency. Without the heat user, it is more reasonable to generate electricity. The candidate power generation processes include the Rankine Cycle (RC), Organic Rankine Cycle (ORC), Kalina Cycle (KC), and supercritical CO2 cycle (sCO2).108–111 Therefore, MT heat sources are more valuable than LT ones.
Methanol is a candidate fuel for the future global energy system. It has a greater volume energy density than hydrogen and a slightly lower volume energy density than methane, making it a promising energy carrier. Green methanol synthesis from captured CO2 and electrolyzed H2 is an endothermic reaction.112 MT-HI system design is depicted in the middle of Fig. 6. The outlet temperature of the synthesis reactor is around 300 °C, which is suitable for direct steam generation. After that, the exhaust is sent to the internal heat recovery for the synthesis inlet. The HT heater of the SOEC system uses electric heat since the heat source temperature is insufficient.


HT-HI. 
The non-metallic mineral, iron, and steel sectors are the principal HT heat source.104,107 Gas turbines and the Rankine cycle are two methods for HT power generation. However, the formal ones are prohibitively expensive for high operating temperatures. The latter must mix HT fluid with air to reduce temperatures to the RC upper limits. Capital costs are lower, but efficiency is sacrificed. For example, the Carnot efficiency drops by 7.58% if the heat source temperature slips from 1000 °C to 800 °C. HT heat sources are valuable and should be used by HT users for optimal exergy efficiency.
The electric arc furnace (EAF) steel-making process is a potential HT heat source for the SOEC system (Fig. 6 right).113 The scrap passes through EAF off-gas for preheating before moving to the EAF hearth. The EAF off-gas temperature is 1000–1400 °C after scrap preheating. It consists of dust, VOC, PCDD/F, PCB, and others, reducing heat recovery efficiency. Another difficulty in heat recovery is a batch operation. Phase change material may mitigate the fluctuations in exhaust gas temperature and flow rate, but the average temperature drops to 600 °C.101 It may also be possible to match the EAF operating time to the wind generation time by energy storage. The exhaust gas can sequentially heat the SOEC feedstock and generate steam. An ORC or other power generation plant is placed between two SOEC heat exchangers to recover some of the power.

Benefit of heat integration
Tech-economic analysis of SOEC systems at eight locations is performed, each location may have an integrated system (see Table 3). This result is guaranteed to be optimal after a two-stage optimization. The decision variable in the outer stage is the VEoL. Rano and Qplate are control variables for the inner stage. Fig. 7 depicts the LCOH in a bar chart, with an error bar marking the probability distribution of LCOH. The LCOH with N-HI in all cases are shown as baseline for comparison. Gray hydrogen cost is illustrated as a reference by dash line (average) and area (range). The gray hydrogen cost is estimated by the empirical formula:10,11 Gray H2 cost[2020$ per kg] = 0.39 × NG Price[$ per GJ] + 0.22(16)Natural gas prices ranged from 2–7 $ per GJ before 2020, averaging 4 $ per GJ.10,12 It is estimated that the cost of gray hydrogen ranges from 1.00–2.95 $ per kg, 1.78 $ per kg on average.
 Fig. 7  LCOH for each case in Scenario 1. The bar chart with the error bar at the top shows the LCOH with heat integration. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). The bottom figure presents the LCOH of thermal energy. LCOH and LCOHHeat in the N-HI case, which is the cost of electric heat, are marked as red circles with error bars at the top and bottom, respectively. 
LCOH was affected by the uncertainty in the thermal energy cost. When the external heat source is absent, onshore wind power produces hydrogen cheaper, and offshore wind power produces hydrogen with more fluctuation. The onshore LCOH is between $3.65 per kg and $4.00 per kg, while offshore LCOH is between 3.94 and 5.77 $ per kg. The standard deviation (STD) of LCOH is around 7.6¢, 17.0¢, and 36.9¢ for onshore, offshore-fixed, and offshore-float, respectively. LCOH is primarily affected by the price of wind power. Offshore cases have a CF at most 20% higher than onshore cases. Nevertheless, this does not result in an advantage for the LCOH since offshore wind power is more expensive.
Heat integration reduces LCOH, particularly at the heating cost, as shown in the bottom of Fig. 7. On4 and OFF4 with HT-HI have the most significant reduction (23.1¢ and 71.4¢), ensuring an advantage over the other cases. Thermal energy costs LCOHheat are responsible for the decline in LCOH. 22.3¢ reduced LCOHheat for ON4 and OFF4 by 61.7¢. The LCOH for OFF2 and OFF3 were cut by 13.9¢ and 29.8¢, respectively. The profit of integration is the difference between heat sources. ON3 saved 10.2¢ by MT-HI, and ON2 saved 7.9¢ by LT-HI. Heat integration for offshore wind-powered hydrogen production is more cost-effective, especially in floated cases. Heat integration would facilitate the promotion of floating wind turbines. The fluctuation of the LCOH is limited by heat integration. For example, STD for OFF4 is 29.1¢ with HT-HI but 36.8¢ without heat integration.
The difference in the efficiency of European onshore wind resources does not differentiate the cost of hydrogen production from place to place. Heat integration is especially critical in the undifferentiated hydrogen market. For example, the cost of hydrogen production for ON4 without heat integration is 17.7¢ higher than that of ON1. However, with HT-HI, the LCOH of ON4 appears to have a market advantage of 5.4¢. LCOH reduction decreases with heat source temperature, which makes sense. But even low-temperature heat sources can make hydrogen producers competitive. The LCOH of ON2 is 7.6¢ more expensive than ON1 but only 2.1¢ more expensive after LT-HI. Therefore, mobilizing local untapped heat for hydrogen preparation can reduce cost differences between regions. Higher profit margins will promote related equipment development and the hydrogen market.
However, heat integration does not allow green hydrogen to compete with gray hydrogen. Even after HT-HI, the average cost of green hydrogen in ON4 is two times that of gray hydrogen. Subsidies of 1.82–2.12 $ per kg, 2.16–2.39 $ per kg, and 3.22–3.70 $ per kg for onshore, offshore fixed, and offshore float wind power will make their LCOH competitive with the gray hydrogen average cost. Therefore, green hydrogen costs must be further reduced along with other ways.
Scenario 2: super grid integration
VRE has exploded in the past decade. Wind, solar, hydropower, biomass, geothermal, and other VRE play essential roles towards net zero. As alternatives to fossil fuels, their share in global energy generation increased from 18.5% (2000) to 28.6% (2020).114 Although Europe has various renewable resources, they are dispersed.115 Wind energy is enriched around the North Sea. Solar energy is abundant in the Mediterranean. Tidal power is prevalent along the Atlantic coast. Biomass energy is widely distributed throughout Europe.115 Development of the VRE will reconstruct the power system from centralization to distribution. Distributed green hydrogen production will save transportation costs and enhance energy security. Creating a super grid will integrate/dispatch VRE using long-distance transmission technologies and increase penetration.35 Super grids will replenish when there is no wind by releasing local reserves or dispatching VRE from other place. CF could be improved, but extra costs involving grid construction will occur.
Potential of super grid integration
The super grid links the SOEC system to nearby and distant power generation facilities. A stable energy source will improve equipment usage and reduce equipment damage due to grid fluctuations. The stability of power relies on renewable energy at the ends of the grid. Wind resources are similar on a small scale but vary widely on a large scale. Specifically, it is doubtful that wind resources are simultaneously unavailable across Europe, which is one of the advantages offered by the super grid.
The correlation coefficients of wind speed in the two regions highlight the benefits of linking them. A more significant correlation coefficient indicates the regions have similar wind resources, and the probability of simultaneously varying is greater. The grid linking two areas with a small correlation coefficient can supplement one side when it lacks wind power with electricity from the other.

Fig. 8 shows the Pearson correlation of wind speed across locations and highlights the most favorable cross-regional combinations. Detail value is listed in ESI.† Three regions (ON2, ON1, and OFF4) are located in the northwest, northeast, and southwest corners of Europe, respectively. ON2 is the perfect partner for the other three regions. ON1 and OFF4 are vital complements to the other two areas. The distribution of heat potential (Fig. 4) shows that central Europe is the heart of industrial energy consumption. Establishing a super grid linking renewable energy sources across Europe will provide stable, clean, and green energy for the European industry.
 Fig. 8  Chord chart of the Pearson correlation matrix for wind power between eight locations. The width of the chord denotes the correlation coefficient between the two places. The red chord is the lowest correlation for each site. Wind power from the other end of a red cord will complement the intermittent wind best. Pearson correlation matrix is attached in the ESI.† 
The European super grid is under construction and will developed organically.35 HVDC is a crucial technology for building super grids with barely long-distance transmission losses than HVAC. Numerous high-voltage transmission lines are being constructed or have been completed. For example, the NordLink linking Norway and Germany is 500 km long and has a voltage of 525 kV.116 1400 MW of power is transmitted between the two countries, approximately equal to the power of the Fosen Vind wind farm. The construction of power grids across Europe is also planned. The EWEA project in the North Sea will produce 150 GW of offshore wind power in 2030, meeting 13–17% of EU electricity demand.117 MEDGRID and DESERTEC projects focus on bringing solar energy from North Africa to Europe.35 ENTSO-E, TYNDP project will build and upgrade over 2000 km of DC cable in pan-European, which will significantly enhance renewable energy penetration and gradually phase out nuclear and other power plants.118
The EU super grid has accomplished a great deal, but it faces some challenges in the future regarding technical, commercial, political, and environmental aspects.35 (1) HVDC and AC grid interactions are fragile. Fault detection, isolation, and system protection must occur within milliseconds. Control strategies and circuit design solutions have been proposed.119 (2) Grid construction is capital-intensive and time-consuming. Green hydrogen demand could also lead to super grid investments. (3) Countries need to negotiate grid codes and border fees. Suppliers, manufacturers, and other stakeholders are encouraged to cooperate on Network Codes by the European Committee. (4) HVDC cables might affect the ocean, lake, and field biomes by cable laying, heat dissipation, contamination leakage, or electromagnetic fields. Detailed preliminary research, a protection plan, and environment-friendly techniques will minimize biological impact.
Super grid related cost include the (1) construction costs and (2) transmission loss. Grid expansion cost is location and distance dependent within €10 per MWh.120 The cost will be borne by the customers as part of the electricity or hydrogen price. The revenue of sustainability and clean environment will be shared by the society.
VRE fluctuations and low inertia require the power system for dispatch, the reserves for balancing, and the electricity markets for trading. The reserves generate or consume electricity, balance the power in the system, and maintain frequency. Fossil fuels provide some generation reserves and thus can't be eliminated. More expensive fossil fuels will increase the electricity price shortly, and the reduced VRE cost will drive the price down in the mid and long term. The electricity market price in the future is predicted to average 87.4 $ MWh−1,41 which is more expensive than wind power LCOE. SOEC can generate hydrogen from wind power with fluctuation. Importing electricity to SOEC from wind farms and HVDC instead of the market might benefit the LCOH.
Benefit of super grid integration
The SOEC system is simulated and optimized with an external power supply from the super grid. ON1 and ON2 can complement the period of no wind for the other sites. Onshore wind power is imported to each location. Grid costs have a normal distribution of N(10,2.5)$ MWh−1.120 The electricity price for hydrogen generation is a weighted average of the import (onshore LCOE and grid-related cost) and wind power LCOE based on the amount used. Importing electricity from the market with an electricity price of N(87.4,10)$ MWh−1 is taken as a ref. 41.
The capacity factor CF is improved by super grid integration: (17)where Pmax is the maximum system power consumption through degradation, Wsupergrid is the external power supplementary per year.
The LCOH with 100 and 200 GWh year−1 of external electricity is shown at the top of Fig. 9. A comparison of the CF values before and after power import is shown at the bottom. Two cases were referenced. (1) Without a super grid, denoted by a solid line. (2) Purchase 200 GWh year−1 electricity from the market, denoted by a dashed line. With a heat source integration, the additional power from the super grid can focus on hydrogen production rather than heating, so the CF boost is even greater. Importing 100 and 200 GWh year−1 of power boosts the CF by about 13% and 27%, respectively. HT-HI boosts the CF by 2% more than the N-HI.
 Fig. 9  LCOH for each case in Scenario 2. The bar chart with the error bar at the top depicts the LCOH with 100 and 200 GWh year−1 power imported from the super grid. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a black dashed line (average) and area (range). LCOH in an independent grid (red) or purchase 200 GWh year−1 electricity from the market (gray) are illustrated as circle and error bar for reference. The bottom figure presents the CF with and without super grid integration. 
The super grid significantly reduces LCOH. ON3 has the largest LCOH reduction, 68.0¢ for 100 GWh year−1 and 105¢ for 200 GWh year−1. The rest of the onshore wind cases had LCOH decreases of 48.6¢ and 77.2¢ or more. The decline in offshore wind cases is less pronounced than in onshore cases, with OFF1 decreasing by 41.4¢ at 100 GWh year−1. As more power is imported, the marginal reduction in LCOH is halved. Further, electricity imports can continue to reduce LCOH, but the rate of decline will also decrease.
Purchasing power from the market does not always reduce LCOH. ON1's LCOH rose by 2.3¢ after purchasing 200 GWh year−1 of power. The other cases save 7.8–88¢. Integrating the electricity market converges the average and distribution of LCOH in each case: averaging at $3.85 per kg and STD of 19¢. However, directly connecting to or contracting with wind farms will exclude fossil energy reserves and reduce LCOH. Importing from wind farms instead of the market reduces LCOH by 72–83¢ (onshore), 62–69¢ (offshore fixed), and 64–71¢ (offshore float). The uncertainty is magnified in onshore cases and weakened in offshore cases. STD is 6.1–7.6¢, 16–17¢, and 29–33¢ for onshore, offshore fixed, and offshore float, respectively.
LCOH with super grid integration is approaching the gray hydrogen cost without surpassing it. 200 GWh year−1 integration will bring LCOH into the range of gray hydrogen costs. Green hydrogen subsidies to compete with the average gray hydrogen cost are 0.81–1.10 $ per kg, 1.44–1.46 $ per kg, and 1.69–2.14 $ per kg for onshore, offshore fixed, and offshore float wind power, respectively.
The competitive advantages of heat integration still exist. After importing 100 GWh year−1 of power, ON4 LCOH drops to $2.95 per kg, while ON1 only drops to $3.17 per kg. MT-HI gradually catches up with its competitors. ON3 surpasses ON1 after importing 200 GWh year−1 of wind power; their LCOHs are 2.85 and 2.88 $ per kg, respectively. Offshore wind power also benefits from heat integration. The LCOH of OFF4 is reduced from $5.00 per kg to $4.05 per kg (100 GWh year−1) and $3.47 per kg (200 GWh year−1).
While super grid integration reduces costs more than heat integration, this does not mean that heat integration is not essential as the super grid matures. After heat integration, ON3 overtook ON1 become one of the strong contenders. In general, the super grid converges the cost of hydrogen production. The difference in LCOH decreases as more power is imported. Hydrogen producers must find breakthroughs, such as the next generation of SOEC.
Scenario 3: SOEC development
High current density operations will reduce the SOEC area and cut capital costs. Performing at high current densities and thermoneutral voltages requires a lower ASR. For instance, ASR at 800 °C and 1.29 V is 902 and 361 mΩ cm2 for −0.50 and −1.25 A cm−2, respectively. Current densities of −4.08 and −5.96 A cm−2 have been reported at Vth,121,122 with ASR of 110 and 75.6 mΩ cm2. However, their lifetimes are not commercially viable. Ni migration driven by cathode overpotential and pH2O is a critical degradation mechanism at high current density.50 CGO infiltration in the cathode of a CSC SOEC reduced the polarization resistance and related over potential.123 Lifetime was prolonged compared to the bare electrode cell.22 Replacing YSZ with CGO in the cathode of ESC was tested and demonstrated stable performance.124 SOEC is developing toward stable, robust and effective. More research is being conducted on material design, fabrication, operation, etc.
Potential of SOEC development
Boosting the current density and suppressing degradation are two goals for the SOEC. Although they are interdependent, it is encouraging that progress has been made over the past decade. 19 SOEC long term tests are collected and analyzed by LCOH, more detail attached in ESI.† Initial degradation of some tests is significant and can't be ignored. Their voltage follows a two-segment PLA: (18)where DR1 is the degradation rate in the first segment and DR2 for the second, ts is the shifted time between two segments. For some long-term tests, the operation was changed halfway (usually in the second segment) to examine the degradation rate in another condition without building a new test. However, the start-up test and the halfway test are different. Start-up tests include the first segment, which is sensitive to operating conditions. The first segment of the halfway test is conducted under another condition. As a result, the halfway tests have a different Vinit from the start-up test. Economic analysis and comparison between halfway and startup tests should be conducted prudently. LCOH for 20 tests,22,40,48,49,51,62,63,66,124–129 including both start-up and halfway tests, is shown in Fig. 10, calculated by 91.3% CF (8 kh operation per year), N-HI, and onshore wind power supply.
 Fig. 10  LCOH for 19 long term tested SOEC and one virtual test under 91.3% CF, N-HI, and onshore wind power LCOE. The size of the plot denotes the test time. The longest halfway test lasted 24 kh. The most extended start-up test lasted 6 kh and was selected for S1 and S2. Detailed data is listed in the ESI.† 
Low current density operation extends lifetime but is not an optimal solution. Initially, LCOH for −0.50 A cm−2 is 2.41–2.94 $ per kg. Technological developments have increased current density and lifetime, resulting in an LCOH drop to ∼$2.1 per kg. Several articles reported long-term experiments with −1.00 A cm−2, but their degradation rates varied widely, resulting in a distribution of LCOH between $2.14 per kg and $2.33 per kg. The −1.25 A cm−2 operation failed to deliver stable degradation and led to an increase in LCOH to 2.31–2.35$ per kg. The decreasing trend of LCOH encountered a boundary between −1.00 and −1.25 A cm−2. Breaking the limit is, therefore, particularly critical. Therefore, the economic performance of the future cell is analyzed here, assuming the boundary is broke successfully. As listed in Table 4, the degradation rate and current density for the future cell are 5‰ kh−1 and −1.25 A cm−2 respectively.
Table 4 Parameter of the virtual SOEC in the Scenario 3




Name
Unit
Value




Current density, J
A cm−2
−1.25


Temperature, T
°C
800


Initial voltage, Vinit
V
To be optimized


Initial resistance, ASRinit
Ω cm2
0.10


Degradation rate, DR
mΩ cm2 kh−1
5.00




mV kh−1
5.00


End of life voltage, VEoL
V
To be optimized




Benifit of SOEC development
In Scenario 3, the initial voltage Vinit, a function of ASRinit, is involved as a decision variable in the outer stage optimization, besides VEoL. Low voltage operation requires higher anode flows and hotplate duty for temperature control. Lifting the initial voltage has the potential to reduce the anode flow rate and heat demand. Therefore, it is possible to save capital costs of the heat exchanger and pressurization devices, as well as the operating costs of electricity. ASRinit is related to material design (e.g., thickness, composition), cell manufacture (e.g., sintering temperature), stack assembling (e.g., interconnect resistance), and operating conditions (e.g., temperature, pressure, H2 fraction). In order to control the Vinit, the ASRinit should be designed before stack assembling.
The optimization results are illustrated in Fig. 11. In addition, the LCOH of N-HI in Scenario 1 is labeled as a reference. SOEC system starting in 2025 and 2035 are compared in Fig. 11 regarding LCOH (top) and LCOHcap (bottom). The lifetime of the SOEC plant is 20 years.
 Fig. 11  LCOH for each case in Scenario 3. The bar chart with the error bar at the top depicts the LCOH for future cells that start in 2025 and 2035, respectively. LCOH in Scenario 1 is marked as red circles and error bars for reference. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). The bottom figure presents the capital cost for reference and future cell by years. 
The development and optimization of SOEC further reduced H2 costs. Compared with the LCOH after heat integration in Scenario 1, SOEC development brings a profit of 54–95¢. ON3 has the most significant reduction from the baseline value. ON4 has the lowest LCOH at $2.76 per kg. The development of the SOEC brings the offshore wind LCOH down to $3.40 per kg (OFF1). There is still an enormous gap between the LCOH for offshore and onshore wind.
If system construction is postponed to 2035, SOEC equipment costs and wind power LCOE will drop significantly because of the large-scale production and learn-by-doing process. OFF3 drop the most to $2.34 per kg. The large-scale production and learning process is reflected by the decrease in capital costs. LCOHcap for the onshore cases decreased from 76–87¢ to 46–54¢ (2025) and 15–18¢ (2035). Correspondingly, the LCOHcap for offshore wind has gradually reduced by 19–25¢ (to 2025) and 45–52¢ (to 2035) from baseline. While onshore and offshore cases have different LCOHcap starting points, they will be nearly identical in 2035. Late market entrants will benefit from mature technology and low costs. However, this will also cause companies to lose the opportunity to capture the market in the early stages of hydrogen development.
Green hydrogen produced by onshore wind will be cheaper than average gray hydrogen cost in 2035. Offshore wind power based green hydrogen will still rely on subsidies to match gray hydrogen. However, the amount is as low as 0.56–0.62 $ per kg and 0.82–1.20 $ per kg for fixed and float offshore wind power, respectively. Heat integration will have a minimal contribution to LCOH in 2035 because the onshore wind is inexpensive. Heat integration is still necessary to reduce LCOH for offshore wind for competitiveness.
Discussion
A summary of the three scenarios will be discussed in this section. First, the operation strategy is outlined. A guideline for SOEC design is presented next. Finally, the pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen production is discussed.
Operating condition
SOEC is controlled by Rano and Qplate to keep temperature gradient within 10 K cm−1 following degradation and voltage variation. Rano and Qplate have a lower limit of five and zero, respectively. The control strategy achieves minimum system power consumption through inner-stage optimization. Integrating heat and the super grid will not change the strategy, but the development of SOEC (increase in current density) will. The optimal operation strategy for six set of current densities at each voltage is illustrated in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Optimal operation strategy (Rano and Qplate) for different current density through degradation. When the voltages increase from Ven to Vth and Vex during degradation, the operation is adapted accordingly. 
When the voltage is lower than 1.24 V, both Rano and Qplate need to be controlled. With an increased voltage, Rano and Qplate decrease at the same time. Consider −0.50 A cm−2 as an example: if the voltage increases from 1.00 V to 1.02 V, Rano decreases from 13.2 to 12.4, and Qplate decreases from 6.80 to 6.30 mW. The optimal strategy follows a convex curve in the operating space. The curve sways from left to right when the current density increases. The optimal Qplate for −1.25 A cm−2 is similar to that of −0.50 A cm−2, with a value of 6.76 mW per cell, but Rano rises twofold to 22.2. Large current density operation increases the heat demand of a single SOEC cell/stack/module. More sweep gas is needed to replenish the reaction heat at Ven. More sweep gas saves more energy than increasing hot plate duty. Such findings emphasize the importance of sweeping gas in the SOEC system, especially below Vth.
The hot plate is not necessary when the voltage is higher than 1.24 V. If the voltage is between 1.24 V and 1.36 V, Rano should be maintained at its minimum value to increase the SOEC temperature gradient from −10 K cm−1 to +10 K cm−1. After that, more sweep gas should be introduced if the voltage exceeds 1.36 V due to degradation. Rano increases to 20 at the highest voltage (1.50 V).
Initial and terminate voltage
The VEoL and decommissioning time are optimized for existing SOECs. For future SOECs, the Vinit and VEoL are optimized, and the expected lifetime is estimated. The top of the Fig. 13 shows the optimal VEoL of the existing SOEC, and the bottom shows the optimal Vinit and VEoL of the future SOEC.
 Fig. 13  Optimal voltage for scenarios. Top: Optimal VEoL for Scenario 1 and 2 with Vinit of 1.06 V. Bottom: Optimal Vinit and VEoL for Scenario 3. 
The VEoL of the SOEC is the decision variable for Scenarios 1 and 2. Without a super grid, the optimal VEoL is ∼1.30 V for onshore cases and ∼1.40 V for offshore cases. With super grid integration, the optimal VEoL increases to 1.40 V for both onshore and offshore cases. Meanwhile, HT-HI will decrease the VEoL by fully utilizing the high efficiency in low voltage operation.
By designing the initial and termination voltages of the future SOEC simultaneously, it is possible to maximize system efficiency, avoid expensive equipment costs, and reduce power consumption. The optimal Vinit without HT-HI is spread from 1.20 V to 1.22 V, and the optimal VEoL is constant at 1.37 V, as shown in area C. For HT-HI cases, the optimal Vinit decrease to 1.17–1.21 V, and optimal VEoL decrease to 1.27–1.35 V, as shown in area B. The cell lifetime is limited by 20–30 kh, since replacement cost is insignificant compare to the addition VRE cost at high voltage. If the lifetime is constrained to be higher than 40 kh, the optimal Vinit is around 1.16 V, and optimal VEoL is around 1.37 V, as shown as area A.
Reducing ASR and Vinit is one of the SOEC design goals that benefits LCOH. Typically, SOECs operate around the Vth (area C), starting with a smaller value and degrading slightly above Vth. Optimal VEoL is constrained by thermodynamics. SOEC is replaced at 1.37 V to curb the temperature gradient without increasing the Rano and the sweep gas flow rate (Fig. 12). System efficiency and operating costs are improved with ASR and Vinit reductions. Even though high voltage operation can achieve auto thermal by recovering additional ohmic heat, heat recovery is inevitably inefficient (lower system efficiency in Fig. 5) and expensive (larger heat exchange area). It is more cost-effective to save energy by avoiding consumption than by recovering it.
The Vinit and VEoL should be further reduced if an HT heat source is present (area B). Low voltage operation is driven by (1) the decreasing SOEC capital cost and (2) HT heat is cheaper than electricity. Frequent replacement is infeasible today and will increase the capital cost. However, using heat instead of electricity in low-voltage operations can save operating costs. More analysis of the replacement cost is included in the EIS document. Similar ideas are being developed and applied to electric vehicles.130
Most of the time, when HT heat is unavailable and frequent replacement is not feasible, the SOEC should be designed in area A. Voltage should develop around Vth and avoid extreme Ven and Vex operations. Extreme Ven (1.0 V) operation requires more heat exchange area and more HT heat (see GCC in Fig. 5), and extreme Vex (1.5 V) consumes unnecessary VRE. Existing systems typically operate above Vth, which is not optimal.131 Developing SOEC with a lower ASRinit is still beneficial to LCOH because ASR can be increased by lowering the temperature during operation. In addition, LT operation decreases the heat exchange area and thermal insulation thickness, further reduces the LCOHcap. Its detailed effect will be discussed in the next section.
Pathway competition
The pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen includes several processes: large-scale production, optimization, heat integration, super grid integration, SOEC development, and late-mover advantage. Fig. 14 compares the contribution of the processes. The waterfall chart on the left illustrates the cost reduction in three cases: ON4 (onshore with HT-HI), OFF2 (offshore fixed with MT-HI), and OFF4 (offshore float with HT-HI). The slope chart on the right compares the quantified potential of each process in three cases.
 Fig. 14  Pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen. Waterfall chart on the left denotes the LCOH reduction. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). Slope chart on the right specified the values for each progress in $ per kg. 
Hydrogen produced by onshore wind power will always be superior to offshore wind. Without large-scale production and optimization, the three cases have LCOH at $4.28 per kg (ON4), $4.64 per kg (OFF2), and $6.07 per kg (OFF4), respectively. Although each process is insignificant in reducing LCOH, they cut LCOH by 67.3% (ON4), 56.2% (OFF2), and 67.9% (OFF4). The reduction is more remarkable for offshore wind, and the gap with onshore wind is rapidly narrowing. Eventually, subsidies for SOEC green hydrogen can be reduced, but they will still be needed for a while. The LCOH of ON4 drops below the average cost of gray hydrogen after 2035, even without subsidies. Meanwhile, OFF2 and OFF4 require 17 and 25¢ in 2035, respectively, much less than the 2.86 and 4.29 $ per kg they initially needed.
Learning curves estimate the benefit of large-scale production, which will reduce capital costs. LCOH will reduce 13–17¢ by large-scale production. System optimization will decrease the LCOH by 23–28¢, which works best for ON4.
Heat integration will offer an advantage in the market by reducing VRE consumption. OFF4 will have a lower LCOH than OFF2 after 2035. HT-HI cut 71¢ for OFF4, while MT-HI only cut 12¢ for OFF2. Recirculating system design maintains system efficiency in Ven and Vex operations. The exhaust and heat consumption for the open system could be much higher at Ven and Vex, which limits their efficiency.
Super grid integration for cheap electricity is the key to green production. It will be the most effective way to reduce LCOH by saving 0.96–1.53 $ per kg. However, it is also critical to note that the market price of electricity will not decrease significantly with the reduction in VRE generation costs. Balancing costs from forecast error and profile costs from trading will elevate the market price of VRE.120 Rising fossil fuel prices will also eliminate the benefits since traditional power plants are flexible reserves for balancing power.41 Super grid may allow cross-regional VRE as a flexible reserve, but further technical, political, environmental, and commercial obstacles must be addressed, as discussed in Scenario 2.35
The benefits of SOEC development are the same in all cases. Breaking the boundary the current density and degradation rate trade-off will cut LCOH by 41–43¢. Further, increasing the cell area, lowering the operating temperature, improving AC/DC efficiency, reducing heat exchange losses, and so on, will also lower the LCOH. A larger cell will reduce fabrication costs. The number of stacks determines the total SOEC area in the module. An enormous SOEC area in the module will make it difficult to control. More sweep gas is needed for heat balance. The community is attracted to LT operation (600–700 °C) because it is easy to manage. LT operation requires less heat exchange area, but the improvement is insignificant. For example, the LCOH of −1.25 A cm−2 and 35% CF decreases 0.8¢ by HT-HI and 0.4¢ by N-HI when moving from 800 °C to 750 °C. Besides, LT operation has other pros and cons. Modules can be made from relatively cheap metals. However, the equilibrium voltage and cell resistance would increase with lower temperature, and the current density must be controlled at a reduced value for Vth. LT operation may cause more SOEC area and LCOHcap. Meanwhile, the relationship between temperature and degradation rate is not entirely clarified. Generally, the degradation is faster at lower temperatures with the same current density, especially over a large temperature span.67 Thus, the benefit of lowering the temperature needs further investigation.
Launching and benefiting from inexpensive equipment and power in 2035 will lower LCOH by 75–109¢. But action needs to start immediately. SOEC is on the verge of commercialization. Hydrogen or hydrogen carriers are expected to fuel ships or trucks. SOFC or PEMFC will generate electricity from hydrogen, replacing conventional power plants. The choice of hydrogen storage/transportation (pressurized H2 or liquid H2) and hydrogen carriers (ammonia, natural gas, methanol, solid carrier, liquid organic carrier) are still under discussion. The decline of SOEC LCOH will motivate clean energy promotion toward net zero carbon emissions. Today's investment can be more profitable and capture future market share with mature SOEC system technology.
Conclusion
The pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen production by SOEC is investigated by three scenarios: heat integration, super grid integration, and SOEC development. LCOH based on the 50000 kg per day SOEC system simulation is estimated as an index. The SOEC economic performance was analyzed based on the local wind capacity factor and heat integration potential. Eight locations with heat integration were involved in the analysis. Optimal design and operation are achieved through two-stage stochastic optimization.
The SOEC degradation process was simulated at the system level for economic analysis. After degradation, the external energy supplied to the system is reduced from 29.9 MW to 1.8 MW. However, overall system efficiency is maintained at 80% LHV due to the increase in SOEC power consumption. Heat integration will reduce LCOH to 3.60, 4.17, and 5.00 $ per kg for onshore, offshore fixed, and offshore float, respectively. Locations with poor wind power supply will benefit from heat integration. Super grid integration is the most critical process for cutting green hydrogen costs. LCOH will fall to $2.59 per kg (onshore), $3.21 per kg (offshore fixed), and $3.47 per kg (offshore float). The development of SOEC will break through the current density and degradation rate trade-offs and reach $2.18 per kg. By 2035, green hydrogen costs will be lower than average gray hydrogen costs at $1.40 per kg. Continual research on heat integration, super grids, and SOEC development will promote green hydrogen to the market and ensure a sustainable society.
Author contributions
Hua Liu: conceptualization, data curation, formal analysis, investigation, methodology, software, visualization, writing (original draft). Lasse Røngaard Clausen: formal analysis, validation, methodology, visualization, supervision, writing (review & editing). Ligang Wang: formal analysis, validation, methodology, visualization, supervision, writing (review & editing). Ming Chen: data curation, resources, visualization, conceptualization, validation, funding acquisition, supervision, writing (review & editing).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Appendix
A1 Capital cost
The equipment uninstall price (purchase cost) Cun is the expenses required to build the system from the ground up. Cun,0cap,i = Cun,0cap,ref,i × (Si,max/Si,ref)γi, ∀I ∈ BoP unit(19)The reference indicator Si, ref and exponent γ are listed in Table 5. The system sizing indicator Si is the maximum value during the degradation process Si,max. Chemical Engineering Plant Cost Indexes (CEPCI) adjust the uninstall cost from the reference year to 2020 for inflation: Cuncap,i = Cun,0cap,i × (CEPCI2020/CEPCIref), ∀I ∈ BoP unit(20)Besides purchase, equipment installation incurs instrumentation costs, piping costs, legal costs, etc.,132 each of them is a fraction to the uninstall cost. The installation cost factor (ICF) is the sum of all this fraction, typically 4.11, but might differ for an individual unit for a specific reason.9 The system capital cost is the sum of the installation cost for all BoP units: (21)
Table 5 Equipment capacities, costs, and scaling exponents




Name

C
cap,ref, $

S

i,ref


γ

ICF
Ref.




H2 comp.
15000
10 kW
0.67
4.11

133 and 134



O2 blower
331900
3642 kW
0.67
4.11

134



Water pump
6600
35 kmol h−1
0.67
4.11

134



Desiccant
53500
1296 kg h−1
0.67
4.11

135



HPSG
87500
500 kg h−1
0.67
4.11

136



SOEC
$0.15 per cm2 × ASOEC
4.11

137 and 138



Recuperator
$220 + 300 $ per m2 × AHX
4.11

139



Electric heater
$140 per kW × PEH
4.11

140



Inverter
$45 per kW × PSOEC
1.00

141





A2 Capacity factor
Wind power data in the EU is collected from the MERRA-2 database.142,143 Wind speed w, longitude, latitude, and roughness length z0 are included in the database. The wind speed for each coordinate satisfies the Weibull distribution with factor k and c:144 (22) (23)where Γ is gamma function. The parameter k is fitted by wind speed historical data. The objective function of the fitting is the R-square between f(w) and the kernel density estimated probability density function.
The updated parameter at new height are: (24) (25) (26)where hr is 10 m, wh is 67 m s−1. Subscript 1 represent original and 2 represent new value. α0 is surface roughness exponent: α0 = (z0/hr)0.2(27)Wind turbine power dependent on the wind speed: (28)where η0 is efficiency coefficients (29)where ηm is the transmission efficiency, ηg is the generator efficiency, Cp is the coefficient of performance. The parameters of Cp of Vestas-80 2 MW wind turbine, a, b, and c are 1.125077, 0.234403; and −2.92941, respectively.144 The cut-in speed wcut-in, rate speed wcut-rate, and cut-out speed wcut-out are 4 m s−1, 14 m s−1 and 25 m s−1 based on the wind turbine profile and develop trend.145 (30)
A3 Optimization
The optimization procedure solves the following two-stage problem:

Inner stage – operation strategy. 
The inner stage denotes the proper operation strategy during SOEC degradation. The system is modeled in a pseudo-transient way since the degradation is significant in long time but stable in short term. The objective is to minimize the total system power consumption Ptot at each time Ptot,j, which is the sum of power consumption for each unit Pi: (P1)Subscript i and j represent the number of unit and number of time step, respectively. The system model is described by the set of equation hi,j (e.g. heat and mass balance of system and each unit) and inequality constraint gi,j (physical limit on design and operation). xi,j denote the statement variables (temperature, flow rate, pressure, etc.). zi,j denotes the control variable (anode ratio Rano and hotplate duty Qplate). The design variable (area, size, etc.) and uncertain parameter (degradation) is denoted as d and θ, respectively.


Outer stage – design and sizing. 
The units are fixed while the operation is changeable after installation. Because of this, the design variable d only have one value, while constraints h and g, state variable x and control variable z are discreted for all M time step. The outer stage is to optimize the design variables d and minimize the LCOH by locating an optimal design: (P2)where gd,i,j is the design constrain to ensure d is the maximum value among the lifetime. Economic model is denoted as the equation set hc,i,j. ci denoted the certain/uncertain parameters for economic analysis (wind power price, thermal energy price, and heat source temperature, etc.). The optimization result of the inner stage x* and z* are included as parameters for the outer stage. Ultimately, the simulation and optimization yields optimal design d* and operation strategy z* for the SOEC system.

Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the project “Integrated Energy Conversion and Control for Smart and Efficient Electrolysis Systems (IECC)” (IFD project no. 8087-00019B). Hua Liu further acknowledges financial support from the China Scholarship Council (CSC202006380038) and from DTU Energy.
Notes and references
IRENA, Future of wind: Deployment, investment, technology, grid integration and socio-economic aspects, International renewable energy agency technical report, 2019.
B. Stolz, M. Held, G. Georges and K. Boulouchos, Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 203–212 CrossRef .
P. Plötz, Nat. Electron., 2022, 5, 8–10 CrossRef .
L. V. Hoecke, L. Laffineur, R. Campe, P. Perreault, S. W. Verbruggen and S. Lenaerts, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 815–843 RSC .
D. A. Cullen, K. Neyerlin, R. K. Ahluwalia, R. Mukundan, K. L. More, R. L. Borup, A. Z. Weber, D. J. Myers and A. Kusoglu, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 462–474 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Birat, F. Patisson and O. Mirgaux, Mater. Tech., 2021, 109, 307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kojima and M. Yamaguchi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 22832–22839 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Zhou, S. Searle and C. Baldino, Cost of Renewable Hydrogen Produced Onsite at Hydrogen Refueling Station in Europe,  2022 Search PubMed .

          D. Peterson and E. Miller, Hydrogen Production Cost from Solid Oxide Electrolysis, Department of energy-usa technical report, 2016.
B. Parkinson, P. Balcombe, J. Speirs, A. Hawkes and K. Hellgardt, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 19–40 RSC .
S. Penner, Energy, 2006, 31, 33–43 CrossRef CAS .
T. Economics, EU Nature gas price, 2022, https://tradingeconomics.com/commodity/eu-natural-gas.
B. S. Pivovar, M. F. Ruth, D. J. Myers and H. N. Dinh, Electrochem. Soc. Interface, 2021, 30, 61 CrossRef .
A. Hauch, R. Küngas, P. Blennow, A. B. Hansen, J. B. Hansen, B. V. Mathiesen and M. B. Mogensen, Science, 2020, 370, eaba6118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, X. Tong and S. Ovtar, ECS Trans., 2021, 103, 475–486 CrossRef CAS .
R. Detz, J. Reek and B. Van Der Zwaan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1653–1669 RSC .
N. Gallandat, K. Romanowicz and A. Züttel, J. Power Energy Eng., 2017, 5, 34–49 CrossRef .
F. Petipas, A. Brisse and C. Bouallou, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 584–595 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Tong, A. Hauch, X. Sun, Z. Yang, S. Peng and M. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 129260 CrossRef CAS .
K. Schwarze, O. Posdziech, S. Kroop, N. Lapeña-Rey and J. Mermelstein, ECS Trans., 2017, 78, 2943 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rao, X. Sun and A. Hagen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, F748 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, P. V. Hendriksen, M. B. Mogensen and M. Chen, Fuel Cells, 2019, 19, 740–747 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, L. R. Clausen, L. Wang and M. Chen, Comput.-Aided Chem. Eng., 2022, 49, 739–744 CAS .
H. Yokokawa, N. Sakai, T. Horita, K. Yamaji, M. Brito and H. Kishimoto, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 452, 41–47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Riedel, M. P. Heddrich and K. Friedrich, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 4570–4581 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Xue, X. Jin, B. Xiong, R. Liu, Y. Peng, L. Jiang and G. Tian, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 38163–38174 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jang, J. Kim, D. Kim, W.-B. Han and S. Kang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2022, 258, 115499 CrossRef CAS .
F. Petipas, A. Brisse and C. Bouallou, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 5505–5513 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rivera-Tinoco, C. Mansilla and C. Bouallou, Energy Convers. Manage., 2010, 51, 2623–2634 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, H. Lee, B. Lee, J. Kim, H. Oh, I.-B. Lee, Y.-S. Yoon and H. Lim, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 250, 114922 CrossRef CAS .
M. Samavati, A. Martin, V. Nemanova and M. Santarelli, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 4785–4803 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, L. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Xia, H. Miao and J. Yuan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 229, 113775 CrossRef CAS .
T. Terlouw, C. Bauer, R. McKenna and M. Mazzotti, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3583–3602 RSC .

          J. O. G. Tande, Wind Energy: An International Journal for Progress and Applications in Wind Power Conversion Technology,  2003, vol. 6, pp. 281–295 Search PubMed .
E. Pierri, O. Binder, N. G. Hemdan and M. Kurrat, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 70, 427–456 CrossRef .
M. Benasla, D. Hess, T. Allaoui, M. Brahami and M. Dena, Energy Strategy Rev., 2019, 24, 1–13 CrossRef .
A. B. Attya, J. L. Domnguez-Garca, F. D. Bianchi and O. Anaya-Lara, Int. J. Electr. Power Energy Syst., 2018, 95, 128–136 CrossRef .
Fuel Cells and Hydrogen 2 Joint Undertaking (FCH 2 JU) Addendum to the Multi – Annual Work Plan 2014–2020, European commission technical report, 2018.
T. Shimonosono, H. Kishimoto, M. E. Brito, K. Yamaji, T. Horita and H. Yokokawa, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 225, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ovtar, X. Tong, J. J. Bentzen, K. T. S. ThydÃÂ©n, S. B. Simonsen and M. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4394–4406 RSC .
G. Luderer, S. Madeddu, L. Merfort, F. Ueckerdt, M. Pehl, R. Pietzcker, M. Rottoli, F. Schreyer, N. Bauer and L. Baumstark, 
            et al.
          , Nat. Energy, 2022, 7, 32–42 CrossRef .
R. Rivera-Tinoco, K. Schoots and B. van der Zwaan, Energy Convers. Manage., 2012, 57, 86–96 CrossRef .
P. V. Hendriksen, M. Khoshkalam, X. Tong, Đ. Tripković, M. A. Faghihi-Sani and M. Chen, ECS Trans., 2019, 91, 1413–1424 CrossRef CAS .
H. Böhm, S. Goers and A. Zauner, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 30789–30805 CrossRef .

          U. Frøhlke, Topsoe confirms final investment decision for construction of world's largest SOEC electrolyzer plant, 2022, https://blog.topsoe.com/.
R. O’Hayre, D. M. Barnett and F. B. Prinz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 152, A439 CrossRef .
S. B. Adler, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4791–4844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schefold, A. Brisse and F. Tietz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 159, A137 CrossRef .
A. Hauch, K. Brodersen, M. Chen and M. B. Mogensen, Solid State Ionics, 2016, 293, 27–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Mogensen, M. Chen, H. L. Frandsen, C. Graves, A. Hauch, P. V. Hendriksen, T. Jacobsen, S. H. Jensen, T. L. Skafte and X. Sun, Fuel Cells, 2021, 21, 415–429 CAS .
X. Tong, S. Ovtar, K. Brodersen, P. V. Hendriksen and M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 25996–26004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. Thyden, Microstructural degradation of Ni-YSZ anodes for solid oxide fuel cells, PhD thesis, Technical University of Denmark,  2008 Search PubMed .
S. D. Ebbesen, C. Graves, A. Hauch, S. H. Jensen and M. Mogensen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1419 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. V. Virkar, M. Khonsari and X.-D. Zhou, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2022, 169, 044529 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Y. Liu, P. V. Hendriksen and M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y.-L. Liu, J. J. Bentzen, W. Zhang, X. Sun, A. Hauch, Y. Tao, J. R. Bowen and P. V. Hendriksen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, F883 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Irvine, D. Neagu, M. C. Verbraeken, C. Chatzichristodoulou, C. Graves and M. B. Mogensen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–13 Search PubMed .
A. Hauch, A. Ploner, S. Pylypko, G. Cubizolles and J. Mougin, Fuel Cells, 2021, 21, 467–476 CAS .
L. Bernadet, C. Moncasi, M. Torrell and A. Tarancón, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 14208–14217 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Chen, Final report for ForskEL 2015-1-12276: Towards Solid Oxide Electrolysis Plants in 2020, Technical university of denmark technical report, 2017.
M. Rao, X. Sun and A. Hagen, J. Power Sources, 2020, 451, 227781 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lang, S. Raab, M. S. Lemcke, C. Bohn and M. Pysik, Fuel Cells, 2020, 20, 690–700 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schefold and A. Brisse, ECS Trans., 2013, 53, 53 CrossRef .
A. Brisse and J. Schefold, Energy Procedia, 2012, 29, 53–63 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schefold, A. Brisse and H. Poepke, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 161–168 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Schefold, A. Léon and C. Walter, 15th European SOFC & SOE Forum, 2022.

          T. L. Skafte, J. Hjelm, P. Blennow and C. Graves, Proceedings of 12th European SOFC & SOE Forum, 2016, pp. 8–27.
X. Sun, M. Chen, P. Hjalmarsson, S. D. Ebbesen, S. H. Jensen, M. Mogensen and P. V. Hendriksen, ECS Trans., 2019, 41, 77–85 CrossRef .
M. Ni, M. K. Leung and D. Y. Leung, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2305–2313 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Molla, K. Kwok and H. L. Frandsen, Fuel Cells, 2019, 19, 96–109 CrossRef CAS .
O. Posdziech, K. Schwarze and J. Brabandt, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 44, 19089–19101 CrossRef .
F. Yang, T. Wang, X. Deng, J. Dang, Z. Huang, S. Hu, Y. Li and M. Ouyang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 31467–31488 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, J. V. T. Høgh, J. U. Nielsen, J. J. Bentzen, S. D. Ebbesen and P. V. Hendriksen, Fuel Cells, 2013, 13, 638–645 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Agersted, M. Chen, P. Blennow, R. Küngas and P. V. Hendriksen, Proceedings of 12th European SOFC & SOE Forum, Lucerne, Switzerland, 2016, pp. 205–337.

          J. Haydary, Chemical process design and simulation: Aspen Plus and Aspen Hysys applications, John Wiley & Sons,  2019 Search PubMed .
M. Ye, P. Sharp, N. Brandon and A. Kucernak, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 8565–8584 CrossRef CAS .
B. Miao, L. Zhang, S. Wu and S. H. Chan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2022, 47, 26827–26841 CrossRef CAS .
P. Preuster, C. Papp and P. Wasserscheid, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 74–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wiser, J. Rand, J. Seel, P. Beiter, E. Baker, E. Lantz and P. Gilman, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 555–565 CrossRef .
M. Jansen, I. Staffell, L. Kitzing, S. Quoilin, E. Wiggelinkhuizen, B. Bulder, I. Riepin and F. Müsgens, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 614–622 CrossRef .
F. Ueckerdt, L. Hirth, G. Luderer and O. Edenhofer, Energy, 2013, 63, 61–75 CrossRef .
C. Li and H. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2016, 180, 707–721 CrossRef CAS .
L. Moreira and F. Arrieta, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 114, 109315 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dai, J. Wang and L. Gao, Energy Convers. Manage., 2009, 50, 576–582 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yari and S. M. S. Mahmoudi, Heat and Mass Transfer, 2011, 47, 181–196 CrossRef CAS .
M. Soltani, M. H. Nabat, A. R. Razmi, M. Dusseault and J. Nathwani, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 222, 113203 CrossRef CAS .
J. Milewski and J. Krasucki, J. Power Technol., 2017, 4, 302–307 Search PubMed .
M. Marchionni, G. Bianchi and S. A. Tassou, Energy, 2018, 148, 1140–1152 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhar, A. Allouhi, A. Jamil and K. Lahrech, Case Stud. Therm. Eng., 2021, 28, 101608 CrossRef .
P. Hevia-Koch and H. K. Jacobsen, Energy Policy, 2019, 125, 9–19 CrossRef .
Energinet, Environmental Assessment of Plan for Thor Offshore wind Farm, report 1: Nontechnical summary and overall assessment, The danish energy agency technical report, 2021.
H. Wang, P. Daoutidis and Q. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 14605–14617 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fernández-Guillamón, K. Das, N. A. Cutululis and Á. Molina-Garca, J. Mar. Sci. Eng., 2019, 7, 399 CrossRef .
M. E. Demir and I. Dincer, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 10420–10430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brisse, M. Zeller, B. Ludwig and J. Brabandt, Fuel Cells, 2019, 19, 408–416 CAS .
G. Kosmadakis, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2019, 156, 287–298 CrossRef .
Z. Su, M. Zhang, P. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang, H. Huang and T. Ouyang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 229, 113769 CrossRef .
S. Brueckner, L. Miró, L. F. Cabeza, M. Pehnt and E. Laevemann, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 38, 164–171 CrossRef .
J. O'brien, M. McKellar, E. Harvego and C. Stoots, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 4808–4819 CrossRef .
A. Faanes and S. Skogestad, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 2198–2208 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Magro, A. Meneghetti, G. Nardin and S. Savino, Energy Convers. Manage., 2015, 104, 78–89 CrossRef .
A. Hauch, M. L. Traulsen, R. Küngas and T. L. Skafte, J. Power Sources, 2021, 506, 230108 CrossRef CAS .
I. R. Skov, N. Schneider, G. Schweiger, J.-P. Schöggl and A. Posch, Energies, 2021, 14, 913 CrossRef .
C. Forman, I. K. Muritala, R. Pardemann and B. Meyer, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 57, 1568–1579 CrossRef .
B. Vonsée, W. Crijns-Graus and W. Liu, Energy, 2019, 178, 419–435 CrossRef .

          M.-A. Richard and R. Labrecque, 11th IEA Heat Pump Conference 2014, 2014.
G. Bianchi, G. P. Panayiotou, L. Aresti, S. A. Kalogirou, G. A. Florides, K. Tsamos, S. A. Tassou and P. Christodoulides, Energy Ecol. Environ., 2019, 4, 211–221 CrossRef .
J. Xu, X. Wang, E. Sun and M. Li, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 238, 114150 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sprouse and C. Depcik, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2013, 51, 711–722 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, M. He and Y. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2012, 16, 5309–5318 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jouhara, N. Khordehgah, S. Almahmoud, B. Delpech, A. Chauhan and S. A. Tassou, Therm. Sci. Eng. Prog., 2018, 6, 268–289 CrossRef .
M. Pérez-Fortes, J. C. Schöneberger, A. Boulamanti and E. Tzimas, Appl. Energy, 2016, 161, 718–732 CrossRef .

          R. Remus, M. A. A. Monsonet, S. Roudier and L. D. Sancho, Best Available Techniques (BAT) Reference Document for Iron and Steel Production, Joint research centre technical report, 2013.
IEA, Renewable Power, 2021, https://www.iea.org/reports/renewable-power.
G. Sanchis, B. Betraoui, T. Anderski, E. Peirano, R. Pestana, B. De Clercq, G. Migliavacca, M. Czernie and M. Paun, IEEE Power Energy Mag., 2014, 13, 38–51 Search PubMed .

          M. Komperød, J. I. Juvik, G. Evenset, R. Slora and L. Jordal, International Conference on Offshore Mechanics and Arctic Engineering, 2017, p. V05AT04A004.

          E. E. W. E. Association
          
            et al.
          , Powering Europe: Wind energy and the electricity grid, 2010.

          E.-E. Tyndp, 10-year network development plan,
2014.
D. Van Hertem and M. Ghandhari, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 3156–3163 CrossRef .
L. Hirth, F. Ueckerdt and O. Edenhofer, Renewable Energy, 2015, 74, 925–939 CrossRef .
H. Shimada, T. Yamaguchi, H. Kishimoto, H. Sumi, Y. Yamaguchi, K. Nomura and Y. Fujishiro, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cao, Y. Li, Y. Zheng, S. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Qin, G. Geng and B. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 2200899 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hjalmarsson, X. Sun, Y.-L. Liu and M. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 316–322 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schefold, A. Brisse and H. Poepke, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 13415–13426 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hubert, J. Laurencin, P. Cloetens, B. Morel, D. Montinaro and F. Lefebvre-Joud, J. Power Sources, 2018, 397, 240–251 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, L. Blum and N. H. Menzler, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, F907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schefold, H. Poepke and A. Brisse, ECS Trans., 2020, 97, 553 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, M. Chen, Y.-L. Liu and P. V. Hendriksen, ECS Trans., 2015, 68, 3359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tietz, D. Sebold, A. Brisse and J. Schefold, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 129–135 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, T. Placke and K. Chau, Energy Rep., 2022, 8, 4058–4084 CrossRef .
G. Min, S. Choi and J. Hong, Appl. Energy, 2022, 328, 120145 CrossRef CAS .

          M. S. Peters, K. D. Timmerhaus and R. E. West, Plant design and economics for chemical engineers, McGraw-Hill New York,  2003, vol. 4 Search PubMed .
C. Yang and J. Ogden, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 268–286 CrossRef CAS .
C. He and F. You, AIChE J., 2015, 61, 1209–1232 CrossRef CAS .
F. Razi, I. Dincer and K. Gabriel, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 31425–31439 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, B. Hu and R. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Sys., 2020, 4, 2000118 CrossRef CAS .

          J. S. G. Mýrdal, P. V. Hendriksen, C. R. Graves, S. H. Jensen and E. R. Nielsen, Predicting the price of solid oxide electrolysers (SOECs), Technical university of denmark technical report, 2016.

          E. J. Carlson, Y. Yang and C. Fulton, Solid Oxide Fuel Cell Manufacturing Cost Model: Simulating Relationships between Performance, Manufacturing, and Cost of Production, National energy technology laboratory, us department of energy technical report, 2004.
S. Quoilin, S. Declaye, B. F. Tchanche and V. Lemort, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2011, 31, 2885–2893 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, S. Guo, Y. Yang and D. Liu, Energy, 2020, 209, 118472 CrossRef .

          K. Mongird, V. Viswanathan, J. Alam, C. Vartanian, V. Sprenkle and R. Baxter, 2020 grid energy storage technology cost and performance assessment, Pacific northwest national laboratory technical report, 2020.
C. A. Randles, A. M. d Silva, V. Buchard, P. R. Colarco, A. Darmenov, R. Govindaraju, A. Smirnov, B. Holben, R. Ferrare, J. Hair, Y. Shinozuka and C. J. Flynn, J. Clim., 2017, 30, 6823–6850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Staffell and S. Pfenninger, Energy, 2016, 114, 1224–1239 CrossRef .
A. Sedaghat, A. Mostafaeipour, M. Rezaei, M. Jahangiri and A. Mehrabi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 15888–15903 CrossRef CAS .
C. Carrillo, A. O. Montaño, J. Cidrás and E. Díaz-Dorado, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 21, 572–581 CrossRef .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00232b‡ Water splitting has an irreversible energy TΔS around 8 kW h kgH2−1, and the reaction is endothermic.17 The electricity and thermal energy of fluids are converted into the chemical energy of hydrogen. Ohmic heat is released inside the SOEC, proportional to the voltage. As ohmic heat fully compensates for endothermic reaction heat at thermoneutral voltage, the cell has 100% electrical efficiency.18This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Green hydrogen is an essential renewable energy carrier that can be used as fuel, reserves, chemical feedstocks, etc. However, expensive production, storage, and transmission costs limit the development of the hydrogen market. Solid Oxide Electrolysis Cell (SOEC) is a promising candidate for producing hydrogen at high temperatures with high efficiency. Reducing SOEC green hydrogen production costs is not a solo operation but a systemic one. It requires equipment advances (like mass production, design/operation optimization, and SOEC breakthrough) and system support (like heat integration, super grid integration, and development of renewable energy capture techniques). This work quantifies the effect of each cost-reduction method through the stochastic optimization framework. The framework covers internal and external uncertainties, such as SOEC degradation, location-specific wind power production, and feedstock market prices. SOEC durability test data, system physics constraints, and other constraints are involved in a realistic simulation. The Levelized Cost of Hydrogen (LCOH) is evaluated to identify technique bottlenecks and economic opportunities in each cost-reduction method. The prospects and benefits of SOEC will attract more investors and drive the development and promotion of green hydrogen. Moreover, the findings will also guide future SOEC designs and help avoid inefficient operations.


 	Fig. 1  Three scenarios to reduce SOEC based hydrogen production cost.	 
H2O + 2e− → H2 + O2−	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
Vcell(t) = E + JcellASR(t), Vinit = Vcell(t = 0)	(4)
	(5)

Current density, J	A cm−2	−0.70
Temperature, T	°C	850
Initial voltage, Vinit	V	1.06
Initial resistance, ASRinit	Ω cm2	0.27
Degradation rate, DR	mΩ cm2 kh−1	13.0

	mV kh−1	8.42
End of life voltage, VEoL	V	To be optimized
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
Qele + Qreact + Qin + Qout + Qplate = 0	(9)
Qele = JcellVcellAcell	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
	(13)

 	Fig. 2  Flowchart of an SOEC system.	 
	(14)

Onshore
2025	34.00	30.00	40.30	
G(20.6, 1.70)
2035	28.96	23.71	34.90	
G(12.5, 2.38)
2050	25.00	20.00	30.09	
G(11.2, 2.28)


Fixed-bottom offshore
2025	60.00	50.37	75.10	
G(11.4, 5.50)
2035	48.59	39.10	63.12	
G(8.08, 6.38)
2050	39.18	33.58	50.00	
G(11.2, 3.73)


Floating offshore
2025	96.27	78.36	120.7	
G(9.97, 10.1)
2035	63.60	51.58	97.56	
G(4.22, 17.6)
2050	46.46	38.62	69.40	
G(4.89, 10.9)
	(15)

 	Fig. 3  Heat to power efficiency ηH2P by temperature and technology. Detailed data is listed in the ESI.† The thermal efficiency is estimated at 35–65% of the Carnot efficiency. RC – Rankine cycle; ORC – organic Rankine cycle; KC – Kalina cycle; CO2 – supercritical CO2 cycle.	 

 	Fig. 4  Eight locations are denoted in the EU map. The heat potential is categorized by temperature and illustrated as circles. The radius of the circle is the heat potential of EU28.96–98 The contour line in the background is the local wind power capacity factor.	 

Onshore
ON1	−0.62	41.5	Onshore	100	34.7	—	N-HI (−)
ON2	−4.38	56.0	Onshore	100	33.6	H2 compressor	LT-HI (70)
ON3	3.75	49.0	Onshore	100	30.1	Green methanol process	MT-HI (300)
ON4	10.0	52.5	Onshore	100	32.2	EAF steel making	HT-HI (1000)


Offshore
OFF1	7.50	56.0	Offshore-fixed	150	51.5	—	N-HI (−)
OFF2	−4.38	47.0	Offshore-fixed	150	47.6	H2 compressor	LT-HI (70)
OFF3	3.75	43.0	Offshore-float	150	38.3	Nuclear power plant99	MT-HI (300)
OFF4	16.9	39.0	Offshore-float	150	40.8	EAF steel making	HT-HI (1000)

 	Fig. 5  Heat balance variation of the SOEC system through degradation at three voltages, 1.00 V (endothermic, Ven), 1.29 V (thermoneutral, Vth), and 1.50 V (exothermic, Vex). Left is the Sankey diagram. The arrow denotes the variance with degradation, and the number nearby denotes the duty. Right-top is the total grant composite curve (GCC) at three voltages. Right-bottom is the system LHV efficiency at different voltages and integration systems.	 

 	Fig. 6  Heat integration example, the dash line represents the SOEC system boundary. Left: LT-HI with the hydrogen compression process. Middle: MT-HI with the green methanol synthesis process. Right: HT-HI with the EAF steel making process exhaust.	 
Gray H2 cost[2020$ per kg] = 0.39 × NG Price[$ per GJ] + 0.22	(16)

 	Fig. 7  LCOH for each case in Scenario 1. The bar chart with the error bar at the top shows the LCOH with heat integration. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). The bottom figure presents the LCOH of thermal energy. LCOH and LCOHHeat in the N-HI case, which is the cost of electric heat, are marked as red circles with error bars at the top and bottom, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 8  Chord chart of the Pearson correlation matrix for wind power between eight locations. The width of the chord denotes the correlation coefficient between the two places. The red chord is the lowest correlation for each site. Wind power from the other end of a red cord will complement the intermittent wind best. Pearson correlation matrix is attached in the ESI.†	 
	(17)

 	Fig. 9  LCOH for each case in Scenario 2. The bar chart with the error bar at the top depicts the LCOH with 100 and 200 GWh year−1 power imported from the super grid. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a black dashed line (average) and area (range). LCOH in an independent grid (red) or purchase 200 GWh year−1 electricity from the market (gray) are illustrated as circle and error bar for reference. The bottom figure presents the CF with and without super grid integration.	 
	(18)

 	Fig. 10  LCOH for 19 long term tested SOEC and one virtual test under 91.3% CF, N-HI, and onshore wind power LCOE. The size of the plot denotes the test time. The longest halfway test lasted 24 kh. The most extended start-up test lasted 6 kh and was selected for S1 and S2. Detailed data is listed in the ESI.†	 

Current density, J	A cm−2	−1.25
Temperature, T	°C	800
Initial voltage, Vinit	V	To be optimized
Initial resistance, ASRinit	Ω cm2	0.10
Degradation rate, DR	mΩ cm2 kh−1	5.00

	mV kh−1	5.00
End of life voltage, VEoL	V	To be optimized

 	Fig. 11  LCOH for each case in Scenario 3. The bar chart with the error bar at the top depicts the LCOH for future cells that start in 2025 and 2035, respectively. LCOH in Scenario 1 is marked as red circles and error bars for reference. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). The bottom figure presents the capital cost for reference and future cell by years.	 

 	Fig. 12  Optimal operation strategy (Rano and Qplate) for different current density through degradation. When the voltages increase from Ven to Vth and Vex during degradation, the operation is adapted accordingly.	 

 	Fig. 13  Optimal voltage for scenarios. Top: Optimal VEoL for Scenario 1 and 2 with Vinit of 1.06 V. Bottom: Optimal Vinit and VEoL for Scenario 3.	 

 	Fig. 14  Pathway toward cost-effective green hydrogen. Waterfall chart on the left denotes the LCOH reduction. For comparison, gray hydrogen costs are denoted by a dashed line (average) and a gray area (range). Slope chart on the right specified the values for each progress in $ per kg.	 
Cun,0cap,i = Cun,0cap,ref,i × (Si,max/Si,ref)γi, ∀I ∈ BoP unit	(19)
Cuncap,i = Cun,0cap,i × (CEPCI2020/CEPCIref), ∀I ∈ BoP unit	(20)
	(21)

H2 comp.	15000	10 kW	0.67	4.11	
133 and 134

O2 blower	331900	3642 kW	0.67	4.11	
134

Water pump	6600	35 kmol h−1	0.67	4.11	
134

Desiccant	53500	1296 kg h−1	0.67	4.11	
135

HPSG	87500	500 kg h−1	0.67	4.11	
136

SOEC	$0.15 per cm2 × ASOEC	4.11	
137 and 138

Recuperator	$220 + 300 $ per m2 × AHX	4.11	
139

Electric heater	$140 per kW × PEH	4.11	
140

Inverter	$45 per kW × PSOEC	1.00	
141

	(22)
	(23)
	(24)
	(25)
	(26)
α0 = (z0/hr)0.2	(27)
	(28)
	(29)
	(30)
	(P1)
	(P2)
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d3ee00232b
‡ Water splitting has an irreversible energy TΔS around 8 kW h kgH2−1, and the reaction is endothermic.17 The electricity and thermal energy of fluids are converted into the chemical energy of hydrogen. Ohmic heat is released inside the SOEC, proportional to the voltage. As ohmic heat fully compensates for endothermic reaction heat at thermoneutral voltage, the cell has 100% electrical efficiency.18

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
