Recent insights into BCN nanomaterials – synthesis, properties and applications  - New Journal of Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NJ04763B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NJ04763B
(Perspective)
New J. Chem., 2023, 47, 2137-2160Recent insights into BCN nanomaterials – synthesis, properties and applications

        
          
            Manjot 
            Kaur
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Kulwinder 
            Singh
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Ankush 
            Vij
          
          
        
      de and 

        
          
            Akshay 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      *f
aUniversity Centre for Research and Development, Chandigarh University, Mohali-140 413, Punjab, India
bAdvanced Functional Materials Laboratory, Department of Nanotechnology, Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University, Fatehgarh Sahib-140 406, Punjab, India
cDepartment of Chemistry, University Institute of Sciences, Chandigarh University, Mohali-140 413, Punjab, India
dDepartment of Physics, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES), Dehradun, 248007, Uttarakhand, India
eDepartment of Physics and Astrophysics, Central University of Haryana, Mahendergarh-123031, India
fDepartment of Physics, Sardar Patel University, Mandi, 175001, India. E-mail: akshaykumar.tiet@gmail.com
Received 
      27th September 2022
    , Accepted 2nd January 2023First published on 2nd January 2023AbstractThis review provides an overview of materials within the B–C–N triangular zone. The structure, properties, synthesis routes and applications of boron carbon nitride (BCN) nanomaterials have been discussed in detail. Boron carbon nitride is a ternary compound of B–C–N, which has been anticipated to possess properties in-between those of conducting graphene and insulating BN. The properties of BCN can be easily tuned with slight variation in the arrangement and composition of B, C and N atoms. Various morphologies of BCN such as nanoparticles, nanosheets, nanotubes, nanoplates, and aerogels show unique and exceptional properties to its analogous counterparts. BCN offers potential applications in energy devices, supercapacitors, nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, electrochemical sensors, catalysis, high-temperature lubricants, novel composites, biomedical applications, etc. This review provides a summary of recent developments in BCN materials.
Manjot Kaur
Dr. Manjot Kaur received her MTech. (2018) and PhD degree (2022) from the Department of Nanotechnology, Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University, Punjab, India. She was awarded Senior research fellow by CSIR, India to pursue her PhD work on nanostructured boron carbon nitride for neutron capture therapy and other applications. She is currently serving as an Assistant Professor at University Centre for Research and Development, Chandigarh University, India. She has published more than 35 research articles in reputed international journals. Her research interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, structure-property relation, optical properties, BNCT, supercapacitor, photodetector and other device-based applications.
Kulwinder Singh
Dr. Kulwinder Singh is working as an Assistant Professor at University Centre for Research and Development, Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab, India. He had obtained a Doctorate of Philosophy in Nanotechnology from the Department of Nanotechnology, Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University, Punjab, India. He received his Master of Technology in Nanotechnology in 2016. He has published more than 40 journal articles in international reputed journals. His interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, theoretical studies, thin films and device-based applications of nanomaterials.
Ankush Vij
Dr. Ankush Vij is working as Professor in Dept of Physics, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES) Dehradun. Prior to this he has served at NIT Hamirpur, Amity University Haryana and Korea Institute of Science Technology (KIST) Seoul in various capacities. His research interests include nanomaterials for applications in solid state lighting, energy harvesting, sensors, radiation dosimetry etc. He has published more than 100 research articles so far in international journals of repute. Dr. Vij has been involved in many research projects funded by various Govt./Industry/International agencies. He has delivered several invited talks within and outside India.
Akshay Kumar
Dr. Akshay Kumar received his MSc degree in Applied Physics from Punjabi University, in 2005 and PhD degree from School of Physics and Material Science, TIET Patiala, India, in 2011. He is now serving as Associate Dean Research and Associate Professor (Physics) in Sardar Patel University Mandi, India. Prior to that he served SGGSWU and MMU Mullana, India in various capacities. He successfully supervised 9 PhD and 45 Master's students. He has published more than 90 research articles in reputed international journals. His research interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, structure-property relation, gas sensors, BNCT, supercapacitors, thin films device physics, photodetectors, etc.
1. Introduction
Nanoscience and nanotechnology have been crossing boundaries to revolutionize a varied range of fields. Nanomaterials are generally defined as materials having dimensions in the nano-range, i.e., 1–100 nm. These nanomaterials are classified as nanoparticles, nanosheets, nanotubes, etc., based on their nano-dimensional growth. In the last few years, research interest in graphene based and layered nanomaterials has flourished due to their interesting physical and chemical properties.1,2 Specific surface area and bandgap have made these nanomaterials significant for the advancement of opto-electronic devices, energy storage, gas sensors, protective layers, etc. The underlying notion of a two dimensional layered material goes back to the 1940s when the layered structure of graphite was described, which could be exfoliated to individual layers having extraordinary electronic characteristics. However, theoretically it was proposed that the monolayer product of graphite may not be thermodynamically stable. In 2004, for the first time, Novoselov et al. successfully extracted individual graphene monolayers using a simple mechanical exfoliation method, which showed high stability and superior electrical conductivity. The exceptional electrical, thermal, mechanical, and optical properties of graphene have motivated research in analogous materials such as boron nitride (BN) and boron carbide (B4C) and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs).3–6 Monolayer boron and boron-based metal organic materials also show potential for application in various fields such as gas sensors, catalysis, energy storage, etc.7–9 One more exciting layered material is boron carbon nitride (BCN) which has gained research consideration over the past few years.
BCN exhibits tunable physical and electrical properties different from hexagonal BN (h-BN) and graphene.10,11 It is expected to combine the properties of BN, B4C, graphene and carbon nitride (C3N4) in BCN compounds. The composition variation of B, C and N atoms is responsible for the properties of BxCyNz.12 The ternary BCN consists of h-BCN rings along with BN and graphene domains which is different from B, N co-doped graphene or carbon-doped BN.13,14 Various theoretical predictions and experimental studies have revealed bandgap tuning possibility for BCN from large bandgap insulators to semiconductors.3,15 This ternary material offers potential applications in energy devices, supercapacitors, nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, electrochemical sensors, catalysis, high-temperature lubricants, novel composites, etc.16–22
2. B–C–N materials
Materials within the B–C–N triangular zone are summarized in Fig. 1. Pure phases are represented in the corners of the triangle. In the C-corner, graphene, carbon nanotubes, buckyballs, and fullerenes are considered, whereas boron clusters and nanotubes are considered in the B-corner. The bottom side of the triangle signifies nano morphologies and phases of BN.23 Various intermediate metastable phases exist when moving from C to B. The most stable phases on this side are B4C, BC3 and BC2.24,25 The sp3 hybridization of the B–C area can disrupt the desirable 2D configuration for BCN films. The layered C3N4 structure exists along the C–N side of the triangle formed by strong covalent bonds. In C3N4, the first set of N-atoms are bonded to 3-coordinated C atoms (sp2 configuration), and then C atoms are bonded with a 2-coordinated second set of N atoms in the triazine ring (sp2 hybridization). In this B–C–N triangle exist the hardest materials known – diamond, followed by cubic BN (c-BN) and B4C.26 The atomic similarity of B, C and N elements leads to the formation of BCN ternary compounds within the triangle.27 c-BCN exhibits super hardness by combining the properties of diamond and c-BN. h-BCN combines the properties of graphene and h-BN to show tunable optical and electrical properties. The materials from the triangle similar to BCN are discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 1  The ternary phase diagram of the B–C–N material system. 
2.1. Graphene
Graphene, composed of an sp2-hybridized single layer of carbon, is the first 2D material available. It is reported as the thinnest and strongest material.28 It exhibits high thermal conductivity (5000 W m−1 K−1), high transparency, strong ambipolar electric field effect, superior carrier mobility, electrical conductivity, environmental compatibility, high theoretical specific surface area, and high Young's modulus (∼1 TPa), etc.29–36 These exceptional properties make 2D graphene promising for biological, electronic, mechanical, sensing, and catalytic applications.37–42 In 2004, for the first time graphene was fabricated by the ‘peeling off’ process.32 Till then, various synthetic routes such as solid exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation of graphite, reduction of graphene oxide, unzipping of carbon nanotubes, organic synthesis, chemical vapor deposition (CVD), epitaxial growth, etc. were employed for the synthesis of graphene.43–49 Graphene is a bandgap less material and oxygen reactive at high temperatures, which limits its use.
2.2. Boron nitride
BN forms a covalent structure similar to carbon allotropes as B–N and C–C bonds are isoelectronic. The first synthesis of BN was reported by Balman in 1842. In the chemical reaction, boric acid (H3BO3) and potassium cyanide were used to synthesize BN, which was unstable.50 With the technological developments, the inexpensive and stable synthesis of BN became a reality. BN can be prepared by mechanical exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, CVD, substitution reaction, solid-state reaction, etc.51,52 BN can be formed in various crystalline structures – hexagonal (h-BN), cubic (c-BN), wurtzite (w-BN), and rhombohedral (r-BN).53 Among these, c-BN is the most stable and is analogous to diamond having sp3-bonded phases. The atomic arrangement of w-BN is also sp3-bonded, arranged in a hexagonal network. r-BN possesses threefold layered stacking (stacking sequence of ABCABC…). h-BN, the most in demand structure, is analogous to graphite and has sp2-bonded atomic arrangements. The layers in hexagonal BN are arranged in AA′AA′… sequence.54 h-BN displays high chemical stability, thermal stability, electrical properties, tunable solubility, high-temperature lubricating properties, and gas adsorption properties.54–56 These days, boron nitride-based composites are also gaining much research interest due to improved properties than h-BN. In 1995, Chopra et al. synthesized boron nitride nanotubes (BNNTs) for the first time.57 BNNTs possess uniform electronic properties, extraordinary mechanical properties, high oxidation resistance, etc. BN has applications in the field of microwave transparent windows, semiconductors, electrodes, fuel cells, batteries, paints, cosmetics, structural material for seals, dental cement, sensors, etc.58,59
2.3. Boron carbide
Boron carbide with the chemical formula B4C is one of the hardest materials after diamond and c-BN. High hardness leads to the use of B4C in bulletproof vests, tank armor, and several industrial applications.60 Also, B4C holds the capability to absorb neutrons and is used for neutron radiation shielding applications.61 The crystal structure of B4C is rhombohedral, which comprises icosahedra (12-atom) positioned at the unit cell corners. The linear chains (3-atom) connect the icosahedra along the rhombohedral axis (111). The composition of the unit cell can be described as B6–C–C–C–B6. The exchange of B and C atoms between interstitial atoms can take place (B6–C–B–C–B6).62 Boron carbide can exist in a wide range of composition (B4C to B10.5C).63 B4C can be synthesized by carbothermic reduction, vapour phase reactions, magnesiothermic reduction, from polymer precursors, by ion beam synthesis, liquid–phase reactions, solid-state reactions, etc.62 The key characteristics of B4C are hardness, good strength, low density (2.52 g cm−3), wear resistance, chemical inertness and high elastic modulus.64,65 Additionally, the occurrence of defect states in B4C modifies its photocatalytic and photoluminescence properties.
2.4. Carbon nitride
Analogous to graphene, bulk g-C3N4 comprises layers held together by weak van der Waals forces. Various exfoliation methods like thermal etching exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, chemical exfoliation, ultrasonic-assisted exfoliation, etc. have been employed to obtain a few sheets of g-C3N4.66 The structure comprises covalently linked (sp2-hybridized) carbon and nitrogen atoms. The bandgap of g-C3N4 is ∼2.7 eV.67 The facile, environment friendly, and low-cost synthesis methods with excellent physicochemical properties have resulted in the exploration of g-C3N4 for enormous applications. The C–N material possesses high hardness, good strength, wide bandgap, corrosion resistance, thermal conductivity, wear resistance, high stability in the air (∼600 °C), etc.68 Properties such as narrow bandgap, biodegradability, tunable bandgap, and electron-rich properties have shown the potential of nanostructured g-C3N4 in photocatalysis, energy storage, sensing, and solar cell applications.66
2.5. Boron carbon nitride
The boron (group IIIA), carbon (group IVA), and nitrogen (group VA) elements have similar atomic sizes. Also, the structures of boron nitride and carbon polymorphs are analogous, which forms a basis for synthesizing a diamond-like phase with all three elements. Boron carbon nitride is a ternary compound of B–C–N, which has been anticipated to possess properties in-between those of conducting graphene and insulating BN.69 This boron carbon nitride class may be further divided into (i) simple, i.e., BN and graphene domain containing composites, and (ii) complex, i.e., N–C and B–C bonds along with B–N and C–C bonding. The percentage of these bonds and the synthesis method are the two parameters that decide the properties of these materials. Various theoretical as well as experimental studies have revealed that BCN materials have numerous potential applications due to their outstanding optical, electrical, mechanical and thermal properties.70,71 These materials can be expected to find possible applications in electrical conductors, electronics, novel composites, high-temperature lubricants, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), etc.2,17
The properties of BCN can be easily tuned with slight variation in the arrangement and composition of B, C and N atoms. The investigation of three hybrid phases of BCN has been explored – h-BxCyNz, c-BxCyNz, and nanohybrids between CNTs and BNNTs.53 The insulating behaviour of h-BN and semi-metallic graphite has instigated research in the analogous h-BxCyNz hybrid phase with a honeycomb structure. h-BxCyNz offers bandgap tunability and stability of nanostructures with a mixture of h-BN and graphite domains. To develop a superhard material, research in the c-BxCyNz phase gained interest. High-temperature high-pressure synthesis methods are used for the synthesis of c-BxCyNz which is phase separated into diamond and c-BN. A detailed discussion of the properties, applications and synthesis methods of BCN is included in the subsequent sections.
3. Nanostructured boron carbon nitride
Generally, BCN nanomaterials are divided into four categories, namely, zero-dimensional, one dimensional, two dimensional and three dimensional BCN nanomaterials, which are summarized in the following subsections and Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of different BCN nanostructures




Material type
Method
Properties/applications




BCN spheres74
Pyrolysis
• Pyrolyzing a simple polymeric precursor at 1000 °C


• Uniform spherical morphology and good crystallinity observed


BCN nanowires90
CVD
• High-purity BCN nanowires were synthesized in the presence of ammonia and water-free alcohol (at 1100 °C)


• Uniform diameters of ∼30 nm


• Vapor-solid mechanism is responsible for the growth of BCN nanowires


BCNNTs91
Solid state reaction
• With the increase in the synthesis temperature, BCNNTs of different morphology formed


• At 1000 °C synthesis -bamboo-like, 1100 °C – both bamboo-shaped and cylindrical BCNNTs, 1200 °C – cylindrical BCNNTs


BCNNTs92
CVD
• High thermal stability (up to 900 °C in air)


• Varying NH3 flow resulted in varied band gap. Also it can vary the doping level of B and N


BCNNSs93
Solid state reaction
• 4 different BCNNS compositions achieved with p-type behavior


• BCN nanosheets also displayed low thermal conductivity


BCNNSs94
CVD
• B0.38C0.27N0.35 nanosheets with length between 0.5 and 1 mm


• PL spectra show an intense peak (3.27–3.31 eV)


BCNNSs95
Embedding C atoms into the lattice of BNNSs
• Bandgap decreased from 5.5 to 2.6 eV with the increase in C incorporation


• Also, high temperature stable ferromagnetic properties observed


• Potential for spintronic and optoelectronic devices.


BCNNSs96
One-pot synthesis
• BCN nanosheets (thickness of 2.2–3.4 nm) showed high adsorption capacities of 210.97 and 625 mg g−1 for Pb2+ and Hg2+, respectively


• Potential for wastewater treatment


BCN nanoflakes97
Pyrolysis
• BCN nanoflakes exhibit oxidation resistance (∼810 °C)


• B–N, C–C and C–N bonds were identified in X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) analysis


2D BCN layers98
Solid-state route
• Four compositions achieved in which carbon-rich B0.15C0.73N0.12 displayed excellent stability for >100 charge/discharge cycles


B–C–N layers99
Microwave-assisted PECVD
• Modifications of the optical, electronic and transport properties of h-BN-rich and C-rich phases


BCN foam100
Modified CVD
• Synthesized BCN foam displayed high electrocatalytic activities for ORR compared to the Pt catalyst


• Also, high thermal stability (up to 900 °C) shown by BCN foam


BCN foam86
CVD
• BCN foam with three compositions was synthesized


• All showed stable thermal performance


• BN concentration increase led to a decrease of the electrical conductivity of the synthesized foam




3.1. Zero-dimensional (OD) BCN nanomaterials
Nanoparticles or nanospheres are referred to as 0D BCN nanomaterials. BCN nanoparticles demonstrate tunable photoluminescence properties. The increase in carbon concentration results in a narrow bandgap with PL emission shift from blue to the green region.72 BCN nanoparticles show a concentration dependent quantum confinement effect on optical properties. BCN nanospheres are also gaining a lot of interest. BC4N microspheres were synthesized with random distribution of B, C and N.73 Theoretical predictions show homogeneous distribution of B and N with high cohesive energy of configurational entropy. BCN hollow spheres with high purity were developed with h-BCN conserved in a spherical shell.74
3.2. One-dimensional (1D) BCN nanomaterials
Nanotubes, nanorods and nanoribbons are 1D BCN nanomaterials, among which BCN nanotubes (BCNNTs) have gained utmost interest.75–77 Similar to BNNTs and carbon nanotubes (CNTs), BCNNTs exhibit spiral or bamboo-like conformations wrapped in single-walled or multi-walled structure. A distinction from CNTs and BNNTs is that BCNNTs exhibit tunable electrical and optical properties with variation in B, C, and N atoms’ arrangement and composition. The thermal conductivity of BCNNTs is improved compared to that of BNNTs. BCNNTs could be fabricated from B, N co-doped CNTs or C-doped BNNTs. Until now, both homogeneous and phase-separated BCNNTs have been reported. B, C, N intermixed homogeneous NTs with a bandgap of 2.8 eV have pyridine-like C–N defective bonding structures, enabling chemical activity.78 The properties of BCNNTs depend upon wall layers, element compositions and structure alignment. Vertically aligned BCNNTs show their potential for photoelectricity and energy storage applications.79 BCN nanorods with high BET (Brunauer, Emmett and Teller) surface area and BCN nanoribbons have also been reported as 1D nanomaterials.
3.3. Two-dimensional (2D) BCN nanomaterials
Similar to 2D graphene, 2D BCN also emerged as a noteworthy layered nanomaterial due to its diverse and excellent properties. Usually, 2D BCN is synthesized as nanosheets.80 BCN nanosheets (BCNNSs) are 2D materials which comprise ternary BCN hybrid NSs, C-doped boron nitride nanosheets (BNNSs) and B, N co-doped graphene. B, N co-doped graphene demonstrates remarkable electrochemical properties because of the synergistic effects of B and N.81,82 The calculated highest-occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest-unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) energy of pure graphene and B, N co-doped graphene by Wang et al. showed high chemical reactivity and low kinetic stability of BCN.82 At low temperatures, graphene layers are metallic, whereas these characteristics enable BCNNSs to be semiconductors. B, N co-doped graphene also demonstrates microwave absorbing properties. But there is an issue of thermodynamic instability with phase isolation which shifts the focus to C-doped BNNSs. Theoretical calculations show the activation of BNNSs (insulators) by carbon substitution. Further intermixing in BCNNSs, rather than doping, results in fewer defect sites and increased sp2 hybridization of B, C and N. Ternary hybrid BCNNSs are homogeneous and display excellent electronic properties. BCNNSs possess high BET surface area and have been reported for lithium-ion storage. Various methods, such as solid-state reaction, microwave plasma CVD, thermal catalytic reaction, etc., have been reported for the synthesis of BCNNSs.83 In these methods, the solid-state reaction produced BCNNSs with low thermal conductivity, while h-BN and graphene possess ultrahigh thermal conductivity. So, BCNNSs can be a potential candidate for thermal energy applications. Another 2D BCN nanostructure is nanoflakes. The BCN nanoflakes synthesized by the pyrolysis method show their potential as high-temperature lubricant materials.
3.4. Three-dimensional (3D) BCN nanomaterials
The 3D graphene nanostructures have great potential in electrical applications, raising curiosity about how 3D BCN would perform. This interest resulted in the development of BCN aerogels and foams with crosslinking networks.84,85 The 3D BCN nanostructure possesses enhanced stability for gas adsorption or energy storage applications. BCN hybrid foams developed by microwave treatment showed density (0.24 g cm−3) with enhanced thermal stability, methanol desorption and conductivity. The improvement was attributed to the charge distribution of boron and nitrogen atoms with carbon and more defect density.85 BC2N and BC4N foams were also fabricated using the same method of which the latter showed incredible thermal stability (∼780 °C). Loeblin et al. reported the synthesis of lightweight 3D BCN aerogels for the first time by CVD with tunable electrical and electromagnetic properties.86 For sensitive electronic applications, generally two different materials are required for thermal and electromagnetic necessities. But 3D BCN possesses benefits of thermal interface and tuneable electromagnetic interference which obliterate the need for additional layers 3D BCN's tuneable properties have immense potential in various applications.87–89
4. Properties of boron carbon nitride
4.1. Crystal structure
For understanding the B–C–N crystal structure, understanding graphene and h-BN monolayer crystal structures is important. In graphite, carbon atoms are bonded covalently in a honeycomb geometry.101 The ABAB… sequence or Bernal stacking is observed in hexagonal graphitic structures because atoms in each layer move half a hexagon with respect to the previous layer. Bi-layer graphene and the AB sequence are shown in Fig. 2(a) and (c).102,103 The dominance of weak van der Waals forces in interlayer interactions is suppressed during graphene extraction by graphite exfoliation. In-plane C–C interactions in graphene are owing to a network of σ-bonds (covalent bonds). The unit cell of graphene has a lattice constant of 2.46 Å, and the in-plane distance (C–C bond length) is ∼1.42 Å.104 In h-BN, there exists in-plane σ-bonds and out-of-plane van der Waals interactions. There is a significant electronegativity difference between B and N, which makes partially ionic σ-bonds. In BN, Bpz and Npz are two layers providing empty orbitals and electron pairs.52 The semi-polarity of BN is responsible for the shorter interlayer distance than graphene. The top view and the AA′ sequence of h-BN are shown in Fig. 2(b) and (d). In BN, two alternating atoms form the AA′AA′…sequence. The x–y position for atoms of each layer correspond to the adjacent layers, i.e., each B atom encounters N atoms in the identical position above and below.
 Fig. 2  Side view of (a) bilayer graphene and (b) h-BN. Schematic illustration of the top view of (c) the AB stacking sequence in graphene and (d) AA′ in h-BN. (e) Side view of vertical BCN consisting of individual layers of h-BN and graphene stacking. (f) In-plane B–C–N system consisting of distinct C and BN domains distributed in a single sheet. Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License from ref. 103. 
In view of graphene and h-BN structures, B–C–N can be generalized into in-plane and out-of-plane heterostructures, as shown in Fig. 2(e) and (f). It is not essential to follow the AA or AA′ stacking sequence in the out-of-plane configuration. The graphene layer can be packed in two h-BN monolayers. It can follow the same or different edge configuration like armchair or B/N-terminated zigzag. In theory, the underlying layer can regulate each layer orientation, but structural defects or strain can disrupt the configuration.
4.2. Chemical properties
The oxidation stability of BCN is complex than that of h-BN and graphene and depends on chemical composition. The oxidation resistance in h-BN has been reported up to 1000 °C in air. In vacuum and inert gas flow conditions, h-BN can be thermally stable up to 1425 °C and 3000 °C, respectively. The oxidation in graphene is observed at 400 °C, while complete thermal dissociation occurs at 800 °C.105,106 The BCN film deposited on Ge demonstrated that higher carbon content resulted in less oxidation than nitrogen enriched films.107 The comparative energy of the structure from different interatomic interactions between B, C and N atoms controls the overall chemical stability of the structure. The cohesive energy calculations revealed that all B–C–N arrangements are not thermodynamically stable concerning the relative energy of the structure. It is reported that more B–C bonds result in less stability of the structure as C–C and B–N bonds are stronger than B–C. The presence of more C–C bonds yields a more stable structure.108,109
4.3. Optical properties
The combination of h-BN and graphene establishes the optical properties of BCN. The optical band gap of h-BN is ∼5.7 eV attributed to π–π* transition from pz orbitals of N to those of B.110–112 The UV-vis analysis of h-BN specifies that incorporation of quantum confinement will further blue shift the absorption peak whereas surface functionalization of BN leads to a decrease in the bandgap (red shift). On the other hand, graphene is gapless with a very low absorption coefficient (∼2.3%). The bandgap of BCN can be tuned in between that of h-BN and graphene depending upon the composition. The reported bandgap of ternary BCN is in the wide range of 2.6 to 5.5 eV, which shows scope for optoelectronic applications. Also, BCN shows properties in the infrared (IR) region.113,114 The bands such as B–N–B, B–N, B–C, C–N, C–C, etc., originate from graphene and h-BN domains. Further, BCN nanomaterials show Raman-active modes.115–117 As reported, graphene shows two main peaks as D and G bands while one sharp peak for E2g mode is observed in the Raman spectra of h-BN. In ternary BCN, Raman modes can be observed as a result of in-plane atomic displacements or the E2g phonon-mode peak.
4.4. Mechanical properties
BCN exhibits properties such as Young's modulus, hardness, and stress value of ∼285 GPa, 35–40 GPa, and 150 MPa, respectively, which are higher than those of h-BN, ∼36.5 GPa, 1.5–1.3 GPa, and 1–16 MPa respectively.118 It has been reported that tribological properties of BCN depend upon carbon content. Hardness increased (11 to 18 GPa) ascribed to sp3 C–N with the increase in carbon. The friction coefficient decreased from 0.4 to 0.2 as a result of increased sp2 carbon domains which act as self-lubricant. In the hybridization of BN and graphene, the tensile fracture of the BCN layer decreases from 115 to 65 GPa with the increase in BN concentration (0 to 45%).119 The hardness of BCN thin films also depends upon boron and nitrogen contents.120 The simulation models of h-BCN with three dissimilar configurations displayed that the fracture strain (0.13–0.17) and fracture strength (81.4–93.4 GPa) are 21% and 35% less than those of graphene. A similar reduction was observed with B, N doping of graphene. The atomic vibrations increase with temperature (100 to 1000 K) and the fracture strength decreases.121,122 This trend is also observed in h-BCN along zigzag and armchair edges.123 With the increase in temperature, a decrease in Young's modulus is also observed which results in possible plastic deformation.
4.5. Electronic properties
Basically, there are two factors on which the electronic band structure of the B–C–N phase depends – (1) atomic ratios varying x, y, z in BxCyNz and (2) atom distribution throughout the surface with the possibility of different bond (C–C, B–N, B–C, and N–C) formation.124 Lack of hands-on information on the nanodomain distribution of graphene and h-BN limits the complete understanding of the electronic structure of BCN materials. There is conflict whether h-BN is an indirect bandgap transition with valence band maximum at K and conduction band minimum at M, or it has direct bandgap along K.125 In contrast, graphene is gapless with two inequivalent Dirac points (K and K′).3 The combination of h-BN and graphene in the BCN system can result in a complex band structure which needs complete understanding by ab initio density functional theory (DFT). The bandgap of h-BCN and the sub-electronic state energy of the gap depend upon the B and N ratio. More B atoms lead to more holes which means prevalence of N results in electron doped structure.126 BxCyNz displays conductivity increase with carbon content. At 40% C, ambipolar behaviour and at 90% C, insulator–metal transition are observed in BCN. Graphene network percolation and hopping between BN edge states may be responsible for this transition. BC3N has been described as a p-type semiconductor to be used in the electrode material. BCN nanofilms also show carbon content based dependence of electrical resistivity. BCN and BC5N comparison showed that specific resistivity decrease with C at% increase may be due to percolation network formation in C atoms.127
4.6. Magnetic properties
High-temperature ferromagnetism has gained interest in the last few years. Graphene and h-BN demonstrate magnetic hysteresis at room temperature.128,129 Hydrogenation and electron donor–acceptor molecules’ interaction play an important role in the magnetic properties of graphene. In h-BN sheets, a decrease in layers leads to increased saturation magnetization in magnetic hysteresis. Similar to graphene and h-BN, BCN materials show ferromagnetism at room temperature. Kumar et al. studied the magnetic properties of BC1.9N under zero field cooled (ZFC) and field cooled conditions (FC) at 500 Oe. ZFC and FC curves show divergence up to room temperature and overlap at a higher field (1 tesla) which suggests magnetically frustrated systems. Room temperature hysteresis provides saturation magnetization (Ms) and coercive field (HC) values to be 0.014 emu g−1 and ∼120 Oe, respectively. BC1.6N prepared by a gas phase method also shows similar behaviour with low magnetization.11
4.7. Theoretical studies
Raidongia et al. synthesized BC4N using urea and boric acid at 930 °C. A comparative analysis of the structure and properties of graphene and BC4N, using first-principles pseudopotential-based DFT calculations, predicted it to be an insulator. The bulk modulus of BC4N exhibits an interesting dependence on the ordering of nitrogen and boron on the graphene lattice.73 Xie et al. worked on the first-principles investigation of Cx(BN)y compounds and investigated the electronic properties, stability and work functions by varying the concentration of carbon. The results showed that band gaps are sensitive to the symmetry and topology. It was suggested that the arrangement having BN dimers grouped to one side and carbon atoms to the other side has the lowest formation energy. This arrangement is thermodynamically stable and furthermore the band gaps of the compounds decrease regularly with increasing carbon content.130 Thomas et al. studied the influence of tensile (uniaxial and biaxial) and compressive strains by ab initio calculations on the work functions of h-BN and BCN monolayer. As shown in Fig. 3, the compressive strain decreases while the tensile strain strengthens the work function. Also, the Young's modulus was found to be highly anisotropic with strain. It showed a decrease with tensile strain and an increase with compressive strain.108
 Fig. 3  (a) Electronic band structure computed using the PBE functional for the BCN monolayer; (b) the computed work function values as a function of uniaxial and biaxial compressive and tensile strains in the BCN monolayer; (c) the angular dependent Young's modulus of the BCN monolayer during 10% and 5% compressive (ε = −0.1 and ε = −0.05) and tensile strain (ε = +0.1 and ε = +0.5) states along with the equilibrium strain state (ε = 0). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. 
S. Banerjee and S. K. Pati studied the effect of the distribution of B, C and N atoms in 2D boron carbon nitrides. They also studied its impact on carrier mobility. The extreme features of C-domains in BCN, BCN-I (random) and BCN-II (localized), revealed an electron (hole) mobility of ∼106 cm2 V−1 s−1 (∼104 cm2 V−1 s−1) and ∼103 cm2 V−1 s−1 (∼106 cm2 V−1 s−1), respectively. They described the fundamental microscopic mechanisms behind extraordinarily large carrier mobility.131 Liu et al. calculated the direct band gap of BC6N theoretically as 1.833 eV. It also showed high carrier mobility in comparison to black phosphorene. It has been observed that coexistence of high carrier mobility and valley-selective circular dichroism in BC6N is promising for the valley Hall effect.132 Nematollahi et al. performed DFT study to analyze the healing of the BCN nanosheets and nanotubes by using the NO molecule and found that the defect formation energy in nanotubes is smaller than that of nanosheets. The adsorption energy of the NO molecule indicates the strong interaction between NO and BCN nanostructures. The results showed that this study might be helpful in purifying the defective BCN nanostructures as well as removing toxic gases (such as NO and CO).133
Yadav et al. reported biomedical application of BCN sheets with theoretical aspects using DFT. Aspirin adsorption on BCN sheets and its HER activity was explored. The results showed high HER activity and excellent adsorption of aspirin in wastewater as compared to boron nitride and graphene. The drug molecule showed great affinity towards BCN sheets. The band gap of BCN reduced by ∼33% with the adsorption of the aspirin molecule.134 Mir et al. reported the adsorption of nucleobases (adenine, cytosine, guanine, thymine and uracil) on a BCN hybrid structure. Structural and thermodynamic stability of BCN was studied in detail. BCN showed superior binding strength than BN. It was also found that the basic properties of nucleobases and BCN remain unchanged upon adsorption. These results emphasized that BCN can be a promising template for self-assembly of nucleobases.135 Shao et al. investigated the potential applications of BC2N, using first-principles calculations, as an anchoring material for Li–S batteries. Doped and defective BC2N showed increased binding energy and improved conductivity. This work emphasized that BC2N monolayers can be a suitable candidate for Li–S batteries.136 Zhang et al. theoretically predicted five stable phases of boron carbon nitrides (BCNs) with uniformly distributed B, C, and N atoms and with a stoichiometric ratio of 1:1:1. BCN monolayers are stabilized due to the relatively high proportion of robust C–C or B–N bonds which leads to noticeable kinetic and thermal stability.137
Esrafili and Rad used density functional theory to theoretically study the sensing mechanism of carbon doped boron nitride. The NO and NO2 molecules showed good adsorption on c-BN, which induced a large variation in the bandgap. The results indicated the use of carbon-doped boron nitride towards NO and NO2 sensing.28
Kumar et al. reported the first principles DFT study on the electronic structures and properties of (BCN)x clusters as well as the (BCN)12 nanotube. Several electronic parameters of (BCN)x clusters have been calculated with x = 1 to 5. The work ought to be valuable in the development of hybrid BCN-based nanostructures.138 Bafekry et al. reported DFT based calculations to investigate the optical, structural, and electronic properties of the 2D BCN monolayer. The molecular dynamics simulation, phonon dispersion, and cohesive energy calculations confirm the stability of the BCN monolayer. Also, the BCN monolayer can absorb UV radiation more efficiently than visible light. The novel properties show the BCN monolayer to be a potential material for opto-electronic applications.139 Wang et al. used DFT calculations to explore the vacancy defect and biaxial strain effect on the magnetic and electronic properties of the BCN monolayer. It has been reported that introduction of C or B vacancies can convert the BCN monolayer from a semiconductor (nonmagnetic) to a half-metal/metal (magnetic). Furthermore, biaxial strain can convert the BCN monolayer between half-metal and metal. Also, biaxial strain can modulate defective BCN monolayer's magnetic properties. This work can be utilized for the development of 2D BCN spintronic nanodevices.140 Zeng et al. theoretically investigated the properties (structure and electronic) of homogeneous and phase segregated BCN. The Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE) hybrid functional method was utilized. The outcomes show tunable band gaps from 4.69 eV to 1.50 eV at gradient C concentration from 8.33% to 58.33%. As observed appropriate band edge potentials and more efficient carrier transfer channels make homogeneous BCN suitable for CO2 reduction and water splitting applications.141
5. Synthesis of BCN
A number of methods have been reported for the synthesis of BCN nanostructures over time. These methods can provide 0D, 1D, 2D and 3D BCN nanostructures. The reported synthesis techniques can mainly be divided into four categories – chemical vapor deposition (CVD), physical vapor deposition (PVD), pyrolysis in a solid and liquid phase, and the molten salt method (MSM). These methods are briefly summarized in the following subsections.
5.1. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
For two dimensional materials, CVD is an extensively used bottom-up synthesis approach in which solid products are formed by gaseous materials reacting on the substrate surface or in the vapor phase. Experimental parameters like pressure, temperature, gas flow rate, precursor composition, and distance between the source and the substrate play an important role in the size, orientation, morphology and layers of the 2D material.142 Kaner et al. reported graphitic B–C–N, for the first time, by thermal decomposition of boron trichloride (BCl3), ammonia (NH3) and acetylene.143 After that, the CVD method for BCN synthesis has progressed and various methods such as ambient pressure CVD (APCVD), thermal catalytic CVD, gaseous catalyst assisted CVD, microwave plasma CVD, and plasma enhanced CVD (PECVD) have been reported.13,94,144–146 These methods result in high-quality products and controlled growth for application-oriented synthesis.
Aoki et al. synthesized BCN thin films by plasma-assisted chemical vapor deposition. Plasma of source gases nitrogen (N2) and CH4 – was produced by supplying radio frequency (RF) power to the turn coil. Precursor BCl3 was carried near the substrate (kept at 730 °C) by H2 gas. The ratios of B, C, N and O were 43%, 30%, 24% and 3% respectively and O atoms were deliberately incorporated. The results of water-treated BCN films showed potential for a novel humidity sensor.147 Son et al. demonstrated that growth of flat graphene pads on a mechanically exfoliated h-BN surface can be achieved by APCVD. Graphene pads are grown with a high yield of ∼95% with round shape, high flatness and homogeneous diameter. It has been observed that the size and layers of graphene pads are directly dependent on growth parameters (temperature and gas concentration).144
In the CVD process, single or multiple source precursors can be employed during the synthesis of 2D BCN nanosheets. Lin et al. reported BCN growth by using single layer graphene oxide (GO), NH3 and boron trioxide (B2O3) as precursors. It was observed that B and N atoms (from precursors) were fused on the substrate while B and C atoms formed B–N and C–N bonds by binding with N.148 Tang et al. reported the synthesis of graphene domains on h-BN by the GACVD process in which silane was used as a gaseous catalyst. Hall measurements showed an ultra-flat dielectric substrate. This synthesis method can be used for device-based applications.145 Leardini et al. reported the synthesis of BCN layers via microwave-assisted PECVD using methylamine borane. This easy method allows reproducible and controlled growth of B–C–N layers onto thin Cu foils. The obtained results showed ternary B–C–N phases in the form of nanolayers as potential candidates for optoelectronics, nanoelectronics and catalysis.99
The GCA-CVD method is directly used to synthesize stacked graphene on exfoliated h-BN. To enhance the graphene growth rate (∼1 μm min−1), silane is used which can offer large graphene domains on h-BN.145 This method here ties the gap in graphene growth on a metal surface and dielectric surface. Germane and silane can be utilized for this catalytic growth. Faster growth with no grain boundaries has been achieved. Zhou et al. reported the growth of ultrawide bandgap ε-Ga2O3/h-BCN heterojunctions on sapphire substrates by metalorganic CVD (MOCVD). h-BCN was a 2D layered structure and ε-Ga2O3 was of polycrystalline nature. It was found that the heterojunction displays a type-II band alignment with 2.77 eV conduction band offset and −1.60 eV valence band offset. This work offers band alignment in ultrawide bandgap h-BCN heterojunctions to explore for electronic and photonic applications.149 Iyyamperumal et al. used melamine diborate as a precursor for the CVD synthesis of vertically aligned multiwall BCNNTs with high capacitance.150 The limitations of the CVD method are expensive templates, sophisticated apparatus, careful handling of the process, high-temperature conditions, etc., which led to exploration of other methods.103
5.2. Physical vapor deposition (PVD)
Various PVD methods such as sputtering, ion beam assisted deposition, and pulse layer deposition have been used for the synthesis of BCN materials. In RF sputtering of BCN films, the main parameters are gas flow rate (N2), deposition temperature, sputtering power, annealing temperature and bias voltage.151 The substrate temperature and bias voltage variation provides control over bond contents in BCN films. The increase of N2 flow decreases elastic modulus, wear resistance and hardness in BCN films. The variation of annealing and deposition temperature affects the bandgap and refractive index. Zagho et al. published a detailed review on BCN films deposited by RF sputtering. This article provides a brief historical overview of BN and B4C, and recent research trends in BCN synthesis. Characterization and properties of RF sputtered BCN thin films have also been covered.151 S. D. Nehate and K. B. Sundaram prepared hydrogen doped BCN thin films and studied electrical properties. The films were prepared by sputtering boron carbide and boron nitride. The influence of temperature and hydrogen gas on the films was studied.152 Nehate et al. have summarized all growth techniques including physical vapor deposition methods for thin films in detail.118
5.3. Pyrolysis
The pyrolysis method thermally transforms B, C, and N precursors into BCN at high temperatures. The overall method is to make a B, C, and N precursor slurry which is heated at high temperature. After washing and drying, BCN is obtained. Moses et al. prepared layered boron carbon nitrides (BCN and BC5N) with varied difference in configuration using the urea route. BCN and BC5N showed a significant difference in the photoluminescence spectra having maxima at 340 and 410 nm respectively.153 Liu et al. prepared hybrid BCN from the reaction of melamine (C3N6H6) and H3BO3 at 600 °C. The synthesized BCN showed high fluorescence in the absence of metal ions. However, the addition of metal ions causes fluorescence quenching. BCN can be used as a possible fluoro-sensor due to this property for the quantitative detection of metal ions. BCN also showed high selectivity towards Ag+ which makes it a facile sensor for sensitive and selective detection of Ag+ in aqueous solution.154 Wang et al. reported 2D BCN synthesis by a pyrolysis method using H3BO3 as the boron source and g-C3N4 as both the template and the nitrogen source. For the first time, BCN nanosheets with a porous structure and high SSA were explored as capacitive deionization (CDI) electrode materials. High adsorption capacity with good stability was observed for BCN nanosheets.155 Zhang et al. reported preparation of ultra-light BCN using a simple precursor synthesis-based pyrolysis method. Frequency-controllable exceptional microwave absorption properties were observed. This was attributed to the combination of lattice polarization and complex permittivity resulting from dopants (B and N) in carbon networks.156 High-purity 0D BCN hollow spheres with good spherical morphology and crystallinity were synthesized from a simple polymeric precursor at 1000 °C. This work provided a simple and efficient way for 0D BCN synthesis for industrial and scientific applications.74
Peng et al. reported a one-pot synthesis method for the synthesis of BCN nanosheets via pyrolysis of the mixture of boric acid and melamine. The molar ratio and heating temperature were varied to optimize the synthesis conditions. BCN possesses high specific surface area, hydrophilicity and electrostatic attraction ability. Due to these properties, BCN nanosheets demonstrate excellent adsorption performance toward mercury and lead ions.96 Zhang et al. reported BCN synthesis using H3BO3, activated carbon and urea mixed in water and dried (60 °C) and then pyrolyzed in a tubular oven at 900 °C (10 h) under a N2 atmosphere. After cooling down, the sample was subjected to further doping in NH3 at 930 °C (3 h). The synthesized BCN was analyzed for CDI application. BCN nanosheets showed high removal capacity with superior cycling stability which makes them suitable for use as a high performance CDI electrode material.157 Yang et al. reported the synthesis of highly porous BCN by rapid solvent-free ball milling followed by pyrolysis processes using B2O3, dicyandiamide (DCD) and polyvinylpyrrolidone as shown in Fig. 4(a). The maximum specific surface area of 1386.7 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 1.13 cm3 g−1 of BCN was achieved. It was observed that the amount of the carbon source played a significant role in the porosity of synthesized BCN.158 Mirzaee et al. reported a template free method by solid-state reaction using urea, boric acid and glucose in a nitrogen atmosphere for the synthesis of BCN nanosheets as shown in Fig. 4(b).159 Tabassum et al. adopted the synthesis strategy assisted by polyethylene glycol, boric acid and urea to grow BCN nanotubes on the melamine foam (MF) derived 3D carbon architecture (Fig. 4(c)).160 Pyrolysis is becoming a prevalent process for BCN synthesis owing to its numerous advantages over CVD such as less expensive, moderate temperature range (600–930 °C), large scale synthesis, etc.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (a) porous BCN by rapid solvent-free ball milling followed by pyrolysis; (b) BCN nanosheets by solid-state reaction using a template free method; (c) 3D-BCN nanotubes on the MF derived carbon architecture; (d) 3D BCN ceramic aerogel based on biohydrogel templates for photoredox catalysis [(a) reproduced with permission from ref. 158; (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 159; (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 160; (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 87]. 
5.4. Molten salt method
The molten salt method (MSM) is an extensively used method to produce 2D nanomaterials. In the MSM, the salt mixture is heated over its melting point to attain a liquid state environment for the reaction to dissolve precursor molecules. After the reaction, it is easy to separate the salt mixture to get pure h-BCNNSs. In this method, the salt acts as a solvent medium and also averts the self-agglomeration of BCN layers.161 The important factors in this method are melting point, solubility and stability. Precursor solubility can influence particle size, reaction rate and surface morphology. In the MSM, mass transport in the molten salt and rapid solvation of precursor molecules enable 2D BCN nanosheet synthesis. The generally used salts for BCN synthesis are ionic compounds such as lithium chloride (LiCl), sodium chloride, (NaCl), and potassium chloride (KCl) with a similar crystal structure. Lei et al. reported the synthesis of few-layered BCNNSs (2–6 atomic layers) by using the LiCl/KCl eutectic mixture. BCNNSs exhibited a high surface area and enhanced lithium storage capability.162 Zheng et al. reported the synthesis of modified BCNNSs by a KCl-assisted molten salt method with boric acid, urea and glucose (C6H12O6) as precursors. In comparison to bulk BCN, modified BCNNSs resulted in lower thickness, improved crystallinity and enhanced charge separation. The photoluminescence, photoelectrochemical and electron paramagnetic resonance analysis specifies the promoted separation/transfer of photoinduced charge carriers. BCNNSs can be used for application in organic transformations.163
Luo et al. fabricated BCN ceramic aerogels via a bio-hydrogel template molten salt method for use as heterogeneous photocatalysts (as shown in Fig. 4(d)). They show superior catalytic efficiency due to the synergistic effect of ceramic 3D structure with improved crystallinity and increased surface area. This BCN aerogel opens new opportunities for photocatalysis.87 Zhang et al. synthesized BCNNSs using boron oxide, glucose, melamine, and NaCl/KCl. The mixture was annealed at 1250 °C for 5 h (under NH3). The as-obtained BCNNS with atomic layered thickness demonstrates improved visible light H2 evolution activity in comparison to bulk BCN.161 Jiang et al. synthesized porous BCN with a simple KCl-assisted strategy. Porous BCN showed high photocatalytic performance than bulk BCN as a result of the improvement in charge separation and transmission by enhanced crystallinity.164 In summary, the MSM can be effectively used to synthesise high-quality and ultra-thin h-BCNNSs with less cost and sustainable solvent.
5.5. Other methods
A one-step simple procedure was used for the synthesis of BCN nanosheets containing cobalt oxide (Co3O4-BCN). Hybrid BCN nanosheets showed high catalytic activity for water oxidation and dye degradation as compared to pristine cobalt oxide. Hybrid BCN displayed good catalytic activity for oxygen evolution reaction in an alkaline electrolyte.165 BCN has also been prepared by thermal exfoliation reaction of graphene with H3BO3 and CH4N2O at 900 °C. BCN samples showed good supercapacitor performance and exceptional ORR activity and also exhibited good response to UV-light. This work demonstrates that BCN can be used in electronics, catalysis and energy devices.16 Wang et al. reported a sol–gel method for the synthesis of porous BCNNSs in which H3BO3, polyvinylic alcohol, and guanidine carbonate were used as precursors. First, a polymeric gel is formed by hydroxyl and amino group crosslinking, which is then treated with P123 for porosity. A 2D layered structure is formed at 900 °C in N2. The release of byproduct gases leads to an increase in pores. The synthesized BCNNSs with high surface area exhibited ORR catalytic performance.166 Sivaprakash et al. (2018) synthesized BCN nanosheets using a thermal condensation technique. They studied the effects of boron loading on photocatalytic properties. The results showed that the thermal stability of BCN increased by 2% in comparison to carbon nitride. Improved photocatalytic activity was observed with the addition of boron in the carbon nitride network. BCN nanosheets showed lower cytotoxicity than typical metal-based catalyst materials. These characteristics make BCN nanosheets a promising candidate for application in dye degradation without harming the environment.167 One of the other methods involved the synthesis of biomass derived ternary BCN at relatively low temperature. The removal capabilities of BCN nanosheets were analyzed. In UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra, it was observed that the amount of B and C impacts the absorption edges of BCN nanosheets. Photocatalytic activities of BCN were evaluated by the degradation of the rhodamine B dye.168 Attri et al. used a combination of freeze-drying, exfoliation and annealing to synthesize BCNNSs. At first, freeze-drying was used to mix boric acid, urea and glucose precursors. Then annealing at 900 °C in N2 resulted in a stacked porous structure. Lastly, porous BCNNSs with low thickness (1.71 nm) were formed by ultrasonic exfoliation.93 Kumar et al. reported the synthesis of a new Fe@TiO2/BCN (FT/BCN) step-scheme (S-scheme) heterostructure. The heterostructure was explored for tetracycline degradation and CO2 photo-reduction to CH4. FT/BCN showed 96.3% tetracycline degradation which was faster (∼7 times) than BCN. The impact of reaction parameters was also investigated. An S-scheme charge transfer mechanism was discussed.169 Xu et al. synthesized a 0D BCN quantum dot (BCNQD) modified 2D Bi4O5I2 composite and utilized it for tetracycline photodegradation. The enhanced degradation rate was explained on the basis that Bi4O5I2 is an electron acceptor and BCNQDs promote photoexcited hole formation. This results in effective separation of photoexcited carriers. This work provides a new idea for BCNQD heterojunction based 0D/2D interface engineering.170
Some of the synthesis methods are summed up in Table 2. Among all the above discussed methods, pulse layer deposition and ion beam assisted methods are difficult to operate and costly due to the requirement of gases. Liquid based direct exfoliation is of high cost and has toxic chemical effects. The sputtering method requires electrical potential during synthesis and is not a cost-effective method. Expensive templates, high temperature and difficulty to operate also limit CVD use for BCN synthesis. Moreover, these methods are mostly forming phase separated or doped B–C–N compounds. The simple and effective synthesis of non-phase segregated BCN is a demanding field of research. Our research group has reported simple, single step synthesis of BCN nanosheets by a solvothermal method using boric acid, acetone and ammonia solution as the B, C and N source respectively.171
Table 2 Summary of BCN synthesis methods reported in the literature




Method
Precursors or media
Conditions (T, P, time)
Mechanisms or reactions
Ref.




CVD
Gas mixture of boron trifluoride (BF3)–CH4–N2–H2, Si (MPCVD)
600 W, 2.5 kPa, 700 °C, 1 h
• Vertical B0.38C0.27N0.35 nanosheets

94



• Thickness ∼2 to a few atomic layers


• Shows intense emission at 3.27 eV with very weak defect-related emission


CVD
B2O3, GO, NH3, SiO2/Si
900–1100 °C for 30 min in NH3
• Conversion of GO nanosheets to BCN on top of the SiO2/Si substrate

148



• Exhibits an ambipolar semiconductor behavior


CVD
Cu
1000 °C, 100 W
• Versatile and scalable process

172



• Patterned regrowth of the B–C–N structure


CVD
Hexane (C6H14), Cu foil, silicon dioxide (SiO2)
950 °C for graphene
• Graphene and h-BN grow sequentially via a two-step process on the substrate to create stacked layers

173



CVD
NH3–borane (BH3), Cu, benzoic acid
1000 °C for h-BN, 1000 °C for 40 min for in-plane, 850 °C for the stacked structure
• In-plane and vertical heterostructures

174



• Selective growth via temperature -triggered switching occurring among in-plane and stacked B–C–N structures


PVD
Si and quartz substrates
500 °C, N2 with a laser energy of 5 J cm−2
• Films are deposited by pulsed laser deposition in a N2 atmosphere

175



• Different compositions and deposition rates by varying N2 pressure


PVD
Acrylonitrile (CH2CHCN), N2, BCl3
0.27 Pa, 1197–1797 °C in N2
• Graphite like structure

176



• CH2CHCN and BCl3 reacted to form BC6N


PVD
Si substrate, B4C
250 °C in Ar/N2
• Reactive magnetron sputtering of a B4C target

177



• Stress reduction happened in the h-BCN film through an increase in the substrate bias voltage and hydrogen addition


PVD
Cesium (Cs) vapor, N2, Si substrate
Sputtering power 60–180 W
• Dual cesium ion sputtering was employed

178



• Taguchi L9 experiment method used to examine optimum process parameters


PVD
Si substrate, B4C
Atmospheric pressure 10−7 torr, 1 mA cm−2
• Dual ion beam sputtering was used to produce the films

179



• High hardness observed in deposited films


PVD
Si substrate
1.2 × 10−6 Pa, laser energy density 2 J cm−2, 500 °C for 4 h
• Pulsed laser deposition was used under various N2 pressures

180



Pyrolysis
H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated charcoal
900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 900 °C, 4 h in NH3
• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors, then reacted with C to form B–C–N

181



• Studied for oxygen reduction reaction


Pyrolysis
H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated charcoal
900 °C, 12 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3
• B2O3 and NH3 reacted with C to form B–C–N

182



Pyrolysis
Mg, B2O3, C3N6H6
Mechanical milling
• Three steps in the mechanism – combustive reduction of B2O3, decomposition of C3N6H6, and formation of BCN

183



Pyrolysis
H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, GO
900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3
• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors

184



• B and N atoms incorporated into the graphene atomic sheets


Pyrolysis
H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated carbon
900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3
• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors

157



• B2O3 and NH3 reacts with C to form BCN


Molten salt method
CH4N2O, NaBH4, guanidine (CH5N3), HCl, LiCl/KCl (45/55 wt)
700 °C, 2 h in N2
• Simple, high yield, chemical process

72



• Precursors self-assemble to form BCNO particles


Molten salt method
CH4N2O, NaBH4, LiCl/KCl (45/55 wt)
750 °C, 2 h in N2
• Simple and environment friendly process

162



• Precursors self-assemble to form BCN nanosheets with 2–6 atomic layers with high surface area


Molten salt method
B2O3, C3N6H6, C6H12O6, NaCl/KCl
1250 °C for 5 h in NH3
• Precursors self-assemble to form black colored BCN nanosheets

161



• Atomic layered thickness with large lateral size




6. Applications of boron carbon nitride
BCN exhibits tunable properties in between those of h-BN and graphene as discussed before. These exceptional properties make BCN desirable for specific applications, as shown in Fig. 5. Some well explored application fields of BCN are discussed in the following subsections.
 Fig. 5  Various applications of boron carbon nitride. 
6.1. BCN as a photocatalyst and adsorbent
Global urbanization and industrialization have resulted in alarming environmental and energy concerns. The prime water pollutants are dyes discharged (textile, tannery, paper industries), organic solvents, and oil spillage in the water sources. Photocatalytic technology provides solution for wastewater treatment.185 Traditional photocatalysts are generally metal oxides with limitations such as wide bandgap, corrosion, poor chemical stability, etc.186 The hydrogen (H2) produced by photocatalytic water splitting is a viable way to meet future energy demands. In recent times, much attention has been given to developing efficient metal-free photocatalysts. BN and C3N4 have been explored as photocatalysts due to their unique properties.186–189 But the former has the issue of very wide bandgap while the latter shows low quantum efficiency for H2 production. The properties of ternary BCN have a combination of the merits of both BN and C3N4. Also, the bandgap tunability of BCN provides more flexibility to develop an efficient photocatalyst. BCN nanosheets have been reported in the literature for wastewater removal in various forms as shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Various applications of BCN nanosheets for wastewater removal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. 
BCN has been reported for the successful degradation and removal of methyl orange (MO), methylene blue (MB), tetracycline and rhodamine B (RhB) from wastewater.83,190–193 In comparison to C3N4 (∼86.83% degradation), BCN showed ∼97.53% degradation of cibacron yellow under UV light irradiation due to the increased effective surface area.167Fig. 7 shows the mechanism of dye degradation with BCN based materials. BCN nanosheets show 97% degradation of rhodamine B (RhB) within 120 min and holes play a leading role in the photo-degradation mechanism.168 The CdS/BCN nanocomposite resulted in 97.4% degradation of RhB within 30 min. The possible mechanism is shown in Fig. 7(c) in which high efficiency can be attributed to improved adsorption ability, type-II heterojunction, high absorption coefficient, and built-in electric field caused by accumulation of charge at the heterojunction interface.194
 Fig. 7  (a) Structural effects and photodegradation mechanism of RhB over porous BCN nanosheets under irradiation; (b) inhibition effects of different radical scavengers on the decolorization of RhB: BCN catalysts; (c) schematic diagram of charge transfer and separation mechanisms involved in the photocatalytic process of 0.5% CdS/BCN; (d) plausible mechanism of degradation in the presence of light and the BCN@PANI hybrid. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168; (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 194; (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 195. 
BCN has also been reported as an efficient adsorbent for the removal of organic compounds, dyes, and heavy metals from wastewater. The comparison of adsorption capacity is given in Table 3. The mechanism behind BCN NSs’ high efficiency for the removal of Hg2+ and Pb2+ depends upon negative surface charge, hydrophilicity, and high specific surface area. The negative charge of BCN NSs helps in attracting cationic metal ions via complexation, electrostatic interactions, or hydrogen-bonding interactions.96
Table 3 Comparison of adsorption capacity of BCN materials for removal of wastewater pollutants




Adsorbent
Adsorbate
Adsorption capacity (mg g−1)
Ref.




BCN
Tetracycline
76.74

196



BCN
Methyl orange
61.27

193



Methylene blue
119.38


Neutral red
747.10


Malachite green
682.46


BCN nanoscrolls
Methylene blue
250

197



Congo red
620


Layered BN–CN composite
Methyl orange
∼60

198



Methylene blue
∼60


Neutral red
1350.1


Malachite green
1040.6


Crystal violet
∼60


BCN aerogel
Sulfur
30.8

89



BCN nanosheets
Hg2+
625

96



Pb2+
210.97




6.2. BCN as an electrocatalyst
Development of multifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) has attained a lot of interest. These electrochemical reactions are involved in a wide range of sustainable energy applications such as fuel cells, overall water splitting, batteries, etc. Environment friendly BCN is suitable for HER due to more active sites from B and N, tunable properties, chemical stability, defect sites such as sp3-C or Stone–Wales defects.103,181 The comparison of HER performance of BCN with other materials is given in Table 4.
Table 4 Comparison of HER activity of BCN with other materials




Sample Id
Tafel slope (b) mV dec−1
Overpotential (mV) to attain 10 mA cm−2
Ref.




BCN
119.9
230

171



BCN-1
298
100

2



BCN-2
357
127


BCN-3
487
195


BCN-4
487
145


BCN-5
586
178


BCN-1
234
>216

199



BCN-4
186


BCN-6
182


BCN-8
253


Bulk MoS2
151
280

200



C, N architectures
120
490

201



N–CN
159.3
620

202



N, B–CN
198.2
710


MoS2/GO
157
490.2

203



3D-MoS2/N-gas
230
261

204



N-Gas
487


MoS2/Ns
372


MoC
129.7
425

205



Mo2C
266
260


TaC
140–200
—

206



C-Mo2C
168
260

207



Graphite
206
—

208



P-graphene
133
553


N-graphene


490


N doped graphene 800 °C
232
559

209



S doped graphene 800 °C
230
480




In water splitting, OER is a crucial partial complementary reaction to HER. The transparent electrode of 2D h-BCN thin layers (on titanium) has been reported for surface electrocatalytic activity and increased conductivity.210 BCN nanosheets also demonstrate ORR activity, in which N concentration tends to reduce the work function and offer additional Lewis base sites subsequent to C. Oxygen molecule adsorption is more favourable on these sites. Furthermore, edge groups increase the likelihood of O protonation and O–H adsorption.211 To provide defect anchors in BCN, its modification with PANI resulted in improved capacitive behavior (Fig. 8). The specific capacitance of the BCN-PANI electrode increased in comparison to that of BCN (2.2 times) and PANI (1.7 times).212
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the charging reaction mechanism of a symmetric supercapacitor device based on the BCN-PANI electrode material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212. 
6.3. Supercapacitors
Graphene has been used in supercapacitor applications due to tunable surface area, excellent electrical conductivity and active sites on the surface.213 Ternary BCN further shows improved supercapacitor behavior. BCN nanosheets (600.9 m2 g−1 surface area) demonstrated the highest capacitance of 464.5 F g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 with cycle stability (98.5%) after 10000 cycles.93 BCN has been extensively proposed in the field of energy conversion and storage. Still, the electrical double-layer behavior and stacked-layer structure hinder capacitance improvement, which limits further development in energy storage applications. Recently, various approaches such as doping, composites, heterostructures, and hybrids of BCN have been reported for improving the performance for supercapacitor applications. The WS2 coated vertically aligned BCN nanotubes show the specific capacitance (170 F g−1) at 1 A g−1 current density while preserving their capacitance (∼85%) at the end of 10000 cycles214 as given in Fig. 9. Defects also play an important role in the HER performance of BCN. The electrochemical charge storage performance (CV and EDLC results) of BCN nanosheets may be attributed to the higher wettability due to B incorporation in C. There are more active sites available for electron transfer which enhance the charge storage rate. Also, the synergistic effects of N incorporation in C enhance the active sites and lessen the electron path to improve the charge storage capacity. Consequently, the better stability makes BCN a potential candidate to be explored as an electrode material in batteries and supercapacitors.171
 Fig. 9  (a) CV curves of the symmetric vertically aligned BCN nanotube (VA-BCN-NT)@WS2 electrode measured at different scan rates, (b) GCD curves of different current densities and (c) specific capacitances at these current densities, (d) capacitance change after 10000 cycles, (e) the Nyquist plot and its equivalent circuit, and (f) Ragone plot of the symmetric VA-BCN-NT@WS2 electrode structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214. 
6.4. Gas adsorption
BCN nanostructures display the capability to adsorb greenhouse gases such as methane (CH4) and carbon dioxide (CO2). The high specific surface area (SSA) of BCN helps to store these gases and further perform subsequent reactions. BCN synthesized by the urea-based method has shown a high SSA (2911 m2 g−1) during the nitrogen adsorption–desorption process. In nanolayer BCN, CO2 absorption capacity with a 100% uptake value (at 195 K) has been reported compared to the metal–organic framework.14 The electrostatic adsorption of oxygen atoms on N and B sites is the possible mechanism behind CO2 adsorption on BCN films.215 The CH4 adsorption can be explained based on pz orbital interactions of C from the gas molecule and N on the film.124 Recently, by first principles calculations, the adsorption behaviors of CO, H2S, NH3 and NO gas molecules on single-layer penta-BCN were studied. It has been observed that penta-BCN has a moderate affinity for these ambient gas molecules. There is a significant change in band gaps with the adsorption of these gas molecules (as shown in Fig. 10(a)) and the desorption recovery time is also feasible (Fig. 10(b)). Also, the adsorption energy and recovery time (for H2S, NH3 and NO) can be adjusted by an external electric field.216
 Fig. 10  (a) The change rate of band gap (%) and (b) recovery time at various temperatures, for six configurations (CO, CO, H2S, NH3, NO, and NO2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 216. 
6.5. Electrochemical sensing
Recently, the electrochemical sensing application of BCN nanolayers has been explored towards uric acid (UA) and dopamine (DA). The h-BCN modified carbon cloth electrode has been tested for detection of UA. With the increase in current density, h-BCN shows high electrocatalytic activity with a sensitivity of 0.32 μA μM−1 for UA. The CV plot is shown in Fig. 11. The modified BCN electrode shows a sensitivity of 0.688 μA μM−1 towards DA detection. Also, simultaneous sensing of both DA and UA is possible due to the significant potential difference (550 mV and 450 mV respectively).217,218
 Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms of the h-BCN-modified electrode at various DA concentrations (10–580μM) in phosphate-buffered solution (pH 6.8). The inset shows the calibration plot for UA concentration. Scan rate, 10 mV s−1. Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution License Copyright © 2020 Yun-Shuai Bi et al.217 
Li et al. reported single-atom niobium-doped boron–carbon–nitrogen nanotubes (SANb-BCN) for the detection of nitrobenzene (NB). The SANb-BCN-modified glassy carbon electrode (SANb-BCN/GCE) gave rise to a NB reduction peak at −0.6 V, which showed a positive shift (∼120 mV) from the NB reduction peak of the bare GCE. Also, the NB peak current attained using SANb-BCN/GCE was approximately 42-fold higher than that of the bare GCE showing the high sensitivity of the BCN based electrochemical sensor for NB.219 Also, hematite–boron–carbonitride (Fe2O3–BCN) nanosheets synthesized by a hydrothermal method and modified on the surface of the GCE have been fabricated as an electrochemical sensor for lead ions (Pb(II)). The Fe2O3–BCN-based electrochemical sensor demonstrated admirable selectivity and anti-interference ability (in anti-interference and actual analysis experiments), showing its potential application in environmental monitoring of Pb(ii) ions.220
6.6. Lithium-ion battery
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are important for energy storage applications. The BxCyNz structure resembling BN distributed on the C–C network shows high current rate capability and lithium cyclability.162,221 The reasons for the high performance of BCN in comparison to graphene are high stability ensuring higher cycling performance, high-density groups offering redox centres for the Li+ ion reaction, and high surface area providing a more contact area. B0.15C0.73N0.12 revealed a maximum surface area accompanied by exceptional stability for more than 100 cycles with a specific capacitance of 710 mA h g−1 at 0.05 A g−1.8 Compared to commercially available graphite, this BCN composition exhibited an approximately two fold higher capacity value. In another work, BCN nanoribbons synthesized by an economical and green route were studied as LIB anodes. BCN showed higher electrochemical performance due to high porosity and specific surface area which offers adequate number of Li+ storage sites and also helps to fasten the Li+/electron transport. The highest reversible capacity, rate capability and cycling stability are found to be 800 mA h g−1 (at 0.1 A g−1), 390 mA h g−1 (at 1.0 A g−1) and 98% retention after 1000 cycles (at 1.0 A g−1) respectively.77 Therefore, BCN has the potential as an anode for lithium–ion batteries. Furthermore, first principles calculations have been performed to study the use of the BCN monolayer as a cathode material for aluminium dual-ion batteries. As AlCl4 reversibly adsorbs on the BCN monolayer, there is a considerable charge transfer of 0.9 |e| from BCN to AlCl4. This demonstrates that the BCN monolayer goes through oxidation during the charging process.222 These studies show the potential of low-dimensional BCN materials for battery applications.
6.7. Electromagnetic wave absorption material
BCN has been lately recognized as a capable material for electromagnetic wave (EMW) absorption, which can be used in high-speed aircraft.156 h-BCN prepared by a polymerization and pyrolysis method shows low density (15 mg cm−3). The EMW absorption is obtained from −52.7 dB at 5.44 GHz to −20.6 dB at 14.8 GHz. The thermal stability of h-BCN shows its huge potential for use as an industrial shielding and aircraft material. The mechanism and performances of EMW absorption for h-BCN bulk are shown in Fig. 12. Mou et al. reported BCN nanosheets with excellent electromagnetic wave absorption properties. High specific surface area results in a conductive network and multiple reflection and scattering, which favour strong absorption. The minimum reflection loss value is −54.24 dB (at 5.2 GHz) and the thickness of 1.4 mm offers a maximum effective absorption bandwidth up to 4.16 GHz.80 In another work, the role of monomers, pyrolysis temperature, and cooling rates in the EMW absorbing property was analysed. The effective absorption bandwidth up to 7.2 GHz was found in the sample cracking at 900 °C with 1:1 proportion of raw materials (aniline and diethylenetriamine). Also, the minimum reflection loss can reach −43.6 dB at 7.92 GHz (thickness 3.5 mm).223
 Fig. 12  The mechanism and performances of EMW absorption for h-BCN bulk. (a) A schematic representation of the possible dissipation route of EMW in h-BCN networks. (b–f) The related electromagnetic parameters and EMW absorption properties of h-BCN bulk, annealed by H3 heating mode with the P3 precursor: (b) RL values of the 3D color mapped wireframe surface with different thickness and frequency, (c) a contour revealing the best performance for practical applications, (d–f) frequency dependence of the complex relative permittivity, complex relative permeability, dielectric loss and magnetic loss tangent, respectively. (g–i) The related electromagnetic parameters of h-BCN bulk, annealed by H3 heating mode with the P2 precursor: (g–i) frequency dependence of the complex relative permittivity, complex relative permeability, dielectric loss and magnetic loss tangent, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. 
6.8. Photodetectors
BCN ultraviolet (UV) detectors showed a photoresponsivity of 6 mA/W under 365 nm illumination.224 Deep UV photodetectors are desirable for various applications such as water purification, military, NASA spacecraft, space communications, rapid missile plume detection, etc.225 BCN with controllable electrical properties and bandgap and exceptional hardness has further prospects in optoelectronic applications to work under extreme conditions.108 Ultrawide bandgap ε-Ga2O3/h-BCN heterojunctions epitaxially grown on sapphire substrates have been studied as both possess high thermal conductivity and a hexagonal structure. h-BCN formed as a two-dimensional layered structure whereas ε-Ga2O3 shows polycrystalline growth. The fabricated heterojunction displays type-II band alignment with a conduction band and a valence band offset of 2.77 eV and −1.60 eV respectively.149 This work opens a pathway to further explore BCN based heterojunctions for electronic and photonic applications.
6.9. BCNO phosphors
Emerging hybrid BCNO materials have potential to be novel rare-earth ion free phosphors. BCNO phosphors provide an opportunity to tune over the whole visible light spectrum. Long duration phosphorescence is observed with excitation from 254 nm to 460 nm.226 BCNO films with higher C and O in composition display more intense emission bands at 534 and 570 nm. The effect of BCNO film structure and chemical composition has been studied in detail.227 Owing to their low cost, excellent performance, and relative non-toxicity, BCN-based phosphors can be used for automobiles, general lighting, medical applications, DNA labelling and biological imaging.228
6.10. Field-effect transistors (FETs)
The energy gap tunability of BCN provides an option to fabricate FETs.229–231 BCN with 40 at% C exhibits ambipolar semiconducting behavior in FET characteristics. The BCN device possesses electron and hole mobility in the 5–20 cm2 V−1 s−1 range.16 Recently, a lateral tunneling transistor based on BN and h-BCN heterostructure has been reported. Non-equilibrium Green's function (NEGF) and an atomistic tight-binding (TB) model have been used to evaluate the device operation. Electrical characteristics of the device, such as ION/IOFF ratio, intrinsic gate-delay time, and subthreshold swing, were calculated. Higher switching (∼8 orders of magnitude) and low subthreshold swing (42.17 mV per decade) have been observed. The conduction band edge (CBE) and valence band edge (VBE) of BN and BCN play significant roles in the electrical behaviour of the fabricated heterostructure device.232
7. Summary and future perspectives
This review covers the synthesis, properties and applications of BCN materials. The ternary phase triangle of B–C–N has been explained in which graphene, BN, B4C and C3N4 possess various unique properties for a wide range of applications. The properties of these materials can be combined and tuned in BCN nanostructures. Various theoretical and experimental studies disclosed superior optical, mechanical, electrical and thermal properties of BCN. The exceptional and tunable properties of BCN make it suitable for energy and environment-related applications. In the reported literature, mostly multiple steps and complex process synthesis routes have been used so far. Although few works have published relatively low temperature and simple synthesis routes, there is a requirement of a simple, cost-effective, single-step synthesis approach with high yield.
The unique optical and electrical properties of the synthesized BCN make it promising for energy related applications. The porous structure and enhanced surface area make this material suitable for water cleaning applications. Also, BCN shows enhanced hydrogen evolution reaction performance due to the presence of more active sites from B and N, tunable properties, chemical stability, defect sites such as sp3-C or Stone–Wales defects. The achieved superior HER performance and charge storage capacity of BCN can be further utilized to study real time supercapacitor and battery applications. BCN can be fabricated with different morphologies to have more active catalytic sites along edges and on its basal planes. The reported works show the role of defect states in the observed properties. Further detailed study of defect states by ab initio density functional theory (DFT) is required for opto-electronic and supercapacitor applications. The synthesized BCN is relatively less toxic in nature. Therefore, similar to BN nanotubes, BCN nanotubes can be explored for drug delivery applications.
BCN can be cross-linked with other 2D materials to form heterostructures. These heterostructures can be studied for HER and electrical properties. Likewise, formation of BCN nanocomposites needs to be explored. Similar to graphene integration on Si chips, BCN integration on Si chips needs to be explored for commercial applications. Theoretical studies predict the thermal conductivity and magnetic properties of BCN but detailed experimental work is required in this field. Such investigations can provide breakthrough properties and expand the horizon of BCN based nanomaterials. Although BCN shows high electrical conductivity but there is limitation in photoelectrode fabrication. So, a consistent method to construct the BCN catalyst on the substrate is required to maintain its activity over a large number of cycles. There is a need for a detailed study of BCN based van der Waals heterostructures with other 2D materials for scope in future energy storage applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
MK is grateful to the Council of Scientific and Industrial Research, India, for providing financial support as SRF (File No. 09/1198(0004)/2020-EMR-I).
References
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhetri, S. Maitra, H. Chakraborty, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 95–101 RSC .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183–191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Rafiq, X. Hu, Z. Ye, A. Qayum, H. Xia, L. Hu, F. Lu and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2022, 91, 106661 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nag, K. Raidongia, K. P. S. Hembram, R. Datta, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1539–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L.-J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, S. J. Lou and Z. Hou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(3), 1945–1967 RSC .
Y. V. Kaneti, D. P. Benu, X. Xu, B. Yuliarto, Y. Yamauchi and D. Golberg, Chem. Rev., 2021, 122(1), 1000–1051 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xia, J. Zhang, X. Chen, C. Cheng, D. Chu, X. Tang, H. Li and Y. Cui, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 435, 213783 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao and K. Pramoda, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2019, 92, 441–468 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kumar, K. Moses, K. Pramoda, S. N. Shirodkar, A. K. Mishra, U. V. Waghmare, A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 5806–5821 RSC .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
L. Ci, L. Song, C. Jin, D. Jariwala, D. Wu, Y. Li, A. Srivastava, Z. F. Wang, K. Storr, L. Balicas, F. Liu and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 430–435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao and K. Gopalakrishnan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 19478–19494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Sreedhara, K. Gopalakrishnan, B. Bharath, R. Kumar, G. U. Kulkarni and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2016, 657, 124–130 CrossRef CAS .
K. Raidongia, D. Jagadeesan, M. Upadhyay-Kahaly, U. V. Waghmare, S. K. Pati, M. Eswaramoorthy and C. N. R. Rao, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 83–90 RSC .
I. Karbhal, R. R. Devarapalli, J. Debgupta, V. K. Pillai, P. M. Ajayan and M. V. Shelke, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 7134–7140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, L. Xu, Y. Tian, H. Li and K. Wang, Carbon, 2018, 137, 458–466 CrossRef CAS .
R. Attri, M. B. Sreedhara and C. N. R. Rao, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2019, 1, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
B. Muchharla, A. Pathak, Z. Liu, L. Song, T. Jayasekera, S. Kar, R. Vajtai, L. Balicas, P. M. Ajayan, S. Talapatra and N. Ali, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3476–3481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Manna and S. K. Pati, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10842–10850 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Lowther, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2005, 17, 3221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, S. Yao and M. Widom, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 144107 CrossRef .
X. F. Jiang, Q. Weng, X. B. Wang, X. Li, J. Zhang, D. Golberg and Y. Bando, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2015, 31, 589–598 CrossRef CAS .
D. Reigada and F. Freire Jr., Surf. Coat. Technol., 2001, 142, 889–893 CrossRef .
Z. F. Ying, D. Yu, H. Ling, N. Xu, Y. F. Lu, J. Sun and J. D. Wu, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 1579–1585 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, S. Ghosh, W. Bao, I. Calizo, D. Teweldebrhan, F. Miao and C. N. Lau, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 902–907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Balandin, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 569–581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2018, 320, 1308 CrossRef PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, I. Skachko, A. Barker and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, B. Liu, D. Tang, B. Yu, C. Jiang and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 411–417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, W. Pisula and K. Muellen, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 718–747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2824–2860 RSC .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photon, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navalon, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 6179–6212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Feng and J. Li, Small, 2014, 10, 2165–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bayazit, L. Xiong, C. Jiang, S. J. A. Moniz, E. White, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 28600–28609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. Gomez, M. Guevara, T. Tene, L. Villamagua, G. T. Usca, F. Maldonado, C. Tapia, A. Cataldo, S. Bellucci and L. S. Caputi, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 546, 149046 CrossRef .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, J. K. Goswamy, P. Kumar and S. Kumar, Mater. Today: Proc., 2021, 50, 1511–1515 Search PubMed .
Y. Yuan, Y. Wang, S. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Liu, C. Sun, D. Yuan, Y. Zhang and X. Cao, Vacuum, 2022, 111136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fadil, S. C. Thickett, V. Agarwal and P. B. Zetterlund, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2022, 125, 101476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Yu, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Xie, Small, 2016, 12, 6640–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Balmain, London Edinburgh Philos. Mag. J. Sci., 1842, 138, 270–277 CrossRef .
S. Angizi, S. A. A. Alem, M. H. Azar, F. Shayeganfar, M. I. Manning, A. Hatamie, A. Pakdel and A. Simchi, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2022, 124, 100884 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, Y. Feng, F. Wang, Z. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .

          C. H. Lee, V. K. Kayastha, J. Wang and Y. K. Yap, Introduction to B–C–N Materials, in BCN nanotubes and related nanostructures, ed. Y. K. Yap, Springer, New York,  2009, pp. 1–22 Search PubMed .
S. Roy, X. Zhang, A. B. Puthirath, A. Meiyazhagan, S. Bhattacharyya, M. M. Rahman, G. Babu, S. Susarla, S. K. Saju, M. K. Tran and L. M. Sassi, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hayat, M. Sohail, M. S. Hamdy, T. A. Taha, H. S. AlSalem, A. M. Alenad, M. A. Amin, R. Shah, A. Palamanit, J. Khan and W. I. Nawawi, Surf. Interfaces, 2022, 29, 101725 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Revabhai, R. K. Singhal, H. Basu and S. K. Kailasa, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2023, 13, 1–41 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Chopra, R. J. Luyken, K. Cherrey, V. H. Crespi, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Science, 1995, 269, 966–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kalay, Z. Yilmaz, O. Sen, M. Emanet, E. Kazanc and M. Çulha, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2015, 6, 84–102 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Foroutan, S. J. Fatemi and S. M. Fatemi, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2020, 10, 265–274 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ye and Z. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 14499–14506 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, K. Okuno, Y. Takeuchi and T. Tabara, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2022, 181, 110074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Suri, C. Subramanian, J. K. Sonber and T. S. R. Ch Murthy, Int. Mater. Rev., 2010, 55, 4–40 CrossRef CAS .
V. Domnich, S. Reynaud, R. A. Haber and M. Chhowalla, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2011, 11, 3605–3628 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2021, 116, 100718 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, K. Sharma, A. A. Rajhi, S. Alamri, A. E. Anqi, A. S. El-Shafay, A. A. Aly, B. F. Felemban, S. Rashidi and M. Derakhshandeh, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2022, 910, 115929 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vaya, B. Kaushik and P. K. Surolia, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2022, 137, 106181 CrossRef CAS .
F. Goettmann, A. Fischer, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Chem. Commun., 2006, 4530–4532 RSC .
A. Alaghmandfard and K. Ghandi, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan and U. Maitra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7809–7832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. O. Todi, B. P. Shantheyanda and K. B. Sundaram, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2013, 141, 596–601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Prakash, V. Todi, K. B. Sundaram, L. Ross, G. H. Xu, M. French, P. Henry and S. W. King, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2015, 4, N3122–N3126 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lei, D. Portehault, R. Dimova and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7121–7127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Raidongia, K. P. S. S. Hembram, U. V. Waghmare, M. Eswaramoorthy and C. N. R. Rao, Z. Anorg. Allg. Chem., 2010, 636, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, G. Wen, X. Huang, B. Zhong and H. Yu, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 3506–3510 RSC .
Z. Liang, H. Tu, K. Zhang, Z. Kong, M. Huang, D. Xu, S. Liu, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 437, 135421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ebadi, K. Ghasemipanah, E. Alaie, A. Rashidi and A. Khataee, J. Water Supply: Res. Technol.–AQUA, 2021, 70, 856–867 CrossRef .
S. Chen, H. Yang, Q. Chen, L. Liu, X. Hou, L. Luo, C. Lin, C. Li and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 346, 136239 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. S. Kim, H. Choi, J. Ahn, J. Hou and H. Kang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1705–1716 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Wang, E. Iyyamperumal, A. Roy, Y. Xue, D. Yu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11756–11760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mou, J. Zhao, G. Wang, S. Shi, G. Wan, M. Zhou, Z. Deng, S. Teng and G. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 437, 135285 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, G. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Li, G. Han, B. Xing, Q. Liu, J. Jia and C. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 580, 152236 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang, L. P. Zhang, Z. H. Xia, A. Roy, D. W. Chang, J.-B. Baek and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4209–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Recepoglu, A. Y. Goren, V. Vatanpour, Y. Yoon and A. Khataee, Desalination, 2022, 533, 115782 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tian, F. Liang, L. Dong, J. Li, Q. Jia, H. Zhang, S. Yan and S. Zhang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2021, 104, 1110–1119 CrossRef CAS .
R. Paul, A. A. Voevodin, D. Zemlyanov, A. K. Roy and T. S. Fisher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3682–3690 CrossRef CAS .
M. Loeblein, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, W. B. Ng and E. H. Teo, Small, 2014, 10, 2992–2999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, Y. Fang, M. Zhou and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6033–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, D. Shi, H. Tu, X. Yao, L. Deng, D. Xu, Y. Shao, Y. Wu and X. Hao, Energy Technol., 2021, 9, 2100824 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, C. Wang, J. Liu, Y. Wei, Y. Chao, Y. Zou, L. Mu, Y. Huang, H. Li and W. Zhu, AIChE J., 2021, 67, e17280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin and Y. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65(15–16), 2476–2478 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, H. Yang, S. Chen, Q. Chen, L. Luo, J. Li, Y. Chen and C. Li, J. Nanomater., 2019, 2019, 3572317 Search PubMed .
H. Li, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang, L. Jing, M. Zhu, F. N. Leong and E. H. T. Teo, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 12511–12517 RSC .
R. Attri, S. Roychowdhury, K. Biswas and C. Rao, J. Solid State Chem., 2020, 282, 121105 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, J. Yu, S. Kuang, C. Xiao and X. Bai, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 120–123 RSC .
C. L. Sun, F. K. Ma, L. Cai, A. Wang, Y. Wu, M. Zhao, W. Yan and X. Hao, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 6617 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Peng, W. Jiang, F. F. Li, L. Zhang, R. P. Liang and J. D. Qiu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11685–11694 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. F. Zeng and G. Wen, A simple precursor pyrolysis route to BCN nanoflakes, Mater. Lett., 2014, 132, 277–280 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sen, K. Moses, A. J. Bhattacharyya and C. Rao, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Leardini, N. J. Arévalo, I. J. Ferrer, J. R. Ares, P. Molina, C. G. Navarro, Y. Manzanares, D. Granados, F. J. Urbanos, F. J. García-García and A. Del Campo, 2D Mater., 2019, 6, 035015 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xue, D. Yu, L. Dai, R. Wang, D. Li, A. Roy, F. Lu, H. Chen, Y. Liu and J. Qu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12220–12226 RSC .
S. Gambhir, R. Jalili, D. L. Officer and G. G. Wallace, NPG Asia Mater., 2015, 7, e186 CrossRef CAS .
S. Angizi, A. Hatamie, H. Ghanbari and A. Simchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28819–28827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Angizi, M. A. Akbar, M. Darestani-Farahani and P. Kruse, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2020, 9, 083004 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, F. Ma and M. Sun, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 16801–16822 RSC .
H. Zeng, C. Zhi, Z. Zhang, X. Wei, X. Wang, W. Guo, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 5049–5055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Li, J. Cervenka, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1457–1462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hatamie, R. Rahmati, E. Rezvani, S. Angizi and A. Simchi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 2212–2221 CrossRef CAS .
S. Thomas, M. S. Manju, K. M. Ajith, S. U. Lee and M. A. Zaeem, Phys. E, 2020, 123, 114180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Beniwal, J. Hooper, D. P. Miller, P. S. Costa, G. Chen, S.-Y. Liu, P. A. Dowben, E. C. H. Sykes, E. Zurek and A. Enders, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2486–2493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Weng, X. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3989–4012 RSC .
C. E. L. A. L. Yelgel and G. P. Srivastava, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2012, 258, 8338–8342 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. G. Henriques, G. B. Ventura, C. D. M. Fernandes and N. M. R. Peres, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 32, 025304 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Asikainen, M. Ritala and M. Leskelä, Thin Solid Films, 2003, 440, 152–154 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takashima and Y. Kanno, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2005, 6, 910–914 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zubiarrain-Laserna and P. Kruse, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2020, 167, 037539 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Zhou, I. Bello, M. K. Lei, K. Y. Li, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2000, 128, 334–340 CrossRef .
H. Ling, J. D. Wu, J. Sun, W. Shi, Z. F. Ying and F. M. Li, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2002, 11, 1623–1628 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Nehate, A. K. Saikumar, A. Prakash and K. B. Sundaram, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 8, 100106 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Ma, V. Ji and P. K. Chu, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2010, 19, 1225–1229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kurapov, D. Neuschütz, R. Cremer, T. Pedersen, M. Wuttig, D. Dietrich, G. Marx and J. M. Schneider, Vacuum, 2002, 4, 335–339 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Zhang, Q. X. Pei, Z. D. Sha and Y. W. Zhang, Phys. Lett. A, 2019, 383, 2821–2827 CrossRef CAS .
B. Mortazavi and S. Ahzi, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 1503–1507 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fang, J. Li, N. Zhao, C. Shi, L. Ma, C. He, F. He and E. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 425, 811–822 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng and D. Suvranu, Phys. E, 2012, 44, 1662–1666 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wickramaratne, L. Weston and C. G. Van de Walle, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25524–25529 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Kaloni, R. P. Joshi, N. P. Adhikari and U. Schwingenschlögl, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 073116 CrossRef .
T. P. Fellinger, D. S. Su, M. Engenhorst, D. Gautam, R. Schlögl and M. Antonietti, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23996–24005 RSC .
A. Sundaresan and C. N. R. Rao, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 96–106 CrossRef CAS .
C. N. R. Rao, H. S. S. Ramakrishna Matte, K. S. Subrahmanyam and U. Maitra, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 45–52 RSC .
Y. Xie, H. Yu, H. Zhang and H. Fu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4391–4397 RSC .
S. Banerjee and S. K. Pati, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13430 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Ma, H. Gao, X. Zhang, H. Ali, W. Li and M. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13179–13186 RSC .
P. Nematollahi, M. D. Esrafili and E. C. Neyts, Surf. Sci., 2018, 672–673, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Yadav, S. H. Mir and J. K. Singh, Chem. Phys. Chem., 2019, 20, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Mir, V. K. Yadav and J. K. Singh, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 3732–3738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Q. Wang, L. Hu, H. Pan and X. Shi, Carbon, 2019, 149, 530–537 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Li, X. Meng, S. Zhou, G. Yang and X. Zhou, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 31, 125301 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kumar, R. Kumar, N. Misra, H. Srivastava, J. K. Tripathi and A. K. Srivastava, Pramana, 2022, 96, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bafekry, M. Naseri, M. M. Fadlallah, I. A. Sarsari, M. Faraji, A. Bagheri Khatibani, M. Ghergherehchi and D. Gogova, J. Appl. Phys., 2021, 130, 114301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, L. Kou, Y. Ni and X. Hu, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2021, 23, 235502 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, H. Chen, X. He, H. Zhang, W. Fang, X. Du, W. Li, Z. Huang and L. Zhao, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2022, 122, 108801 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, B. Liu, X. Zou and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6091–6133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Kane, J. Kouvetakis, C. E. Warble, M. L. Sattler and N. Bartlett, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22, 399–404 CrossRef .
M. Son, H. Lim, M. Hong and H. C. Choi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3089–3093 RSC .
S. Tang, H. Wang, H. S. Wang, Q. Sun, X. Zhang, C. Cong, H. Xie, X. Liu, X. Zhou, F. Huang and X. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, G. Chen, Z. Shi, C. C. Liu, L. Zhang, G. Xie, M. Cheng, D. Wang, R. Yang, D. Shi and K. Watanabe, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 792–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Aoki, H. Shima, C. Kimura and T. Sugino, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2007, 16, 1300–1303 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Lin, C. Y. Su, X. Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, C. W. Chu, H. Y. Lin, M. T. Chang, F. R. Chen and L. J. Li, Small, 2012, 8, 1384–1391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Wei, T. Chen, W. Tang, K. Xu, Z. Zeng, X. Zhang and H. Fu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2022, 583, 152502 CrossRef CAS .
E. Iyyamperumal, S. Wang and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5259–5265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Zagho, H. D. Dawoud, N. Bensalah and T. M. Altahtamouni, Emerging Mater., 2019, 2, 79–93 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Nehate and K. B. Sundaram, ECS Meet. Abstr., 2019, MA2019–01, 2165 CrossRef .
K. Moses, S. N. Shirodkar, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Mater. Res. Express, 2014, 1, 025603 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Gao, M. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Wang and B. Feng, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 52452–52458 RSC .
S. Wang, G. Wang, T. Wu, Y. Zhang, F. Zhan, Y. Wang, J. Wang, Y. Fu and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14644–14650 RSC .
T. Zhang, J. Zhang, G. Wen, B. Zhong, L. Xia, X. Huang, H. Zhao, H. Wang and L. Qin, Carbon, 2018, 136, 345–358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, G. Wang, S. Wang, J. Wang and J. Qiu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 552, 604–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, D. Bu and S. Huang, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 27658–27663 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mirzaee, A. Rashidi, A. Zolriasatein and M. R. Abadchi, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2021, 115, 108350 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabassum, C. Qu, K. Cai, W. Aftab, Z. Liang, T. Qiu, A. Mahmood, W. Meng and R. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(42), 21225–21230 RSC .
M. Zhang, M. Zhou, Z. Luo, J. Zhang, S. Wang and X. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2558–2561 RSC .
W. Lei, S. Qin, D. Liu, D. Portehault, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 352–354 RSC .
M. Zheng, T. Yuan, J. Shi, W. Cai and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 8068–8072 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, C. Zang, H. Cheng, B. Sun and X. Gao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 7955–7962 RSC .
T. Balakrishnan, M. Anis, S. Arun, M. Kumar, S. A. Kumar and S. Mayavan, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 79448–79451 RSC .
J. Wang, J. Hao, D. Liu, S. Qin, D. Portehault, Y. Li, Y. Chen and W. Lei, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 306–312 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sivaprakash, M. Induja and P. G. Priya, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 100, 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tu, H. Liao, Q. Deng, X. Liu, R. Shang and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 21905 RSC .
A. Kumar, P. R. Thakur, G. Sharma, D. N. Vo, M. Naushad, T. Tatarchuk, A. García-Peñas, B. Du and F. J. Stadler, Chemosphere, 2022, 287, 132301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Bu, B. Liang, Y. Liu and L. Wang, Chemosphere, 2022, 289, 133230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kaur, R. A. Mir, I. Chauhan, K. Singh, U. Krishnan, M. Kumar, P. Devi, O. P. Pandey and A. Kumar, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 559, 149982 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Levendorf, C. J. Kim, L. Brown, P. Y. Huang, R. W. Havener, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2012, 488, 627–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Song, S. Zhao, J. Huang, L. Ma, J. Zhang, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2032–2037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gao, X. Song, H. Du, Y. Nie, Y. Chen, Q. Ji, J. Sun, Y. Yang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, C. B. Wang, S. Zhang, D. M. Zhang, Q. Shen and L. M. Zhang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2010, 204, 1863–1867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kawaguchi, Y. Imai and N. Kadowaki, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1084–1090 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Park, J. H. Lee, W. S. Lee and Y. J. Baik, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 549, 276–280 CrossRef CAS .
F. Byon, J. K. Kim, S. Lee, J. H. Hah and K. Sugimoto, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2003, 169, 340–343 CrossRef .
C. Morant, P. Prieto, J. Bareno, J. M. Sanz and E. J. T. S. F. Elizalde, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 515, 207–211 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Xiao, C. B. Wang, Q. Shen and L. M. Zhang, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 276, 141–144 CrossRef CAS .
K. Moses, V. Kiran, S. Sampath and C. N. R. Rao, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 838–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kumar, K. S. Subrahmanyam, P. Chaturbedy, K. Raidongia, A. Govindaraj, K. Hembram, A. K. Mishra, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1662–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jalaly, F. J. Gotor, M. Semnan and M. J. Sayagués, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 3453 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kang, Z. Chu, D. Zhang, G. Li, Z. Jiang, H. Cheng and X. Li, Carbon, 2013, 61, 200–208 CrossRef CAS .
A. Naseri, G. A. Sarabi, M. Samadi, M. Yousefi, M. Ebrahimi and A. Z. Moshfegh, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2022, 48, 911–933 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jourshabani, B. K. Lee and Z. Shariatinia, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 276, 119157 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zhang, S. Zhang, S. Xu, X. Wu, J. Chang and Z. He, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 864, 158153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, G. Huang, X. Chen, J. Yin, P. Zhang, Y. Yao, J. Shen, Y. Wu and J. Huang, Nano Today, 2022, 44, 101486 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, X. Guan and S. Shen, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2022, 20, 3505–3523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Q. Zhang, C. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Bu, B. Liang, Y. Liu and L. Wang, Chemosphere, 2022, 289, 133230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, Q. Zhang, W. Xu, X. Kang and L. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2022, 311, 131489 CrossRef CAS .
T. Balakrishnan, K. U. V. Kiran, S. M. Kumar, A. Raju, S. A. Kumar and S. Mayavan, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 564–571 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, P. Wang, Y. Guo, L. Rao and C. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 412, 128532 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, X. Hou, Q. Li, Z. Fang, T. Yang, T. Liang, X. Duan, M. Shang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1803–1810 RSC .
M. S. Raghu, L. Parashuram, M. K. Prashanth, K. Y. Kumar, C. P. Kumar and H. Alrobei, Nano-Struct. Nano-Objects, 2021, 25, 100667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, C. Yan, P. Wang, L. Rao and C. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124136 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, J. Hao, D. Liu, S. Qin, C. Chen, C. Yang, Y. Liu, T. Yang, Y. Fan and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9787–9791 RSC .
Y. Guo, R. Wang, P. Wang, L. Rao and C. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5727–5741 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tabassum, R. Zou, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang and S. Guo, A catalyst-free synthesis of B, N co-doped graphene nanostructures with tunable dimensions as highly efficient metal free dual electrocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16469–16475 RSC .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Lithium intercalation compound dramatically influences the electrochemical properties of exfoliated MoS2, Small, 2015, 11, 605–612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sakaushi and K. Uosaki, Highly Efficient Oxygen and Hydrogen Electrocatalytic Activities of Self-Morphogenic Nanoporous Carbon, Nitrogen Architectures, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 99–103 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qu, Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, K. Davey, S. Dai and S. Z. Qiao, Promotion of Electrocatalytic Hydrogen Evolution Reaction on Nitrogen-Doped Carbon Nanosheets with Secondary Heteroatoms, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7293–7300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Tian, J. You, C. Yang, J. Su, Y. Li, Y. Gao and H. Gu, 
            In situ synthesis of MoS2/graphene nanosheets as free-standing and flexible electrode paper for high-efficiency hydrogen evolution reaction, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10698–10705 RSC .
Y. Hou, B. Zhang, Z. Wen, S. Cui, X. Guo, Z. He and J. Chen, A 3D hybrid of layered MoS2/nitrogen-doped graphene nanosheet aerogels: An effective catalyst for hydrogen evolution in microbial electrolysis cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 795–13800 Search PubMed .
S. Upadhyay and O. P. Pandey, One-pot synthesis of pure phase molybdenum carbide (Mo2C and MoC) nanoparticles for hydrogen evolution reaction, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 27114–27128 CrossRef CAS .
L. K. Brar, A. Gupta and O. P. Pandey, Influence of carbon content of nano-TaC powders on the electrocatalytic and photocatalytic properties, Catal. Today, 2019, 325, 98–108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fan, H. Chen, Y. Wu, L.-L. Feng, Y. Liu, G.-D. Li and X. Zou, Growth of molybdenum carbide micro-islands on carbon cloth toward binder-free cathodes for efficient hydrogen evolution reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16320–16326 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, L. H. Li, T. Xing, Y. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Toward design of synergistically active carbon-based catalysts for electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, High Catalytic Activity of Nitrogen and Sulfur Co-Doped Nanoporous Graphene in the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 127, 2159–2164 CrossRef .
N. Jiménez-Arévalo, F. Leardini, I. J. Ferrer, J. R. Ares, C. Sánchez, M. M. S. Abdelnabi, M. G. Betti and C. Mariani, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1922–1932 CrossRef .

          R. Shibuya, T. Kondo and J. Nakamura, Active sites in nitrogen-doped carbon materials for oxygen reduction reaction, in Carbon-based metal-free catalysts: design and applications, ed. L. Dai, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co, Weinheim, Germany,  2018, pp. 227–249 Search PubMed .
D. Shi, M. Yang, B. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Ai, Y. Shao and X. Hao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 626, 544–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. C. Vivekchand, C. S. Rout, K. S. Subrahmanyam, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, J. Chem. Sci., 2008, 120, 9–13 CrossRef CAS .
Y. O. Yesilbag, F. N. T. Yesilbag, A. Huseyin and M. Ertugrul, J. Energy Storage, 2022, 52, 104964 CrossRef .
A. K. Mishra and S. Mishra, J. Mol. Graphics Modell., 2019, 93, 107446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wei, X. Dou, L. Zhao, J. Du and G. Jiang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2022, 334, 113326 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Bi, B. Liu, X. Y. Liu, Y. Qin and B. X. Zou, J. Nanomater., 2020, 2020, 4604820 Search PubMed .
K. Pramoda, K. Moses, U. Maitra and C. N. R. Rao, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 1892–1898 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, X. Peng, X. Liu, H. Wang, S. Zhang and G. Hu, RSC Adv., 2021, 11(46), 28988–28995 RSC .
Y. Zhu, X. Wang, P. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. He, X. Jia, F. Chang, H. Wang and G. Hu, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2021, 225, 112745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Jiang, M. Jiang, Z. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Kuang and C. Fu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 14940–14952 CrossRef CAS .
H. Saini, S. Das and B. Pathak, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1(7), 2418–2425 RSC .
F. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Meng, T. Zhang, G. Qu, K. Wang, W. Zhao, X. Huang, B. Zhong, L. Xia and H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2022, 33(15), 155601 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Prakash, S. D. Nehate and K. B. Sundaram, Opt. Lett., 2016, 41, 4249–4252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. Gao, Z. Lu, F. Meng, J. Lin, X. Xu, J. Zhao and C. Tang, Mater. Lett., 2013, 102, 102–105 CrossRef .
H. Katsui, K. Harada, Z. Liu, N. Kondo and M. Hotta, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48(20), 31016–31022 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jing, H. Ouyang, W. Li and Y. Long, Microchem. J., 2022, 178, 107359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Burmeister, M. G. Trunk and M. J. Bojdys, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 11559–11576 RSC .
H. Ma, Y. Xing, B. Cui, J. Han, B. Wang and Z. Zeng, Chin. Phys. B, 2022, 31, 108502 CrossRef .
R. Majidi and A. I. Ayesh, Micro Nanostruct., 2022, 167, 207244 CrossRef CAS .
A. Horri and R. Faez, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2022, 4, 3520–3524 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
Table Content:

Manjot Kaur
	Dr. Manjot Kaur received her MTech. (2018) and PhD degree (2022) from the Department of Nanotechnology, Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University, Punjab, India. She was awarded Senior research fellow by CSIR, India to pursue her PhD work on nanostructured boron carbon nitride for neutron capture therapy and other applications. She is currently serving as an Assistant Professor at University Centre for Research and Development, Chandigarh University, India. She has published more than 35 research articles in reputed international journals. Her research interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, structure-property relation, optical properties, BNCT, supercapacitor, photodetector and other device-based applications.

Kulwinder Singh
	Dr. Kulwinder Singh is working as an Assistant Professor at University Centre for Research and Development, Chandigarh University, Mohali, Punjab, India. He had obtained a Doctorate of Philosophy in Nanotechnology from the Department of Nanotechnology, Sri Guru Granth Sahib World University, Punjab, India. He received his Master of Technology in Nanotechnology in 2016. He has published more than 40 journal articles in international reputed journals. His interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, theoretical studies, thin films and device-based applications of nanomaterials.

Ankush Vij
	Dr. Ankush Vij is working as Professor in Dept of Physics, University of Petroleum and Energy Studies (UPES) Dehradun. Prior to this he has served at NIT Hamirpur, Amity University Haryana and Korea Institute of Science Technology (KIST) Seoul in various capacities. His research interests include nanomaterials for applications in solid state lighting, energy harvesting, sensors, radiation dosimetry etc. He has published more than 100 research articles so far in international journals of repute. Dr. Vij has been involved in many research projects funded by various Govt./Industry/International agencies. He has delivered several invited talks within and outside India.

Akshay Kumar
	Dr. Akshay Kumar received his MSc degree in Applied Physics from Punjabi University, in 2005 and PhD degree from School of Physics and Material Science, TIET Patiala, India, in 2011. He is now serving as Associate Dean Research and Associate Professor (Physics) in Sardar Patel University Mandi, India. Prior to that he served SGGSWU and MMU Mullana, India in various capacities. He successfully supervised 9 PhD and 45 Master's students. He has published more than 90 research articles in reputed international journals. His research interests include synthesis of nanomaterials, structure-property relation, gas sensors, BNCT, supercapacitors, thin films device physics, photodetectors, etc.

 	Fig. 1  The ternary phase diagram of the B–C–N material system.	 

BCN spheres74	Pyrolysis	• Pyrolyzing a simple polymeric precursor at 1000 °C
• Uniform spherical morphology and good crystallinity observed
BCN nanowires90	CVD	• High-purity BCN nanowires were synthesized in the presence of ammonia and water-free alcohol (at 1100 °C)
• Uniform diameters of ∼30 nm
• Vapor-solid mechanism is responsible for the growth of BCN nanowires
BCNNTs91	Solid state reaction	• With the increase in the synthesis temperature, BCNNTs of different morphology formed
• At 1000 °C synthesis -bamboo-like, 1100 °C – both bamboo-shaped and cylindrical BCNNTs, 1200 °C – cylindrical BCNNTs
BCNNTs92	CVD	• High thermal stability (up to 900 °C in air)
• Varying NH3 flow resulted in varied band gap. Also it can vary the doping level of B and N
BCNNSs93	Solid state reaction	• 4 different BCNNS compositions achieved with p-type behavior
• BCN nanosheets also displayed low thermal conductivity
BCNNSs94	CVD	• B0.38C0.27N0.35 nanosheets with length between 0.5 and 1 mm
• PL spectra show an intense peak (3.27–3.31 eV)
BCNNSs95	Embedding C atoms into the lattice of BNNSs	• Bandgap decreased from 5.5 to 2.6 eV with the increase in C incorporation
• Also, high temperature stable ferromagnetic properties observed
• Potential for spintronic and optoelectronic devices.
BCNNSs96	One-pot synthesis	• BCN nanosheets (thickness of 2.2–3.4 nm) showed high adsorption capacities of 210.97 and 625 mg g−1 for Pb2+ and Hg2+, respectively
• Potential for wastewater treatment
BCN nanoflakes97	Pyrolysis	• BCN nanoflakes exhibit oxidation resistance (∼810 °C)
• B–N, C–C and C–N bonds were identified in X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (XPS) analysis
2D BCN layers98	Solid-state route	• Four compositions achieved in which carbon-rich B0.15C0.73N0.12 displayed excellent stability for >100 charge/discharge cycles
B–C–N layers99	Microwave-assisted PECVD	• Modifications of the optical, electronic and transport properties of h-BN-rich and C-rich phases
BCN foam100	Modified CVD	• Synthesized BCN foam displayed high electrocatalytic activities for ORR compared to the Pt catalyst
• Also, high thermal stability (up to 900 °C) shown by BCN foam
BCN foam86	CVD	• BCN foam with three compositions was synthesized
• All showed stable thermal performance
• BN concentration increase led to a decrease of the electrical conductivity of the synthesized foam

 	Fig. 2  Side view of (a) bilayer graphene and (b) h-BN. Schematic illustration of the top view of (c) the AB stacking sequence in graphene and (d) AA′ in h-BN. (e) Side view of vertical BCN consisting of individual layers of h-BN and graphene stacking. (f) In-plane B–C–N system consisting of distinct C and BN domains distributed in a single sheet. Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 License from ref. 103.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Electronic band structure computed using the PBE functional for the BCN monolayer; (b) the computed work function values as a function of uniaxial and biaxial compressive and tensile strains in the BCN monolayer; (c) the angular dependent Young's modulus of the BCN monolayer during 10% and 5% compressive (ε = −0.1 and ε = −0.05) and tensile strain (ε = +0.1 and ε = +0.5) states along with the equilibrium strain state (ε = 0). Reproduced with permission from ref. 108.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (a) porous BCN by rapid solvent-free ball milling followed by pyrolysis; (b) BCN nanosheets by solid-state reaction using a template free method; (c) 3D-BCN nanotubes on the MF derived carbon architecture; (d) 3D BCN ceramic aerogel based on biohydrogel templates for photoredox catalysis [(a) reproduced with permission from ref. 158; (b) reproduced with permission from ref. 159; (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 160; (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 87].	 

CVD	Gas mixture of boron trifluoride (BF3)–CH4–N2–H2, Si (MPCVD)	600 W, 2.5 kPa, 700 °C, 1 h	• Vertical B0.38C0.27N0.35 nanosheets	
94

• Thickness ∼2 to a few atomic layers
• Shows intense emission at 3.27 eV with very weak defect-related emission
CVD	B2O3, GO, NH3, SiO2/Si	900–1100 °C for 30 min in NH3	• Conversion of GO nanosheets to BCN on top of the SiO2/Si substrate	
148

• Exhibits an ambipolar semiconductor behavior
CVD	Cu	1000 °C, 100 W	• Versatile and scalable process	
172

• Patterned regrowth of the B–C–N structure
CVD	Hexane (C6H14), Cu foil, silicon dioxide (SiO2)	950 °C for graphene	• Graphene and h-BN grow sequentially via a two-step process on the substrate to create stacked layers	
173

CVD	NH3–borane (BH3), Cu, benzoic acid	1000 °C for h-BN, 1000 °C for 40 min for in-plane, 850 °C for the stacked structure	• In-plane and vertical heterostructures	
174

• Selective growth via temperature -triggered switching occurring among in-plane and stacked B–C–N structures
PVD	Si and quartz substrates	500 °C, N2 with a laser energy of 5 J cm−2	• Films are deposited by pulsed laser deposition in a N2 atmosphere	
175

• Different compositions and deposition rates by varying N2 pressure
PVD	Acrylonitrile (CH2CHCN), N2, BCl3	0.27 Pa, 1197–1797 °C in N2	• Graphite like structure	
176

• CH2CHCN and BCl3 reacted to form BC6N
PVD	Si substrate, B4C	250 °C in Ar/N2	• Reactive magnetron sputtering of a B4C target	
177

• Stress reduction happened in the h-BCN film through an increase in the substrate bias voltage and hydrogen addition
PVD	Cesium (Cs) vapor, N2, Si substrate	Sputtering power 60–180 W	• Dual cesium ion sputtering was employed	
178

• Taguchi L9 experiment method used to examine optimum process parameters
PVD	Si substrate, B4C	Atmospheric pressure 10−7 torr, 1 mA cm−2	• Dual ion beam sputtering was used to produce the films	
179

• High hardness observed in deposited films
PVD	Si substrate	1.2 × 10−6 Pa, laser energy density 2 J cm−2, 500 °C for 4 h	• Pulsed laser deposition was used under various N2 pressures	
180

Pyrolysis	H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated charcoal	900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 900 °C, 4 h in NH3	• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors, then reacted with C to form B–C–N	
181

• Studied for oxygen reduction reaction
Pyrolysis	H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated charcoal	900 °C, 12 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3	• B2O3 and NH3 reacted with C to form B–C–N	
182

Pyrolysis	Mg, B2O3, C3N6H6	Mechanical milling	• Three steps in the mechanism – combustive reduction of B2O3, decomposition of C3N6H6, and formation of BCN	
183

Pyrolysis	H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, GO	900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3	• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors	
184

• B and N atoms incorporated into the graphene atomic sheets
Pyrolysis	H3BO3, CO(NH2)2, activated carbon	900 °C, 10 h in N2 followed by 930 °C, 3 h in NH3	• B2O3 and NH3 are formed from the precursors	
157

• B2O3 and NH3 reacts with C to form BCN
Molten salt method	CH4N2O, NaBH4, guanidine (CH5N3), HCl, LiCl/KCl (45/55 wt)	700 °C, 2 h in N2	• Simple, high yield, chemical process	
72

• Precursors self-assemble to form BCNO particles
Molten salt method	CH4N2O, NaBH4, LiCl/KCl (45/55 wt)	750 °C, 2 h in N2	• Simple and environment friendly process	
162

• Precursors self-assemble to form BCN nanosheets with 2–6 atomic layers with high surface area
Molten salt method	B2O3, C3N6H6, C6H12O6, NaCl/KCl	1250 °C for 5 h in NH3	• Precursors self-assemble to form black colored BCN nanosheets	
161

• Atomic layered thickness with large lateral size

 	Fig. 5  Various applications of boron carbon nitride.	 

 	Fig. 6  Various applications of BCN nanosheets for wastewater removal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 83.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structural effects and photodegradation mechanism of RhB over porous BCN nanosheets under irradiation; (b) inhibition effects of different radical scavengers on the decolorization of RhB: BCN catalysts; (c) schematic diagram of charge transfer and separation mechanisms involved in the photocatalytic process of 0.5% CdS/BCN; (d) plausible mechanism of degradation in the presence of light and the BCN@PANI hybrid. (a and b) Reproduced with permission from ref. 168; (c) reproduced with permission from ref. 194; (d) reproduced with permission from ref. 195.	 

BCN	Tetracycline	76.74	
196

BCN	Methyl orange	61.27	
193

Methylene blue	119.38
Neutral red	747.10
Malachite green	682.46
BCN nanoscrolls	Methylene blue	250	
197

Congo red	620
Layered BN–CN composite	Methyl orange	∼60	
198

Methylene blue	∼60
Neutral red	1350.1
Malachite green	1040.6
Crystal violet	∼60
BCN aerogel	Sulfur	30.8	
89

BCN nanosheets	Hg2+	625	
96

Pb2+	210.97

BCN	119.9	230	
171

BCN-1	298	100	
2

BCN-2	357	127
BCN-3	487	195
BCN-4	487	145
BCN-5	586	178
BCN-1	234	>216	
199

BCN-4	186
BCN-6	182
BCN-8	253
Bulk MoS2	151	280	
200

C, N architectures	120	490	
201

N–CN	159.3	620	
202

N, B–CN	198.2	710
MoS2/GO	157	490.2	
203

3D-MoS2/N-gas	230	261	
204

N-Gas	487
MoS2/Ns	372
MoC	129.7	425	
205

Mo2C	266	260
TaC	140–200	—	
206

C-Mo2C	168	260	
207

Graphite	206	—	
208

P-graphene	133	553
N-graphene	
	490
N doped graphene 800 °C	232	559	
209

S doped graphene 800 °C	230	480

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of the charging reaction mechanism of a symmetric supercapacitor device based on the BCN-PANI electrode material. Reproduced with permission from ref. 212.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) CV curves of the symmetric vertically aligned BCN nanotube (VA-BCN-NT)@WS2 electrode measured at different scan rates, (b) GCD curves of different current densities and (c) specific capacitances at these current densities, (d) capacitance change after 10000 cycles, (e) the Nyquist plot and its equivalent circuit, and (f) Ragone plot of the symmetric VA-BCN-NT@WS2 electrode structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 214.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The change rate of band gap (%) and (b) recovery time at various temperatures, for six configurations (CO, CO, H2S, NH3, NO, and NO2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 216.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cyclic voltammograms of the h-BCN-modified electrode at various DA concentrations (10–580μM) in phosphate-buffered solution (pH 6.8). The inset shows the calibration plot for UA concentration. Scan rate, 10 mV s−1. Reproduced under Creative Commons Attribution License Copyright © 2020 Yun-Shuai Bi et al.217	 

 	Fig. 12  The mechanism and performances of EMW absorption for h-BCN bulk. (a) A schematic representation of the possible dissipation route of EMW in h-BCN networks. (b–f) The related electromagnetic parameters and EMW absorption properties of h-BCN bulk, annealed by H3 heating mode with the P3 precursor: (b) RL values of the 3D color mapped wireframe surface with different thickness and frequency, (c) a contour revealing the best performance for practical applications, (d–f) frequency dependence of the complex relative permittivity, complex relative permeability, dielectric loss and magnetic loss tangent, respectively. (g–i) The related electromagnetic parameters of h-BCN bulk, annealed by H3 heating mode with the P2 precursor: (g–i) frequency dependence of the complex relative permittivity, complex relative permeability, dielectric loss and magnetic loss tangent, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry and the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique 2023
