Composition modulation in one-dimensional and two-dimensional chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00418H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00418H
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7504-7521Composition modulation in one-dimensional and two-dimensional chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures

        
          
            Honglai 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiao 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoli 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiangfeng 
            Duan
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Anlian 
            Pan
          
          
        
      *a
aKey Laboratory for Micro-Nano Physics and Technology of Hunan Province, State Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensing and Chemometrics, College of Materials Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: anlian.pan@hnu.edu.cn
bSchool of Physics and Electronics, Hunan University, Changsha, 410082, P. R. China
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. E-mail: xduan@chem.ucla.edu
Received 
      21st May 2018
    First published on 12th September 2018AbstractLow dimensional heterostructures have potential applications in information, sensing, and energy-related technologies. In order to obtain high-quality low dimensional heterostructures, an essential method is tuning chemical composition in a single nanostructure to obtain two or multiple components with well-matched electronic band structures. Here, we present a tutorial review of a unique chemical vapor growth approach with in situ switchable solid chemical sources that can build composition-modulated chalcogenide heterostructures in one-dimensional nanowires, quasi one-dimensional nanobelts and two-dimensional atomic layered nanosheets in a controlled manner. This approach has generated a large variety of heterostructures that not only exhibit gradient distribution in chemical composition, but also show sharp interfaces. Diverse integrated photonic and optoelectronic devices are enabled by the composition-modulated heterostructures based on chalcogenides or other material systems.
Honglai Li
Honglai Li received his Bachelor degree in physics from Hunan University, and received a PhD in Condensed Matter Physics from Hunan University then taught there as a Yuelu Scholar in 2017. His main research interests lie in the controlled growth of low dimensional semiconductor structures, and physical properties as well as device applications of nanostructures.
Xiao Wang
Xiao Wang received his MSc degree in Condensed Matter Physics from Peking University in 2007 and his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Tübingen in 2012. In 2013–2016, he worked as a Habilitand and a junior research group leader at the University of Tübingen. Currently, he is a professor in the School of Physics and Electronics of Hunan University. His current research interests are nanooptics, low-dimensional materials, and their optoelectronics applications.
Xiaoli Zhu
Xiaoli Zhu received her PhD degree in 2009 from Tohoku University, Japan. She is currently an associate professor at the school of physics and electronics, Hunan University and her research interests are nano-photonic and nano-optoelectronic devices.
Xiangfeng Duan
Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.
Anlian Pan
Anlian Pan received his PhD from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. Afterward, he worked as a Humboldt Research Fellow at Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, and then, he joined Arizona State University as a postdoctoral fellow, where he became a research assistant professor. He joined Hunan University as a full professor in 2010. He has published more than 180 papers in international journals. His research interests include controlled vapor growth of low dimensional semiconductors and heterostructures, and investigating micro–nano photonics and optoelectronics properties and device applications based on semiconductor nanostructures.

Key learning points
(1) A source switchable vapor growth strategy will be introduced.
(2) How to realize precise composition modulation within single 1D and 2D chalcogenide semiconductors via the developed growth strategy.
(3) How to achieve sharp interfacial composition profiles of chalcogenide heterostructures through the real-time composition control.
(4) Growth control of 2D chalcogenide heterostructures: lateral epitaxy vs. vertical stack.
(5) Device applications of composition-modulated chalcogenide semiconductors.

1. Introduction
Over the past decades, semiconductor nanostructures have attracted considerable attention in the development of modern integrated photonic and electronic devices,1,2 owing to their unique photoelectric conversion, photocatalysis, electroluminescence, and piezoelectric properties.3–6 The transition from laboratory research to practical application of the semiconductor nanostructures is largely governed by rationally tailoring their electronic and optical properties. To achieve this goal, multiple approaches have been proposed; for example, the optical bandgaps of the nanostructured semiconductors were tuned by alloying two or more semiconductors.7–10
Among many types of low dimensional materials, chalcogenide semiconductors possess unique electronic and optical properties.11–14 For example, individual chalcogenide nanowires have been found to be high-performance waveguide and optical gain materials;11 while chalcogenide nanosheets have emerged as an exciting class of ultrasensitive semiconductor sensors and energy storages.12 With the rapid development of low dimensional chalcogenide semiconductors, more fundamental physical properties and potentials are required to be explored, which are closely related to their chemical compositions.
A heterostructure constructed by different semiconductors is a key component in photonic and electronic nanodevices.15–17 Initially, low dimensional heterostructures were shown to be realized through simple physical contact, for instance, touching or overlapping different nanostructures with each other.18,19 However, such a physical method is generally difficult and usually brings unfavourable interfacial contaminations that may deteriorate device performance. The chemical synthesis and growth could be an important alternative approach to obtain high-quality low dimensional heterostructures. Furthermore, composition engineering can achieve low dimensional heterostructures with a sharp interface, which is of great significance in constructing high-performance or new multi-functional nanodevices.
The construction of heterostructures through composition modulation in low dimensional semiconductors has been widely reported.20,21 Most of the heterostructured nanostructures are synthesized through the Metal Organic Chemical Vapor Deposition (MOCVD) and Molecular Beam Epitaxy (MBE)22,23 methods at present. However, the synthesis or growth process is either relatively complex or high-demanding for the equipment. In addition, the yield of chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructures obtained by MOCVD and MBE is relatively low. Compared to MOCVD and MBE methods, conventional chemical or physical vapor deposition growth technology is a kind of more convenient approach for the growth of semiconductor nanostructures. Nevertheless, the vapor pressure of source materials is difficult to control in the vapor deposition route, therefore, the realization of composition modulation within single one-dimensional (1D) and two-dimensional (2D) chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures has always been a great challenge. A potential solution to such challenge is locally tailoring chemical composition in the single nanostructure to obtain two or multiple components with well-matched electronic band structures.
During the past several years, our group has developed a simple and effective source-switching-vapor-growth method to obtain low dimensional chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures, which can be easily controlled by tuning the evaporation temperature and vapor pressure of the source materials during the growth process. Based on this, it is necessary and timely to write a tutorial review to introduce our newly developed growth strategy on the preparation of composition modulated single 1D and 2D chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructures, and to highlight the advantages of these nanostructures in the application of nanophotonics and related integrated information devices. In this tutorial review, we will first describe in-detail the developed vapor-pressure-controlled method for the growth of composition engineered low dimensional semiconductor nanostructures. Secondly, from three different structural systems (i.e., nanowires, nanobelts and 2D atomic crystals), we will summarize the recent progress in preparing composition modulated single nanostructures and heterostructures using this effective control growth strategy. At the same time, for every structural system, the new applications in functional nanoelectronic and optoelectronic devices based on the achieved composition engineered nanostructures will also be discussed. Finally, we will provide the conclusions and perspectives for the composition modulation within single semiconductor nanostructures.
2. Synthesis technology
For the realization of composition modulation in chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures, we developed a simple and effective source switchable vapor growth strategy, by which the composition or bandgap of the grown semiconductor nanostructures can be tuned as desired. As shown in Fig. 1a, a common vapor growth experimental set-up is employed in the chemical composition engineering. The precursor type here is usually the corresponding powder of chalcogenide semiconductor, and the gas phase transport media is the inert gas, such as nitrogen and argon. For instance, if we want to modulate the composition of the nanostructure from chalcogenide materials A to B, source of A should first be evaporated, condensated and nucleated to assemble the initiating structure, and then B is followed to continue the growth on the basis of the initiating structure. In this case, we heat the boat loaded with source material A to the center of the heating zone, and the other boat loaded with source material B is located at the upstream of the furnace. The two boats are linked together by a quartz rod, and most importantly, they can be pushed optionally during the growth process, to leave or reach the heating center of the furnace, which is realized by a step motor driven magnetic assist system. Through this way, we can precisely control the vapor concentration of the two materials, thus to modulate the chemical composition of the grown chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures from A to B along the growth direction. At the same time, the source boats also can be pulled back again, leading to the composition in the structures tuned from A to B then tuned back to A. Taking the growth process of 1D chalcogenide semiconductor nanowires for example. Fig. 1b shows that the heating temperatures of source materials A and B are changed gradually by slowly pushing the boats during the growth process. In this case, the evaporation of material A is decreased gradually to none while that of material B is increased step by step. Thus, the growth precursor is tuned and the composition of the obtained chalcogenide nanowires is gradually modulated, as shown schematically in Fig. 1c. The ball on the top of the nanowire is the gold catalyst, which is also the nucleating site of the nanowire. On the other hand, if the heating temperatures of materials A and B are rapidly changed in complementarity (Fig. 1d), through quickly exchanging the sources boats using the step motor driven system, the growth composition along the nanowires can be changed sharply to form axial heterostructures, as shown schematically in Fig. 1e. Using this same growth strategy, composition graded and sharply changed in quasi-1D nanobelts and 2D atomic layered crystal chalcogenides can also be achieved, to get the controlled growth of various chalcogenide semiconductor nanoscale heterostructures.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup used for the composition modulated chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures. Schematic diagram of the heating temperatures vs. time for materials A and B to form composition graded nanostructure and heterostructure, respectively (b and d), and the corresponding growth processes of the composition modulated one-dimensional chalcogenide semiconductor nanowires (c and e). 
3. Results
3.1 1D nanowire system
Nanowire is a kind of 1D structure with a radial restriction of less than 100 nm. Semiconductor nanowires have been proposed and demonstrated as versatile building blocks for future integrated photonic and optoelectronic devices, such as nanolasers, transistors, energy conversion and sensors.1 Composition-graded alloy semiconductor nanostructures on a single substrate (so called single substrate based spatial semiconductor composition grading) can work as a new material platform used in super broadly tunable nanolasers, color engineered display and lighting, multispectral detectors and full spectrum solar cells. In addition to alloy composition grading on a single substrate, another more challenging task is to achieve controlled composition grading along the length direction of a single nanowire. Such new nanowire structures have novel physical properties and show potential fascinating applications in constructing new integrated optoelectronic devices, such as nanoscale multiterminal photodetectors, white light LEDs, full spectrum solar cells and so on.
While semiconductor heterostructures are key components for various traditional electrical and optoelectronic device applications.17,19 1D semiconductor nanowires (NWs) are considered as the ideal candidates for realizing small size semiconductor heterostructures, because they can form defect-free lattice-mismatched axial semiconductor heterostructures as the result of the highly efficient strain relaxation, which is of crucial important for high performance optical and optoelectronic devices. Especially, due to the 1D geometry, semiconductor axial NW heterostructures can confine light and carriers in one dimension, leading to the possible realization of multicolor nanolasers, light-emitting diodes, asymmetric waveguide, and photodetectors, etc.
Though the developed source moving/switching growth method, chalcogenide semiconductor nanowires with a completely composition gradient along the wire length were fabricated.24,25Fig. 2a is the real-color image of the achieved composition graded chalcogenide semiconductor CdSxSe1−x nanowires under a 405 nm laser illumination.24 The electrons at valence band are excited to the conduction band and form excitons with the holes generated at the conduction band under the laser irradiation. The exciton recombination emits light at the bandgap energy (from the valence band to the conduction band) and forms photoluminescence (PL). So the changing of the PL color can reflect the bandgap modulation of the nanostructure. All wires in Fig. 2a have multicolor PL emissions, which continuously vary from green to red along the lengths, corresponding to their gradually changed bandgaps or compositions. The corresponding local PL shown in Fig. 2b demonstrates that the spectral peak wavelength along the length of one single nanowire continuously tuned from 505 nm (pure CdS) at one end to 710 nm (pure CdSe) at the other end of the wire, indicating that the as-grown wires have complete composition tunability along their lengths. Fig. 2c gives the position-dependent composition and bandgap values along the length of the composition graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. As the energy of X-ray fluorescence photons from elemental radiation is different, the energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) is always used to conduct the quantitative analysis of elements. The bandgap values obtained from the PL spectra of the nanowire are in good agreement with those calculated from the EDS and Vegard's law:10Eg(ABxC1−x) = xEg(AB) + (1−x)Eg(AC) − x(1 − x)bindicating that all of the observed PL are from the band-edge emission, which is tunable with the gradually changed compositions along the axial direction of the wires. The defect or structural disorder in semiconductor nanostructures will disturb the nearby periodic potential fields and form additional bound states, and produce additional impurity levels in the forbidden band, resulting in undesired emission in low-energy area. The exhibited single band-edge emission, without any defect-related or structural disorder-related low-energy emission, demonstrates that any spots along the entire length of the wires are highly crystallized nanostructures.
 Fig. 2  (a) Real-color image of some CdSxSe1−x NWs under a 405 nm laser illumination. (b) PL spectra along the length of a complete composition CdSxSe1−x nanowire (inset), excited locally with a beam of focused 405 nm laser. (c) Position-dependent compositions and bandgap values along the length of the multicolor CdSxSe1−x NW. (a and c) are reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (d) The real-color image of several dispersed full-composition ZnCdSSe nanowires under 355 nm laser illuminations. (e) Position-dependent element percentages along the length of a composition graded ZnCdSSe wire for elements Zn, Cd, S, and Se, respectively. (f) Large area real-color images of samples T1–T4 under the illumination, respectively. (g) CIE chromaticity diagram with the chromatic coordinates of the four representative samples calculated using the detected PL spectra collected from T1–T4. (d)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. 
Semiconductor-based white lighting has attracted considerable attention for more flexible control of photometric properties and higher conversion efficiency compared with the traditional incandescent lighting. Based on the source switchable vapor growth strategy, we also realized the growth of composition gradient chalcogenide semiconductor ZnCdSSe nanowires, with gradually tunable bandgaps covering the entire visible range along the length of the wires.25 For the growth of composition gradient ZnCdSSe nanowires, ZnS and CdSe powders are selected as the source materials. The boat with ZnS was located at the center of the heating zone, and the boat with CdSe was placed upstream. Besides the source materials, the silicon substrate also can be pulled slowly by the magnet in the deposition area during the growth. Finally, the composition in the nanowire is tuned from ZnS to CdSe gradually. The real-color image of several dispersed wires under 355 nm laser illumination is given in Fig. 2d, which shows the emission colors of all these nanowires gradually changed along the axial direction of the wires. The red color end of the wire corresponds to the Cd/Se-rich alloys, while the blue end corresponds to the Zn/S-rich alloys. The EDS analysis of a representative single wire indicates that the nanowire consists of Zn, Cd, S, and Se elements. From the position-dependent element percentages shown in Fig. 2e, the element contents of Cd and Se increase gradually from the detected positions along the wire, while the element contents of Zn and S are decreased by degrees. As the PL peak wavelength along the nanowire is tuned from ∼380 nm (∼ZnS) to ∼700 nm (∼CdSe), the wires can have three main color (blue, green, and red) segments through controlling the composition along the length of the wire, which provides an opportunity to get the white light. The relative length of the color segments in the composition modulated wires determines the corresponding intensities of the emission bands, so the photometric properties of these nanowires can be directly controlled by the respective growth time of these segments. Fig. 2f shows the large area images of the dispersed nanowires under laser illumination removed from the four representative samples (samples T1–T4), respectively, which were obtained with different relative lengths of the corresponding color segments. The emitting colors from samples T1–T3 are light blue, light yellow, and orange, respectively, while that from sample T4 gives a pure white PL emission. The CIE (International Commission on Illumination) chromatic coordinates were calculated using the detected PL spectra collected from T1–T4. Here, the x-axis represents the relative value associated with red, and the y-axis represents the relative value associated with green, while the relative value z associated with green is equal to 1 − x − y. Fig. 2g shows that the chromaticity coordinates of samples T1–T3 are located at the edge of the white area in the CIE diagram, while that of sample T4 is located at the center of the white area, which is in good agreements with the observations of the real color PL images in Fig. 2f. The composition modulated tricolor nanowire white lighting would have competitive conversion efficiency compared to the conventional white lighting technology.
Structures that allow unidirectional propagation of electrical current represent the most fundamental building blocks for all-semiconductor electronic devices and circuits, including transistors and logic gates that are responsible for the revolution of electrical computing and information technology in the past half century. For composition homogeneous nanostructures, undirectional light propagation is hard to achieve as a result of their symmetry in the light propagation. As shown in Fig. 3a, when the end with narrow bandgap (NBG) of a composition graded nanowire is locally excited by a focused laser, the photon energy (E) of the emitted light here is smaller than the bandgap energy of any other positions along the nanowire. Hence only the structural disorder absorption consumes the energy in the propagation process while the light is propagating along the bandgap-increasing direction (forward).26 In comparison, when the end with wide bandgap (WBG) of the nanowire is excited with the same power, the nanowire would act as an active optical cavity and the excited light will travel along the bandgap-decreasing direction (backward) through incessantly repeated band-to-band re-absorption and re-emitting processes, since the E is larger than the bandgap energy of any other positions. Besides the same propagation loss from the structural disorder, the re-absorption and re-emitting processes play an important role in this case, so the total loss would be significantly increased, which can be seen in Fig. 3b. Then electrical transport properties of the composition-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowires were evaluated by studying the performance of field-effect transistor (FET) fabricated from single nanowires.27Fig. 3c indicates the gate-dependent source–drain current (Ids) versus voltage (Vds) curves measured at various gate voltages (Vg) from −1.0 V to +1.0 V in ambient air. Due to the distinct electrical transfer properties of CdS and CdSe, the output characteristics with positive and negative bias are asymmetry.
 Fig. 3  (a) Theoretical design of asymmetric light propagation in composition graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. (b) SEM and real-color PL images of the nanowire under the illumination and with local excitation at ends. Scale bar, 7 μm. (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (c) Output characteristics of a single CdSxSe1−x nanowire FET. The insets are the SEM image and schematic configuration of the FET, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012. (d) Finite element model for calculating the transported PL spectra along the bandgap-decreased direction of the composition-graded nanowire. (e) Initial spectrum before guiding (S0), and the representative simulated spectra at four different propagation distances (S1–S4), respectively. (f) Real-color PL images of the nanowire branched structure under a focused excitation and at the WE of the trunk (inset: diffused laser illumination). (d)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (g) Sketch of selecting the cut point according to the localized PL spectrum of composition graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. (h) Real color images of the composition graded nanowire after being cut. (g and h) are reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (i) Real-color image for a representative symmetrically composition-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. Scale bar: 20 μm. (j) Schematic diagram of a symmetrically composition-graded NW with graded bandgap structure along the axial direction and schematic waveguiding with local excitation at the center of the NW. (k) Pumping power-dependent emission intensity for symmetrically composition-graded nanowire and composition-homogeneous CdSxSe1−x alloy nanowire, respectively. (i)−(k) are reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
At the same time, nanoscale wavelength-selective optical waveguiding can also be realized in single composition-graded chalcogenide semiconductor CdSxSe1−x nanowires under locally optical excitation.28 The optical waveguiding behavior of the nanostructure indicates its effective propagation of the emitted light. Fig. 3d illustrates the finite element model for calculating the transported PL spectra along the bandgap-decreased direction of the composition-graded nanowire, and graded bandgap structure along the axial direction of the nanowire is presented in Fig. 3a. When the propagation distance is increased, the peak wavelength of the obtained spectra largely shifts to the long wavelength (low energy) region (Fig. 3e), which confirms that the observed wavelength converted waveguiding definitely originates from the gradually composition-modulated structure. Based on this distance-dependent wavelength-converted waveguiding, a branched nanowire structure with a composition-graded nanowire trunk and three composition-uniform CdS nanowire branches is constructed. Fig. 3f shows the real-color PL image of the branched structure with a focused laser excited at the WBG end of the nanowire trunk. The emitted light has been guided to the NBG end of the graded chalcogenide semiconductor nanowire, where the emission color has changed into red (position 5). Meanwhile, light spot with different color is observed at each end of the branches (position 2–4), and the exhibited color keeps the same as that of corresponding junction, which indicates that the guided light within the trunk has been selectively guided out of the branches.
Nanoscale lasers are promising for applications in high-throughput sensing and optical communication. When the intensity of excitation light source is increased to some extent, the optical gain that arrived from the emitted light reflecting back and forth in the nanostructure, triggers the cascade of enlargement, resulting in the formation of nanoscale laser. Based on the composition graded nanowire, a novel approach to define nanowire laser wavelengths over a wide spectral range was demonstrated. As presented in Fig. 3a, only the longest light wavelength can be observed due to the asymmetric light propagation effect. To make full use of the multicolor emissions of the NW, the NBG end with longest emission wavelength could be cut off to form a new nanowire cavity where the lasing wavelength is controlled by the new NBG end.29 As shown in Fig. 3g, the cut point is selected according to the localized PL spectrum of the composition graded nanowire. Then lasing wavelengths can be specially tailored by cutting the nanowire as needed and exciting the new narrow-bandgap end with increasing the intensity of excitation light source (Fig. 3h). Further, we also designed a low-loss nanowire cavity by constructing a symmetrical composition distribution along the chalcogenide semiconductor wire length.30 The real-color image of a typical symmetrically composition-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire is shown in Fig. 3i. The composition along this symmetrically composition modulated nanowire is gradually changed from the center to the two ends, resulting in the center of the wire having a minimum bandgap value (Fig. 3j). When the middle area of the NW is locally excited, the emitted light will be passively guided towards the two opposite ends with almost no self-absorption, since the photon energy of the emitted light is smaller than the bandgap of any other sites along the two bandgap increasing directions. As a result, the propagation loss of the guiding light in these symmetrically composition-graded nanowires is smaller than the active waveguiding process in common composition-homogeneous nanowires, since the self-absorption induced optical loss cannot take place in these symmetric wires. Fig. 3k shows the intensities of the sharp emission line as a function of the pumping power density, which exhibits a super linear increase when the power density is above a threshold. The laser threshold (the lowest pumping power for the laser) in symmetrically composition-graded NWs (∼50 kW cm−2) is several times lower than that in composition-homogeneous NWs (∼200 kW cm−2). The greatly shortened absorption region in these symmetrically composition-graded NWs due to the special symmetrical graded structure is the key factor that is responsible for the lower lasing threshold compared to regular homogeneous nanowires.
Heterostructure plays an important role in 1D nanostructured devices. Previously, the axial heterostructures of 1D chalcogenide nanowires were always synthesized through MBE with Au nano-catalyst on oxidized Si substrates, as illustratively shown in Fig. 4a, which shows the schematic diagrams of the VLS growth procedures and the energy band diagram of the as-grown ZnSe/ZnCdSe heterostructure nanowires.31Fig. 4b shows the high resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) images of the ZnSe/Zn0.98Cd0.02Se heterostructure nanowires with Lw = 6 nm. Considering the synthesis process is high-demanding for the equipment, we further optimized the growth through a conventional physical vapor deposition growth technology by changing the source materials rapidly, and achieved high-quality sharply interfacial axial chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructure nanowires.32–34 The real-color image of the as-grown CdS–CdSSe nanowire axial heterostructures under the illumination of a laser at 405 nm is shown in Fig. 4c,32 which indicates that each wire is formed with one red segment and one green segment. Fig. 4d shows the TEM image and the detailed spatial element distributions of the chalcogenide semiconductor wire,33 with position 2 locating at around the interface of the nanostructure, further confirming that these as-grown NWs are heterostructures composed of the pure CdS segment and CdSSe alloy segment. Meanwhile, the wire can be grown to three segments, with the length of the central CdSSe being shortened from ∼40 micron to ∼300 nm, as shown in Fig. 4e. Fig. 4f gives the line scanning EDS profiles of a typical CdS–CdSSe–CdS nanowire axial heterostructures in Fig. 4e. The modulation of elements Se and S across the interface is opposite, which is consistent with the high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) image (inset) with a clear contrast between the middle and the side parts, indicating the sharp interface of both the interfaces. Owing to the one-dimensional geometry of axial heterostructures, the obtained high quality nanowire heterostructures can act as good waveguides and resonant cavities to confine the emission light. Fig. 4g shows the pumping fluence dependent green and red band emission intensity plots of the axial heterostructures, respectively. The intensity of the both emission bands has a super-linear increase with the pumping fluence, and exhibits a threshold of ∼79.4 μJ cm−2 (green band) and ∼70.4 μJ cm−2 (red band), respectively, demonstrating the lasing action in the nanowire cavities.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagrams of the VLS growth procedures and energy band diagram of the ZnSe/ZnCdSe heterostructure nanowires. Lw: length of the ZnCdSe segment. (b) HRTEM images of the ZnSe/Zn0.98Cd0.02Se heterostructure nanowires with Lw = 6 nm. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. (c) Real-color image of several CdS–CdSSe nanowire heterostructures under a wide illumination of a laser (405 nm). Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Chinese Physical Society, copyright 2017. (d) TEM image of the heterostructure and 2D TEM elemental mapping for elements S, Se and Cd, respectively. (e) Real-color image for a representative CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructure with short CdSSe segment. (f) EDS line profile of Cd, Se and S across the interface of heterostructure. The inset: the HAADF-STEM image. (g) Pumping fluence-dependent lasing peak intensity based on single CdS–CdSSe–CdS NW heterostructures at ∼516.4 nm (green band) and at ∼597.9 nm (red band), respectively. (d)–(g) are reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (h) Schematic of a CdS–CdSSe nanowire heterostructure-based photodetector. (i) I–V measurements with the illumination of different wavelengths and in dark. (j) I–V measurements under 500 nm laser illumination with various power densities. (k) The on–off response of the device upon 500 nm light illumination at a voltage of 1 V (2.86 mW cm−2). (h)–(k) are reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
Then photodetector was fabricated using single as-grown CdS–CdSSe semiconductor nanowire axial heterostructures to show the sensitivity of the device with light, as illustratively shown in Fig. 4h.34 The current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the heterostructure photodetector exposed to different wavelengths of light (640, 580, 540, 500, and 480 nm) and under dark conditions are shown in Fig. 4i. The conductance of the nanowire heterostructure is very small in the dark condition, while a high current of ∼235 nA is recorded at an applied voltage of 1 V when the device is illuminated with visible light (500 nm) at a power intensity of 2.33 mW cm−2. The photocurrent increases dramatically with different wavelengths at the same excitation power density, demonstrating the high sensitivity of the nanowire photodetector. The power density dependent photoresponse of the photodetector illuminated with 500 nm visible light is shown in Fig. 4j. The photocurrent of the photodetector gradually rises with the increase in the light density and reaches values >10−7 A at a power density of 2.33 mW cm−2. The photocurrent increases by more than 5 orders of magnitude, compared with the current under dark condition. Fig. 4k shows the time response of a CdS–CdSSe axial photodetector by periodic turning on or off a 500 nm laser with the device under 1 V bias. The stability and reproducibility of the photodetector are very good, with the rise and decay times of about 68 and 137 μs, respectively, which are much faster than the pure CdS nanowire device and the reported results for single composition detectors.
3.2 Quasi 1D nanobelt system
In contrast to one-dimensional semiconductor nanowires, semiconductor nanobelts, with nanoscale depth and microscale length and width, can form new two-dimensional optical cavities (a cavity in which light waves bounce back and forth to provide light energy feedback).2 Generally, the growth temperature of nanobelt is higher than that of nanowire through the traditional thermal evaporation. The cross section of the nanobelt is a narrow rectangular structure, and its surface is very clean, without any defect, making the nanobelt ideal single crystal structure. The light in a semiconductor nanobelt only has strong photon confinement in the depth direction and can simultaneously realize light transport and resonance along both the length and the width. Because of the structural anisotropy, the chalcogenide semiconductor nanobelts perform different physical properties at different orientations, leading to there are big differences in their fundamental science. Moreover, composition modulation within single chalcogenide semiconductor nanobelt structures can manipulate photon behavior in two different cavities (along the width and length directions) and realize new photonic phenomena and applications.
As illustratively shown in Fig. 5, graded composition modulation along the width direction of quasi 1D single CdS1−xSex nanobelts was achieved through the source switchable growth strategy.35 Along the width of the chalcogenide semiconductor nanobelts, the Se composition x could be continuously tuned from 0 to ∼0.62, resulting in local band edge emission from the alloys tuned from ∼515 nm to ∼640 nm. For the lateral growth of these composition graded nanobelts, the CdS and CdSe powder boats were located at the heating zone and the upstream far away from the heating zone, respectively. Conventionally, pure CdS nanobelts are first grown through a well-developed vapor deposition route. After the first growth stage (850 °C) for pure CdS nanobelts, the CdSe powder was gradually pushed into the heating zone by the step motor. Meanwhile, the temperature was gradually increased to 880 °C. In subsequent vapor deposition process, the thermodynamic growth rate in the [0001] direction is much faster than those in the [0110] and [2110] directions due to the high growth temperature, and the positively charged Cd-terminated surface catalyzes more actively than the negatively charged S-terminated surface because of their difference in the activation energy (Fig. 5a). During the subsequent deposition of CdS1−xSex along the width of the preformed CdS nanobelts, the vapor concentrations of both S and Se are continuously changed through the source switchable growth strategy. Finally, lateral-composition-graded CdS1−xSex alloy nanobelts are achieved (Fig. 5b). A typical scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image in Fig. 5c shows that the as-grown sample was composed of nanobelts with a length up to tens of micrometers, and a width ranging from 2 to 10 μm. Fig. 5d shows the 2D elemental mappings of a selected region of the belt for the detected elements Cd, Se, and S. It is evident that Mo is uniformly distributed across the whole belt, while the gradual modulation of elements Se and S is opposite in the lateral direction. Fig. 5e presents the PL spectra along the width of a nanobelt, which shows strong light emissions when the peak wavelength was continuously tuned from 515 to 640 nm. Fig. 5f and g show a series of PL spectra of a typical belt pumped at different powers. At a relatively low pumping intensity, a broad emission band, ranging from 519 to 623 nm, was detected. When the pumping power was increased, sharp emission peaks at 622.5, 557, and 519 nm appeared in order. The observed multi-peaks in the three spectral regions arose from multiple modes oscillating in the optical cavity. The different mode numbers and mode spacings of the lasing groups indicate that they arose from different cavities. Through estimation of the cavity length in an optical resonance, the mode spacings at 519 nm and 557 nm correspond to a cavity length of L = 10 μm, while the spacing values at a wavelength of 623 nm correspond to L = 32 μm. Thus, the lasing lines at around 519 and 557 nm were from the optical resonance along the width, while the lasing lines at 623 nm contributed to the resonance in the length direction of the lateral composition-graded belts. Fig. 5h shows the pumping-power-dependent spectra intensity for the three groups of lasing lines. The lasing thresholds for the green (519 nm), orange (557 nm), and red (622.5 nm) lasing peaks were estimated to be ∼300, ∼200, and ∼60 kW cm−2, respectively, indicating that the red lasing threshold was much lower than the other two lasing thresholds.
 Fig. 5  (a) A nanobelt crystallographic configuration that lead to asymmetric growth. (b) Schematic illustrations of the asymmetric lateral growth of the lateral composition graded nanobelts. (c) SEM image of as-prepared composition graded nanobelts. (d) 2D elemental mapping for the three detected elements (Cd, S, and Se). (e) The local normalized spatial resolved PL spectra along the width of the nanobelt. (f and g) Pumping power-dependent PL spectra of a lateral composition graded nanobelt at room temperature. (h) Pumping power-dependent PL intensity for the three lasing peaks, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
Our simple and effective source switchable vapor growth strategy can also be used to grow chalcogenide semiconductor nanobelt lateral heterostructures with sharp composition interfaces.17,36,37 To achieve the nanobelt heterostructures, after the first growth stage (840 °C) for pure CdS nanobelts, the temperature was reduced to 740 °C, and then CdSe boat was quickly pushed into the heating zone to replace the CdS boat. Alloy CdSSe can directly epitaxial grow along the width direction of pre-grown CdS nanobelts through the source switchable vapor growth strategy, as shown in Fig. 6a. Fig. 6b is the real-color image of the achieved heterostructured nanobelts under the illumination of a 405 nm continuous wave (CW) laser. If we continue to exchange the evaporated source materials between CdS and CdSSe in the forward growth process, CdS–CdSSe–CdS–CdSSe–CdS lateral superlattice nanobelts can be finally achieved. Fig. 6c gives the real-color image of some dispersed lateral superlattice nanobelts, under the illumination of a diffused 405 nm laser, which exhibit green and red color side by side, coming from the PL emission of CdS and CdSSe, respectively. As shown in Fig. 6d, the pre-grown CdS nanobelts can also be anion exchanged to form alloy CdSSe firstly, and then their lateral sides will be epitaxially grown with CdS through the source-moving chemical vapor deposition route, resulting in the heterostructures with alloy CdSSe at the center and pure CdS at the edges, different from the structures shown in Fig. 6a and b. The real-color image of some selected belts under the laser illumination (Fig. 6e) shows that these belts have a fine sandwich-like structure, with green color on both lateral sides and red color in the central region.36 The well defined interfaces indicate an abrupt change of the composition between the lateral sides and the central region of the belts. The PL spectra from both lateral sides and the central region all exhibit a strong single peak. These nanobelt lateral heterostructures offer promising applications in the design of diverse compact photonic components. Then a dual-wavelength nanoscale laser is achieved based on such lateral heterostructure, pumped by a pulse laser at room temperature. When the pumping power is increased, two sharp emission modes appear successively. Further, through an effective control of the anion exchange time, the wavelength spacing of the two lasing lines can be tuned by adjusting the composition within the nanobelts. Then five representative dual-wavelength lasing spectra were recorded from the composition modulated heterostructure nanobelts (Fig. 6f), which show that the lasing wavelength at the edge region of the belt is almost fixed, while the lasing wavelength at the center region can be continuously tuned from 582.7 to 645.5 nm, confirming the broad tunability of the spacing between the two lasing lines.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of CdS–CdSSe heterostructure nanobelt through direct lateral epitaxial growth. (b and c) Real-color images of some lateral CdS–CdSSe and CdS–CdSSe–CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures through epitaxial growth under diffused 405 nm laser illumination. (d) Schematic diagram of CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructure nanobelt through anion exchange and lateral epitaxial growth. (e) Real-color photograph of some lateral CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures under laser illumination. (f) Dual-wavelength lasing with different wavelength spacing obtained from the lateral CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures. (e and f) are reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (g) Illustration of the growth procedure for multi-segment nanobelt heterostructure. R1–R3 and T1–T3 are the positions and temperature regions in the furnace. (h) Real-color images of individual structures after the corresponding growth sequences. Scale bars, 15 μm. (i) White and full-colour tunable lasing obtained from the multi-segment nanobelt heterostructure. (g)–(i) are reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
More importantly, based on the breakthrough of lateral superlattice nanobelts, multi-colour lasing and even white lasing were obtained. The growth procedure is shown schematically in Fig. 6g.37 Cd- and Se-rich ZnCdSSe nanobelts (P3) were grown at R3 (T3 ∼ 640 °C). The substrate was then moved to R1 (T1 ∼ 780 °C) through the source switchable strategy to promote the dual-ion exchange process, resulting in the structures to transform uniformly into a Zn- and Se-rich ZnCdSSe alloy (after P31 growth). The growth process was then followed by moving the substrate at R2 (T2 ∼ 740 °C) and R3 successively, and the second and third segments were synthesized by incorporating more Cd ions to add green and red light emissions one after another (P312 and P3123), resulting in the final multi-segment heterostructure capable of simultaneous RGB light emission. The real-color images of individual structures after the corresponding growth sequences (Fig. 6h) prove the realization of these lateral superlattice nanobelts. The lasing behavior of these nanobelts was studied under a pulsed laser. By exercising control over the pumping power delivered to each of the segments independently, mixed lasing colours were controllably varied in the full-colour range and the desired white colour was achieved (Fig. 6i).
3.3 2D atomic layered crystal system
Since the discovery of graphene in 2004, 2D layered materials have attracted considerable attention in the past decade. Layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), e.g., MoS2, MoSe2, WS2, and WSe2, are burgeoning 2D semiconductor chalcogenide nanostructures for their unique electronic and optical properties.9,12 Generally, the surface dangling bonds that suffered by most traditional semiconductor nanostructures are few in these crystalline structured 2D nanosheets, therefore they can exhibit excellent electronic properties that are not easily procurable in other semiconductor nanostructures. Moreover, the atomically thin 2D layered semiconductors provide a fascinating model system to design and prepare semiconductors with precisely controlled atomic structure and electronic properties at the level of atom thickness. Further, composition or band gap engineering of these 2D semiconductor materials is valuable and significant to find diverse applications ranging from traditional photonics, optoelectronics, energy storage, to the burgeoning areas of spintronic devices, flexible electronics, and quantum computing. Together, a great challenge in these 2D chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures is to realize the precise spatial modulation and control of their electronic properties and chemical composition to achieve various composition heterostructures.
With the source switchable vapor growth strategy, composition graded MoS2(1−x)Se2x atomic layered nanosheets can be synthesized by an effective control of the vaporization of the source materials through a lateral epitaxial process, as shown schematically in Fig. 7a.38 Here, alumina boats loaded with sulfur and MoO3 powders were placed at their corresponding position for the growth of MoS2, and the other boat loaded with selenium powder was placed upstream far away. After 1 min of growth for MoS2, the selenium powder was shifted downstream slowly for evaporation, and the sulfur powder was concomitantly shifted upstream until it could not evaporate any more. Due to the existence of dangling bonds, the edge of the preformed MoS2 nanosheet would act as the growth front. When the selenium powder started to evaporate, more and more Se atoms (and less and less S atoms) react with MoO3, resulting in the growth of composition graded MoS2(1−x)Se2x alloy in the lateral direction. Fig. 7b shows a typical single nanosheet with the growth times of 1, 3, 7, and 10 min, respectively, which indicates that the nanosheet grows larger and larger with the increased growth time. Fig. 7c shows a typical TEM image of a representative nanosheet and the 2D elemental mapping for the detected elements of Mo, S, and Se, respectively, in a white rectangle region of this sheet. Mo is uniformly distributed across the whole region, while S is located more at the center with reducing signal toward the edge region of the sheet, and Se shows the opposite trend with essentially zero signal at the center and increasing signal toward the edge region. The position-dependent compositions and bandgap values of a single composition graded MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheet are given in Fig. 7d. The bandgap values (converted from the PL spectra) are in good consistency with those obtained from the calculation according to the bandgap relation. The formation of composition graded single MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets was further confirmed by the composition dependent vibration modes observed from the micro-Raman measurements (Fig. 7e). The transition and shifting of molecular vibration modes shows a good agreement with the continuously modulated chalcogenide contents from the center to the edge in these lateral composition graded 2D semiconductors. Similarly, composition gradient WxMo1−xS2 monolayers were achieved utilizing the source evaporation sequence like ours.39 Because of the melting point of MoO3 is lower than that of WO3, MoO3 sublimates first and give rise to the initial growth of MoS2-dominating composition in the center region. Subsequently, further increasing temperature induces the growth of WS2-dominating composition at the edge region. From the edge to the center of the nanosheet, the detected PL wavelength was gradually red-shifted, with the calculated x value of the monolayer decreased step by step from 1 to 0 (Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the growth process of the lateral composition graded MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets [ratio: Se/(S + Se)]. (b) Optical images of representative single MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets at four different growth stages (scale bars, 5 μm). (c) Typical TEM image of the MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets (scale bar, 3 μm) and 2D elemental mapping for the three detected elements: Mo, S, and Se, respectively. (d) Position-dependent compositions and bandgap values of the sheet. (e) Position-dependent micro-Raman spectra of the lateral composition graded nanosheet. (a)–(e) are reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (f) PL peak wavelength and the composition of MoxW1−xS2 monolayer as a function of the position. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2015. (g) Optical image of both-way composition graded WS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets (scale bar, 3 μm). (h) Position-dependent PL spectra of the nanosheet indicated by the arrow in (g). (i and j) The wavelength-selected PL mapping of a both-way composition graded nanosheet in the spectral regions of 715–725 nm, and 735–745 nm, respectively (scale bar, 2 μm). (g)–(j) are reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
The composition grading has also been realized in the WS2(1−x)Se2x alloy systems.40 WS2 triangular nanosheets were firstly synthesized to act as the seed for the lateral growth of the 2D TMD nanostructures. When the Se powder started to evaporate and moved towards the heating center, more and more Se atoms reacted with WS2 before nucleating, resulting in the growth of composition graded WS2xSe2(1−x) alloy in the lateral direction. If the Se precursor atoms first increased and then decreased in the growth process, it would lead to the composition modulating forth and back from the center to the edge of the nanosheets. The formation of these both-way composition graded WS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets was confirmed in Fig. 7g–j. Obviously, the short wavelength region (715–725 nm) is mainly located at the center and periphery of the nanosheet, while the long wavelength region (735–745 nm) is mostly located between the center and the edge.
We also extended the developed vapor growth method to the controlled growth of 2D chalcogenide lateral heterostructures with sharp composition interfaces.41 Through changing the source materials rapidly in the growth process of layered TMDs, the vapor pressure and precursor atoms in the growth system were immediately changed, eventually leading to sharply tuned chemical components in the grown 2D semiconductor nanostructure. As shown in Fig. 8a, a triangular domain of MoS2 is first grown using a CVD process. With an in situ switch of the chemical vapor sources for the growth of MoSe2 in the middle of growth, lateral hetero epitaxial growth can occur at the peripheral active growth front to form MoS2–MoSe2 lateral heterostructures. The resulting MoS2–MoSe2 lateral heterostructure domains predominantly exhibit a well-faceted equilateral triangular geometry with some truncated triangles or hexagons (Fig. 8b), with the thickness of about 0.8 nm, indicating a monolayer structure. The Raman spectra (Fig. 8c) show significant difference of peak position between the center and edge of the 2D semiconductor. The spectrum from the centre of the 2D nanostructure has two prominent peaks corresponding to the resonance modes of MoS2, while the spectrum from the edge shows clear peaks in agreement with the resonance modes of MoSe2. At the same time, 2D lateral monolayer WS2–WSe2 heterostructures are also achieved by the developed source switching vapor growth strategy. For the growth of WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures, the WS2 powder and WSe2 powder were directly used as the source materials. The source switchable technique was used to push the WS2 source out of and WSe2 source into the centre hot zone without breaking vacuum. To reveal the spatial composition modulation within the grown nanosheet, EDS elemental mapping of the WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure is given in Fig. 8d, which confirms the chemical modulation within the heterostructures, with the tungsten signal nearly uniformly distributed throughout the entire triangular domain, while sulfur localized in the centre and selenium localized in the peripheral area.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of lateral epitaxial growth of MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure. (b) Atomic force microscopy and optical images (inset) of a monolayer MoS2–MoSe2 nanosheet. (c) Raman spectra of a MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure. (d) EDS elemental maps of W, S and Se atoms and the composite EDS mapping image of S and Se atoms, scale bars, 200 nm. (b)–(d) are reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (e) High-resolution STEM image taken from the WSe2–MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (f) Optical image of the WS2/MoS2 lateral heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (g) SEM image of the MoSe2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. Scale bar, 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (h) Scanning photocurrent mapping image of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterostructure p–n diode. Scale bar, 2 μm. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. 
Similarly, through sequential chemical vapor deposition of WSe2 and MoS2, WSe2–MoS2 lateral heterostructures were obtained by van der Waals epitaxy.42 The annular dark field (ADF) image of the lateral WSe2–MoS2 junction obtained with scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) revealed that the ADF signal increased with the atomic number (Fig. 8e). Thus, the W (74), Mo (42), Se (34), and S (16) atoms could be distinguished by their intensity. At the same time, seamless high-quality high quality MoS2–WS243 (Fig. 8f) and MoSe2–WSe244 (Fig. 8g) lateral heterostructures were achieved by the sequential chemical vapor deposition, respectively. The formation of such 2D chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructures with well-defined composition or electronic modulation can open up exciting opportunities for the creation of a series of functional electronic and optoelectronic devices. With well-defined p-type characteristics in WSe2 and n-type characteristics in WS2, p–n diode was formed within the WSe2–WS2 lateral heterostructure. Such p–n diodes form the fundamental basis for many functional devices, including photodiodes. Fig. 8h gives the photocurrent mapping of the photodiode, which clearly shows that the photocurrent response is localized to the lightly doped WS2 and WS2–WSe2 interface region in the centre of the nanosheet, confirming that the depletion layer is largely localized to the lightly doped WS2 in the lateral heterostructure diodes.
We have further designed a general synthetic strategy for highly robust growth of diverse lateral multi-heterostructures and super lattices based on 2D atomic crystals, which creates an interesting material system for fundamental studies and novel device demonstrations at the limit of single-atom thickness.45 With the assistance of reverse flow from the substrate to the source, the excessive thermal degradation or uncontrolled nucleation during the source switchable growth approach was greatly avoided. By this means, various composition-modulated lateral 2D TMDs multi-heterostructures and superlattices are successfully achieved, in which the number of periods and repeated spacing can be readily varied through the in situ switch of diverse source materials.
Apart from the direct growth of 2D layered chalcogenide heterostructures, selective atomic substitution of the atomic crystals in our source switching vapor atmosphere or environment is also an effective approach to achieve various composition modulated 2D heterostructures.46–48 As illustrated in Fig. 9a, when a monolayer MoS2 is treated by H2-plasma, the top-layer sulfur atoms can be stripped off and replaced by hydrogen atoms.46 The plasma coil is made by a cylindrical copper tube with a cooling water flow and placed at the upper streamside of the MoS2 sample. The distance between the center of plasma coil and the sample is 10 cm. Hydrogen plasma with a power of 50 W and hydrogen flow of 20 sccm at the pressure of 100 mTorr was used to strip off the top-layer sulfur atoms. The source moving strategy allows the subsequent Se atoms to replace the H atoms without breaking the vacuum, forming a structurally stable Janus MoSSe monolayer in which the Mo atoms are covalently bonded to the bottom-layer S and top-layer Se atoms. Fig. 9b shows that the intensities of Raman modes (A1 and E′) for monolayer MoS2 decrease and eventually vanish with increasing stripping time, and the Raman peaks appear again after sulfurization, indicating the recovery of MoS2 monolayers from MoSH and the reversibility of this process. When the selenization is performed for MoSH, the modes shift to 288 and 355 cm−1, respectively, indicating the successful substitution of H by Se. Fig. 9c presents an ADF STEM image of a cross-section of the Janus MoSSe monolayer. The clearly distinguishable bottom S and top Se atoms confirm that the selective atomic substitution approach is successful to modulate the composition in 2D chalcogenide nanostructures. In addition to the medium plasma method to form Janus MoSSe, S atoms in MoS2 can be directly substituted by Se atoms. Inspired by the great difference of the Se substitution temperature from the monolayer and the bilayer MoS2, when a stacking MoS2 nanosheet is exposed in the Se atmosphere (Fig. 9d) at an appropriate temperature, the Se atoms can only substitute the S atoms at the peripheral monolayer region, keeping the composition of the central bilayer region unchanged, thus resulting in the formation of MoS2–MoS2(1−x)Se2x lateral heterostructures.47Fig. 9e shows the substitution time dependent PL peak energy and the induced Se molar fraction x of the monolayer and bilayer regions after the substitution, respectively, which demonstrates that the S in the monolayer region can be gradually substituted by Se at 750 °C, while the bilayer region is very stable at this temperature. Thus, lateral composition modulated 2D chalcogenide heterostructures have been successfully prepared through the layer-dependent atomic substitution process. Similar like the Se substitution in MoS2, the pre-grown TMD monolayer nanosheets also can be easily selenized. The formation of lithographically patterned arrays of lateral semiconductor heterostructures within a single two-dimensional crystal was demonstrated.48 Electron beam lithography is used to pattern MoSe2 monolayer crystals with SiO2, and the exposed locations are selectively and totally converted to MoS2 using pulsed laser vaporization of sulfur to form MoSe2/MoS2 heterostructures in predefined patterns. Fig. 9f shows the formation of lateral heterostructure arrays prepared by the patterning and selective substitution process. The uniform intensity of Raman maps clearly indicates the spatial uniformity of the MoSe2 and MoS2 domains, and the formation of heterostructure arrays within the monolayer crystals.
 Fig. 9  (a) The medium plasma method to form Janus MoSSe. Firstly, the MoS2 monolayer exposed to H2 plasma to strip the top-layer S. The plasma was then switched off and a quartz boat loaded with Se powder was moved next to the sample without breaking the vacuum. Se powders were then thermally vaporized to achieve selenization and complete the synthesis of Janus MoSSe monolayers. (b) Raman characteristics for the MoS2 and those after H2 plasma treatment, sulfurization and selenization. (c) Annular dark-field STEM image of the sample cross-section, showing the asymmetric MoSSe monolayer structure with Se (orange) on top and S (yellow) at the bottom of the Mo atoms (blue). (a)–(c) are reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the lateral heterostructured MoS2–MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheet by the Se substitution in a designed stacking MoS2 nanosheet. (e) Substitution time-related bandgap values and compositions of the composition modulated heterostructures. (d and e) are reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Lateral heterojunction arrays formed within monolayer crystals by patterning and selective conversion processes. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
Vertically stacked 2D chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructures are another kind of important building blocks for the potential applications in information and energy fields, which allow the integration of highly disparate layered materials without the constraints of crystal lattice matching.19 Different from the growth of lateral heterostructures, the preparation of vertically stacked 2D structures always needs a relatively low temperature to avoid the planar epitaxial process. Two-step growth offers a precise control of temperature to achieve vertically staked heterostructures with van der Waals interaction. Fig. 10a shows the schematic of WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure from monolayer MoSe2. Then type I and type II heterostructures are formed in sequence, after 10 and 20 min growth of the second layer WSe2.49 Due to the existence of dangling bonds, WSe2 always grow at the edge of the MoSe2 layer, forming both vertical bilayer heterostructure on MoSe2 surface and seamless in-plane heterostructure by epitaxial growth. Fig. 10b shows the high-magnification optical images of pristine MoSe2 monolayers, and the type I and type II WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructures. The type I heterostructure consists of WSe2 bilayer (1), WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer (2), and MoSe2 monolayer (3) from the edge to the center. While the type II heterostructure contains of WSe2 monolayer, WSe2 bilayer, and WSe2/MoSe2 bilayer from the edge to the center.
 Fig. 10  (a and b) Schematic and optical images of pristine monolayer MoSe2, type I and type II WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of vertically stacked WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure. (d) Optical image of as-grown vertically stacked WSe2/SnS2 heterostructure. Scale bar: 200 μm. (e) HRTEM image taken at the bilayer region of the 2D structure. (f) An optical image of fabricated WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure device. Scale bar, 60 μm. (g) Ids–Vbg curves across the p (WSe2)–n (SnS2) heterostructure (measured using electrodes 3 and 4). (h) Photocurrent response of the device, the laser light is turned on/off by a chopper worked at 1 Hz (520 nm, 101 mW cm−2, Vds = 1 V). (c)–(h) are reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. 
Through the two-step source switching CVD route, we have also demonstrated direct van der Waals epitaxial growth of large scale vertically stacked bilayer WSe2/SnS2 p–n junctions.50 The pre-prepared large-scale WSe2 monolayers were used as templates for the van der Waals epitaxial growth of SnS2 monolayers in vapor phase at low temperature to achieve the vertical bilayer heterostructures. Fig. 10c shows a top view of atomic structure illustration of the WSe2/SnS2 bilayer heterostructure, in which the bottom WSe2 monolayer and the top SnS2 monolayer are stacked by weak vdWs force. Fig. 10d is the corresponding WSe2/SnS2 vertical heterostructure obtained after the second step growth. The pre-grown WSe2 triangular domain is partially covered by the SnS2 domain, which can be distinguished from the optical contrast in the optical image. At the same time, the bilayer heterostructure region shows obvious Moiré patterns (Fig. 10e), caused by the regular interference between the lattices of SnS2 and WSe2. The smallest periodic cell is demarcated by the red dashed rhombus, with a lattice constant of 2.24 nm. Fig. 10f shows the device fabricated by the WSe2/SnS2 vertical heterostructure, which indicates the transport characteristic of the vertical heterostructure is p-type dominant, demonstrating that holes in the bottom WSe2 dominate the charge transport across this junction (Fig. 10g). Benefit from the existence of the barrier near the vertical junction, leading to a very low leak current (10−14 A), and an ultrahigh on–off ratio to 107, two orders higher than that of the pristine WSe2 device. As shown in Fig. 10h, the device exhibits the excellent stability and reliability with the on/off photo switching behavior at Vds = 1 V without additional gate voltage. This study of WSe2/SnS2 van der Waals heterostructures marks an important step toward high-performance integrated optoelectronic devices and systems.
4. Summary and outlook
In summary, we developed a new source moving/switching vapor growth strategy for growth of composition modulated chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures. Although significant efforts and progresses have been made to realize composition modulation among different chalcogenide nanostructures, precise spatial modulation of composition within single 1D and 2D chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures has always been a considerable challenge. Combining with different growth mechanisms and different compounds, we have realized both the graded composition modulation and abrupt composition variation within single 1D and quasi-1D semiconductor nanostructures (heterostructures). In addition, this strategy has been successfully extended to realize the controllable growth of spatially composition-modulated 2D atomic layered TMDs, with the composition gradually tuned or abrupt changed to form heterostructures. Based on these achieved composition modulated chalcogenide semiconductor heterostructures, nanoscale optical diodes, multi-wavelength lasers, wavelength converters, photodetectors, and logic inverters were realized.
The composition modulated nanostructure opens up enormous opportunities to tune the fundamental properties of chalcogenide nanostructures for various applications. The developed source switchable growth strategy can act as a universal method to be extended to other material systems and applications, realizing the controlled growth of all kinds of lateral and vertically stacked heterostructures, multi-heterostructures and superlattices. Since the source switchable vapor growth is based on the strategy to control the vapor pressure of source materials and precursor atoms, which is irrelevant to the substrate surfaces, the developed growth strategy also can be performed on non-planar surfaces and flexible surfaces. Inspired by the great advancements in controlled preparations of composition engineered low dimensional semiconductor nanostructures, various application investigations in information, sensing, energy and many other related fields would attract considerable attentions in the next few years.
The progress achieved in composition modulation within 1D and 2D chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures represents only an initial success in this new field of material science research. Many new opportunities and challenges remain in the coming years. Large scale and area growth of composition modulated nanostructures and heterostructures need be realized. The transformation of heterostructure types is also a considerable challenge at present, which may be realized through the composition modulation across the interfaces. An important breakthrough will be the realization of various multiheterostructures and superlattices in every growth direction of the chalcogenide semiconductor nano-structures, and the use of these structures in energy related devices. For applications in tunable and multifunctional in-formation devices, a great challenge in composition modulation is to realize the growth of single nanostructures with controlled doping and defect. Future developments of improved source/substrate switchable growth methods could be important to meet the challenges. In addition to the growth and corresponding device applications, it is equally important to pursue the novel physical properties of the composition modulated chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures and use them in new semiconductor-based functional device designs. At the same time, researching the quantum control of composition modulated semiconductor nanostructures will be more important, for both the fundamental science and their potential application in novel quantum devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
All authors are grateful to the NSF of China (No. 51525202, 61574054, 51772084, 61505051, 61635001, and 51802089), the Aid program for Science and Technology Innovative Research Team in Higher Educational Institutions of Hunan Province, Joint Research Fund for Overseas Chinese, Hong Kong and Macau Scholars of the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61528403), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
Notes and references
W. Guo, M. Zhang, A. Banerjee and P. Bhattacharya, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3355–3359 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Zapien, Y. K. Liu, Y. Y. Shan, H. Tang, C. S. Lee and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 213114 CrossRef .
H. Choi, M. Kuno, G. V. Hartland and P. V. Kamat, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5487 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
X. Hu, H. Liu, X. Wang, X. Zhang, Z. Shan, W. O. Zheng, H. Li, X. Wang, X. Zhu, Y. Jiang, Q. Zhang, X. Zhuang and A. Pan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 19, 1800293 CrossRef .
L. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Wei and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16448 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Pan, H. Yang, R. Liu, R. Yu, B. Zou and Z. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 15692–15693 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, X. Duan, X. Wu, X. Zhuang, H. Zhou, Q. Zhang, X. Zhu, W. Hu, X. Wang, J. Xu, A. Pan and X. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3756–3759 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Wu, Y. Pan, W. Ji, B. Zheng, Q. Zhang, X. Zhuang, X. Zhu, X. Wang, X. Duan and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4853–4860 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Denton and N. W. Ashcroft, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1991, 43, 3161 CrossRef .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, R. Agarwal and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2003, 421, 241–245 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, A. Pan, R. Yu and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859–8876 RSC .
H. Li, J. Wu, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1067–1075 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Morozov and M. Kuno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 083103 CrossRef .
C. Tan, J. Chen, X. J. Wu and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 17089 CrossRef .
B. Mukherjee, S. Sarker, E. Crone, P. Pathak and V. R. Subramanian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33280–33288 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Guo, W. Hu, Q. L. Zhang, X. J. Zhuang, X. L. Zhu, H. Zhou, Z. P. Shan, J. Y. Xu and A. L. Pan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2844–2849 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Aivazian, Z. Gong, A. M. Jones, R. L. Chu, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, C. Zhang, D. Cobden, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 148–152 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 Search PubMed .
Q. L. He, H. Liu, M. He, Y. H. Lai, H. He, G. Wang, K. T. Law, R. Lortz, J. Wang and I. K. Sou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4247 Search PubMed .
V. Zannier, D. Ercolani, U. P. Gomes, J. David, M. Gemmi, V. G. Dubrovskii and L. Sorba, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7183–7190 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Dimitrov, M. Murphy, J. Smart, W. Schaff, J. R. Shealy and L. F. Eastman, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87, 3375 CrossRef .
R. D. Dupuis and P. D. Dapkus, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 31, 466 CrossRef .
F. X. Gu, Z. Y. Yang, H. K. Yu, J. Y. Xu, P. Wang, L. M. Tong and A. L. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2037–2039 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Yang, J. Y. Xu, P. Wang, X. J. Zhuang, A. L. Pan and L. M. Tong, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5085–5089 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Xu, X. J. Zhuang, P. F. Guo, W. Q. Huang, W. Hu, Q. L. Zhang, Q. Wan, X. L. Zhu, Z. Y. Yang, L. M. Tong, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 820 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, H. Lu, Z. Yang, L. Tong, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1109–1113 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Y. Xu, X. J. Zhuang, P. F. Guo, Q. L. Zhang, W. Q. Huang, Q. Wan, W. Hu, X. X. Wang, X. L. Zhu, C. Z. Fan, Z. Y. Yang, L. M. Tong, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5003–5007 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, D. Wang, C. Meng, Z. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Ma, L. Dai, X. W. Liu, T. Hasan, X. Liu and Q. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3153–3159 CrossRef PubMed .
P. F. Guo, X. J. Zhuang, J. Y. Xu, Q. L. Zhang, W. Hu, X. L. Zhu, X. X. Wang, Q. Wan, P. B. He, H. Zhou and A. L. Pan, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1251–1256 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Hsiao, S. J. Chang, S. C. Hung, Y. C. Cheng, B. R. Huang, S. B. Wang, B. W. Lan and S. H. Chih, J. Cryst. Growth, 2010, 312, 1670–1675 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Liang, H. Liu, X. Zhang, Q. Wan, Q. Zhang and A. Pan, Acta Phys. Sin., 2017, 66, 064204 Search PubMed .
Q. L. Zhang, H. W. Liu, P. F. Guo, D. Li, P. Fan, W. H. Zheng, X. L. Zhu, Y. Jiang, H. Zhou, W. Hu, X. J. Zhuang, H. J. Liu, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 28–35 CrossRef .
P. F. Guo, J. Y. Xu, K. Gong, X. Shen, Y. Lu, Y. Qiu, J. Q. Xu, Z. J. Zou, C. L. Wang, H. L. Yan, Y. S. Luo, A. L. Pan, H. Zhang, J. C. Ho and K. M. Yu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8474–8481 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Zhuang, P. F. Guo, Q. L. Zhang, H. W. Liu, D. Li, W. Hu, X. L. Zhu, H. Zhou and A. L. Pan, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 933–941 CrossRef .
J. Y. Xu, L. Ma, P. F. Guo, X. J. Zhuang, X. L. Zhu, W. Hu, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 12394–12397 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Fan, S. Turkdogan, Z. Liu, D. Shelhammer and C. Z. Ning, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 796–803 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Li, Q. L. Zhang, X. D. Duan, X. P. Wu, X. P. Fan, X. L. Zhu, X. J. Zhuang, W. Hu, H. Zhou, A. L. Pan and X. F. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5284–5287 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zheng, L. Sun, T. Yin, A. M. Dubrovkin, F. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 063113 CrossRef .
X. P. Wu, H. L. Li, H. J. Liu, X. J. Zhuang, X. Wang, X. P. Fan, X. D. Duan, X. L. Zhu, Q. L. Zhang, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4707–4712 RSC .
X. D. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. L. Li, X. P. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. L. Zhang, A. L. Pan, J. H. Jiang, R. Q. Yu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Y. Li, Y. Shi, C. C. Cheng, L. S. Lu, Y. C. Lin, H. L. Tang, M. L. Tsai, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei, J. H. He, W. H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L. J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Zhang, P. Chen, X. D. Duan, K. T. Zang, J. Luo and X. F. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788–792 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lu, H. Zhu, J. Xiao, C. Chuu, Y. Han, M. Chiu, C. Cheng, C. Yang, K. Wei, Y. Yang, Y. Wang, D. Sokaras, D. Nordlund, P. Yang, D. A. Muller, M. Chou, X. Zhang and L. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 744–749 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Li, X. P. Wu, H. J. Liu, B. Y. Zheng, Q. L. Zhang, X. L. Zhu, Z. Wei, X. J. Zhuang, H. Zhou, W. X. Tang, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 961–967 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, M. W. Lin, K. Wang, A. R. Lupini, J. Lee, L. Basile, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. Yoon and D. B. Geohegan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7749 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Lei, G. Ye, B. Li, Y. He, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Lou, Z. Liu, R. Vajtai, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6135–6141 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Yang, B. Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, T. Xu, C. Pan, J. Zou, X. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Qi, H. J. Liu, Y. X. Feng, W. D. Hu, F. Miao, L. T. Sun, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1906 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Honglai Li
	Honglai Li received his Bachelor degree in physics from Hunan University, and received a PhD in Condensed Matter Physics from Hunan University then taught there as a Yuelu Scholar in 2017. His main research interests lie in the controlled growth of low dimensional semiconductor structures, and physical properties as well as device applications of nanostructures.

Xiao Wang
	Xiao Wang received his MSc degree in Condensed Matter Physics from Peking University in 2007 and his PhD in Physical Chemistry from the University of Tübingen in 2012. In 2013–2016, he worked as a Habilitand and a junior research group leader at the University of Tübingen. Currently, he is a professor in the School of Physics and Electronics of Hunan University. His current research interests are nanooptics, low-dimensional materials, and their optoelectronics applications.

Xiaoli Zhu
	Xiaoli Zhu received her PhD degree in 2009 from Tohoku University, Japan. She is currently an associate professor at the school of physics and electronics, Hunan University and her research interests are nano-photonic and nano-optoelectronic devices.

Xiangfeng Duan
	Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at the Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.

Anlian Pan
	Anlian Pan received his PhD from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2006. Afterward, he worked as a Humboldt Research Fellow at Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, and then, he joined Arizona State University as a postdoctoral fellow, where he became a research assistant professor. He joined Hunan University as a full professor in 2010. He has published more than 180 papers in international journals. His research interests include controlled vapor growth of low dimensional semiconductors and heterostructures, and investigating micro–nano photonics and optoelectronics properties and device applications based on semiconductor nanostructures.

Key learning points
(1) A source switchable vapor growth strategy will be introduced.
(2) How to realize precise composition modulation within single 1D and 2D chalcogenide semiconductors via the developed growth strategy.
(3) How to achieve sharp interfacial composition profiles of chalcogenide heterostructures through the real-time composition control.
(4) Growth control of 2D chalcogenide heterostructures: lateral epitaxy vs. vertical stack.
(5) Device applications of composition-modulated chalcogenide semiconductors.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the experimental setup used for the composition modulated chalcogenide semiconductor nanostructures. Schematic diagram of the heating temperatures vs. time for materials A and B to form composition graded nanostructure and heterostructure, respectively (b and d), and the corresponding growth processes of the composition modulated one-dimensional chalcogenide semiconductor nanowires (c and e).	 
Eg(ABxC1−x) = xEg(AB) + (1−x)Eg(AC) − x(1 − x)b

 	Fig. 2  (a) Real-color image of some CdSxSe1−x NWs under a 405 nm laser illumination. (b) PL spectra along the length of a complete composition CdSxSe1−x nanowire (inset), excited locally with a beam of focused 405 nm laser. (c) Position-dependent compositions and bandgap values along the length of the multicolor CdSxSe1−x NW. (a and c) are reproduced from ref. 24 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011. (d) The real-color image of several dispersed full-composition ZnCdSSe nanowires under 355 nm laser illuminations. (e) Position-dependent element percentages along the length of a composition graded ZnCdSSe wire for elements Zn, Cd, S, and Se, respectively. (f) Large area real-color images of samples T1–T4 under the illumination, respectively. (g) CIE chromaticity diagram with the chromatic coordinates of the four representative samples calculated using the detected PL spectra collected from T1–T4. (d)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 25 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Theoretical design of asymmetric light propagation in composition graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. (b) SEM and real-color PL images of the nanowire under the illumination and with local excitation at ends. Scale bar, 7 μm. (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 26 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2012. (c) Output characteristics of a single CdSxSe1−x nanowire FET. The insets are the SEM image and schematic configuration of the FET, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 27 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2012. (d) Finite element model for calculating the transported PL spectra along the bandgap-decreased direction of the composition-graded nanowire. (e) Initial spectrum before guiding (S0), and the representative simulated spectra at four different propagation distances (S1–S4), respectively. (f) Real-color PL images of the nanowire branched structure under a focused excitation and at the WE of the trunk (inset: diffused laser illumination). (d)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (g) Sketch of selecting the cut point according to the localized PL spectrum of composition graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. (h) Real color images of the composition graded nanowire after being cut. (g and h) are reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (i) Real-color image for a representative symmetrically composition-graded CdSxSe1−x nanowire. Scale bar: 20 μm. (j) Schematic diagram of a symmetrically composition-graded NW with graded bandgap structure along the axial direction and schematic waveguiding with local excitation at the center of the NW. (k) Pumping power-dependent emission intensity for symmetrically composition-graded nanowire and composition-homogeneous CdSxSe1−x alloy nanowire, respectively. (i)−(k) are reproduced from ref. 30 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic diagrams of the VLS growth procedures and energy band diagram of the ZnSe/ZnCdSe heterostructure nanowires. Lw: length of the ZnCdSe segment. (b) HRTEM images of the ZnSe/Zn0.98Cd0.02Se heterostructure nanowires with Lw = 6 nm. (a and b) Reproduced from ref. 31 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2010. (c) Real-color image of several CdS–CdSSe nanowire heterostructures under a wide illumination of a laser (405 nm). Reproduced from ref. 32 with permission from Chinese Physical Society, copyright 2017. (d) TEM image of the heterostructure and 2D TEM elemental mapping for elements S, Se and Cd, respectively. (e) Real-color image for a representative CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructure with short CdSSe segment. (f) EDS line profile of Cd, Se and S across the interface of heterostructure. The inset: the HAADF-STEM image. (g) Pumping fluence-dependent lasing peak intensity based on single CdS–CdSSe–CdS NW heterostructures at ∼516.4 nm (green band) and at ∼597.9 nm (red band), respectively. (d)–(g) are reproduced from ref. 33 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2017. (h) Schematic of a CdS–CdSSe nanowire heterostructure-based photodetector. (i) I–V measurements with the illumination of different wavelengths and in dark. (j) I–V measurements under 500 nm laser illumination with various power densities. (k) The on–off response of the device upon 500 nm light illumination at a voltage of 1 V (2.86 mW cm−2). (h)–(k) are reproduced from ref. 34 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) A nanobelt crystallographic configuration that lead to asymmetric growth. (b) Schematic illustrations of the asymmetric lateral growth of the lateral composition graded nanobelts. (c) SEM image of as-prepared composition graded nanobelts. (d) 2D elemental mapping for the three detected elements (Cd, S, and Se). (e) The local normalized spatial resolved PL spectra along the width of the nanobelt. (f and g) Pumping power-dependent PL spectra of a lateral composition graded nanobelt at room temperature. (h) Pumping power-dependent PL intensity for the three lasing peaks, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 35 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic diagram of CdS–CdSSe heterostructure nanobelt through direct lateral epitaxial growth. (b and c) Real-color images of some lateral CdS–CdSSe and CdS–CdSSe–CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures through epitaxial growth under diffused 405 nm laser illumination. (d) Schematic diagram of CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructure nanobelt through anion exchange and lateral epitaxial growth. (e) Real-color photograph of some lateral CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures under laser illumination. (f) Dual-wavelength lasing with different wavelength spacing obtained from the lateral CdS–CdSSe–CdS heterostructures. (e and f) are reproduced from ref. 36 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2012. (g) Illustration of the growth procedure for multi-segment nanobelt heterostructure. R1–R3 and T1–T3 are the positions and temperature regions in the furnace. (h) Real-color images of individual structures after the corresponding growth sequences. Scale bars, 15 μm. (i) White and full-colour tunable lasing obtained from the multi-segment nanobelt heterostructure. (g)–(i) are reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram of the growth process of the lateral composition graded MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets [ratio: Se/(S + Se)]. (b) Optical images of representative single MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets at four different growth stages (scale bars, 5 μm). (c) Typical TEM image of the MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheets (scale bar, 3 μm) and 2D elemental mapping for the three detected elements: Mo, S, and Se, respectively. (d) Position-dependent compositions and bandgap values of the sheet. (e) Position-dependent micro-Raman spectra of the lateral composition graded nanosheet. (a)–(e) are reproduced from ref. 38 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (f) PL peak wavelength and the composition of MoxW1−xS2 monolayer as a function of the position. Reproduced from ref. 39 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2015. (g) Optical image of both-way composition graded WS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets (scale bar, 3 μm). (h) Position-dependent PL spectra of the nanosheet indicated by the arrow in (g). (i and j) The wavelength-selected PL mapping of a both-way composition graded nanosheet in the spectral regions of 715–725 nm, and 735–745 nm, respectively (scale bar, 2 μm). (g)–(j) are reproduced from ref. 40 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of lateral epitaxial growth of MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure. (b) Atomic force microscopy and optical images (inset) of a monolayer MoS2–MoSe2 nanosheet. (c) Raman spectra of a MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructure. (d) EDS elemental maps of W, S and Se atoms and the composite EDS mapping image of S and Se atoms, scale bars, 200 nm. (b)–(d) are reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (e) High-resolution STEM image taken from the WSe2–MoS2 in-plane heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from The American Association for the Advancement of Science, copyright 2015. (f) Optical image of the WS2/MoS2 lateral heterostructure. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (g) SEM image of the MoSe2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. Scale bar, 10 μm. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. (h) Scanning photocurrent mapping image of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterostructure p–n diode. Scale bar, 2 μm. Reproduced from ref. 41 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The medium plasma method to form Janus MoSSe. Firstly, the MoS2 monolayer exposed to H2 plasma to strip the top-layer S. The plasma was then switched off and a quartz boat loaded with Se powder was moved next to the sample without breaking the vacuum. Se powders were then thermally vaporized to achieve selenization and complete the synthesis of Janus MoSSe monolayers. (b) Raman characteristics for the MoS2 and those after H2 plasma treatment, sulfurization and selenization. (c) Annular dark-field STEM image of the sample cross-section, showing the asymmetric MoSSe monolayer structure with Se (orange) on top and S (yellow) at the bottom of the Mo atoms (blue). (a)–(c) are reproduced from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017. (d) Schematic diagram of the preparation of the lateral heterostructured MoS2–MoS2(1−x)Se2x nanosheet by the Se substitution in a designed stacking MoS2 nanosheet. (e) Substitution time-related bandgap values and compositions of the composition modulated heterostructures. (d and e) are reproduced from ref. 47 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (f) Lateral heterojunction arrays formed within monolayer crystals by patterning and selective conversion processes. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a and b) Schematic and optical images of pristine monolayer MoSe2, type I and type II WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructures. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic of vertically stacked WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure. (d) Optical image of as-grown vertically stacked WSe2/SnS2 heterostructure. Scale bar: 200 μm. (e) HRTEM image taken at the bilayer region of the 2D structure. (f) An optical image of fabricated WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure device. Scale bar, 60 μm. (g) Ids–Vbg curves across the p (WSe2)–n (SnS2) heterostructure (measured using electrodes 3 and 4). (h) Photocurrent response of the device, the laser light is turned on/off by a chopper worked at 1 Hz (520 nm, 101 mW cm−2, Vds = 1 V). (c)–(h) are reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2017.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
