Current status and prospects of memristors based on novel 2D materials  - Materials Horizons (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9MH02033K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9MH02033K
(Review Article)
Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 1495-1518Current status and prospects of memristors based on novel 2D materials

        
          
            Qianlong 
            Zhao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjian 
            Xie†
b, 
      
        
          
            Ya-Pei 
            Peng†
c, 
      
        
          
            Kaiyang 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huide 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xiangnan 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jingsheng 
            Chen
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Xiaobing 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *ad
aNational-Local Joint Engineering Laboratory of New Energy Photovoltaic Devices, Key Laboratory of Digital Medical Engineering of Hebei Province, College of Electron and Information Engineering, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, P. R. China. E-mail: yanxiaobing@ime.ac.cn
bShenzhen Engineering Laboratory of Phosphorene and Optoelectronics, SZU-NUS Collaborative Innovation Center for Optoelectronic Science & Technology, International Collaborative Laboratory of 2D Materials for Optoelectronics Science and Technology of Ministry of Education, College of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Shenzhen University, Shenzhen 518060, China. E-mail: hzhang@szu.edu.cn
cCollege of Health Science and Environmental Engineering, Shenzhen Technology University, Shenzhen, 518118, China
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576, Singapore
Received 
      18th December 2019
    , Accepted 13th February 2020First published on 13th February 2020AbstractAs promising non-volatile memory devices, memristors have received extensive attention since they can effectively mimic synapses and enable the fabrication of neuromorphic systems. In recent years, 2D materials have been widely used in memristors because of their unique advantages, which not only improve the performance of memristors, but also promote the applicability of memristors in flexible electronics, low-power high-temperature devices, neuromorphic computing, etc. In this review, we summarize the applications of 2D materials in fabricating memristors and their physical switching mechanisms. The challenges involved are discussed and the corresponding strategies are reviewed.
Qianlong Zhao
Qianlong Zhao is currently pursuing his MS in the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering at Hebei University, Baoding, China. His research interests focus on the application of 2D materials in memristors.
Xiaobing Yan
Xiaobing Yan received his PhD from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2011. He is currently a Professor at the College of Electron Information and Engineering, Hebei University, Baoding, China. His current research interests include the study of emerging memories, such as charge-trapping memory, phase-change memory, resistive switching memory, and brain-inspired neuromorphic devices.
I. Introduction
In the age of big data, tremendous amounts of data are produced every year. In more than a decade (from 2005 to 2020), the digital universe grew 300 times, from 130 exabytes to 40 trillion gigabytes.1 The sheer volume of data requires the next generation of non-volatile memory (NVM) technologies to possess large storage and high speed. Recently, many new types of NVM technologies (e.g., resistive random-access memory (RRAM),2–9 magnetic random-access memory (MRAM),10–13 phase-change memory (PCM),14–18etc.) have exhibited outstanding advantages, simultaneously providing permanent storage and fast processing of large volumes of data. Among them, memristors have shown the ability to store and output information by switching between different resistance states, and the scalable nanoscale dimension of memristors facilitates obtaining higher density and large-scale integration.19–23 In 1971, based on the symmetry theory, Leon Chua predicted the fourth basic passive circuit element other than resistance, capacitance, and inductance, namely, the memristor.24 A memristor connects the charge and magnetic flux, and it defines the relationship between them. From the relation dφ = Mdq, it is evident that the memristor is a function of the amount of charge. Its characteristic is that the resistance is not fixed but varies with the passing charge. When the previous passing charge does not change, the resistance of the memristor will remain unchanged. However, at that time, no one proposed a corresponding physical model or example of a memristor. By 2008, Hewlett Packard laboratories reported the first working memristive device in the journal Nature.25 Since then, memristors have entered a stage of rapid development. In 2008, Yang et al. prepared a TiO2-based memristor device,26 which exhibited fast bipolar non-volatile switching behavior and supported the generic model of resistance conversion in oxide systems through experimental evidence. Subsequently, in 2010, Lu et al. prepared a nanoscale silicon-based memristor device27 and demonstrated that a hybrid system comprising complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) neurons and memristor synapses can simulate important synaptic functions. It is important to note that in the process of continuous development, researchers also have had to deal with certain controversies regarding the identification of genuine memristive properties,28 which has resulted in a more comprehensive study of memristors. In short, it is inappropriate to use memristors in place of all resistive memory devices.28 However, this is not the focus of this article and will not be comprehensively discussed here. In this paper, we refer to a memristor as a device that depends on changes in resistance.
Furthermore, the memristor exhibits switching speeds in the subnanosecond scale,29,30 low programming energy consumption,31 and long write/erase endurance.32 Importantly, the resistance state of the memristor depends on its past states; therefore, it can be used to mimic the synaptic connections in the (biology) brain, which has attracted increasing attention in neuromorphic computing.33,34 Further, the memristor is expected to resolve the key problem of traditional computer architecture.35 The human brain consumes much less energy (about 20 W) in many complex learning processes as compared to the most advanced computers (about 1 MW), and its processing efficiency is also better.36,37 Therefore, using hardware computing to simulate the brain and achieve brain function in the field of neural computing may have a profound influence on next-generation artificial intelligence.38–40 Until now, Yan et al. implemented a series of synaptic functions using memristors, such as long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD), spike-timing-dependent plasticity (STDP), and paired-pulse facilitation (PPF).41–45 This has led to the further development of memristors in the field of brain neurobionics.
In terms of device structures and functional layers, memristors mostly comprise a three-layered structure comprising a top electrode (TE), bottom electrode (BE), and a functional layer. This structure is simple and compatible with today's CMOS processes.46–48 Memristors store information by changing the resistance of the functional layer when a voltage is applied.49,50 Earlier studies on the functional layer materials that could be used in memristors have mainly involved traditional oxide materials, such as TiO2,42,51 tantalum oxide,52,53 HfOx,54 WOx,55 ZHO/IGZO,43etc. Oxide-based memory resistors have many advantages, such as relatively stable performance and mature research. However, it is difficult to reduce the dimensions of memristors based on traditional three-dimensional (3D) oxides; further, with the development of newer materials, when the film is reduced from 3D to two-dimensional (2D) architectures, other interesting characteristics may become evident, which are worth studying for scaling down the size of the device. Therefore, 2D materials as the representative of newer materials are a hot research direction and might become a strong focus for future investigations.
Subsequent to the successful exfoliation of graphene, 2D materials have attracted increasing attention because of their atomic thickness56–58 that has yielded excellent electrical, optical,59–61 thermal, and mechanical properties.62–67 2D materials as functional and structural materials have been widely used in various application fields, such as transistors, batteries, photovoltaics, and water treatment.68–81 They are expected to append or even replace conventional semiconductor materials in the fabrication of nanoscale electronic devices with smaller size, lower power consumption, and higher efficiency.82–85 The studied 2D materials include a wider variety of materials from conductors and semiconductors to insulators, such as graphene,86–89 boron nitride (BN),90,91 topological insulators,92–94 transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs; e.g., MoS2 and WS2),95–97 2D perovskites,98,99 InSe,100–103 SnS,104,105 TiS2,106 black phosphorus (BP),107–117 MXenes,118–120 antimoene,121–124 bismuthene,125–129 borophene,130 tellurene,131–136 selenium nanosheets,137,138 and 2D metals.139 Importantly, numerous 2D materials have been used in memristors because of their excellent properties.86–88,90,91,95–99,107
Due to its excellent electrical conductivity, ultrahigh structural and chemical stabilities, and large carrier mobility, graphene has shown unparalleled advantages when used as a memristor functional layer.86–88,140–142 In addition, some researchers have used graphene as an electrode143,144 to prepare a memristor, which showed nonvolatile characteristics and improved device performance. Some researchers added monolayer graphene to the BE to prevent the conductive filament (CF) from penetrating into the BE, and devices based on this structure have shown satisfactory resistive switching (RS) performances, including high endurance, fast speed, and long retention.145,146 In addition to graphene, TMDs as functional layer materials of memristors have also been widely studied.41,145,147 For example, Nokia Labs Skolkovo reported that a memristor prepared using layered MoS2 exhibits low programming voltages from 0.1 to 0.2 V and adjustable resistance of 102–108 Ω.145 Subsequently, Yan et al. fabricated an artificial electronic device using 2D layered WS2 nanosheets. The device consumed low power and successfully simulated biological synaptic functions.41 In addition, for RS devices, the physical switching mechanism has always been the focus of research, and popular switching mechanisms include filaments, atomic vacancy, and trapping and detrapping of electrons. Different mechanisms can yield different device performances. Fig. 1 shows a comprehensive overview of memristors based on 2D materials and the switching mechanisms of these memristors; these studies have rapidly advanced the development of memristors.
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of reviews involving memristors comprising 2D materials and the switching mechanism of these memristors. No. 1: reproduced from ref. 86. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. No. 2: reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 3: reproduced from ref. 148. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. No. 4: reproduced from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 5: reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. No. 6: reproduced from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. No. 7: reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 8: reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. No. 9: reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. No. 10: reproduced from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 11: reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 12: reproduced from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 13: reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. No. 14: reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 15: reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. No. 16: reproduced from ref. 107. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Based on the rapid development of 2D-materials-based memristors, we have prepared this review that mainly discusses the applications of 2D materials in memristors and their physical switching mechanisms. Subsequently, the challenges and outlook of memristors based on 2D materials are provided.
II. Memristors based on 2D materials
A. Graphene and its derivatives

1. Working as a functional layer. 
Lateral RRAMs comprise a three-layered structure of metal–functional layer–metal with standard plane geometry, which is similar to a hybrid transistor structure.41–43 Graphene and its other derivatives have been studied as functional layer media for use in lateral RRAMs due to their low manufacturing cost, high mechanical flexibility, and high optical transparency.153,154 In 2015, S. Porro et al. reported a Ag/graphene oxide (GO)/ITO device with typical bipolar switching characteristics.155Fig. 2a shows the optical photographs of the Ag/GO/ITO device. Fig. 2b shows the typical I–V curves; the red solid line is the first cycle of the I–V curve, and the black dotted and dashed lines are the fifth and tenth cycles of the I–V curve, respectively. The arrows indicate the scanning direction of the voltage. Evidently, the device exhibits stable bipolar behavior. In addition, Huang et al. also prepared Ag/GO/ITO devices by using GO,156 where the GO film was annealed at different temperatures; the performance of this device exhibited a close relationship with the annealing temperature of the GO film. It was found that at the annealing temperature of 20 °C, the device exhibited typical storage behavior and had a high ON/OFF current ratio. Fig. 2c shows the I–V curves of the Ag/GO/ITO device at the annealing temperature of 20 °C. The illustration is a schematic diagram of the device. Among them, sweep 1 to sweep 4 are voltage-scanning processes. Evidently, the device can only be turned ON and cannot be turned OFF, which is typical write-once-read-many-times behavior. Fig. 2d shows the retention characteristics of the high-resistance state (HRS) and low-resistance state (LRS). The device is under retention for more than 103 s without significant attenuation and has an ON/OFF current ratio of 104, which can effectively prevent data misreading. In addition, some researchers have successfully simulated biological synapses by using GO-based memristors, which have certain application potential in future neuromorphic computing.157,158
 Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of the Ag/GO/ITO device. (b) I–V curves of the Ag/GO/ITO device. The red solid line is the I–V curve of the first cycle. Reproduced from ref. 155. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (c) I–V curve of the Ag/GO/ITO devices when the annealing temperature of the GO films was 20 °C. Inset shows the schematic illustration of the devices. (d) Retention characteristics of the device. Reproduced from ref. 156. Copyright 2014 IOP Publishing Ltd. Printed in the UK. 


2. Working as an electrode. 
Graphene can not only be used as an interfacial layer between the electrode and the medium but also as an electrode. A resistive memory device based on a graphene electrode providing inherent selection elements was reported by Lu et al., as shown in Fig. 3a–d.143 They used multilayer graphene (MLG) as the conducting electrodes for improving their conductance values. It was found that the deposition sequence of MLG/Ta2O5−x/TaOy/MLG and MLG/TaOy/Ta2O5−x/MLG led to two different switching characteristics of the resistive memory. Spontaneous functionalization during the device manufacturing process in graphene materials can lead to functionalized graphene electrodes with volatility threshold switching and high overall nonlinear switching features when used as resistive memory. In addition, Lu et al. found that the epoxy group was present in the functionalized graphene electrodes, which served as a deep level trap for conducting electrons, resulting in variable range hopping with lower conductance. The high-energy electrons can enter a shallower trap at a sufficiently high voltage, which yields rapid enhancements in conductivity and current, corresponding to the transformation from HRS to LRS. This formation of the switching process is due to the volatility of electron capture/decapture in the functionalized graphene BE and nonvolatility of the oxygen-vacancies-transit-induced bipolar switching in the tantalum oxide layers.
 Fig. 3  (a) Photograph of the glass substrate after MLG transfer and (b) glass chip after fabricating a device. (c) Bipolar RS characteristics of the MLG/TaOy/Ta2O5−x/MLG device with ON-state linear features and (d) MLG/Ta2O5−x/TaOy/MLG device with ON-state nonlinearity. Reproduced from ref. 143. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram of the polymer-assisted exfoliation of MoS2. (f) I–V characteristics. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, Zhang et al. proposed a simple method for the stripping and dispersing of MoS2 by polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) (Fig. 3e).144 Firstly, MoS2 was employed as the acceptor and reduced GO (rGO) was applied as the conducting electrode with the framework of rGO/MoS2–PVP/Al. It exhibited typical bistable switching and nonvolatile writable memory effects with the flash function. The I–V feature of this elastic storage device is shown in Fig. 3f. This particular electric field effect may be related to the charge capture and decapture responses of MoS2 in the PVP model by the action of an electrical field. Flash memory systems based on 2D nanomaterials as the conductive electrodes and functional materials can be nonvolatile and erasable, which has feasible applications in USB flash drives, flexible memory cards, radio-frequency identification, solid-state drives, and electronic tags.

B. TMDs
TMDs, which are expressed as MX2 (M: transition metal such as Mo, W, Sn, Hf, Zr; X: chalcogen atom such as S, Se, Te), exhibit excellent performances with respect to electrical, optical, chemical, and mechanical properties.159–161Via van der Waals forces, a layer of transition metal atoms can be sandwiched between two layers of chalcogen atoms. As a semiconductor, TMDs possess advantages such as a sizable bandgap, relatively high carrier mobility, stability in air, etc.162,163

1. MoS2. 
MoS2—a typical TMD—has aroused considerable attention due to its significantly unique mechanical,164 electrical,165–168 and biological properties.169–172 Correspondingly, numerous applications have been demonstrated in the fields of catalysis,173,174 electronics,175–177 energy,178,179 and biomedical applications.180–183 Environmental applications of 2D MoS2 are also expected. In fact, bulk MoS2, which exists as mineral molybdenite in nature, has been applied as environmental adsorbents184 and catalysts185 in the long term. However, the environmental applications of MoS2 are limited by the synthesis of monolayer or few-layer MoS2 nanosheets, which hold unique 2D nanosized properties. Recently, the development of advanced technologies in obtaining monolayer and large-scale MoS2 nanosheets have provided renewed potential.186,187 Following the original work, the synthesis methods,188–190 physical and chemical tuning,191 and functionalization192 have been reported, and novel environmental applications based on the photothermal effect of MoS2 have been revealed.193,194
However, when compared with graphene and its derivatives/composites, raw MoS2 nanosheets show no significant RS behaviors.195 Fortunately, it can be introduced by treating a mixing solution or by chemical functionalization with other kinds of materials (e.g., dielectric polymers).196 In 2015, Hu et al. reported the perfect odd-symmetric memristor prepared by using 1T-phase MoS2 nanosheets (Fig. 4a).197 They also demonstrated that 2H-phase bulk MoS2 exhibited ohmic properties, while 1T-phase detached MoS2 showed a particular memory response, resulting in voltage-related changes in the resistance. The conductivity of the 1T-phase MoS2 was 107 times higher than that of the 2H phase. Electrical field could induce lattice distortion and enhance the delocalization of electrons in the 1T phase, thereby significantly increasing the conductivity and leading to resistance changes. Furthermore, they yield asymmetric Ag/MoS2/Ag memristive devices. A symmetric I–V loop with compression lag could be obtained after applying a bias voltage on this device from 0 mV → 1000 mV → −1000 mV → 0 mV (Fig. 4b and c). These results also verified the existence of the negative differential resistance (NDR).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of Ag/MoS2/Ag/MoS2/Ag memristor. (b) I–V curve of a memristor (a) under room temperature and (c) in the logarithmic scale. Reproduced from ref. 197. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Basic I–V characteristic of a MoOx/MoS2 memory device. (e) Capacitive and resistive parts of the MoS2/MoOx memristor. (f) I–V curves based on memristors with different TE materials. Reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (g) Schematic drawing of a graphene/MoS2−xOx/graphene (GMG) device (top) and a cross-section image (bottom). (h) Photograph and measurement setup. (i) Typical switching characteristics of GMG devices. (j) High endurance of 2 × 107 obtained for a pulse width of 1 μs. Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (k and l) Principle schematic and local I–V features of the memristor at Vg = 40 V. (m) Gate tunability of the memristor. (n) Typical I–V curves (V > 0 V) of the bisecting-GB memristor for different Vg values. Reproduced from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. 
Subsequently, a breakthrough experiment was reported. An innovation for fabricating memory and memory capacitor switches for use as an inexpensive printed electronic application was introduced by Bessonov et al., which could be attributed to the easy availability and low cost of MoS2-based structures.145 They fabricated this device by depositing few-layer MoS2 tablets by thermally assisted air oxidation. Solution-treated WOx/WS2 and MoOx/MoS2 heterostructures exhibited an unprecedentedly wide adjustable resistance range from 102 to 108 Ω and programming voltage of 0.1–0.2 V (Fig. 4d). Bipolar RS is controlled by an ultrathin (<3 nm) oxide layer, which also has a capacitive contribution. Because of the high nonlinearity of switching dynamics, different synaptic flexibility mechanisms can be achieved via a series of electrical impulses (Fig. 4e and f). LTP, STP, and binary switching have been proven to facilitate the adjustment of the resistance state of memristors according to pulse amplitudes, pulse numbers, and input frequencies.
Metal-oxide-based RRAMs have been widely used because of their expandability, temperature robustness, and machine-learning potential.198 However, thicker oxide layers lead to the necessity of a relatively high programming voltage, while thinner oxide layers lead to a smaller window and greater leakage current.198 Based on these principles, a new interface engineering concept was proposed via the majorization of the oxide layer itself to decrease the programming voltages and improve the ON/OFF ratio. The concept of MoS2–Pd interface engineering was proposed, and diaphanous ITO/HfO2/MoS2–Pd NPs/ITO RRAMs were prepared by Wang et al.198 The electrode/oxide interface of HfOx-based RRAMs was designed with the mixed structure of MoS2 and Pd nanoparticles. Via interface engineering, for a relatively thick HfOx layer (∼15 nm), the setting voltage could be extremely reduced (from −3.5 to −0.8 V), with incremental ON/OFF ratio and good uniformity; further, the memory window could be increased by 30 times. In addition, this RRAM could commonly work for 200 cycles of memory switching even at higher temperatures. Further, the resistances in the LRS and HRS did not significantly decrease, exhibiting good data retention performance and stability. Owing to the high transmittance of ITO and atomic thickness of MoS2 films, the arranged RRAM exhibited higher visible-light transparency, larger RS window, and low setting voltage, making it promising for applications in wearable electronic devices and transparent circuits with comparatively low power supply voltages.
Most of the research has been done on the use of a single type of 2D-material-based memristor, which has certain shortcomings, such as high-temperature instability.96,153,154 By combining different 2D materials, a heterogeneous structure can be realized to resolve these shortcomings in electronic devices, particularly for those requiring vertical multilayered structures. Wang et al., for the first time, fabricated a robust memory resistor based on a full-layer 2D heterogeneous structure (graphene/MoS2–xOx/graphene) (Fig. 4g and h), which exhibited repeatable bipolar RS (Fig. 4i), excellent switching performance, durability up to 107 times higher, and the highest operating temperature of up to 340 °C (Fig. 4j).96 They found that the atomic structure of the switch layer (MoS2–xOx), electrodes (graphene), and atom-sharpened interface play a pivotal role in ensuring device robustness and thermal stability at elevated temperatures. In situ high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) for high-temperature operation revealed that the MoS2–xOx layer exhibited high thermal stability. Further, the scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) studies revealed a switching mechanism and good limited conduction channel based on the migration of oxygen ions. In addition, the fully layered 2D material offered good mechanical flexibility for use in flexible electronic applications; from our experimental demonstration, excellent endurance of more than 1000 bending cycles could be obtained.
Memristor based on the metal–insulator–metal (MIM) structure, which uses TiO2 or other insulating oxides, is limited by the lack of external control of the switching voltages and control over filament formation.199–201 Lauhon and Hersam reported a novel memristor element based on the grain boundary (GB) in single-layer MoS2 devices, which yielded three-terminal MoS2 memristors with gate tunability.150 In particular, the GB resistance generated by the contact could be easily modulated repeatedly and the switching ratio could reach up to ∼103 (Fig. 4k). In intersecting-GB memristors, the severally addressable local gates in the MoS2 memristors could be used to continuously adjust the SET voltage (VSET) and provide a fault-tolerant structure. By changing the gate bias voltage (∼0–40 V), the VSET value could be changed from 3.5 to 8.0 V (Fig. 4m); a controllable VSET value provided additional flexibility in designing complementary and bipolar RS structures. Furthermore, bisecting-GB memristors yield bistable resistance values of more than 3 orders of magnitude at a zero bias voltage, while the shape of the positive curves and switching ratio (∼4–6) remain relatively unchanged with gate voltage (Fig. 4l and n). A series of results have confirmed the excellent properties of such GB-based memristors.


2. WS2. 
In order to realize low-power operation, researchers have used advanced materials to prepare memristor devices that are different from the two main mechanisms of metal-ion CFs or oxygen vacancies.153,154 WS2 is a TMD, which is different from other 2D materials such as graphene due to its tunable bandgap and unique semiconductor properties.67,202–206 Yan et al. proposed a low-power-consumption memristor device with the Pd/WS2/Pt device structure based on 2H-phase WS2. The switching time was fast at 13 ns (14 ns), program current was low (1 μA) in the ON state, and the SET (RESET) energy could reach the femtojoules levels (Fig. 5a–d).41 TEM observations revealed the presence of more tungsten and sulfur vacancies in the WS2 films than those observed in WS2 nanosheets. Therefore, the formation of tungsten and sulfur vacancies and electron hopping between them are the main reasons for the improved RS performance, which is different from traditional metal-ion CFs or oxygen vacancies. Further, the device could realize the simulation of the synaptic function of living organisms, including excitation and inhibition under negative and positive impulses stimulation training, memory, and learning for transitions from the STDP, PPF, and STP to LTP.
 Fig. 5  (a) Classic I–V characteristics with linear coordinates. (b) Miscellaneous program currents reported in other studies (hybrid perovskites,99,151,207 MoS2,96,150,197 BN,91 and graphene208,209). (c) ON state at a voltage pulse of 13 ns and (d) OFF state at a voltage pulse of 14 ns. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, in 2017, Choi et al. reported a Ag/WS2/Ag device prepared by a flexible PET substrate via the full-print manufacturing technology using detached WS2 flakes as the functional layer for use in rewritable bipolar memory devices.147 They demonstrated the structural, physical, mechanical, and electrical properties of the detached WS2 flakes for the full-printing technology. Then, they used an atom-thick layer of aluminum oxide (Al2O3) to encapsulate the devices to protect them from moisture. In other words, the Ag/WS2/Ag-based memory devices could achieve low power consumption, high switching ratio (∼103), nonvolatile bipolar behavior, longer retention time (∼105 s), low operating voltage (∼2 V), high endurance (1500 voltage sweeps), mechanical robustness (1500 cycles), low current compliance (50 μA), and unique repeatability under ambient conditions, which heralded a new possibility for flexible electronic device integration.


3. MoTe2. 
MoTe2 has aroused considerable interest for electronic applications because of its polymorphism ability.210,211 Zhang et al. demonstrated the structural transformation from a 2H semiconductor to an orthorhombic Td conducting phase under the action of an electric field and a distorted transient structure (2Hd) in vertical RRAM devices based on 2H-phase MoTe2 and Mo1−xWxTe2 (Fig. 6a).212 They demonstrated the possibility of using electric fields to induce phase transitions. The setting voltages of the Mo1−xWxTe2 devices were monotonously dependent on the wafer thickness (Fig. 6b). By comparing the RRAM characteristics based on 2H-phase MoTe2 samples and 2H-phase Mo1−xWxTe2 alloys, they found that the 2H-phase Mo1−xWxTe2 alloys need a smaller VSET value to trigger the RRAM behavior. The energy required to convert the semiconductor state into the metal state continuously decreases in Mo1−xWxTe2 alloys as x increases (Fig. 6c). Temperature-dependent electrical measurements reveal that the 2Hd state could behave as a semiconductor metal depending on the transient state. In addition, they used an Al2O3/MoTe2 pile with an ON/OFF current ratio of 106 at less than 1 μA to implement a selector RRAM framework.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a vertical MoTe2 device; optical and SEM images. (b) Log-scale I–V curves of vertical Mo0.96W0.04Te2 RRAM devices after electroforming. (c) VSET values versus flake thicknesses of MoTe2, Mo0.97W0.03Te2, Mo0.96W0.04Te2, Mo0.93W0.07Te2, and Mo0.91W0.09Te2. Reproduced from ref. 213. 

C. Other 2D materials

1. BN. 
BN possesses a wide bandgap (about 5.5 eV),91,213 which is an ideal material for RRAM and other logic devices.214–216 Lanza et al. studied the existence of RS in multilayer BN reactor and developed a series of worthwhile RRAM devices with multilayer hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) to be the active RS media (Fig. 7a).91 In addition, Fig. 7b shows the VSET and VRESET values as 0.4 and −0.8 V, respectively. The device properties can be controlled by inserting interfacial graphene electrodes and adjusting the particle size and thickness of the BN pile. The device based on BN shows the coexistence of bipolar and threshold RS behaviors for the first time, because it affords the facile generation of B vacancies and penetration of metal ions. The RS phenomenon was investigated by inserting MLG between the metal electrodes and h-BN. Due to graphene's high electrical resistance outside the plane, the interfacial electrodes of graphene were shown to shorten the power dissipation of RRAM devices, protect the medium from ambient humidity, stabilize the RS response by preventing oxygen diffusion, allow mechanical bending without compromising performance, and afford excellent transparency.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure of Ti/thin h-BN/Cu devices. (b) Classic I–V characteristics in a memristor device. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) I–V curves of bipolar and (d) unipolar RS responses in single-layer h-BN crossbar devices. (e) Basic I–V characteristics in single-layer h-BN devices based on Au foil and (f) Ni foil. Reproduced from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, Wu et al. reported the nonvolatile RS (NVRS) capabilities of single-layer BN grown by chemical vapor deposition (CVD) vertically sandwiched between metallic electrodes.90 They studied two different device structures with three metal electrodes (Ni, Au, and Ag). Shapeless switches were fabricated in both bipolar and unipolar modes with fast switching speeds (<15 ns) and high switching ratios (107) that were achieved via pulse manipulation. The fabrication of this single-atom h-BN NVRS device extended the atomic resistance member to a 2D insulator. The classic I–V characteristics of the single-layer h-BN MIM device (Fig. 7c–f) exhibited bipolar and unipolar RS behaviors for devices with Au and Ni foils, respectively. Moreover, they investigated the temperature-related electron transport properties and performed simulations using an ab initio method to reveal the conductance-bridging mechanism in the switching process, which could be achieved by the occupation of metal ions in B vacancies and the interactions between the interfacial localized defects and metal ions. These efforts could yield newer applications in printing electronics, ultrathin flexible memory, radio-frequency switches, and neuromorphic computing.


2. BP. 
BP is the first and also the most investigated one in the 2D group-VA family. In 2014, Li et al. were the first to fabricate BP and they used it to fabricate a BP-based field-effect transistor.217 Then, subsequent studies revealed other promising properties of BP, such as superior mechanical properties,218,219 highly anisotropic carrier transport,220–224 negative Poisson's ratios,225 strain-induced conduction bands,226 perpendicular topological characteristic, and excellent optical responses.221,227,228 Moreover, the wrinkled structure of BP enabled it to exhibit a larger area when compared with those obtainable from flat-surfaced 2D materials; this facilitated in enhancing its drug-loading capability,229,230 use as imaging agents,110,231 and application as metal ions,232 All these abovementioned characteristics of BP make it suitable for numerous applications in transistors,233–237 batteries,238–241 energy storage,242,243 photonics,221,244,245 sensors,246–249 and photothermal cancer therapy.229,250–254
The primary difficulty in handling BP is its instability, i.e., degradation under environmental conditions, which prevents the mass production of few-layer BP using the liquid-phase exfoliation (LPE) method. Hao et al. obtained BP films from exfoliated BP nanosheets with selected solvents and reported an environmentally stable nonvolatile RRAM device with the Al/BP film/ITO structure.107 Flexible BP memory devices are made from the deposited Al layer on the top of BP films, and the degradation-produced amorphous top degraded layer (TDL) can be used as the bottom of the insulation layer of the Al electrode so as to prevent further degradation of the propagation to the BP film as well as to ensure excellent memory performance even after three months of environmental exposure. In their work, the fabricated BP memory device exhibited bistable RS behaviors, high ON/OFF current ratio (as high as 3 × 105), high stability (105 s), and high ON/OFF ratio (as high as 104).
Many researchers have proposed several techniques for enhancing the stability of BP, including covalent bonding with carbon-free radicals255 and aryl diazonium,256 intercalation of alkali metal hydrides,257 doping of fluorine adatoms,258 surface coordination of the titanium sulfonate ligand,255 metal-ion modification,232 and encapsulation by h-BN,259,260 graphene shell,261 GO,113 organic monolayers,262 and AlOx.233,263 Of course, seeking other stable phosphorene-analog photothermal materials (such as tin sulfide (SnS)) is also a possible method.104,264,265 These strategies can open up new potential for the photothermal application of phosphorene and phosphorene-analog materials for use in environmental applications.


3. Perovskites. 
Organolead halide perovskite materials, with their simple and cheap manufacturing process, good charge mobility, and excellent light absorption coefficient, have opened a novel era for the development of highly potent low-cost solar cells.266–270 Besides solar cells, rapid developments in perovskite technology has resulted in the direct expansion of many other infusive areas, such as applications in optical and electronics devices.271–273 In 2012, Choi and Wang demonstrated a new style of dual-function RS memory device with a simple Ag and CH3NH3PbI3−xClx perovskite bilayer structure on an analog and digital RS FTO substrate.99 The RS characteristic of the device was induced by the sudden generation and fracture of the filament under the action of a comparatively high bias sweep (Fig. 8a). This bistable RS exhibited reliable performance, with a retention time of 4 × 104 s and lifetime of more than 103 times, indicating that the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO device could work as an appropriate RRAM device. It was also shown that light illumination had a certain impact on RS performance (Fig. 8b and c). This device exhibited digital as well as analog switching characteristics, which could be used in the fabrication of neural morphological calculation devices.
 Fig. 8  (a) Figure on the left reveals the formation of Ag CFs, while the figure on the right reveals the rupture of Ag CFs. (b) Log I–V characteristics under light illumination. (c) Energy levels of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO device under the light illumination. Reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2013. 
Subsequently, Liu et al. fabricated an organic and inorganic hybrid perovskites (OIHPs) memristor, confirming the possibility of implementing OIHPs for producing rewritable memory devices.98 Using polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) as the RS layers as well as a two-step spin-coating process, the CH3NH3PbI3 perovskite was prepared as the charge-capture layer that formed the charge trap. The conductive mechanism of ITO/PMMA/CH3NH3PbI3/PMMA/Ag device was studied by means of its I–V characteristics. This memory device could be reprogrammed with an ON/OFF ratio of up to 103. The results show that OIHPs have worthwhile electronic application prospects for use in RS memory devices.


4. GaSe. 
In addition to TMDs, 2D layered III–VI semiconductor materials have received wide research attention due to their attractive optical and electrical properties.274 Here, GaSe has a direct bandgap of approximately 25 meV and an indirect bandgap of approximately 2 eV.275 GaSe is anticipated to possess remarkable electrical and optical characteristics276–278 and has broad application prospects in terahertz-wave generation, nonlinear optics, and optoelectronics.279–281 Jie et al. studied three-terminal transistors in 2D layered GaSe nanosheets by combining memristor devices with field-effect transistors.152 A memory resistor with silver electrodes exhibits nonvolatile bipolar RS features. The three-terminal 2D GaSe transistor also exhibits nonvolatile bipolar RS features with the advantages of large switching ratio, worthwhile wear resistance, excellent retention performance, and low electric field threshold. After a week of exposure to air, the RS behavior was significantly enhanced, ultralow threshold electric field was ∼3.3 × 102 V cm−1, and the switching ratio reached 5.3 × 105 (Fig. 9a and c). The RS characteristic shows no significant changes in the VSET and VRESET values from the scan loop at the initial bias (Fig. 9b). The corresponding ultralow electric field of GaSe-based memristors may be because of the small migration energy of the inherent Ga vacancies in GaSe, which is beneficial for practical applications in low-power NVMs (Fig. 9d).
 Fig. 9  (a) I–V curves of the Ag/GaSe/Ag device. (b) 50 data cycles of the device. (c) Fitting results of the I–V curves in (a). (d) Energy band diagram of Ag/GaSe for a metal–semiconductor junction. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. 

III. Switching mechanism for memristors based on 2D materials
A. Filaments

1. Metal iron filaments. 
Memristors have rich RS mechanisms, such as filament, vacancy, and electrons trapping. Among them, filament is a widely recognized mechanism, which is mainly divided into metal-ion filaments and vacancy filaments. The electrodes of the memristor based on metal-ion filaments are generally considered as active electrodes. The formation and breakage of the filament can be achieved by oxidation/reduction reactions. Pan et al. reported a multilayer h-BN RS with the filament conduction mechanism.91 The typical I–V curves of this device are shown in Fig. 10a, which exhibits free-forming bipolar RS. The cycle-to-cycle variability is very small with a read voltage of 0.1 V for more than 350 cycles. The electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) profiles for non-defective and GB/CF positions of a Ti/thin h-BN/Cu memristor at LRS are shown in Fig. 10b and c, which reveal that the signals propagated in the depth because of rigorous Ti and B motion at the GB/CF locations (Fig. 10c). Moreover, the migration of B toward the Ti electrode is easier due to the lower activation energy at the GB, and Ti ions move toward the cathode to form a Ti or TiN-based CF. The stable formation and breakage of the CF is the reason for the stable switching between the HRS and LRS in the device, as well as the key to the excellent device performance.
 Fig. 10  (a) I–V characteristics in the device reveal bipolar RS. (b and c) EELS cross-sectional analyses of the device's (LRS) original position and GB/CF position. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, K. Qian et al. observed that the physical mechanism of a 2D h-BN memristor with a Cu foil electrode and Ag TE is via the Ag filaments.282Fig. 11 shows the TEM image of a sample cross-section. The images are taken after the SET operation, which clearly show the CFs with a typical conical shape (Fig. 11a and d). The filament connects the Cu foil (BE) and Ag (TE) to the h-BN layer, which is localized with the thinner part near the BE and wider base near the TE (Fig. 11a). In order to study the chemical constituents of the CFs, energy-dispersive X-ray spectrometry (EDS) was used under the scanning TEM (STEM) mode. Fig. 11c (circular region marked as “1” in Fig. 11b) shows that the concentration of Ag elements in the middle of the h-BN film is somewhat large. Moreover, noncomplete CF in the memory cells of the same ON state was analyzed by HRTEM (Fig. 11e, corresponding to Fig. 11d). It is evident that the lattice stripes in the filament grow along the TE, and the lattice stripes of the filament are the same as that of the Ag electrode shown in Fig. 11e. Furthermore, Fig. 11e shows the d-spacing values measured in the TE region, namely, 0.23 and 0.20 nm that correspond to the (111) and (200) planes of Ag, respectively. These results show that Ag is the main element in the CF in the Ag/h-BN/Cu foil device. The noncomplete filament (protruding in a closed area) starts to grow along the Ag TE (Fig. 11f), and the shape of the CF also contradicts the widely accepted electrochemical metallization (ECM) theory. According to this theory, the core assumption is that Mz+ would be translated into M atoms with sufficient electrons at the cathode, and the transfer layer will be reduced during the drift of electrons that cannot be captured, which is reasonable for the high diffusion coefficients and solubility of conventional solid electrolyte Mz+ materials (Ag+ or Cu2+). The ECM theory has been supported via visual evidence, for example, the Ag/H2O/Pt and Ag/SiO2/Pt structures. For switch materials with low cation migration rates, the filament grows from the anode to the cathode, such as that observed in Cu/ZrO2/Pt and Ag/amorphous Si/Pt memory devices. In addition, the h-BN membrane can provide a much lower Ag+ migration rate for Ag TE/h-BN/Cu devices. Therefore, Ag+ can snatch the injected free electrons from the BE and then be translated into Ag atoms at the h-BN membrane before reaching the cathode, as shown in Fig. 11g. As a matter of fact, even for switch materials that have high cation migration rates, the electronic current is still the primary constituent of the program current rather than the ionic current. Hence, it is possible that the cations in h-BN are reduced by sufficient electrons.
 Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of the CF. (b) STEM image of the device in the ON state. (c) EDS image of the circled area in (b). (d) TEM image of the CF in the same device that is not in complete contact with the Cu BE. (e) HRTEM image of Ag CF in (d). (f) HRTEM image of incomplete Ag CF (the closed area is lit). (g) Principle schematic of the filament growth process for h-BN-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 282. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Ag-filament-based mechanisms are the most common in metal-ion CF mechanisms and have also been demonstrated in 2D graphene quantum dot devices. X. Yan et al. proposed that the physical mechanism of Ag/Zr0.5Hf0.5O2/GO quantum dots/Zr0.5Hf0.5O2/Ag (abbreviated as “AZA”) device was the Ag filaments.283 The fitting line of the AZA for the HRS device is divides into two sections. The direct-tunneling (DT) conduction and Fowler–Nordheim tunneling (FNT) models are used to describe the conduction behaviors. In the TEM analysis of the AZA, which reveals an intermediate resistance state. The Ag filament can be found growing toward the TE, but the filaments are not completely attached to the TE. The related elemental mapping image of this device shows a gap between the TE and the peak of nanoclusters. There are some Ag nanocrystallites in this gap. Hence, with an appropriate electric field, electrons can easily tunnel through this gap, which is consistent with the analyses of the FNT and DT tunneling mechanisms. Therefore, by this research, the metal-ion CF mechanism has been further developed.


2. Vacancy filaments. 
Vacancy defects can be widely observed in 2D materials, which facilitate the formation of vacancy filaments; this can lead to the transition of the resistance state.284,285 Y. Yang et al. reported GaSe three-terminal memtransistors with the Ag/GaSe/Ag structure.152 Ga vacancies could arrange the CFs when an external electric field is applied, inducing the Ohmic conduction reaction in the LRS. Fig. 12a shows some mobile Se ions in p-type GaSe. Se ions move to the source electrode when a negative Vds is applied. The cumulative Se ions form a cation vacancy at the interface of GaSe and Ag electrode, as shown in Fig. 12b. This Ga vacancy can be used as the p-type CF nuclei. The CFs grow under the action of an electric field until the conductive fiber is formed as the negative voltage increases. The device switches to the LRS, that is, the SET process is activated, as shown in Fig. 12c. Se ions emigrate to the drain pole when an electric field is applied under positive Vds, leading to the breakage of the Ga-vacancy filament and resulting in the OFF state of the device (Fig. 12d). Therefore, the formation and breakage of the vacancy filament allows the device to be stably switched.
 Fig. 12  (a) Original state at Vds = 0. (b) Growth process of the Ga-vacancy-based CF. (c) Source and drain electrodes connected by the CFs. (d) Process of CF breakage. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. 

B. Atomic vacancies

1. Single-type vacancies. 
In addition to the filament mechanism, another switching mechanism is based on the atomic vacancies. Some vacancies are inherent in 2D materials, and some are generated by external stimuli (such as electric fields). Furthermore, some materials only form a single type of vacancy, and some materials can create multiple vacancies—the key to stable switching behavior. Bessonov et al. reported a Ag/MoOx/MoS2/Ag memristive device,145 as shown in Fig. 13a and b. The authors hypothesized that defects at the edges and along the structural dislocations of the MoS2 crystal lead to active nonstoichiometric regions, promote oxidation at lower temperatures, and avoid the degradation of polymer substrates. The ideal oxidation process can be denoted as 2MoS2 + 7O2 → 2MoO3 + 4SO2. However, according to the XPS analysis, annealing at 200 °C for 3 h can yield MoOx layers (<3 nm), as shown in Fig. 13c. Due to the limitation of oxygen diffusion, MoS2 oxidation is limited to about 3 nm. It is speculated that Mo has a lower oxidation state (Mo5+) and nonstoichiometric MoOx comprises Mo6+. In addition, due to the lattice mismatch between MoO3 and MoS2, a large number of point defects and structural distortions can appear on the heterogeneous interface. The higher the oxidation temperature, the higher is the MoO3 content on the surface (Fig. 13d). This research yields excellent vacancy-induced performance.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MoOx/MoS2 memristors. (b) SEM images of the AgNW/MoOx/MoS2 memristor. (c) XPS profile of the MoOx/MoS2 device. (d) Oxidation degree of Mo on the surface. Reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e–g) EDS line-scan profiles. (e) Pristine MoS2−xOx layer has a uniform atomic distribution, where Mo:(S + O) = ∼1:2. (f) A decrease in S atoms and Mo:(S + O) is about 1:1.2. (g) Oxygen atoms increase when the power is OFF, and the ratio of Mo:(S + O) turns back to 1:2. (h–j) Principle schematic of the RS mechanism of GMG devices. (h) Electroforming step shows a uniform distribution of elements in the original state and the presence of sulfur vacancies in the electroforming process in the (i) ON and (j) OFF states. Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. 
Subsequently, Wang et al. demonstrated a switching mechanism and a well-defined conduction channel based on oxygen ion migration on the memristors device's cross-section (Fig. 13e–g).96 In the pristine state, the MoS2−xOx layer presents uniform atomic distribution, and the average atomic ratio of Mo to S and O is about 0.5 (Fig. 13e). This indicates that the sulfur vacancies in MoS2−xOx mainly comprise oxygen that is formed after thermal oxidation (Fig. 13h). After electroforming, the atomic ratio of Mo:(S + O) is reduced to 1:1.2, and the atomic percentage of S in the channel area gets obviously decreased (Fig. 13f). The loss of S atoms (formation of S vacancies) can be attributed to the thermal migration influence under Joule heating: an increase in current causes an increase in temperature, which then drives the lighter ions to leave the channel area (Fig. 13h and i). Under the action of thermal decomposition, the oxygen ions in the channel region are driven to fill the sulfur vacancies, which results in an increase in oxygen atoms in the channel region, thereby making the device switch to the OFF state (Fig. 13j). This switching mechanism mainly depends on oxygen-ion migration, and the structural changes in the channel are small, which is considered to be the main source of the observed excellent switching properties.


2. Compound-type vacancies. 
Metal-ion-filament- or oxygen-vacancy-based memristor devices require large working currents and cannot meet the requirements of low power consumption.286,287 Therefore, in order to fabricate a low-power-consuming device, it is necessary to fabricate memristor devices that do not depend on metal-ion filaments or oxygen vacancies. The electron hopping between the vacancies and the formation of vacancies between sulfur and tungsten were proposed as a new RS conduction mechanism by Yan et al. in 2019.41 The TEM images of the original WS2 nanosheets and films are shown in Fig. 14a and b, respectively. The TEM images of the films (Fig. 14b) reveal more defects than those in the original WS2 nanosheets (Fig. 14a). The magnified images show standard hexagonal cells and cells with W and S vacancies (inset, Fig. 14b). Fig. 14c shows the profile lines of W atoms collected from all the turquoise-colored areas shown in Fig. 14a and b, which show W-vacancy (VW) defects in the films. These results show there are two vacancies—from tungsten and sulfur—in this device, and the device can realize stable switching because of both these vacancies.
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM images of WS2 nanosheets and (b) films in the LRS. (c) Line profile of W atoms from the areas marked in turquoise; top and bottom images correspond to (a) and (b), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, X. Yan et al. reported a memristor based on the Al/Ti3C2Tx/Pt structure. They analyzed the contribution of Ti and O vacancies on the switching process, as shown in Fig. 15.45Fig. 15a–d show the fitting results of the I–V curves at the HRS and LRS. To investigate the device's physical mechanism, the microstructure was analyzed. From Fig. 15e, it is evident that the microstructure of Ti3C2Tx reveals the partial oxidization of Ti3C2Tx into TiO2. This is also confirmed by the XPS data. The TEM image shown in Fig. 15f indicates the presence of Ti vacancies (black area in the white-dotted contour) in the Ti3C2Tx flakes (yellow-dotted area is without Ti vacancies), and this conversion yields the spacing diagrams shown in Fig. 15g and h. The absent peak (marked by the arrow) indicates the presence of atomic vacancies. These results show that the atomic vacancies and partial oxidation play important roles in the switching process. The enhancement of oxygen vacancies and changes in the valence states of the elements were measured using the XPS techniques. A 0.1 mm-diameter X-ray beam source could fully cover the regions of the electrode and collate information regarding all the elements in the vertical orientation of the sample. The position of Ti 2p1/2 was found to move to the right under low resistance.
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Fitting curves for the HRS and LRS. (c and d) HRS and LRS parts of the I–V characteristics. (e) Oxidization of Ti3C2Tx into TiO2. (f) White-dotted region shows the presence of certain atomic vacancies and the yellow-dotted region shows no atomic vacancies. (g and h) Line profiles of the white- and yellow-dotted regions. XPS depth analyses of Ti3C2Tx flakes in the original state and LRS. (i and m) 20 nm. (j and n) 40 nm. (k and o) 60 nm. (l) Relative contents of Ti3+ and Ti4+ at different depths. (p) Oxygen contents of HRS and LRS at different depths in the flakes. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In addition, they analyzed the XPS results of the HRS and LRS at the positions of 20, 60, and 100 nm under the Al electrode. Fig. 15i–k and m–o showed the XPS depth profiles of the functional layer. Further, Fig. 15l shows the change trends for Ti3+ and Ti4+ in the HRS and LRS, which reveals that the number of Ti4+ decreases, while the number of Ti3+ increases. The decrease in Ti4+ also indicates the increase in oxygen vacancies. Fig. 15p shows the increase in elemental oxygen in the LRS and HRS with the depth in the sheet. Hence, Ti and oxygen vacancies can serve as trap positions for hopping carriers: easier hopping is conducive toward changes between the LRS and HRS.

C. Trapping and detrapping of electrons
In addition to filament and vacancy mechanisms, other researchers have found that the switching mechanism of a device can be related to the trapping and detrapping of electrons on the interface. H. K. He et al. reported a memristor with the W/MoS2/p-Si structure.149 The switching reaction of the p–n junction could be ascribed to the trap position on the MoS2/p-Si interface. In this random local potential fluctuations (RLPF) technique, low-energy holes and electrons are distributed in potential wells and spatially separated from each other, resulting in higher recombination time (Fig. 16a). Since further carriers are excited and redistributed, a persistent photocurrent is more pronounced at higher photon density, which then occupy the potential wells. Earlier studies on the hysteresis of MoS2 FETs have indicated that hysteresis was primarily caused by the trapping/detrapping processes of electrons. In addition, the influence of the interface trap position on the RS is verified. The trap location on the MoS2/p-Si interface plays an important role in the memory behavior because of the existence of a native SiO2 layer in this device. When the device is positively biased, electrons are trapped in the interface trap position; further, the electrical conductivity of MoS2 decreases and the device turns to the HRS (Fig. 16b). HRS can be quickly recovered to an intermediate-resistance state (IRS) due to the spontaneous electrons trapped in the MoS2.
 Fig. 16  (a) Energy band structure of monolayer MoS2 with local potential fluctuations and the MoS2/SiO2 interface with suspended Si–O bonds. (b) Schematic diagram of the RS of the MoS2/p-Si junction. Reproduced from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Notably, H. K. He et al. observed that both HRS and LRS are volatile and their currents gradually decay to the IRS due to the occurrence of spontaneous trapping/detrapping processes. Moreover, the electrons fall off and migrate to MoS2 and the device is set to the LRS when it is reversely biased. This work proposes a novel RS mechanism, which deserves more research.
IV. Existing challenges
In spite of the tremendous advantages of 2D materials in device preparation processes196 for transparent and flexible devices, there are still some key issues that need to be resolved. First, in actual industrial production, large-area controllable preparation and transfer technologies for 2D materials still present formidable challenges. This is because the available area is too small that limits its application in large areas of electronic equipment. Second, the interaction between 2D materials and substrates or other materials in the environment limits their application (interactions may alter the properties of 2D materials or produce new materials that are not conducive to research). For example, some 2D materials may be oxidized in air and change their original properties. Third, the study of the stability of 2D materials in neural computing is also a big challenge. Research on neural computing is still in its infancy, and new materials are being constantly explored. To realize the excellent computing power of the nervous system, a stable material needs to be found that can emulate the nerve, which requires 2D materials to be further enhanced with respect to stability. Furthermore, the low optical absorption or limited spectral range inherent in most 2D materials limit the capabilities of photonic and optoelectronic devices. Because the optical and electronic properties depend on the lateral dimensions of the 2D structure, lateral quantum confinement is also a problem that needs to be resolved.288–290 Finally, the doping of 2D materials is a technical problem. Because it is easy to form defects by doping 2D materials with the traditional doping method of 3D materials, many defects can be easily formed in the preparation process of 2D materials.
V. Summary and outlook
In this paper, the applications of 2D materials, such as graphene, TMDs, BN, BP, perovskites, and GaSe in the field of memristors are summarized, which emphasize the advantages of a 2D system. The structures and characteristics of different 2D material systems are analyzed. It is found that various types of 2D material systems possess rich physical switching mechanisms, namely, filament, atomic vacancy, and trapping and detrapping of electrons. In addition, studies have found that a memristor can have a significant impact on brain-like computing and artificial intelligence.
Admittedly, the advantages presented by memristors based on 2D materials ensure that they can have promising development prospects in the future. Here, we list some of the research directions that exist for the future. First, in the short term, the performance of a memristor based on 2D materials, such as the ON/OFF current ratio, cycling performance, retention time, power consumption, and switching voltage, should be further improved such that the memristor can conform to actual storage needs. In this respect, the process of preparing 2D materials is very critical. There are many preparation methods for 2D materials, which are generally categorized into top-down and bottom-up preparation methods. The top-down method mainly involves the exfoliation method, one of the most famous being micromechanical cleavage using a Scotch tape to cleave thin flakes from the bulk-layer materials.291 In addition, there is another common method called the LPE technique, namely, 2D materials are placed in various solvents for exfoliation and sonication-force-assisted exfoliation is often used in this process.292–294 The ultrasound energy induces bubbles in the solvent, and the collapse of these bubbles produces forces that exfoliates the bulk-layer materials into 2D materials. The bottom-up methods mainly include CVD, epitaxy, and chemical synthesis from small molecules,294–298 which are the key to prepare high-quality single-layer films and will be another future research direction.
Second, the switching mechanism of a memristor based on 2D materials is an important research direction. This can involve the observation and identification of conductive channels in the memristor device with atomic resolution under different switching conditions using an in situ probing technique in conjunction with the high spatial resolution of EELS. Ideally, the formation and annihilation of conducting channels can be observed at the atomic scale. In addition, the study of defects is very important to understand the basic characteristics of the materials. There are many ways to study defects, for example, GBs in materials and GB migration can be studied via atomic force microscopy (AFM), which can directly affect the optical and electronic properties of materials. In addition, the GB structure formed in the material due to the preparation process, stress, and voltage can also be observed by aberration-corrected high-resolution TEM (AC-HRTEM) and aberration-corrected scanning TEM (AC-STEM) at the atomic scale. For atomic-vacancy defects, it is necessary to use precise instruments to characterize the atomic structure; TEM is a worthwhile technique to achieve this requirement. For atomic-vacancy defects, it is necessary to use precise instruments to characterize the atomic structure. AC-HRTEM and AC-STEM are worthwhile strategies to observe the absence of atoms and the formation of vacancies. In addition to these characterization techniques, energy for defect formation can also be determined via first-principles calculations to investigate the difficulty of defect formation. These methods can shed some light on the research direction with respect to material defects.
Third, a memristor device based on 2D materials has the ability of persistent storage and release of information via optical and electrical modulations, which is a cutting-edge research direction. Designing various hybrid systems can facilitate an increase in the number of storage levels and improve the storage performance. In this case, UV-vis light can be added to control the device to explore the effects of light (under different wavelengths and different powers) on device performance. In addition, exploring the influence of light should not be limited to the visible region; it is essential to develop optical memory devices operating in the infrared bands. Another research direction is the application of memristors based on 2D materials in flexible electronics. Electron devices for flexible wearable and future biomedical applications (such as implanted treatments and human–machine interfaces) must be flexible with good mechanical properties, and 2D materials with unique advantages have promising potential for applications in this respect; this can be expected to improve people's living standards. In addition, memristors based on 2D materials have made great progress in the applications of synaptic simulation and neuromorphic systems in the recent years, but there is still a long way to go to implement brain-like computing. Further, current neuromorphic systems based on 2D materials contain only one or several synapses or neurons, and system integration is still at a relatively low level; there is still a lot of room for development in the future. Finally, at the atomically thin limit, some excellent properties of materials are revealed, and the material characteristics and functionalities are dominated by surface chemistry and interface coupling. In order to realize the full technological potential of 2D materials and design new material systems with atomic accuracy, 2D heterogeneous systems will be an important research direction in the future. By combining the valuable properties of different 2D materials, a heterogeneous system can be used to resolve the problems that cannot be resolved by a single 2D material, particularly those that require vertical multilayered structures. 2D layered materials are connected by van der Waals force without direct chemical bonds. Therefore, different 2D materials are not restricted by lattice matching when combining, and it is easy to form heterojunctions, which has the potential for development in the future. In this respect, the preparation of large-area heterojunctions is a potential development direction. In actual production, materials are needed to meet the needs of large-area applications. Now, preparation methods can be used to fabricate single-layer 2D materials, but the preparation of continuous multilayer heterojunctions is difficult, because the growth of a continuous multilayer often destroys the quality and properties of the underlying materials. Therefore, the continuous and controllable preparation of multilayer and large-area heterogeneous structures is a potential area for future development. In other words, research on 2D-materials-based memristors is just the beginning; in order to realize these prospects, continuous innovative research is imperative.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Science and Technology Development Fund (No. 007/2017/A1 and 132/2017/A3), Macao SAR, China, the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61674050, 61874158, 61875138, 61435010, and 6181101252), the Outstanding Youth Project of Hebei Province (Grant No. F2016201220), the Outstanding Youth Cultivation Project of Hebei University (Grant No. 2015JQY01), the Project of Science and Technology Activities for Overseas Researcher (Grant No. CL201602), the Project of Distinguished Young of Hebei Province (Grant No. A2018201231), the Support Program for the Top Young Talents of Hebei Province (Grant No. 70280011807), the Training and Introduction of High-level Innovative Talents of Hebei University (Grant No. 801260201300), the Hundred Persons Plan of Hebei Province (Grant No. E2018050004 and E2018050003) and the Supporting Plan for 100 Excellent Innovative Talents in Colleges and Universities of Hebei Province (SLRC2019018), the Science and Technology Innovation Commission of Shenzhen (KQTD2015032416270385, JCYJ20150625103619275 and JCYJ20170811093453105), the Science and Technology Project of Shenzhen (JCYJ20180508152903208), the Opening Project of Key Laboratory of Microelectronic Devices & Integrated Technology, Institute of Microelectronics, Chinese Academy of Sciences are acknowledged.
References

          J. Gantz and D. Reinsel, IDC iView IDC Anal. Futur. 2012, 2007, pp. 1–16.
X. Yan, Z. Zhou, B. Ding, J. Zhao and Y. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2259–2267 RSC .
X. Yan, L. Zhang, Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Q. Liu and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11046–11052 RSC .
Z. Xiao, J. Zhao, C. Lu, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Li, K. Wang and Q. Zhao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 113, 223501 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, W. Guan, S. Long, R. Jia, M. Liu and J. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 12117 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, G. Yuan, Z. Yan, Y. Wang, X. Lu and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700425 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, Y. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Bai and S. Zhu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 33108 CrossRef .
X. Yan, E. Zhang, H. Hao, Y. Chen, G. Bai, Q. Liu, J. Lou, B. Liu and X. Li, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2015, 62, 3244–3249 CAS .
X. B. Yan, Y. D. Xia, H. N. Xu, X. Gao, H. T. Li, R. Li, J. Yin and Z. G. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 112101 CrossRef .
J. G. Zhu, Proc. IEEE, 2008, 96, 1786–1798 Search PubMed .
D. Apalkov, B. Dieny and J. M. Slaughter, Proc. IEEE, 2016, 104, 1796–1830 CAS .
B. N. Engel, J. Akerman, B. Butcher, R. W. Dave, M. DeHerrera, M. Durlam, G. Grynkewich, J. Janesky, S. V. Pietambaram and N. D. Rizzo, IEEE Trans. Magn., 2005, 41, 132–136 Search PubMed .
S. Tehrani, J. M. Slaughter, E. Chen, M. Durlam, J. Shi and M. DeHerren, IEEE Trans. Magn., 1999, 35, 2814–2819 CrossRef .
H. F. Hamann, M. O'Boyle, Y. C. Martin, M. Rooks and H. K. Wickramasinghe, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Lacaita and A. Redaelli, Microelectron. Eng., 2013, 109, 351–356 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pirovano, A. L. Lacaita, A. Benvenuti, F. Pellizzer and R. Bez, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 452–459 CrossRef .
H.-S. P. Wong, S. Raoux, S. Kim, J. Liang, J. P. Reifenberg, B. Rajendran, M. Asheghi and K. E. Goodson, Proc. IEEE, 2010, 98, 2201–2227 Search PubMed .

          M. K. Qureshi, V. Srinivasan and J. A. Rivers, ACM SIGARCH Computer Architecture News, ACM, 2009, vol. 37, pp. 24–33.

          B. Govoreanu, G. S. Kar, Y. Y. Chen, V. Paraschiv, S. Kubicek, A. Fantini, I. P. Radu, L. Goux, S. Clima and R. Degraeve, 2011 International Electron Devices Meeting, IEEE, 2011, pp. 31–36.
J. H. Yoon, J. Zhang, X. Ren, Z. Wang, H. Wu, Z. Li, M. Barnell, Q. Wu, L. J. Lauhon and Q. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702010 CrossRef .
C. Wu, T. W. Kim, T. Guo, F. Li, D. U. Lee and J. J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602890 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhao, Z. Dong, H. Tian, D. DiMarzi, M. Han, L. Zhang, X. Yan, F. Liu, L. Shen and S. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703232 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chang, Y. Yang and W. Lu, IEEE Circuits Syst. Mag., 2013, 13, 56–73 Search PubMed .
L. Chua, IEEE Trans. Circuit Theory, 1971, 18, 507–519 Search PubMed .
D. B. Strukov, G. S. Snider, D. R. Stewart and R. S. Williams, Nature, 2008, 453, 80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Yang, M. D. Pickett, X. Li, D. A. A. Ohlberg, D. R. Stewart and R. S. Williams, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Jo, T. Chang, I. Ebong, B. B. Bhadviya, P. Mazumder and W. Lu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1297–1301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. Kim, Y. V. Pershin, M. Yin, T. Datta and M. Di Ventra, 2019, arXiv preprint arXiv:1909.07238.
B. J. Choi, A. C. Torrezan, J. P. Strachan, P. G. Kotula, A. J. Lohn, M. J. Marinella, Z. Li, R. S. Williams and J. J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5290–5296 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Torrezan, J. P. Strachan, G. Medeiros-Ribeiro and R. S. Williams, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 485203 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, F. Cai, Q. Wang, B. Chen, S. Gaba and W. D. Lu, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2016, 37, 404–407 CAS .
K. H. Kim, Jo, S. Hyun, S. Gaba and W. Lu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 53106 CrossRef .
S. Yu, Y. Wu, R. Jeyasingh, D. Kuzum and H. S. P. Wong, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 2729–2737 CAS .
W. Yi, K. K. Tsang, S. K. Lam, X. Bai, J. A. Crowell and E. A. Flores, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4661 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Indiveri, B. Linares-Barranco, R. Legenstein, G. Deligeorgis and T. Prodromakis, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 384010 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kuzum, S. Yu and H. S. P. Wong, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 382001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Thomas, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2013, 46, 93001 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pi, C. Li, H. Jiang, W. Xia, H. Xin, J. J. Yang and Q. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xia, W. Robinett, M. W. Cumbie, N. Banerjee, T. J. Cardinali, J. J. Yang, W. Wu, X. Li, W. M. Tong and D. B. Strukov, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3640–3645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khiat, P. Ayliffe and T. Prodromakis, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 32614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, Q. Zhao, A. P. Chen, J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, J. Wang, H. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Li and Z. Xiao, Small, 2019, 15, 1901423 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, J. Zhao, S. Liu, Z. Zhou, Q. Liu, J. Chen and X. Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705320 CrossRef .
X. Yan, Z. Zhou, J. Zhao, Q. Liu, H. Wang, G. Yuan and J. Chen, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1183–1192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, Y. Pei, H. Chen, J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, X. Li and C. Qin, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805284 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yan, K. Wang, J. Zhao, Z. Zhou, H. Wang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Li, Z. Xiao and Q. Zhao, Small, 2019, 15, 1900107 CrossRef PubMed .

          X. Sheng, Z. L. Zhou and R. H. Henze, US Pat., 9035272 B2,  2015 Search PubMed .

          C. Xu, X. Dong, N. P. Jouppi and Y. Xie, 2011 Design, Automation & Test in Europe, IEEE, 2011, pp. 1–6.
M. J. Sharifi and Y. M. Banadaki, J. Circuit., Syst. Comput., 2010, 19, 407–424 CrossRef .
C. Yakopcic, T. M. Taha, G. Subramanyam, R. E. Pino and S. Rogers, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2011, 32, 1436–1438 Search PubMed .

          Y. Ho, G. M. Huang and P. Li, Proceedings of the 2009 International Conference on Computer-Aided Design, ACM, 2009, pp. 485–490.
D.-H. Kwon, K. M. Kim, J. H. Jang, J. M. Jeon, M. H. Lee, G. H. Kim, X.-S. Li, G.-S. Park, B. Lee and S. Han, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, S. Choi and W. Lu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2369–2376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Miao, J. P. Strachan, J. J. Yang, M. Zhang, I. Goldfarb, A. C. Torrezan, P. Eschbach, R. D. Kelley, G. Medeiros-Ribeiro and R. S. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5633–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yu, B. Gao, Z. Fang, H. Yu, J. Kang and H. P. Wong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1774–1779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chang, S.-H. Jo and W. Lu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7669–7676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Bandurin, A. V. Tyurnina, G. L. Yu, A. Mishchenko, V. Zólyomi, S. V. Morozov, R. K. Kumar, R. V. Gorbachev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi and S. Pezzini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 223–227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Wang, S. Tang, J. Shao, Z. Sun, H. Xie, H. Wang and X.-F. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6996–7002 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Y. Tam and L. M. Zhao, Opt. Lett., 2008, 33, 2317–2319 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Zhang, Q. Bao, D. Tang, L. Zhao and K. Loh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 141103 CrossRef .
Q. Bao, H. Zhang, B. Wang, Z. Ni, C. H. Y. X. Lim, Y. Wang, D. Y. Tang and K. P. Loh, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 411–415 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, A. Martinez and F. Wang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 227 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16055 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, K. Majumdar, H. Liu, Y. Du, H. Wu, M. Hatzistergos, P. Y. Hung, R. Tieckelmann, W. Tsai and C. Hobbs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6275–6280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, Y. Li, B. Li, H. Tian, C. Fan, Y. Zhang, Z. Hua, M. Wang, H. Zheng and E. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10036–10041 RSC .
X. Wei, F.-G. Yan, C. Shen, Q.-S. Lv and K.-Y. Wang, Chin. Phys. B, 2017, 26, 38504 CrossRef .
Q. Lv, F. Yan, X. Wei and K. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1700490 CrossRef .
G. Le Lay, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 202 CrossRef .
G. Iannaccone, F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo and G. Fiori, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vaziri, G. Lupina, C. Henkel, A. D. Smith, M. O'stling, J. Dabrowski, G. Lippert, W. Mehr and M. C. Lemme, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1435–1439 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Zhang, C. Shi, E. Liu, J. Li, N. Zhao and C. He, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3837–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. K. Sen and S. Mitra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 1240–1247 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, M. Song, P. Liang, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, H. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Wang and H. A. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803181 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ye, S. Zhang, W. Zhao, H. Yao and J. Hou, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3603–3605 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. Van Der Zant and G. Castellanos, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, S. Yin, X. Zhang, W. Sun and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3924–3930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vélez, J. Island, M. Buscema, O. Txoperena, S. Parui, G. A. Steele, F. Casanova, H. S. J. van der Zant, A. Castellanos-Gomez and L. E. Hueso, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15442–15449 RSC .
Z. Liu, S. P. Lau and F. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5638–5679 RSC .
S. Dervin, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15115–15131 RSC .
K. Guan, D. Zhao, M. Zhang, J. Shen, G. Zhou, G. Liu and W. Jin, J. Membr. Sci., 2017, 542, 41–51 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, Z. Xu and C. Gao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3693–3700 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim, Science, 2009, 324, 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. C. Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81, 109 CrossRef .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. He, F. Zhuge, X. F. Zhou, M. Li, G. C. Zhou, Y. W. Liu, J. Z. Wang, B. Chen, W. J. Su and Z. P. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 232101 CrossRef .
X. Zhuang, Y. Chen, G. Liu, P. Li, C. Zhu, E. Kang, K. Noeh, B. Zhang, J. Zhu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1731–1735 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Sharbati, Y. Du, J. Torres, N. D. Ardolino, M. Yun and F. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802353 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, R. Ge, P. Chen, H. Z. Chou, Y. Zhang, S. Banerjee, M. Chiang, J. C. Lee and D. Akinwande, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806790 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Pan, Y. Ji, N. Xiao, F. Hui, K. Tang, Y. Guo, X. Xie, F. M. Puglisi, L. Larcher and E. Miranda, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604811 CrossRef .
M. Liu, N. Zhao, H. Liu, X. Zheng, A. Luo, Z. Luo, W. Xu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, IEEE Photonics Technol. Lett., 2014, 26, 983–986 Search PubMed .
Y. Tang, H. Yin, S. Chen, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Wang, L. You and J. Guan, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2015, 21, 116–122 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, M. Wu, P. Tang, S. Chen, J. Du, G. Jiang, Y. Li, C. Zhao, H. Zhang and S. Wen, Laser Phys. Lett., 2014, 11, 55101 CrossRef .
V. K. Sangwan, H.-S. Lee, H. Bergeron, I. Balla, M. E. Beck, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, Nature, 2018, 554, 500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, S. Cai, C. Pan, C. Wang, X. Lian, Y. Zhuo, K. Xu, T. Cao, X. Pan and B. Wang, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 130 CrossRef CAS .

          V. K. Sangwan, H.-S. Lee and M. C. Hersam, 2017 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE, 2017, pp. 1–5.
Y. Liu, F. Li, Z. Chen, T. Guo, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, Vacuum, 2016, 130, 109–112 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. Choi and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7824–7830 RSC .
Z. Li, H. Qiao, Z. Guo, X. Ren, Z. Huang, X. Qi, C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, D. Zhang and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705237 CrossRef .
K. D. Sang, H. Wang, M. Qiu, R. Cao, Z. Guo, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Q. Xiao, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanomaterials, 2019, 82 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Cao, H.-D. Wang, Z.-N. Guo, D. K. Sang, L.-Y. Zhang, Q.-L. Xiao, Y.-P. Zhang, D.-Y. Fan, J.-Q. Li and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900020 CrossRef .
F. Wu, H. Xia, H. Sun, J. Zhang, F. Gong, Z. Wang, L. Chen, P. Wang, M. Long and X. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1900314 CrossRef .
L. Wu, Z. Xie, L. Lu, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Jiang, Y. Ge, F. Zhang, S. Lu and Z. Guo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. Xie, F. Zhang, Z. Liang, T. Fan, Z. Li, X. Jiang, H. Chen, J. Li and H. Zhang, Photonics Res., 2019, 7, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ge, Z. Zhu, Y. Xu, Y. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Liang and D. Fan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701166 CrossRef .
C. Hao, F. Wen, J. Xiang, S. Yuan, B. Yang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, L. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2016–2024 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shao, H. Xie, H. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, Q. Xiao, X.-F. Yu, Y. Zhao and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Zhu, X. Yu, X. Zeng, Q. Xiao, X. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Wang, J. Shi and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Z. Li, H. Cui, Y. Zhou, W. Li, W. Tao, H. Zhang, H. Wang and P. K. Chu, Small, 2017, 13, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Q. Jiang, L. Xu, N. Chen, H. Zhang, L. Dai and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13849–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, W. Liang, J. Zhao, Z. Li, M. Qiu, T. Fan, C. S. Luo, Y. Zhou, Y. Li and Z. Guo, Small, 2017, 13, 1702739 CrossRef .
C. Xing, G. Jing, X. Liang, M. Qiu, Z. Li, R. Cao, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8096 RSC .
X. Liang, X. Ye, C. Wang, C. Xing, Q. Miao, Z. Xie, X. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and L. Mei, J. Controlled Release, 2019, 296, 150–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yin, R. Cao, J. Guo, C. Liu, J. Li, X. Feng, H. Wang, W. Du, A. Qadir and H. Zhang, Laser Photon. Rev., 2019, 13, 1900032 CrossRef .
S. Liu, Z. Li, Y. Ge, H. Wang, R. Yue, X. Jiang, J. Li, Q. Wen and H. Zhang, Photonics Res., 2017, 5, 662–668 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Sang, H. Wang, Z. Guo, N. Xie and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903419 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, S. Liu, W. Liang, S. Luo, Z. He, Y. Ge, H. Wang, R. Cao, F. Zhang and Q. Wen, Laser Photon. Rev., 2018, 12, 1700229 CrossRef .
Y. Cai, J. Shen, G. Ge, Y. Zhang, W. Jin, W. Huang, J. Shao, J. Yang and X. Dong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(1), 56–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kim, H.-J. Koh, C. E. Ren, O. Kwon, K. Maleski, S.-Y. Cho, B. Anasori, C.-K. Kim, Y.-K. Choi and J. Kim, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 986–993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Zhu, L. Li, J. Wang, Y. Zhang, P. E. Saw, W. Li, N. Kong and M. A. Islam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–11 Search PubMed .
W. Tao, X. Ji, X. Xu, M. A. Islam, Z. Li, S. Chen, P. E. Saw, H. Zhang, Z. Bharwani and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11896–11900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Song, Z. Liang, X. Jiang, Y. Chen, Z. Li, L. Lu, Y. Ge, K. Wang, J. Zheng and S. Lu, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 045010 CrossRef .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. Wu, Z. Li, G. Jing, B. Dong, S. Lu, Y. Li and Y. Xiang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
C. Xing, W. Huang, Z. Xie, J. Zhao, D. Ma, T. Fan, W. Liang, Y. Ge, B. Dong and J. Li, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 621–629 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, Z. Liang, L. Wu, Y. X. Chen, Y. Song, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, B. Dong, Y. Xiang and F. Xing, Laser Photon. Rev., 2018, 12, 1700221 CrossRef .
L. Lu, W. Wang, L. Wu, X. Jiang, Y. Xiang, J. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2852–2861 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chai, X. Li, T. Feng, P. Guo, Y. Song, Y. Chen and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 17617–17622 RSC .
H. Huang, X. Ren, Z. Li, H. Wang, Z. Huang, H. Qiao, P. Tang, J. Zhao, W. Liang and Y. Ge, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 235201 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ji, N. Kong, J. Wang, W. Li, Y. Xiao, S. T. Gan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Song and Q. Xiong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803031 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705833 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, G. Qiu, R. Wang, S. Huang, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Du, W. A. Goddard, M. J. Kim and X. Xu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228–236 CrossRef .
W. Huang, Y. Zhang, Q. You, P. Huang, Y. Wang, Z. N. Huang, Y. Ge, L. Wu, Z. Dong and X. Dai, Small, 2019, 15, 1900902 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xing, D. Huang, S. Chen, Q. Huang, C. Zhou, Z. Peng, J. Li, X. Zhu, Y. Liu and Z. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, J. Zhao, D. Huang, Y. Wang, F. Zhang, Y. Ge, Y. Song, C. Xing, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6235–6242 RSC .
L. Wu, W. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, D. Ma, Y. Xiang, J. Li, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806346 CrossRef .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C. Y. Xu, X. Xu and W. Wu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Wu, D. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Ge and Z. N. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9582–9593 RSC .

          J. Yang, F. Miao, W. Wu, S.-Y. Wang and R. S. Williams, US Pat., 8203171 B2,  2012 Search PubMed .

          F. Miao, J. Yang, W. Wu, S.-Y. Wang and R. S. Williams, US Pat., 8294132 B2,  2012 Search PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Cao, F. Zhao, L. Wang, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 233–238 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Lee, S. Lee, C. Liu, Z. Zhong and W. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3693–3699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Zeng, X. Cao, G. Lu, L. Wang, Q. Fan, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 3517–3522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bessonov, M. N. Kirikova, D. I. Petukhov, M. Allen, T. Ryhänen and M. J. A. Bailey, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, N. Lu, X. Zhao, H. Xu, W. Banerjee, H. Lv, S. Long, Q. Li, Q. Liu and M. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10623–10629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Rehman, G. U. Siddiqui, Y. H. Doh and K. H. Choi, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2017, 32, 95001 CrossRef .
H. Y. Jeong, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Kim, J. O. Hwang, J.-E. Kim, J. Y. Lee, T. H. Yoon, B. J. Cho, S. O. Kim and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4381–4386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, R. Yang, W. Zhou, H. Huang, J. Xiong, L. Gan, T. Zhai and X. Guo, Small, 2018, 14, 1800079 CrossRef PubMed .
V. K. Sangwan, D. Jariwala, I. S. Kim, K.-S. Chen, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Du, Q. Xue, X. Wei, Z. Yang, C. Xu, D. Lin, W. Jie and J. Hao, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 566–573 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Hong, J. Eun Kim, S. O. Kim and B. Jin Cho, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 44506 CrossRef .
L.-H. Wang, W. Yang, Q.-Q. Sun, P. Zhou, H.-L. Lu, S.-J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 63509 CrossRef .
S. Porro and C. Ricciardi, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 68565–68570 RSC .
M. Yi, Y. Cao, H. Ling, Z. Du, L. Wang, T. Yang, Q. Fan, L. Xie and W. Huang, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 185202 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Z. Wang, W. Zhao, B. Hu, L. Xie, M. Yi, H. Ling, C. Zhang, Y. Chen, J. Lin, J. Zhu and W. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600244 CrossRef .
S. Pinto, R. Krishna, C. Dias, G. Pimentel, G. N. P. Oliveira, J. M. Teixeira, P. Aguiar, E. Titus, J. Gracio, J. Ventura and J. P. Araujo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 063104 CrossRef .
Z. Xie, Y. Duo, Z. Lin, T. Fan, C. Xing, L. Yu, R. Wang, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 1902236 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Li, A. Aljarb, Y. Shi and L. J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2017, 118, 6134–6150 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Selig, G. Berghäuser, M. Richter, R. Bratschitsch, A. Knorr and E. Malic, 2D Mater., 2017, 5, 35017 CrossRef .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chou, B. Kaehr, J. Kim, B. M. Foley, M. De, P. E. Hopkins, J. Huang, C. J. Brinker and V. P. Dravid, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4160–4164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yue, J. Kang, Z. Shao, X. Zhang, S. Chang, G. Wang, S. Qin and J. Li, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ataca and S. Ciraci, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3934–3941 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, J. S. Ross, G. Liu, G. Aivazian, A. Jones, Z. Fei, W. Zhu, D. Xiao, W. Yao and D. Cobden, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 149–153 Search PubMed .
F. Xiong, H. Wang, X. Liu, J. Sun, M. Brongersma, E. Pop and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6777–6784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, C. Wang, X. Gu, H. Gong, L. Cheng, X. Shi, L. Feng, B. Sun and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3433–3440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, W. Yin, X. Zheng, G. Tian, X. Zhang, T. Bao and X. Dong, Theranostics, 2015, 5, 931–945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, J. Yu, F. Lv, L. Yan, L. R. Zheng, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11000–11011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, S. Shi, C. Liang, S. Shen, L. Cheng, C. Wang, X. Song, S. Goel, T. E. Barnhart and W. Cai, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 950–960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Alimohammadi, D. Zhang and G. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, Z. Zhang, X. Xu, J. Song, X. Li and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. M. Shinde, K. P. Dhakal, S. W. Lee, H. Kim, J. Ahn and Z. Lee, NPG Asia Mater., 2018, 10, 810–820 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. J. Park, M. Kang, S. Kang, J. Koo, S. M. Shinde, J. Shin, S. Jeon, G. Park and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1690 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Wang, S. Chen, H. Pang, H. Xue and Y. Yu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600289 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao and T. F. Heinz, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, K. Li, Y. Chen, H. Chen, M. Ma, J. Feng, Q. Zhao and J. Shi, Biomaterials, 2015, 39, 206–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yin, L. Yan, J. Yu, G. Tian, L. Zhou, X. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Yong, J. Li and Z. Gu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6922–6933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Xiu, Y. Sun, D. Zhu, Q. Zhang, L. Yuwen, L. Weng, Z. Teng and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15835–15845 RSC .
W. Xie, Q. Gao, D. Wang, Z. Guo, F. Gao, X. Wang, Q. Cai, S. Feng, H. Fan and X. Sun, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 2470–2487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takaoka, N. Takeda, Y. Shimaoka and T. Fujiwara, Toxicol. Environ. Chem. Rev., 1999, 73, 1–16 CrossRef CAS .
P. Raybaud, J. Hafner, G. Kresse, S. Kasztelan and H. Toulhoat, J. Catal., 2000, 190, 128–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Smith, P. J. King, M. Lotya, C. Wirtz, U. Khan, S. De, A. O'Neill, G. S. Duesberg, J. C. Grunlan and G. Moriarty, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3944–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, F. Alimohammadi, D. Zhang and G. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1963–1969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chang, X. Hai, H. Pang, H. Zhang, L. Shi, G. Liu, H. Liu, G. Zhao, M. Li and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Ji, X. Ren, Y. Ma, X. Shi, Z. Tian, A. M. Asiri, L. Chen, B. Tang and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800191 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Haotian, Y. Hongtao, S. H. Seung, L. Yanbin and C. Yi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 46, 2664–2680 Search PubMed .
D. Voiry, A. Goswami, R. Kappera, C. de Carvalho Castro e Silva, D. Kaplan, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 45 CrossRef CAS .
J. Theerthagiri, R. A. Senthil, B. Senthilkumar, A. R. Polu, J. Madhavan and M. Ashokkumar, J. Solid State Chem., 2017, 252, 43–71 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 8229 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hui, E. Grustan-Gutierrez, S. Long, Q. Liu, A. K. Ott, A. C. Ferrari and M. Lanza, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2017, 3, 1600195 CrossRef .
C. Tan, Z. Liu, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2615–2628 RSC .
P. Cheng, K. Sun and Y. H. Hu, Nano Lett., 2015, 16, 572–576 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Tian, H. Zhao, T. Zhang, W. Mao, Y. Qiao, Y. Pang, Y. Li, Y. Yang and T. Ren, Small, 2018, 14, 1702525 CrossRef PubMed .

          R. Waser and M. Aono, Nanoscience And Technology: A Collection of Reviews from Nature Journals, World Scientific,  2010, pp. 158–165 Search PubMed .
J. J. Yang, D. B. Strukov and D. R. Stewart, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Prodromakis, B. P. Peh, C. Papavassiliou and C. Toumazou, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 3099–3105 CAS .
W. Sik Hwang, M. Remskar, R. Yan, V. Protasenko, K. Tahy, S. Doo Chae, P. Zhao, A. Konar, H. Xing and A. Seabaugh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 13107 CrossRef .
L. Liu, S. B. Kumar, Y. Ouyang and J. Guo, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2011, 58, 3042–3047 CAS .
A. Kuc, N. Zibouche and T. Heine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 245213 CrossRef .
H. Zeng, G.-B. Liu, J. Dai, Y. Yan, B. Zhu, R. He, L. Xie, S. Xu, X. Chen and W. Yao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1608 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Iqbal, M. Z. Iqbal, M. F. Khan, M. A. Shehzad, Y. Seo, J. H. Park, C. Hwang and J. Eom, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu and J.-S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413–5418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. He, J. Li, X. Wu, P. Chen, J. Zhao, K. Yin, M. Cheng, W. Yang, G. Xie and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5593–5598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, C. Du, K. Sun, E. Kioupakis and W. D. Lu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3571–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-A. N. Duerloo, Y. Li and E. J. Reed, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-A. N. Duerloo and E. J. Reed, ACS Nano, 2015, 10, 289–297 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Zhang, H. Zhang, S. Krylyuk, C. A. Milligan, Y. Zhu, D. Y. Zemlyanov, L. A. Bendersky, B. P. Burton, A. V. Davydov and J. Appenzeller, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Chopra, R. J. Luyken, K. Cherrey, V. H. Crespi, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Science, 1995, 269, 966–967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Eichler and C. Lesniak, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2008, 28, 1105–1109 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, X. Wang, Q. Zhang, L. Zou, X. Xu and Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7360–7365 CrossRef CAS .

          F. M. Puglisi, L. Larcher, C. Pan, N. Xiao, Y. Shi, F. Hui and M. Lanza, 2016 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting (IEDM), IEEE, 2016, pp. 34–38.
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Tao, W. Shen, S. Wu, L. Liu, Z. Feng, C. Wang, C. Hu, P. Yao, H. Zhang and W. Pang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11362–11370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei and X. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 372–398 Search PubMed .
X. Miao, G. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Yan and M. Ji, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 3053–3059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2884–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 817–824 Search PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jiang and H. S. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Lu, L. L. Miao, Z. N. Guo, X. Qi, C. J. Zhao, H. Zhang, S. C. Wen, D. Y. Tang and D. Y. Fan, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 11183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Jiang, S. Chen, Z. Guo, X. Yu, C. Zhao, H. Zhang, Q. Bao, S. Wen and D. Tang, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12823–12833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Qiu, W. X. Ren, T. Jeong, M. Won, G. Y. Park, D. K. Sang, L. P. Liu, H. Zhang and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 5588–5601 RSC .
M. Qiu, D. Wang, W. Liang, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, D. K. S ang, C. Xing, Z. Li and B. Dong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 501–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, L. Wen, J. Zeng, Y. Wang, Q. Sun, L. Deng, C. Zhao and Z. Li, Biomaterials, 2016, 91, 81–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, S. Chen, Z. Wang, Z. Yang, F. Liu, Y. Xu, J. Wang, Y. Yi, H. Zhang and L. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703811 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K. S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, V. D. Z. Hs and A. Castellanosgomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wu, T. Ameen, H. Zhang, L. A. Bendersky, H. Ilatikhameneh, G. Klimeck, R. Rahman, A. V. Davydov and J. Appenzeller, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 377–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. He, Y. Wang, Y. Huang, Y. Shi, X. Wang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2018, 19, 331–337 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Yuan, K. Zhang, Y. Hou, Q. Sun, Y. Yao, S. Li, Q. Bao, H. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–6 CAS .
L.-Q. Sun, M.-J. Li, K. Sun, S.-H. Yu, R.-S. Wang and H.-M. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14772–14779 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-L. Xu, S. Lin, N. Onofrio, L. Zhou, F. Shi, W. Lu, K. Kang, Q. Zhang and S. P. Lau, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4164 CrossRef PubMed .
A. E. Del Rio Castillo, V. Pellegrini, H. Sun, J. Buha, D. A. Dinh, E. Lago, A. Ansaldo, A. Capasso, L. Manna and F. Bonaccorso, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 506–516 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, X. Li, Z. Wang and H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 131–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Qiu, Z. T. Sun, D. K. Sang, X. G. Han, H. Zhang and C. M. Niu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13384–13403 RSC .
Z. Xie, Y.-P. Peng, L. Yu, C. Xing, M. Qiu, J. Hu and H. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2019 DOI:10.1002/solr.201900400 .
S. Lin, S. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Li, T. W. Ng, Z. Xu, Q. Bao, J. Hao, C. Lee and C. Surya, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, G. Huang, H. Mu, S. Lin, J. Chen, S. Xiao, Q. Bao and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 93 Search PubMed .
N. Youngblood, C. Chen, S. J. Koester and M. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 247 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Venuthurumilli, P. D. Ye and X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4861–4867 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Abbas, B. Liu, L. Chen, Y. Ma, S. Cong, N. Aroonyadet, M. Ko'pf, T. Nilges and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5618–5624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, J. Yuan, L. Fei, X. Wang, Q. Bao, Y. Wang, K. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Small, 2016, 12, 5000–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Qiu and H. Zhang, J. Innovative Opt. Health Sci., 2018, 11, 1830003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, T. Fan, Z. Xie, Q. Zeng, P. Xue, T. Zheng, Y. Chen, X. Luo and H. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2020, 119827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, S. Chen, M. Qiu, X. Liang, Q. Liu, Q. Zou, Z. Li, Z. Xie, D. Wang and B. Dong, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2018, 7, 1701510 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Fan, Z. Xie, W. Huang, Z. Li and H. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 114002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, S. Chen, Y. Duo, Y. Zhu, T. Fan, Q. Zou, M. Qu, Z. Lin, J. Zhao and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22129–22140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Wang, H. Huang, Q. Xiao, Y. Xu, Z. Guo, H. Xie, J. Shao, Z. Sun and W. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5003–5007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tan, I. Abdelwahab, L. Chu, S. M. Poh, Y. Liu, J. Lu, W. Chen and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704619 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Xian, W. Liang, J. Zhao, Z. Li, Q. Meng, T. Fan, C. S. Luo, Z. Ye, L. Yu and Z. Guo, Small, 2017, 13, 1702739 CrossRef PubMed .
R. A. Doganov, E. C. O'Farrell, S. P. Koenig, Y. Yeo, A. Ziletti, A. Carvalho, D. K. Campbell, D. F. Coker, K. Watanabe and T. Taniguchi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Han, S. Xu, L. Wang, W. Ye, T. Han, Y. He and Y. Cai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
A. Avsar, I. J. Veramarun, J. Y. Tan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. C. Neto and B. Özyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4138–4145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Q. Zhou, Q. Li, X. Yao and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603990 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Na, Y. T. Lee, J. A. Lim, K. Hwang, G. T. Kim, W. K. Choi and Y. W. Song, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11753–11762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Huang, Z. Xie, T. Fan, J. Li, Y. Wang, L. Wu, D. Ma, Z. Li, Y. Ge and Z. N. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 9582–9593 RSC .
Z. Xie, D. Wang, T. Fan, C. Xing, Z. Li, W. Tao, L. Liu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4747–4755 RSC .
H.-S. Kim, S. H. Im and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5615–5625 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
A. Buin, R. Comin, J. Xu, A. H. Ip and E. H. Sargent, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 4405–4412 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2269–2275 RSC .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506 CrossRef CAS .
M. Era, S. Morimoto, T. Tsutsui and S. Saito, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 676–678 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ha, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. M. M. Soe, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, D. H. Cao, F. Liu, B. Traoré, C. Katan and J. Even, Chem, 2017, 2, 427–440 CAS .
Z. Yang, W. Jie, C.-H. Mak, S. Lin, H. Lin, X. Yang, F. Yan, S. P. Lau and J. Hao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4225–4236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fan, M. Bauer, L. Kador, K. R. Allakhverdiev and E. Y. Salaev, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 91, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Late, B. Liu, J. Luo, A. Yan, H. S. S. R. Matte, M. Grayson, C. N. R. Rao and V. P. Dravid, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3549–3554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Jie, X. Chen, D. Li, L. Xie, Y. Y. Hui, S. P. Lau, X. Cui and J. Hao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1185–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Hu, Z. Wen, L. Wang, P. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, R. Gresback, M. Tian, K. Wang, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, G. Eres, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao and M. A. McGuire, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, J. Cheng, Y. Zhou, T. Cao, H. Hong, Z. Liao, S. Wu, H. Peng, K. Liu and D. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7994–7997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Nie, Y. Liu, K. Yan, J. Hong, C. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. Yin, Z. Liu and H. Peng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1485–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Qian, R. Y. Tay, V. C. Nguyen, J. Wang, G. Cai, T. Chen, E. H. T. Teo and P. S. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2176–2184 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, L. Zhang, H. Chen, X. Li, J. Wang, Q. Liu, C. Lu, J. Chen, H. Wu and P. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803728 CrossRef .
Z. Lin, B. R. Carvalho, E. Kahn, R. Lv, R. Rao, H. Terrones, M. A. Pimenta and M. Terrones, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 22002 CrossRef .
H. Terrones, R. Lv, M. Terrones and M. S. Dresselhaus, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2012, 75, 62501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, H. J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Wang, X. H. Xu and X. S. Miao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 183513 CrossRef .
C. Lenser, A. Kuzmin, J. Purans, A. Kalinko, R. Waser and R. Dittmann, AIP, 2012, 076101 Search PubMed .
P. Miró, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
J. V. Lauritsen, J. Kibsgaard, S. Helveg, H. Topsøe, B. S. Clausen, E. Lægsgaard and F. Besenbacher, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 53 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Han, S. Lee and J. Cheon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2581–2591 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Nicolosi, M. Chhowalla, M. G. Kanatzidis, M. S. Strano and J. N. Coleman, Science, 2013, 340, 1226419 CrossRef .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun’Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Palumbo, X. Liang, B. Yuan, Y. Shi, F. Hui, M. A. Villena and M. Lanza, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1700506 CrossRef .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X. J. Wu, Q. He, Y. Jian, Z. Xiao, J. Chen, Z. Wei, S. Han, G. H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, Y. Luo, B. Liu and H. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6224–6266 RSC .
Q. A. Vu, H. Kim, V. L. Nguyen, U. Y. Won, S. Adhikari, K. Kim, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703363 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Qianlong Zhao
	Qianlong Zhao is currently pursuing his MS in the Department of Electronic and Information Engineering at Hebei University, Baoding, China. His research interests focus on the application of 2D materials in memristors.

Xiaobing Yan
	Xiaobing Yan received his PhD from Nanjing University, Nanjing, China, in 2011. He is currently a Professor at the College of Electron Information and Engineering, Hebei University, Baoding, China. His current research interests include the study of emerging memories, such as charge-trapping memory, phase-change memory, resistive switching memory, and brain-inspired neuromorphic devices.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of reviews involving memristors comprising 2D materials and the switching mechanism of these memristors. No. 1: reproduced from ref. 86. Copyright 2009 American Institute of Physics. No. 2: reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 3: reproduced from ref. 148. Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. No. 4: reproduced from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 5: reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. No. 6: reproduced from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited. No. 7: reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 8: reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. No. 9: reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. No. 10: reproduced from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 11: reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 12: reproduced from ref. 151. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 13: reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd. No. 14: reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. No. 15: reproduced from ref. 99 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. No. 16: reproduced from ref. 107. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Photograph of the Ag/GO/ITO device. (b) I–V curves of the Ag/GO/ITO device. The red solid line is the I–V curve of the first cycle. Reproduced from ref. 155. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2015. (c) I–V curve of the Ag/GO/ITO devices when the annealing temperature of the GO films was 20 °C. Inset shows the schematic illustration of the devices. (d) Retention characteristics of the device. Reproduced from ref. 156. Copyright 2014 IOP Publishing Ltd. Printed in the UK.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Photograph of the glass substrate after MLG transfer and (b) glass chip after fabricating a device. (c) Bipolar RS characteristics of the MLG/TaOy/Ta2O5−x/MLG device with ON-state linear features and (d) MLG/Ta2O5−x/TaOy/MLG device with ON-state nonlinearity. Reproduced from ref. 143. Copyright 2014 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram of the polymer-assisted exfoliation of MoS2. (f) I–V characteristics. Reproduced from ref. 144. Copyright 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of Ag/MoS2/Ag/MoS2/Ag memristor. (b) I–V curve of a memristor (a) under room temperature and (c) in the logarithmic scale. Reproduced from ref. 197. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (d) Basic I–V characteristic of a MoOx/MoS2 memory device. (e) Capacitive and resistive parts of the MoS2/MoOx memristor. (f) I–V curves based on memristors with different TE materials. Reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (g) Schematic drawing of a graphene/MoS2−xOx/graphene (GMG) device (top) and a cross-section image (bottom). (h) Photograph and measurement setup. (i) Typical switching characteristics of GMG devices. (j) High endurance of 2 × 107 obtained for a pulse width of 1 μs. Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. (k and l) Principle schematic and local I–V features of the memristor at Vg = 40 V. (m) Gate tunability of the memristor. (n) Typical I–V curves (V > 0 V) of the bisecting-GB memristor for different Vg values. Reproduced from ref. 150. Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Classic I–V characteristics with linear coordinates. (b) Miscellaneous program currents reported in other studies (hybrid perovskites,99,151,207 MoS2,96,150,197 BN,91 and graphene208,209). (c) ON state at a voltage pulse of 13 ns and (d) OFF state at a voltage pulse of 14 ns. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a vertical MoTe2 device; optical and SEM images. (b) Log-scale I–V curves of vertical Mo0.96W0.04Te2 RRAM devices after electroforming. (c) VSET values versus flake thicknesses of MoTe2, Mo0.97W0.03Te2, Mo0.96W0.04Te2, Mo0.93W0.07Te2, and Mo0.91W0.09Te2. Reproduced from ref. 213.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure of Ti/thin h-BN/Cu devices. (b) Classic I–V characteristics in a memristor device. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) I–V curves of bipolar and (d) unipolar RS responses in single-layer h-BN crossbar devices. (e) Basic I–V characteristics in single-layer h-BN devices based on Au foil and (f) Ni foil. Reproduced from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Figure on the left reveals the formation of Ag CFs, while the figure on the right reveals the rupture of Ag CFs. (b) Log I–V characteristics under light illumination. (c) Energy levels of the Ag/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/FTO device under the light illumination. Reproduced from ref. 99. Copyright the Royal Society of Chemistry 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) I–V curves of the Ag/GaSe/Ag device. (b) 50 data cycles of the device. (c) Fitting results of the I–V curves in (a). (d) Energy band diagram of Ag/GaSe for a metal–semiconductor junction. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) I–V characteristics in the device reveal bipolar RS. (b and c) EELS cross-sectional analyses of the device's (LRS) original position and GB/CF position. Reproduced from ref. 91. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) TEM image of the CF. (b) STEM image of the device in the ON state. (c) EDS image of the circled area in (b). (d) TEM image of the CF in the same device that is not in complete contact with the Cu BE. (e) HRTEM image of Ag CF in (d). (f) HRTEM image of incomplete Ag CF (the closed area is lit). (g) Principle schematic of the filament growth process for h-BN-based devices. Reproduced from ref. 282. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Original state at Vds = 0. (b) Growth process of the Ga-vacancy-based CF. (c) Source and drain electrodes connected by the CFs. (d) Process of CF breakage. Reproduced from ref. 152. Copyright 2018 Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagram of MoOx/MoS2 memristors. (b) SEM images of the AgNW/MoOx/MoS2 memristor. (c) XPS profile of the MoOx/MoS2 device. (d) Oxidation degree of Mo on the surface. Reproduced from ref. 145. Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (e–g) EDS line-scan profiles. (e) Pristine MoS2−xOx layer has a uniform atomic distribution, where Mo:(S + O) = ∼1:2. (f) A decrease in S atoms and Mo:(S + O) is about 1:1.2. (g) Oxygen atoms increase when the power is OFF, and the ratio of Mo:(S + O) turns back to 1:2. (h–j) Principle schematic of the RS mechanism of GMG devices. (h) Electroforming step shows a uniform distribution of elements in the original state and the presence of sulfur vacancies in the electroforming process in the (i) ON and (j) OFF states. Reproduced from ref. 96. Copyright 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM images of WS2 nanosheets and (b) films in the LRS. (c) Line profile of W atoms from the areas marked in turquoise; top and bottom images correspond to (a) and (b), respectively. Reproduced from ref. 41. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Fitting curves for the HRS and LRS. (c and d) HRS and LRS parts of the I–V characteristics. (e) Oxidization of Ti3C2Tx into TiO2. (f) White-dotted region shows the presence of certain atomic vacancies and the yellow-dotted region shows no atomic vacancies. (g and h) Line profiles of the white- and yellow-dotted regions. XPS depth analyses of Ti3C2Tx flakes in the original state and LRS. (i and m) 20 nm. (j and n) 40 nm. (k and o) 60 nm. (l) Relative contents of Ti3+ and Ti4+ at different depths. (p) Oxygen contents of HRS and LRS at different depths in the flakes. Reproduced from ref. 45. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Energy band structure of monolayer MoS2 with local potential fluctuations and the MoS2/SiO2 interface with suspended Si–O bonds. (b) Schematic diagram of the RS of the MoS2/p-Si junction. Reproduced from ref. 149. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
