The potential versus current state of water splitting with hematite  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CP04267D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CP04267D
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 22485-22503The potential versus current state of water splitting with hematite

        
          
            Omid 
            Zandi
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Thomas W. 
            Hamann
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Michigan State University, 578 S Shaw Lane, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. E-mail: hamann@chemistry.msu.edu
Received 
      21st July 2015
    , Accepted 4th August 2015First published on 4th August 2015AbstractThis review describes the potential of hematite as a photoanode material for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting. The current understanding of key loss-mechanisms of hematite are introduced and correlated to performance enhancement strategies. The significant voltage loss associated with overcoming the competitive water oxidation and surface state recombination has recently been surmounted through a combination of high temperature annealing and surface modification with water oxidation catalysts. Substantial efforts have been made at nanostructuring electrodes to increase the charge separation efficiency without sacrificing light absorption. Even in optimized nanostructured electrodes, however, charge separation continues to be the primary barrier to achieving efficient water splitting with hematite. Specifically, significant depletion region recombination results in voltage dependant photocurrent which constrains the fill factor. Thus, future directions to enhance the efficiency of hematite electrodes are discussed with an emphasis on circumventing depletion region recombination.
Introduction
Sunlight is by far the most abundant energy resource. Utilization of less than 1% of the energy available from solar photons hitting Earth's surface could indefinitely satisfy the world's entire energy demand.1,2 While efficient photovoltaic (PV) systems have been available for decades, their high production and installation costs has limited their implementation.3,4 There have been major recent advancements in alternative PV technologies, which have the capability of disrupting the cost/efficiency trade-off of traditional PV. In addition, an economy-of-scale reduction in the cost of Si is rapidly bending the cost-curve of Si-based PV down to a level nearing grid parity in parts of the United States and Europe. Another problem associated with utilizing the vast solar energy resource is that it has significant regional, seasonal and diurnal variations in intensity. Thus, an efficient way to store and transport solar energy is necessary. In addition, approximately a quarter of energy consumption is currently used for transportation, which requires high-energy-density chemical fuels.5,6 Therefore, the development of effective routes to store solar energy in chemical fuels is a critical ongoing science challenge.
Photosynthesis offers a great example of utilizing sunlight energy to drive chemical reactions thereby storing the energy in chemical bonds. The overall efficiency of solar energy storage by photosynthesis is less than 1%, however. Efforts have therefore been made to develop artificial photosynthesis systems capable using sunlight to drive chemical reaction uphill and produce solar fuels. The prototypical example is generating hydrogen from the photoelectrolysis of water, the hydrogen can then be used in fuel cells to get the energy back out.1,7,8
There are several artificial photosynthesis strategies being pursued. One strategy is to utilize the electrical power generated by PV systems to drive an external electrolyzer.7,9 For example, recently Luo et al. reported a tandem perovskite-based PV coupled with a NiFe double hydroxide catalyst which delivered 12.3% solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency.10 While using earth abundant materials in a perovskite/NiFe system relaxes the production costs, the long-term stability of the PV system is the major limiting factor, which needs to be resolved in order to become commercially viable.11 In a related approach, a buried junction PV to can be directly coated with water oxidation/reduction catalysts to make an integrated solar water splitting device. A recent system developed by Nocera and co-workers is based on a buried junction Si PV coated with cobalt-phosphate water oxidation and NiMOZn water reduction catalysts generated STH efficiencies over 10%.7,12 Importantly, both of these systems are composed entirely of earth abundant materials and thus capable of being scaled up. The primary drawback, however, is the likely high production cost and stability.
Another strategy, which is a closer analogue of natural photosynthesis, is in situ generation of hydrogen by splitting water at semiconductor electrodes, known as photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting.5,13,14 The first examples of this approach were reported by Boddy15 in 1968 and later on by Fujishima and Honda16 on single crystal TiO2 electrodes. Extensive studies have been done since then on advancing PEC water splitting at semiconductor electrodes including exploring alternative materials beyond wide gap TiO2.17 The “holy grail” of this approach is a semiconductor material composed of earth abundant elements that offers suitable optoelectronic properties to efficiently harvest and convert the solar energy to drive the water splitting reactions and is stable under relatively harsh PEC water oxidation/reduction conditions. Currently, no single material has proven to meet these stringent requirements. If a single material were to be used, the band edges would have to straddle the electrochemical potentials of the H2O oxidation and reduction reactions, vide infra, to effect unassisted H2 evolution upon irradiation. In addition, the semiconductor material must have a band gap 1.8–2.2 eV to provide sufficient energy to overcome the thermodynamic and kinetics potential to split water while still absorbing a significant fraction of light.13,18 These requirements greatly limit the choices of material as realizing a semiconductor with the right band gap and band edge positions has proven difficult.
Alternatively, a tandem configuration (combining an n-type photoanode and p-type photocathode) relaxes the energy constraints of a single absorber photoelectrode. The combination of a larger band gap photoanode with a smaller band gap photocathode allows significantly higher STH efficiencies to be achieved by harvesting a greater fraction of solar photons.13,19 In addition, a tandem configuration allows independent optimization of photoelectrodes for water oxidation and reduction reactions. Thus, a tandem configuration is almost certainly necessary for PEC water splitting to ultimately be practical. For detailed information on different PEC cell configurations, and related efficiency considerations, interested readers can refer to a comprehensive review.13,18–20
Efficiency
Splitting water to O2 and H2 requires 238 kJ mol−1 under standard conditions, which corresponds to a 1.23 V Nernstian potential difference of the oxygen evolution (OER) and hydrogen evolution (HER) reactions, which in alkaline conditions can be written as:4H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 4OH− (HER) E0 = 0.0 V vs. RHE4OH− + 4e− → O2 + 4e− + 2H2O (OER) E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE
In addition to the thermodynamic potential difference, overpotentials are usually required to compensate for recombination and the kinetics of the HER, ηHER, and OER, ηOER, at the photocathode and photoanode electrolyte interfaces, respectively. Thus, the electron quasi-Fermi level of a photocathode must be at least −ηHER (V vs. RHE) and the quasi-Fermi level of holes of the photoanode must be at least 1.23 + ηOER (V vs. RHE) as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Energetics of a tandem cell under PEC H2O oxidation and reduction. Schematic J–V characteristics of a tandem PEC cell under operating condition is also shown. Shaded box is the maximum power generated by the photoanode, which can be used to calculate single electrode efficiency using eqn (2). Jtherm and Von are labeled for the photoanode J–V. 
The solar-to-hydrogen efficiency, ηSTH, under operating condition is then given by the following equation, assuming unity faradic efficiency,13 (1)where Jop is the operating current density in mA cm−2 and Pin is the incident light power density (AM1.5, 100 mW cm−2). In a tandem cell where the photocathode and photoanode are connected in series, by accounting for the major loss mechanisms and assuming that all the transmitted photons by the top cell (n-type) are absorbed by the bottom cell (p-type), STH efficiencies up to 21% are expected for an optimum band gap alignment (1.89 eV for the photoanode and 1.34 eV for the photocathode, respectively).19 Other calculations have predicted even higher maximum attainable efficiencies (up to 29%) by considering Shockley–Queisser limit on each absorber and minimum overpotential losses at each photoelectrode/electrocatalyst (i.e. band gaps of 1.6 and 0.95 eV for the photoanode and photocathode, respectively).18 These efficiency figures thus makes tandem PEC cells particularly attractive, which can be achieved in a relatively simple design.
The efficiency calculation based on eqn (1) is valid only for a complete PEC cell where the only input power is sunlight. Experimental evaluation of photoelectrodes, however, is often performed in a three-electrode electrochemical cell configuration. This configuration is advantageous since the performance of the photoelectrode can be measured independent of any polarization losses at the counter electrode. While single photoelectrode efficiency does not represent the overall STH of the PEC cell, having a general principle to calculate efficiency for single photoelectrodes is helpful to compare different systems and separately optimize new photoanode and photocathode materials. The efficiency of a single photoelectrode in the three-electrode configuration setup can be calculated directly from the current–potential (J–V) response using following equation:13 (2)where Jm (in mA cm−2) is the photocurrent density at maximum power point and Vm (in V) is the photovoltage generated at maximum power point with respect to thermodynamic standard potentials (1.23 V for H2O oxidation on a photoanode), and Pin is the illumination power (100 mW cm−2). The efficiency of a single electrode therefore can readily be determined through inspection of the J–V curve as shown in Fig. 1 for the photoanode. One immediately infers from this relation that efficiency calculation for a single photoelectrode is meaningful only when photocurrent is generated at potentials negative of 1.23 V vs. RHE. The fill factor (ff) of a single photoelectrode can be estimated using the photocurrent onset potential (Von) and photocurrent at the thermodynamic potential (Jtherm) of the reaction of interest, i.e. ff = JmVm/JthermVon.
Photocathodes used to photoelectrochemically generate H2 must have sufficiently negative conduction band edge to enable HER. In addition, they must be stable in aqueous solutions under operating conditions. p-Si with the band gap of 1.1 eV is a promising photocathode material. Efficient photocathode systems based on p-Si in combination with Pt and NiMo catalysts, have been reported which perform near to the bulk recombination limit.21–23 p-type WS2 (1.4 eV)24 and WSe2 (1.2 eV)25 are another class of material which are attractive especially because of the high potentially photovoltage (as high as 800 mV) that can be generated under PEC H2O reduction. Alternative earth abundant-based photocathode materials include p-GaAs (1.4 eV), and p-Cu2O (2.0 eV) which possess suitable band gap and conduction band energy levels.13,26
The development of a photoanode has lagged behind these relatively efficient photocathode materials. Thus, a major problem that needs to be overcome in order to realize an efficient tandem PEC water splitting cell is a better photoanode material. The challenge is to develop a photoanode material which can provide sufficient photovoltage and photocurrent to produce a high operating current when matched with the photocathode. This requires a high level of material development and fundamental understanding of existing materials, as discussed throughout this review. In order to achieve this, a photoanode material for must fulfill several stringent requirements in order to produce stable and efficient H2O oxidation under solar illumination:
1. It should be an n-type semiconductor in order to effectively utilize the band bending electric field to separate charge carriers at the interface
2. It needs to be a good absorber in the visible part of the solar spectrum
3. The valence band position must be sufficiently positive of the H2O oxidation potential
4. The semiconductor material must be stable under potentially harsh PEC water oxidation conditions
5. The charge transport properties must favorably outcompete the recombination loss processes to produce high quantum yields with minimal applied bias
While there is a long list of materials that can harvest the sunlight and possess appropriate energetics, the stability requirement basically limits the photoanode candidates to metal oxide-based semiconductors. Metal oxide candidates, however, are either wide band gap or offer poor charge transport and stability.13,17 Therefore, no single semiconductor material is known to date that can fulfill all of the above requirements.
TiO2 is one of the most studied photoanode materials, which provides a classic benchmark for fundamentals studies on oxide-based photoanodes. Poor light harvesting ability of TiO2 however sets a fundamental restriction on efficient PEC water splitting using this material. Metal oxide semiconductors such as α-Fe2O3, WO3, CuWO4, and BiVO4 offer better light-harvesting ability, though (in some cases) in the expense of poorer charge transport properties compared to TiO2.17,27 These oxides have valence band that is excessively positive of H2O oxidation reaction. Their conduction band energy, however, is more positive of H2 evolution potential. Their integration with a photocathode in a tandem PEC device is therefore the practical solution for this energy mismatch.19
Hematite
The optimum band gap for a photoanode in tandem configuration PEC cell is between 1.8 and 2.3 eV.19,20 Hematite (α-Fe2O3) with the band gap of 2.1 eV therefore stands out as one of the most promising oxide material for a photoanode. Integration of the solar spectrum for the band gap of 2.1 eV generates 12.5 mA cm−2 photocurrent, delivering nearly 15% STH when coupled with a suitable photocathode. In addition to good light absorption, hematite offers excellent stability in neutral and basic pH, which is desired for H2O oxidation reaction. Further, iron and oxygen amongst the most abundant elements in the earth crust, which promises the scalability of PEC devices based on hematite. Despite all these attractive properties, the experimental PEC water oxidation efficiency with hematite has remained poor during nearly two decades of extensive research.
The J–V response due to H2O oxidation by hematite can be expressed as the product of the solar photon flux (ϕ) and the efficiency of three processes: light harvesting (ηlh), charge separation (ηcs), and hole collection (ηhc) (Fig. 2): Jph(V) = −qϕ(ηlh × ηcs(V) × ηhc(V))(3)
 Fig. 2  Schematic energetics and charge transfer processes under PEC water oxidation with hematite. The water oxidation photocurrent is controlled by the efficiency of light harvesting, charge separation, and hole collection processes. Red arrows indicate recombination pathways. 
The efficiencies of these processes are in turn determined by the material and interface properties. The ηlh is the fraction of incident photons that are absorbed, which is fundamentally limited by the band gap of the material. Each absorbed photon produces charge carriers: an electron in the conduction band and a hole in the valence band. The ηcs is the fraction of photogenerated valence band holes that reach the electrode/water interface. The ηhc is then the fraction of surface holes that oxidize water, or a hole scavenger, as opposed to recombining with conduction band electrons at the surface. The quantity of ηcs × ηhc directly reflects the conversion efficiency of absorbed photons to current under PEC H2O oxidation reaction, denoted APCE.
Light harvesting
Two major electronic transitions in hematite are d–d transitions described by ligand field theory and ligand to metal charge transfer (LMCT) transitions.28,29 Transitions from high spin ground state in Fe3+ to the excited ligand field states is both spin and parity-forbidden. This transition can become allowed through magnetic coupling between the nearest Fe3+ atoms in the hematite lattice.28 The LMCT transitions include excitations from O 2p valence band orbitals to Fe 3d crystal field type orbitals. The lower energy LMCT transition of this series is from nonbonding orbitals localize on O 2p orbitals to the antibonding Fe 3d t2g orbitals.28,29 Two major electronic transitions peaks in hematite around 430 and 550 nm are both assigned to ligand field transitions (Fig. 3a). The LMCT transitions are mainly occur at UV region of the spectrum.28 The intense absorption peaks resulting from d–d transitions (which is unexpected based on selection rules) has been explained in terms of magnetic coupling between adjacent Fe atoms as well as the trigonal distortion enforced by the face sharing FeO6 polyhedra in hematite which both result in the relaxation of the selection rules.28–31 Molecular orbital calculations on octahedral and trigonally distorted FeO6 coordination show that the trigonal distortion increases the spin polarization of the oxygen atoms bridging face-sharing FeO6 polyhedra, which in turn, enhances the superexchange interaction and the strength of the magnetic coupling between neighboring Fe atoms.29
 Fig. 3  (a) Absorptance spectra of 50 nm hematite thin film electrode prepared by atomic layer deposition. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16494–16505. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Maximum photocurrent density calculated for hematite as a function of electrode thickness assuming no reflection loss and unity quantum yield for absorbed photons with energy above the band gap. The photocurrent reaches the maximum of 12.4 mA cm−2 at ∼1 μm. 
The light harvesting efficiency at a given wavelength (λ) is expressed by Beer's law as a function of semiconductor absorption coefficient (α) and electrode thickness (l): . A semiconductor electrode must therefore be 3/α thick to absorb the 95% of the incident light at a given wavelength.32 Materials with strong absorption properties are advantageous as a relatively thinner electrode would be necessary to obtain efficient light absorption. By integrating the solar spectrum for the photons with energy above the band gap (assuming the unity conversion quantum efficiency, i.e. ηcs= ηhc = 1), one can calculate the maximum theoretically achievable photocurrent for a given semiconductor. A plot of calculated maximum photocurrent density for a hematite electrode as a function of electrode thickness is shown in Fig. 3b. The photocurrent reaches the maximum of ∼12.4 mA cm−2 at 1 μm thickness. A photocurrent density of over 10 mA cm−2 is possible, however, for a thickness as low as 100 nm owing to the high absorptivity of hematite.
Nanostructured electrodes
While electrodes must be >400 nm thick to absorb enough incident light to enable efficient STH conversion, a poor charge separation efficiency generally constrains the minority carrier collection length in hematite to much smaller values as discussed in detail below.33–35 The combination of a short hole collection length and a long light penetration depth therefore limits the photocurrent of thick planar hematite electrodes. The development of nanostructured electrodes offers a unique approach to decouple this geometrical mismatch.
Nanostructuring can be essentially employed in two approaches:
(1) Fabricating high aspect ratio hematite electrode with nanoscale structure, e.g. nanotubes,36 nanowires,37 oriented nanorods,34 nano-cauliflowers,38 and mesoporous nanoparticle.39 The best example of this approach was reported by Grätzel and co-workers on nano-cauliflower hematite electrodes prepared by chemical vapor deposition which produced current densities over 3 mA cm−2 at 1.23 V vs. RHE.38
(2) Thin film absorber (TFA) electrodes deposited on high aspect ratio transparent conductive oxide (TCO) substrates (Fig. 4). This method, which has received somewhat less attention, is an attractive approach as it allows uniform hematite films with optimized dimensions, which are optically scaled up over the nanostructured conductive substrate. Examples of this approach include coating high surface area conducting substrates such as nanonets,40 tungsten oxide41 or nanostructured TCO substrates e.g. nanoparticle Nb:SnO2,42 or ITO inverse opals,43 which all have produced substantially higher photocurrent compared to planar electrodes. One of the significant advantages of the TFA approach is electrodes are amenable to detailed systematic investigation of the material in the form of planar thin films with controllable geometry. The downside of this approach is a substrate–thin film interface effect that can decrease charge separation through inducing a defective hematite layer, as discussed below. For detailed information about nanostructured hematite electrodes, interested reader is referred to excellent recent reviews.44–46
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of thin film absorber (TFA) nanostructuring approach demonstrating an optimized hematite film deposited on transparent conductive substrates with different geometries. One successful example of this approach was demonstrated by a SiO2/ITO inverse opal transparent substrate coated with a thin film of hematite via ALD (b). Figure b is adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 360–367. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Substrate modification
While in principal TFA offers a route to simultaneously optimize light absorption and charge separation, such ultrathin hematite films deposited on TCO substrates such as F-doped SnO2 (FTO) actually exhibit very poor water oxidation performance.47–49 The poor water oxidation activity of ultrathin hematite electrode is generally accepted to be the result of enhanced bulk recombination induced by the FTO–hematite interface effect, generally known as “dead layer”.47,48 Itoh and Bockris studied PEC water oxidation with hematite films prepared by spray pyrolysis.49,50 Negligible water oxidation photocurrent was observed for 20 nm thick hematite electrodes, which was attributed to an enhanced recombination at the FTO–hematite interface. Liang et al.51 and Souza et al.52 studied thicknesses-dependent PEC water oxidation performance of hematite electrodes. Significantly lower photocurrent was observed for the thinner electrodes, which was attributed to the enhanced recombination at FTO–hematite interface catalyzed by stress induced trap states at the interface. Sivula, Grätzel and co-workers studied the hematite ultrathin films prepared by APCVD and spray pyrolysis.48,53,54 A poor photoactivity of the thinnest hematite films was attributed the low crystallinity and enhanced recombination sites in the dead layer. Kronawitter et al. studied hematite thin films annealed at 450 °C and 800 °C using synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy.55 It was found that the interaction between hematite and the FTO is associated with the set of unoccupied O p states located below the conduction band which was eliminated upon annealing at 800 °C.55 A possible combination of accelerated electron hole-recombination and/or decreased hole mobility in the dead layer prevents the efficient charge separation in the ultrathin films.
Efforts toward the activation of hematite ultrathin films have been made by modifying the FTO substrate with different metal oxide underlayers. Hisatomi et al. demonstrated that the water oxidation performance of ultrathin hematite films prepared by spray pyrolysis can be significantly improved through incorporation of a Ga2O3 underlayer.53 Improved water oxidation performance was attributed to an increased crystallinity of the thin films deposited on the isomorphic Ga2O3 template.53 In another report by the same group it was shown that the photoactivity of hematite ultrathin films can be alternatively enhanced through incorporation of 2 nm Nb2O5 or TiO2 underlayer or a monolayer of SiO2.54 Ultrathin films of hematite with an Nb2O5 underlayer demonstrated excellent APCE of ∼40% with 400 nm light at 1.43 V vs. RHE.54 The effect of underlayer in this case was attributed to the suppression of electron back injection and recombination at the FTO–hematite interface.54
Zandi et al. have also studied PEC water oxidation with hematite ultrathin film electrodes prepared by atomic layer deposition (ALD).47 Use of ALD allows for reproducible ultrathin films of hematite to be prepared which are pinhole free, enabling the uniform and conformal coverage of the underlying substrate. For this purpose 18 nm of hematite electrode was deposited on bare FTO as control electrode and the effect of different metal oxide underlayers was explored by modification of the FTO substrate also via ALD. It was found that multiple oxide underlayer including Ga2O3 and Nb2O5 dramatically enhance the water oxidation performance of ultrathin film from nearly zero photocurrent to a magnitude comparable to optimal thicker electrodes (Fig. 5).47 A combination of photoelectrochemical, spectroscopic and microscopic measurements was employed to probe the role of the underlayer and understand the mechanism by which it enhances water oxidation performance. The degree of crystallinity of the ultrathin films was examined by confocal Raman spectroscopy and through line shape analysis of hematite phonon modes. As seen in Fig. 5 the J–V response of the electrode deposited on bare FTO shows negligible photocurrent and very positive water oxidation onset. The electrode with a 2 nm Ga2O3 underlayer demonstrated a nearly ideal J–V profile with enhanced photocurrent and water oxidation onset. Fig. 5b shows major hematite Raman phonon modes for the electrodes with and without a Ga2O3 underlayer. Obvious differences can be seen in the peak intensity and full-width-at-half-maximum (FWHM) of the peaks. Films with an underlayer show significantly sharper peaks, indicating a more crystalline medium and larger grain size (grain size here is taken as the size of the continuous domains which are separated by defects or grain boundaries). The films deposited on bare FTO, however, show relatively weaker peaks and significant asymmetric broadening. This is can be attributed to low crystallinity and a disordered medium with smaller grain size in agreement with other reports.56–59 High resolution SEM images (Fig. 5) further confirmed an obvious difference in the film morphology and the extent of continuous medium, indicating significantly larger grain size and more ordered structure for the film deposited on a Ga2O3, in line with Raman spectrum and enhanced water oxidation activity. Moreover, for the films deposited on Ga2O3, the intense Raman peaks are only observed after annealing at 500 °C. This is contrast to the films on FTO which showed nearly identical spectrum before and after annealing (Fig. 5b). For the film with underlayer, the as deposited film is dominantly amorphous which undergoes crystallization after annealing. The amorphous nature of the film allows Fe and O atoms to diffuse easily during annealing process and form larger crystallites. Therefore Ga2O3 modifies the growth mode of Fe2O3 by allowing the deposition of a uniform amorphous film, unlike that on bare FTO which results in deposition of a more crystalline film.
 Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of 18 nm hematite electrodes with (solid dark blue) and without (dashed red) 2 nm Ga2O3 underlayer under water oxidation in pH 6.9 phosphate buffer and 1 Sun illumination. (b) Respective Raman phonon modes of hematite films before (dotted lines) and after (solid lines) annealing at 500 °C. Bottom panel show SEM images of hematite films deposited on bare FTO (c) and FTO modified with 2 nm Ga2O3 (d). Scale bar is 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16494–16505. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Similar behavior was observed for Nb2O5, WO3, and ITO underlayer suggesting that performance enhancement is in fact through the same mechanism.47 Therefore the dead layer was attributed a low quality hematite layer with high density of grain boundaries and trap states forming throughout the entire film once deposited on bare FTO. A combination of enhanced rate of recombination along with reduced hole mobility is the reason behind the poor PEC water oxidation activity. Our findings along with others shed light on the origin of poor water oxidation performance of hematite ultrathin films and elucidate strategies to overcome the poor water oxidation activity. Specifically, growth of high quality crystalline hematite electrodes is necessary to obtain efficient charge separation. Future research on this aspect may target designing epitaxial hematite thin films and investigations of the effect of preferred crystallographic orientations on the charge transport properties of hematite.60
Charge separation
Band bending at the interface of n-type semiconductor/electrolyte facilitates charge separation in the depletion region. Charge separation in the bulk material is determined by the charge carrier mobility and lifetime of photogenerated holes in the valence band, i.e. the hole diffusion length, Lp. Ideally (in the absence of significant depletion region recombination) one would expect efficient charge separation for the thickness of the depletion width plus one diffusion length of the holes (W + Lp).61 Charge carriers generated outside of this thickness undergo recombination and do not contribute to the photocurrent. In the regime of short diffusion length materials, ηcs becomes potential dependent as the magnitude of applied potential determines the extent of band bending and hence the depletion width. Knowledge of carrier diffusion length and depletion width is therefore crucial to design efficient hematite photoelectrodes.
The hole diffusion length for hematite is often stated as being 2–10 nm, however generally without a direct measurement. We note that this would clearly imply quantitative charge separation in the depletion region. Under these conditions the Gärtner model could be used to interpret voltage dependent photocurrent densities. Klahr et al. showed, however, that the APCE is not quantitative in the depletion region, indicating that hole diffusion length is essentially zero and collection is limited by drift.62,63 The drift length of holes is dependent on the voltage drop and thus the extent of band bending across the electrode. For a hematite electrode in contact with a fast hole scavenger, where ηhc = 1, eqn (3) can be written as:32,63 Jph(V) = Jabs × ηcs(V)(4) The voltage dependent photocurrent arises from the charge separation efficiency, given by (5)where μp is the hole mobility, τp is the hole lifetime, V is applied potential, Vbi is the built-in voltage (defined as the difference between the flat band and solution potential, i.e. Vbi= Efb− Es), and l is the electrode thickness. At zero applied potential ηcs is equal to μτVfb/l, which is the hole drift length assuming uniform filed across the electrode.63 The charge separation efficiency is thus expected to increase with increasing hole lifetime and mobility. This equation is only valid for the case of quantitative hole collection efficiency. In the case of H2O oxidation, ηhc is less than unity due to sluggish kinetics as well as surface recombination; ηhc is therefore another potential dependent term controlling the water oxidation photocurrent as discussed below.

Fig. 6 shows a typical J–V curve of a thin film hematite electrode in 1 M KOH under 1 Sun illumination. The J–V response in the presence of a H2O2 is also shown for comparison. H2O2 is known as a good hole scavenger with a near quantitative hole collection efficiency on hematite.64 Any difference between the J–V under H2O oxidation with respect to a hole scavenger thus can be unambiguously attributed to surface recombination effects. In the case of H2O2 oxidation, the photocurrent turns on at potentials positive of the flat band potential (∼0.55 V under illumination) as expected for the case of no surface recombination. Under H2O oxidation however, nearly 600 mV additional positive bias is required to initiate steady state PEC water oxidation. This is known to be due to the kinetic competition between hole collection by H2O oxidation and surface recombination.6,64 Once the applied bias is positive enough to enable effective electron extraction (and compensate Fermi-level pinning) the rate of surface recombination is suppressed allowing efficient hole transfer to H2O molecules, which results in comparable J–V behavior for H2O2 and H2O oxidation at these potentials.
 Fig. 6  
J–V curves of a planar thin film hematite electrode in contact with 1 M KOH and in the presence of added 0.5 M H2O2 as hole scavenger under 1 Sun illumination.† 
Another importation point is the shape of the J–V curves. From Fig. 6 it can be seen that the fill factor is seemingly higher under H2O oxidation compared to hole scavenger oxidation. This could be misleading as one may expect an identical J–V shape and thus fill factor if the photocurrent onset can be pushed to lower potentials under H2O oxidation, i.e. if surface recombination can be mitigated. However, when surface recombination is effectively suppressed, the J–V curve would resemble the curve with a hole scavenger, which is described by eqn (4) and (5), and have a low fill factor of ∼0.25. This is a significant limitation of charge separation to the overall efficiency of hematite photoanodes.
Doping
The charge transport mechanism in hematite occurs via small polaron hoping at room temperature.65–68 Small polarons are highly localized and thus require higher activation energy to hop to the neighboring atoms, resulting in a low carrier mobility.69 Strategies to modify bulk properties to improve the charge transport in hematite have largely focused on n-type doping with aliovalent atoms. Doping is historically used in semiconducting material to tune the conductivity through increasing carrier concentration. The conductivity (σ) of semiconducting materials is related to the free carrier concentration and carrier mobility (μ) given by:70 σ = qnμn + qpμp(6) The conductivity therefore is the sum of conductivities due to electrons (n) and holes (p) density.
Examples of intentional n-type doping include incorporation of M4+ cations into Fe3+ sites in hematite. This in principle can induce oxygen vacancies and thus increase the majority carrier concentration and electron conductivity.67,71 While an increased conductivity has often been associated with enhanced water oxidation performance of M4+-doped hematite films, we note that this effect cannot alone explain the dramatic enhancement often observed upon doping. To further clarify this statement, the total voltage drop for a 1 μm thick resistive (ρ ∼ 105 Ω cm) film operating at 10 mA cm−2 current density is only 100 mV.71 Therefore the ohmic potential drop due to low conductivity has minor influence on water oxidation performance of the electrodes, which operate at significantly lower currents. Although a high electron conductivity is generally required for efficient charge collection, hole mobility in hematite is the limiting factor in charge separation.51,62 Any attempt to tune the conduction property and increasing majority carrier concentration by intentional n-type doping, therefore, does not necessarily increase the hole conductivity which is occurring via the valence band. We further note that in the case of hematite very high level of impurities (1–10%) are typically employed which is much larger than the ppm level of dopant generally needed to control the electronics of semiconductors. In addition, as different dopants do not just simply act as electronic dopants, the term “dopant” may not be an appropriate convention to refer to the impurities.
In principle, there are several ways by which dopants can improve the water oxidation efficiency.72 Doping can enhance the charge separation efficiency by increasing the minority carrier mobility and/or lifetime and hence enhancing the flux of holes reaching semiconductor/electrolyte interface. This enhancement could arise, for example, from improved crystallinity of the hematite lattice, changing crystallographic orientation, or passivation of bulk trap states.71,72 Dopants can act as structural directing agents and change the morphological nanostructure, which can modify the light absorption and charge collection efficiency.73 Since PEC water oxidation is generally the metric used to determine the benefit of dopants, any dopant at the surface can act as a catalyst and thus improve hole collection efficiency. Alternatively, the dopants can passivate surface states thus reducing surface recombination.71,72 The dopants could also increase the majority carrier density, hence the flat band potential and conductivity. Interestingly, all of the above possible effects have been previously used to interpret the beneficial effect of different dopants.71,72,74–77
Glasscock et al. presented a thorough study of undoped and Si and Ti-doped hematite films prepared by magnetron sputtering.71 It was shown that doping is necessary to activate the poor water oxidation performance of thin film hematite electrodes. Although Ti and Si-doping increased the films conductivity, the conductivity effect alone was argued to be insignificant. The activation mechanism through doping was attributed to the passivation of surface states and bulk grain boundaries and thus suppressing recombination.71 They also observed significant structural and morphological change for Si-doped films compared to undoped and Ti-doped analogs. The Si-doped samples showed dominantly amorphous structure with significantly smaller grain size. No significant differences were observed in the morphology and crystallinity of undoped and Ti-doped electrodes. In the Raman spectra of Ti-doped films, however, an extra peak was observed at ∼660 cm−1 which was attributed to disorder and grain boundaries near the surface.71
McFarland and co-workers studied hematite electrodes prepared by electrodeposition doped with various dopants including Pt, Al, Ti, Cr and Mo.74,75,78,79 5% Pt-doped hematite demonstrated significantly improved water oxidation photocurrent compared to undoped samples.79 The effect of Pt was explained in term of increased conductivity resulting from an enhanced carrier concentration. No significant differences were observed in the XRD spectra of undoped and Pt-doped electrodes. Raman spectra, however, showed an extra peak at 657 cm−1 for doped samples with its intensity increasing with Pt concentration.79 The variation in the Raman spectra was attributed to the changes in the surface structure upon doping with Pt.79 In another report they presented Al as an effective isovalent dopant for enhanced water oxidation with hematite.74 While no enhanced carrier concentration is expected from isovalent Al, significantly improved water oxidation photocurrent was attributed to conductivity improvement induced by lattice contraction.74 The lattice contraction, which was confirmed by structural refinement of XRD analysis, can potentially modify charge transport via polaron happing and hence the conductivity. The case of isovalent doping is a good example of performance enhancement through structural modification and not by increasing the carrier concentration. Structural changes observed for the Pt-doped hematite electrodes thus can also contribute to the water oxidation improvement, although it was not elucidated by the authors. They also studied the effect of Ti-doping in hematite films prepared by APCVD.78 It was found that 0.8 atomic% Ti doped electrode demonstrate substantially higher IPCE when compared to undoped samples. Electrode morphology was found that significantly differs for undoped and Ti-doped samples at different Ti concentration. This dopant-induced structural change is often observed for such preparation methods, which makes the interpretation of photoelectrochemical data difficult.73,78 He and Parkinson studied the effect of trace amount of metal dopants on hematite water oxidation activity through a high-throughput combinatorial measurements.80 The combinatorial approach allowed them to probe the effect of different dopant concentration as well as multiple dopants using an ink-jet printing device. It was found that Ti doping enhances the water oxidation photocurrent while Al and Si had little to no effect when added to the hematite structure individually. Addition of multiple dopants also showed enhanced water oxidation activity, indicating the possible synergistic effect from multiple dopants.80 This is possible since several activation mechanisms are probable for any individual dopant both electronically and structurally.
Among all studied dopant candidates, Ti-doped hematite electrodes have demonstrated promising photoelectrochemical performance toward water oxidation.71,72,77,80 Although significant improvement in the water oxidation efficiency have been achieved by the incorporation of Ti impurity, the specific cause of Ti-doping effect has not yet clearly determined. A great portion of recent studies therefore has been focused on understanding the mechanism by which Ti-doping improves water oxidation with hematite photoelectrodes. A comprehensive perspective by Kronawitter et al. has recently reviewed the theoretical and experimental studies on Ti-doped hematite electrode prepared by different preparation techniques.81
Zhao et al. studied the electrical transport properties of epitaxial Ti-doped films prepared by molecular beam epitaxy with different concentrations of Ti.67 No significant differences in RHEED patterns of the films were observed, indicating no detectable crystallographic orientation changes upon doping. Refined structural parameters form the XRD data, however, showed that the Ti-doped films exhibit lattice expansion in c direction compared to the undoped hematite analogous to the observation by McFarland et al. for Al-doping.74 Fe K-shell and Ti K-edge XANES measurements confirmed that Ti is incorporated as Ti4+ and is substituted for Fe in the lattice.67 Considering the smaller ionic radius of Ti4+ (0.61 Å) compared to high spin Fe3+ (0.65 Å) lattice contraction is expected for a Ti substituted hematite structure.67 From Hall measurements it was found that carrier concentration and mobility do not scale with Ti concentration, indicating that Ti is not simply acting as an electrical dopant.67 Huda et al. studied electronic structure of pure and transition metal doped hematite.82 The effect of doping with different transition metals was explained in terms of tuning the band diagram and modification in the unit cell volume, which affects the effective mass of charge carriers hence the transport properties. It was found that Ti incorporation is associated with a reduction in the unit cell volume and reduced Fe–Fe bond length, which could affect the hopping probability of charge carriers, consistent with the observation by Zhao et al.67 Local distortion was also observed but not discussed as an effective factor. Changes in the unit cell volume and in general changes in the local symmetry is particularly important since the charge transport in hematite is limited by small polaron hopping. Further assuming that conduction in hematite dominantly occurs along Fe layers (where all Fe atoms have the same magnetic moment), Ti can alter the symmetry (and magnetic moment) hence serve to increase intralayer as well as interlayer conduction. This is probably the most effective function of Ti-dopant as it will be discussed in details below. Magnan and co-workers studied epitaxial Ti-doped hematite films by RHEED and EXAFS83,84 No significant changes were observed in the crystalline quality and crystallographic orientations upon Ti-doping up to 17%. Structural parameters from the EXAFS simulations for undoped and Ti-doped samples indicated that Ti atoms substitute for Fe atoms and there is no evidence of interstitial Ti, in agreement with Kronawitter et al.81 It was also found that Ti incorporation is associated with a slight site distortion, i.e. the distance between Ti and surrounding O and Fe atoms are different from that of pure hematite (shorter Ti–O and longer Ti–Fe bonds). No Fe2+ and Ti3+ were observed at doping levels up to 17%, in agreement with other reports.67,81,82 The water oxidation improvement was attributed to the formation of cation vacancies and shift of the valence band, increased carrier concentration and diffusion length.83,84
Zandi et al. recently studied the role of Ti-doping in hematite thin films prepared by ALD.72 Conformal and layer-by-layer growth mechanism of ALD enables controlled introduction of dopant in semiconductor thin films, while maintaining the simple and constant geometry dictated by sample substrate.72 Using ALD, hematite films of different thickness and Ti concentration were prepared by introduction of one cycle Ti between a desired number of Fe2O3 ALD cycles during the deposition. The Ti-doped electrodes where then examined under PEC water oxidation condition and compared with that of undoped sample of the same thickness. An optimum concentration of 3% atomic was determined by XPS depth profiling. Fig. 7 shows the J–V response of undoped and 3% Ti-doped hematite films under water oxidation condition. Ti-doped electrode produced significantly higher photocurrent along with an improved water oxidation onset potential and fill factor compared to the undoped films. This electrodes demonstrated enhanced APCE over the entire absorption profile, with and excellent values nearly 50% at 400 nm at 1.8 V vs. RHE.72
 Fig. 7  
J–V curves of 18 nm of undoped (dashed red) and 3% Ti-doped (solid orange) hematite electrodes under water oxidation in pH 6.9 and 1 Sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Systematic photoelectrochemical and spectroscopic measurements where then designed to probe the effect of Ti-doping by performing control experiments for possible activation mechanisms. Post-deposition of TiO2 on the surface of undoped hematite films allowed us to control for the possible catalytic/surface passivation effects of Ti on the surface. J–V measurement in the presence of the Fe(CN)64− hole scavenger revealed that the performance enhancement is a combination of bulk and surface improvements. Post deposition of different thicknesses of TiO2 on the surface of undoped hematite sample, however, showed no improvement, indicating the surface effect is also dictated by the bulk doping. Carrier concentration and flat band potential were calculated from Mott–Schottky plots produced from electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) measurements at different applied potential.72 Surprisingly the carrier concentration of 3% Ti-doped and undoped electrode was found to be nearly identical with no clear correlation with Ti concentration, in agreement with previous report.67 This is significant as the majority of the literature attribute the Ti-doping effect to enhanced majority carrier concentration and hence improved conductivity. Further experiments were therefore conducted to elucidate the mechanism behind the water oxidation improvement upon Ti-doping. EIS analysis under illumination was performed of hematite electrode in contact with aqueous electrolyte at different applied potential. Charge transfer resistance and surface state capacitance (i.e. the chemical capacitance due to hole accumulation on the surface) were extracted from the fit of the EIS measurements. The surface state capacitance increased by a factor of three concomitant with almost one order drop in charge transfer resistance for Ti-doped electrodes.72 A larger surface state capacitance was attributed to larger number of holes that can be trapped and thus participate in the water oxidation reaction which was consistent with the concomitant decrease in charge transfer resistance. These combined results indicate that Ti doping produces a hematite surface with somehow higher density of active sites for water oxidation. We therefore concluded that part of the improvement is due to activation of the surface toward water oxidation. This could be due to an increased lifetime of the hole on the surface (i.e. suppressed rate if surface recombination) on the surface of Ti-doped hematite electrodes. As mentioned above, an activated surface may result from an activated bulk, which means bulk doping was necessary to obtain the improvement. The bulk contribution can be an increased hole life time and hole mobility which increases the number of hole reaching the surface and thus enhanced photocurrent. These bulk improvement was attributed to the activation of a “dead layer” forming at the FTO–hematite interface, which was more significant for the very thin films. These finding clearly determined that Ti is not acting as an electronic dopant, in contrast to some previous reports.77,78,85 The mechanism by which Ti-dopant activates the bulk and thereby the surface of hematite films, however, is still unclear.
Structural analysis by Zhao et al.,67 Magnan et al.83,84 and Huda et al.82 of analogous epitaxial thin films, and the observation made by Glasscock et al.,71 all share an identical structural effect: i.e. structural distortion through substitution of Ti for Fe sites. One possible mechanism is therefore, modification of hematite electronics and trap state density through substitution of Ti for Fe atoms in the hematite lattice. This is supported by a recent study by Kronawitter et al.81 on hematite thin films of different preparation methods through synchrotron-based soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements. O-K edge X-ray absorption spectra showed that Ti-doping is associated with a new O 2p hybridized state, indicating the contribution of Ti s and d orbitals in the band structure of hematite.81
Our recent studies have helped us further uncover the fundamental mechanism by which Ti-doping enhances charge transport properties of hematite electrodes. While no structural differences were observed through XRD measurements, the Raman spectrum of Ti-doped electrode showed an interesting feature: an extra peak at 658 cm−1 that emerges upon Ti doping (Fig. 8). This peak is often observed for doped and undoped hematite electrodes around 657–660 cm−1 which has been assigned to magnetite and maghemite phase impurities.86–88 This peak was also observed by several group for hematite electrodes upon doping with Ti, Pt, and Si which was assigned to strain-induced distortion and surface defects.71,73,79 Several experimental and theoretical spectroscopic studies on hematite, however, assign this peak to an IR active and Raman inactive phonon mode which is not observed in the Raman spectra of pure hematite phase.57,89–92 This Raman inactive mode is activated upon relaxation of lattice symmetry and hence the selection rules.89–91 We therefore, assign the Raman peak at 658 cm−1 to distortion-induced Raman mode activated upon doping. This is consistent with the changes in cell parameters (unit cell contraction) observed by Zhao et al.,67 Huda et al.,82 and Magnan et al.,83 for Ti-doped and McFarland and co-workers74,79 for Pt and Al-doped hematite samples. We note that FeO6 octahedra in hematite is slightly distorted due to face sharing requirement of Fe2O9 units.28,39 Substitution of Ti for Fe atoms thus further enhances the Oh to C3V distortion leading to the relaxation of the octahedral symmetry and activation of this phonon mode in the Raman spectra. Trigonal distortion upon doping can potentially modify the distances between neighboring atoms, which in turn alters the hopping probability of electron and holes through the bulk of the material. Moreover, substitution of Ti for Fe atoms results in the mixing of Ti s and d orbitals with Fe and O band which further modifies the selection rules and charge transfer properties through neighboring metal centers. Distortion to a more trigonal structure can also modify the ligand field environment around the metal centers and thus alter the orbital splitting and hybridization. Although it is not trivial to clearly determine this electronic effect, possible modification of band diagram can result in an enhanced carrier dynamics in the valence and conduction band as well as bulk/surface trap passivation.
 Fig. 8  Raman spectra of 20 nm undoped (red) and 3% Ti-doped (orange) hematite thin films deposited on FTO, showing the emergence of distortion-induced peak at 658 cm−1 upon Ti-doping. Doubling the Ti concentration (cyan, 6% Ti) did not change the intensity of the peak while doubling the film thickness (dark blue, 40 nm) resulted in enhanced peak intensity. This is consistent with an optimum effective concentration for Ti as measured by photoelectrochemical measurements. Thickness dependent intensity of the peak indicates that this peak is due to bulk modification and not a result of surface or interface effect. 
We therefore conclude Ti-doping is enhancing the charge separation in bulk hematite mainly through a structural distortion effect, i.e. trigonal distortion, which result in the enhanced charge separation (bulk improvement) and enhanced charge collection on the surface by reducing surface recombination (hole collection improvement). A combination of bulk improvement and surface hole collection improvement effects was also observed by and Kim et al. for Ti-doped ultrathin films also prepared by ALD.93
Hole collection
As discussed above, substrate and bulk modification strategies are generally employed to enhance light harvesting and charge separation efficiencies of hematite electrodes. While these strategies ultimately increase the flux of holes reaching the electrode surface, these surface holes need to be collected efficiently via H2O oxidation reaction to enable a sustained photocurrent. The combination of sluggish kinetics of the four-hole H2O oxidation reaction and high rate of surface recombination, results in suboptimal hole collection efficiencies.6,94–96 It is only at very positive applied potentials where the surface electron concentration, and thus recombination, is reduced enough to allow the rate of hole transfer to H2O molecules to out-compete surface recombination. The effect of surface recombination can be clearly seen by comparing the J–V responses of H2O oxidation to that of the oxidation of a fast hole collector, e.g. H2O2 in Fig. 6, where the hole collection is quantitative. The ratio of photocurrents under water oxidation conditions to that of a hole scavenger therefore provides a useful method to quantify the hole collection efficiency. As seen in Fig. 6, the photocurrent onset of H2O oxidation is nearly 600 mV more positive of that of H2O2 oxidation. This additional applied potential required to suppress surface recombination represents a major loss in efficiency.
Although the mechanism of water oxidation on hematite is still not well-understood, it is generally agreed that water oxidation is in competition with surface electron–hole recombination.95–98 Peter and co-workers utilized electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and intensity modulated photocurrent spectroscopy (IMPS) to investigate the water oxidation mechanism on the hematite surface.98–100 A charge transfer model was developed to interpret EIS and IMPS data that assumed that charge transfer is associated with the formation of oxidized surface species as a result of surface hole accumulation. The results of the kinetics measurements were discussed in terms of competition between hole transfer from the surface states (i.e. water oxidation reaction) and recombination with conduction band electrons.98,99 A nearly potential independent recombination rate was measured for few hundred millivolts which attributed to Fermi level pinning by surface states.100 They further modified the hematite surface with Co2+, which is known to produce enhanced H2O oxidation. It was found that the rate of hole transfer is nearly constant for Co2+ modified electrodes, while the recombination rate was strongly potential dependent. This behavior was attributed to suppressed rate of surface recombination and reduced Fermi level pinning, which is in contrast to commonly known catalytic effect of Co modification.98,100
Klahr et al. also studied water oxidation with hematite thin films prepared by ALD under varying condition of pH, light intensity and applied potential, employing photoelectrochemical and EIS measurements.96,101 In the EIS measurements under illumination two potential dependent capacitive elements were observed. An equivalent circuit representing the hematite/electrolyte interface containing a chemical capacitance due to the accumulation of holes in surface states was used to interpret the EIS data.101 It was found that the chemical capacitance due to storing hole in the surface state, namely surface states capacitance, Css, shows a Gaussian distribution coincident with water oxidation onset potential (Fig. 9a). The charge transfer resistance, Rct, was found that reaches its minimum at the peak of surface states (hence the water oxidation onset) consistent with kinetics data by peter and co-workers.99 These finding suggest that hole transfer on hematite occurs through surface states; i.e. once a critical number of holes (enough to out-compete the hole consumption by recombination) were stored on the surface, sustained water oxidation start to onset, which is coincident with the minimum of charge transfer resistance. Identical charging and discharging of surface states was also observed through photocurrent transient and cyclic voltammetry measurement, further supporting the EIS data.96,101 Recently, the photoelectrochemical oxidation of methanol and water was also compared.102 The surface capacitance correlated with water oxidation decreased with the addition of CH3OH.102 This reduction in surface states, combined with corroborating O2 evolution measurements, confirmed that the surface states are actively participating in the hole transfer mechanism to H2O. Further, no surface states were observed in an inert anhydrous acetonitrile solution, or in the presence of Fe(CN)63/4− as a hole scavenger.101,102 These combined results confirm that surface states and associated capacitance observed in the EIS measurements are specific of H2O oxidation reaction, in accord with Peter et al. observation.98
 Fig. 9  (a) Relationship between J–V response (green curve), surface state capacitance, Css (orange triangles), and charge transfer resistance, Rct (red circles) for a thin film hematite electrode in contact with aqueous solution of pH 6.9 under 1 Sun illumination. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Changes in the absorption spectra measured at 0.82 V (red), 1.22 (orange) and 1.62 V vs. RHE corrected for the reference applied potential of 0.62 V. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10393–10399. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
The nature of the oxidized surface species formed during PEC water oxidation on hematite was further investigated using light and potential-modulated absorption spectroscopy by Peter and co-workers. Absorption spectra showed an absorption feature around 570 nm which was attributed to oxidized FeIII–OH surface species to form FeIVO, which are intermediates to H2O oxidation reaction.98 Klahr et al. also utilized in situ spectroelectrochemistry measurements to gain a more clear insight on the surface chemistry of hematite electrodes under PEC water oxidation.103 A bias dependent absorption feature was observed in absorption spectra at 572 nm (Fig. 9b). Quantitative correlation was found between the amount of charge stored in the surface states (as measure by cyclic voltammetry and EIS) and the magnitude of the absorption peak which indicates they originate from the same effect.103 Moreover, the absorption cross-section of the peak at 572 nm was found that is comparable to that observed for Fe-based oxygen activating enzymes, where Fe–oxo intermediates are known to mediate the reaction upon oxidation with highly oxidizing agents.104
The direct determination of the chemical identity of these surface states has not been determined, however, nor have they been confirmed to be intermediates in H2O oxidation reaction as opposed to recombination centers. The spectroscopic studies outlined above, however, strongly support the formation of oxidized surface Fe–OH terminations, which further proceed to release O2. This assignment is also supported by theoretical calculations on different surface termination of hematite where sequential hole-transfer mechanism mediated by a Fe–O–OH groups was suggested.105 On the other hand, extensive studies have been done on understanding the mechanism of PEC H2O oxidation on the surface of TiO2. Experimental evidence form in in situ FTIR and photoluminescence measurement suggested the formation of peroxo species in the from of Ti–O–OH and Ti–O–O–Ti during water oxidation.106 Considering the mechanistic insight form theoretical calculations and analogues molecular water oxidation catalyst systems, four sequential hole transfer reactions appear to be likely on the surface of hematite with the first step being hole transfer (oxidation) to iron-hydroxide surface terminations. Therefore the terminology of “surface trapped holes” or “long-lived holes” are most likely a FeIVO group which immediately converts to Fe–O–OH and releases O2 upon further oxidation and reaction with H2O molecules. FeIVO groups can alternatively recombine with conduction and trapped electrons leading to surface recombination. Theoretical calculation showed that some surface terminations are thermodynamically prevented form fully oxidizing H2O105 which result in the stable FeIVO species that are more prone to recombination. This emphasizes the importance of surface terminations at hematite surface in determining the hole collection efficiency on these electrodes. It should be noted that different preparation methods could result in the hematite electrode with different surface area and terminations. Therefore part of the discrepancy in the suggested mechanisms can arise form different measurement condition and not a fundamental effect.
A more clear picture of surface states and their distribution can be alternatively made through a relatively simple experiment.96Fig. 10 shows cyclic voltammetry curves performed in dark immediately after holding a hematite electrode at 2 V vs. RHE under 1 Sun illumination. Holding at very positive potential and under illumination serves to oxidize the surface states. Subsequent reduction of these states in the cathodic scan results in a peak in current corresponding to the density of those states at that specific energy.96,107 The first peak in the CV which was also observed in the EIS measurement was assigned to surface hole accumulation in the form of surface states which are intrinsic to water oxidation. This reduction peak is in fact due to the following reaction, which is essentially recombination reaction (R represents bulk hematite).R–FeIVO + e− + H2O → R–FeIII–OH + OH−
 Fig. 10  CV curves of hematite in contact with aqueous solution of pH 6.9 scanned at 200 mV s−1 after holding the electrode at 2 V vs. RHE for 60 seconds under 1 Sun illumination. The first cycle is a solid red line and the second cycle is a dashed orange line. Peaks in current in the first cathodic scan are due to the charging of surface states located at different energies. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The oxidation/reduction (or hole trapping/de-trapping) is therefore, is associated with the formation of FeIVO/FeIII–OH on the surface as measured in CV experiments.
The second peak in the CV appearing right before the dark current onset (i.e. below the flat band), is assigned to a set of shallow surface states, most probably intrinsic to hematite surface, which are not involved in water oxidation reaction. These surface states can still trap hole and electrons hence catalyze surface recombination. Another adverse effect of these shallow states is the ability to pin the Fermi level at that potential thus limiting the extent of band bending at hematite–solution interface which is often observed for hematite electrodes.96,101,107
Due to the kinetic competition between surface recombination and water oxidation reaction any surface modification can potentially alter these branching ratios and hence produce a performance improvement. We note that, while several bulk modification and nanostructuring techniques have produced substantially higher photocurrents, the water oxidation onset potential on bare hematite electrodes has been consistently 500–600 mV positive of the flat band potential (typical onset about 1.1–1.2 V vs. RHE). This voltage loss is due to surface recombination which itself is a function of electric field at the interface (i.e. the degree of band bending). On the other hand, band bending is known that is limited by Fermi level pinning by surface trap states.
Surface passivation through high temperature annealing
Numerous examples of reduction in water oxidation onset have been reported through surface modification with passivation layers.108–111 Shift in the water oxidation onset potential upon surface modification has been attributed to the mitigation of Fermi level pinning and thus an enhanced band bending.112 Surface recombination on hematite thin film electrodes was recently shown to be effectively suppressed by annealing at elevated temperatures.107 For example, annealing in air at 800 °C resulted in a record water oxidation photocurrent onset potential of 0.7 V vs. RHE for a bare hematite electrode, corresponding to the cathodic shift of ∼350 mV compared to high quality control electrodes annealed at 500 °C (Fig. 11).107 A combination of photoelectrochemical and EIS measurement were employed to probe the effect of high-T annealing. Control J–V measurement in the presence of hole scavenger H2O2 ruled out any possible bulk contribution, i.e. H2O oxidation onset shift is the result of a surface modification (Fig. 11). Cyclic voltammetry measurements were subsequently performed to monitor the effect of high-T annealing on the density and distribution of surface states.107 Interestingly only one cathodic peak in CV response was observed for hematite electrodes annealed at 800 °C. As it can be seen in Fig. 11 this peak is coincident with the photocurrent in the same manner as the first peak for the electrode annealed at 500 °C. The absence of shallow surface states after annealing at 800 °C indicates that these states are presumably passivated at elevated temperature. The shift in the J–V response was therefore attributed to the mitigation of Fermi level pinning and reduced surface recombination.107
 Fig. 11  
J–V curves of 18 nm hematite thin film electrodes annealed at 500 °C (a) and 800 °C (b) under H2O and H2O2 oxidation condition in pH 13.6 and 1 Sun illumination. (c and d) Corresponding CV curves scanned at 1 V s−1 in dark after holing electrodes at 2 V vs. RHE under 1 Sun illumination. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1522–1526. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
This behavior was also observed in the Mott–Schotkky plots where no indication of Fermi level pinning was observed for the electrode annealed at 800 °C (Fig. 12). In addition the flat band potential was unchanged upon annealing at 800 °C consistent with the observation made by J–V measurements in H2O2. Surface passivation at higher temperature is analogues to the effect Al2O3 and Ga2O3 overlayers, although it is more effective as it results in a higher cathodic shift and does not suppress the photocurrent (which is the case for surface overlayers).109 We note that a cathodic shift in the photocurrent onset potential was also observed by Sivula et al.39 and Ling et al.76 for hematite electrodes annealed at 800 °C, however, the surface effect of higher temperature annealing was not explored. A performance improvement was also observed by Cho et al. for TiO2, ZnO, and α-Fe2O3 electrodes through flame annealing of the surface at 1000 °C.113 Our conclusion is also consistent with the report by Kronawitter et al. who showed that high-temperature annealing is removing trap states located just below the conduction band edge based on soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy measurements.55
 Fig. 12  Mott–Schottky plots of 18 nm hematite electrode annealed at 500 °C (blue circles) and 800 °C (green squares). Fermi level pinning appears as a potential independent region over nearly 200 mV for the electrode annealed at 500 °C. Measurements were performed in 1 M KOH (pH 13.6) and under 1 Sun illumination. 
Calculated hole collection efficiency (ηhc) showed that hole collection on hematite thin film electrodes annealed at 800 °C is quantitative at thermodynamic water oxidation potential (i.e. 1.23 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 13a). We therefore have shown that a combination of a Ga2O3 underlayer, high T annealing is an effective strategy to enhance PEC performance of hematite ultrathin films and achieve nearly quantitative hole collection on the surface. Even with quantitative hole collection efficiency, the maximum photocurrent observed at 1.23 V is significantly lower than what is expected based on the flux of the absorbed photons (calculated to be ∼4 mA cm−2). As shown in Fig. 13b charge separation efficiency, ηcs, at 1.23 V is less than 15% of the total photon flux absorbed by the material indicating that more than 85% of the photogenerated electron–hole pairs undergo recombination in the bulk. Although a very short hole diffusion length is often described to be the dominant factor impeding electron–hole separation in the bulk, our results clearly indicates a strong depletion region recombination given that ηcs is only ∼25% at very positive potential where the entire film is depleted. We note that low charge separation efficiency is general to hematite electrodes regardless of electrode morphology and the light harvesting efficiency.64 The ultrathin films nature offers the ability to incorporate the larger fraction of the bulk within holes diffusion + drift length and thus exhibit higher absorbed APCE compared to thick films. A high rate of depletion region recombination however, plays the key role in limiting charge separation efficiency thus the overall photocurrent with hematite thin film absorber electrodes.
 Fig. 13  Hole collection, ηhc (a) and charge separation, ηcs (b) efficiency of hematite electrodes annealed at 500 °C (blue circles) and 800 °C (green squares). ηhc was calculated by dividing H2O oxidation photocurrent to that of the hole scavenger H2O2 (JH2O/JH2O2). ηcs was calculated form the ratio of JH2O2/Jabs, where Jabs is the maximum photocurrent calculated from absorbed photons assuming quantitative charge separation and collection. 
Catalysts
Since the water oxidation efficiency on the surface of hematite is determined by the kinetic competition between forward hole transfer and recombination of holes with the conduction band electrons, the addition of electrocatalyst to the electrode surface can enhance the kinetics in favor of water oxidation. Numerous examples of this strategy have been reported for hematite electrodes by incorporating cobalt and nickel-based catalysts such as Co-Pi,97,114–116 CoOx,38,112,117 NiFeOx,118,119 and NiOx.120 A cathodic shift in the photocurrent onset potential has been observed almost in every case. The mechanism by which surface modification with catalysts enhances hole collection efficiency is also extensively studied. Interested reader can refer to a recent perspective attributed to the surface effects of hematite electrodes.6 There has been always a great deal of controversy as to the role of electrocatalyst when added to the photoanode surface. Recently Lin and Boettcher reported a unique approach to characterize the semiconductor/electrolyte interface on Ni(OH)2 and IrO2 coated TiO2 electrodes.121 While the TiO2/IrO2 behaved as classic Schottky junction, porous Ni(OH)2 demonstrated an “adaptive junction” where the potential of the catalyst layer drops positively to a certain potential and remains constant. This behavior was explained in the way that ion-permeable Ni(OH)2 is capturing the photogenerated holes in the TiO2 valence band which produces NiOOH. Once sufficient concentration of NiOOH species is generated to drop the Nerstian potential of catalyst to positive of H2O oxidation reaction, the photocurrent flux from TiO2 valence band matches water oxidation rate resulting in constant potential in the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH layer (i.e. constant steady state NiOOH and Ni(OH)2 concentration).121 These finding suggest porous catalysts such as Ni(OH)2 and Co-Pi behave as an adaptive junction when added to the surface of semiconductor photoanode.122 They therefore can perform a dual function; suppressing recombination rate by trapping and storing holes and enhancing water oxidation kinetics by facilitating hole transfer at the adaptive junction. Very recently Jang et al. utilized an amorphous NiFeOx catalyst which pushed the water oxidation photocurrent onset of hematite to an unprecedented value of 0.45 V vs. RHE.119 The observed cathodic shift of >300 mV on an already well-performing hematite electrodes is significantly higher than the effect of Co-Pi and NiOx. Therefore, the role of NiFeOx is unlikely to be catalysis or surface passivation. In addition, considering that the fill factor and the turn on photocurrent slope were significantly improved with NiFeOx,119 there is a possibility that hematite–NiFeOx is behaving as a n–p junction which facilitates hole transport and collection at the interface. More work is required to unravel the details of this exciting result so it can be further exploited.
Path forward
Throughout this review, major recombination pathways limiting the water oxidation efficiency with hematite electrodes were discussed and strategies to mitigate the loss mechanisms were elucidated. Nanostructuring is certainly necessary to deconvolute the light harvesting and charge separation efficiencies. Nanostructured thin film absorber (TFA) approach was discussed as a promising strategy to scale up light harvesting, while maintaining the ultrathin bulk electrode. The drawback of TFA approach, however, is the substrate–hematite interface effect. It was shown that this interface effect can be alleviated through incorporating of a suitable underlayer. While a high quality bulk material is necessary to achieve enhanced charge separation, surface properties were also shown that strongly affect the hole collection efficiency and thus the working photovoltage. We demonstrated that surface passivation via high-T annealing produces nearly quantitative hole collection efficiency. The ultrathin film hematite electrode with a 2 nm Ga2O3 underlayer thus generated a photocurrent onset just slightly positive of the flat band potential. Further shifts in the onset potential to even lower potentials is thus only probable through shifting the flat band potential to more negative energies.5
The big unresolved problem with hematite, however, is the poor charge separation. For the best performing thin film electrode the charge separation efficiency is less than 20% at 1.23 V vs. RHE. At this potential the ultrathin film is nearly fully depleted, indicating that the even in the presence of depletion region electric field, recombination occurs at such high rate that only a small portion of the photogenerated holes drift to the electrode surface. This implies that the hole diffusion length is essentially zero and depletion region recombination is the dominant loss mechanism controlling charge separation efficiency. Future research directions on PEC water splitting with hematite must therefore target enhancing the charge separation efficiency by mitigating depletion region recombination. Below are strategies to tackle this challenging problem.
One strategy is to enhance charge separation through fabricating heterojunction structures. This can be accomplished for example through coating a suitable p-type material on hematite to design an n–p junction, which could potentially enhance charge separation at the interface. One example of this approach was reported by Lin et al. by Mg-doped hematite (p-type) on native n-type hematite which demonstrated enhanced water oxidation activity.123 Further work is needed to understand and effectively utilize the potential beneficial effects of this approach.
Another strategy is to deposit highly n-type doped ultrathin hematite films. A high concentration of dopants allows sharper band bending as potential drops across a thinner width. The advantage of this strategy is generating holes very close to the interface, which have greater chance to be collected as they travel a shorter distance and experience an already high drift potential. The impact of the depletion region recombination on the output photocurrent of a semiconductor/liquid interface was modeled by Jarrett124 who modified the Gärtner's model125 (which assumes no depletion region recombination). As discussed for hematite, depletion region recombination is important in materials with low mobility, since it takes longer for holes to cross the depletion region which increases the chance of recombination. Jarrett thus introduced transient time, τt (the time required for a charge carrier to cross the depletion layer), and examined the effect of mobility and electronic properties on the transient time relative to a constant recombination time, τR (the lifetime of a charge carrier in the depletion region). Transient time is given by eqn (7) which is inversely related to carrier mobility (μ) and ionized dopant density (Ni).124 (7)where κ, is the semiconductor dielectric constant and ε0 is the vacuum permittivity. It was shown that for a relatively short hole transit time, i.e. τt/τR ≤ 1, over 80% IPCE is achievable for a planer electrode assuming no surface recombination and that the most of the light is absorbed in the depletion region.124 At longer transit times, however, the IPCE drops significantly. This indicates that for efficient charge collection in the depletion region, the transient time should be shorter or comparable to the recombination time. From eqn (7), one expects decreased transit times with increasing dopant density.
Warren recently showed the relation between the transit time and dopant density for a range of small and large polaron mobilities (Fig. 14).126 From this plot it is clear that for hematite with hole mobility ∼10−2 cm2 V−1 s−167,127,128 to have a τt comparable to τR (which on the ps time scale124) the dopant density must be >1020 cm−3. This corresponds to a depletion width of <10 nm (Fig. 14). Therefore, a higher dopant density (and smaller space charge layer) of an ultrathin (∼10 nm) film is required to accelerate the hole drift in the depletion layer. The thin film absorber approach therefore is necessary to allow sufficient light absorption while maintaining an optimal electrode thickness and dopant density throughout the material.
 Fig. 14  Transit time, τt, for the movement of a charge carrier across the depletion region as function of ionized dopant density, Ni, and polaron mobility, μ. Adapted with permission from ref. 126. 
Another important factor which has been overlooked in the literature is possible anisotropic hole transport in the hematite bulk. Anisotropic electron transport in hematite is well-known and has been experimentally demonstrated.65,129–132 The water oxidation photocurrent, however, is limited by hole transport through the valence band, which would produce completely different behavior. Investigating the hole mobility and charge separation efficiency with hematite electrodes having different preferred crystallographic orientations would be interesting to determine this possibility. In addition, different crystallographic orientations would also modify the surface of hematite, e.g. surface state density, surface site activity and the flat band potential, which would affect the hole collection efficiency.5 In evidence of this proposed strategy, Peter et al. recently demonstrated that hematite electrodes deposited at various temperatures exhibit different preferred plane orientations.5 Substantial differences were observed in the water oxidation photocurrent onset potential, which was attributed to a shift in the flat band potential. More recently Kment et al. demonstrated dramatic differences in water oxidation photocurrent for hematite electrode exposing either 110 or 104 planes.131 Enhanced photocurrent was shown to be a combination of enhanced charge separation in the bulk and improved surface hole collection. These results indicate a possible anisotropic hole transport which can be exploited to improve the charge separation efficiency, as well as the hole collection efficiency, with hematite photoelectrodes. This possibility requires more work to improve our understanding of the detailed effect of crystal orientation on solar water splitting with hematite.
Conclusion
The understanding and performance of solar water oxidation with hematite photoanodes has been improving steadily over the last decade. Numerous nanostructuring strategies have been introduced which have successfully decoupled the geometrical mismatch between light absorption depth and hole collection length, resulting in promising photocurrent densities. Recently, a combination of high temperature annealing and surface deposited electrocatalyst was shown to overcome surface state recombination and Fermi-level pinning which shifted the photocurrent onset potential close to the flat band potential. These results raise new hopes of generating high photocurrent densities with minimal applied potential losses. Depletion region recombination, even in the nanostructured systems, still effectively limits the bias-dependant charge separation efficiency to values below 20% at 1.23 V vs. RHE. It is this loss mechanism that still constrains the fill factor, and thus water splitting efficiency, of hematite photoanodes. The great steps that have been made in improving the photocurrent and onset potential, however, give hope that the limitations of charge separation on the fill factor can likewise be overcome. Thus, hematite still holds promise to achieve efficient and stable solar water oxidation. With the parallel ongoing progress in photocathode systems, it is possible that hematite will soon see the light of the day as a photoanode in an efficient tandem PEC water splitting device.
Acknowledgements
TWH thanks the National Science Foundation (CHE-1150378) for support of this research.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Smalley, MRS Bull., 2005, 30, 412–417 CrossRef .
G. A. Martin, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 6–11 Search PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter and K. G. Upul Wijayantha, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 1983–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. H. Young, B. M. Klahr, O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1660–1671 CAS .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J.-H. Im, M. T. Mayer, M. Schreier, M. K. Nazeeruddin, N.-G. Park, S. D. Tilley, H. J. Fan and M. Gratzel, Science, 2014, 345, 1593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, Science, 2014, 345, 1566–1567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. Mckone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. Boddy, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1968, 115, 199–203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, T. F. Jaramillo, T. G. Deutsch, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, N. Gaillard, R. Garland, K. Takanabe, C. Heske, M. Sunkara, E. W. McFarland, K. Domen, E. L. Miller, J. a. Turner and H. N. Dinh, J. Mater. Res., 2011, 25, 3–16 CrossRef .
S. Hu, C. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 CAS .
M. S. Prévot and K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17879–17893 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bolton, S. J. Strickler and J. S. Connolly, Nature, 1985, 316, 495–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Boettcher, E. L. Warren, M. C. Putnam, E. a. Santori, D. Turner-Evans, M. D. Kelzenberg, M. G. Walter, J. R. McKone, B. S. Brunschwig, H. a. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Warren, H. A. Atwater and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 747–759 CAS .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. a. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653–9661 CAS .
J. A. Baglio, G. S. Calabrese and D. J. Harrison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 2246–2256 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Mckone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
K. Sivula, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1624–1633 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Sherman and D. T. Waite, Am. Mineral., 1985, 70, 1262–1269 CAS .
D. M. Sherman, Phys. Chem. Miner., 1985, 12, 161–175 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pailhé, A. Wattiaux, M. Gaudon and A. Demourgues, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1040–1047 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Pailhé, A. Wattiaux, M. Gaudon and A. Demourgues, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 2697–2704 CrossRef PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 7830–7834 RSC .
T. Lindgren, H. Wang, N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, A. Hagfeldt and S.-E. Lindquist, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2002, 71, 231–243 CrossRef CAS .
N. Beermann, L. Vayssieres, S.-E. Lindquist and A. Hagfeldt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2456–2461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Bjorksten, J. Moser and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 1994, 6, 858–863 CrossRef .
S. K. Mohapatra, S. E. John, S. Banerjee and M. Misra, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 3048–3055 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, S. Wang, Y. Ding, Z. Lin Wang and S. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 215–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, R. Zboril, F. Le Formal, R. Robert, A. Weidenkaff, J. Tucek, J. Frydrych and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7436–7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, S. Zhou, S. W. Sheehan and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2398–2401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2862–2867 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefik, M. Cornuz, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, S. Mhaisalkar and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5431–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Riha, M. J. Devries Vermeer, M. J. Pellin, J. T. Hupp and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 360–367 CAS .
R. van de Krol, Y. Liang and J. Schoonman, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 2311 RSC .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Grätzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, G. Yuan, S. Sheehan, S. Zhou and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4862–4869 CAS .
O. Zandi, J. Beardslee and T. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16494–16503 CAS .
F. Le Formal, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1099–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Itoh and J. O. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1266–1271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Itoh and J. O. Bockris, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 56, 874–876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, C. S. Enache and R. van de Krol, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2008, 2008, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
F. L. Souza, K. P. Lopes, E. Longo and E. R. Leite, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 1215–1219 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Brillet, M. Cornuz, F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 223–232 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, H. Dotan, M. Stefik, K. Sivula, A. Rothschild, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2699–2702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, C. Rogero, J.-H. Guo, S. S. Mao, F. J. Himpsel and L. Vayssieres, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 22780–22785 CAS .
D. Bersani, P. P. Lottici and X.-Z. Ding, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 72, 73–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bersani, P. P. Lottici and A. Montenero, J. Raman Spectrosc., 1999, 360, 355–360 CrossRef .
S. Balaji, Y. Djaoued and J. Robichaud, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2006, 37, 1416–1422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V Chernyshova, M. F. Hochella and A. S. Madden, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 1736–1750 RSC .
J. D. Emery, C. M. Schlepu, P. Guo, S. C. Riha, R. P. H. Chang and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 21894–21900 CAS .

          R. Van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2012, vol. 102 Search PubMed .
B. M. Klahr, A. B. F. Martinson and T. W. Hamann, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 461–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 063508 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dotan, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, A. Rothschild and S. C. Warren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 958–964 CAS .
K. M. Rosso, D. M. a. Smith and M. Dupuis, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 6455–6466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Iordanova, M. Dupuis and K. M. Rosso, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 122, 144305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhao, T. C. Kaspar, T. C. Droubay, J. McCloy, M. E. Bowden, V. Shutthanandan, S. M. Heald and S. a. Chambers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 245325 CrossRef .
P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bosman and H. J. van Daal, Adv. Phys., 1970, 19, 1–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. X. Ming, P. E. Laibinis, S. T. Nguyen, J. M. Kesselman, C. E. Stanton and N. S. Lewis, Progress in Inorganic Chemistry,  2007 Search PubMed.
J. A. Glasscock, P. R. F. Barnes, I. C. Plumb and N. Savvides, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 16477–16488 CAS .
O. Zandi, B. Klahr and T. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 634–642 CAS .
I. Cesar, K. Sivula and A. Kay, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 772–782 CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. Yan, G. D. Stucky, Y.-S. Hu, M. M. Al-Jassim and E. W. McFarland, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 510–517 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y.-S. Hu, A. J. Forman, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 15900–15907 CAS .
Y. Ling, G. Wang, D. a Wheeler, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2119–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wang, Y. Ling, D. A. Wheeler, K. E. N. George, K. Horsley, C. Heske, J. Z. Zhang and Y. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3503–3509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, A. Kleiman-Shwarsctein, Y.-S. Hu, J. Lefton, S. Sharma, A. J. Forman and E. McFarland, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1020–1028 CAS .
Y. Hu, A. Kleiman-shwarsctein, A. J. Forman, D. Hazen, J. Park, E. W. McFarland and S. Barbara, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3803–3805 CrossRef CAS .
J. He and B. A. Parkinson, ACS Comb. Sci., 2011, 13, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, S.-H. Shen, P. Liao, I. S. Cho, O. Zandi, Y.-S. Liu, K. Lashgari, G. Westin, J.-H. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, E. A. Carter, X. L. Zheng, T. W. Hamann, B. E. Koel, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3100–3121 CAS .
M. N. Huda, A. Walsh, Y. Yan, S.-H. Wei and M. M. Al-Jassim, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107, 123712 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Magnan, D. Stanescu, M. Rioult, E. Fonda and A. Barbier, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 133908 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rioult, H. Magnan, D. Stanescu and A. Barbier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3007–3014 CAS .
N. T. Hahn and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6474–6482 CrossRef CAS .
I. H. Campbell and P. M. Fauchet, Solid State Commun., 1986, 58, 739–741 CrossRef CAS .
O. N. Shebanova and P. Lazor, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 174, 424–430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, X. Li, C. Du, Y. Huang and H. Du, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2009, 40, 76–79 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jubb and H. C. Allen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2804–2812 CAS .
S. Onari, T. Arai and K. Kudo, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 16, 1717–1721 CrossRef .
K. F. Mccarty, R. April and J. M. Rowell, Solid State Commun., 1988, 68, 799–802 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mccarty, D. R. Boehme and S. N. Laboratories, J. Solid State Chem., 1989, 27, 19–27 CrossRef .
D. W. Kim, S. C. Riha, E. J. Demarco, A. B. F. Martinson, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12199–12207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 17, 315–326 CrossRef .
M. Barroso, S. Pendlebury, A. Cowan and J. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 2724–2734 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7626–7636 CAS .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert and T. W. Hamann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16693–16700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Cummings, F. Marken, L. M. Peter, A. A. Tahir and K. G. U. Wijayantha, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2027–2029 RSC .
C. Y. Cummings, F. Marken, L. M. Peter, K. G. Upul Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1228–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Peter, K. G. U. Wijayantha and A. A. Tahir, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 309–322 RSC .
B. Klahr, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-Santiago, T. Hamann and J. Bisquert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Klahr, S. Gimenez, O. Zandi, F. Fabregat-Santiago and T. W. Hamann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 7653–7660 CAS .
B. Klahr and T. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10393–10399 CAS .
F. Tiago de Oliveira, A. Chanda, D. Banerjee, X. Shan, S. Mondal, L. Que, E. L. Bominaar, E. Münck and T. J. Collins, Science, 2007, 315, 835–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hellman and R. G. S. Pala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 12901–12907 CAS .
R. Nakamura and Y. Nakato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1290–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi and T. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1522–1526 CrossRef CAS .
F. Le Formal, N. Tétreault, M. Cornuz, T. Moehl, M. Grätzel and K. Sivula, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 737–743 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, F. Le Formal, M. Cornuz, J. Brillet, N. Tétreault, K. Sivula and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2512–2515 CAS .
L. Steier, I. Herraiz-cardona, S. Gimenez, F. Fabregat-santiago, J. Bisquert, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7681–7688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xi, P. S. Bassi, S. Y. Chiam, W. F. Mak, P. D. Tran, J. Barber, J. S. Chye Loo and L. H. Wong, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4430–4433 RSC .
M. Barroso, C. a Mesa, S. R. Pendlebury, A. J. Cowan, T. Hisatomi, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, Proc. Natl. Acad.
Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15640–15645 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Cho, M. Logar, C. H. Lee, L. Cai, F. B. Prinz and X. Zheng, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 24–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Zhong and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4202–4207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Barroso, A. J. Cowan, S. R. Pendlebury, M. Grätzel, D. R. Klug and J. R. Durrant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14868–14871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. M. Klahr, E. C. Tyo, S. Seifert, S. Vajda, M. J. Pellin, T. W. Hamann and A. B. F. Martinson, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2396–2405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Du, X. Yang, M. T. Mayer, H. Hoyt, J. Xie, G. McMahon, G. Bischoping and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12692–12695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–5 Search PubMed .
K. M. H. Young and T. W. Hamann, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 8727–8730 RSC .
F. Lin and S. W. Boettcher, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1–6 Search PubMed .
T. W. Hamann, Nat. Mater., 2013, 13, 3–4 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Xu, M. T. Mayer, Z. I. Simpson, G. McMahon, S. Zhou and D. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5508–5511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jarrett, J. Appl. Phys., 1981, 52, 4681–4689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gärtner, Phys. Rev., 1959, 116, 84–87 CrossRef .

          S. C. Warren, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production,  2011, vol. 102, pp. 293–316 Search PubMed .
R. F. G. Gardner, F. Sweett and D. W. Tanner, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1963, 24, 1183–1196 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liao, M. C. Toroker and E. A. Carter, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 013701 CrossRef PubMed .
C. X. Kronawitter, I. Zegkinoglou, S. Shen, J. Guo, F. J. Himpsel, S. S. Mao and L. Vayssieres, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13483–13488 RSC .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kment, P. Schmuki, Z. Hubicka, L. Machala, R. Kirchgeorg, N. Liu, L. Wang, K. Lee, J. Olejnicek, M. Cada, I. Gregora and R. Zboril, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7113–7123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Warren, K. Voïtchovsky, H. Dotan, C. M. Leroy, M. Cornuz, F. Stellacci, C. Hébert, A. Rothschild and M. Grätzel, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 842–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Hematite thin film preparation and PEC measurements conditions can be found elsewhere.107This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
Table Content:
4H2O + 4e− → 2H2 + 4OH− (HER) E0 = 0.0 V vs. RHE
4OH− + 4e− → O2 + 4e− + 2H2O (OER) E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE

 	Fig. 1  Energetics of a tandem cell under PEC H2O oxidation and reduction. Schematic J–V characteristics of a tandem PEC cell under operating condition is also shown. Shaded box is the maximum power generated by the photoanode, which can be used to calculate single electrode efficiency using eqn (2). Jtherm and Von are labeled for the photoanode J–V.	 
	(1)
	(2)
Jph(V) = −qϕ(ηlh × ηcs(V) × ηhc(V))	(3)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic energetics and charge transfer processes under PEC water oxidation with hematite. The water oxidation photocurrent is controlled by the efficiency of light harvesting, charge separation, and hole collection processes. Red arrows indicate recombination pathways.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Absorptance spectra of 50 nm hematite thin film electrode prepared by atomic layer deposition. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16494–16505. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (b) Maximum photocurrent density calculated for hematite as a function of electrode thickness assuming no reflection loss and unity quantum yield for absorbed photons with energy above the band gap. The photocurrent reaches the maximum of 12.4 mA cm−2 at ∼1 μm.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of thin film absorber (TFA) nanostructuring approach demonstrating an optimized hematite film deposited on transparent conductive substrates with different geometries. One successful example of this approach was demonstrated by a SiO2/ITO inverse opal transparent substrate coated with a thin film of hematite via ALD (b). Figure b is adapted with permission from ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 360–367. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) J–V curves of 18 nm hematite electrodes with (solid dark blue) and without (dashed red) 2 nm Ga2O3 underlayer under water oxidation in pH 6.9 phosphate buffer and 1 Sun illumination. (b) Respective Raman phonon modes of hematite films before (dotted lines) and after (solid lines) annealing at 500 °C. Bottom panel show SEM images of hematite films deposited on bare FTO (c) and FTO modified with 2 nm Ga2O3 (d). Scale bar is 100 nm. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16494–16505. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 
Jph(V) = Jabs × ηcs(V)	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 6  
J–V curves of a planar thin film hematite electrode in contact with 1 M KOH and in the presence of added 0.5 M H2O2 as hole scavenger under 1 Sun illumination.†	 
σ = qnμn + qpμp	(6)

 	Fig. 7  
J–V curves of 18 nm of undoped (dashed red) and 3% Ti-doped (solid orange) hematite electrodes under water oxidation in pH 6.9 and 1 Sun illumination. Reproduced from ref. 72 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Raman spectra of 20 nm undoped (red) and 3% Ti-doped (orange) hematite thin films deposited on FTO, showing the emergence of distortion-induced peak at 658 cm−1 upon Ti-doping. Doubling the Ti concentration (cyan, 6% Ti) did not change the intensity of the peak while doubling the film thickness (dark blue, 40 nm) resulted in enhanced peak intensity. This is consistent with an optimum effective concentration for Ti as measured by photoelectrochemical measurements. Thickness dependent intensity of the peak indicates that this peak is due to bulk modification and not a result of surface or interface effect.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Relationship between J–V response (green curve), surface state capacitance, Css (orange triangles), and charge transfer resistance, Rct (red circles) for a thin film hematite electrode in contact with aqueous solution of pH 6.9 under 1 Sun illumination. Adapted with permission from J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4294–4302. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (b) Changes in the absorption spectra measured at 0.82 V (red), 1.22 (orange) and 1.62 V vs. RHE corrected for the reference applied potential of 0.62 V. Adapted with permission from J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10393–10399. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 
R–FeIVO + e− + H2O → R–FeIII–OH + OH−

 	Fig. 10  CV curves of hematite in contact with aqueous solution of pH 6.9 scanned at 200 mV s−1 after holding the electrode at 2 V vs. RHE for 60 seconds under 1 Sun illumination. The first cycle is a solid red line and the second cycle is a dashed orange line. Peaks in current in the first cathodic scan are due to the charging of surface states located at different energies. Adapted from ref. 96 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  
J–V curves of 18 nm hematite thin film electrodes annealed at 500 °C (a) and 800 °C (b) under H2O and H2O2 oxidation condition in pH 13.6 and 1 Sun illumination. (c and d) Corresponding CV curves scanned at 1 V s−1 in dark after holing electrodes at 2 V vs. RHE under 1 Sun illumination. Reproduced with permission from J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1522–1526. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Mott–Schottky plots of 18 nm hematite electrode annealed at 500 °C (blue circles) and 800 °C (green squares). Fermi level pinning appears as a potential independent region over nearly 200 mV for the electrode annealed at 500 °C. Measurements were performed in 1 M KOH (pH 13.6) and under 1 Sun illumination.	 

 	Fig. 13  Hole collection, ηhc (a) and charge separation, ηcs (b) efficiency of hematite electrodes annealed at 500 °C (blue circles) and 800 °C (green squares). ηhc was calculated by dividing H2O oxidation photocurrent to that of the hole scavenger H2O2 (JH2O/JH2O2). ηcs was calculated form the ratio of JH2O2/Jabs, where Jabs is the maximum photocurrent calculated from absorbed photons assuming quantitative charge separation and collection.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 14  Transit time, τt, for the movement of a charge carrier across the depletion region as function of ionized dopant density, Ni, and polaron mobility, μ. Adapted with permission from ref. 126.	 
Footnote
† Hematite thin film preparation and PEC measurements conditions can be found elsewhere.107

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2015
