Selective growth of layered perovskites for stable and efficient photovoltaics   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7EE03513F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7EE03513F
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 952-959Selective growth of layered perovskites for stable and efficient photovoltaics†

        
          
            Kyung Taek 
            Cho
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Giulia 
            Grancini
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yonghui 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emad 
            Oveisi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jaehoon 
            Ryu
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Osbel 
            Almora
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Manuel 
            Tschumi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pascal Alexander 
            Schouwink
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Gabseok 
            Seo
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Sung 
            Heo
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Jucheol 
            Park
          
        
      h, 
      
        
          
            Jyongsik 
            Jang
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Sanghyun 
            Paek
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Germà 
            Garcia-Belmonte
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *a
aGroup for Molecular Engineering of Functional Materials, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Valais Wallis, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: sanghyun.paek@epfl.ch; mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
bInterdisciplinary Centre for Electron Microscopy, Ecole Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland
cSchool of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Seoul National University, 599 Gwanangno, Gwanakgu, Seoul 151-742, Korea
dInstitute of Advanced Materials (INAM), Universitat Jaume I, 12006 Castelló, Spain
eInstitut des Sciences et Ingénierie Chimiques, École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne, Valais Wallis, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland
fDepartment of Energy Science, Sungkyunkwan University, 2066, Seobu-ro, Jangan-gu, Suwon 16419, Korea
gSamsung Advanced Institute of Technology, 130, Samsung-ro, Yeongtong-gu, Suwon, 16678, Korea
hBusiness Support Department, Gumi Electrons & Information Technology Research Institute, Gumi, 39171, Korea
Received 
      11th December 2017
    , Accepted 6th February 2018First published on 8th February 2018AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) are promising alternatives toward clean energy because of their high-power conversion efficiency (PCE) and low materials and processing cost. However, their poor stability under operation still limits their practical applications. Here we design an innovative approach to control the surface growth of a low dimensional perovskite layer on top of a bulk three-dimensional (3D) perovskite film. This results in a structured perovskite interface where a distinct layered low dimensional perovskite is engineered on top of the 3D film. Structural and optical properties of the stack are investigated and solar cells are realized. When embodying the low dimensional perovskite layer, the photovoltaic cells exhibit an enhanced PCE of 20.1% on average, when compared to pristine 3D perovskite. In addition, superior stability is observed: the devices retain 85% of the initial PCE stressed under one sun illumination for 800 hours at 50 °C in an ambient environment.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells with astonishing power conversion efficiency (PCE) values exceeding 22% are predicted to become a cost-effective photovoltaic technology but are yet to reach commercialization due to their poor stability under operation. We improved the stability of perovskite solar cells by employing a thin two-dimensional (2D) perovskite layer on top of a three-dimensional (3D) perovskite film. In contrast to previous methods, our modified devices include a distinct layer of 2D perovskite because of the use of large cations. By intercalating a wide band-gap 2D perovskite layer, the charge carrier recombination at the interface was reduced, and the efficiency was enhanced. The perovskite solar cell devices retained 85% of the initial PCE stressed under one sun illumination for 800 hours at 50 °C. Our passivating method with a 2D perovskite layer guides towards reaching higher stability and efficiency of perovskite solar cells.

Introduction
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) with PCE over 22% are attracting extensive interest in renewable energy research aiming to deliver low-cost electricity while reducing carbon dioxide emission.1–3 However, their commercialization is still restricted by insufficient long-term stability in ambient atmosphere. Therefore, advances in improving device stability without sacrificing the efficiency are vital for the future of PSCs. Under water, UV light or thermal stress, the three-dimensional (3D) ABX3 crystal structure composed of small organic cations (A+), metal cations (B2+) and halide anions (X−) collapses leading to decomposition back into the precursors.4–6 To improve the structural stability, various cations, such as formamidinium (FA+), cesium (Cs+), rubidium (Rb+), and different anions, such as bromide (Br−) and chloride (Cl−), have been explored and mixed together into mixed 3D perovskites; [FA/MA]Pb[I/Br]3,7 [FA/Cs]Pb[I/Br]3,8,9 or [Rb/Cs/FA/MA]Pb[I/Br]3.10
On the other hand, to overcome the limited stability of 3D perovskites, two-dimensional (2D) perovskites have been proposed due to their own superior stability with respect to the 3D ones, but at the expense of lower efficiency mainly due to their contrasting optoelectronic properties (i.e. higher exciton binding energy, lower absorption).11,12 A 2D perovskite is formed when large organic cations (R+) are incorporated which isolate the anionic metal layers disrupting the 3D perovskite structure. They have the general formula R2(A)n−1BnX3n+1 (n = 1, 2, 3, 4,…) where n is the number of layers, as the inorganic Ruddlesden–Popper phase. Using R = n-butylammonium a PCE of up to 12.5%13 has been reported.14–16 Here, we developed a strategy for controlled growth of a 2D perovskite overlayer on a 3D perovskite to take advantages of both high efficiency of 3D and stability of 2D perovskites. This approach conceptually differs from previous studies mixing 3D and 2D perovskites together by adding bulky cations homogeneously into perovskite precursors.11,17–20 Indeed, by controlling the deposition parameter, a distinct 2D perovskite capping layer is obtained on top of the 3D perovskite film in the form of a layer by layer interface. When embodied in photovoltaic cells, this leads to a maximum PCE of 20.7%, representing a giant step forward with respect to the recent results of mixing 3D and 2D perovskites.20 Importantly, the efficiency remained 85% of the initial value after 800 hours of maximum power point tracking under full illumination at 50 °C temperature under ambient conditions (30–60% relative humidity) showing the superior stability of the 2D/3D approach.
We employed phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) to obtain a 2D perovskite in the form of PEA2PbI4. The PEAI bulky cation has a large molecular radius that causes anionic layers in the 3D architecture to be isolated and transform into a 2D perovskite.19,21,22 In particular, the PEA+ cation was demonstrated to improve the phase stability in FAPbI3 when a small amount of PEAI was added as quasi-3D FAxPEA1−xPbI3 perovskite23 and the change in valence band in (PEA)2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 was very negligible.24 However, different from typical methods of mixing cations together, we attained the surface growth of a 2D perovskite overlayer on top of a 3D perovskite by dynamic spin coating of a PEAI isopropanol (IPA) solution on an optimized lead excess pristine Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39 (CFMPIB) perovskite film. This technique can reduce the impact of the permeation of the IPA solution into the pristine perovskite films and provide a uniform thin PEAI film. For the pristine CFMPIB perovskite film, we exploited a lead excess stoichiometric ratio of a precursor perovskite solution (FAI:PbI2 = 1:1.05) due to its positive effect on reducing defects in perovskite films,25,26 and it was also aimed to be used for reacting with PEAI. The final perovskite film after the annealing process is called L-CFM/P (layered perovskite with CFMPIB and quasi-PEA2PbI4).
Results and discussion
Growth of the 2D perovskite thin layer and characterization

Fig. 1A shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of the CFMPIB and the L-CFM/P films coated on TiO2/FTO substrates. In the pristine CFMPIB perovskite film, the PbI2 peak (at 12.7°) is observed, demonstrating the presence of excess lead iodide in the CFMPIB precursor solution, as well as a δ-phase of the FA-based perovskite. However, when the PEAI IPA solution (10 mg ml−1) was coated on the CFMPIB film and annealed, the PbI2 and δ-phase peaks disappeared and new peaks at 5.44°, 10.8°, 16.3°, 21.7° and 27.3° were observed. We prepared a reference PEA2PbI4 film and measured the XRD data. By comparing the peak positions we observe that the newly formed perovskite is consistent with the PEA2PbI4 phase.21,23 Despite the formation of the 2D perovskite, the other peaks for the mixed 3D perovskite are scarcely modified both in intensities and positions. For the (111) crystal plane of the main 3D perovskite phase, the 2θ diffraction at 14° was zoomed and the full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) of CFMPIB and L-CFM/P was estimated as in Fig. S1 (ESI†). Whereas the PEA2PbI4 peak at 10.8° increased and the PbI2 peak at 12.7° disappeared when the films were heated, the main CFMPIB perovskite peak at 14.1° was neither shifted nor reduced. This change indicates that the PEA2PbI4 perovskite was generated separately in the CFMPIB perovskite film. As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), note that a strong peak at 4.69°, revealing the presence of PEAI, is reduced as the heating time increased. In addition, we fabricated perovskite films from a solution including the CFMPIB precursor and PEAI together, where the amount of added PEAI matched the excess molar ratio of PbI2 in the CFMPIB precursor solution (FAI:PEAI:PbI2 = 1:0.05:1.05). As shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), the PbI2 peak is not detected in the XRD pattern like the L-CFM/P film. Quite differently, however, the peak of PEA2PbI4 in the region around 5° is absent, indicating that in this case the 2D perovskite is not formed, as in the case of spin-coating the PEAI solution on pristine CFMPIB perovskite films. After spin coating the PEAI solution, it is interesting to notice that the colour of the L-CFM/P film changed to dark green compared to the pristine CFMPIB film, as shown by the images in the inset of Fig. 1B. Ultraviolet-Visible (UV-Vis) absorption and the reflectance spectra of CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and PEAI2PbI4 perovskite films are shown in Fig. 1B and C. The 2D perovskite presents a band edge at around 540 nm with a strong peak at 530 nm due to its excitonic feature. Considering the 2D/3D film, we observe a slight redshift of the band edge due to the formation of the 2D perovskite layer on top, in agreement with the literature showing that the addition of a small amount PEAI to mixed 3D perovskites redshifts the absorption edge.23 In addition, the presence of the 2D perovskite in L-CFM/P can also be confirmed from the presence of a small bump at 500 nm in the reflectance spectra. To further confirm the presence of the 2D perovskite layer, we performed photoluminescence (PL) analysis of the CFMPIB and L-CFM/P perovskites comparing the emission from the top and bottom of the perovskite sample (Fig. 2A, B and Fig. S4 (ESI†)). We used an excitation light of 450 nm which has a penetration depth of less than 100 nm.27,28 This implies that we mainly collect the PL from the first 100 nm-layer at the top or bottom of the perovskite, respectively. For CFMPIB, the PL peaks at 759 nm and 775 nm by exciting the top surface and the bottom interface of the perovskite film, respectively. The small shift in the peak position might be due to the different perovskite crystal size when confined in the mesoporous-TiO2 structure,29 but it is consistent with the band-edge emission of the 3D CFMPIB perovskite. On the other hand, strikingly, the L-CFM/P film shows a different behaviour upon comparing the top and bottom PL spectra. From the top surface of the L-CFM/P film, a strong peak at 508 nm and a weak peak at 765 nm were measured, while from the bottom side only one peak at 776 nm was observed. The peak at 508 nm from the top side is a signature of the emission of the newly formed 2D perovskite. In agreement with the XRD data, this provides compelling evidence for the presence of a separated layer of 2D perovskite on the top surface. It is worth noting that the PEA2PbI4 perovskite layer is very thin and the 3D pristine perovskite remains unreacted because of the presence of the small PL peak at 765 nm. The pristine perovskite phase was barely affected by the PEAI treatment, except for the modification of the top layer to the 2D perovskite film. We also conducted XRD analysis with fixed X-ray incident angles at 0.3°, 2° and 5° to elucidate the structure of the surface and internal perovskite layers (Fig. 2C and Fig. S5 (ESI†)). At a lower angle of incident beam, the XRD data are dominated more by the top of the perovskite layers. Moving the incident angle from 0.3° to 5°, the relative intensity of the signal corresponding to the internal 3D perovskite phase (14.1°) increased substantially in the L-CFM/P layer. The change from the surface to full depth diffractions reflects that the formation of PEA2PbI4 likely occurred on the surface of the perovskite films in further accordance with PL results.
 Fig. 1  Characterization of CFMPIB (Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39), L-CFM/P (PEA2PbI4 layered on CFMPIB), and PEA2PbI4 perovskites. (A) XRD spectra. α, δ, ★ and # denote diffraction peaks corresponding to the α, δ phases of the FAPbI3 based perovskite, PbI2 and FTO, respectively. The intensity for the PEA2PbI4 perovskite was reduced by a factor of 500 to put in the same figure with other perovskites. (B) UV-Vis spectra. The inset images in (B) show photo images of CFMPIB and L-CFM/P films, (C) diffuse reflectance spectra of these three perovskite films. All perovskite films examined for these measurements were prepared by coating on mesoporous TiO2/compact TiO2/FTO substrates. 
 Fig. 2  Comparison of photoluminescence emission spectra of CFMPIB and L-CFM/P perovskites. (A and B) Steady-state normalized PL spectra excited with a laser of 450 nm from the top surface of perovskite films (A) and bottom of perovskite films (B). Non-normalized PL of CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and PEA2PbI4 is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). (C) XRD data for the L-CFM/P film at X-ray incident angles of 0.3° (for surface) and 5° (for interior). α and # denote diffraction peaks corresponding to the α phase of the FAPbI3 based perovskite and FTO, respectively. 
Device structure, charge transfer, and charge recombination.
We fabricate PSCs comparing the pristine CFMPIB perovskite with the one treated with the L-CFM/P perovskite in a “mesoporous” architecture (fluorine doped tin oxide/compact and mesoporous TiO2/perovskite/spiro-OMeTAD/gold). The top view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of perovskite films revealed stark differences with/without the PEAI coating (Fig. 3A). The pristine CFMPIB perovskite deposited on top of the mesoporous TiO2 layer showed a compact, pinhole free morphology, and large grains having distinct grain boundaries like a rock wall. The 2D perovskite on top leads, on the other hand, to a more homogeneous and smoother film, with reduced grain boundaries. This can indicate decreased defects in the perovskite layer, possibly impacting positively on charge recombination. Atomic force microscope (AFM) measurement is made to further scrutinize the surface of the perovskite film (Fig. S6 (ESI†)). Results indicate that the root mean square roughness (Rq) value decreased after spin-coating PEAI and annealing, from 25.01 nm to 18.76 nm, again pointing towards a smoother morphology. In contrast to the variation of the top surfaces of perovskite films, their cross-sectional SEM images displayed no distinct difference (Fig. S7 (ESI†)). To elucidate the difference between the surface and perovskite bulk, a cross-sectional high-resolution scanning transmission electron microscopy (HR-STEM) image of the whole L-CFM/P device was taken as shown in Fig. 3B. The magnified view in Fig. 3C exhibits a region close to the surface having a different structure and distinct fringes compared to the perovskite bulk. To clearly visualize the structural difference at the top surface layer, we recorded a fast Fourier transform (FFT) pattern corresponding to the lattice fringe, as shown in the bottom inset in Fig. 3C and we generated an inverse FFT image of the marked reflection as shown in Fig. 3D. White patterns, indicating the same structure, at the top of the perovskite layer implies that our approach leads to the formation of the thin 2D perovskite layer effectively with a significantly distinct interface.
 Fig. 3  Morphologies of the perovskite film and PSCs with CFMPIB and L-CFM/P. (A) Top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the CFMPIB film (left) and the L-CFM/P film (right). (B) Cross-sectional STEM HAADF image of a complete device fabricated with L-CFM/P. (C) HR-STEM HAADF image from the surface region of L-CFM/P along with a magnified view in the right top inset. A fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of this grain is displayed in the bottom inset. (D) Inverse FFT from yellow spots in the FFT and the corresponding STEM HAADF image. 
The distinct thin 2D perovskite layer on CFMPIB films induces an energy band offset inside perovskite films which is expected to cause an increase of charge transfer of photo-generated electrons to TiO2 and to block the charge recombination at the interface of the perovskite/hole transporting layer (HTL) under illumination.30 Based on the Tauc plot (Fig. S8, ESI†) and ultra-violet photoelectron spectra (UPS) shown in Fig. 4A, the energy level diagram of L-CFM/P is illustrated in Fig. 4B. Considering the valence level coherence between the CFMPIB and PEA2PbI4 perovskites, the energy alignment suggests a favourable hole transfer within the stack. In the meantime, the photo-excited electrons in the conduction band of CFMPIB would be prevented from diffusing into the HTL because of the higher conduction energy level of PEA2PbI4.
 Fig. 4  Energy level diagram and photovoltaic performance of PSCs with CFMPIB and L-CFM/P. (A) Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) for CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and spiro film. For UPS measurement, each film, such as CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and spiro-OMeTAD (on L-CFM/P), was prepared on FTO/compact and mesoporous TiO2/like real devices. (B) Energy band diagram of the L-CFM/P device and description of how the 2D perovskite capping layer improved the PCE. At the rear region of the perovskite film, the new 2D perovskite having a wide band gap can block transfer of excited electrons to the HTM layer. The band gap of perovskites is determined from the PL measurement and Tauc plot (Fig. S8, ESI†). (C) J–V curves and hysteresis of PSCs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. (D) Histograms of the PCEs. (E) Photo-stability test from maximum power point tracking under 800 h continuous illumination of full intensity in an inert gas (blank ones) and ambient (filled ones) environment with encapsulated glass. 
To investigate the charge transfer kinetics within perovskite films, impedance spectroscopy on both samples was performed (Fig. S9, ESI†). In the Nyquist plot under the same open circuit voltage (880 mV), the L-CFM/P device showed a bigger low-frequency arc than the CFMPIB cell, where this arc at the low frequency is associated with the interface charge recombination process.31,32 The recombination resistance, obtained from the fitting of the arcs to the equivalent circuit model of the inset of Fig. S9 (ESI†), increased twice from the CFMPIB to the L-CFM/P based devices. This indicates a reduced charge recombination which can be explained through the favourable charge transfer at the perovskite interfaces. As shown by the time resolved PL decays probed at 770 nm on the perovskite surface at different pulse fluences (Fig. S10 and Table S1, ESI†), L-CFM/P showed a slightly faster decay than the pristine CFMPIB film at the initial time, where electron–hole bimolecular recombination dominated.33 Considering the fluence dependence of the PL signal, a similar behaviour is observed for the two perovskites, indicating a rather similar trap density (Fig. S11, ESI†).33 Thus, the slightly faster quenching of L-CFM/P can be due to the interfacial hole transfer from the CFMPIB perovskite to the top PEA2PbI4 layer, which possibly reduces the charge recombination as demonstrated by the impedance spectra.34
Device performance and stability
The effect of this strategy was proved by the photovoltaic performance of complete devices. Fig. 4C presents the current density–voltage (J–V) curves and hysteresis of devices with pristine CFMPIB and L-CFM/P perovskite films. Both cells show negligible hysteresis. We fabricated more than 100 PSCs with L-CFM/P, and the PCEs are summarized in the histogram (Fig. 4D) and statistical data (Fig. S12, ESI†). The devices with 3D/2D perovskite films presented improved efficiencies with a high degree of reproducibility. The best performing device with L-CFM/P achieved an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 1.15 V, a short-circuit current (JSC) of 22.73 mA cm−2, and a fill factor (FF) of 0.794, yielding a PCE of 20.75%. We recorded the corresponding incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) of each PSC (Fig. S13, ESI†). Although both devices show high IPCE, the device employing the passivating 2D perovskite layer has a slightly higher efficiency than the pristine perovskite device in the whole wavelength range from 400 nm to 800 nm. The integrated JSC values from the IPCE curve with the AM 1.5G solar spectrum are in agreement with the values obtained from the J–V measurement. We found that L-CFM/P can be employed on various ETLs or configurations by testing on a passivated planar SnO2 ETL (Fig. S14, ESI†).35
To study the stability effect of the 2D perovskite capping layer, we examined the long-term stability of the 2D perovskite containing films under dark storage and continuous illumination conditions. Firstly, for storage without continuous illumination, L-CFM/P enhanced device stability compared to the pristine CFMPIB perovskite (Fig. S15, ESI†) and maintained the initial PCE of 20%, while that of the device with pristine CFMPIB was decreased gradually. Fig. 4E presents maximum power point tracking (MPPT) of the CFMPIB (black) and L-CFM/P (red) PSCs for 800 hours stressed at 50 °C under continuous illumination of full intensity in an argon atmosphere (blank) and under ambient conditions (filled), where the relative humidity was maintained between 30% and 60% without controlling. The L-CFM/P devices displayed impressive improved stability even at 50 °C temperature in air, retaining 90% of the initial PCE after 800 hours under the inert gas condition and in 85% humid environment with encapsulation. However, the devices based on the pristine 3D perovskite showed faster degradation of performance.
The small initial drop and continuous degeneration of devices could also be due to the organic charge transport materials. However, despite spiro-OMeTAD being used in these PSCs as the HTM, which is known for instability due to dopants, metal electrode diffusion, and morphological decomposition,10,36 the L-CFM/P cells showed surprisingly stable performance even at 50 °C. Thus, it should be noted that 2D perovskite capping layer between the perovskite and HTM can minimize the negative effects of the organic HTM as a buffer layer. The stability improvement can also be confirmed without encapsulation in flowing constant humid air gas, 40 ± 5RH% (Fig. S16, ESI†). Although the performance of both devices decayed absolutely faster than that in the inert gas mainly for reasons related to the organic HTM, the relative stability of the PEAI treated perovskite solar cells was enhanced in comparison with the control pristine device.
As a comparison, we also prepared solar cells using a precursor solution mixing CFMPIB and PEAI (Fig. S17, ESI†; see XRD spectra comparison in Fig. S3, ESI†). This strategy leads to a fine distribution of the 2D perovskite in the bulk which however leads to a dramatic drop in performance.
Conclusions
In conclusion, our strategy demonstrates an innovative method to engineer interfaces and direct the growth of a low dimensional perovskite which leads to improved stability and efficiency when employed in solar cells. Different from simply mixing low dimensional perovskite precursor cations, we modified the surface of the perovskite film to obtain a distinct lower dimensional – 2D – perovskite at the top surface. A different perovskite layer with a clear interface is observed and identified by optical and structural characterization comparing the surface and the bulk. In addition, the wide band gap of the newly grown perovskite at the interface between the hole transporting layer and the absorbing layer leads to favoured hole transfer, possibly reducing the charge recombination and overall resulting in enhanced efficiency. In conclusion, our investigation opens the possibility of controlling the growth of a layer by layer perovskite by low-cost solution processing. Most significantly, the presence of such low dimensional perovskite layer results in the improvement of the device stability. This approach can be generalized as a standard route to optimize perovskites for long term stability maintaining high efficiency, pushing the perovskite technology in the market, for photovoltaics and beyond.
Experimental methods
Materials
Formamidinium iodide (FAI) and methylammonium bromide (MABr) were purchased from Dyesol. Lead iodide (PbI2) and lead bromide (PbBr2) were obtained from TCI. Cesium iodide (CsI) was purchased from GmbH. Phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) was synthesized.21 10 ml of phenylethylamine was diluted in 20 ml of anhydrous ethanol and cooled in an ice bath. With vigorous stirring, 20 ml of HI (55 wt% in H2O, Sigma Aldrich) was slowly added dropwise. After stirring for 20 min, a colorless precipitate was filtered. The precipitate was washed with diethyl ether and dissolved in methanol twice. To obtain pure white crystals, the PEAI precipitate was recrystallized twice and stored in a vacuum oven overnight to dry.
Perovskite solar cell fabrication
FTO glass substrates (Nippon sheet glass) were sequentially cleaned with detergent solution, acetone, and ethanol. And then by spray pyrolysis deposition, a compact TiO2 layer was coated on the cleaned FTO substrate heated at 450 °C. The precursor solution was prepared by diluting titanium diisopropoxide (Sigma-Aldrich) in ethanol (0.6 ml:10 ml). After cooling, a mesoporous TiO2 film was prepared by coating a diluted TiO2 paste (Dyesol 30 NR-D) solution in ethanol. Right after spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 20 s, the substrates were sintered on a hot plate at 500 °C for 30 min. For doping Li on TiO2, the films were treated with 0.1 M lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonimidate solution (Li-TFSI, Aldrich) in acetonitrile by spin-coating at 3000 rpm for 10 s, and were finally baked at 500 °C for 30 min again. The lead excess (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 precursor solution was prepared by mixing FAI (1.1 M), PbI2 (1.15 M), MABr (0.2 M) and PbBr2 (0.2 M) in a mixed solvent of DMF:DMSO = 4:1 (volume ratio). Another 1.15 M solution of CsPbI3 was also prepared in DMF:DMSO (with the same volume ratio). For triple cation mixed perovskite solution, (FAPbI3)0.85(MAPbBr3)0.15 and CsPbI3 solutions were mixed in 10 vol% ratio. The solution was then spin-coated at 1000 rpm for 10 s and continuously at 4000 rpm for 30 s in a nitrogen glove box. After entering the second step, 100 μl of anhydrous trifluorotoluene was poured 15 seconds before the completion of the process.37 Films were then annealed at 100 °C for 60 min. For forming an additional 2D perovskite film on top of this perovskite film, cooled substrates were treated with a PEAI isopropanol solution. 100 μl of PEAI solution (15 mg ml−1) were spin-coated on the as-prepared perovskite films at 4000 rpm, which is similar to the anti-solvent dropping method. Finally, spiro-OMeTAD was spin-coated at 4000 rpm for 20 s. A 70 mM spiro-OMeTAD solution was prepared by dissolving in chlorobenzene with 4-tert-butylpyridine, Li-TFSI in acetonitrile, and Co[t-BuPyPz]3[TFSI]3 (FK209) in acetonitrile at a molar ratio of spiro:FK209:Li-TFSI:TBP of 1:0.03:0.5:3.3. Devices were completed with thermal evaporation of a 70 nm thick gold counter electrode.
For devices based on the planar SnO2 ETL,35 compact TiO2/FTO substrates were prepared as explained previously for mesoporous TiO2. A PTO layer was prepared by spin-coating a precursor solution of SnCl4 (Acros) dissolved in water. 0.1 M SnCl4 aqueous solution was spin-coated at 5000 rpm for 10 s on the substrates to get ∼20 nm thickness. Then the substrates were transferred onto a hotplate and heated at 180 °C for 1 h and cooled down.
Perovskite characterization
X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis in an angle range of 2θ = 3° to 30° was carried out using a Bruker D8 Advance diffractometer. The absorbance and reflectance measurements were performed with an integrating sphere using a UV/Vis/NIR spectrophotometer (PerkinElmer Lamda). Photoluminescence were measured using a Flourolog-3 (Horiba Scientific) with an excitation laser of 450 nm. High-resolution scanning electron microscope (SEM) images were obtained on a ZEISS Merlin at an accelerating voltage of 5 kV. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images were acquired using a Park NX10 (Park system) and analyzed with XEI AFM data analysis software.
Time-resolved PL experiments were performed with a spectrophotometer (Gilden Photonics) using a pulsed source at 480 nm (Ps diode lasers BDS-SM). The time-resolved signals were recorded by a Time Correlated Single Photon Counting detection technique with a time resolution of 1 ns.
For the STEM and STEM-EDX measurements, cross-sectional lamellae were prepared from the devices using the conventional focused ion beam (FIB) lift-out technique on a Zeiss Nvision 40. To reduce FIB induced damage, a final thinning in the FIB at 5 kV using a beam current of 80 pA was employed. To minimize exposure to air, the data were acquired just after the FIB preparation. STEM imaging and energy dispersive X-ray analysis were performed on an aberration-corrected FEI Titan Themis 60-300 transmission electron microscope in scanning mode at an accelerating voltage of 200 kV. This microscope is equipped with a high brightness X-FEG gun and Bruker Super-X EDX detectors (four windowless silicon drift detectors).
The impedance spectra measurements were carried out with an SP-200 BioLogic potentiostat with an AC perturbation of 10 mV from 75 mHz to 1 MHz, at room temperature with 5% humidity. The illumination was tuned with an Oriel DC Regulated illuminator in order to make Voc = 880, which corresponds to the operation region of the samples (Voc = 1.1 V at 1 sun). With fitting purposes, in addition to the elements included in the equivalent circuit shown in the inset of Fig. 4A, extra series resistive and inductive elements were also considered. In the equivalent circuit Rb and Cb are the resistive and capacitive elements, respectively, behind the high frequency arc in the Nyquist plot, whose physical meaning is related to dielectric and chemical bulk properties. On the other hand, RS and CS analogously characterize the high frequency arc whose nature may be associated with interface phenomena.
Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) was carried out in an ultrahigh vacuum. The photon line width was ∼250 meV and the minimum spot size was ∼1 mm. He I photons (21.2 eV) with a bias of 5 eV were used to acquire the spectra at a normal emission level. The photoelectrons were collected using a Sigma Probe (Thermo VG Scientific) with 50 meV precision.
Solar cell measurement
Photovoltaic performance was evaluated using commercial solar simulators (Oriel, 450 W, Xenon, AAA class). The light intensity was matched to one sun (AM 1.5G or 100 mW cm−2) by calibrating with a Si reference cell equipped with an IR-cutoff filter (KG5, Newport), and it was done before each measurement. Current–voltage (J–V) curves of the PSCs were obtained by applying an external voltage bias while measuring the current response using a Keithley 2400 digital source meter. The voltage scan rate was 25 mV s−1 in forward and reverse scans. Devices were not preconditioned such as light soaking or a pre-voltage bias applied before starting the measurement. The cells were masked with an active area of 0.16 cm2. EQE was measured using an IQE200B (Oriel) without bias light.
Stability tests were carried out in a sealed cell holder with a glass cover (house made), where argon gas was filled to remove the residual water and oxygen from the holder. For the ambient condition test, the argon gas was turned off and the humidity and oxygen were not controlled, and the cells were encapsulated with surlyn (solaronix) and glass coverslips. In this case, the humidity was not controlled but the laboratory humidity was monitored, which ranged from 30 to 60% relative humidity at room temperature. In the glass cover, 0.1225 cm2 masks were equipped. The LED lamp used in the system had a light intensity of 100 mW cm−2. J–V curves were recorded on an electronic system using a 22 bit delta-sigma analog to digital converter. A scan rate of 25 mV s−1 with a step size of 5 mV was used and the devices were kept at the temperature of 50 °C. Every 2 hours the J–V measurement and maximum power point tracking were performed. A reference Si-photodiode was placed in the same holder to check the intensity of the light.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
K. C. and S. P. designed and fabricated the devices. K. C. conducted XRD, UV-vis, and SEM. G. G. conducted PL measurements. Y. H. fabricated SnO2 based devices. E. O. performed the STEM measurement. J. R. and J. J. conducted AFM and UPS measurements. O. A. and G. G. B. conducted the impedance measurement. T. M. set up stability testing. M. N. directed the research and supervised the overall project. It is appreciated that G. S., S. H., and J. P. tried to measure EDX. The authors acknowledge SNSF NRP 70 project; number: 407040_154056, European Commission H2020-ICT-2014-1,SOLEDLIGHT project, grant agreement N1: 643791 and the SwissState Secretariat for Education, Research and Innovation (SERI), and CTI 15864.2 PFNM-NM, Solaronix, Aubonne, Switzerland. G. G. acknowledges the Swiss National Science Foundation (SNSF) funding through the Ambizione Energy project HYPER (grant number PZENP2_173641). G. G.-B. acknowledges MINECO of Spain for funding under project MAT2016-76892-C3-3-R and Y. L. acknowledges support from Special funding for energy research, managed by Prof. Andreas ZÜTTEL, Funds N1 563074. O. A. acknowledges Generalitat Valenciana for a grant (GRISOLIAP2014/035). This work was supported by the Global Frontier R&D Program of the Center for Multiscale Energy System funded by the National Research Foundation under the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, Korea (NRF-2012M3A6A7054861). We thank Borun New Material Technology for providing high quality spiro-OMeTAD.
Notes and references
B. Obama, Science, 2017, 355, 126–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, M. Grätzel, T. Miyasaka, K. Zhu and K. Emery, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16152 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. E. L. (NREL), Research Cell Efficiency Records.
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D’Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, K. Appavoo, H. Tsai, M. Chhowalla, M. A. Alam, M. Y. Sfeir, C. Katan, J. Even, S. Tretiak, J. J. Crochet, G. Gupta and A. D. Mohite, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, S. Meyer, Y. Dkhissi, K. Weber, J. M. Pringle, U. Bach, L. Spiccia and Y.-B. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8139–8147 CAS .
X. Li, D. Bi, C. Yi, J.-D. Décoppet, J. Luo, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 353, 58–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. P. McMeekin, N. Sakai, S. van Reenen, K. Wojciechowski, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Adv. Mater., 2016, 29, 164186 Search PubMed .
J. W. Lee, D. H. Kim, H. S. Kim, S. W. Seo, S. M. Cho and N. G. Park, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501310 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. C. Smith, E. T. Hoke, D. Solis-Ibarra, M. D. McGehee and H. I. Karunadasa, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11232–11235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Shin, E. J. Yeom, W. S. Yang, S. Hur, M. G. Kim, J. Im, J. Seo, J. H. Noh and S. I. Seok, Science, 2017, 356, 167–171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Nature, 2015, 517, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Grancini, C. Roldán-Carmona, I. Zimmermann, E. Mosconi, X. Lee, D. Martineau, S. Narbey, F. Oswald, F. De Angelis, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, P. Gao, R. Scopelliti, E. Oveisi, J. Luo, M. Grätzel, A. Hagfeldt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2910–2915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, O. Wang, K. Liu, X. Du, L. Guo and H. Liu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 162, 93–102 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Q. Lin, F. P. Chmiel, N. Sakai, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17135 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-E. Cohen, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604733 CrossRef .
N. Li, Z. Zhu, C.-C. Chueh, H. Liu, B. Peng, A. Petrone, X. Li, L. Wang and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 7, 1601307 CrossRef .
M. Yuan, L. N. Quan, R. Comin, G. Walters, R. Sabatini, O. Voznyy, S. Hoogland, Y. Zhao, E. M. Beauregard, P. Kanjanaboos, Z. Lu, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 872–877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bi, W. Tress, M. I. Dar, P. Gao, J. Luo, C. Renevier, K. Schenk, A. Abate, F. Giordano, J. P. Correa Baena, J. D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel and A. Hagfeldt, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501170 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Kim, N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, W. S. Yang, J. Seo, J. S. Yun, A. Ho-Baillie, S. Huang, M. A. Green, J. Seidel, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 6, 1502104 CrossRef .
C. Roldan-Carmona, P. Gratia, I. Zimmermann, G. Grancini, P. Gao, M. Graetzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3550–3556 CAS .
J. J. van Franeker, K. H. Hendriks, B. J. Bruijnaers, M. W. G. M. Verhoeven, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601822 CrossRef .
G. Grancini, S. Marras, M. Prato, C. Giannini, C. Quarti, F. De Angelis, M. De Bastiani, G. E. Eperon, H. J. Snaith, L. Manna and A. Petrozza, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3836–3842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Cho, S. Paek, G. Grancini, C. Roldan-Carmona, P. Gao, Y. Lee and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 621–627 CAS .
O. Almora, C. Aranda, E. Mas-Marzá and G. Garcia-Belmonte, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 173903 CrossRef .
A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, I. Mora-Sero, J. Bisquert, Y. S. Kang, T. J. Jacobsson, J.-P. Correa-Baena and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8023–8032 CAS .
M. Saba, M. Cadelano, D. Marongiu, F. Chen, V. Sarritzu, N. Sestu, C. Figus, M. Aresti, R. Piras, A. Geddo Lehmann, C. Cannas, A. Musinu, F. Quochi, A. Mura and G. Bongiovanni, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Yue, J. Liu, W. Zhang, X. Yang, H. Chen, E. Bi, I. Ashraful, M. Grätzel and L. Han, Science, 2015, 350, 944–948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lee, S. Paek, K. T. Cho, E. Oveisi, P. Gao, S. Lee, J.-S. Park, Y. Zhang, R. Humphry-Baker, A. M. Asiri and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12729–12734 CAS .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Paek, P. Schouwink, E. N. Athanasopoulou, K. T. Cho, G. Grancini, Y. Lee, Y. Zhang, F. Stellacci, M. K. Nazeeruddin and P. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3490–3498 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee03513fThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells with astonishing power conversion efficiency (PCE) values exceeding 22% are predicted to become a cost-effective photovoltaic technology but are yet to reach commercialization due to their poor stability under operation. We improved the stability of perovskite solar cells by employing a thin two-dimensional (2D) perovskite layer on top of a three-dimensional (3D) perovskite film. In contrast to previous methods, our modified devices include a distinct layer of 2D perovskite because of the use of large cations. By intercalating a wide band-gap 2D perovskite layer, the charge carrier recombination at the interface was reduced, and the efficiency was enhanced. The perovskite solar cell devices retained 85% of the initial PCE stressed under one sun illumination for 800 hours at 50 °C. Our passivating method with a 2D perovskite layer guides towards reaching higher stability and efficiency of perovskite solar cells.


 	Fig. 1  Characterization of CFMPIB (Cs0.1FA0.74MA0.13PbI2.48Br0.39), L-CFM/P (PEA2PbI4 layered on CFMPIB), and PEA2PbI4 perovskites. (A) XRD spectra. α, δ, ★ and # denote diffraction peaks corresponding to the α, δ phases of the FAPbI3 based perovskite, PbI2 and FTO, respectively. The intensity for the PEA2PbI4 perovskite was reduced by a factor of 500 to put in the same figure with other perovskites. (B) UV-Vis spectra. The inset images in (B) show photo images of CFMPIB and L-CFM/P films, (C) diffuse reflectance spectra of these three perovskite films. All perovskite films examined for these measurements were prepared by coating on mesoporous TiO2/compact TiO2/FTO substrates.	 

 	Fig. 2  Comparison of photoluminescence emission spectra of CFMPIB and L-CFM/P perovskites. (A and B) Steady-state normalized PL spectra excited with a laser of 450 nm from the top surface of perovskite films (A) and bottom of perovskite films (B). Non-normalized PL of CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and PEA2PbI4 is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). (C) XRD data for the L-CFM/P film at X-ray incident angles of 0.3° (for surface) and 5° (for interior). α and # denote diffraction peaks corresponding to the α phase of the FAPbI3 based perovskite and FTO, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphologies of the perovskite film and PSCs with CFMPIB and L-CFM/P. (A) Top-view scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of the CFMPIB film (left) and the L-CFM/P film (right). (B) Cross-sectional STEM HAADF image of a complete device fabricated with L-CFM/P. (C) HR-STEM HAADF image from the surface region of L-CFM/P along with a magnified view in the right top inset. A fast Fourier transform (FFT) image of this grain is displayed in the bottom inset. (D) Inverse FFT from yellow spots in the FFT and the corresponding STEM HAADF image.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy level diagram and photovoltaic performance of PSCs with CFMPIB and L-CFM/P. (A) Ultra-violet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) for CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and spiro film. For UPS measurement, each film, such as CFMPIB, L-CFM/P, and spiro-OMeTAD (on L-CFM/P), was prepared on FTO/compact and mesoporous TiO2/like real devices. (B) Energy band diagram of the L-CFM/P device and description of how the 2D perovskite capping layer improved the PCE. At the rear region of the perovskite film, the new 2D perovskite having a wide band gap can block transfer of excited electrons to the HTM layer. The band gap of perovskites is determined from the PL measurement and Tauc plot (Fig. S8, ESI†). (C) J–V curves and hysteresis of PSCs at a scan rate of 25 mV s−1. (D) Histograms of the PCEs. (E) Photo-stability test from maximum power point tracking under 800 h continuous illumination of full intensity in an inert gas (blank ones) and ambient (filled ones) environment with encapsulated glass.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7ee03513f

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
