Tin oxide based nanostructured materials: synthesis and potential applications  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR07040A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR07040A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 1566-1605Tin oxide based nanostructured materials: synthesis and potential applications

        
          
            Soumya Ranjan 
            Mishra
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Md. 
            Ahmaruzzaman
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology, Silchar – 788010, Assam, India. E-mail: mda2002@gmail.com
Received 
      24th October 2021
    , Accepted 15th December 2021First published on 16th December 2021AbstractIn view of their inimitable characteristics and properties, SnO2 nanomaterials and nanocomposites have been used not only in the field of diverse advanced catalytic technologies and sensors but also in the field of energy storage such as lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, and in the field of energy production such as solar cells and water splitting. This review discusses the various synthesis techniques such as traditional methods, including processes like thermal decomposition, chemical vapor deposition, electrospinning, sol–gel, hydrothermal, solvothermal, and template-mediated methods and green methods, which include synthesis through plant-mediated, microbe-mediated, and biomolecule-mediated processes. Moreover, the advantages and limitations of these synthesis procedures and how to overcome them that would lead to future research are also discussed. This literature also focuses on various applications such as environmental remediation, energy production, energy storage, and removal of biological contaminants. Therefore, the rise and journey of SnO2-based nanocomposites will motivate the modern generation of chemists to modify and design robust nanoparticles and nanocomposites that can effectively tackle significant environmental challenges. This overview concludes by providing future perspectives on research into tin oxide in synthesis and its various applications.Soumya Ranjan MishraSoumya Ranjan Mishra is a research scholar in the Department of Chemistry, NIT Silchar. He was awarded an M.Sc in chemistry from the same institute. He has published several research papers in international journals and at conferences. He is working in the area of nanostructured semiconductor-based photocatalysts for the remediation of emerging environmental pollutants and energy production.Md. AhmaruzzamanMd. Ahmaruzzaman is currently working as a senior associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Silchar, India. He has been ranked in the top 2% of scientists in the world for the last two consecutive years and also declared as "Best Scientist in University" in the world scientist and university ranking 2021, published by AD SCIENTIFIC INDEX. His worldwide ranking (subject wise) is 24. He received his postgraduate M.Sc. degree. (Chemistry) from North Bengal University after his graduation from the same University. He also received his postgraduate M.Tech. degree. (Energy Science & Technology) from Jadavpur University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. He has supervised several projects at postgraduate level and produced more than ten PhDs. He has published more than 170 research papers in international journals as well as at various national and international conferences. He has more than 9000 citations in international journals. He is a reviewer of various peer-reviewed reputed international and national journals. He is the Co-Editor of Current Photochemistry and also Section Editor of Current Materials Science journal.
1. Introduction
Toxic contaminants such as organic pollutants, including dyes, pharmaceutical compounds, organic compounds, pesticides, and inorganic pollutants including heavy metals and salt ions, are released into water bodies by various industries, agricultural sectors, and even households.1–5 These pollutants are carcinogenic and neurogenic and thus profoundly impact the lives of living organisms and threaten our environment. Also, these contaminants accumulate in aquatic organisms and reach the human body via the food chain.6–9 Over the past two decades, many methods have been used, such as coagulation, membrane processing, adsorption, ion exchange, and photocatalysis to remove these toxic contaminants.10–12 Photocatalysis using nanocatalysts is the most promising method to decrease the pollutants in the environment. Researchers have achieved great heights in this field but are yet to overcome the obstacle of large-scale applications.13
A significant amount of work is underway to synthesize, characterize, and modify nanocatalysts, as they have shown applications in pharmaceuticals, textiles, cosmetics, and even energy science and engineering.14–17 Nanoscience deals with nanomaterials having a size range of about 1–100 nanometers. Nanomaterials show improved electrical, optical, magnetic, and catalytic properties compared with their bulk material due to their high surface area to volume ratio and significantly smaller size.18–20 Moreover, nanoparticles are more reactive as the surface contains 90% of the atoms, whereas in the case of bulk particles, the atom concentration on the surface decreases to 1%. Due to these exceptional characteristics, nanoparticles are profoundly used in critical sectors of modern science and engineering, such as in industry, biosensors, nano-medicines and pharmaceuticals, photocatalysis, and cleaning agents.21 Among the nanoparticles, SnO2 is relatively popular among researchers because of its wide variety of applications, as shown in Fig. 1. SnO2, commonly called tin oxide, forms a strong interaction between the adsorbed contaminant chemically and physically, thus increasing its stability. As the SnO2 nanoparticles have a high bandgap (∼3.7 eV) and thermal stability (∼873 K), they are primarily used in glass coatings, catalysis, sensors, cognitive remediation, and lithium-ion batteries.22–25 SnO2 is also ideal for optoelectronic devices,26 field emission displays,27 light-emitting diodes,28 dye-based solar cells29 and anti-static coatings.30 As a transition metal nanoparticle, SnO2 is biocompatible, less toxic, and eco-friendly in terms of synthesis and usage.31
 Fig. 1  Applications of SnO2 nanoparticles. 
The synthesis of nanoparticles by traditional methods is conducted with various precautions due to the involvement of toxic reagents. These traditional methods involve synthesizing nanoparticles, especially SnO2, by various physical and chemical methods such as hydrothermal, electrochemical, electrospinning, microwave irradiation, photochemical, and solid vapor deposition methods.32–36 As these methods were not environment-friendly and cost-effective, researchers switched to green synthesis.37 The green synthesis methods were pure and non-toxic and were eco-friendly and cost-effective.38,39 This piece of literature focuses on the structure, properties, and synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites. Also, it discusses various applications, such as environmental remediation by photocatalytic activity and sensors, energy production by solar cells and water splitting, energy storage by lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, and biological contaminant removal because of the antimicrobial activity of SnO2 nanoparticles and SnO2-based nanocomposites.
1.1. Scope of the review
Many articles that specifically deal with the green method of synthesizing tin oxide nanoparticles and their applications were recently published. To date, and to the best of our knowledge, no comprehensive review has focused on the various synthesis procedures of SnO2 nanoparticles and their potential applications in the field of environment and energy. This review provides a broad overview of the advantages and limitations of traditional and green synthesis methods for SnO2 nanoparticles and their nanocomposites. Previously, few pieces of literature have been published that have showcased some specific applications of SnO2 nanoparticles like photocatalytic degradation, sensors, or lithium-ion batteries. However, a single review article is yet to be published covering nearly all the applications of tin oxide nanoparticles and their nanocomposites, including photocatalytic activity, solar cells, fuel cells, supercapacitors, water-splitting, and antimicrobial activity. In addition, we also discuss the role and applications of tin oxide nanocomposites. Finally, we offer a new perspective on designing and synthesizing nano tin-oxide-based structures in diverse applications. We anticipate that this review will inspire a broad community of scientists involved in the design and development of SnO2-based nanoparticles and their nanocomposites.
Since the discovery of SnO2 nanoparticles, incredible research progress has been achieved not only in the field of green synthesis methods, where they act as antimicrobial agents or show cytotoxic activity, but also in various applications, including environmental remediation energy production, and storage. Over the last decade, there has been a significant increase in the number of publications in the field of energy and the environment reporting the application of SnO2-based nanoparticles and nanocomposites as critical materials. Fig. 2 indicates the growth and importance of the research in the field of SnO2-based nanomaterials. This citation index figure is taken from the ‘Web of Science’ with the keyword search “tin oxide nanoparticles”.
 Fig. 2  Publications identified via the keywords ‘tin oxide nanoparticles’ from 2010 to October 2021. The number of publications for the search all field: ‘tin oxide nanoparticles’, timespan: 2011–2021, indexes = SCI, SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, as found in Web of Science (date: 10th October 2021). 
2. Synthesis of tin oxide and tin-oxide-based nanocomposites
2.1. Traditional methods

2.1.1. Thermal deposition. 
This synthesis method is typically performed in a tube furnace, where the source materials, usually used in condensed and powdered form, are vaporized at a very high temperature. Then this vaporized material is condensed to form the desired nanostructure by controlling conditions like substrate amount, temperature, and pressure.40–44 Researchers are working on various synthesis routes to prepare nanomaterials and nanocomposites for specific applications. For nanocomposite synthesis, factors such as the kinetic energy of the added dopant atom, source to substrate ratio, and metal coating thickness come into play.45,46Fig. 347 shows the horizontal furnace along with its various heating zones. Thermal deposition, when paired with evaporation–condensation, vapor–liquid–solid, and vapor–solid processes, produces exciting results. Luo et al.48 synthesized tin oxide nanowires and nanobelts by thermal oxidation aided by the vapor–liquid–solid process to study photoluminescence. The prepared nanowires were obtained very precisely due to the fine-tuning of the temperature in the tube furnace. To achieve the desired morphology, Zhang et al.49 used the thermal deposition method to synthesize graphite-based TiO2/SnO2. Here graphite was used along with the source material, and TiO2 was added as the substrate to obtain the desired ultrawide nanowires and nanobelts. The SEM images of the nanowires and nanobelts of the nanocomposite are shown in Fig. 4.49
 Fig. 3  Schematic diagram illustrating a horizontal heating furnace along with various heating zones. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2005. 
 Fig. 4  a–c represent SEM images for nanowires, and d–f represent SEM images for nanobelts. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission of IOP science, copyright 2009. 


2.1.2. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD). 
In this CVD method, the substrate interacts with one or more precursors. With the help of carrier gases, the vaporized precursors are introduced to the substrate. The desired nanocomposite and nanostructures are obtained when the atoms released from the precursor bind powerfully to the substrates, leading to nucleation and growth of the product.50,51 As the vaporized precursors achieve the high temperature in the furnace, supersaturation is reached and they precipitate on the surface when cooled, resulting in nucleation and growth of the nanostructure.52,53 Wang et al.54 used the thermal chemical vapor deposition technique to synthesize plate- and chrysanthemum-shaped SnO2 on single silicon substrates. In this process, a carbothermal evaporation of tin oxide and activated carbon took place with the help of a Au–Ag alloy. Cube-like SnO2 was also synthesized using the chemical vapor deposition technique without the aid of any catalyst.55 Ma et al.56 produced molybdenum-doped SnO2 to test its conductivity using chemical vapor deposition. The synthesized tin oxide nanoparticles were tetragonal in structure, and showed lower resistance and higher transmittance. The SEM images of SnO2 and Mo-doped SnO2 are shown in Fig. 5.56 The researchers found that the SnO2 nanostructures were spherical and agglomerated to form homogeneous sizes before doping. The CVD method has been proved to be very important in nanotechnology as it provides a dense coating and porous surface, varying the morphology.57
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of SnO2. (b) SEM image of Mo-doped (1.9%) SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021. 


2.1.3. Electrospinning. 
Ultrathin nanofibers are synthesized by electrospinning through an electrically charged jet of a polymer solution. The electrospinning setup consists of a syringe holding the polymer solution, two electrodes, and a DC voltage supply in the kilovolt range, as shown in Fig. 6.58 Due to the high voltage, the dripping polymer from the syringe is added to the fiber. The polymer becomes looped by the fiber due to the bending of the fiber by the charge, and the diameter decreases. This process goes on until ultrathin nanofibers are obtained and collected.59
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the electrospinning setup. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2010. 
Apart from nanofibers, the electrospinning method results in the formation of nanotubes and nanoflowers like 1D SnO2 structures.60,61 As the nanostructures produced by this method are highly porous, they have potential applications in photocatalysis, lithium-ion batteries, and sensors. Jiang et al.62 synthesized Eu2O3/Au/SnO2 nanofibers via the electrospinning method to detect the presence of acetone in an aqueous solution. Due to the synergistic effect of the ternary nanofibers, the nanocomposite showed a very high efficiency in sensing acetone. Researchers also synthesized porous rutile SnO2 nanotubes by using a precursor solution of poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), chloroform (CHCl3), and dimethyldineodecanoate Sn (C22H44O4Sn).63 Wang et al.64 developed SnO2 hollow microtubes for efficient photocatalytic activity, which showed speedy degradation, high stability, and reusability. Fig. 764 shows the XRD spectra of SnO2 microtubes before and after photocatalytic activity. It was found that both the intensity and position of the peaks were similar and were not affected by the photocatalytic activity, concluding that the synthesized microtube was stable in UV light irradiation.
 Fig. 7  XRD pattern of (a) SnO2 microtube, and (b) SnO2 microtube after photocatalytic activity. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013. 


2.1.4. Spray pyrolysis. 
In spray pyrolysis, the characteristics of significant nanoparticles, such as the properties, thickness, and surface morphology, are often controlled by the deposition temperature and the preliminary droplet size.65 This technique is used mainly due to its low operational cost, extensive surface area coverage, and ease of mass production.66–68 Spray pyrolysis is mainly used to add a metal oxide layer, including SnO2, on various nanoparticles and nanocomposites.69 Itoh et al.70 synthesized an In/SnO2 nanocomposite by adding SnO2 onto indium nanoparticles by salt-assisted spray pyrolysis (SASP) and low-pressure spray pyrolysis (LPSP). The prepared nanocomposites were crystalline and dense, and required minimal heating time. SnO2 heterostructures were synthesized using SnCl4·5H2O as a precursor, with the help of chemical spray pyrolysis.71 A polycrystalline sample was obtained with a bandgap of 3.54 eV and was used for optical applications.
Furthermore, Paloly and Bushiri72 synthesized nanostructured SnO2 thin films using the chemical spray pyrolysis technique. The researcher duo studied the changes in the properties of the produced heterostructures by using six solvents. Similarly, another group of researchers synthesized SnSe–SnO2 nanocomposites by adding a thin layer of SnO2 on SnSe nanospheres by spray pyrolysis.73 Kumar et al.74 synthesized Nd/SnO2 nanofilms using the spray pyrolysis technique to study the optical properties and optoelectronic applications. The produced nanocomposite showed high crystallinity and a good surface morphology. Liu et al.75 synthesized an Sb/SnO2 nanocomposite using the spray pyrolysis technique and investigated the photovoltaic activity. This research group used the nanocomposite for organic solar cells and concluded that this synthesis technique solved the existing interfacial problems.


2.1.5. Vapor–liquid–solid growth. 
In 1964, Wagner and Ellis76 first introduced the metal catalyst-supported vapor–liquid–solid technique for the growth of silicon whiskers. The metal catalyst is transformed into liquid alloy droplets at high temperatures and absorbs the vapor component. Then this liquid alloy droplet helps precipitate the vapor components on the liquid–solid interface. Thus, the research duo concluded that a vapor-phase precursor is needed to obtain a solid 1D nanomaterial, where the vapor phase supersaturates a liquid catalyst. This technique is widely used, highly efficient, and accepted for producing 1D nanomaterials, where the produced nanowires are grown on the metal-coated surface.49,77–79 Budak et al.80 mentioned that one-dimensional crystalline SnO2 nanowires had been produced by the carbothermal reduction of tin oxide nanopowder followed by thermal evaporation of the reduced vapor precursor and growth via the vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism. Similarly, Choi81 synthesized metal oxide nanowires for optoelectronics using a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism. In addition, Johari et al.42 also showed the synthesis of SnO2 nanowires via a vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) growth mechanism where the metal oxide is grown on Au/Si nanospheres to form a SnO2/Au/Si nanocomposite.


2.1.6. Sol–gel processing. 
This method is one of the prevalent traditional methods among researchers to synthesize nanoparticles and nanocomposites. Sol–gel processing also helps in varying the morphology of binary and ternary nanocomposites.82 The method is preferred for producing oxide materials and is easy to use as it works even at room temperature. The nanostructured materials are converted first to a colloidal suspension called a sol and then to an irreversible gel by the hydrolysis and polymerization of compatible precursors. The reagents are added to the solvents rapidly to achieve discrete nucleation and proper growth.83 Periathai et al.84 synthesized nanosized rutile tetragonal SnO2 by sol–gel processing, maintaining a constant pH of 8, and following a soft chemical synthesis route.85 SnO2/SiO2 was synthesized by Liu et al.86 to oxidize the sulfur-containing contaminants from water and wastewater. The authors followed a sol–gel methodology using SnCl2-based DESs as the loading component.
Similarly, using the sol–gel spin coating technique, Sivakumar et al.87 synthesized Ti-doped SnO2 to investigate its electrical and optical properties. The AFM micrographs obtained were used to study the surface morphology, shown in Fig. 8.87 The study revealed that the microstructures had grown homogeneously, and the doped Ti atoms were attached to the surface of the SnO2 without diffusing into it. The doping % of Ti gradually increased, leading to a decrease in the size of the desired Ti-doped-SnO2 nanostructures.
 Fig. 8  AFM micrographs showing (a) SnO2 nanostructures, (b) Ti-doped (1%)-SnO2, (c) Ti-doped (2%)-SnO2, (d) Ti-doped (3%)-SnO2, (e) Ti-doped (4%)-SnO2, and (f) Ti-doped (5%)-SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021. 


2.1.7. Hydrothermal and solvothermal process. 
This conventional methodology is primarily carried out in a sealed vessel, where the solvents are used at temperatures higher than the boiling point. In this process, a Teflon-lined steel chamber is used to control the temperature but not the pressure. So, the pressure developed elevates the boiling point, and the lining withstands a temperature of 623 K. Due to these characteristics, the hydrothermal and solvothermal method is widely accepted among researchers to grow nanomaterials.88,89 Hydrothermal terminology is adopted when water is used as the solvent for the reaction, while solvothermal terminology is applied when any solvent, including organic solvents, is used. Single crystalline microcubes of SnO2 were synthesized by Lupan et al.90 by the hydrothermal method. Fig. 990 shows that the TEM images confirmed that the SnO2 cube had a height and width of 0.33 nm. These data matched accurately with the distance between the 001 and 110 planes of rutile tin oxide. Bai et al.91 synthesized a p-Sb2O3/n-SnO2 nanocomposite by the solvothermal method to sense hydrogen gas. Also, sensors such as a SnO/SnO2 nanocomposite were also synthesized by the solvothermal method to sense organic compounds like triethylamine.92
 Fig. 9  TEM and SAED images of a SnO2 microtube. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2008. 


2.1.8. Template-based synthesis. 
This methodology is used to synthesize metal oxide nanorods and nanotubes.93 The template acts as a base to grow the desired nanomaterials, and after the product is achieved, the template is washed away by thermal decomposition or by chemical dissolution. Water-soluble templates are usually washed with distilled water, whereas other templates are washed with concentrated basic solution, yielding 1D nanomaterials.94 With the help of dimethylsulfoxide micelles as a template, Wang et al.95 synthesized SnO2 nanotubes. To further study the quality of the crystal and vibration properties, the researchers conducted Raman scattering, as shown in Fig. 10.95 Apart from DMS, some popular templates used by researchers are anodic alumina oxide,96,97 manganese dioxide,98 zinc oxide,99 carbon nanotubes,100 natural cellulose fibers,101 and polycarbonate membrane.102 Dai et al.103 synthesized carbon-coated SnO2 by using a self-sacrificing template for a lithium-ion battery anode. The tin oxide produced was hollow; hence it was very efficient for the lithium-ion anode.
 Fig. 10  Raman spectrum of SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2008. 


2.1.9. Electrodeposition. 
This technique is mainly used to synthesize 1-D nanorods and nanotubes in a very cost-effective manner.104 The mechanism is based upon the movement of ions due to the applied electric voltage. First, the ions are transported and discharged near the electrode region; this is followed by the disintegration of the ion–ligand bond. After the disintegration, the atoms are incorporated onto the substrate resulting in nucleation and growth of the desired nanostructure. In addition, the growth of the nanostructure on the substrate electrode depends on several factors, such as lattice orientation and adhesion energy.105–107 Kim et al.108 synthesized a Cu/SnO2 nanocomposite for enhanced charge capacity. The researchers concluded that the charge capacity increased to 729 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C rate due to the addition of tin oxide. Another group of researchers also doped tin oxide produced from the electrodeposition method with carbon nanofibers to form a SnO2/CNF nanocomposite by the chemical vapor deposition technique.109 This nanocomposite is used as an anode in lithium-ion batteries with a high-capacity retention of 78% and a sizeable coulombic efficiency of 99.8% at the 100th cycle. Table 1 discusses the advantages, disadvantages, and reaction conditions of all the traditional synthetic procedures.
Table 1 Summary of the traditional synthesis techniques




Synthesis technique
Advantages
Disadvantages
Material produced
Reaction conditions
Ref.




Thermal deposition
Ease of synthesis and controllable morphology; higher material utilization efficiency
Hard to produce nanocomposites and doped nanomaterials
SnO2 nanobelts
Low pressure; high vacuum (10−4 Pascal)

48



Chemical vapor deposition
Can conduct synthesis on a large scale; does not require a high vacuum
Requires high temperature; costly
Mo–SnO2
Deposition temperature – 450 °C; reaction time – 50 min

56



Electro-spinning
Synthesized nanofibers have unique properties; thin nanofibers with a large surface area
Use of toxic solvents; have to focus on safety; problem to obtain 3D structures
Rutile–SnO2
Room temperature – 700 °C; heating rate – 10 °C min−1; time – 2 hours

63



Spray pyrolysis
Low operational cost; simple; extensive surface coverage; can conduct synthesis on a large scale
Low yield; cannot determine the growth temperature
SnSe–SnO2
Tube furnace temperature – 900 °C; flow rate – 5 L min−1

73



Vapor–liquid–solid growth
Controllable properties and morphology
Prolonged process
SnO2 nanowires
Pressure – 50 Torr; temperature – 700 °C; time – 30–60 min

80



Sol–gel processing
Synthesizes high-quality materials; homogeneous and pure; uses relatively low temperature
Long processing time; high cost of raw materials
Pd/SnO2; Pt/SnO2; Au/SnO2
Calcination temperature – 250 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C, 600 °C, 800 °C, and 1000 °C; time – 8 hours

85



Hydrothermal; solvothermal
Synthesizes large and good quality crystals; controls morphology
Low yield; need for expensive autoclaves
SnO2 microcubes
System heated to 98 °C for 15 min; allowed to cool to 40 °C naturally; synthesized products annealed at 370 °C for 10 min

90



Template-based synthesis
Easy and simple to use; fast technique; effective morphology control
Hard to determine compatibility between substrate and template
SnO2 nanotubes
Desired salts stirred for 2 hours; Na2S added; refluxed for 24 hours

95



Electrodeposition
Versatile and cost-effective
Non-uniform plating; high processing cost; not eco-friendly
SnO2 thin film
System temperature – 80 °C

108






2.2. Green methods
Apart from the traditional methods, green methods are also used for the synthesis of nanoparticles. The traditional methods include physical methods such as thermal deposition, chemical vapor deposition, electrospinning, and so on,110–114 whereas the chemical methods include sol–gel, hydrothermal, solvothermal, template-based precipitation, etc.115–121 The sol–gel method is quite popular among researchers, but the heat required for synthesizing SnO2 nanoparticles reaches 1073 K.122 Furthermore, chemical methods require a chemical stabilizer and capping agents to produce tin oxide nanoparticles to check the size and prevent nanoparticle agglomeration.123 Some of the widely used capping agents are shown in Table 2. The chemical method requires toxic chemical reagents, solvents, and even a very high temperature, which severely threatens the ecosystem.
Table 2 Capping agents for green synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles




Capping agent
Size of synthesized nanoparticles (in nm)
Shape
Application
Ref.




Urea
∼4
Spherical
Photodegradation of rhodamine B and methyl violet 6B

124



Glycine
∼4.5–30
Spherical
Photodegradation of methylene blue and methyl violet 6B

125



Arginine
∼4–5
Spherical
Photodegradation of methylene blue

126



Ascorbic acid
∼40
Spherical
Results in body weight loss of neonatal rats

127



Glycerol
∼8–30
Spherical
Photodegradation of methylene blue and methyl violet 6B

128



Serine
∼30
Spherical
Photodegradation of eosin Y

129





However, in comparison to chemical methods, physical methods are pretty simple and cost-effective for synthesizing tin oxide nanoparticles and their nanocomposites.130 As these methods do not require any capping agents, high temperature, or high pressure, and give pristine products, they are highly rated among researchers. Nevertheless, these methods showed certain limitations, such as the need for complex machines, a skilled workforce, and high energy.131 So, researchers came up with the idea of green synthesis methods to avoid such circumstances. The green synthesis methods prove to be cost-effective, environment-friendly, and efficient and work in ambient conditions to synthesize SnO2 nanoparticles and their nanocomposites. Biologically inspired methods and biological entities such as plant extracts and microorganisms are used as an alternative to the traditional methods.132

2.2.1. Plant-mediated synthesis. 
Various scientists carry out plant-mediated synthesis worldwide as it is non-toxic and has natural capping and reducing agents. The tin oxide nanoparticles synthesized from this process were pure, and the process was easy and eco-friendly. Furthermore, this method does not require a high temperature or pressure, or any costly equipment. So, it is pretty cost-effective, and it produces stable nanoparticles on a large scale.133,134 The synthesis procedure is quite simple as the salt of the desired nanoparticle is added to the plant extract, and then the solution is subjected to centrifugation. Then the pellets obtained undergo thermal treatment to obtain the desired product. Several analytical techniques are also conducted on the product to find its purity, morphology, and efficiency. The mechanism for the synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles is shown in Fig. 11.135Table 3 indicates the various plant extracts used for the synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles.
 Fig. 11  Synthesis of SnO2 with the help of plant extracts. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021. 
Table 3 Synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles using plant extracts




Plant (part)
Precursors
Shape/size
Applications
Ref.





Saccharum officinarum (stem)
SnCl2·2H2O, AgNO3
Spherical/8–10 nm
Antibacterial and antioxidant agent

136




Saccharum officinarum (stem)
SnCl2·2H2O, NaBH4
Tetragonal/3–4.5 nm
Photodegradation of rose bengal and methylene blue

137




Coccinia grandis (leaves)
SnCl4·5H2O, HNO3
Nanotubes/∼10 μm
Water decontamination

138



Hardwood sawdust
SnCl4·5H2O
Spherical/12 nm
Adsorption of arsenic and fluoride

139




Aspalathus linearis (leaf)
SnCl4·5H2O
Quasi-spherical/2.5–11.4 nm
Photodegradation of Congo red, eosin Y, and methylene blue

140




Persia americana (seed)
SnCl2
Flake-like/4 nm
Photodegradation of phenolsulfonphthalein dye

141




Daphne alpina (leaf)
SnCl4·5H2O
Elongated shape/19–27 nm
Adsorption of Cd2+ ion

142







2.2.2. Microbe-mediated synthesis. 
Most microbes are non-toxic and can be used in the physiochemical synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles as they are eco-friendly and cost-effective. The microbes include various bacteria, fungi, and yeasts used to produce tin oxide nanoparticles and nanocomposites by intracellular and extracellular mechanisms. Furthermore, this method does not require any toxic chemicals or high energy. The intracellular mechanism involves the uptake of metal ions in the microbial cell, followed by the formation of nanoparticles in the presence of enzymes, coenzymes, and other biomolecules inside the cell. However, the extracellular mechanism is slightly different as the metal ions stick to the microbe's surface. Then, the enzymes and proteins on the surface reduce the metal ions, resulting in stabilized nanoparticles.143 The study concluded that the extracellular synthesis mechanism is very efficient as it produces nanoparticles in bulk and skips some steps to recover these nanoparticles.144 Bacteria like Lactobacillus sporogenes,145,146Stenotrophomonas maltophilia,147Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense,148Pseudomonas aeruginosa,149Bacillus licheniformis,150 and Salmonella typhimurium151 are used by researchers for the extracellular bacteria-mediated synthesis of nanoparticles. However, only one synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles with the help of a bacterium (Erwinia herbicola) has been reported.152 As shown in Fig. 12,152 the FT-IR spectra confirmed the presence of the carboxyl, amide, and amine groups of the proteins on the surface of the nanoparticles. The protein was found to not only help in the photodegradation of dyes but also helped in stabilizing the nanoparticles. Other microbes like algae and fungi are also used to synthesize nanoparticles, but no synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles has been reported to date.
 Fig. 12  FT-IR spectrum of SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2014. 


2.2.3. Biomolecule-mediated synthesis. 
Apart from plant and microbe-based synthesis, researchers have also discovered the synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles by various biomolecules such as amino acids, enzymes, and sugars, as shown in Table 4. The mechanism of forming tin oxide nanoparticles by biomolecules is shown in Fig. 13.135
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the biomolecule-mediated synthesis of tin oxide. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021. 
Table 4 Synthesis of SnO2 with the help of biomolecules




Biomolecules
Precursors
Shape/size
Applications
Ref.




Tyrosine
SnCl2·2H2O
Tetragonal/15–20 nm
Photodegradation of violet 4 BSN dye

153



Glycine
SnCl2·2H2O, glycine
Spherical/6–33 nm
Studying the effect of polar and non-polar solvents on SnO2 nanoparticles

154



Ascorbic acid
SnCl2·2H2O
Spherical/30 nm
Affects bodyweight of neonatal mice

127



Aspartic acid and glutamic acid
SnCl2·2H2O
Spherical/16–26 nm
Photodegradation of rose bengal and eosin Y dye

155



Sugarcane juice
SnCl2·2H2O
Spherical/2.5–4.5 nm
Photodegradation of rose bengal and methylene blue

137






3. Assessment of various synthesis methods for SnO2 and SnO2-based nanocomposites
Among the traditional methods, it was found that the sol–gel method has been a prevalent and efficient method for the synthesis of nanoparticles.156 However, the use of toxic chemicals and a high energy need lead to a search for alternate synthesis methods.157 Synthesis procedures like thermal decomposition and electrospinning require a high temperature and a lot of energy, which can prove lethal and relatively expensive in the long run. Furthermore, the sol–gel, hydrothermal and solvothermal processes involve chemicals that are harmful to the environment. Also, the high cost of raw materials, volume shrinkage, and cracking of the prepared nanomaterial during drying make it less cost-effective.
It has been concluded from the above discussion that the green synthesis methods have been relatively popular among scientists as they are non-toxic, chemical additive-free, cost-efficient, and easy to follow. The tin oxide nanoparticles synthesized from the green processes were pure, and the processes were easy and eco-friendly, which encouraged researchers to follow the processes. Among the different green synthesis methods, plant-mediated synthesis has been the most followed process, as secondary metabolites such as phenols, flavonoids, tannins, terpenoids, and carbohydrates present in the plant help reduce and stabilize the metal and metal oxide nanoparticles.158 Also, plant-mediated synthesis is cost-effective, easy to conduct, and less hazardous than other green methods. Microbe-mediated synthesis is also an eco-friendly process; however, more research is required in that field to synthesize SnO2 nanoparticles.143 Furthermore, in the case of biomolecule-mediated synthesis, an amino acid acts as the capping agent, thus reducing the use of toxic chemicals. So, from the study, it was concluded that plant-mediated green synthesis is the best for producing SnO2 nanoparticles among all the traditional and other green synthesis methods.
4. Structure and properties of tin oxide nanoparticles
Tin(IV) oxide, also called stannic oxide (SnO2), is an amphoteric colorless solid.159 SnO2 has a molecular mass of 150.69 g mol−1, a 6.90 g mol−1 density, a melting point around 1773 K, and a boiling point around 2073 K. The tin in stannic oxide, also known as cassiterite, has an oxidation state of +4, is chemically and thermally stable, and shows high optical transparency and reflectivity in the IR region.160–162 The properties mentioned above, combined with the oxidizing ability of tin oxide, make the nanoparticles a perfect weapon to remove toxic contaminants from water and wastewater.163
Stannic oxide possesses a rutile structure, having unit cell dimensions of a = b = 0.4737 nm and c = 0.3186 nm, an octahedral crystal, and a space group no. 136 P42mnm.164,165 As shown in Fig. 14,166 one tin ion is surrounded by six oxygen ions while one oxygen ion is surrounded by three tin ions, leading to a 6:3 coordination structure.167 Also, tin oxide has several polymorphs (Fig. 15168), such as the rutile type (P42/mnm), CaCl2 type (Pnnm), α-PbO2 type (Pbcn), pyrite type (Pa3), ZrO2 type orthorhombic phase I (Pbca), cotunnite type orthorhombic phase II (Pnam), and fluorite type (Fm3m).168–172 These polymorphs are attained when the stable pristine rutile structure is subjected to a very high mechanical pressure.
 Fig. 14  Unit cell structure of the rutile stannic oxide. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 15  Several polymorphs of stannic oxide (gray and red colors represent Sn and O atoms, respectively). (a) Rutile (P42/mnm) and CaCl2-type (Pnnm), (b) R-PbO2-type (Pbcn), (c) pyrite-type (Pa3), (d) ZrO2-type (Pbca), (e) fluorite-type (Fm3m), and (f) cotunnite-type (Pnam). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2007. 
Researchers found that SnO2 showed photocatalytic activities and it was utilized for photocatalytic applications. In addition, tin oxide was cost-effective, thermostable, non-toxic, and highly photosensitive.173–175 The high photocatalytic activity was due to the octahedral structure, which increased the recombination time of the electrons and holes.176,177
In their studies, Zhang et al.178 revealed that tin oxide showed excellent electrical conductivity due to defects in the crystal lattice of the metal oxide. Due to these defects, the bandgap decreases significantly, making SnO2 a perfect material to construct semiconductors. The 3.6 eV bandgap corresponds to the photoactivation in the UV range of the electromagnetic spectrum, which helps in the photodegradation of contaminants, especially organic wastes.179 In order to maintain electrical neutrality, the extra oxygen anions initiate the oxidation of Sn2+ to Sn4+.180,181 Due to constructive properties like low electrical resistance, high conductivity, and high optical transparency,182 SnO2 showed many practical applications, discussed further in this review literature.
Furthermore, to increase efficiency, doping of nanomaterials is conducted. As the introduced dopant alters the electronic arrangement of the nanomaterial, it improves the optical and structural properties. So, in this piece of literature, applications of SnO2 and SnO2-based nanocomposites will be discussed. Also, due to its affinity towards organic toxins and gases like carbon monoxide and hydrogen, the metal oxide can be used as a sensing material.183 In this review, the role of SnO2 as a semiconductor and its photocatalytic applications will also be discussed.
5. Applications of SnO2 and SnO2-based nanocomposites
5.1. Environmental remediation

5.1.1. Photocatalytic activity. 
The photodegradation process degrades toxic contaminants such as dyes, pharmaceutical compounds, organic compounds, industrial wastes, and agricultural wastes.184 SnO2 nanoparticles photodegrade these contaminants but pose some drawbacks as they show less efficiency due to their high recombination rate and low surface morphology.185 However, in the case of SnO2-based nanocomposites, the produced electrons and holes took more time to recombine, thus decreasing the activation energy and increasing the thermodynamic stability. So, tin oxide nanocomposites are essential for the removal of such toxic pollutants by photodegradation.
Semiconductor-based binary and ternary nanocomposites are most effective for the photodegradation of pollutants. Such a photocatalyst provides stability, a better charge transfer rate, and high-quality surface morphology. A schematic illustration of charge transfer by binary and ternary nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 16.186 The detailed mechanism followed by the SnO2 is shown in Fig. 17.187 Due to irradiation of light, the electrons and holes get excited and separated. Along with the light irradiation, hydrogen peroxide is added in some cases. The electrons formed result in the formation of superoxide radicals O2*−, which react with H2O2 leading to the formation of *OH radicals and degrading the pollutants. Here, the holes act as an oxidizing agent and the electrons as a reducing agent. These holes and electrons break down the contaminants by oxidizing and reducing them, respectively.
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of charge transfer by binary and tertiary nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017. 
 Fig. 17  Photodegradation mechanism of contaminants. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
The green synthesis of tin oxide particles has been quite popular among researchers for the photodegradation of dyes.188 Diallo et al.140 synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles to photodegrade methylene blue from an aqueous solution using Asphalathus linearis leaf extract. The photocatalyst showed an efficiency of 100% in 12 minutes of UV light irradiation. The synthesized nanoparticles also showed photodegradation of eosin Y and Congo red dye with an efficiency of 100%, in 18 and 20 min, respectively, of UV light irradiation. However, researchers took more than an hour under UV light irradiation to photodegrade methylene blue when the SnO2 nanoparticles were synthesized using Cyphomandra betacea plant extracts.189 Besides UV light irradiation, Kumar et al.190 photodegraded RY-186 dye under visible light irradiation. The researchers synthesized the SnO2 nanoparticles using Psidium guajava leaf extract, which showed an efficiency of 90% in 3 hours of sunlight irradiation. Fu et al.191 used the leaf extract of Plectranthus amboinicus to synthesize SnO2 nanoparticles for the photodegradation of rhodamine B under visible light irradiation. The bio-synthesized nanoparticles showed an efficiency of 95% in about 2 hours under irradiation with visible light of wavelength 420 nm.
Furthermore, researchers have synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles from extracts of Vitex agnus-castus fruit for the photodegradation of rhodamine B.192 The nanoparticles produced ranged from 4 to 13 nm, with an average size of 8 nm. The degradation efficiency was 91.7% at 298 K in about three hours and followed first-order kinetics. Also, Lycopersicon esculentum leaf extracts are used to synthesize SnO2 nanoparticles for photodegradation of methylene blue.193 The extract concentration affected the nanoparticles’ crystal size, and the nanoparticles showed 100% efficiency in 2 hours of visible light irradiation. Honarmand et al.194 synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles using the juice of Ziziphus (jujube fruit) for the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes. The authors degraded methylene blue and Eriochrome black T with 90% and 83% efficiency, respectively. The synthesized nanoparticles were highly stable and could be reused up to 4 times, and worked efficiently in visible light irradiation. The schematic illustration of the photodegradation of dyes by green SnO2 quantum dots is shown in Fig. 18.155
 Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of photodegradation of dyes by green SnO2 quantum dots. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
Traditional synthesis of SnO2 and SnO2-based nanocomposites is also conducted for the photodegradation of dyes and other toxic contaminants. Researchers synthesized tetragonal SnO2 nanoparticles using ascorbic acid as a complexing agent.195 The nanoparticle size was about 3 nm, and the nanoparticles showed optical as well as photocatalytic activity. The tin oxide nanoparticles photodegraded methylene blue with an efficiency of 90%. Costantino et al.196 produced SnO2 nanoparticles supported by an electrospun cellulose acetate fibrous membrane using the thermal induction method. The synthesized nanomaterial showed enhanced photocatalytic activity and photodegradation of methylene blue and methyl orange with 79 and 54% efficiency, respectively, under visible light irradiation. To degrade malachite green from wastewater, researchers synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles using the hydrothermal method.197 The photodegradation of the toxic dye was conducted under UV light irradiation for 3 hours, with an efficiency of 98%. In another experiment, researchers degraded RD 81 by SnO2 nanoparticles with the help of hydrogen peroxide.198 The removal was carried out under visible light irradiation with an efficiency of around 98%, and the mechanism followed pseudo-second-order kinetics.
In order to degrade rhodamine B and fluorescein dye, researchers prepared a BiVO3/SnO2 nanocomposite using the sol–gel process.199 The composite showed a very high efficiency in photodegradation as compared with pure SnO2. Fig. 19 shows the removal of dyes by SnO2 and the BiVO3/SnO2 nanocomposite.199 A perusal of this figure indicated that the BiVO3/SnO2 nanocomposite showed a faster degradation efficiency compared with that of SnO2. Tu et al.200 synthesized SnO2/TiO2 to remove toxic contaminants such as dyes from an aqueous solution. The study found that the increased efficiency was due to the simultaneous transfer of electrons from the TiO2 to the conduction band of tin oxide and the transfer of holes from the tin oxide to the valence band of TiO2. This transfer of electrons and holes resulted in increased oxidizing power of the nanocomposite and easy breakdown of the contaminants. In order to study the degradation of rhodamine B, researchers synthesized SnO2/ZnO.201 The prepared nanocomposite showed better efficiency than pure SnO2 and ZnO. Even a tiny amount of ZnO triggered the photocatalytic activity of SnO2. Due to heterojunction formation in SnO2/ZnO, the recombination time for electrons and holes increased, leading to effective degradation of rhodamine B under UV light irradiation.202 Similar to the previous study, Bhosale et al.203 synthesized nanoparticles to photodegrade rhodamine B under visible light irradiation. The prepared Cr2O3/SnO2 nanocomposite showed an efficiency of 98% when kept for an hour in sunlight. When compared with the standard P25 photocatalyst, the nanocomposite showed 3.5 times more efficiency to remove the dye.
 Fig. 19  UV-Vis spectrum of photodegradation of rhodamine B (a) by SnO2 and (b) by BiVO3/SnO2 and of fluorescein dye (c) by SnO2 and (d) by BiVO3/SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission of RSC journals, copyright 2021. 
The ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposite photodegrades Cibacron red dye in an aqueous solution under UV light irradiation.204 The ZnO/SnO2 photocatalyst was synthesized using the co-precipitation method followed by calcination at various temperatures. The photodegradation mechanism followed pseudo-second-order kinetics with an efficiency of 78%. Kutuzova et al.205 followed the hydrothermal synthesis method to synthesize a TiO2/SnO2 nanocomposite for photocatalytic cationic and anionic dye degradation. The studies indicated that the nanocomposite showed sorption–photocatalytic properties where the photocatalyst showed higher sorption ability with anionic dyes, whereas it showed higher photocatalytic activity with cationic dyes. The enhanced sorption–photocatalytic properties were due to the addition of TiO2 onto the SnO2 nanoparticles. In addition, another group of researchers produced the same nanocomposite using the sonication-assisted impregnation method.206 The synthesized TiO2/SnO2 nanocomposite photodegraded methylene blue and Congo red under visible light irradiation with 97% and 90% efficiency. The enhanced photocatalytic activity is due to the decreased band-gap and improved surface morphology, resulting in better charge separation.
Furthermore, Zhang et al.207 synthesized SnO2/g-C3N4 nanocomposites to photodegrade toxic dyes using the facile one-pot synthesis method. The produced nanocomposite showed an efficiency of 58% to remove methyl orange under irradiation with visible light. The high stability and reusability were the key results obtained in the study. Researchers have also worked on the removal of toxic bisphenol A dye.208 The synthesized SnO2–CNF nanocomposite showed an efficiency of 98%, and the removal followed a combined mechanism of adsorption and photodegradation. The synthesis followed a traditional and green method combination, where the tin oxide quantum dots were encapsulated in carbon nanoflakes. Likewise, Dutta et al.209 also embedded tin oxide quantum dots on reduced graphene surfaces to remove toxic contaminants from wastewater. The SnO2/r-Gr nanocomposite also removed heavy metals and harmful microorganisms alongside organic dyes. The studies indicated that the nanocomposite exhibited fast methylene blue removal and showed separation ability for a binary dye mixture. It showed 94% separation efficiency for a mixture of methylene blue and methyl orange and 76% separation efficiency for a mixture of methylene blue and rhodamine B.
Vignesh et al.210 synthesized ternary nanocomposites such as the g-C3N4/SnO2–Cu2O photocatalyst for anionic and cationic dye photodegradation under visible light irradiation by calcination and a hydrothermal supported technique. The prepared nanocomposite showed very high efficiency and was reusable up to 5 times. Likewise, SnO2-based nanocomposites synthesized using the sol–gel method by Sery et al.211 also showed very high reusability, i.e., up to 8 times, and had a chemical formula of Sn0.94Ti0.03Ni0.03O2. The nanocomposite had a very low band-gap of 3.24 eV, which resulted in decreasing activation energy and increasing efficiency for the photodegradation of Coomassie brilliant blue dye. In addition to that, researchers also produced ternary nanocomposites such as g-C3N4/rGO/SnO2 for the photodegradation of rhodamine B.212 Along with photocatalytic activity, the hydrothermally synthesized nanocomposite also possessed excellent optoelectronic properties, and was non-toxic, stable, and cost-effective. Compared with g-C3N4/SnO2, this nanocomposite showed 40% more degradation efficiency for rhodamine B. Researchers synthesized a CeO2/SnO2/rGO (CSG) nanostructured composite via the hydrothermal method to remove methylene blue from an aqueous solution.186 The studies found that with 90 min irradiation of visible light, the photocatalyst showed an efficiency of 95%. For extensive degradation of Basic blue 41, Abbas Attar developed Zn–SnO2/Al2O3 nanotubes using a liquid-phase deposition process.213 The dye was degraded efficiently under visible light irradiation, and the enhanced performance was due to the high specific area, wide visible-light absorption range, narrowed bandgap by Zn-doping, and effective electron–hole separation.
Sirohi et al.214 produced a rGO/CdO/SnO2 ternary nanocomposite (GCS) to photodegrade Congo red and malachite green under visible light irradiation. The nanocomposite showed excellent photocatalytic behavior due to the decreased band-gap and electron–hole separation. Due to the addition of graphene, the charge carriers are easily transferred to it from the metal oxide, resulting in speeding up of the photocatalytic activity. Researchers have also worked on molecular organic frameworks added to the nanocomposites for better photocatalytic activity.215 The MOF UiO-66 was added to tin oxide and reduced graphene oxide to form a ternary nanocomposite SnO2@UiO-66/rGO, to photodegrade rhodamine B. The studies revealed that the efficiency reached around 95% within 2.5 hours irradiation under visible light. This enhanced performance was credited to the synergistic effect between SnO2 nanoparticles, UiO-66, and rGO, along with the high surface area and microporous structure. In addition, researchers also synthesized a g-C3N4/Au–SnO2 quantum dot ternary nanocomposite via a three-step approach to photodegrade rhodamine B under visible light irradiation.216 The Au–SnO2 quantum dots were embedded on the graphitic carbon nitride homogenously, which enhanced the photocatalytic activity to degrade the dye in under 40 minutes altogether.
Researchers also worked on the photodegradation of pharmaceutical compounds by green syntheses, such as that of rabeprazole, using CuSnO3 quantum dots.217 The nanomaterial was prepared by the green synthesis method using extracts of Catharanthus roseus leaf. The eco-friendly photocatalyst showed an efficiency of 87% when irradiated under visible light for 2 hours and obeyed pseudo-first-order kinetics. In another study, researchers synthesized SnO2/AC to effectively degrade naproxen, which removed 94% of the contaminant within 120 minutes under visible light irradiation.218 The tin oxide nanoparticles were derived from Saccharum officinarum juice, whereas the activated carbon was derived from Corchorus olitorius stems, and the nanocomposite was synthesized by combining the two components by the hydrothermal method, as shown in Fig. 20.218 Using leaf extracts of Iresine herbstii, researchers synthesized nanocrystalline Ag/SnO2 for the photodegradation of doripenem.219 The studies revealed that the antibiotic contaminant degraded better under UV light irradiation, with a rate constant of 1.39 × 10−2 min−1. The nanocatalyst showed an efficiency of 84% in about 3 hours of UV light irradiation and was reusable up to five times without any decrease in the photocatalytic ability. The doped Ag decreases the band-gap and hence enhances the photocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 20  Reaction mechanism for the production of SnO2/AC. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Using the hydrothermal method, researchers produced a SnO2@ZnS nanocomposite to degrade various pharmaceutical compounds.220 The synthesized nanocomposite photodegraded acetaminophen, carbamazepine, metoprolol, and triclosan, and the efficiency was 70%, 40%, 67%, and 40%, respectively. Guocheng et al.221 synthesized praseodymium-based SnO2/Ti for the photodegradation of codeine. The nanocomposite was prepared by the electrodeposition method, and the photocatalytic activity depended on the concentration of praseodymium. The codeine removal efficiency was 94.9%, where its concentration decreased from 392 to 20 mg L−1. On the other hand, researchers have photodegraded diclofenac from an aqueous solution through photodegradation using TiO2–SnO2 mixed-oxide catalysts.222 The nanocomposite removed diclofenac with an efficiency of 90% under UV light irradiation. The photocatalyst was reusable up to several times and showed much stability during the process. Similarly, another group of researchers also degraded diclofenac from an aqueous solution using ZnO/SnO2.223 The toxic contaminant was degraded entirely in an hour under irradiation with UV light.
Ternary nanocomposites such as SnO2–BiVO4–CuO were synthesized by the hydrothermal method to photodegrade pharmaceutical compounds such as phenazopyridine.224 The prepared nanocomposite showed higher efficiency in the removal of the toxic contaminants in comparison with pristine SnO2, BiVO4, and CuO. Using graphene oxide as a support, Sayadi et al.225 synthesized an Fe3O4/ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposite for the photodegradation of azithromycin. As the compounds result in antibiotic-resistant bacterial formation, it is essential to remove them from the environment. The nanocomposite took 2 hours to photodegrade about 90% of the azithromycin under irradiation with UV light.
Researchers worked on photodegrading insecticides and pesticides from the environment using green as well as traditional synthesis methods. Riaz et al.226 synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles derived from Psidium guajava extract to photodegrade DDT from an aqueous solution. The studies revealed that the efficiency skyrocketed when the nanoparticles were combined with PANI. Under 12 minutes of microwave irradiation, the nanoparticles achieved an efficiency of 82% in degrading 100 ppm of the toxic contaminants. Furthermore, insecticides like thiamethoxam were photodegraded by SnO2 quantum dots with the help of extracts of Camellia sinensis shoots.227 The average size of the nanoparticles was around 4.3 nm, and they showed an efficiency of 57% in 45 minutes under irradiation with visible light.
In addition, pesticides like Triclopyr are also degraded from wastewater by researchers using tin oxide nanocomposites.228 The ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposite was prepared using the co-precipitation method, and the composite with 10% tin oxide showed maximum efficiency. The removal of Triclopyr took place under visible light irradiation for 2 hours and showed an efficiency of 95%. The mechanism of degradation due to charge transfer is shown in Fig. 21.228 Furthermore, the researchers also worked on degrading pesticides from an aqueous solution. They developed a Au–SnO2–CdS composite for the effective degradation of imidacloprid under LED irradiation.229 Imidacloprid is a very toxic insecticide, and it works by affecting the transmission of nerve impulses in insects by binding irreversibly to specific insect nicotinic acetylcholine receptors. The degradation followed a pseudo-first-order reaction with an efficiency of 95%. Also, to degrade clothianidin insecticide, which belongs to the same category as imidacloprid, the researchers synthesized a Au–SnO2–rGO nanocomposite by the hydrothermal method.230 The photodegradation showed an efficiency of 97% under UV–LED light irradiation and followed pseudo-first-order kinetics with a rate constant of 0.0309 min−1.
 Fig. 21  Photodegradation mechanism of Triclopyr. Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2019. 
To achieve a non-toxic aqueous system, the removal of organic compounds is also necessary. Researchers also have photodegraded p-nitrophenol from an aqueous solution with the help of extracts of Saccharum officinarum (sugar cane) stem.137 The synthesized tin oxide quantum dots achieved an efficiency of 99.5% in reducing the compound under 1 hour of visible light irradiation. Further analysis suggested that a blue shift was obtained by the band-gap energy and a reduction of particle size. Saravankumar et al.231 synthesized a Ag/SnO2 nanocomposite by the hydrothermal method to photodegrade phenol from an aqueous solution. The addition of Ag to tin oxide resulted in a high charge separation of the electron–hole pairs and a high recombination time. The nanocomposite achieved an efficiency of 91% in 60 minutes under irradiation with visible light. To tackle organic pollutants such as carbofuran, scientists have synthesized the ternary nanocomposite Fe3O4–SnO2–gC3N4 by the hydrothermal method.232 The photodegradation was conducted under LED light irradiation, and the nanocomposite showed improved stability, recyclability, and consistency over multiple cycles of operation. The nanocomposite showed an efficiency of 89% and followed a pseudo-first-order reaction with a rate constant of 0.015 min−1.


5.1.2. Sensors. 
SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites are utilized in environmental remediation, public safety, and health by several researchers.233,234 Gas, electric, and chemical sensing, and photoelectrochemical biosensing are conducted with the help of tin oxide sensors as the sensors have very high selectivity, sensitivity, reusability, and simple and cost-effective design.235,236 These sensors work due to the physical and chemical changes in the surface morphology. The efficiency of sensing is increased by decreasing the size of the nanoparticles, altering the morphology, and adding dopants or other nanoparticles. Fig. 22 shows that the doped tin oxide showed an excellent sensing ability compared with pure tin oxide.237
 Fig. 22  Ethanol sensing by doped and pure SnO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission of Wiley-VCH, copyright 2000. 
Tin oxide nanoparticles synthesized by the green method showed excellent gas-sensing ability. To detect hydrogen gas with high sensitivity and selectivity, researchers synthesized 0.5 wt% Pd-doped SnO2 nanoparticles.238 The produced nanoparticles even detected H2 at a low concentration of 50 ppm in the presence of nitrogen gas. This high sensitivity was due to the synergistic effect of tin oxide and doped palladium atoms. Plant-based extracts such as Cicer arietnum were used to synthesize Fe-doped SnO2 nanoparticles to sense ammonia from the surroundings.239 The synthesized Fe-doped SnO2 nanoparticles showed a gas response of 46% when they encountered 100 ppm of ammonia at a temperature of 473 K. The un-doped tin oxide lacked selectivity and showed an inadequate gas response of 28%. The gas-sensing ability of Ni-doped SnO2 nanoparticles was studied by Gattu et al.240 The nanoparticles were prepared using the traditional and the green method to sense NO2 gas in the atmosphere. The study revealed that the nanoparticles synthesized by the green biological method showed more sensitivity to nitrogen dioxide than those synthesized by the traditional chemical method. The increased efficiency was credited to the Ni-doping, decreased size (resulting in an increased surface area), and selectivity of SnO2 for NO2 gas.
Another study found that biosynthesized Au-doped SnO2 nanoparticles showed high selectivity for NO2 gas.241 The nanoparticles when used as sensor, sensed nitrogen dioxide at a 100 ppm concentration and at 473 K, and the results showed that the gas sensing was nearly 30%. The selectivity and enhanced gas-sensing ability were due to the lattice distortion and oxygen vacancies in the SnO2 created by the gold doping. In recent studies, Dhage et al.242 synthesized a CuO–SnO2 nanocomposite using a co-precipitation method to sense toxic carbon dioxide gas. The band-gap of the composite was 2.6 eV, and the gas response was found to be 3.5% for 100 ppm of CO gas at 473 K. Fig. 23242 shows that the resistance response, gas response, and reusability were also studied. With grape juice as a solvent, Prajapati et al.243 synthesized SnO2/carbon quantum dots (CQDs) by the hydrothermal method. Similar to the previous study, the nanocomposite was also utilized to sense toxic carbon monoxide gas from the atmosphere. The gas response was around 55% at a 1000 ppm gas concentration at a temperature of 548 K. Apart from gas sensing at higher concentrations, researchers have also worked on sensing gas at much lower concentrations.244 To sense nitrogen dioxide in such low concentrations as five ppm, researchers synthesized ternary Ag–SnO2–βC3N4 nano-heterojunctions by the hydrothermal method. The sensor showed about a 90% gas response with an excellent response time of 27.2 seconds. The enhanced response ability was due to the Schottky defects and the formed n–n heterojunction.
 Fig. 23  (a) Resistance response curve, (b) gas sensitivity vs. temperature curve, (c) gas sensitivity vs. time curve, and (d) reusability of sensor curve. Reproduced from ref. 242 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Apart from gas sensing, tin oxide nanoparticles and nanocomposites have also been used in sensing toxic chemicals and electrical and photoelectrochemical biosensing. Mohanta et al.245 synthesized a SnO2@ZIF-8 nanohybrid electrochemical sensor by the sonochemical method for sensing para-nitrophenol from an aqueous solution. The sensor showed an exceptional electrochemical performance towards sensing para-nitrophenol with a detection limit of 0.565 μM and a sensitivity of 2.63 μA cm−2 μM−1. On the other hand, researchers have also worked on sensing formaldehyde from an aqueous solution.246 Researchers synthesized a SnO2/Fe2O3 nanocomposite for a fast response in sensing formaldehyde even at a meager limit. To study the impact of the functional behavior of primary cortical neuronal cells, researchers have developed biosensors made up of tin oxide. The poly-L-lysine (PLL) coated-TiO2/SnO2 biosensor helped study the neuro-electrical phenomenon of the neuronal cells with the aid of a Nyquist plot. So, the study concluded that the prepared nanocomposite biosensor could control the influence of the functional behavior of primary cortical neuronal cells.

5.2. Energy production

5.2.1. Solar cells. 
Dye-sensitized solar cells, also known as DSSCs, are eco-friendly machines consisting of a metal oxide semiconductor photoanode, redox electrolytes, and dye molecules fused into a photoanode and electrolyte.247,248 The main application of DSSCs is to produce a photoelectric current, which they do by using photon energy to excite the fused dye molecules, leading to the transfer of electrons to the conduction band of the metal oxide semiconductor. Researchers worked on dye-sensitized solar cells and modified their photoanode using a SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite to alter the photovoltaic parameters.249 The hydrothermal process was followed to synthesize the nanocomposite, and the photovoltaic parameters were measured using the current–voltage curve. Fig. 24249 shows that the synthesized SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite showed excellent thermal stability with only 5% weight loss at 1073 K. The nanocomposite can replace platinum as a photoanode and it showed a power conversion efficiency of 3.28%. Also, due to the improved charge transfer, delayed recombination, and reduced band-gap, the DSSC showed enhanced efficiency. Another group of researchers also used a SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite to alter the photovoltaic parameters.250 They synthesized dissymmetric SnO2/TiO2 nanofibers by the electro-spinning method with a tube diameter between 20 and 80 nm and showed a maximum power conversion efficiency of 8.3%. The enhanced efficiency was credited to the heterojunction surface, which resulted in improved charge separation and transport.
 Fig. 24  TGA analysis of SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite. Reproduced from ref. 249 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021. 
Solar cells are also used for solar light harvesting and the transfer of photons to electrons. Snaith et al.251 synthesized a SnO2-based solid-state DSSC to convert solar power to electric power. The production of electrical power by the solar cell nanocomposite showed an efficiency of 3%, whereas the transfer of photons to electrons achieved unity efficiency. The modified hole transfer and the mesoporous structure of tin oxide resulted in an enhanced performance. Another group of researchers successfully tried to convert solar power to electric power with an efficiency of 3.89% using pure SnO2 as a photoelectrode.252 However, pure SnO2 showed drawbacks like a less porous surface, which increased the dye concentration and decreased the electron supply. In another study, researchers used a SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite as a semiconductor photoelectrode in a DSSC to convert solar power to electric power due to its high electron mobility.223 Here, ZnO is used as a sacrificial template for better alignment of the TiO2 and SnO2 nanotubes, which results in an efficiency of 3.53%. To study the enhanced performance, the researchers conducted electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) with both SnO2 DSSCs and SnO2/TiO2 DSSCs using Nyquist plots (Fig. 25a) and a Bode phase angle vs. frequency curve (Fig. 25b).253
 Fig. 25  EIS of SnO2 DSSCs and SnO2/TiO2 DSSCs using (a) Nyquist plots and (b) a Bode phase angle vs. frequency curve. Reproduced from ref. 253 with permission of Core.uk, copyright 2019. 
Furthermore, Ke et al.254 synthesized a low-temperature solution-processed nanocrystalline SnO2 photoelectrode to use in perovskite solar cells. The researchers found an excellent efficiency of 16.02%, which was attributed to the nanocrystalline tin oxide films that showed properties like antireflection and high electron mobility. The prepared nanomaterial can be used as an alternative for electron transport layers (ETLs) and manufacturing cost-efficient perovskite solar cells. Moreover, researchers further enhanced an SnO2 photoelectrode by adding hydrogen peroxide to the precursor solution, producing an H2O2–SnO2 electron transport layer (ETL).255 The power conversion efficiency was found to be 22.15%, and it showed long-term stability. Liu et al.256 added SnO2 quantum dots to perovskite solar cells to increase their efficiency from 16.5% to 20.1%. The enhanced power conversion efficiency was credited to the excellent optical and electronic properties of the SnO2 quantum dot-based electron transport layer. Similarly, Yang et al.257 utilized SnO2 as an electron-selective layer (ESL) to obtain a record power conversion efficiency of 22.7%, along with excellent stability. As per the author's opinion, this invention would boost the quality of the perovskite solar cells and lead to large-scale photovoltaic manufacturing.


5.2.2. Water splitting. 
As discussed above, the solar energy produced by the solar cells needs to be stored and converted into chemical energy for further use. Solar energy can be stored in a simple H2 chemical bond.258 So, water splitting is significant for energy production, as the hydrogen molecules formed during the reaction help to convert solar energy to chemical energy. Another advantage of water splitting is that it produces water as a waste product during hydrogen production, not harming the environment. To achieve this, non-toxic, stable, and cost-effective semiconductors are required for water splitting on their surface.259 This process is also called photoelectrolysis, achieved by joining the semiconductor PV modules to the electrolyzers or catalytic electrodes. The fabrication cost is avoided due to the usage of discrete electrolyzers wired to p–n junction solar cells, and the splitting quickly happens at the surface due to the creation of an electric field at the junction of the semiconductor.260,261Fig. 26262 describes the mechanism of hydrogen evolution in water splitting under acidic conditions.
 Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the hydrogen evolution reaction by water splitting. Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2010. 
Radecka et al.263 synthesized TiO2/SnO2 nanotubes for hydrogen generation by photoelectrochemical water splitting. The nanocomposites, produced by electrochemical anodization, were hydrophobic and became superhydrophilic when irradiated with UV light. Furthermore, to enhance the solar to hydrogen conversion efficiency, the nanocomposites were doped with tin metal, resulting in an advanced photocurrent density reaching 0.2 μA cm−2, a lengthier recombination time of 5–15 seconds, and an additional negative flat band potential VFB = −0.5; −0.6 V. Similarly, researchers also modified TiO2/SnO2 to inverse opal (IO) films and produced a nanocomposite with a polystyrene support.264 To reduce the high 3.8 eV band-gap of TiO2, researchers added SnO2–IO films, thus leading to enhanced photoelectrochemical behavior. The photocurrent density (Jsc) was found to be 4.67 mA cm−2 at 0.5 V (vs. NHE), and this improved performance was due to the meager charge-transfer resistance (Rct) in the photoelectrode and the semiconductor junction. Advanced studies revealed that the performance of the nanocomposite improved by 20% when it was doped with 10% fluorine atoms, forming a F–TiO2/SnO2 semiconductor.
Chen et al.265 synthesized a 3D and 1D nanodendrite array of BiVO4/SnO2 for photoelectrochemical water splitting. The presence of tin oxide led to enhanced charge separation efficiency and photocurrent density. The 3D array showed a charge separation efficiency of 88%, whereas the 1D array showed a charge separation efficiency of 55% when the PEC took place under visible light irradiation. In addition, researchers doped the nanocomposite with gold metal, leading to high light absorption and decreased recombination under visible light irradiation.266 The synthesized Au–BiVO4/SnO2 IO heterostructure showed a photocurrent density of 3.83 mA cm−2 and a charge separation efficiency of 70.8% at 1.23 V vs. RHE. Furthermore, researchers further studied the BiVO4/SnO2-based nanocomposite to make the photoanode commercially available for generating clean and efficient energy.267 Under irradiation with LED light, the semiconductor showed a photocurrent density of 1.1 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M NaOH (sodium hydroxide) electrolyte at 1.23 V vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode).


5.2.3. Fuel cells. 
Fuel cells are static energy conversion equipment that converts the chemical reaction of fuels directly into electrical energy and produces water as its byproduct.268,269 In comparison with fuel cells, conventional heat engines show less efficiency and even add to pollution. Fuel cells work as batteries and engines by sharing similar characteristics to batteries in load conditions and operating like engines.270 The schematic illustration of a fuel cell is shown in Fig. 27.271 The major drawback of fuel cells is the installation cost, and various researchers are working on developing these power conversion devices to reduce the cost.
 Fig. 27  Schematic representation of a fuel cell. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2009. 
Dou et al.272 synthesized SnO2 nanorods by the hard template method and doped them with platinum to form a Pt/SnO2 nanocomposite. Furthermore, the researchers replaced the Pt/C anode with the prepared nanocomposite and found that the electrochemical stability improved significantly. The Pt/SnO2 nanocomposite maintained most of its electrochemically active surface area under ten hours of potential held at 1.6 V, while its electrochemically active degradation rate was one order of magnitude lower than that of Pt/C under potential cycling between 0.6 and 1.2 V. Researchers also worked on microbial fuel cells by replacing the traditional anode with a multi-walled carbon nanotube/SnO2 nanocomposite.273 As per the author's opinion, the MWCNTs–SnO2 anode showed a maximum power density of 1421 mW m−2. This enhanced performance was attributed to high conductivity and the sizeable, unique surface area of the prepared SnO2 nanomaterial.

5.3. Energy storage

5.3.1. Lithium-ion batteries. 
Lithium-ion batteries are known for their high capacity, cyclability, and flexible designs and are considered a more eminent power source for portable electronic devices. Graphite anodes were usually used in lithium-ion batteries, but they showed a pretty low storage capacity of 372 mA h g−1. Thus, to enhance the storage capacity, researchers replaced the graphite anodes with SnO2 nanoparticles.274 However, SnO2-based anodes had certain drawbacks, such as showing poor retention capacity during high cyclability, which was due to significant volume changes and agglomeration of Sn nanoparticles during the charge–discharge process.275 Firstly, various structures such as nanowires, nanosheets, hollow spheres, nanoflowers, etc., of SnO2 were used to overcome the tin accumulation.276,277 Secondly, researchers hybridized SnO2 with carbon-based materials to improve the retention during cycling as they support the mechanical strain produced during volume change, thus minimizing the effect.278,279 Thus, nanocomposites like SnO2/CNT, SnO2/graphene, and SnO2/carbon composites showed higher storage capacity along with higher retention during cycling.280
To improve the reusability and enhance the electrochemical performance of lithium-ion batteries, researchers introduced carbon nanotubes (CNT) as they have very high electron conductivity.281 So, the synthesized SnO2/CNT nanocomposite contains Sn–C bonds, which propel the electron transfer. This property leads to an increase in the reversibility as the Sn reacts with Li2O and forms SnO2. So, the studies concluded that SnO2/CNT nanocomposite reversibility is directly proportional to the number of Sn–C bonds. Researchers also synthesized a SnO2/CNT nanocomposite to increase the capacity of lithium-ion batteries.282 With the help of polyvinylpyrrolidone, the SnO2 nanoparticles were stacked on the CNT sheets uniformly. When used as anodes, the nanocomposites showed an enhanced reversible specific charge capacity of 850 mA h g−1 and improved the recyclability performance. In addition, Sun et al.283 synthesized a Sn–SnO2@CNT nanocomposite for enhanced performance of lithium-ion batteries. Sn–SnO2 resulted in a decrease of volume and surface morphology, so the researchers embedded it onto the surface of carbon nanotubes (CNT). When acting as an anode, the nanocomposite showed a specific charge capacity of 1059 mA h g−1 and a phenomenal cycling ability, having 1000 cycles with 86% retention ability.
Researchers produced a C–SnO2/CNT nanocomposite as an anode in lithium-ion batteries using the hydrothermal process and carbonization.284 It showed an excellent specific capacity of 1572 mA h g−1 and improved cycling ability, having 100 reversible cycles and still maintaining the reversible specific capacity at 1000 mA h g−1 (63.61% retention ability). Such a remarkable electrochemical performance was attributed to the hierarchical sandwiched structure and substantial synergistic effects of the ultrafine tin oxide nanoparticles and the carbon coating. Furthermore, Liu et al.285 synthesized an ultrafine 3D SnO2/CNT nanocomposite by the solvothermal approach for improving the retention ability. The SnO2/CNT nanocomposite anode improved the retention ability of the lithium-ion battery to 76% at 100 reuseable cycles with a maximum specific capacity of 1109 mA h g−1. The specific capacity vs. cycles plot is shown in Fig. 28.285 It also improves the rate performance and stability along with solving the significant volume change issue during recyclability.
 Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of retention ability. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2019. 
Using a redox reaction, Wang et al.286 synthesized a SnO2/graphene composite to improve the lithium-ion battery's rate performance and cyclic stability. When acting as an anode, the nanocomposite showed a reversible charge specific capacity of 840 mA h g−1 at a current density of 67 mA g−1 with a retention ability of up to 86%, over 30 reusable cycles. Researchers further worked on the nanocomposite to improve its capacity.287 The SnO2/graphene nanocomposite synthesized by the gas–liquid interface reaction exhibited a high reversible specific capacity of 1304 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1 and exceptional rate capability; even at a high current density of 1000 mA g−1, the reversible capacity was still as high as 748 mA h g−1. Yao et al.288 synthesized a SnO2/graphene nanocomposite by embedding tin oxide nanoparticles homogeneously on a graphene matrix. When used as an anode, the nanocomposite showed an enhanced specific storage capacity of 765 mA h g−1, credited to the 3D structure. The electrochemical performance of the nanocomposite is shown in Fig. 29,288 where figure (a) illustrates the reusability profile, whereas figure (b) depicts the discharge capacity over 100 cycles.
 Fig. 29  (a) Reusability profile of the SnO2/graphene nanocomposite acting as an anode. (b) Comparison of reversible discharge capacity. Reproduced from ref. 288 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2009. 
The hydrothermal-process-synthesized F–SnO2@RGO nanocomposite is used as an anode to enhance the storage and stability of lithium-ion batteries.289 The fluorine atom improved the electron transportation and the lithium-ion diffusion in the nanocomposite. The nanocomposite showed a significantly high specific capacity of 1277 mA h g−1 and high retention ability even after 100 cycles. Thus, the uniform spread of fluorine-doped tin oxide particles over reduced graphene oxide sheets enhanced the electrochemical performance. Tang et al.290 prepared a SnO2/graphene nanocomposite by a hydrothermal and calcination process to enhance the electrochemical performance of lithium-ion batteries. The researchers found that the synthesized composite showed a reversible capacity of 675.8 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 500 mA g−1. It even showed a retention ability of 96.37% after 100 cycles. In addition to that, ultrathin SnO2/graphene was used as an anode to improve the capacity of lithium-ion batteries.291 The nanocomposite showed a maximum capacity of 940 mA h g−1 and high stability even after long-term use. When used as an anode, this nanocomposite is ultrastable as it is used in flexible lithium-ion batteries for portable and wearable electronic devices.
Besides CNT and graphene, many carbon-based composites, nanomaterials, and nanocomposites are also used as the anode in lithium-ion batteries. Researchers synthesized a hollow nanostructured SnO2/C composite to enhance the electrochemical performance of tin oxide-based anodes in lithium-ion batteries.292 The synthesized nanocomposite showed a high specific capacity of 788 mA h g−1 and was recycled up to 900 times with a retention ability of 69.8%. The nanocomposite showed superior performance compared with pure tin oxide as it avoided the agglomeration of SnO2 in the voids. Similarly, to avoid this situation, Versaci et al.293 synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles with a C45 support. The SnO2/C45 nanocomposite, when used as an anode, showed excellent cycling performance with a 100% retention ability after 600 cycles. It showed a maximum specific capacity of 1400 mA h g−1 and high electrode stability, thus improving the electrochemical performance.
Furthermore, researchers also synthesized a Sn/SnO2@NC nanocomposite by the hydrothermal method to use it as an anode to improve the lithium-ion battery's cycling and rate performance.294 The heightened electrochemical performance can be somewhat credited to the heterostructured microcube that can accelerate the transfer rate of lithium ions by decreasing the transmission paths and this is partly credited to the nitrogen-doped carbon coating that can overcome the volume effect and contribute to fractional lithium storage capacity. It showed a specific capacity of 1058 mA h g−1 and was recycled up to 100 times with a retention ability of 46%. Using the co-precipitation method and CaSn(OH)6 nanocubes as a sacrificial template, researchers synthesized hollow SnO2@C nanoboxes to be used as an anode in lithium-ion batteries.103 The synthesized nanocomposite showed a specific capacity of 806.5 mA h g−1 and was recyclable up to 100 times with a retention ability of 97.5%. This improved performance and cycling stability were due to the nanocomposite structure, which provided a buffer space for volume expansion, a large electrolyte contact area, and a short ion transfer path.


5.3.2. Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors, also called ultracapacitors, are electrochemical energy storage devices that combine the high energy storage capability of conventional batteries with the high power delivery capability of conventional capacitors.295–297 These are mainly used in all industries ranging from hybrid electric vehicles, such as Tesla, Ather, Ford, etc., to small pieces of equipment due to their higher capacity and long recyclability.298 The supercapacitors changed the dynamic of the automobile industry as they reduced the harmful emissions and the dependency on non-renewable sources such as natural gas, petrol, and diesel.299 Metal oxide such as SnO2-based supercapacitors showed very high capacity and stability. The SnO2-based nanocomposite was compatible, eco-friendly, and cost-effective when used as a supercapacitor.300,301
Rani et al.302 used the impregnation method to synthesize SnO2@C composite electrodes for supercapacitors. The synthesized nanocomposite showed a specific capacitance of 432 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 current density in 1 M potassium hydroxide electrolyte with a capacitance retention of 95.5% after 2000 cycles. The electrodes also led to an energy density of 29.4 W h kg−1 and power density of 418 W kg−1 when a 1 A g−1 current density was applied. The presence of bimodal pores facilitates the continuous flow of electrons, and the optimized design stabilizes the cycles. Furthermore, researchers have also worked on a ZnO/SnO2 composite, which would work as the electrode for supercapacitors to enhance their energy capacitance.303 The studies showed that the nanocomposite has a specific capacitance of 2307 F g−1 at a 20 mV s−1 scan rate in 3 M potassium hydroxide electrolyte with a capacitance retention of 79% after 7000 cycles. When the optimum current was applied, the hybrid supercapacitor showed an energy density of 47.28 W h kg−1 and a power density of 10400 W kg−1. To improve the electrochemical performance of supercapacitors, researchers combined mesoporous carbon hollow spheres with hollow double-shelled tin oxide to form an electrode with a good electrical conductivity and a controllled volume expansion.304 The synthesized SnO2/MesCHS nanocomposite showed an enhanced electrochemical performance, having a specific capacitance of 470 F g−1 at a 20 A g−1 current density with a capacitance retention of 88.4% after 4000 cycles along with a coloumbic efficiency of 86.5%.
In addition to that, researchers, with the help of the co-precipitation method, synthesized ternary Fe–SnO2@CeO2 electrodes for applications in supercapacitors.305 The synthesized nanocomposite showed a specific capacitance of 348 F g−1 at a 1 A g−1 current density with a capacitance retention of 85% after 5000 cycles. At the same current density, the three-electrode system-based supercapacitor showed an energy density of 32.2 W h kg−1 and a power density of 747 W kg−1. Similarly, a ternary rGO–SnO2–polyaniline nanocomposite was used as an electrode to enhance the performance of the supercapacitor.306 The electrodes were assembled in 1 M sulphuric acid and showed a specific capacitance of 524.2 F g−1 at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. Wang et al.,307 using the hydrothermal method, synthesized a Co3O4–SnO@SnO2 nanocomposite to enhance the supercapacitors’ electrochemical performance, as shown in Fig. 30.307 The produced nanocomposite showed a specific capacitance of 1.056 F cm−2 at 1 mA cm−2 current density with a capacitance retention of 91.5% after 2000 cycles. The improved performance was credited to the high electrical conductivity and low internal resistance.
 Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of the synthesis and experimental setup of the Co3O4–SnO@SnO2 nanocomposite as the electrode for supercapacitors. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2019. 

5.4. Removal of biological contaminants
Researchers utilized tin oxide nanoparticles and their nanocomposites to remove microorganisms, such as bacteria, viruses, and fungi. The tin oxide synthesized for the mentioned cause was produced by the green synthesis method or traditional synthesis method. However, modern researchers prefer the green method as it is eco-friendly and less toxic.308,309
As reported, using Daphne mucronata (D. mucronata) leaf extract as a capping agent, researchers synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles to study the antimicrobial effect.310 The synthesized nanomaterial had a very high surface area of 147 m2 g−1, and it showed antimicrobial activity for both bacteria and fungi along with the photodegradation of rhodamine 6G dye. The order of activity was Gram-negative bacteria (GNB) > Gram-positive bacteria (GPB) > fungi. Khan et al.311 synthesized a SnO2 nanoparticle aqueous extract of Clerodendrum inerme to study the antimicrobial activity. The studies concluded that the nanoparticles showed both antibacterial and antifungal activity resulting in removal of microorganisms such as Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis, Aspergillus flavus, and Candida albicans. The nanoparticles were also doped with copper, and showed hemolysis activity and acted as an antitumor and anticancer agent, as shown in Fig. 31.311 Researchers also developed an eco-friendly, stable, and cost-efficient Ag–SnO2 nanocomposite that showed antimicrobial activity.136 The nanoparticles were produced from extracts of Saccharum officinarum and showed antimicrobial action against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Escherichia coli, and Bacillus subtilis. Researchers studied the Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus and the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae using SnO2 nanoparticles synthesized from Stevia rebaudiana leaf extract.312 The study revealed that the nanoparticles showed a greater inhibition effect on Gram-positive bacteria than Gram-negative bacteria. However, it was found that the antimicrobial activity was directly proportional to the concentration of the nanoparticles, i.e., a decrease in the number of nanoparticles decreases the inhibition effect and vice versa.
 Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of the synthesis and application of tin oxide nanoparticles made from extracts of Clerodendrum inerme. Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Using the biogenic wet synthesis method, Kumari et al.313 synthesized quantum-confined SnO2 nanoparticles to study the antimicrobial activity. When added to ethylene glycol, these resulted in an improvement of thermal conductivity and antibacterial activity. Similarly, using the same synthesis procedure, researchers also developed SnO2 nanoparticles that showed an inhibitory effect on the Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli.314 The antibacterial mechanism is shown in Fig. 32.314 It was confirmed that when the bacterial body comes in contact with the tin oxide nanoparticles, it undergoes dehydrogenation, which results in cell death with the release of some amount of hydrogen peroxide. Along with the antimicrobial activity, the nanoparticles also acted as antioxidants and degraded pharmaceutical compounds.
 Fig. 32  Antibacterial activity by SnO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2015. 
Further studies solidified the theory that the antimicrobial activity was directly proportional to the concentration of nanoparticles.315 Researchers also developed SnO2 nanoparticles using the biogenic wet synthesis method with peptides as the precursor to study the antibacterial activity.316 The presence of peptides ensures biocompatibility, and the nanoparticles showed very high stability and effectiveness during the antimicrobial activity. In another study, Nathan et al.317 synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles from Stevia rebaudiana plant leaf extracts in a cost-effective and environment-friendly process. As per the author's opinion, the antibacterial effect was seen to be maximum on the Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus compared with the Gram-negative bacterium Klebsiella pneumoniae. The above result was confirmed by Gowri et al.,318 although they prepared the tin oxide nanoparticles using aloe vera gel extracts and experimented on different Gram-negative bacteria. To test the antibacterial ability, the researchers applied SnO2 nanoparticles to a cotton textile using the pad dry cure method. The studies concluded that the nanoparticles showed a more inhibitory effect on the Gram-positive bacterium Staphylococcus aureus compared with the Gram-negative bacterium Escherichia coli.
Erkan et al.319 synthesized a Pd/TiO2/SnO2 nanocomposite to inhibit bacteria and viruses such as Escherichia coli, Staphylococcus aureus, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, and Aspergillus niger spores. The addition of palladium enhanced the antimicrobial activity by increasing the activity of the semiconductor oxides. The antimicrobial efficiency for inhibiting bacteria and fungi was reported as Escherichia coli > Staphylococcus aureus > Saccharomyces cerevisiae > Aspergillus niger. Furthermore, another composite Au/SnO2 was produced to check the antibacterial ability on Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis.320 As per the author, the synthesized nanocomposite showed very high efficiency in inhibiting Escherichia coli compared with Bacillus subtilis. A group of researchers prepared Co/SnO2 nanocomposites to investigate their antimicrobial properties.321 The synthesized nanocomposite was tested against Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis using the diffusion method. The study concluded that the nanocomposite showed an equal inhibitory effect on Gram-negative and Gram-positive bacteria.
6. Future perspectives
The ease of synthesis, high stability, compatibility, and adaptive properties of tin oxide make it an exciting nanomaterial for various applications in environmental remediation and energy production and storage. Generally, traditional and green synthesis methods are used for the production of tin oxide nanomaterials and nanocomposites. However, after extensive research, it was concluded that the green methods are far superior to the traditional methods as they are non-toxic, cost-effective, free of chemical additives, and eco-friendly. The different green synthesis procedures using different plant extracts led to various shapes and sizes of tin oxide nanoparticles, showing various applications. However, some subtle improvements are needed to prosper in this field and close the research gaps.
A proper study should be conducted to find the accurate stoichiometry between the precursor and plant extracts, eventually linked with surface morphology. Also, the mechanism that the plant extracts follow for synthesizing SnO2 nanoparticles is yet to be unravelled. The role of a particular plant extract in synthesizing a particular type of tin oxide nanoparticle is not fully understood. Hence, further research should be conducted in this field. Apart from the stems, fruits, and leaves, other parts of plants such as flowers should be studied, as various colours and components may bring some changes in nanoparticles. As discussed above, researchers have not mentioned the optimum temperature and the reaction conditions for synthesizing SnO2 nanoparticles and their nanocomposites. Experimental trials should be conducted in this direction.
Furthermore, it was found that most reported SnO2 nanoparticles are spherical-shaped. However, various shapes and sizes of SnO2 nanoparticles affect the efficiency, versatility, and stability. Also, the extraction of plants using mixed solvents has not been studied yet. So, further research should also discuss the role of reaction time, temperature, pH, the solvent used, and the extract concentration. In addition, the applications of biomolecule-mediated synthesized nanoparticles are pretty limited, so further studies are required in this field.
The nanoparticles developed by green synthesis methods showed extreme stability during the photodegradation of contaminants in an aqueous solution. However, the traditionally synthesized tin oxide nanoparticles sometimes become unstable and dissolve in water, leading to secondary pollution.322 More investigations should be done to improve the stability of these nanocomposites. Also, the large-scale use of these SnO2 nanoparticles has not been studied. It is essential as the photodegradation of contaminants is needed for the industrial sector such as textile industries, pharmaceutical companies, chemical industries, and many more. Also, future researchers should be directed on the cost-effectiveness and ease of preparation of the desired photocatalysts. Sensors made up of SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites were also used to detect gas and other toxic chemicals. However, these sensors lacked a statistical method to analyse the complex data. Also, the sensors are sensitive to varying temperatures and pH, so more studies should be conducted in this field, and more focus should be given to amplifying the sensitivity to the desired contaminant. In addition, sensors lose their longevity when they have more exposure to the desired gas. So, future researchers should work in this field to improve the sensitivity of tin-oxide-based nanostructured materials towards a particular contaminant/pollutant.
Energy production by solar cells and water splitting is an efficient and straightforward procedure. Nevertheless, these are not very cost-effective, and the nanocomposites are mainly synthesized by the traditional method. So, more focus should be given to the green synthesis of these nanocomposites, resulting in a more eco-friendly and chemical additive-free environment. Also, the high energy usage and installation cost of the solar cells cause significant concern. So, future research work should be focused on enhancing the efficiency of SnO2-based solar cells to overcome these drawbacks. Lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors made up of tin oxide nanoparticles show enhanced photochemical ability. However, these energy storage devices are still unable to catch up with the needs of modern society. The tech-generation requires high storage power and a very high number of recycles, which these nanocomposites lack. Researchers should work on this in the future by making it more enhanced as well as cost-effective. Studies regarding the antimicrobial activity of SnO2 nanoparticles have also been discussed. Researchers have conducted green synthesis of SnO2-based nanostructured materials for antimicrobial activity. However, more improvement is needed to enhance their performance. Further investigation must be done for the remediation of viruses and fungi.
More research should be carried out to produce SnO2 nanoparticles and SnO2-based nanocomposites using the green synthesis method for various applications, such as solar cells, water splitting, lithium-ion batteries, and supercapacitors. As discussed above, a proper mechanism is yet to be found to synthesize tin oxide nanoparticles and their nanocomposites. Thus, it is essential to research this field to know the exact chemical reactions and mechanisms undergone during the synthesis. The actual reaction mechanism will allow monitoring and enhancing of the biosynthesis process, which is essential for the large-scale production of SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites. Hence, understanding the rapidly growing synthesis method discussed herein will help facilitate future research progress on SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites and their enormous potential for industrial or large-scale production in the near future.
7. Conclusion
Traditional and green methods are usually used to prepare tin oxide nanoparticles and nanocomposites. However, due to the drawbacks of the traditional methods, researchers switched to green methods. The green synthesis methods were given prime focus as they are chemical additive-free, non-toxic, eco-friendly, and cost-effective. Plant extracts, microbes, and biomolecules were used as capping and reducing agents for the efficient synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles. However, as discussed in this piece of literature, plant-mediated synthesis is the best synthesis technique. This review also focussed on the structure and characterization of tin oxide nanoparticles and composites. The tin oxide nanoparticles showed varieties of applications due to the use of different precursors in their synthesis. In this review, we discussed the various applications such as: (i) environmental remediation, which included SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites working as catalysts for photocatalytic degradation, and acting as sensors; (ii) energy production, which included SnO2 nanocomposites working as a photoanode for solar cells and water splitting; (III) energy storage, which included a SnO2 nanocomposite electrode for lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors; and (iv) biological remediation where the SnO2 nanoparticles and nanocomposites showed antimicrobial ability. It was concluded that tin oxide nanoparticles and their nanocomposites might have excellent potential for environmental remediation, energy production, and storage. This review will help understand the synthesis mechanisms and their drawbacks and lead a path to future research, eventually leading to large-scale production and application.
Author contributions
Soumya Ranjan Mishra: conceptualization, methodology, visualization, writing – original draft preparation. Md. Ahmaruzzaman: supervision, editing, and reviewing the whole manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they do not have any potential conflict of interest.
References
J. Michałowicz and W. Duda, Phenols–Sources and Toxicity, Pol. J. Environ. Stud., 2007, 16(3), 347–362 Search PubMed .
X. Peng, Y. Yu, C. Tang, J. Tan, Q. Huang and Z. Wang, Occurrence of steroid estrogens, endocrine-disrupting phenols, and acid pharmaceutical residues in urban riverine water of the Pearl River Delta, South China, Sci. Total Environ., 2008, 397(1–3), 158–166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Phipps, G. W. Holcombe and J. T. Fiandt, Acute toxicity of phenol and substituted phenols to the fathead minnow, Bull. Environ. Contam. Toxicol., 1981, 26(5) CAS .
G. Palani, A. Arputhalatha, K. Kannan, S. K. Lakkaboyana, M. M. Hanafiah, V. Kumar and R. K. Marella, Current trends in the application of nanomaterials for the removal of pollutants from industrial wastewater treatment—a review, Molecules, 2021, 26(9), 2799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmaruzzaman, A review on the utilization of fly ash, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2010, 36(3), 327–363 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Ritter, P. Sibley, K. Hall, P. Keen, G. Mattu and L. Beth Linton, Sources, pathways, and relative risks of contaminants in surface water and groundwater: a perspective prepared for the Walkerton inquiry, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, Part A, 2002, 65(1), 1–142 CrossRef PubMed .
D. T. Sponza, Application of toxicity tests into discharges of the pulp-paper industry in Turkey, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2003, 54(1), 74–86 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ahmaruzzaman, Biochar based nanocomposites for photocatalytic degradation of emerging organic pollutants from water and wastewater, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 140, 111262 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gadore and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Tailored fly ash materials: A recent progress of their properties and applications for remediation of organic and inorganic contaminants from water, J. Water Process. Eng., 2021, 41, 101910 CrossRef .
V. Gadore and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Fly ash–based nanocomposites: a potential material for effective photocatalytic degradation/elimination of emerging organic pollutants from aqueous stream, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2021, 1–24 Search PubMed .
S. R. Mishra and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Cerium Oxide and its Nanocomposites: Structure, Synthesis, and Wastewater Treatment Applications, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 102562 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, X. Li, Y. Quan, Y. Yin and S. Zheng, Effect of long-term organic removal on ion exchange properties and performance during sewage tertiary treatment by conventional anion exchange resins, Chemosphere, 2015, 136, 181–189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhou and D. W. Smith, Advanced technologies in water and wastewater treatment, Can. J. Civ. Eng., 2001, 28(S1), 49–66 CrossRef .
L. J. Frewer, N. Gupta, S. George, A. R. H. Fischer, E. L. Giles and D. Coles, Consumer attitudes towards nanotechnologies applied to food production, Trends Food Sci. Technol., 2014, 40(2), 211–225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmed, S. A. Chaudhry and S. Ikram, A review on biogenic synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles using plant extracts and microbes: a prospect towards green chemistry, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2017, 166, 272–284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Hussein, Applications of nanotechnology to improve the performance of solar collectors–Recent advances and overview, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 62, 767–792 CrossRef .
S. Ahmed, M. Ahmad, B. L. Swami and S. Ikram, A review on plants extract mediated synthesis of silver nanoparticles for antimicrobial applications: a green expertise, J. Adv. Res., 2016, 7(1), 17–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Charinpanitkul, K. Faungnawakij and W. Tanthapanichakoon, Review of recent research on nanoparticle production in Thailand, Adv. Powder. Technol., 2008, 19(5), 443–457 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Rad, H. Abbasi and M. H. Afzali, Gold nanoparticles: synthesising, characterizing and reviewing novel application in recent years, Phys. Procedia, 2011, 22, 203–208 CrossRef .

          M. D. Purkayastha and A. K. Manhar, Nanotechnological applications in food packaging, sensors and bioactive delivery systems, in Nanoscience
in food and agriculture,  2016, vol. 2, pp. 59–128 Search PubMed .
S. Bagheri and N. M. Julkapli, Modified iron oxide nanomaterials: functionalization and application, J. Magn. Magn. Mater., 2016, 416, 117–133 CrossRef CAS .
C. Branci, N. Benjelloun, J. Sarradin and M. Ribes, Vitreous tin oxide-based thin film electrodes for Li-ion micro-batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135(1–4), 169–174 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Hong, C. J. Liang, X. Y. Sun and X. T. Zeng, Characterization of organic photovoltaic devices with indium-tin-oxide anode treated by plasma in various gases, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100(9), 093711 CrossRef .
A. Sharma, A. Ahmed, A. Singh, S. Oruganti, A. Khosla and S. Arya, Recent advances in tin oxide nanomaterials as electrochemical/chemiresistive sensors, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2021, 168(2), 027505 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tazikeh, A. Akbari, A. Talebi and E. Talebi, Synthesis and characterization of tin oxide nanoparticles via the Co-precipitation method, Mater. Sci., 2014, 32(1), 98–101 CAS .
H. He Jr., T. H. Wu, C. L. Hsin, K. M. Li, L. J. Chen, Y. L. Chueh, L. J. Chou and Z. L. Wang, Beaklike SnO2 nanorods with strong photoluminescent and field–emission properties, Small, 2006, 2(1), 116–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, F. Zong, X. Cui, H. Ma, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, F. Yang and J. Zhao, Structure and field emission properties of SnO2 nanowires, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61(19–20), 4152–4155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang and T. Chen, Nonaqueous and template-free synthesis of Sb doped SnO2 microspheres and their application to lithium-ion battery anode, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54(13), 3510–3515 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, Z. V. Zivcova, M. Zlamalova, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Electron-selective layers for dye-sensitized solar cells based on TiO2 and SnO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(12), 6512–6521 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, L. Ma, Q. Zhang, C. Wang and X. Xu, SnO2-based nanomaterials: synthesis and application in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, J. Nanomater., 2015, 2015 Search PubMed .
S. M. Roopan, G. Madhumitha, A. Abdul Rahuman, C. Kamaraj, A. Bharathi and T. V. Surendra, Low-cost and eco-friendly phyto-synthesis of silver nanoparticles using Cocos nucifera coir extract and its larvicidal activity, Ind. Crops Prod., 2013, 43, 631–635 CrossRef CAS .
E. Kowsari and M. R. Ghezelbash, Ionic liquid-assisted, facile synthesis of ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposites, and investigation of their photocatalytic activity, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 17–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, D. Ghosh and S. Chen, Large-scale electrochemical synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles, J. Mater. Sci., 2008, 43(15), 5291–5299 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, G. Sun, Z. Zhou, S. Sun, Q. Wang, S. Yan and H. Li, 
            et al., Size-controllable synthesis of monodispersed SnO2 nanoparticles and application in electro-catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(18), 8774–8778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tian, C. Liang, J. Liu, H. Zhang and L. Zhang, Reactive and photocatalytic degradation of various water contaminants by laser ablation-derived SnOx nanoparticles in liquid, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(45), 18242–18247 RSC .
H. Wang, F. Sun, Y. Zhang, K. Gu, W. Chen and W. Li, Photochemical construction of free-standing Sn-filled SnO2 nanotube array on a solution surface for flexible use in photocatalysis, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21(33), 12407–12413 RSC .
R. Kumar, S. M. Roopan, A. Prabhakarn, V. G. Khanna and S. Chakroborty, Agricultural waste Annona squamosa peel extract: biosynthesis of silver nanoparticles, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2012, 90, 173–176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gangula, R. Podila, L. Karanam, C. Janardhana and A. M. Rao, Catalytic reduction of 4-nitrophenol using biogenic gold and silver nanoparticles derived from Breynia rhamnoides, Langmuir, 2011, 27(24), 15268–15274 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Kirubaharan, D. Kalpana, Y. S. Lee, A. R. Kim, D. J. Yoo, K. S. Nahm and G. Gnana Kumar, Biomediated silver nanoparticles for the highly selective copper(II) ion sensor applications, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51(21), 7441–7446 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. H. Yang, C. X. Wang and G. W. Yang, Nanostructures and self-catalyzed growth of SnO2, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98(7), 073520 CrossRef .
L. J. Li, Synthesis and photoluminescence properties of tin oxide nanostructures, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 44, 1269 CAS .
A. Johari, M. C. Bhatnagar and V. Rana, Effect of substrates on structural and optical properties of tin oxide (SnO2) nanostructures, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12(10), 7903–7908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Sun, G. W. Meng, Y. W. Wang, T. Gao, M. G. Zhang, Y. T. Tian, X. S. Peng and L. D. Zhang, Large-scale synthesis of SnO2 nanobelts, Appl. Phys. A, 2003, 76(2), 287–289 CrossRef CAS .
D. Calestani, M. Zha, A. Zappettini, L. Lazzarini, G. Salviati, L. Zanotti and G. Sberveglieri, Structural and optical study of SnO2 nanobelts and nanowires, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2005, 25(5–8), 625–630 CrossRef .
P. Nguyen, H. T. Ng and M. Meyyappan, Growth of individual vertical germanium nanowires, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(5), 549–553 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, S. J. Wang, T. Yu and T. Wu, Controlling the growth mechanism of ZnO nanowires by selecting catalysts, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111(47), 17500–17505 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batzill and U. Diebold, The surface and materials science of tin oxide, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2005, 79(2–4), 47–154 CrossRef CAS .
S. Luo, J. Fan, W. Liu, M. Zhang, Z. Song, C. Lin, X. Wu and P. K. Chu, Synthesis and low-temperature photoluminescence properties of SnO2 nanowires and nanobelts, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17(6), 1695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, J. Gao, L. M. Wong, J. G. Tao, L. Liao, Z. Zheng and G. Z. Xing, 
            et al., Morphology-controlled synthesis and a comparative study of the physical properties of SnO2 nanostructures: from ultrathin nanowires to ultrawide nanobelts, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20(13), 135605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, E. Koep and M. Liu, A highly sensitive and fast-responding SnO2 sensor fabricated by combustion chemical vapor deposition, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(15), 3997–4000 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kalantar-zadeh and B. Fry, Characterization techniques for nanomaterials, in Nanotechnology-Enabled Sensors,  2008, pp. 211–281 Search PubMed .
H. T. Feng, R. F. Zhuo, J. T. Chen, D. Yan, J. J. Feng, H. J. Li, S. Cheng and P. X. Yan, Axial periodical nanostructures of Sb-doped SnO2 grown by chemical vapor deposition, Phys. E, 2009, 41(9), 1640–1644 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, S. Ge and Y. Zuo, Influence of growth parameters on the morphology and magnetic property of SnO2 nanostructures, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157(8), K162 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, L. Li, P. Xu and L. W. Xing, Fabrication and photoluminescence of the SnO2 plate-shape nanostructures and chrysanthemum-shape nanostructures, Rev. Adv. Mater. Sci., 2013, 33, 14 Search PubMed .
D. Qin, P. Yan, G. Li, J. Xing and Y. An, Self-construction of SnO2 cubes based on aggration of nanorods, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62(16), 2411–2414 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ma, M. Nikiel, A. G. Thomas, M. Missous and D. J. Lewis, A novel and potentially scalable CVD-based route towards SnO2: Mo thin films as transparent conducting oxides, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 1–16 Search PubMed .

          Y. Liu, W. Rauch and M. Liu, Solid state ionic devices III, The Electrochemical Society, Pennington, NJ,  2002 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, J. Li, G. An and X. He, Highly porous SnO2 fibers by electrospinning and oxygen plasma etching and its ethanol-sensing properties, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144(1), 43–48 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Ramakrishna, An introduction to electrospinning and nanofibers, World Scientific,  2005 Search PubMed .
X. Xia, X. J. Dong, Q. F. Wei, Y. B. Cai and K. Y. Lu, Formation mechanism of porous hollow SnO2 nanofibers prepared by one-step electrospinning, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2012, 6(2), 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
N. K. Elumalai, R. Jose, P. S. Archana, V. Chellappan and S. Ramakrishna, Charge transport through electrospun SnO2 nanoflowers and nanofibers: role of surface trap density on electron transport dynamics, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116(42), 22112–22120 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jiang, C. Wang, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, J. Jin, X. Guo, L. Zhong, Z. Duan and H. Li, Electrospun Eu2O3/Au/SnO2 ternary nanofibers with synergistically enhanced acetone sensing properties, Mater. Lett., 2021, 130729 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, I. Ramos and J. J. Santiago-Avilés, Synthesis of ultra-fine porous tin oxide fibres and its process characterization, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18(29), 295601 CrossRef .
X. Wang, H. Fan and P. Ren, Electrospinning derived hollow SnO2 microtubes with highly photocatalytic property, Catal. Commun., 2013, 31, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wittawat, R. Rittipun, M. Jarasfah and B. Nattaporn, Synthesis of ZnO/TiO2 spherical particles for blue light screening by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 24, 101126 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. C. C. Nakaruk and C. C. Sorrell, Conceptual model for spray pyrolysis mechanism: fabrication and annealing of titania thin films, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2010, 7(5), 665–676 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Aouaj, R. Diaz, A. Belayachi, F. Rueda and M. Abd-Lefdil, Comparative study of ITO and FTO thin films grown by spray pyrolysis, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44(7), 1458–1461 CrossRef CAS .
I. W. Lenggoro, Y. Itoh, N. Iida and K. Okuyama, Control of size and morphology in NiO particles prepared by a low-pressure spray pyrolysis, Mater. Res. Bull., 2003, 38(14), 1819–1827 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gordillo, L. C. Moreno, W. De la Cruz and P. Teheran, Preparation and characterization of SnO2 thin films deposited by spray pyrolysis from SnCl2 and SnCl4 precursors, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 252(1), 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Itoh, M. Abdullah and K. Okuyama, Direct preparation of nonagglomerated indium tin oxide nanoparticles using various spray pyrolysis methods, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19(4), 1077–1086 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Patil, D. D. Kajale, V. B. Gaikwad and G. H. Jain, Spray pyrolysis deposition of nanostructured tin oxide thin films, Int. Scholarly Res. Not., 2012, 2012, 5 Search PubMed .
A. R. Paloly and M. Junaid Bushiri, The effect of solvents on the growth and key properties
of tin oxide thin films deposited via chemical spray pyrolysis, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 261, 124209 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Park, J. H. Kim and Y. C. Kang, Lithium-ion storage performances of sunflower-like and nanosized hollow SnO2 spheres by spray pyrolysis and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(28), 13531–13538 RSC .
K. D. A. Kumar, S. Valanarasu, A. Kathalingam and K. Jeyadheepan, Nd3+ Doping effect on the optical and electrical properties of SnO2 thin films prepared by nebulizer spray pyrolysis for opto-electronic application, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 101, 264–271 CrossRef .
C. Liu, R. Félix, K. Forberich, X. Du, T. Heumüller, G. J. Matt and E. Gu, 
            et al., Utilizing the unique charge extraction properties of antimony tin oxide nanoparticles for efficient and stable organic photovoltaics, Nano Energy, 2021, 89, 106373 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. S. Wagner and S. W. C. Ellis, Vapor–liquid–solid mechanism of single crystal growth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4(5), 89–90 CrossRef .
S. Mathur, S. Barth, H. Shen, J.-C. Pyun and U. Werner, Size–dependent photoconductance in SnO2 nanowires, Small, 2005, 1(7), 713–717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Meng, T. Yanagida, H. Yoshida, K. Nagashima, M. Kanai, F. Zhuge and Y. He, 
            et al., A flux induced crystal phase transition in the vapor–liquid–solid growth of indium-tin oxide nanowires, Nanoscale, 2014, 6(12), 7033–7038 RSC .
R. R. Kumar, K. Narasimha Rao, K. Rajanna and A. R. Phani, Low temperature growth of SnO2 nanowires by electron beam evaporation and their application in UV light detection, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48(4), 1545–1552 CrossRef CAS .
S. Budak, G. X. Miao, M. Ozdemir, K. B. Chetry and A. Gupta, Growth and characterization of single crystalline tin oxide (SnO2) nanowires, J. Cryst. Growth, 2006, 291(2), 405–411 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-J. Choi, Vapor–liquid–solid growth of semiconductor nanowires, in Semiconductor nanostructures for optoelectronic devices, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2012, pp. 1–36 Search PubMed .
J.-C. Robert and Y. Le Cars, Applications of sol-gel technology in imaging, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 2(1), 707–710 CrossRef CAS .
C. Burda, X. Chen, R. Narayanan and M. A. El-Sayed, Chemistry and properties of nanocrystals of different shapes, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105(4), 1025–1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Periathai, N. Jeyakumaran and N. Prithivikumaran, Influence of pH on the Properties of SnO2 Nanoparticles Synthesized by Sol-Gel Process, Asian – J. Chem., 2013, 25 CAS .
A. Cabot, J. Arbiol, J. Rv Morante, U. Weimar, N. Barsan and W. Göpel, Analysis of the noble metal catalytic additives introduced by impregnation of as obtained SnO2 sol–gel nanocrystals for gas sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 70(1–3), 87–100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Li, R. Zhao and H. Zhang, A facile Sol-gel method based on urea-SnCl2 deep eutectic solvents toward synthesis of SnO2/SiO2 with high oxidation desulfurization activity, New J. Chem., 2021, 45, 15901–15911 RSC .
P. Sivakumar, H. S. Akkera, T. Ranjeth Kumar Reddy, Y. Bitla, V. Ganesh, P. Mohan Kumar, G. Srinivas Reddy and M. Poloju, Effect of Ti doping on structural, optical and electrical properties of SnO2 transparent conducting thin films deposited by sol-gel spin coating, Opt. Mater., 2021, 113, 110845 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, J. Luo, N. N. Kariuki, M. M. Maye, V. W. Jones and C. J. Zhong, Novel interparticle spatial properties of hydrogen-bonding mediated nanoparticle assembly, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15(1), 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Noskov, G. Lamoureux and B. Roux, Molecular dynamics study of hydration in ethanol–water mixtures using a polarizable force field, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109(14), 6705–6713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lupan, L. Chow, G. Chai, H. Heinrich, S. Park and A. Schulte, Growth of tetragonal SnO2 microcubes and their characterization, J. Cryst. Growth, 2008, 311(1), 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, H. Guo, J. Wang, Y. Dong, B. Liu, F. Guo, D. Chen, R. Zhang and Y. Zheng, Hydrogen gas sensor based on SnO2 nanospheres modified with Sb2O3 prepared by one-step solvothermal route, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 331, 129441 CrossRef CAS .
L. Meng, W. Bu, Y. Li, Q. Qin, Z. Zhou, C. Hu, X. Chuai, C. Wang, P. Sun and G. Lu, Highly selective triethylamine sensing based on SnO/SnO2 nanocomposite synthesized by one-step solvothermal process and sintering, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 342, 130018 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barth, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, J. D. Holmes and A. Romano-Rodriguez, Synthesis and applications of one-dimensional semiconductors, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55(6), 563–627 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, R.-R. Cheng, H.-H. Bi, Y.-H. Lu, L.-B. Ma and X.-J. He, A review of porous carbons produced by template methods for supercapacitor applications, New Carbon Mater., 2021, 36(1), 69–81 CrossRef .
N. Wang, X. Cao and L. Guo, Facile one-pot solution phase synthesis of SnO2 nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112(33), 12616–12622 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kolmakov, Y. Zhang, G. Cheng and M. Moskovits, Detection of CO and O2 using tin oxide nanowire sensors, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15(12), 997–1000 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, Y. Xu and Q. Li, Controlled fabrication of SnO2 arrays of well-aligned nanotubes and nanowires, Nanoscale, 2010, 2(10), 2104–2108 RSC .
J. Zhang, J. Guo, H. Xu and B. Cao, Reactive-template fabrication of porous SnO2 nanotubes and their remarkable gas-sensing performance, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5(16), 7893–7898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kuang, T. Xu, Z.-X. Xie, S.-C. Lin, R.-B. Huang and L.-S. Zheng, Versatile fabrication of aligned SnO2 nanotube arrays by using various ZnO arrays as sacrificial templates, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19(7), 1019–1023 RSC .
W. Zhu, W. Wang, H. Xu and J. Shi, Fabrication of ordered SnO2 nanotube arrays via a template route, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 99(1), 127–130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, N. Matsunaga, K. Shimanoe, N. Yamazoe and T. Kunitake, Nanotubular SnO2 templated by cellulose fibers: synthesis and gas sensing, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(13), 3513–3518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lai, J. A. Gonzalez Martinez, M. Grätzel and D. Jason Riley, Preparation of tin dioxide nanotubes via electrosynthesis in a template, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16(27), 2843–2845 RSC .
Q. Dai, C. Gu, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Hong, S. W. Joo and J. Huang, Self-sacrificing template method to controllable synthesize hollow SnO2@C nanoboxes for lithium-ion battery anode, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2021, 115653 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Dharmadasa and J. Haigh, Strengths and advantages of electrodeposition as a semiconductor growth technique for applications in macroelectronic devices, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2005, 153(1), G47 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, J. Wei, H. Zhu, F. Ma and S. Wang, Electrodeposition of gold nanoparticle arrays on ITO
glass as electrode with high electrocatalytic activity, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48(3), 1338–1341 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Ayal, Z. Zainal, H. N. Lim, Z. A. Talib, Y.-C. Lim, S.-K. Chang and A. M. Holi, Fabrication of CdSe nanoparticles sensitized TiO2 nanotube arrays via pulse electrodeposition for photoelectrochemical application, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 106, 257–262 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Aal, S. M. El-Sheikh and Y. M. Z. Ahmed, Electrodeposited composite coating of Ni–W–P with nanosized rod-and spherical-shaped SiC particles, Mater. Res. Bull., 2009, 44(1), 151–159 CrossRef .
S. Kim, H. Lee, C. M. Park and Y. Jung, Synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticle film by cathodic electrodeposition, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2012, 12(2), 1616–1619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dirican, M. Yanilmaz, K. Fu, Y. Lu, H. Kizil and X. Zhang, Carbon-enhanced electrodeposited SnO2/carbon nanofiber composites as anode for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 240–247 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Abdullah, N. M. Ismail and D. M. Nuruzzaman, Characterization of tin oxide (SnO2) nanostructures prepared by thermal oxidation, in AIP Conference Proceedings, AIP Publishing LLC,  2018, vol. 2035(1), pp. 070009 Search PubMed .
G. E. Patil, D. D. Kajale, V. B. Gaikwad and G. H. Jain, Spray pyrolysis deposition of nanostructured tin oxide thin films, Int. Scholarly Res. Not., 2012, 2012, 1–5 Search PubMed .
S. Rehman, S. M. Asiri, F. A. Khan, B. Rabindran Jermy, H. Khan, S. Akhtar, R. Al Jindan, K. M. Khan and A. Qurashi, Biocompatible tin oxide nanoparticles: synthesis, antibacterial, anticandidal and cytotoxic activities, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4(14), 4013–4017 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Nagirnyak, V. A. Lutz, T. A. Dontsova and I. M. Astrelin, Synthesis and characterization of tin(IV) oxide obtained by chemical vapor deposition method, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Desarkar, P. Kumbhakar and A. K. Mitra, Optical properties of tin oxide nanoparticles prepared by laser ablation in water: Influence of laser ablation time duration and laser fluence, Mater. Charact., 2012, 73, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chakravarty, S. Chakraborty, R. Shukla, J. Bahadur, R. Ram, S. Mazumder, H. D. Sarma, A. K. Tyagi and A. Dash, Mechanochemical synthesis of mesoporous tin oxide: a new generation nanosorbent for 68 Ge/68 Ga generator technology, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45(34), 13361–13372 RSC .
E. Abdelkader, L. Nadjia and V. Rose-Noëlle, Adsorption of Congo red azo dye on nanosized SnO2 derived from sol-gel method, Int. J. Ind. Chem., 2016, 7(1), 53–70 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Song and Y. Kang, Preparation of high surface area tin oxide powders by a homogeneous precipitation method, Mater. Lett., 2000, 42(5), 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zamand, A. N. Pour, M. R. Housaindokht and M. Izadyar, Size-controlled synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles using reverse microemulsion method, Solid State Sci., 2014, 33, 6–11 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Farrukh, P. Tan and R. Adnan, Influence of reaction parameters on the synthesis of surfactant-assisted tin oxide nanoparticles, Turk. J. Chem., 2012, 36(2), 303–314 CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Hu, A. Tang, S. Jin and G. Qiu, Synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles by mechanochemical reaction, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 363(1–2), 276–279 CrossRef .

          T. V. K. Karthik, A. Maldonado and M. d. l. L. Olvera, Synthesis of tin oxide powders by homogeneous precipitation. Structural and morphological characterization, in 2012 9th International Conference on Electrical Engineering, Computing Science and Automatic Control (CCE), IEEE,  2012, pp. 1–7 Search PubMed .
C. H. Shek, J. K. L. Lai and G. M. Lin, Grain growth in nanocrystalline SnO2 prepared by sol-gel route, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 11(7), 887–893 CrossRef CAS .
A.-M. Ungureanu, I. Jitaru and F. Gosnea, Mn doped SnO2 prepared by a sol-gel method, UPB Sci. Bull., Ser. B: Chem. Mater. Sci., 2013, 75, 43–52 CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Ahmaruzzaman and T. Sinha, Surfactant effects on the synthesis of durable tin-oxide nanoparticles and its exploitation as a recyclable catalyst for the elimination of toxic dye: a green and efficient approach for wastewater treatment, RSC Adv., 2014, 4(93), 51418–51429 RSC .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Ahmaruzzaman, T. B. Devi and J. Nath, Photodegradation of methyl violet 6B and methylene blue using tin-oxide nanoparticles (synthesized via a green route), J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2016, 325, 116–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee and M. Ahmaruzzaman, A green and novel approach for the synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles and its exploitation as a catalyst in the degradation of methylene blue under solar radiation, Mater. Lett., 2015, 145, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, K.-q. Yang and L. Qiu, Biosynthesis of vitamin C stabilized tin oxide nanoparticles and their effect on body weight loss in neonatal rats, Environ. Toxicol. Pharmacol., 2017, 54, 48–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Ahmaruzzaman and T. Sinha, A novel approach for the synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles and its application as a catalyst in the reduction and photodegradation of organic compounds, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 136, 751–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bhattacharjee and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Facile synthesis of SnO2 quantum dots and its photocatalytic activity in the degradation of eosin Y dye: a green approach, Mater. Lett., 2015, 139, 418–421 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitra, A. Aravindh, G. Das, Y. Pak, I. Ajia, K. Loganathan, E. Di Fabrizio and I. S. Roqan, High-performance solar-blind flexible deep-UV photodetectors based on quantum dots synthesized by femtosecond-laser ablation, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 551–559 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chandrasekaran, S. Gnanasekar, P. Seetharaman, R. Keppanan, W. Arockiaswamy and S. Sivaperumal, Formulation of Carica papaya latex-functionalized silver nanoparticles for its improved antibacterial and anticancer applications, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 219, 232–238 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. K. Reddy, J. M. Joy, T. Mitra, S. Shabnam and T. Shilpa, Nano silver–a review, Int. J. Adv. Pharm., 2012, 2(1), 09–15 Search PubMed .
J. Qu, X. Yuan, X. Wang and P. Shao, Zinc accumulation and synthesis of ZnO nanoparticles using Physalis alkekengi L, Environ. Pollut., 2011, 159(7), 1783–1788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Addressing nanotoxicity: green nanotechnology for a sustainable future, in The ELSI handbook of nanotechnology: risk, safety, ELSI and commercialization,  2020, pp. 103–112 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Gebreslassie and H. G. Gebretnsae, Green and Cost-Effective Synthesis of Tin Oxide Nanoparticles: A Review on the Synthesis Methodologies, Mechanism of Formation, and Their Potential Applications, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2021, 16(1), 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Sinha, M. Ahmaruzzaman, P. P. Adhikari and R. Bora, Green and environmentally sustainable fabrication of Ag-SnO2 nanocomposite and its multifunctional efficacy as photocatalyst and antibacterial and antioxidant agent, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5(6), 4645–4655 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Photocatalytic-degradation and reduction of organic compounds using SnO2 quantum dots (via a green route) under direct sunlight, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(81), 66122–66133 RSC .
M. Ahmaruzzaman, D. Mohanta and A. Nath, Environmentally benign fabrication of SnO2-CNT nanohybrids and their multifunctional efficiency as an adsorbent, catalyst and antimicrobial agent for water decontamination, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 1–19 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Bio-inspired adsorption of arsenite and fluoride from aqueous solutions using activated carbon@SnO2 nanocomposites: isotherms, kinetics, thermodynamics, cost estimation and regeneration studies, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6(1), 356–366 CrossRef CAS .
A. Diallo, E. Manikandan, V. Rajendran and M. Maaza, Physical & enhanced photocatalytic properties of green synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles via Aspalathus linearis, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 681, 561–570 CrossRef CAS .
G. Elango, S. M. Kumaran, S. S. Kumar, S. Muthuraja and S. M. Roopan, Green synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles and its photocatalytic activity of phenolsulfonphthalein dye, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 145, 176–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haq, W. Rehman, M. Waseem, M. Shahid, K. H. Shah and M. Nawaz, Adsorption of Cd2+ ions on plant mediated SnO2 nanoparticles, Mater. Res. Express, 2016, 3(10), 105019 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Xu, Z.-S. Chen and G. Chen, Biosynthesis of nanoparticles by microorganisms and their applications, J. Nanomater., 2011, 2011(8), 1–16 Search PubMed .
H. M. Yusof, R. Mohamad and U. H. Zaidan, Microbial synthesis of zinc oxide nanoparticles and their potential application as an antimicrobial agent and a feed supplement in animal industry: a review, J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol., 2019, 10(1), 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Khan, S. A. Ansari, J.-H. Lee, J. Lee and M. H. Cho, Mixed culture electrochemically active biofilms and their microscopic and spectroelectrochemical studies, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2(3), 423–432 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Dhoondia and H. Chakraborty, Lactobacillus mediated synthesis of silver oxide nanoparticles, Nanomater. Nanotechnol., 2012, 2, 15 CrossRef .
S. Mishra, B. R. Singh, A. H. Naqvi and H. B. Singh, Potential of biosynthesized silver nanoparticles using Stenotrophomonas sp. BHU-S7 (MTCC 5978) for management of soil-borne and foliar phytopathogens, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Moisescu, S. Bonneville, D. Tobler, I. Ardelean and L. G. Benning, Controlled biomineralization of magnetite (Fe3O4) by Magnetospirillum gryphiswaldense, Mineral. Mag., 2008, 72(1), 333–336 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Singh, A. K. S. Rawat, W. Khan, A. H. Naqvi and B. R. Singh, Biosynthesis of stable antioxidant ZnO nanoparticles by Pseudomonas aeruginosa rhamnolipids, PLoS One, 2014, 9(9), e106937 CrossRef PubMed .
R. M. Tripathi, A. S. Bhadwal, R. K. Gupta, P. Singh, A. Shrivastav and B. R. Shrivastav, ZnO nanoflowers: novel biogenic synthesis and enhanced photocatalytic activity, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2014, 141, 288–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Ghorbani, F. P. Mehr and A. K. Poor, Extracellular synthesis of copper nanoparticles using culture supernatants of Salmonella typhimurium, Orient. J. Chem., 2015, 31(1), 527–529 CrossRef .
N. Srivastava and M. Mukhopadhyay, Biosynthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles using bacterium Erwinia herbicola and their photocatalytic activity for degradation of dyes, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53(36), 13971–13979 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Tammina and B. K. Mandal, Tyrosine mediated synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles and their photocatalytic activity towards Violet 4 BSN dye, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 221, 415–421 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee, M. Ahmaruzzaman, A. K. Sil and T. Sinha, Amino acid mediated synthesis of luminescent SnO2 nanoparticles, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 22, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bhattacharjee and M. Ahmaruzzaman, A novel and green process for the production of tin oxide quantum dots and its application as a photocatalyst for the degradation of dyes from aqueous phase, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 448, 130–139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. A. Reddy, J. Naveen Kumar, S. Roji Marjorie and S. Thanikaikarasan, Physical, chemical and optical properties of tin oxide nanoparticles through Sol–Gel route, Mater. Today: Proc., 2020, 33, 2955–2957 Search PubMed .
S. Amin, A. R. Solangi, D. Hassan, N. Hussain, J. Ahmed and H. Baksh, Recent
trends in development of nanomaterials based green analytical methods for environmental remediation, Curr. Anal. Chem., 2021, 17(4), 438–448 CrossRef CAS .
P. Basnet, T. Inakhunbi Chanu, D. Samanta and S. Chatterjee, A review on bio-synthesized zinc oxide nanoparticles using plant extracts as reductants and stabilizing agents, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2018, 183, 201–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cabot, J. Arbiol, R. Ferre, J. R. Morante, F. Chen and M. Liu, Surface states in template synthesized tin oxide nanoparticles, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95(4), 2178–2180 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He and J. Zhou, Synthesis, characterization, and activity of tin oxide nanoparticles: influence of solvothermal time on photocatalytic degradation of rhodamine B, Mod. Res. Catal., 2013, 2(3A), 13 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bouras, J.-L. Rehspringer, G. Schmerber, H. Rinnert, S. Colis, G. Ferblantier, M. Balestrieri, D. Ihiawakrim, A. Dinia and A. Slaoui, Optical and structural properties of Nd-doped SnO2 powder fabricated by the sol–gel method, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2(39), 8235–8243 RSC .
B. C. Yadav, R. Dixit and S. Singh, A review on synthesis, fabrication, and properties of nanostructured pure and doped tin oxide films, Int. J. Sci. Innov. Res., 2014, 2(1), 41–57 Search PubMed .
K. Anandan and V. Rajendran, Influence of dopant concentrations (Mn = 1, 2 and 3 mol%) on the structural, magnetic and optical properties and photocatalytic activities of SnO2 nanoparticles synthesized via the simple precipitation process, Superlattices Microstruct., 2015, 85, 185–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dou and C. Persson, Comparative study of rutile and anatase SnO2 and TiO2: Band-edge structures, dielectric functions, and polaron effects, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113(8), 083703 CrossRef .
H. Yu, S. Wang, C. Xiao, B. Xiao, P. Wang, Z. Li and M. Zhang, Enhanced acetone gas sensing properties by aurelia-like SnO2 micro-nanostructures, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17(23), 4316–4324 RSC .
A. M. Al-Hamdi, U. Rinner and M. Sillanpää, Tin dioxide as a photocatalyst for water treatment: a review, Process Saf. Environ. Prot., 2017, 107, 190–205 CrossRef CAS .
T. Entradas, J. F. Cabrita, S. Dalui, M. R. Nunes, O. C. Monteiro and A. J. Silvestre, Synthesis of sub-5 nm Co-doped SnO2 nanoparticles and their structural, microstructural, optical and photocatalytic properties, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2014, 147(3), 563–571 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gracia, A. Beltrán and J. Andrés, Characterization of the high pressure structures and phase transformation of SnO2: a density functional theory study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Karki, M. C. Warren, L. Stixrude, G. J. Ackland and J. Crain, Ab initio studies of high-pressure structural transformations in silica, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 3465 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Teter, R. J. Hemley, G. Kresse and J. Hafner, High pressure polymorphism in silica, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 2145 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tsuchiya, R. Caracas and J. Tsuchiya, First principles determination of the phase boundaries of high-pressure polymorphs of silica, Geophys. Res. Lett., 2004, 331, L11610 Search PubMed .
A. R. Oganov, M. J. Gillan and G. D. Price, Structural stability of silica at high pressures and temperatures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 71, 064104 CrossRef .
S. Chaisitsak, Nanocrystalline SnO2: F thin films for liquid petroleum gas sensors, Sensors, 2011, 11(7), 7127–7140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Morimitsu, Y. Ozaki, S. Suzuki and M. Matsunaga, Effects of surface modification with platinum and ruthenium on temperature and humidity dependence of SnO2-based CO gas sensors, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 67(1–2), 184–188 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rakibuddin and R. Ananthakrishnan, A novel Ag deposited nanocoordination polymer derived porous SnO2/NiO heteronanostructure for the enhanced photocatalytic reduction of Cr (vi) under visible light, New J. Chem., 2016, 40(4), 3385–3394 RSC .
R. Abe, M. Higashi, K. Sayama, Y. Abe and H. Sugihara, Photocatalytic activity of R3MO7 and R2Ti2O7 (R = Y, Gd, La; M = Nb, Ta) for water splitting into H2 and O2, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(5), 2219–2226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          O. Madelung, U. Rossler and M. Schulz, Tin dioxide (SnO2) crystal structure, lattice parameters, in Thermal expansion non-tetrahedrally bonded elements and binary compounds I,  1998, pp. 1–2 Search PubMed .
G. Zhang, C. Xie, S. Zhang, S. Zhang and Y. Xiong, Defect chemistry of the metal cation defects in the p-and n-doped SnO2 nanocrystalline films, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(31), 18097–18109 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmed, M. G. Rasul, W. N. Martens, R. Brown and M. A. Hashib, Advances in heterogeneous photocatalytic degradation of phenols and dyes in wastewater: a review, Water, Air, Soil Pollut., 2011, 215(1), 3–29 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Sanal and M. K. Jayaraj, Growth and characterization of tin oxide thin films and fabrication of transparent p-SnO2/n-ZnO p–n hetero junction, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178(12), 816–821 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Yang, W. Wang, Z. Ye and J. Lu, Structural and optical properties of (Zn, Co) co-doped SnO2 nano particles, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27(11), 12119–12127 CrossRef .
B. V. Mistry, D. K. Avasthi and U. S. Joshi, Tuning of optical and electrical properties of wide band gap Fe: SnO2/Li: NiO p–n junctions using 80 MeV oxygen ion beam, Appl. Phys. A, 2016, 122(12), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yamazoe and N. Miura, Some basic aspects of semiconductor gas sensors, Chem. Sens. Technol., 1992, 4, 19–42 CAS .
M. Ahmaruzzaman and V. Gadore, MoS2 based nanocomposites: An excellent material for energy and environmental applications, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 105836 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Tin oxide nanostructured materials: an overview of recent developments in synthesis, modifications and potential applications, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(112), 110996–111015 RSC .
A. Priyadharsan, V. Vasanthakumar, S. Karthikeyan, V. Raj, S. Shanavas and P. M. Anbarasan, Multi-functional properties of ternary CeO2/SnO2/rGO nanocomposites: visible light driven photocatalyst and heavy metal removal, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 346, 32–45 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahmaruzzaman and S. R. Mishra, Photocatalytic performance of g-C3N4 based nanocomposites for effective degradation/removal of dyes from water and wastewater, Mater. Res. Bull., 2021, 111417 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Hassan and M. A. Mannaa, Photocatalytic degradation of brilliant green dye by SnO2/TiO2 nanocatalysts, Int. J. Nano Mater. Sci., 2016, 5(1), 9–19 CAS .
G. Elango and S. M. Roopan, Efficacy of SnO2 nanoparticles toward photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue dye, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2016, 155, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kumar, A. Mehta, A. Mishra, J. Singh, M. Rawat and S. Basu, Biosynthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles using Psidium Guajava leave extract for photocatalytic dye degradation under sunlight, Mater. Lett., 2018, 215, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, Y. Zheng, Q. Ren, A. Wang and B. Deng, Green biosynthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles by plectranthus amboinicus leaf extract their photocatalytic activity toward rhodamine B degradation, J. Ovonic Res., 2015, 11(1), 21–26 CAS .
J. Ebrahimian, M. Mohsennia and M. Khayatkashani, Photocatalytic-degradation of organic dye and removal of heavy metal ions using synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles by Vitex agnus-castus fruit via a green route, Mater. Lett., 2020, 263, 127255 CrossRef CAS .
H. E. Garrafa-Galvez, O. Nava, C. A. Soto-Robles, A. R. Vilchis-Nestor, A. Castro-Beltrán and P. A. Luque, Green synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticle using Lycopersicon esculentum peel extract, J. Mol. Struct., 2019, 1197, 354–360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Honarmand, M. Golmohammadi and A. Naeimi, Biosynthesis of tin oxide (SnO2) nanoparticles using jujube fruit for photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes, Adv. Powder Technol., 2019, 30(8), 1551–1557 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Tammina, B. K. Mandal and N. K. Kadiyala, Photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue dye by nonconventional synthesized SnO2 nanoparticles, Environ. Nanotechnol. Monit. Manag., 2018, 10, 339–350 Search PubMed .
F. Costantino, A. Armirotti, R. Carzino, L. Gavioli, A. Athanassiou and D. Fragouli, In situ formation of SnO2 nanoparticles on cellulose acetate fibrous membranes for the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2020, 398, 112599 CrossRef CAS .

          S. A. Devi, K. Jugeshwar Singh and K. Nomita Devi, Hydrothermal synthesis of SnO2 for the photocatalytic degradation of malachite green dye, in AIP Conference Proceedings, AIP Publishing LLC,  2020, vol. 2265(1), pp. 030059 Search PubMed .
S. Z. Ghazanfari, J. Jaafari, S. D. Ashrafi and K. Taghavi, Decolourisation of direct red dye 81 from aqueous solutions by SnO2/H2O2 hybrid process, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2021, 1–15 CrossRef .
H. S. Abd-Rabboh, A. H. Galal, R. A. Aziz and M. A. Ahmed, A novel BiVO3/SnO2 step S-scheme nano-heterojunction for an enhanced visible light photocatalytic degradation of amaranth dye and hydrogen production, RSC Adv., 2021, 11(47), 29507–29518 RSC .
Y.-F. Tu, S.-Y. Huang, J.-P. Sang and X.-W. Zou, Synthesis and photocatalytic properties of Sn-doped TiO2 nanotube arrays, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 482(1–2), 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wen, G. Wang, W. Lu, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and J. Li, Enhanced photocatalytic properties of mesoporous SnO2 induced by low concentration ZnO doping, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7(9), 1722–1725 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, L. Zhang, H. Xue, C. Wang and Y. Liu, Electrospun nanofibers of ZnO–SnO2 heterojunction with high photocatalytic activity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114(17), 7920–7925 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bhosale, S. Pujari, G. Muley, B. Pagare and A. Gambhire, Visible-light-activated nanocomposite photocatalyst of Cr2O3/SnO2, J. Nanostruct. Chem., 2013, 3(1), 1–7 Search PubMed .
N. Verma, S. Yadav, B. Marí, A. Mittal and J. Jindal, Synthesis and charcterization of coupled ZnO/SnO2 photocatalysts and their activity towards degradation of cibacron red dye, Trans. Indian Ceram. Soc., 2018, 77(1), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Dontsova, A. S. Kutuzova, K. O. Bila, S. O. Kyrii, I. V. Kosogina and D. O. Nechyporuk, Enhanced photocatalytic activity of TiO2/SnO2 binary nanocomposites, J. Nanomater., 2020, 2020 Search PubMed .
A. Mohammad, M. E. Khan, M. H. Cho and T. Yoon, Fabrication of binary SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposites under a sonication-assisted approach: Tuning of band-gap and water depollution applications under visible light irradiation, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47(11), 15073–15081 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, F. Chang, Y. Qi, X. Zhang, J. Yang, X. Liu and S. Li, A facile one-pot and alkali-free synthetic procedure for binary SnO2/g-C3N4 composites with enhanced photocatalytic behavior, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2020, 115, 105112 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Biogenic synthesis of SnO2 quantum dots encapsulated carbon nanoflakes: An efficient integrated photocatalytic adsorbent for the removal of bisphenol A from aqueous solution, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 828, 154093 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dutta, S. Thiyagarajan and D. Bahadur, SnO2 quantum dots decorated reduced graphene oxide nanocomposites for efficient water remediation, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 297, 55–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vignesh, G. Palanisamy, M. Srinivasan, N. Elavarasan, K. Bhuvaneswari, G. Venkatesh, T. Pazhanivel, P. Ramasamy, M. Aslam Manthrammel and M. Shkir, Fabricating SnO2 and Cu2O anchored on g-C3N4 nanocomposites for superior photocatalytic various organic pollutants degradation under simulated sunlight exposure, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2021, 108606 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Sery, W. A. Mohamed, F. F. Hammad, M. M. Khalil and H. K. Farag, Synthesis of pure and doped SnO2 and NiO nanoparticles and evaluation of their photocatalytic activity, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2021, 125190 Search PubMed .
G. Ali, S. J. A. Zaidi, M. A. Basit and T. J. Park, Synergetic Performance of Systematically Designed g-C3N4/rGO/SnO2 Nanocomposite for Photodegradation of Rhodamine-B Dye, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 151140 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sadeghzadeh-Attar, Binary Zn-doped SnO2/Al2O3 nanotube composites for visible-light-driven photocatalytic degradation of basic blue 41, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(10), 9931–9942 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sirohi, S. Kumar, V. Singh, N. Chauhan and A. Vohra, Synthesis, characterization and photocatalytic properties of graphene-CdO/SnO2 ternary nanocomposites in visible light, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6(7), 075901 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, X. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Liu and W. Zhang, Facile preparation of a novel SnO2@ UiO-66/rGO hybrid with enhanced photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(94), 92011–92019 RSC .
B. Babu, R. Koutavarapu, J. Shim and K. Yoo, Enhanced visible-light-driven photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic performance of SnO2 quantum dot-anchored g-C3N4 nanosheets, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2020, 240, 116652 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta, S. Raha, S. V. Gupta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Bioinspired green synthesis of engineered CuSnO3 quantum dots: An effective material for superior photocatalytic degradation of Rabeprazole, Mater. Lett., 2019, 240, 193–196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Begum and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Biogenic synthesis of SnO2/activated carbon nanocomposite and its application as photocatalyst in the degradation of naproxen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 780–789 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta, S. Raha and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Biogenic green synthetic route for Janus type Ag: SnO2 asymmetric nanocomposite arrays: Plasmonic activation of wide band gap semiconductors towards photocatalytic degradation of Doripenem, Mater. Lett., 2018, 230, 203–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hojamberdiev, B. Czech, A. Can Göktaş, K. Yubuta and Z. C. Kadirova, SnO2@ZnS photocatalyst with enhanced photocatalytic activity for the degradation of selected pharmaceuticals and personal care products in model wastewater, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 827, 154339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guocheng, L. Zheng and W. Yongliao, Preparation and application of pharmaceutical wastewater treatment by praseodymium doped SnO2/Ti electrocatalytic electrode, J. Rare Earths, 2008, 26(4), 532–537 CrossRef .
E. Mugunthan, M. B. Saidutta and P. E. Jagadeeshbabu, Photocatalytic degradation of diclofenac using TiO2–SnO2 mixed oxide catalysts, Environ. Technol., 2019, 40(7), 929–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Novaković, V. Bežanović, T. Ivetić, G. Štrbac, I. Mihajlović and D. Štrbac, Photodegradation of diclofenac sodium in aqueous solution by ZnO/SnO2 powder mixture catalyst,  2016 Search PubMed .
A. Yousefi and A. Nezamzadeh-Ejhieh, Preparation and characterization of SnO2-BiVO4-CuO catalyst and kinetics of phenazopyridine photodegradation, Iran. J. Catal., 2021, 11(3), 247–259 Search PubMed .
M. H. Sayadi, S. Sobhani and H. Shekari, Photocatalytic degradation of azithromycin using GO@ Fe3O4/ZnO/SnO2 nanocomposites, J. Cleaner Prod., 2019, 232, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
U. Riaz and J. Zia, Microwave-assisted
rapid degradation of DDT using nanohybrids of PANI with SnO2 derived from Psidium Guajava extract, Environ. Pollut., 2020, 259, 113917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Das and S. S. Dhar, Synthesis of SnO2 quantum dots mediated by Camellia sinensis shoots for degradation of thiamethoxam, Toxicol. Environ. Chem., 2020, 102(1–4), 186–196 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yadav, N. Kumar, V. Kumari, A. Mittal and S. Sharma, Photocatalytic degradation of Triclopyr, a persistent pesticide by ZnO/SnO2 nano-composities, Mater. Today: Proc., 2019, 19, 642–645 CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Au–SnO2–CdS ternary nanoheterojunction composite for enhanced visible light-induced photodegradation of imidacloprid, Environ. Res., 2021, 201, 111586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, A novel Au-SnO2-rGO ternary nanoheterojunction catalyst for UV-LED induced photocatalytic degradation of clothianidin: Identification of reactive intermediates, degradation pathway and in-depth mechanistic insight, J. Hazard. Mater., 2020, 397, 122685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Saravanakumar and V. Muthuraj, Fabrication of sphere like plasmonic Ag/SnO2 photocatalyst for the degradation of phenol, Optik, 2017, 131, 754–763 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Facile fabrication of novel Fe3O4-SnO2-gC3N4 ternary nanocomposites and their photocatalytic properties towards the degradation of carbofuran, Chemosphere, 2021, 285, 131395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qi, T. Zhang, S. Wang and X. Zheng, Humidity sensing properties of KCl-doped ZnO nanofibers with super-rapid response and recovery, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 137(2), 649–655 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ivanov, E. Llobet, X. Vilanova, J. Brezmes, J. Hubalek and X. Correig, Development of high sensitivity ethanol gas sensors based on Pt-doped SnO2 surfaces, Sens. Actuators, B, 2004, 99(2–3), 201–206 CrossRef CAS .
V. Wal, R. L. G, W. Hunter, J. C. Xu, M. J. Kulis, G. M. Berger and T. M. Ticich, Metal-oxide nanostructure and gas-sensing performance, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138(1), 113–119 CrossRef .
N. S. Baik, G. Sakai, K. Shimanoe, N. Miura and N. Yamazoe, Hydrothermal treatment of tin oxide sol solution for preparation of thin-film sensor with enhanced thermal stability and gas sensitivity, Sens. Actuators, B, 2000, 65(1–3), 97–100 CrossRef CAS .
E. R. Leite, I. T. Weber, E. Longo and J. A. Varela, A new method to control particle size and particle size distribution of SnO2 nanoparticles for gas sensor applications, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12(13), 965–968 CrossRef CAS .
P. Manjula, R. Boppella and S. V. Manorama, A facile and green approach for the controlled synthesis of porous SnO2 nanospheres: application as an efficient photocatalyst and an excellent gas sensing material, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4(11), 6252–6260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          K. P. Gattu, K. Ghule, N. P. Huse, A. S. Dive, S. B. Bagul, R. V. Digraskar, R. Sharma and A. V. Ghule, Bio-green synthesis of Fe doped SnO2 nanoparticle thin film, in AIP Conference Proceedings, AIP Publishing LLC,  2017, vol. 1832(1), pp. 050162 Search PubMed .
K. P. Gattu, K. Ghule, A. A. Kashale, V. B. Patil, D. M. Phase, R. S. Mane, S.-H. Han, R. Sharma and A. V. Ghule, Bio-green synthesis of Ni-doped tin oxide nanoparticles and its influence on gas sensing properties, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(89), 72849–72856 RSC .
K. P. Gattu, A. A. Kashale, K. Ghule, V. H. Ingole, R. Sharma, N. G. Deshpande and A. V. Ghule, NO2 sensing studies of bio-green synthesized Au-doped SnO2, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2017, 28(17), 13209–13216 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Dhage, V. L. Patil, P. S. Patil, J. Ryu, D. R. Patil and Y. S. Malghe, Synthesis
and Characterization of CuO-SnO2 nanocomposite for CO gas sensing application, Mater. Lett., 2021, 130831 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Prajapati, P. K. Khiriya, G. K. Tripathi, P. Bundela and P. S. Khare, Green Synthesis of SnO2/Carbon Quantum Dots Nanocomposite for Gas Sensing Application, Int. J. Res. Rev., 2021, 8(7), 332–336 CAS .
D. Mohanta and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Novel Ag-SnO2-βC3N4 ternary nanocomposite based gas sensor for enhanced low-concentration NO2 sensing at room temperature, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 326, 128910 CrossRef CAS .
D. Mohanta, A. Mahanta, S. R. Mishra, S. Jasimuddin and M. Ahmaruzzaman, Novel SnO2@ZIF-8/gC3N4 nanohybrids for excellent electrochemical performance towards sensing of p-nitrophenol, Environ. Res., 2021, 197, 111077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lou, Q. Huang, Z. Li, G. Lei, X. Liu and J. Zhang, Fe2O3-sensitized SnO2 nanosheets via atomic layer deposition for sensitive formaldehyde detection, Sens. Actuators, B, 2021, 345, 130429 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Guai, M. Y. Leiw, C. M. Ng and C. M. Li, Sulfur–Doped Nickel Oxide Thin Film as an Alternative to Pt for Dye–Sensitized Solar Cell Counter Electrodes, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2(3), 334–338 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Guai, Y. Li, C. M. Ng, C. M. Li and M. B. Chan-Park, TiO2 composing with pristine, metallic or semiconducting single–walled carbon nanotubes: which gives the Best Performance for a dye–sensitized solar cell, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13(10), 2566–2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Qureshi, S. Javed, H. M. A. Javed, A. Akram, M. Salman Mustafa, U. Ali and M. Zubair Nisar, Facile formation of SnO2–TiO2 based photoanode and Fe3O4@ rGO based counter electrode for efficient dye-sensitized solar cells, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2021, 123, 105545 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wei, X. Y. Gu, E. Z. Chen, Y. Q. Wang, Z. Dai, Z. R. Zhu and S. Q. Kang, 
            et al., Dissymmetric interface design of SnO2/TiO2 side-by-side bi-component nanofibers as photoanodes for dye sensitized solar cells: Facilitated electron transport and enhanced carrier separation, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 583, 24–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith and C. Ducati, SnO2-based dye-sensitized hybrid solar cells exhibiting near unity absorbed photon-to-electron conversion efficiency, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(4), 1259–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. S. Souza, F. G. S. Oliveira, V. F. Nunes, F. M. Lima, A. F. L. Almeida, I. M. de Carvalho, M. P. F. Graça and F. N. A. Freire, High performance SnO2 pure photoelectrode in dye-sensitized solar cells achieved via electrophoretic technique, Sol. Energy, 2020, 211, 312–323 CrossRef CAS .

          Z. H. H. Bakr, Synthesis and Characterization of Tin based hybrid nanofibers and nanoflowers as photoelectrode in dye-sensitized solar cells, Core.uc.uk,  2019 Search PubMed .
W. Ke, G. Fang, Q. Liu, L. Xiong, P. Qin, H. Tao and J. Wang, 
            et al., Low-temperature solution-processed tin oxide as an alternative electron transporting layer for efficient perovskite solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(21), 6730–6733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, H. Liu, F. Ye, Z. Chen, J. Ma, J. Liang, X. Zheng, C. Tao and G. Fang, Hydrogen peroxide-modified SnO2 as electron transport layer for perovskite solar cells with efficiency exceeding 22%, J. Power Sources, 2021, 481, 229160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Chen, H. Wang, F. Ye, J. Ma, X. Zheng, P. Gui, L. Xiong, J. Wen and G. Fang, A facile room temperature solution synthesis of SnO2 quantum dots for perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(17), 10636–10643 RSC .
G. Yang, P. Qin, G. Fang and G. Li, Tin oxide (SnO2) as effective electron selective layer material in hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskite solar cells, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27(4), 962–970 CrossRef .
A. J. Bard and M. A. Fox, Artificial photosynthesis: solar splitting of water to hydrogen and oxygen, Acc. Chem. Res., 1995, 28(3), 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Lewis, Light work with water, Nature, 2001, 414(6864), 589–590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Turner, A realizable renewable energy future (vol 285, pg 687, 1999), Science, 1999, 285(5433), 1493–1493 Search PubMed .
A. Heller, Conversion of sunlight into electrical power and photoassisted electrolysis of water in photoelectrochemical cells, Acc. Chem. Res., 1981, 14(5), 154–162 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Solar water splitting cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Radecka, A. Wnuk, A. Trenczek-Zajac, K. Schneider and K. Zakrzewska, TiO2/SnO2 nanotubes for hydrogen generation by photoelectrochemical water splitting, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40(1), 841–851 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gun, G. Y. Song, V. H. V. Quy, J. Heo, H. Lee, K.-S. Ahn and S. H. Kang, Joint effects of photoactive TiO2 and fluoride-doping on SnO2 inverse opal nanoarchitecture for solar water splitting, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7(36), 20292–20303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Chen, J.-S. Yang and J.-J. Wu, Three-dimensional undoped crystalline SnO2 nanodendrite arrays enable efficient charge separation in BiVO4/SnO2 heterojunction photoanodes for photoelectrochemical water splitting, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(5), 2143–2149 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, R. Tang, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Au nanoparticles coupled three-dimensional macroporous BiVO4/SnO2 inverse opal heterostructure for efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 248, 593–602 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Bondarchuk, I. Corrales-Mendoza, J. A. Aguilar-Martinez, S. A. Tomas, D. A. Gomez-Caiceros, A. Hernandez-Mendez and F. Marken, A BiVO4 photoanode grown on porous and conductive SnO2 ceramics for water splitting driven by solar energy, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46(7), 9040–9049 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Wang and M. Hashem Nehrir, Distributed generation applications of fuel cells, in 2006 Power Systems Conference: Advanced Metering, Protection, Control, Communication, and Distributed Resources, IEEE,  2006, pp. 244–248 Search PubMed .
A. B. Stambouli and E. Traversa, Fuel cells, an alternative to standard sources of energy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2002, 6(3), 295–304 CrossRef .
B. Cook, Introduction to fuel cells and hydrogen technology, Eng. Sci. Educ. J., 2002, 11(6), 205–216 CrossRef .
A. Kirubakaran, S. Jain and R. K. Nema, A review on fuel cell technologies and power electronic interface, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13(9), 2430–2440 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dou, M. Hou, D. Liang, W. Lu, Z. Shao and B. Yi, SnO2 nanocluster supported Pt catalyst with high stability for proton exchange membrane fuel cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 92, 468–473 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mehdinia, E. Ziaei and A. Jabbari, Multi-walled carbon nanotube/SnO2 nanocomposite: a novel anode material for microbial fuel cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 130, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
P. Meduri, C. Pendyala, V. Kumar, G. U. Sumanasekera and M. K. Sunkara, Hybrid tin oxide nanowires as stable and high capacity anodes for Li-ion batteries, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(2), 612–616 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Du, C. Zhong, P. Zhang, Z. Guo, Z. Chen and H. Liu, Tin dioxide/carbon nanotube composites with high
uniform SnO2 loading as anode materials for lithium ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55(7), 2582–2586 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, D. Deng, J. Y. Lee and L. A. Archer, Preparation of SnO2/carbon composite hollow spheres and their lithium storage properties, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(20), 6562–6566 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ning, Q. Dai, T. Jiang, K. Men, D. Liu, N. Xiao and C. Li, 
            et al., Facile synthesis of tin oxide nanoflowers: a potential high-capacity lithium-ion-storage material, Langmuir, 2009, 25(3), 1818–1821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-S. Park, G.-X. Wang, Y.-M. Kang, D. Wexler, S.-X. Dou and H.-K. Liu, Preparation and electrochemical properties of SnO2 nanowires for application in lithium–ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46(5), 750–753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Belliard, P. A. Connor and J. T. S. Irvine, Novel tin oxide-based anodes for Li-ion batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135(1–4), 163–167 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie and V. K. Varadan, Synthesis and characterization of high surface area tin oxide/functionalized carbon nanotubes composite as anode materials, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 91(2–3), 274–280 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, J. Huang, H. Qi, L. Cao, J. Yang, Q. Xi, X. Luo, K. Yanagisawa and J. Li, Adjusting the chemical bonding of SnO2@ CNT composite for enhanced conversion reaction kinetics, Small, 2017, 13(31), 1700656 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-X. Zhang, C. Feng, Y.-C. Zhai, K.-L. Jiang, Q.-Q. Li and S.-S. Fan, Cross–stacked carbon nanotube sheets uniformly loaded with SnO2 nanoparticles: a novel binder–free and high–capacity anode material for lithium–ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(22), 2299–2304 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, H. Si, Y. Zhang, Y. Shi, K. Wang, J. Liu and Y. Zhang, Sn-SnO2 hybrid nanoclusters embedded in carbon nanotubes with enhanced electrochemical performance for advanced lithium ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ma, W. Zhang, Y.-S. He, Q. Gong, H. Che and Z.-F. Ma, Carbon coated SnO2 nanoparticles anchored on CNT as a superior anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(7), 4121–4126 RSC .
M. Liu, S. Zhang, H. Dong, X. Chen, S. Gao, Y. Sun and W. Li, 
            et al., Nano-SnO2/carbon nanotube hairball composite as a high-capacity anode material for lithium ion batteries, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7(4), 4195–4203 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Zhou, K. Yao, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, A SnO2/graphene composite as a high stability electrode for lithium ion batteries, Carbon, 2011, 49(1), 133–139 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, High reversible capacity of SnO2/graphene nanocomposite as an anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56(12), 4532–4539 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yao, X. Shen, B. Wang, H. Liu and G. Wang, In situ chemical synthesis of SnO2–graphene nanocomposite as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11(10), 1849–1852 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, L. Xiao, S. Jiang, G. Li, Y. Huang and J. Geng, Fluorine-doped SnO2@ graphene porous composite for high capacity lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27(13), 4594–4603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Wang, X. Ma and M. Li, Rodlike SnO2/graphene nanocomposite and its application
for lithium-ion batteries, Mater. Lett., 2021, 294, 129765 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Zhang, X. Liu and C. Zhang, Hybridizing ultrathin SnO2 nanorods with graphene for stabilized high capacity and flexible lithium-ion batteries, Ionics, 2021, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Lu, Y. Chen, Q. Tian, W. Zhang, Z. Sui and J. Chen, Enabling improved cycling stability of hollow SnO2/C composite anode for lithium-ion battery by constructing a built-in porous carbon support, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 537, 148052 CrossRef CAS .
D. Versaci, A. Costanzo, S. M. Ronchetti, B. Onida, J. Amici, C. Francia and S. Bodoardo, Ultrasmall SnO2 directly grown on commercial C45 carbon as lithium-ion battery anodes for long cycling performance, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 367, 137489 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, S. Nie, C. Miao, Y. Xin, H. Mou, G. Xu and W. Xiao, Heterostructural Sn/SnO2 microcube powders coated by a nitrogen-doped carbon layer as good-performance anode materials for lithium ion batteries, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 606, 1042–1054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kim, E. P. Samuel, C. Park, Y.-I. Kim, A. Aldalbahi, F. Alotaibi and S. S. Yoon, Wearable fabric supercapacitors using supersonically sprayed reduced graphene and tin oxide, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 856, 157902 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Best practice methods for determining an electrode material's performance for ultracapacitors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3(9), 1294–1301 RSC .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Carbon-based materials as supercapacitor electrodes, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(9), 2520–2531 RSC .
T. Chen and L. Dai, Carbon nanomaterials for high-performance supercapacitors, Mater. Today, 2013, 16(7–8), 272–280 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, What are batteries, fuel cells, and supercapacitors?, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104(10), 4245–4270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Lokhande, D. P. Dubal and O.-S. Joo, Metal oxide thin film based supercapacitors, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11(3), 255–270 CrossRef .
J.-H. Sung, S.-J. Kim and K.-H. Lee, Fabrication of microcapacitors using conducting polymer microelectrodes, J. Power Sources, 2003, 124(1), 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
M. U. Rani, V. Naresh, D. Damodar, S. Muduli, S. K. Martha and A. S. Deshpande, 
            In situ formation of mesoporous SnO2@ C nanocomposite electrode for supercapacitors, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 365, 137284 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Javaid, A. Ali, M. Ammar, M. Zafar and M. Ali, An efficient ZnO/SnO2 based hybrid electrode material for enhanced supercapacitor performance, in Book of abstracts,  2021, pp. 413 Search PubMed .
G. Yang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Xue, J. Yang and C. Peng, Rational construction of well-defined hollow double shell SnO2/mesoporous carbon spheres heterostructure for supercapacitors, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 873, 159810 CrossRef CAS .
S. Asaithambi, P. Sakthivel, M. Karuppaiah, R. Yuvakkumar, K. Balamurugan, T. Ahamad, M. A. Majeed Khan, G. Ramalingam, M. K. Mohammed and G. Ravi, Preparation of Fe-SnO2@CeO2 nanocomposite electrode for asymmetric supercapacitor device performance analysis, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 36, 102402 CrossRef .
V. Jayaweera, W. L. N. C. Liyanage, R. C. L. De Silva, S. R. D. Rosa and I. R. Kottegoda, Reduced Graphene Oxide-SnO2-Polyaniline Ternary Composite for High-Performance Supercapacitors, Mater. Sci. Res. India, 2021, 18(2), 206–216 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Long, D. Cao, D. Han and F. Gu, A high-performance flexible supercapacitor based on hierarchical Co3O4-SnO@SnO2 nanostructures, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 341–350 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Epand and R. F. Epand, Lipid domains in bacterial membranes and the action of antimicrobial agents, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Biomembr., 2009, 1788(1), 289–294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Russell, Similarities and differences in the responses of microorganisms to biocides, J. Antimicrob. Chemother., 2003, 52(5), 750–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haq, W. Rehman, M. Waseem, A. Shah, A. R. Khan, M. U. Rehman, P. Ahmad, B. Khan and G. Ali, Green synthesis and characterization of tin dioxide nanoparticles for photocatalytic and antimicrobial studies, Mater. Res. Express, 2020, 7(2), 025012 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Khan, S. Kanwal, K. Rizwan and S. Shahid, Enhanced antimicrobial, antioxidant, in vivo antitumor and in vitro anticancer effects against breast cancer cell line by green synthesized un-doped SnO2 and Co-doped SnO2 nanoparticles from Clerodendrum inerme, Microb. Pathog., 2018, 125, 366–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Merlin, S. Chitra and N. Nalini Jayanthi, Synthesis and Characterization of Tin Oxide Nanoparticles Using Plant Extract, Der. Pharma Chem., 2018, 10, 17–20 CAS .
M. M. Kumari and D. Philip, Synthesis of biogenic SnO2 nanoparticles and evaluation of thermal, rheological, antibacterial and antioxidant activities, Powder Technol., 2015, 270, 312–319 CrossRef .
V. K. Vidhu and D. Philip, Biogenic synthesis of SnO2 nanoparticles: evaluation of antibacterial and antioxidant activities, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2015, 134, 372–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kamaraj, R. Vennila, M. Arthanareeswari and S. Devikala, Biological activities of tin oxide nanoparticles synthesized using plant extract, World J. Pharm. Pharm. Sci., 2014, 3(9), 382–388 Search PubMed .
A. V. Singh, T. Jahnke, Y. Xiao, S. Wang, Y. Yu, H. David and G. Richter, 
            et al., Peptide-induced biomineralization of tin oxide (SnO2) nanoparticles for antibacterial applications, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19(9), 5674–5686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nathan and P. Myvizhi, Green synthesis and characterization of tin oxide nanoparticles using plant extract, Int. J. Pure Appl. Math., 2018, 119(12), 6439–6448 Search PubMed .
S. Gowri, R. Rajiv Gandhi and M. Sundrarajan, Green synthesis of tin oxide nanoparticles by aloe vera: structural, optical and antibacterial properties, J. Nanoelectron. Optoelectron., 2013, 8(3), 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
A. Erkan, U. Bakir and G. Karakas, Photocatalytic microbial inactivation over Pd doped SnO2 and TiO2 thin films, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2006, 184(3), 313–321 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Mostafa and E. A. Mwafy, Effect of dual-beam laser radiation for synthetic SnO2/Au nanoalloy for antibacterial activity, J. Mol. Struct., 2020, 1222, 128913 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Qamar, S. Shahid, S. A. Khan, S. Zaman and M. N. Sarwar, Synthesis characterization, optical and antibacterial studies of Co-doped SnO2 nanoparticles, Dig. J. Nanomater. Biostruct., 2017, 12(4), 1127–1135 Search PubMed .
I. Hussain, N. B. Singh, A. Singh, H. Singh and S. C. Singh, Green synthesis of nanoparticles and its potential application, Biotechnol. Lett., 2016, 38(4), 545–560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Soumya Ranjan Mishra	Soumya Ranjan Mishra is a research scholar in the Department of Chemistry, NIT Silchar. He was awarded an M.Sc in chemistry from the same institute. He has published several research papers in international journals and at conferences. He is working in the area of nanostructured semiconductor-based photocatalysts for the remediation of emerging environmental pollutants and energy production.
Md. Ahmaruzzaman	Md. Ahmaruzzaman is currently working as a senior associate professor in the Department of Chemistry, National Institute of Technology Silchar, India. He has been ranked in the top 2% of scientists in the world for the last two consecutive years and also declared as "Best Scientist in University" in the world scientist and university ranking 2021, published by AD SCIENTIFIC INDEX. His worldwide ranking (subject wise) is 24. He received his postgraduate M.Sc. degree. (Chemistry) from North Bengal University after his graduation from the same University. He also received his postgraduate M.Tech. degree. (Energy Science & Technology) from Jadavpur University. He obtained his Ph.D. degree from the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi. He has supervised several projects at postgraduate level and produced more than ten PhDs. He has published more than 170 research papers in international journals as well as at various national and international conferences. He has more than 9000 citations in international journals. He is a reviewer of various peer-reviewed reputed international and national journals. He is the Co-Editor of Current Photochemistry and also Section Editor of Current Materials Science journal.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of SnO2 nanoparticles.	 

 	Fig. 2  Publications identified via the keywords ‘tin oxide nanoparticles’ from 2010 to October 2021. The number of publications for the search all field: ‘tin oxide nanoparticles’, timespan: 2011–2021, indexes = SCI, SCI-EXPANDED, SSCI, A&HCI, as found in Web of Science (date: 10th October 2021).	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic diagram illustrating a horizontal heating furnace along with various heating zones. Reproduced from ref. 47 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2005.	 

 	Fig. 4  a–c represent SEM images for nanowires, and d–f represent SEM images for nanobelts. Reproduced from ref. 49 with permission of IOP science, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of SnO2. (b) SEM image of Mo-doped (1.9%) SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 56 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the electrospinning setup. Reproduced from ref. 58 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 7  XRD pattern of (a) SnO2 microtube, and (b) SnO2 microtube after photocatalytic activity. Reproduced from ref. 64 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 8  AFM micrographs showing (a) SnO2 nanostructures, (b) Ti-doped (1%)-SnO2, (c) Ti-doped (2%)-SnO2, (d) Ti-doped (3%)-SnO2, (e) Ti-doped (4%)-SnO2, and (f) Ti-doped (5%)-SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 9  TEM and SAED images of a SnO2 microtube. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 10  Raman spectrum of SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2008.	 

Thermal deposition	Ease of synthesis and controllable morphology; higher material utilization efficiency	Hard to produce nanocomposites and doped nanomaterials	SnO2 nanobelts	Low pressure; high vacuum (10−4 Pascal)	
48

Chemical vapor deposition	Can conduct synthesis on a large scale; does not require a high vacuum	Requires high temperature; costly	Mo–SnO2	Deposition temperature – 450 °C; reaction time – 50 min	
56

Electro-spinning	Synthesized nanofibers have unique properties; thin nanofibers with a large surface area	Use of toxic solvents; have to focus on safety; problem to obtain 3D structures	Rutile–SnO2	Room temperature – 700 °C; heating rate – 10 °C min−1; time – 2 hours	
63

Spray pyrolysis	Low operational cost; simple; extensive surface coverage; can conduct synthesis on a large scale	Low yield; cannot determine the growth temperature	SnSe–SnO2	Tube furnace temperature – 900 °C; flow rate – 5 L min−1	
73

Vapor–liquid–solid growth	Controllable properties and morphology	Prolonged process	SnO2 nanowires	Pressure – 50 Torr; temperature – 700 °C; time – 30–60 min	
80

Sol–gel processing	Synthesizes high-quality materials; homogeneous and pure; uses relatively low temperature	Long processing time; high cost of raw materials	Pd/SnO2; Pt/SnO2; Au/SnO2	Calcination temperature – 250 °C, 400 °C, 450 °C, 600 °C, 800 °C, and 1000 °C; time – 8 hours	
85

Hydrothermal; solvothermal	Synthesizes large and good quality crystals; controls morphology	Low yield; need for expensive autoclaves	SnO2 microcubes	System heated to 98 °C for 15 min; allowed to cool to 40 °C naturally; synthesized products annealed at 370 °C for 10 min	
90

Template-based synthesis	Easy and simple to use; fast technique; effective morphology control	Hard to determine compatibility between substrate and template	SnO2 nanotubes	Desired salts stirred for 2 hours; Na2S added; refluxed for 24 hours	
95

Electrodeposition	Versatile and cost-effective	Non-uniform plating; high processing cost; not eco-friendly	SnO2 thin film	System temperature – 80 °C	
108


Urea	∼4	Spherical	Photodegradation of rhodamine B and methyl violet 6B	
124

Glycine	∼4.5–30	Spherical	Photodegradation of methylene blue and methyl violet 6B	
125

Arginine	∼4–5	Spherical	Photodegradation of methylene blue	
126

Ascorbic acid	∼40	Spherical	Results in body weight loss of neonatal rats	
127

Glycerol	∼8–30	Spherical	Photodegradation of methylene blue and methyl violet 6B	
128

Serine	∼30	Spherical	Photodegradation of eosin Y	
129


 	Fig. 11  Synthesis of SnO2 with the help of plant extracts. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021.	 


Saccharum officinarum (stem)	SnCl2·2H2O, AgNO3	Spherical/8–10 nm	Antibacterial and antioxidant agent	
136


Saccharum officinarum (stem)	SnCl2·2H2O, NaBH4	Tetragonal/3–4.5 nm	Photodegradation of rose bengal and methylene blue	
137


Coccinia grandis (leaves)	SnCl4·5H2O, HNO3	Nanotubes/∼10 μm	Water decontamination	
138

Hardwood sawdust	SnCl4·5H2O	Spherical/12 nm	Adsorption of arsenic and fluoride	
139


Aspalathus linearis (leaf)	SnCl4·5H2O	Quasi-spherical/2.5–11.4 nm	Photodegradation of Congo red, eosin Y, and methylene blue	
140


Persia americana (seed)	SnCl2	Flake-like/4 nm	Photodegradation of phenolsulfonphthalein dye	
141


Daphne alpina (leaf)	SnCl4·5H2O	Elongated shape/19–27 nm	Adsorption of Cd2+ ion	
142


 	Fig. 12  FT-IR spectrum of SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 152 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustration of the biomolecule-mediated synthesis of tin oxide. Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission of Springer, copyright 2021.	 

Tyrosine	SnCl2·2H2O	Tetragonal/15–20 nm	Photodegradation of violet 4 BSN dye	
153

Glycine	SnCl2·2H2O, glycine	Spherical/6–33 nm	Studying the effect of polar and non-polar solvents on SnO2 nanoparticles	
154

Ascorbic acid	SnCl2·2H2O	Spherical/30 nm	Affects bodyweight of neonatal mice	
127

Aspartic acid and glutamic acid	SnCl2·2H2O	Spherical/16–26 nm	Photodegradation of rose bengal and eosin Y dye	
155

Sugarcane juice	SnCl2·2H2O	Spherical/2.5–4.5 nm	Photodegradation of rose bengal and methylene blue	
137


 	Fig. 14  Unit cell structure of the rutile stannic oxide. Reproduced from ref. 166 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 15  Several polymorphs of stannic oxide (gray and red colors represent Sn and O atoms, respectively). (a) Rutile (P42/mnm) and CaCl2-type (Pnnm), (b) R-PbO2-type (Pbcn), (c) pyrite-type (Pa3), (d) ZrO2-type (Pbca), (e) fluorite-type (Fm3m), and (f) cotunnite-type (Pnam). Reproduced from ref. 168 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of charge transfer by binary and tertiary nanocomposites. Reproduced from ref. 186 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  Photodegradation mechanism of contaminants. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic illustration of photodegradation of dyes by green SnO2 quantum dots. Reproduced from ref. 155 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 19  UV-Vis spectrum of photodegradation of rhodamine B (a) by SnO2 and (b) by BiVO3/SnO2 and of fluorescein dye (c) by SnO2 and (d) by BiVO3/SnO2. Reproduced from ref. 199 with permission of RSC journals, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 20  Reaction mechanism for the production of SnO2/AC. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 21  Photodegradation mechanism of Triclopyr. Reproduced from ref. 228 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 22  Ethanol sensing by doped and pure SnO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 237 with permission of Wiley-VCH, copyright 2000.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Resistance response curve, (b) gas sensitivity vs. temperature curve, (c) gas sensitivity vs. time curve, and (d) reusability of sensor curve. Reproduced from ref. 242 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 24  TGA analysis of SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposite. Reproduced from ref. 249 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2021.	 

 	Fig. 25  EIS of SnO2 DSSCs and SnO2/TiO2 DSSCs using (a) Nyquist plots and (b) a Bode phase angle vs. frequency curve. Reproduced from ref. 253 with permission of Core.uk, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic illustration of the hydrogen evolution reaction by water splitting. Reproduced from ref. 262 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic representation of a fuel cell. Reproduced from ref. 271 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic illustration of retention ability. Reproduced from ref. 285 with permission of ACS publications, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Reusability profile of the SnO2/graphene nanocomposite acting as an anode. (b) Comparison of reversible discharge capacity. Reproduced from ref. 288 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2009.	 

 	Fig. 30  Schematic illustration of the synthesis and experimental setup of the Co3O4–SnO@SnO2 nanocomposite as the electrode for supercapacitors. Reproduced from ref. 307 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 31  Schematic illustration of the synthesis and application of tin oxide nanoparticles made from extracts of Clerodendrum inerme. Reproduced from ref. 311 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 32  Antibacterial activity by SnO2 nanoparticles. Reproduced from ref. 314 with permission of Elsevier, copyright 2015.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
