Gate tunable photovoltaic effect in a MoSe 2 homojunction enabled with different thicknesses   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC01806A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01806A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7051-7056Gate tunable photovoltaic effect in a MoSe2 homojunction enabled with different thicknesses†

        
          
            Yujue 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nengjie 
            Huo
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jingbo 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials and Energy, Guangdong University of Technology, Guangzhou 510006, P. R. China
bState Key Laboratory for Superlattices and Microstructures, Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: jbli@semi.ac.cn
Received 
      25th April 2017
    , Accepted 29th June 2017First published on 29th June 2017AbstractTwo-dimensional (2D) material based photovoltaic devices have attracted attention due to their atomically thin profile, strong light–matter interaction and mechanical flexibility. van der Waals heterojunctions, assembled with different 2D materials and a homojunction, are achieved with a doping technique and have been demonstrated to have considerable photovoltaic properties. Here, a more facile approach is proposed to realise an in-plane MoSe2 homojunction with a gate tunable and highly efficient photovoltaic effect. By applying a negative back gate, the device can exhibit a current rectification ratio as high as 105 and a significant Voc of 0.24 V under illumination. The high power conversion efficiency of 1.9% and high photo-responsivity of 550 A W−1 with a fast temporal response of 10 ms indicate that our MoSe2 homojunction based device is a promising candidate in photovoltaic and photodetection applications.
Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) have emerged as one of the most interesting and important 2D materials, following the success of graphene, because of their sizable band gap, strong photon–matter interaction, and large area of processing, as well as their number of optoelectronic applications.1–5 So far, MoS2 is widely studied in nano- and photo-transistors with a high mobility of 200 cm2 V−1 s−1, large ON/OFF ratio of 108 and high responsivity of 880 A W−1.6,7 However, the photo-response dynamics are limited to several seconds due to the numerous intrinsic defects and traps in MoS2.7–9 In addition to this, mono- or multi-layer WS2 and WSe2 have also been demonstrated with promising application potentials in field effect transistors (FETs), photodetectors and solar cells.10–13 Recently, photovoltaic devices based on 2D materials have attracted much attention due to their atomically thin profile, flexibility and low-cost. To achieve the novel photovoltaic components, an efficient P–N junction has been created using many different techniques. For example, van der Waals heterojunctions consisting of a vertical P–N junction of MoS2 and WSe2 have been fabricated through dry or wet transfer techniques to perform with excellent photodetection and photovoltaic properties.14–16 Lateral and vertical MoS2 PN junctions are also realised by chemical or physical doping techniques, which enables the production of MoS2 based light emitting diodes and solar cells.17–19 Recently, in-plane PN junctions in monolayer WSe2 have also been created by designing two local bottom gates based on the ambipolar property of WSe2. In this structure, holes and electrons are respectively induced on each side by applying a negative and positive gate, yielding an in-plane junction and good photovoltaic effect with a high open circuit voltage (Voc).20,21 Although a considerable photovoltaic property has been obtained, the used methods and techniques involve either difficult processing or high cost.
As we know, the energy band can be changed from an indirect to a direct band gap by thinning the thickness of 2D TMDs. Based on this, researchers have also tried to fabricate the lateral junctions by modulating the thickness of WSe2 or MoS2 where the monolayer and multilayer TMDs are contacted with source and drain electrodes, respectively.22–26 They observed a photocurrent under zero bias at the interface due to the formation of a built-in field. However, the photovoltaic effect is very weak with a negligible Voc value. 2D MoSe2 has a similar structure and physical properties to MoS2, but has been reported less in view of its application in optoelectronics compared to MoS2.27,28 In this work, we fabricated a MoSe2 in-plane homojunction that was, for the first time, enabled by flakes with different thickness. Due to the very different gate modulation levels of the currents and charges of thin and thick MoSe2 flakes, we get a gate controllable built-in field at the interface, which can contribute to a gate-tunable photovoltaic effect with a Voc of 0.24 V and PCE up to 1.9%, as well as a high responsivity of 550 A W−1. The high performance, along with the easier processing, provides a new and interesting platform for 2D material based photodetection and photovoltaic devices.
Experimental
Device fabrication
The MoSe2 flakes of interest, consisting of different thickness, were exfoliated naturally using the micromechanical cleavage method on top of a degenerately doped silicon substrate with a 90 nm-thick layer of SiO2. The detailed process is as follows: MoSe2 crystal slices were pasted on PDMS adhesive tape. By folding the sticky side of the tape in half then tearing the tape very slowly, the MoSe2 slices were divided into two. This operation was repeated 2–3 times, and the nanoflakes were exfoliated onto the SiO2/Si substrate by pressing the tape gently and then removing it slowly. After the exfoliation, the substrate was placed in acetone for 2 hours at 60 °C to remove the residual glue. The source and drain are Ti (2 nm)/Au (50 nm) electrodes, which were located on the thin and thick MoSe2 flakes, respectively, and were fabricated by laser writer lithography and metal evaporation technique. Due to the different band energies and doping levels for the thin and thick MoSe2,29,30 a homojunction with a depletion region at the interface can form and lead to rectifying and photovoltaic effects, which can also be modulated by the back gate. Before measurement, the device was annealed under N2 atmosphere at 150 °C for 2 hours to improve the contact quality.
Device measurement and characterization
All the measurements were performed in an ambient environment and at room temperature using an Agilent B1500A semiconducting device analyzer. The responsivity and temporal response times were measured under a short-pulsed light at a wavelength of 635 nm using a four-channel laser controlled with an Agilent A33220A waveform generator.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a and b show the optical microscope image and schematic diagram of the device, respectively, consisting of different thickness (∼4 and ∼28 nm, respectively, extracted from the AFM measurement shown in the ESI,† Fig. S1) MoSe2 flakes on both sides. We have also measured the Raman scattering and PL of the thin and thick MoSe2 flakes, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†). We observed the obvious E12g and B12g Raman scattering modes in thin flakes corresponding to the few layer characteristics of MoSe2, while both modes disappeared with thick flakes corresponding to the bulk feature. These Raman scattering phenomena are very consistent with previous reports.31 A weak PL peak was observed at around 809 nm from thin flakes due to the radiation recombination of a band gap of 1.53 eV. No significant photoluminescence was observed in the thick MoSe2 flakes.
 Fig. 1  (a and b) The optical microscope image and schematic side view of the MoSe2 homojunction device, respectively, with Ti (2 nm)/Au (50 nm) electrodes. The scale bar is 10 μm. (c) The linear and (d) log plots of the drain–source (Isd–Vsd) characteristic of the device for different back-gate voltages Vg under darkness. (e) The dependence of the rectification ratio on the back gate, showing the largest ratio of up to 105 at the negative gate (Vg = −15 V). (f and g) The output curves of the device in a linear and log scale, respectively, under 14.4 mW cm−2 illumination intensity. (h) The transfer curves of the device under dark and light illumination. 
The output characteristic (the source–drain current Isdversus the drain voltage Vsd) of the device for the different back gate Vg under darkness and light illumination of 14.4 mW cm−2 is plotted on a linear scale (Fig. 1c and f) and log scale (Fig. 1d and g), respectively. It is pronounced that the device can exhibit rectifying properties due to the existence of a lateral homojunction. Besides, when under darkness, the current rectification ratio (defined as the ratio of the magnitude of the current at a negative Vsd of −1 V to the current at a positive Vsd of 1 V) as a function of the back gate is extracted in Fig. 1e, which increases by decreasing the back gate and can reach as high as 105 at the negative gate (Vg of −15 V) due to the formed larger depletion region and built-in field (Fig. 3e). The slight drop of the rectifying ratio at a Vg of −20 V is likely from the indistinguishable low dark current at a reverse bias (positive Vsd here) beyond the resolution of our measured system. In order to further prove that the rectifying property is from the MoSe2 lateral homojunction, and due to the different thicknesses and not the contact barrier, control devices based on only thin and thick MoSe2 flakes were fabricated and measured. From the nearly symmetrical and linear I–V curves under darkness, shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†), the MoSe2 and Ti/Au electrodes have almost Ohmic contact, thus no current rectifying properties occur in these control devices. In addition, as shown by the transfer curves (Fig. 1h), the homojunction device demonstrates obvious ambipolar behaviour, which reveals the main transport contribution from thick MoSe2 as discussed below.
Now we turn to the photovoltaic property of the homojunction based device. Under illuminated conditions, from the enlarged output curves shown in Fig. 2a (a linear scale) and Fig. 2b (a log scale), we can observe an emerging photovoltaic effect with a distinct open-circuit voltage (Voc) and short-circuit current (Isc). Meanwhile, both Voc and Isc can be modulated by the back-gate voltage Vg. In comparison, no photovoltaic property was observed in the devices based on MoSe2 flakes with the same thickness (Fig. S3, ESI†) due to the absence of a lateral junction, further indicating that the photovoltaic property of our homojunction device indeed comes from the lateral junction and built-in field at the interface. The dependence of the open-circuit voltage on the back gate of the device is plotted on a linear scale (Fig. 2c) and log scale (Fig. 2d). When the negative back gate (Vg < 0 V) is applied, the Voc is negative and increases up to −0.24 V with an increasing negative gate. In contrast, it is converted to be positive by applying positive back gate, but remains very low. Interestingly, the Isc can also be modulated by the back gate and divided into two regions with the same value of Voc. Fig. 2e (a linear scale) and Fig. 2f (a log scale) show Isc as a function of Vg. At Vg < 0 V, Isc is positive and increases with the increasing negative gate. At Vg > 0 V, Isc is converted to be negative and also increases with the increasing positive gate. It is noted that these results can be repeated well, and Fig. S4 (ESI†) shows the performance of another homojunction device. Also, by switching the source and drain, the device performance (i.e. Voc and Isc) would subsequently be inverted. More details can be found in the ESI† (Fig. S5).
 Fig. 2  The enlarged linear (a) and log (b) plots of the output characteristics (Isd–Vsd) of the device measured at an incident power density of 14.4 mW cm−2. (c and d) The open-circuit voltage Voc as a function of the back-gate voltage Vg in a linear and log scale, respectively. The dependence of the short-circuit current Isc on the back gate in the linear (e) and log (f) scales. 
Accordingly, the gate-tunable Isd was also investigated by measuring the transfer curves with a zero bias (Vsd = 0 V) under darkness and under 14.4 mW cm−2 illumination states as shown in Fig. 3a. The source–drain current Isd is zero under darkness but an obvious current emerges under light illumination indicating the formation of significant photocurrent. In addition, it can be found that the dependence of Isd on Vg under light at a Vsd of 0 V is well consistent with the observed behaviour from the gate-tunable Isc curves (Fig. 2e). Moreover, in Fig. 3b, the electrical power P (defined as P = VI) at a different back gate Vg is calculated; obviously the electrical power is increased with an increasing negative gate and the maximum power Pm can reach 0.29 nW at a Vg of −20 V. It is predicted that the electrical power has further improvement room by applying a larger back gate. Then, the fill factor FF (defined as FF = Pm/IscVoc) and power conversion efficiency PCE (defined as PCE = Pm/Pi = IscVocFF/Pi, where Pi is the given incident optical power) as functions of the back gate are plotted, as shown in Fig. 3c. The FF ranges from 0.25 to 0.38 and the PCE increases up to 1.9% with the increasing negative gate. The high values of FF and PCE indicate the promising potential of our homojunction device in solar cell applications.
 Fig. 3  (a) The transfer characteristics (Isd–Vg) of the device (under darkness and 14.4 mW cm−2 illumination states) with an applied bias voltage Vsd of 0 V. (b) The electrical power P calculated at different gate voltages Vg showing a maximum power Pm of 0.29 nW at Vg = −20 V. (c) The back gate-dependent fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The PCE increases up to 1.9% with the increasing negative gate. (d) The gating response (Isd–Vg) of the device based on thin and thick MoSe2, respectively. (e–g) The schematic band diagram of the homojunction device at a different back gate Vg under light illumination; here Φ is the built-in field at the interface, EC is the minimum conduction band energy, EF is the Fermi level energy and EV is the maximum valence band energy. 
To understand the gate tunable photovoltaic effect, we measured the gate modulated drain–source current Isd in the device based on thin and thick MoSe2, respectively, which is shown in Fig. 3d. The very different gate modulation levels of current in the devices with different thicknesses of MoSe2 can be observed. For thick MoSe2, the device demonstrates ambipolar behaviour with a majority of holes in the negative gate and a majority of electrons in the positive gate. Whereas, the thin MoSe2 device mainly demontrates N-type behaviour with much less carrier density than the thick MoSe2 device, thus forming a much lower current. Based on this, Fig. 3e–g show schematic diagrams of the energy bands of the homojunction device at different back gates. At the negative gate (Vg = −20 V), the thin flake is depleted with the Fermi level EF in nearly the middle of the band gap, whereas the holes accumulated in the thick flake with the Fermi level close to the valence band EV (Fig. 3e). Due to the different carrier densities in both sides from the different positions of the Fermi levels, the carriers can diffuse into each other and equilibrate the system to form a depletion region and built-in field Φ at the interface. Thus an obvious band bending forms at the interface, which can contribute to the current rectification and photovoltaic effect in our device. When the light illuminates the device, the photo-generated electrons transfer from the thick to thin side and the holes transfer in opposite directions forming a photocurrent. Due to the photo-excited carrier accumulation on both sides, a significant Voc can be achieved. With increasing Vg, the current in the thin flake almost stays low, but the current in the thick flake decreases obviously due to the depletion of the holes (Fig. 3d). This means that the Fermi level in the thin flake is almost still in the middle while the Fermi level in the thick flake increases until reaching close to the middle of the band gap at a Vg of 0 V, seen in Fig. 3f. In this case, the built-in field at the interface becomes smaller, resulting in reduced Voc and Isc. On the other hand, at Vg > 0 V, the current on both sides increases due to the gate induced electrons, but the current in the thick flake increases faster than that in the thin flake (Fig. 3d). This will lead to an energy band at Vg > 0 V, as shown in Fig. 3g. As a result, the built-in field and photo-generated carrier transfer are inversed, corresponding to inversed Voc and Isc.
In Fig. 4a, the photo-response dynamic of the photocurrent in the device is also measured at a zero bias and different gate voltage Vg. The photocurrent response is very fast at around 10 ms, which can be seen from the enlarged time-resolved photo-response in the inset of Fig. 4a. It is interesting that the photocurrent can also be modulated by the back gate, which is positive at Vg < 0 V and became negative at Vg > 0 V. This is in good agreement with the gate dependence of Isc (Fig. 2e). By applying a bias voltage Vsd of 1 V, the photocurrent is much improved, due to the additional electrical field, and the response dynamics remain fast (∼10 ms, Fig. 4b) due to the diode behaviour from the homojunction at the interface. Meanwhile, the electrical response of the photovoltaic device upon illumination is determined by its responsivity in units of A W−1, defined as R = Iph/PS where Iph is the photocurrent, P is the incident light power density and S is the active area. Fig. 4c shows the responsivity dependence on the optical intensities at a Vsd of 0 V. The responsivity at a Vg of −20 V is dramatically improved to ∼1 A W−1 compared to that at a Vg of 0 V, which can be attributed to the enlarged built-in field (Fig. 3e), thus leading to more efficient carrier separation at the interface under a negative back gate. With the application of a bias Vsd = 1 V, the responsivity at a Vg of −20 V is further improved up to 550 A W−1 at low optical intensity, much higher than that in previously reported MoSe2 based detectors,24,25 and about 2–3 orders of magnitude larger than that in devices consisting of MoSe2 flakes with the same thickness (Fig. S6, ESI†). The drop in responsivity with increasing incident optical power is due to the gradual saturation of the photo-sensitizing trap states of the MoSe2 under a high light intensity, which is in agreement with other MoS2 based photodetectors.7
 Fig. 4  The time-resolved photoresponse of the device for different values of gate voltage Vg, measured at an illumination power density of 14.4 mW cm−2 with Vsd = 0 V (a) and Vsd = 1 V (b). The inset is the enlarged photo-response and it shows a fast decay time (∼10 ms) after turning off the incident light. (c and d) The dependence of the responsivity on the illumination intensity at a different back gate, and a bias voltage Vsd of 0 V and 1 V, respectively. The device exhibits a higher responsivity of 550 A W−1 for a low light power density of Vsd = 1 V and Vg = −20 V. 
Conclusions
In summary, a MoSe2 homojunction enabled with different thickness flakes is demonstrated for the first time. Due to the different carrier densities caused by the different gate modulation levels, a large built-in field can form at the interface and enable a gate controllable rectifying and photovoltaic effect. At a negative back gate, the current rectification ratio can reach as high as 105 and a significant Voc of 0.24 V can be observed under light illumination. Our photovoltaic device can also display a PCE up to 1.9% revealing the application potential in solar cells. Besides, the temporal response with or without bias is very fast, on the order of 10 ms, and a responsivity as high as 550 A W−1 is achieved, indicating that our device is a promising candidate for photodetector applications. The novel and facile MoSe2 homojunction with high and gate tunable photovoltaic performance paves a new way for 2D platforms in optoelectronic applications.
Conflict of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the “One-Hundred Talents Program” of the Guangdong University of Technology (GDUT) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 11674310.
Notes and references
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, Ph. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Withers, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, A. Mishchenko, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, A. I. Tartakovskii and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, D. K. Polyushkin, A. Pospischil and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6165–6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, Y.-H. Chang, Y.-J. Cheng and L.-J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tan, Y. Fan, Y. Zhou, Q. Chen, W. Xu and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7866–7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zeng, L. Tao, C. Tang, B. Zhou, H. Long, Y. Chai, S. P. Lau and Y. H. Tsang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huo, S. Yang, Z. Wei, S.-S. Li, J.-B. Xia and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, T. Zhang, J. Yao, Y. Zhang, J. Xu and G. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 22 Search PubMed .
C.-H. Lee, G.-H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast, A. A. Unal, G. Conti, C. Conlon, G. K. Palsson, M. C. Martin, A. M. Minor, C. S. Fadley, E. Yablonovitch, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6198–6202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, D. Li, H. Zhou, C. Wang, A. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Li, D. Lee, D. Qu, X. Liu, J. Ryu, A. Seabaugh and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Choi, D. Qu, D. Lee, X. Liu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and W. J. Yoo, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9332–9340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nipane, D. Karmakar, N. Kaushik, S. Karande and S. Lodha, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2128–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Howell, D. Jariwala, C.-C. Wu, K.-S. Chen, V. K. Sangwan, J. Kang, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2278–2284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tosun, D. Fu, S. B. Desai, C. Ko, J. S. Kang, D.-H. Lien, M. Najmzadeh, S. Tongay, J. Wu and A. Javey, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10990 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Yin, X. Wei, Z. Tan, J. Shu, B. Liu, Y. Zeng, S. Gao, H. Peng, Z. Liu and Q. Chen, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600048 CrossRef .
S. Kallatt, G. Umesh, N. Bhat and K. Majumdar, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15213 RSC .
Z.-Q. Xu, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, W. Huang, X. Xia, W. Yu, Y. Xue, L. Sun, C. Zheng, Y. Lu, L. Liao and Q. Bao, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 041001 CrossRef .
Y.-H. Chang, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Han, J. Pu, J.-K. Chang, W.-T. Hsu, J.-K. Huang, C.-L. Hsu, M.-H. Chiu, T. Takenobu, H. Li, C.-I. Wu, W.-H. Chang, A. T. S. Wee and L.-J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8582–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jung, S. M. Kim, H. Moon, G. Han, J. Kwon, Y. K. Hong, I. Omkaram, Y. Yoon, S. Kim and J. Park, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T.-R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y.-T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H.-T. Jeng, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tongay, J. Zhou, C. Ataca, K. Lo, T. S. Matthews, J. Li, J. C. Grossman and J. Wu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5576–5580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Böttger, X. Zhang, J. Börner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. M. de Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc01806aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a and b) The optical microscope image and schematic side view of the MoSe2 homojunction device, respectively, with Ti (2 nm)/Au (50 nm) electrodes. The scale bar is 10 μm. (c) The linear and (d) log plots of the drain–source (Isd–Vsd) characteristic of the device for different back-gate voltages Vg under darkness. (e) The dependence of the rectification ratio on the back gate, showing the largest ratio of up to 105 at the negative gate (Vg = −15 V). (f and g) The output curves of the device in a linear and log scale, respectively, under 14.4 mW cm−2 illumination intensity. (h) The transfer curves of the device under dark and light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 2  The enlarged linear (a) and log (b) plots of the output characteristics (Isd–Vsd) of the device measured at an incident power density of 14.4 mW cm−2. (c and d) The open-circuit voltage Voc as a function of the back-gate voltage Vg in a linear and log scale, respectively. The dependence of the short-circuit current Isc on the back gate in the linear (e) and log (f) scales.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The transfer characteristics (Isd–Vg) of the device (under darkness and 14.4 mW cm−2 illumination states) with an applied bias voltage Vsd of 0 V. (b) The electrical power P calculated at different gate voltages Vg showing a maximum power Pm of 0.29 nW at Vg = −20 V. (c) The back gate-dependent fill factor (FF) and power conversion efficiency (PCE). The PCE increases up to 1.9% with the increasing negative gate. (d) The gating response (Isd–Vg) of the device based on thin and thick MoSe2, respectively. (e–g) The schematic band diagram of the homojunction device at a different back gate Vg under light illumination; here Φ is the built-in field at the interface, EC is the minimum conduction band energy, EF is the Fermi level energy and EV is the maximum valence band energy.	 

 	Fig. 4  The time-resolved photoresponse of the device for different values of gate voltage Vg, measured at an illumination power density of 14.4 mW cm−2 with Vsd = 0 V (a) and Vsd = 1 V (b). The inset is the enlarged photo-response and it shows a fast decay time (∼10 ms) after turning off the incident light. (c and d) The dependence of the responsivity on the illumination intensity at a different back gate, and a bias voltage Vsd of 0 V and 1 V, respectively. The device exhibits a higher responsivity of 550 A W−1 for a low light power density of Vsd = 1 V and Vg = −20 V.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc01806a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
