Recent developments in electrode materials for the selective upgrade of biomass-derived platform molecules into high-value-added chemicals and fuels   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2GC02956A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2GC02956A
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2022, 24, 7818-7868Recent developments in electrode materials for the selective upgrade of biomass-derived platform molecules into high-value-added chemicals and fuels†

        
          
            Ziyi 
            Fan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wenjun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Liang 
            Li
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuqiao 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuqin 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *cd, 
      
        
          
            Shuangyin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zupeng 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a
aJiangsu Co-Innovation Center of Efficient Processing and Utilization of Forest Resources, International Innovation Center for Forest Chemicals and Materials, College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University, Longpan Road 159, Nanjing 210037, China. E-mail: zhangwj@njfu.edu.cn; czp@njfu.edu.cn
bCenter for Photoelectrochemistry and Devices, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southeast University, Nanjing 211189, PR China
cState Key Laboratory of Chem/Bio-Sensing and Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Advanced Catalytic Engineering Research Center of the Ministry of Education, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: yuqin_zou@hnu.edu.cn
dSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jishou University, Jishou 416000, China
Received 
      9th August 2022
    , Accepted 8th September 2022First published on 15th September 2022AbstractAs the “fourth-largest energy source” and the “only renewable organic carbon source”, biomass and its derived platform molecules (BDPMs) are widely used for selective upgrading to high-value-added chemicals and fuels, which can alleviate the energy crisis caused by the shortage of traditional fossil fuels. Electrocatalysis is emerging as a promising “biorefinery technology” for BDPM valorization, in which various high-value-added chemicals and fuels can be produced under green and mild conditions. However, the development of electrocatalytic upgrading of BDPMs is hugely lopsided due to a limited understanding of the reaction mechanisms. Herein, we comprehensively review the electrocatalytic upgrade of the top 14 BDPMs (classified into three main groups: alcohols, furans, and carboxylic acids) into high value-added chemicals and fuels, concentrating on the reaction pathways and the mechanisms. Thereafter, we emphasize the recent development of advanced electrode materials and focus on the principles for enhanced electrochemical activity and product selectivity. Afterward, a detailed analysis of advanced electrocatalyst synthesis and modification strategies is described to inspire more research attention and bring forward the practical application of the technique. Finally, we highlight the opportunities, identify the challenges, and propose perspectives for the future development of this flourishing field.Ziyi FanZiyi Fan received his B.S. degree from Nanjing Forestry University (China) in 2021. He is now pursuing his Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Zupeng Chen and Prof. Wenjun Zhang at the School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). His main interests are the design and fabrication of nanocatalysts for the catalytic conversion of biomass and the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide.Wenjun ZhangWenjun Zhang received her Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Jin from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, P.R. China. Since 2020, she has worked in the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). Her main interests are the design and fabrication of nano-catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide and catalytic conversion of biomass.Yuqin ZouYuqin Zou received her Ph.D. degree from the University of Manchester (Manchester, UK), in May 2017. Since 2017, she has worked in the College of Chemical Engineering, Hunan University (China). Her research activities embrace the study of the mechanisms of electrocatalytic biomass conversion, the design of spinel, layered double hydroxide and metal–organic framework nanomaterials and their applications in electrocatalysis and electrosynthesis.Shuangyin WangShuangyin Wang received his B.S. degree in 2006 from Zhejiang University and his Ph.D. degree in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a professor of the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are in plasma technology, defects in various crystals, and their application for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.Zupeng ChenZupeng Chen received his Ph.D. degree from the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany), in December 2015, under the supervision of Prof. Markus Antonietti. He then joined the group of Prof. Javier Pérez-Ramírez, ETH Zurich, as a postdoctoral fellow from 2016 to 2019. Since 2020, he has taken up a full professorship position in the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). His research activities embrace the design of efficient and stable heterogeneous catalysts and their applications in photo(electro)catalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction, biomass valorization, and industrially relevant transformations such as alkyne selective hydrogenations and Suzuki C–C couplings.
Introduction
Organic synthesis is a central tool for manufacturing chemicals and fuels, and specific products, including pharmaceuticals, dyes, pesticides, and additives, that are indispensable for science, technology, and daily life.1,2 Nevertheless, the main feedstocks of chemical synthesis are dominated by nonrenewable fossil resources, which are expected to be depleted by 2060 at the current consumption rate.3,4 Therefore, it is imperative to explore alternative renewables to address the discrepancy between the increasing global demand for energy and the shortage of conventional fossil fuel resources. Encouragingly, governments worldwide have actively proposed sustainable development strategies to develop renewable and environmentally friendly clean energy, including solar energy, wind energy, nuclear energy, geothermal energy, and so on.5–7 However, these energy vectors vary regionally and pose some potential threats to the ecological environment. They cannot provide organic carbon sources to produce high-value-added chemicals and fuels.8
Biomass has been widely regarded as the “fourth-largest energy source” after coal, oil, and natural gas and is the only renewable resource that can provide non-fossil organic carbon sources.9 In the face of the exhaustion of fossil energy and environmental pollution, the development and utilization of biomass energy is an essential strategic measure for global energy transformation and the realization of climate change goals, which promotes the sustainable development of the economy. It is estimated that by 2030, about 35 percent of the world's chemicals and other industrial products will come from biological manufacturing. To reach this strategic goal successfully, the U.S. Department of Energy reported 12 kinds of biomass-derived platform molecules (BDPMs) that could be used to synthesize high-value-added chemicals and fuels in 2004.10 On this basis, Bozell and Petersen supplemented it according to nine evaluation criteria in 2010 and finally suggested the “Top 10 + 4” BDPMs, including alcohols (ethanol, glycerol and derivatives, sorbitol, xylitol), furans (furfural, 5-hydroxymethylfurfural, 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid), carboxylic acids (levulinic acid, lactic acid, succinic acid), biohydrocarbons (isoprene, other biohydrocarbons), and hydroxypropionic acid/aldehyde.11 Since then, the conversion of biomass and BDPMs has become a hot research topic because it provides a green and feasible way to reduce the heavy dependence on conventional fossil fuels.12
The biomass energy industry is in the critical stage of technological breakthrough and commercial application development. Regrettably, directly using biomass and its derivates to produce high-value-added chemicals and fuels remains challenging, mainly due to the lack of economically competitive upgrading technologies.13,14 The most common technology for biomass utilization is converting it into solid, liquid, and gaseous fuels for further utilization, including direct combustion, biological conversion, and thermochemical conversion. However, these technologies are typically performed under harsh operating conditions (e.g., temperatures of 80–400 °C, hydrogen pressures of 0.1–2 MPa) and usually require continuous utilization of high-cost H2, O2 or chemical oxidants, which compromises selectivity toward the target products and results in severe damage to the environment. Moreover, the catalysts used in industrial production are usually expensive and poisonous, which brings a substantial economic burden and causes severe environmental pollution. Hence, developing novel chemistry and strategies is essential to transform widely-available biomass resources selectively and efficiently into value-added chemicals and fuels, preferably without extensive functionalization, defunctionalization, or protection.14,15
In recent years, upgrading BDPMs through electrocatalytic technology has become a rapidly growing research focus in energy and fuel production.9 Compared with traditional “biorefinery technology”, it has unique advantages.16–18 First, it uses clean and sustainable H2O as a hydrogen or oxygen source, avoiding high-cost H2, O2 or chemical oxidants. Second, the operation can be carried out under environmental conditions. Therefore, the activation barrier, reaction rate, and product selectivity can be well controlled by altering the electrode potentials, current densities, or designed catalysts. Third, the interfacial reactions of catalysts can be monitored using a variety of electrochemical measurements and in situ spectroscopy, which is beneficial for mechanism understanding. Fourth, the driving force of electricity could be obtained from clean and renewable energy, such as solar energy, wind energy, and so on, thus avoiding an energy-consuming high-temperature process. Fifth, the oxidation and reduction reactions can be easily integrated as the electrons obtained from the oxidation reaction on the anode can flow to and further be used for the reduction reaction on the cathode, which can simultaneously produce the oxidation and reduction products, thus significantly increasing the practical value of electrocatalytic technology.
According to the principles of thermodynamics, the processes of oxidation or reduction can occur if the anode potential is above the equilibrium potential or the cathode potential is below the equilibrium potential. However, the performances of the oxidation and reduction reactions are usually restricted due to the limit of reaction kinetics; therefore, a relatively large overpotential is required to achieve a reasonable reaction rate. It is particularly important to prepare effective electrocatalysts by regulating the interaction between electrocatalysts and reaction molecules to achieve a change in the activation energy or reaction pathway. In addition, the intrinsic catalytic performance of the employed catalysts is critical to the behavior of electrocatalytic reactions; therefore, the design of advanced and efficient catalysts can accelerate the reaction process to meet the needs of industrial production. In the past two decades, the rapid development of in situ characterization technology and various efficient preparation methods has promoted the successful synthesis of various nanocatalysts with high activity and stability.19 The rational design of efficient electrocatalysts accelerates research on the electrocatalytic upgrading of BDPMs to a new stage of development. It drives the establishment of the necessary criteria and leads to improvement of the basic principles simultaneously. Unfortunately, it is still a great challenge to avoid the accumulation of intermediates and catalyst poisoning for the specific electrocatalytic system by adjusting the electronic structure and surface structure of nanostructured electrocatalysts.20 Electrocatalytic upgrading of BDPMs into high-value-added chemicals and fuels is still in its infancy. However, in the growth stage, a better understanding of the reaction pathway and mechanism, and a strategy for rational catalyst design targeting specific reactions, can provide solutions for the complete and selective conversion of BDPMs into the desired products.
For the first time, this review provides a comprehensive survey of the electrochemical upgrading of biomass-derived platform molecules into high-value-added chemicals and fuels. The top 14 BDPMs are categorized into three main groups, i.e., alcohols, furans, and carboxylic acids. After a detailed introduction to the typical reaction pathway and mechanism of electrocatalytic valorization of each platform compound, we pay close attention to the recent development of advanced electrode materials (Fig. 1). We have emphasized the fundamental principles for the synthesis and modification strategies for efficient electrocatalysts, establishing the structure–property–performance relationships to guide the adjustment of the electrochemical activities and selectivities towards specific biochemicals and fuels. Finally, we provide rational criticism and a reasonable outlook on the current and future developments of the BDPM electrocatalytic upgrading. It is anticipated that these constructive perspectives will inspire advancements for the rational exploitation of highly efficient electrode materials for upgrading biomass and its derivations into high-value-added biochemicals and fuels and finally take the lead in industrialization.
 Fig. 1  Chronology of the development of electrode materials for the upgrading of biomass-derived platform molecules in the last 20 years.18,21,23,27,51,61,64,65,70,72,75,78,79,91,93,94,120,164,165,185,225,234,238,239,241,242,249,253,258,267,269,271,273,286,290,298,301,311,313,319,323,326 
Electrocatalytic upgrading of alcohols
Electrochemical ethanol oxidation reaction
Ethanol is a typical C2 type alcohol, the composition of which was first determined by the French chemist Antoine in 1784. It can be produced from the biomass of agricultural, forestry, and urban residues to achieve large-scale production.21 Due to it being a widely available source, ethanol is widely used in medicine, fuels, and direct fuel cells (DFCs). DFCs can convert chemical energy into fuel through electrochemical oxidation. The conversion efficiency of DFCs is about 60%, which is higher than that of internal combustion engines (30%).22,23 Since the global “oil crisis” in the early 1970s, governments have actively implemented ethanol fuel programs. Brazil, the world's largest producer and consumer of the fuel ethanol, produces more than 10 million tons of ethanol annually, 97% of which is used as fuel. The United States is the country ranked second in terms of ethanol production as a fuel, in which gasohol, gasoline blended with 10% ethanol, has been commonly used. China, the third largest producer and consumer of fuel ethanol, is lagging far behind Brazil and the United States, with fuel ethanol production accounting for only about 2% of gasoline production. DFCs provide a new idea for alleviating the problem of energy shortages. Compared to methanol DFCs, ethanol is less toxic and has a higher energy density. In addition, ethanol has a lower crossover effect than methanol, namely, fuel cross over through the membrane to cause cathode depolarization,24–26 which can reduce fuel penetration to the cathode, thus reducing fuel waste, increasing oxidation rate and fuel efficiency. The electrochemical ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR) occurs at the electrode or electrolyte interface, which is oxidized to form protons, carbon dioxide, electrons, and intermediates/partially oxidized ethanol products such as acetaldehyde and acetic acid (Scheme 1). Unfortunately, in ethanol DFC systems, if ethanol directly participates in the electrochemical reaction, the kinetics is very sluggish due to the transfer of 12 electrons for its complete oxidation (eqn (1)). However, as mentioned above, the EOR may proceed only to acetaldehyde or acetic acid involving only 2 or 4 electrons, respectively. C2H6O + 3H2O → 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e−(1)
 Scheme 1  The main pathways of the ethanol oxidation reaction. 
Electrolytes, electrode catalysts, and support materials have a meaningful impact on the performance of the DFC system. Significantly, the development of the EOR mainly depends on the design of an efficient electrode catalyst, which can enhance the electro-oxidation performance of ethanol and reduce fuel crossover by breaking the C–C bond of ethanol.

Pt-based catalysts. 
Pt-based catalysts are considered the best candidates for the electro-oxidation of alcohols under acidic conditions.24 Many studies focused on the arrangement of Pt atoms at the catalyst surface, which affected the catalytic activity.27–29 Busó-Rogero et al. studied the role that Pt single crystal electrodes played in the EOR when using sulfuric acid and perchloric acid as supporting electrolytes.27 CO was generated at low potentials due to cleavage of the C–C bond of the ethanol molecule, which could poison the electrode surface and further reduce the activity of the EOR. They found that the current density had a sharp increase at 0.7 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) on the Pt (100) electrode, which indicated that CO was further oxidized (Fig. 2a). However, the phenomenon of a sharp change in current density did not appear on the Pt (111) electrode, indicating that the formation rate of CO on the surface was relatively low (Fig. 2c). The Pt (110) electrode showed an average performance between that of Pt (111) and Pt (100) (Fig. 2b). Although the main oxidation product on all three basal planes was acetic acid, the production of CO2 on the Pt (100) electrode was much higher than that on Pt (111) electrode.
 Fig. 2  CVs for the EOR on (a) Pt (100), (b) Pt (110) and (c) Pt (111) electrodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 0.2 ethanol (black line) and 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.2 M ethanol (red line). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. CVs for the EOR on (d) CF and € PCF electrodes with variable Pt contents (“LPt” and “HPt” represent low and high Pt concentrations, respectively) in 0.5 M H2SO4. Steady-state CVs of the EOR on (f) CFHPt electrode with or without ethanol. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Although commercial Pt/C electrodes have been considered the best catalysts for the EOR under acidic conditions, unfortunately, the high cost of Pt has become one of the obstacles to the commercialization of ethanol DFCs. In addition, a high density of intermediates (e.g., CO, acetaldehyde, and acetic acid) will block the active sites of Pt, resulting in a decrease of the catalytic activity and stability of Pt electrodes. Some promising methods have emerged to promote the performance of the EOR,30,31 including the development of new supporting materials32–34 and alloyed electrocatalysts based on Pt.35 Yu et al. ultrasonically mixed commercial Pt/C catalyst and TiO2 nanoparticles to enhance the activity of Pt/C catalysts for the EOR.33 TiO2 nanoparticles were dispersed homogeneously in the interspaces of Pt/C nanoparticles, resulting in a high density of TiO2–Pt–C interfaces, which significantly accelerated the EOR. In addition, the activity and stability of the composite for the EOR were better than those of pure Pt/C.
Carbon materials are also considered excellent electrocatalyst supports due to their specific properties. However, the corrosion of Pt-supported carbon catalysts under acidic conditions caused a degradation of the electrochemical performance. Therefore, the primary solution is efficiently depositing the metal on a carbon support and chemically modifying the surface of carbon materials by changing the interface properties and interaction between the metal and carbon support, so that a more efficient and stable electrocatalytic performance of the EOR can be obtained. Some studies indicated that N and P-doped carbon materials could improve the electrochemical performance of the EOR.36–38 In particular, P species have been demonstrated to be effective inhibitors of carbon electro-oxidation, which improve the performance of the electrocatalyst.38 García-Mateos et al. synthesized lignin fiber with (microporosity, surface area of 1141 m2 g−1) and without (mesoporosity, surface area of 780 m2 g−1) P element and loaded it with Pt by electrospinning.34 Due to the better oxidation resistance of fibers with P, the obtained lignin fibers were stabilized in air and could be further carbonized at 900 °C under a N2 atmosphere to obtain lignin-based carbon fiber. In addition, metallic nanoparticles (about 2 nm) could well disperse in the catalysts in the presence of P, while larger Pt particle sizes were obtained without P. As seen in Fig. 2d and e, the observation of the peaks (between −0.2 and 0.0 V vs. silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl)) was due to the oxidation of H2 generated on this electrocatalyst, suggesting that the Pt nanoparticles in different lignin-based carbon fibers with and without P (PCFs and CFs, respectively) were performing electro-oxidation. In addition, there were lots of double-layer charges recorded in Fig. 2e, which confirmed the significant role of micropores and larger surface areas of P-doped lignin fibers. Notably, the introduction of Pt onto CFs remarkably decreased their electro-oxidation onset potential for the fibers (Fig. 2d). However, Pt content did not affect the electrochemical performance when introducing Pt onto PCFs (Fig. 2e). The result indicated that P element could protect carbon against electro-oxidation, even when it was acting as an electrocatalyst support. The electro-activity of lignin-based carbon fibers was tested for the EOR (Fig. 2f). The onset potential for the EOR was 0.25 V vs. the silver chloride electrode (Ag/AgCl), and the current reached a maximum of 19.4 A g−1 at 0.69 V vs. Ag/AgCl in the presence of ethanol. Most importantly, the Pt-containing carbon fibers could be directly used as electrodes without binder or conductivity promoter, which avoided pore blockage and prevented the degradation of the electrode's conductivity and activity.
Alloying Pt with other metals is a crucial research direction, which can not only reduce Pt loading and cost,39–43 but also weaken the poisoning effects of intermediate species (e.g., CO) on Pt and increase the activity of Pt-based catalysts.44–46 The Pd electrode is an excellent electrocatalyst towards small molecule electro-oxidation, which serves as a good substitute for Pt due to its relatively lower price.47 Therefore, the introduction of Pd into Pt-based materials can effectively reduce the Pt content and promote the industrialization of Pt-based EOR catalysts.45 Zheng and co-workers uniformly deposited PtPd nanocubes (NCs) onto reduced graphene oxide (rGO) through a one-pot solvothermal reduction.40 Under the optimum atomic ratio of Pt:Pd (1:5), the specific activity (2.3 mA cm−2) and mass activity (1.08 A mgPt−1) are relatively higher than those of rGO-supported Pt nanoparticles (0.3 mA cm−2 specific activity and 0.018 A mgPt−1 mass activity). As early as 2006, Cho et al. realized the performance of an EOR that was comparable to that of commercial Pt/C by adjusting the ratio of Pt and Pd.39 A small amount of Pt (∼5 at%) showed a maximum power density of 0.75 W cm−2, higher than that of Pt/C, thus promoting the industrialization of the Pt-based electrocatalyst for the EOR by reducing its content. Au is also considered an excellent candidate in the synthesis of Pt alloys,48,49 which could have increased electrocatalytic activity with enhanced long-term catalytic stability. Au can effectively remove CO through an indirect reaction pathway, thus significantly improving the performance of the EOR. Song et al. prepared porous PtAu alloy nanoflowers (PtAu ANFs) by a one-pot successive co-reduction method without any seed, polymer, or surfactant.43 The PtAu ANFs exhibited improved catalytic performances for the EOR in contrast with PtAu nanocrystals (PtAu NCs), PtAu nanoparticles (PtAu NPs), and commercial Pt/C catalysts due to having more active sites (Fig. 3a and b). As shown in Fig. 3a, the specific activity of PtAu ANFs (7.06 mA cm−2) was 1.10, 1.08, and 4.03-fold higher than those of PtAu NCs, PtAu NPs, and Pt/C, respectively. From Fig. 3b, it can be seen that the EOR current density on PtAu ANFs was higher and more stable than that on PtAu NCs, PtAu NPs, and commercial Pt/C, which indicated the enhanced catalytic activity and excellent stability of PtAu ANFs for the EOR.
 Fig. 3  (a) Specific activity and (b) I–T measurements for the EOR on PtAu ANFs, PtAu NCs, PtAu NPs and commercial Pt/C at 0.8 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Song et al.43 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Catalytic activity for the EOR as a function of PtRu composition at 0.5 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Camara et al.21 Copyright 2005 Elsevier. (d) LSVs for the EOR on PtSn and Pt in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Vigier et al.51 Copyright 2004 Elsevier. I CVs and (f) I–T measurements (applied potential is 0.45 V vs. SCE) for the EOR on Pt3Co@Pt/PC and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al.57 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
To suppress the adsorption of intermediate species and improve the EOR kinetics for C–C bond scission, some promoters (such as Ru,21,42 Sn,50–53 Bi,54 Ir metal, or oxides33,55,56) can be introduced into Pt. These promoters can generate OH species on neighboring Pt atoms, which facilitate the removal of CO intermediate. In addition, the introduction of these promoters may also modify the electronic structure of Pt via the ligand effect, leading to a weaker binding energy of CO on the Pt surface. In 2005, Camara et al. studied the effect of Ru on the EOR in PtRu alloys.21 When the atomic ratio of Ru reached up to 40%, the rate of the EOR had a promoting effect (Fig. 3c). Unfortunately, facilitation of the EOR was only due to the more selective production of acetic acid, which has a minimal ability to promote the C–C bond breakage of ethanol. Sn can turn adsorbed water molecules into adsorbed OH species, promoting the oxidation of CO and CH3CO species to generate CO2 and CH3COOH at lower potentials.50–53 Vigier and co-workers studied the EOR on a PtSn alloy catalyst and found that the activity of PtSn was almost twice that of the Pt/C catalyst (Fig. 3d).51 They thought that Sn could promote the dissociation and adsorption of ethanol and then break the C–C bond at lower potentials. However, the introduction of Sn did not further oxidize acetic acid to CO2. Freitas et al. prepared Ptpc/Ir/Pt metallic multilayer nanostructured electrodes by depositing Ir and Pt on polycrystalline Pt.55 The Ptpc/Ir/Pt electrode showed an excellent electrocatalytic performance, and ethanol was converted entirely into CO2 at 1.5 V vs. RHE. Zhang et al. prepared Pt3Co with Pt-skin structured bimetallic nanocatalysts supported on porous graphitic, which was only 1–2 atomic layers with a thickness of 0.5 nm.57 Significantly, the current density of Pt3Co@Pt/PC (Pt3Co with a Pt-skin surface, supported on porous graphitic carbon) (0.79 mA μgPt−1) was 2.5 times higher than that of Pt/C (0.32 mA μgPt−1) (Fig. 3e). Among them, the peak at 0.60 V vs. a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was due to the formation of acetaldehyde, acetic acid and CO2. In comparison, the peak at 0.96 V vs. SCE was due to acetic acid. In addition, Pt3Co still showed better electrocatalytic activity than Pt/C after a 1 h stability test (Fig. 3f).
Although bimetallic catalysts have a significant improvement in the performance of the EOR compared with single metal catalysts, there are still some disadvantages. In a sense, trimetallic catalysts can regulate the performance of the EOR more carefully. Adding a third component can improve the surface properties of the catalyst and increase the selectivity, activity, and stability of the EOR by using the synergistic effect of the bifunctional mechanism.58–61 Kowal and co-workers synthesized a PtRuSnO2/C electrocatalyst by a cation-adsorption–reduction-galvanic-displacement synthesis method.61 Ternary PtRuSnO2/C showed a higher current density than those of PtSnO2/C and PtRu/C (Fig. 4a and b), while its electrochemical activity was an order of magnitude more than that of commercial Pt/C. Noteworthily, the authors calculated the adsorption energies of water on the surface of these four electrodes through density functional theory (DFT) (Fig. 4c). They thought that the phenomenon was mainly caused by the saturation of the SnO2 sites by H2O/OH, which weakened the interaction of water with Pt or Rh and promoted the activity of the EOR. Furthermore, they predicted the reaction pathways of the EOR on the Pt electrode (Fig. 4d). Among all the possibilities, the optimal pathway for C–C bond breaking was *CH3CH2OH → *CH3CH2O + H* → *CH2CH2O + 2H* → *CH2 + *CH2O + 2H* (the blue arrows in Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  LSVs for the EOR on (a) PtRhSnO2/C and PtSnO2/C, and (b) PtRhSnO2/C and PtRu/C deposited on a glassy carbon electrode in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.2 M ethanol. (c) DFT calculated adsorption energies of H2O on the surfaces of SnO2, RhSnO2, PtSnO2, and PtRhSnO2 with (red dots) and without (black dots) H2O saturating the SnO2 sites, and (d) possible pathways for cleavage of the C–C bond of the ethanol molecule on the PtRhSnO2 surface. Reproduced with permission from Kowal et al.61 Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group. 


Pd-based catalysts. 
As a relatively economical substitute for Pt, Pd has also been widely used as an efficient catalyst for the EOR in recent years.62–65 Different from Pt, Pd has a relatively lower EOR activity in acidic media but exhibits higher catalytic activity (four times better than Pt) in alkaline solutions.66–69 In general, alkaline solutions can provide more OH− ions for adsorption on the catalyst surface, thus providing better kinetics of the oxidation reaction. Yang and co-workers studied the reaction mechanism for the EOR on the Pd electrode under alkaline conditions by in situ attenuated total reflection surface-enhanced infrared absorption spectroscopy with H–D isotope replacement.63 Different from the reaction pathways for the EOR under acidic conditions, the authors found that ethanol may undergo dehydrogenation to form adsorbed acetyl rather than acetaldehyde. Then the adsorbed acetyl decomposes to CO and CHx at lower potentials and is further converted into acetate or CO2. The large amounts of acetate and other side products under alkaline conditions result in poor selectivity toward C–C bond cleavage.62 Huang et al. combined nanosized Pd particles, defective Ni(OH)2 nanoflakes, and a graphene support to form a hybrid electrocatalyst (Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO) by a two-step solution method, and then applied it to the EOR.64 The excellent catalyst had a higher peak current (1546 mA mg−1) than those of Pd/C (1050 mA mg−1) and Pd/rGO (1416 mA mg−1) (Fig. 5a). In addition, Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO exhibited outstanding cycling stability, with more than 90% of its initial activity being retained after even 40000 cycles (Fig. 5b). After four such consecutive reactivation cycles, there was no decrease in activity after cyclic voltammetry (CV) reactivation (Fig. 5c). They thought that such ultra-high stability was attributed to the synergistic effect between Ni(OH)2 and Pd. After analysis of the oxidation products, it was found that acetate and carbonate were the main products of the EOR, and the Faraday efficiency (FE) of acetate was 96% (Fig. 5d). Qiu et al. synthesized PdZn dual site nanoparticles on N-doped carbon@ZnO support (PdZn/NC@ZnO) via synthetic method control.65 PdZn/NC@ZnO exhibited a much higher current density than Pd/C (Fig. 5e). It was noteworthy that the mass activity of PdZn/NC@ZnO (18.14 A mgPd−1) was 24 times higher than that of Pd/C (0.76 A mgPd−1), and the specific activity (54.60 mA cm−2) was 37-fold higher than Pd/C (1.48 mA cm−2). In addition, PdZn/NC@ZnO showed superior long-term activity for the EOR, but the current density of Pd/C decayed rapidly (Fig. 5f).
 Fig. 5  (a) CVs and (b) cycling stability (−0.2 V vs. SCE) for the EOR on Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO, Pd/rGO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. (c) Long-time durability of Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO. Note: “↑” represents “the catalyst was reactivated and electrolyte was replaced”. (d) FE for C1 (CO2, CO and CHx) or C2 (acetate) on Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO, Pd/rGO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Huang et al.64 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag. (e) CVs and (f) I–T measurements (−0.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl) for the EOR on PdZn/NC@ZnO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Qiu et al.65 Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group. 


Au and Rh-based catalysts. 
Compared to Pt, Au is traditionally considered inactive under acidic conditions. However, Au shows good electrochemical activity and high resistance toward the formation of poisoning surface oxides for the EOR under alkaline conditions, where the activities of Au vary in a highly nonlinear fashion with pH values (Fig. 6a).70 Kwon et al. attempted to explain the reaction pathway of the EOR on Au electrodes under alkaline conditions.70 Surprisingly, they found that the ethoxy anion was the reactive species at pH > 11, the concentration of which increased sharply with higher pH. At pH = 13, the ethoxy anion was then more readily oxidized to acetaldehyde, which was the main reason for a higher EOR activity under alkaline conditions. Notably, they pioneered the idea that the first deprotonation for ethanol was base-catalyzed, and the second deprotonation was fast, but Au catalyzed, which was the main reason for the high oxidation activity of ethanol DCFs in alkaline media. However, they still did not solve the problem of the C–C bond breakage of ethanol by using Au.71 Due to the slight surface energy difference between different Au surfaces, some research groups tried to enhance the EOR activity of Au electrodes by adjusting their morphology in recent years. Wang et al.72 and You et al.73 reported the preparation of Au nanodendrites (Au NDs) using low-potential synthesis on a glassy carbon electrode and a subsequent galvanic replacement reaction between Ni wire and HAuCl4 in an aqueous solution. Due to the “clean” surface, larger surface area, and great active sites, Au NDs exhibited superior catalytic performance for the EOR in alkaline electrolytes than that of polycrystalline Au nanoparticles (Fig. 6b and c). Wang et al. fabricated a three-dimensional Au nanoparticle/reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/carbon fiber (CF) hybrid electrode (Au0.5/rGO/Au0.5/rGO/CF) via a layer-by-layer (LBL) method. Then they assembled two rGO sheets and two Au nanoparticle sheets in alternate layers on the CFs. The Au0.5/rGO/Au0.5/rGO/CF electrode showed highly efficient electrocatalytic activity (Fig. 6d) and stability (Fig. 6e) toward the EOR in an alkaline medium. They thought that the synergistic interaction between the rGO sheets and Au nanoparticles enhanced the catalytic activity of the EOR.
 Fig. 6  (a) Measured current density (jp) minus the background current density (j0) for the EOR on the Au electrode at peak potential (black curve) or 1.2 V vs. RHE (red curve) in different pH values of 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PBS) + 0.5 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Kwon et al.70 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) CVs for the EOR on the Au ND electrode in 1.0 M KOH with and without 1.0 M ethanol. (c) CVs for the EOR on the Au–dendrite-modified glassy carbon electrode in 1.0 M NaOH with and without 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Huang et al.73 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) CVs and (e) I–T measurements (0.65 V vs. RHE) for the EOR on Au0.5/rGO/Au0.5/rGO/CF, Au/rGO/CF and Au/CF electrodes in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Feng et al.72 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (f) Metal mass-normalized CVs for the EOR on the Rh H-NSs and commercial Pt/C in 1 M KOH + 1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Kang et al.75 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. 
Rh nanostructures are also considered another promising catalyst for the EOR since they can significantly reduce the overpotential. It has been reported that Rh could significantly enhance the EOR activity under acidic conditions.74 Chen et al. synthesized surface-cleaned hollow Rh nanospheres (Rh H-NSs) by removing the surfactant with Au to form Au-core@Rh-shell nanostructures (Au@Rh NSs).75 The Rh H-NSs showed excellent electro-oxidation activity of alcohols. However, compared with the electrochemical methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), the electrochemical activity of the EOR on Rh H-NSs (105 mA mg−1 at 0.6V vs. RHE) was inferior to that of commercial Pt/C (311 mA mg−1 at 0.6V vs. RHE) (Fig. 6f). This phenomenon was due to the removal of intermediates of the EOR from the Rh surface being more sluggish than that from commercial Pt nanoparticles.


Non-noble metal catalysts. 
Non-noble metals have been a promising group of alternatives for the EOR due to their low cost, electrochemical stability, poisoning tolerance, and high activity.76 Daryakenari et al. prepared a NiO layer attached to the surface of nanographitic flakes via a single-step electrophoretic deposition process.77 The fabricated catalyst layers showed a very low onset voltage (−0.2 V vs. Ag/AgCl) in the EOR. Hassen and co-workers produced Co3O4/carbon/substrate electrodes by controlling the catalyst mesocrystal morphology (i.e., corn tubercle pellets, banana clusters, layered lamina, or multiple cantilevered sheets).78 The unique morphologies equipped these Co3O4 catalysts with high densities of exposed active facets, various mesopores in the cage interior, window architectures, and vertical alignments to the substrate, which exhibited higher efficiency in the EOR compared with commercial Pt/C catalysts. Chen et al. found that electronegative fluorine could moderate the binding energy between the Fe sites (FeOOH) and reactants (OH− or C2H5O−), resulting in more optimized adsorption and enhanced charge densities on the Fe sites for the highly-efficient EOR.79
Ethanol is desired as a fuel for DFCs. Unfortunately, breaking the C–C bond in ethanol is one of the factors hindering the development of ethanol DFCs. Another challenge is that the EOR has a high pH environment for the electrolyte. Although the reaction pathway of the EOR is roughly the same under acidic and alkaline conditions, the design of catalysts is complex because different catalysts have different electrochemical activities under different catalytic conditions. So far, Pt- and Pd-based materials are still the best catalysts for the EOR under acidic and alkaline conditions, respectively. Although various methods of reducing Pt and Pd contents have been successfully applied to the design of efficient electrocatalysts, improving the atomic utilization rate of Pt- and Pd-based catalysts and reducing the toxic effect of intermediates will directly affect the commercial application value of ethanol DFCs. The development of non-noble metal catalysts is still in its infancy due to their low stability, although non-noble catalysts have shown high EOR electrochemical activity. Therefore, the main development direction of the EOR is still to seek efficient and stable electrocatalysts and study the reaction mechanism of the EOR by employing DFT calculations and in situ techniques.

Electrochemical glycerol oxidation reaction
Glycerol was discovered in 1799 by Carl Wilhelm Scheele from natural oils.80 During the past two decades, biodiesel production has emerged due to people's awareness of environmental protection and governments’ strong support for the green fuel industry. As a by-product during the transesterification process of biomass raw materials and biodiesel, glycerol is widely used in the medicine, food, textile, and other industries. However, because of its high cost and the lack of advanced biorefinery technology, glycerol consumption is not enough to offset the glycerol waste produced in biodiesel production (the percentage of the biodiesel industry associated with glycerol sources is 64%), which causes a severe waste of resources and an economic burden.81–83 Therefore, it is necessary to improve the biorefinery technology of glycerol to promote the balanced development of the global biodiesel production industry.84 The electrochemical glycerol oxidation reaction (GOR) provides a feasible way to resolve the difficulty. Glycerol is a typical trihydroxy alcohol compound, a suitable electrocatalytic substrate for electrophilic or nucleophilic attack.85 In addition, compared with the MOR and EOR, glycerol has gradually become an excellent candidate for DFCs due to its higher volumetric energy density, lower toxicity, and volatility.80,86,87 Unfortunately, the long chain of glycerol prevents crossover from the electrolyte membranes and is different from methanol and ethanol.88 Besides, glycerol can be partially oxidized to produce mesoxalate and generate 10 electrons without breaking the C–C bonds (eqn (2)) and can be completely oxidized to generate 14 electrons (eqn (3)).89,90 C3H8O3 + 12OH− → C3O52− + 10H2O + 10e−(2) C3H8O3 + 20OH− → 3CO32− + 14H2O + 14e−(3)
As early as 2016, Pagliaro's group first reported the 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO) mediated GOR.91 They found that glycerol selectively generated 1,3-dihydroxyacetone (DHA) at 1.1 V vs. RHE. Surprisingly, DHA was further oxidized to hydroxypyruvic acid (HPA) with the reaction time increased. Although the catalytic mechanism has not been studied in-depth, this research significantly paved the way for the selective GOR of high-value-added chemicals and fuels. Recently, by changing the applied potentials, reaction times, scanning rates, reaction media, and glycerol concentration, all kinds of high value-added chemicals (e.g., C3 products: DHA, glyceraldehyde (GALD), glyceric acid (GLA), tartronic acid (TA), mesoxalic acid (MOA); C2 products: HPA, oxalic acid (OA), glyoxylic acid (GOA), glycolic acid (GCA), lactic acid (LA); C1: products: formic acid (FA)) could be selectively produced (Scheme 2).
 Scheme 2  The main pathways of the glycerol oxidation reaction. 
Nevertheless, the slow oxidation rates of the GOR and low product selectivities limit its large-scale industrial application. Therefore, developing advanced electrode materials with high catalytic activity and stability has become the central task in overcoming these challenges at this stage. Accordingly, some representative electrocatalysts for the GOR are described systematically and comprehensively.

Pt-based catalysts. 
Pt-based catalysts have been recognized as the most active electrocatalysts for the GOR due to their high catalytic activity and good chemical stability.92–94 Despite the excellent catalytic performance and superior acid and alkali resistance, the large-scale application of Pt is still limited due to its high cost and rare properties.95–100 To solve the problems mentioned above, the strategies of reducing the size of Pt particles and the metallic Pt content,100–102 synthesizing optimized morphologies and structures,103–106 employing suitable support materials34,107–112 and alloying with other metals113–116 have been widely studied in recent years.
Carbon-supported Pt nanoparticle (Pt/C) catalyst as a commercial material has been commonly used in the GOR.93,117–119 One of the parameters that significantly influences the performance of Pt-based electrocatalysts is the metal content. Linares et al. studied the effect of different Pt weight percentages in commercial amorphous Pt/C for the GOR.120 With an increase of the Pt content, the onset potential and Pt surface poisoning were found to be decreased, while the current densities and the catalytic activity increased. However, when the Pt percentage increased to 60%, the glycerol crossover effect significantly increased owing to the reduced thickness of the catalytic layer. Moreover, only a few oxidized products (e.g., TA, GLA, OA, GOA, MOA) were found, which were not beneficial for the accumulation of GOR products. Therefore, keeping a balance between metal percentage and catalytic activity is essential for the design of an efficient Pt-based electrocatalyst toward the GOR.
As mentioned above, glycerol can be completely oxidized to CO2 accompanied by the generation of 14 electrons. However, breaking the C–C bonds in glycerol is still a considerable challenge for the industrialization of glycerol DFCs. In addition, as the main poisoning intermediates, the adsorption of CO on the surface of the Pt electrode will reduce the catalytic activities and affect the product selectivities. It is worth noting that some soluble intermediates generated in the first step of the GOR (e.g., DHA, GALD) are high-value-added chemicals. Therefore, it is necessary to understand the mechanism of distinct selectivities toward different products and the formation of different intermediates of the GOR at the atomic level. In this regard, the combination of experimental and computational studies provides a feasible way. An accurate computational study is of guiding significance for elaborating reaction mechanisms and the design of excellent catalysts. Koper et al. investigated the GOR at Pt (111) and Pt (100) electrodes under acidic conditions.121 They found that the selectivity of the GOR differed by the arrangement of the crystal plane, with DHA, GALD, and GCA being the products on Pt (111) and GALD being the only product on Pt (100). The authors believed that the difference in selectivity of the GOR was owing to the slightly different binding modes of dehydrogenated glycerol onto the two different surfaces. Therefore, adjusting the exposed planes of the electrocatalysts is a feasible way to improve the reaction activities and the selectivities of the desired products.
Although Pt-based electrocatalysts have excellent activities and selectivities for the GOR, their inferior stability in acidic electrolytes with high overpotentials remains a challenge. Therefore, it is an effective strategy to improve the stability of Pt-based catalysts by modifying the metal surfaces at the atomic level or designing new classes of catalysts using advanced synthesis techniques. Kim's team used the atomic layer deposition (ALD) technique to coat the atomically thin TiO2 layer (ca. 2 nm) onto Pt/C (ALD (TiO2)-Pt/C).94 After being heat-treated at 150 °C under a N2 atmosphere, the ALD (TiO2)-Pt/C (150 HT) catalyst showed a reaction rate (53.1 μmol gPt−1 s−1) and turnover frequency (TOF) (0.027 s−1), with ultra-stable catalytic GOR performance after a CV stability test of 1200 cycles, that were 2.8 and 3 times higher than those of Pt/C. The researchers considered that the optimized catalytic performance was caused by the synergistic effects between Pt nanoparticles and ALD-coated TiO2, which could generate new Pt–O–Ti bonds and change the physicochemical properties of Pt, and thus, more oxidized chemicals such as GLA (29.3%) and GCA (23.5%) were generated. In addition, this research team also utilized ALD technology to load the SnO2 layer onto the surface of carbon-supported Pt nanoparticles (Pt/C),122 which was also suitable for the growth of Au123 and Ni124 layers, and then significantly facilitated the electrocatalytic activity of the GOR. Therefore, the development of an efficient methodology for catalyst design can adjust the geometric and electron structure of metal nanoparticle catalysts at the atomic level, which improves the catalytic activities, product selectivities, and stability of the GOR.
Reducing the sizes of metal particles can significantly increase the number of exposed active sites, which can therefore effectively improve the activities of the GOR. The change of the surface atomic structure and the introduction of surface defects synergistically increase the number of unsaturated metal atoms on the surface of catalysts, therefore improving the catalytic activity. Accordingly, Wang et al. synthesized amorphous ultra-dispersed Pt clusters supported on nitrogen functionalized carbon (AU-Pt/PMC (1,10-phenylline modified carbon)) via a severe etching process for the GOR.125 AU-Pt/PMC possessed ultra-small Pt clusters (0.36 nm) and a very low Pt loading (5.6 wt%) with an amorphous structure. Due to the unique amorphous ultra-dispersed structure, the superimposed effect of Pt clusters and strong metal–support interactions (SMSI), the activity (peak current is 1.02 A mgPt−1) and stability (the current after 3000 s is 0.073 A mgPt−1) of AU-Pt/PMC for the GOR were 5.1 and 24.3 times higher than those of commercial Pt/C. By reducing the sizes of Pt particles and improving the surface area, AU-Pt/PMC successfully solved the contradiction between catalyst cost and performance effectively. It was noteworthy that the support material PMC provided a high content of N, which could immobilize the ultra-small Pt clusters and enhance the catalytic activity of Pt clusters through the SMSI. In addition, PMC had more structural defects and exposed edge planes (ID/IG = 1.29), which synergistically increased the specific surface area and introduced anchorage sites to stabilize Pt clusters effectively.
Various promising support materials have been developed, such as carbon (e.g., carbon nanowires, carbon black, carbon nanofoam, carbon fibers (graphite fiber), carbon nanospheres, carbon nanotubes, honeycomb-like carbon, bamboo-like carbon (BCNTs), multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT),126 single-walled carbon nanohorns (SWCNHs),127 diamond-like carbon, graphene), conductive polymers (e.g., polyaniline (PANI),102 poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiphene) (PEDOT),128 poly(phthalazinone ether ketone) (PPEK-SH)129), metal oxides (e.g., CeO2,130 MnOx,131 IrOx132), mesoporous silica, etc., which were widely used as supports for metals and metal alloys. For example, Lee and co-workers prepared highly-dispersed Pt nanoclusters on microporous three-dimensional (3D) graphene-like carbon (3D-GLC) for the GOR, which had a high surface area (ca. 2910 m2 g−1), by zeolite template-based carbon synthesis and subsequent Pt impregnation methods.93 The successful synthesis of 3D graphene-like carbon material with a highly ordered microporous structure not only solved the problem of the specific surface area being too small (less than 300 m2 g−1) for commercial Pt/C but also overcame the restacking problem of the two-dimensional (2D) graphene support. In addition, Pt/3D-GLC greatly improved the activity and selectivity of the GOR, with a high TOF (31.99 h−1) and glycerol conversion efficiency (7.7%); these were 2.9 and 3.3 times higher than those of Pt/C, respectively. Meanwhile, the selectivity of GLA was greatly improved to 42.7%.
The doping of heteroatoms (i.e., N, S, P) endows the functionalized carbon supports with unique surface properties and electronic characteristics, improving the dispersion and electronic structure of the loaded metals.133–135 Various N-doped carbon materials have been extensively studied. However, since N-doped carbon materials are a complex system involving a variety of N-containing functional groups, different N sites (electron donors or electron acceptors) can electronically interact with metal NPs in opposite directions making the exact catalysis mechanism over them hard to understand.136–138 However S-doping can change the surface structure and electronic properties of carbon materials, improve the SMSI and alter the adsorption and desorption behavior of reactants and intermediates; this has become a hot research topic in recent years.135,139–141 Ning et al. recently reported a simple method to load Pt nanoparticles (NPs) onto S-doped carbon nanotubes (SCNTs) and further investigated the interactions between Pt NPs and SCNTs.112 The electrocatalytic activity of Pt NPs/SCNTs was better than that of Pt NPs/CNTs (Fig. 7a–c) since the doping of elemental S in a thiophene-like structure (C–S–C) could activate the neighboring C atoms, which effectively improved the interactions between Pt NPs and activated C. This structure had a strong ability to remove the poisonous intermediate CO. The formed C–S–C bond had a synergistic effect with the neighboring Pt–C, which promoted the adsorption and activation of the reactants. Product analysis showed that OA, TA, GLA, GOA, and FA could be obtained from Pt/SCNTs prepared under different conditions (i.e., different amounts of sulfur doping (thiourea: 50 mg, 100 mg, and 200 mg), different reduction methods (H2 reduction method, ethylene glycol (EG) reduction method, NaBH4 reduction method)) at different potentials (Fig. 7d–f). The selectivity of GLA (>80%) was much higher than that of other products. However, as the potential increased, GLA was further oxidized to TA, GOA, FA, and even carbonate (CO32−). It is seen that the combination of catalyst support materials and metal nanoparticles has a significant influence on improving the catalytic performance. Therefore, selecting suitable support materials is conducive to enhancing the SMSI and preparing highly-efficient catalysts.
 Fig. 7  CVs for the GOR on Pt electrodes (a) with different carbon supports and (b) synthesis methods. (c) I–T measurements for the GOR on different Pt electrodes at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M formic acid + 0.5 M H2SO4. Product distributions from the GOR under different applied potentials on (d) Pt/CNT (H2), (e) Pt/SCNT (200-H2), and (f) Pt/SCNT (100-EG) catalysts in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol after 8 h I–T tests. Reproduced with permission from Ning et al.112 Copyright 2019 ENGLAND. Note: “black” represents “OA”; “orange” represents “TA”; “pink” represents “GLA”; “blue” represents “GOA”; “green” represents “FA”. 
Recent studies showed that bimetallic nanoparticles exhibited strong electrocatalytic activity,142,143 and could be prepared by controlling the shape or adjusting the size and compositions,139,140,144,145 such as bimetallic alloys, trimetallic alloys, jagged structures, core–shell structures, hollow structures, ultra-small nanoparticles and so on.146 When compared with Pt, Pd can effectively reduce the cost of catalysts. Moreover, owing to their similar face-centered cubic structures and extremely high lattice matching (99.23%), Pd and Pt are favorable for synthesizing bimetallic alloys.147–149 Furthermore, due to the high catalytic activities and low corrosion of Pd, the combination of Pd and Pt can significantly improve the catalytic performance by using the synergistic effects between these two metals.116,150 Wang et al. constructed a bimetallic PdPt nanowire network (PdPt NNW) for the GOR by simply mixing H2PtCl6 and Na2PdCl4 in an aqueous solution.146,151,152Fig. 8a shows CV images of PdPt NNW with different ratios of Pd and Pt and commercial Pt/C; these results demonstrates that the Pd55Pt30 NNW had the highest electrocatalytic activity (peak current 0.046 A cm−2), higher than that of Pt/C (0.023 A cm−2). In addition, the stability of the PdPt NNW (Fig. 8b) was superior to that of commercial Pt/C (Fig. 8c). The Pd55Pt30 NNW maintained a similar catalytic activity after current–time measurements (I–T), while the activity of Pt/C significantly decreased. A variety of excellent PtPd bimetallic electrocatalysts have been successfully applied in the GOR, such as Pt encapsulated Pd nanocubes (Pt@Pd NCs),153 rGO supported PtPd alloyed core–shell nanodendrites (PtPd ACSNDs/rGO), etc.116 To reduce the cost and improve the durability of Pt-based catalysts, some research groups have considered alloying Au with Pt.114,149 Although the electrocatalytic activities of Au are far inferior to that of Pt, the Au electrode exhibits a higher peak intensity than Pt in some alkaline solutions.154 Therefore, the modification of Pt with Au may result in the formation of a Pt–Au bimetallic structure to improve the electrochemical performance and poisoning resistance of Pt. For example, Dai and colleagues prepared AuPt bimetallic nanoparticles (AuPt NPs) with a controlled surface composition (molar percentage) for the GOR. Fig. 8d shows the results of linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) for the GOR on different AuPt nanoparticles, Pt, and Au electrodes. It was found that AuPt bimetallic nanoparticles exhibited a lower onset potential (lower than 0.6 V vs. RHE) than Au electrodes. Most importantly, different from the GOR products previously reported using Au or Pt electrodes, AuPt NPs reached a high LA selectivity (>70%) (Fig. 8e), and AuPt NPs (15% Ptsurf) had the highest LA selectivity (73%) at 0.45 V vs. RHE (Fig. 8f).114
 Fig. 8  (a) CVs for GOR on the PdPt NNW and commercial Pt/C. (b) CVs for GOR on (b) Pd55Pt30 NNW and (c) Pt/C before and after I–T tests. Reproduced with permission from Hong et al.146 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) LSVs for GOR on different AuPt nanoparticles and Au, Pt nanoparticles. The product distribution of GOR under different applied potentials (e) and different surface compositions (f) on AuPt. Reproduced with permission from Dai et al.114 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Product distribution under different applied potentials on Pt/C (g) and PtAg (h). (i) Effects of glycerol concentration with 0.5 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from Zhou et al.155 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Note: “steel blue” represents “TA”; “navy” represents “OA”; “green” represents “GLA”; “purple” represents “GCA”; “light sky blue” represents “AA”; “red” represents “FA”; “orange” represents “LA”; “yellow” represents “GOA”; “magenta” represents “GALD”; “black” represents “DHA”. 
Apart from the above-mentioned noble metals, Ag and Pt have similar lattice constants, which is beneficial for synthesizing AgPt alloys. The introduction of Ag can change the lattice of Pt, thus improving the catalytic activity and selectivity of the GOR.131,155 However, because of the limited activity of Ag for the GOR, the abundant Ag sites on the Pt surface may impede the catalytic activity. Therefore, how to improve the activities and selectivities of Pt-based bimetallic electrocatalysts while avoiding blockage of the doping of another metal has become one of the problems to be solved in the design of efficient Pt alloy electrocatalysts. Zhou and colleagues successfully fabricated 3D porous Pt@Ag skeletons with a large surface area and abundant unsaturated coordinated Pt atoms by the galvanic replacement reaction with an acid-etching procedure.155 The Pt@Ag skeletons consisting of ultrathin frames and abundant Pt (111) facets significantly enhanced the utilization efficiency of Pt and provided a more efficient Pt active site for the GOR (peak current density 7.57 mA cm−2).121Fig. 8g and h show the product distribution of Pt/C and Pt@Ag. It was found that the secondary alcohol oxidation pathway (Scheme 2) on the Pt@Ag electrode was extensively promoted due to the abundant Pt (111) facets. The selectivity of DHA was 82.6% at 0.7 V vs. RHE, which was 1.64 times that of Pt/C. Additional studies found that the concentration of glycerol affected the selectivity of the GOR (Fig. 8i). A low concentration of glycerol would promote the formation of GALD. The selectivity of GALD was highest (92.6%) when the concentration of glycerol was 0.05 M. However, the selectivity of DHA was promoted and then inhibited with an increase in glycerol concentration, reaching a peak value (82.6%) in 0.5 M glycerol. Alloying Pt with non-noble metals is also considered to be an effective strategy to effectively improve the electrocatalytic activity since they effectively reduce the cost of catalysts and provide a strong synergistic effect and well-modified electronic structure.115,121,156–163 By adjusting the dosage of citric acid, ascorbic acid, and glucose, Gao et al. prepared PtNi catalysts with ultrathin nanowires (UNWs), sinuous nanowires (SNWs), and ultrashort nanorods (UNRs) for the GOR.157 In contrast, PtNi SNWs showed excellent electrocatalytic activity in the GOR, in which the mass activity (4250 mA mg−1) and specific activity (7.3 mA cm−2) were 4.3 times and 3.9 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C. In addition, this research group also prepared a series of ultrathin Pt–Co nanowires (PtCo NWs) with different metal ratios and obtained excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability during the GOR.115
In recent years, p-block metal promoters such as Bi, Sb, Sn, and Pb have been studied extensively because of their positive effect on the adsorption ability when modified on the Pt electrode surface.107,162,164–168 Koper's group conducted a great deal of work on Bi-modified Pt electrodes.164,165 They found that the presence of Bi on the Pt (111) electrode improved the reaction activity and selectivity for DHA generation. In contrast, the presence of Bi on the Pt (100) electrode decreased the reaction activity for the formation of GALD. Bi could decrease the active site densities, preventing the adsorption of poisoning intermediates such as CO. The selectivity and FE of DHA are nearly 100% at an arbitrary potential between 0.5 V vs. the normal hydrogen electrode (NHE) and 0.6 V vs. NHE, which is the highest selectivity for DHA formation so far. Souza et al. studied the effects of Bi on Pt alloys in alkaline solution, which were significantly different from the results in acid media.166 In an alkaline medium, GLA was the main product, while DHA was produced in a negligible amount. The researchers suggested that adatoms hindered the formation of CO and other unknown intermediates by suppressing the pathways of C–C bond breaking, thereby increasing the yield of GLA. In addition, they found that Pb also had a similar effect to that of Bi, which could change the electron configuration at the catalyst surface and generate some positively charged species to stabilize the negatively charged or uncharged reaction intermediates, thus improving the activity of the GOR.162
In recent years, a number of trimetallic catalysts have attracted increasing attention because the combination of these elements can improve the catalytic activity and enhance the product selectivity of the GOR.113,169–176 Zhou et al. prepared trimetallic PtAu@Ag nanoparticles with different Pt/Au ratios using Ag nanoparticles as sacrificial seeds through a seed-mediated growth process, which achieved a high GOR activity (peak intensity was 25.5 mA mg−1, 42 and 36 times higher than those for Pt/C and Au/C) in alkaline solutions.169 In addition, they found that different products could be obtained by adjusting the atomic ratios and applied potentials, and thereby the catalyst assisted glycerol in producing more C3 products. By controlling the nucleation phase, Yang and colleagues synthesized highly-uniform sub-10 nm Pd–Cu–Pt twin icosahedrons. Due to the electronic effect, synergistic effect, geometric effect, and abundant surface active sites originating from the formation of near-surface alloy and special icosahedral shape, the catalyst exhibited excellent activity in the GOR.170 They considered that the phenomenon was attributed to Pd–Cu–Pt icosahedrons, which had a higher C–C bond breaking ability toward glycerol, thereby making glycerol have a higher energy conversion efficiency.


Pd-, Au- and Ag-based catalysts. 
The electrocatalytic activity of Pd can be comparable to that of Pt, and thereby many research teams have devoted themselves to studying Pd-based catalysts, aiming to solve the economic problems caused by industrial Pt/C.177 Since the electrocatalytic performance of Pd-based catalysts is strongly dependent on their morphology and composition,178 controlling the shape of catalysts has recently attracted extensive attention. Using a 3D-printed electrolytic cell, Guima et al. synthesized Pd nanocubes with a size of 15–40 nm through an ascorbic acid method. High selectivity of TA (99%) was achieved at an applied potential of 0.87 V vs. RHE in alkaline electrolytes for a long reaction time. The existence of the (100) surface on Pd nanocubes led to the glycerol → GLAD → GLA → TA conversion pathway (Scheme 2).179 Au is another commonly used noble metal electrode for the GOR due to its high resistance to the poisoning effect of the reaction intermediate CO. As early as 1984, Kahyaoglu et al. found that Au had a catalytic effect on the GOR,180 in which glycerol could adsorb on the electrode surface and then react with adsorbed OHad. The higher anode potential of Au oxidation could promote the catalytic activity of Au when compared to the Pt electrode in some alkaline solutions.70,130,181 Since OH− in solution makes it challenging to provide abundant protons, there is almost no activity in acidic media.182 Most GORs have taken place on Au under alkaline conditions. Jiang's group synthesized 1.5 nm CeO2 nanoclusters through sequential polyelectrolyte functionalization and microwave-assisted self-assembly using 1-pyrenecarboxylic acid (PC) functionalized multi-walled carbon nanotubes (PC-MWNTs) as the support. Then the support was used to load Au NPs that were applied in the GOR, which achieved a peak current density (59.2 mA cm−2) 28 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C.130 It was the first time that the catalytic activity of the Au electrode exceeded that of Pt. The high electrocatalytic activity was mainly due to the relatively small size of the synthesized CeO2 nanoclusters, which could reduce the particle size of the noble metal catalyst and promote its dispersion, thus avoiding aggregation and improving its electrocatalytic activity.183,184 Ag is commonly used as an essential component of alloys for exploring the GOR; these can exhibit excellent catalytic potential due to the synergistic effects between Ag and other metal nanoparticles. The effects of pH and glycerol concentrations in alkaline media on the GOR with Ag electrodes were thoroughly studied by Santiago's group.185 They found that the activity of the GOR was not affected by the varying concentrations of glycerol when the potentials were higher than 1.125 V vs. RHE. However, the activity was highly dependent on pH, of which the oxidation currents constantly increased when the pH shifted from 11 to 14. In addition, active species were detected on the surface of the Ag electrode, which enhanced the yields of GLA, GCA, and FA when reacted with adsorbed OHad.
Some non-Pt metal bimetallic nanoparticles have become research hotspots in recent years.186–198 Benipal et al. reported that PdAg alloy catalysts played dual roles in the catalytic reaction. In detail, Pd can promote the deprotonation of alcohol in a basic electrolyte, while Ag can facilitate aldehyde intermediate oxidation and the cleavage of C–C bonds.199 Furthermore, they prepared PdAg bimetallic nanoparticles supported on carbon nanotubes (PdAg/CNT) and studied their GOR behaviors. By introducing different Pd and Ag ratios of PdAg/CNT, they found that the open-circuit voltage (OCP) of PdAg/CNT was 0.83 V, which was 30 mV higher than that of PdAg3/CNT and 70 mV higher than that for Pd/CNT. Moreover, the peak power density was 76.5 mW cm−2, 9.1% higher than that of PdAg3/CNT. They believed that this was because the active sites of the Pd catalyst could be covered by Ag with increasing Ag contents, thereby resulting in inferior catalytic activity. In addition, they found that the selectivities of C2 species (i.e., OA and GCA) on PdAg/CNT were enhanced as the Ag content increased, suggesting that Ag contributed to deeper oxidation and C–C bond cleavage.186 To further investigate the electrocatalytic oxidation activity of glycerol, MOA, TA, LA, OA, and GCA using Pd/CNT, PdAg/CNT, PdAg3/CNT, Ag/CNT, CV experiments were conducted at 60 °C, and the results are shown in Fig. 9. The onset of the GOR began at a relatively lower potential (−0.47 V vs. Hg/HgO reference electrode (MMO)) on PdAg/CNT than those on Pd/CNT and Ag/CNT (Fig. 9a), which indicated the critical synergistic effect of Pd and Ag on alcohol group oxidation. Similarly, in the low potential range (−0.22 V vs. MMO), the current density of PdAg/CNT was significantly higher than those of Pd/CNT and Ag/CNT catalysts. The result was consistent with that of GCA electro-oxidation (Fig. 9f), in which PdAg showed the lowest potential (−0.56 V vs. MMO). In contrast, OA containing two carboxylic acid groups was inactive in the reaction (Fig. 9e), indicating that it was an end chemical product because the carboxylic acid group could not be further oxidized. Interestingly, TA and LA were considerably stable over the sweep potential range for these four catalysts (Fig. 9c and d). Although both contained alcohol groups, they could be protected by two adjacent inert carboxyl or methyl groups due to steric effects in the alcohol group. Therefore, Pd active sites had a negligible effect on the deprotonation of TA and LA hydroxyl groups. Compared with other Pd-containing catalysts, MOA was more stable on Ag catalysts with no apparent change in current density below −0.22 V vs. MMO (Fig. 9b). The further oxidation of MOA results in C–C bond cleavage, which indicates that Ag itself hardly facilitates cleavage of the C–C bond, mainly due to the synergistic effect of Ag and Pd. It was slightly different from Santiago's study. Although there is no doubt that Ag has catalytic activity for the GOR, the role of the active site on Ag still needs to be further investigated.
 Fig. 9  CVs for GOR on Pd/CNT, PdAg/CNT, PdAg3/CNT and Ag/CNT in 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M (a) GLA, (b) MOA, (c) TA, (d) LA, (e) OA, and (f) GCA. Reproduced with permission from Qi et al.199 Copyright 2016 Elsevier. 
At present, most electrode materials require the addition of binders to coat the catalysts on the support and further stabilize them in the electrolyte; this aims to prevent the catalysts from aggregating, separating, and instability, thus maintaining the catalytic activity.200 However, abundant active sites are embedded without catalytic performance, resulting in relatively low efficiency. In contrast, self-supported electrocatalysts avoid active site clogging without introducing polymer binders or additives. In addition, the superior self-supporting structure also provides a rapid electron transfer ability, ensuring adequate electrolyte access to the active site and providing a large electrochemical surface area. Therefore, the preparation of highly efficient self-supported electrocatalysts is of great significance in improving the catalytic activities and selectivities for the GOR. Boukil and colleagues synthesized self-supported Ag–Au nanocages directly grown on gas diffusion electrodes (GDE@AgAu). Due to its nanoporous and nanoalloy properties, the electrocatalytic performance of the GDE@AgAu electrode was significantly improved with an onset potential of below 0.5 V vs. RHE and a current density of 290 mA cm−2. It was at least an order of magnitude larger than commercial Au/C catalysts and other reported mono- and multi-metallic electrocatalysts. The catalyst had an excellent electrocatalytic activity and achieved high selectivity of FA (66%) and GCA (32%) production.187 Efficient self-supported electrocatalysts have shown excellent electrocatalytic activity and selectivity of the GOR. Therefore, it is of great significance to develop more efficient self-supported materials for the development of the GOR.
The composite catalysts formed by non-Pt noble metals and transition metals are also considered advanced materials, which not only reduced the cost of improving the utilization efficiency of noble metals but also effectively adjusted the morphology and activity of catalysts.153,177,201–204 By introducing hexadecyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) into the reaction system, Xu et al. successfully prepared binary Pd2Pb alloy nanocubes (Pd2Pb NCs) with outstanding properties and synergistic effects, which showed excellent catalytic activity and stability in the GOR.205 Metal oxides also act as a kind of promising catalyst component, which has great potential for electron injection/extraction at the electrodes.206–208 Kang et al. prepared a phosphorus and nickel oxide composite catalyst (Pd–NiOx–P/C) for the GOR in an alkaline medium. The addition of P and NiOx greatly improved the activity of the Pd-based catalyst. They believed that electrons could transfer from low electronegative P and NiOx to Pd, thus modifying the electronic structure of Pd. Moreover, the introduction of P and NiOx could minimize the size of the nanoparticles, resulting in a larger electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the catalyst. In addition, the co-existence of P and NiOx on Pd nanoparticles could limit the oxidation of Pd and thus improve the stability of the catalyst.207


Non-noble metal catalysts. 
Noble metals and their alloys have been widely used as electrocatalysts for the GOR. However, their high cost and rapid poisoning rate with in situ generated intermediates such as CO can hinder their large-scale practical application. Therefore, developing promising catalysts with optimized activity and stability of the GOR is urgently required.70 Non-noble metal-based electrocatalysts, which have lower costs, stable electrocatalytic activity, and superior CO poisoning tolerance, provide a feasible way to solve the above problems. Therefore, the design of non-noble metal catalysts has been widely studied.209,210
Ni-based electrocatalysts are attractive candidates for the GOR due to their relatively high electrocatalytic activity, toxicity resistance, and long-term stability in alkaline solutions.208,210–215 Baranova and Houache studied many Ni-based electrode materials for the GOR in recent years. In 2018, they investigated the GOR on polycrystalline Ni electrodes in alkaline media after sinusoidal-wave treatment.211 They found additional grooves and pits on the Ni surface after sinusoidal-wave treatment, which improved access of glycerol molecules in the electrolyte to the active site of the Ni electrode surface. As observed in Fig. 10a, the treated Ni electrode significantly improved the current density of the GOR. In addition, compared with the untreated Ni electrode, the onset potential (0.44 V vs. MMO) of the GOR decreased by 45 mV. To further study the stabilities of the untreated and treated Ni electrodes, the I–T test was performed at 0.52 V vs. MMO (Fig. 10b). The current density on both electrodes decreased slightly within 10 min before reaching the stable state. After reaching the stable state, the current density obtained at the treated Ni electrode (1.0 mA cm−2) was almost 9 times higher than that of the untreated electrode, which meant that the activities and stabilities of the GOR were significantly improved. Unfortunately, there is no apparent difference in product selectivities between the treated and untreated Ni electrode surfaces. They also synthesized carbon-supported NixM1−x (M = Bi, Pd, and Au) with different atomic ratios (M atomic ratios ≤20%) by the heatless co-reduction method.216 The LSV curves of various NixM1−x/C and Ni/C catalysts are shown in Fig. 10c. It was found that the onset potential of three bimetallic NixM1−x/C materials was lower than that of Ni/C. It is noteworthy that the current density of the Ni90M10/C electrocatalyst displayed the highest current density of 46 mA cm−2 and the lowest onset potential of 0.12 V vs. MMO. In situ infrared spectroscopy (FTIRS) and electrochemical measurements showed that all the catalysts produced FA. The GOR led to 100% selectivity for FA after 1 h electrolysis and 100% conversion of glycerol at 1.55 V vs. Ag/AgCl after 24 h. Interestingly, if the GOR was conducted in a flow electrolyzer, Ag NPs were used as a catalyst for the CO2 reduction reactions (CO2RRs) at the cathode. Running the co-electrolysis process in the flow electrolyzer showed that all NixM1−x bimetallic catalysts were active for the GOR and exhibited a low onset potential of the CO2RR. The Ni0.9Au0.1/C catalyst achieved the highest partial CO current density of 0.6 mA cm−2 at −1.5 V vs. Ag/AgCl, as shown in Fig. 10d. The design of efficient and low-energy input GOR anode materials combined with emerging hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs), CO2RRs, or N2 reduction reactions (N2RRs) shows great potential for high-value-added fuels and chemical electrosynthesis, which provides a direction for the development of the GOR.217,218
 Fig. 10  (a) LSVs and (b) I–T measurements (0.52 V vs. MMO) for the GOR on the Ni electrode in 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol before and after electrochemical sinusoidal-wave treatment. Reproduced with permission from Houache et al.211 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) LSVs for the GOR on NixM1−x/C (M = Pd, Au, and Bi) catalysts in N2-purged 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol. (d) The co-electrolysis performance of NixPd1−x/C in 2.0 M KOH + 2.0 M glycerol. Reproduced with permission from Houache et al.216 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Bott-Neto et al. used [Ni(Salen)] complexes as the precursor and uniformly encapsulated Ni(OH)2 nanoparticles with an average size of 2.4 nm in a polymer film to prepare catalysts with excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability for the GOR.212In situ FTIRS confirmed that the GOR began with the formation of the β-NiOOH phase and the oxidation products (mainly GLA, FA, and some free CO32−) were similar to those identified on Ni electrodes. The enhanced catalytic performance was caused by the cyclic oxidation of β-Ni(OH)2, which generated the β-NiOOH species followed by charge transfer to the alcohols, thereby regenerating β-Ni(OH)2.
A Co-based catalyst is also efficient for the GOR. Using a nanometer-sized material formed from dicobalt octacarbonyl and 1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane (Co-DPPE) as electrocatalysts, Lam and colleagues successfully achieved the ideal selectivity of the main product (e.g., LA and GLA) under different reaction conditions. Under atmospheric pressure, LA could be prepared below 60 °C with a low current density (1.8 mA cm−2), while GLA could be prepared at room temperature at a higher current density (8.8 mA cm−2). Unfortunately, Co-DPPE was less stable after a long reaction time.219 Han et al. investigated a series of Co-based spinel oxides (MCo2O4, M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn) as electrocatalysts for the GOR. Their catalytic activities in alkaline solution followed the sequence of CuCo2O4 > NiCo2O4 > CoCo2O4 > FeCo2O4 > ZnCo2O4 > MnCo2O4 (Fig. 11a). Then the CuCo2O4 catalyst was directly immobilized on carbon fiber paper for the GOR. A high selectivity of 80.6% for FA and an overall FE of 89.1% toward all value-added products (e.g., GLA, GCA, and FA) were achieved with a high glycerol conversion of 79.7% at 1.30 V vs. RHE and pH 13 (Fig. 11b).220
 Fig. 11  (a) LSVs for the GOR on the MCo2O4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn) nanostructures grown on carbon fiber paper and bare carbon fiber paper in 0.1 M KOH with (solid lines) and without (dashed-dotted lines) 0.1 M glycerol. (b) Concentration profiles of glycerol and corresponding oxidation products of the GOR on CuCo2O4 with increasing charge at 1.30 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol. Reproduced with permission from Han et al.220 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. LSVs for both the GOR and OER at pH = 13 (c) and pH = 9 (e). Product selectivity of the GOR at 1.69 V vs. RHE at pH = 13 (d) and 2.06 V vs. RHE at pH = 9 (f). Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.221 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. Note: “red” represents “DHA”; “green” represents “GCA”; “yellow” represents “FA”; “black solid line” represents “yield of DHA”. 
Liu et al. firstly used CuO as an electrocatalyst for the GOR. They found that CuO had a high tendency to secondary alcohol oxidation (Scheme 2) under a high current density (3 mA cm−2) (Fig. 11e), which could achieve a high DHA selectivity (∼60%) with 2.06 V vs. RHE at pH = 9 for 3 h GOR (Fig. 11f). Although it was lower than the DHA selectivity obtained on PtBi/C (∼100%), the current density was an order of magnitude higher than that of PtBi/C.221 The GOR showed better kinetics at pH = 13 (Fig. 11c), while DHA would spontaneously transform into GLAD without applied potentials. Therefore, under strongly alkaline conditions, the GOR usually occurred simultaneously for other C1 and C2 products derived from GLAD oxidation, which was not conducive to the production of the target product DHA. It can be seen from Fig. 11d that only a small amount of DHA was produced.
The GOR is a promising alternative for generating value-added chemicals that harvest electrical energy or hydrogen, depending on the electrochemical reactor configuration (fuel cell or electrolysis cell, respectively). Compared with other C1 (e.g., FA, methanol) and C2 (e.g., ethanol) molecules, the GOR has rarely been studied. This may be due to the sluggish kinetics, complex oxidation mechanisms, and various products, making the mechanistic studies difficult. Therefore, preparing efficient GOR electrocatalysts through advanced synthesis approaches has become the key to solving these problems. The Pt-based electrocatalyst is still the most outstanding catalyst in the GOR due to its high catalytic activity. Non-noble metals were also widely studied due to their low cost and high catalytic activity. Ni-, Co-, and Cu-based electrocatalysts have shown excellent catalytic performance in the GOR, although the relatively high overpotential and low product selectivity must still be overcome. In addition, suitable support materials significantly enhance the SMSI of metal nanoparticles and thus significantly improve the catalytic performance of the GOR. Therefore, selecting suitable support materials is of vital importance for the design of efficient electrocatalysts. Many metal alloys exhibited remarkable GOR activity and product selectivity, which might be due to the synergistic effects between different metals. However, there is no relatively precise mechanism to explain this phenomenon. Therefore, taking advantage of in situ techniques and DFT calculations to study catalytic mechanisms and optimize experimental conditions (e.g., electrolyte pH, temperature, glycerol concentration, applied potentials, or currents) is of significant importance for the GOR. In addition, the relatively low current density leads to a slower reaction rate. Due to product diversification, the FE of the target product is low, resulting in a large amount of energy loss, which hinders the industrial development of the GOR. Combining the GOR with the HER, CO2RR, and N2RR shows great potential for the electrosynthesis of value-added chemicals and fuels. Therefore, there is still a vast space for development in catalyst design, conversion efficiency, and cost of the GOR. However, a few studies reported the GOR combined with cathode reactions. At the same time, researchers mainly focus on electrochemical properties rather than the diversity of products and the selectivities of value-added chemicals. Because of this, we reviewed a variety of promising excellent catalysts in the field of the GOR in this section, providing readers with necessary references for aspects of the mechanism, synthesis methods, activity, selectivity, and product yield. Various novel GOR catalysts reported in recent years are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 Representative catalysts developed for GOR and their effect on product selectivity and conversion




Catalyst
Electrolyte

E
onset

Conversion (%)
Selectivity (%)
Ref.




Note: “—” represents “not available”.




TEMPO
0.05 M glycerol + 0.2 M NaHCO3
—
—
DHA (30), HPA (35)

91



40% Pt/C
1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
—
—
TA (70)

120



Pt (111)
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M HClO4
0.5 V vs. RHE
—
HPA (—)

121



Pt (100)
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M HClO4
0.6 V vs. RHE
—
GALD (—)

121



ALD (TiO2)-Pt/C (150 HT)
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4
—
12.7
GALD (39), GLA (29.3), GCA (23.5)

94



ALD(SnO2)-Pt/C (150 HT)
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4
0.56 V vs. SHE
8.6
GALD (42), GLA (53.4)

114



AU-Pt/PMC
0.5 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH
0.32 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—
—

125



Pt/3D-GLC
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4
1.14 V vs. NHE
7.7
GLA (42.7), GALD (56)

93



Pt/SCNTs(100-EG)
1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
—
—
GLA (∼85)

112



Pt/porous PANI
0.5 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4
—
—
—

102



PdPt NNW
0.1 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH
—
—
—

146



AuPt NPs
0.5 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
—
—
LA (>70)

114



3D porous Pt@Ag
1 M glycerol + 0.5 M KOH
0.51 V vs. RHE
—
DHA (82.6)

155



Bi–Pt/C
0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4
0.65 V vs. NHE
—
DHA (100)

164



PtxAuy@Ag
0.5 M glycerol + 0.5 M KOH
0.43–0.54 V vs. RHE
—
DHA (77.1)

169



Pd nanocube
0.2 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH
—
—
TA (99)

179



Pd dendrites/PEDOT
0.1 M + 1.0 M NaOH
—
—
—

128



Au/CeO2/PC-MWNT (MW)
1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
−0.43 V vs. SCE
—
—

130



PdAg/CNT
1 M glycerol + 4 M KOH
−0.39 V vs. MMO
55
OA (35.9), GCA (20.9), TA (26.4)

186



PdAg3/CNT
1 M glycerol + 4 M KOH
−0.44 V vs. MMO
33
OA (39.2), GCA (37.9), TA (13.7)

186



GDE@AgAu
0.1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
0.3 V vs. RHE
—
FA (66), GCA (32)

187



Pd–NiOx–P/C
0.5 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH
−0.48 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—
—

207



Ni/C
0.1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH
—
—
—

211



Co–DPPE
0.25 M glycerol + 0.5 M NaOH
—
—
LA (43)

219



CuO
0.1 M glycerol + 1 M Na2B4O7
1.2 V vs. RHE
—
DHA (60)

221






Electrochemical sorbitol oxidation reaction
Sorbitol is a typical representative of polyalcohols among the “10 + 4” kinds of BDPMs. It can be easily obtained from cellulose through acid-catalyzed hydrolysis followed by dehydration or reductive conversion.222 Over 500000 tons of sorbitol are produced by the chemical reduction of glucose per year. The commercial production of sorbitol is 200 million pounds in one year. It is widely used in the food, pharmaceutical, and cosmetic industries. Importantly, it has a wide range of applications in DFCs.223,224 However, it can be seen from the EOR and GOR mentioned above that the electrocatalytic oxidation of alcohols is very complex. The complexity of alcohol oxidation increases with the number of carbons in the molecule. As a typical hexahydric alcohol, an electrochemical sorbitol oxidation reaction (SOR) can theoretically transfer 26 electrons. In addition, just like any other alcohol, sorbitol is adsorbed on the electrocatalytic surface by dissociative adsorption involving the OH bonded to the C1 carbon. Because of an adsorptive process (mainly fuel chemisorption through a dehydrogenation process), an electron transfer process, and a desorption process, sorbitol is very difficult to oxidize to CO2 completely. Consequently, the formation of different products with longer chains usually occurs, affecting the performance of sorbitol DFCs. In fact, glucose is confirmed to be the first reaction intermediate for the SOR. Therefore, the SOR follows the well-reported glucose oxidation pathway to form glucono-δ-lactone and gluconic acid as byproducts.225,226 A reported reaction pathway of the SOR in an acidic medium is shown in Scheme 3, illustrating that glucose by-products dominate the reaction. In contrast, the formation of shorter-chain by-products (e.g., GOA and FA) and traces of lactone and CO can be detected.226 Moreover, compared with the EOR and GOR, the SOR has a lower current density and inferior energy conversion; these are not conducive to industrial application. Therefore, the preparation of efficient catalysts for the SOR can improve sorbitol adsorption through C1, thereby decreasing the overpotential, improving the current density, and promoting a route that favors the splitting of sorbitol into shorter-chain high value-added chemicals such as GOA and FA. Some advanced electrocatalysts for the SOR reported in recent years are introduced in the following sections.
 Scheme 3  The main pathways of the sorbitol oxidation reaction (SOR) in an acidic medium. 
As early as the 1990s, there have been many papers on the SOR using Pt-based and Au-based electrodes under acidic conditions.225,227–233 It was found from these studies that a low current density and poor energy conversion made sorbitol unsuitable for DFCs, so the development of SOR was stalled for nearly 20 years. However, the SOR has re-entered the public view due to the rapid development of nano-electrocatalysts and the urgent demand for DFCs. In 2014, Oyarce et al. used sorbitol and glucose as fuels in proton exchange membrane fuel cells with an anode of 0.9 mg cm−2 PtRu/C and a cathode of 0.3 mg cm−2 Pt/C.234 The authors found that the kinetics of the SOR was slower than that of the electrochemical glucose oxidation reaction. However, sorbitol DFCs showed higher performance at low temperatures than that of glucose DFCs due to sluggish catalyst poisoning. Notably, the mass-specific peak power density of sorbitol DFCs was 3.2 mW mg−1 at 65 °C, an order of magnitude larger than previously reported glucose DFCs. Unfortunately, sorbitol and glucose crossover poisoning of Pt/C cathodes or adsorbed intermediates (e.g., CO and lactone) and other oxidation products (e.g., GOA and FA) inactivate the PtRu catalyst, and the performance of both DFCs decrease significantly after a longer reaction.
Due to the poor SOR activity and stability on Pt electrodes,235 the SOR requires the development of highly active Pt-free materials for the value-added utilization of sorbitol as a fuel for electrochemical energy conversion systems. Au-based electrocatalysts exhibit activity for alcohol oxidation (e.g., ethanol and 2-propanol) and are considered the best catalysts for glucose electro-oxidation (first reaction intermediate) in alkaline media. Using Au as a primary electrocatalyst can ensure that the reaction reaches a higher oxidation state and avoids the oxidation limitations of glucose. In 2019, Torres-Pacheco et al. investigated the activities of the SOR on Pd/C, Au/C, and Au–Pd alloy nanomaterials at room temperature.226 As shown in Fig. 12a, the current density of Pd/C was almost 3.5 times higher than that of commercial Pt/C, which might contribute to greater electron transfer in sorbitol molecules. The activity of Au/C was similar to that of Pt/C, while the current density of Au–Pd/C was 2 times that of Pt/C at a lower overpotential (60 mV) (Fig. 12b); this may contribute to its ability to enable the dissociation–adsorption of polyalcohols. In addition, the onset potential of Au–Pd/C was the lowest, which indicated that the Au–Pd alloys could enhance the oxidation of alcohols in contrast with their monometallic counterparts. However, one drawback of using Au as a monometallic electrocatalyst was the higher overpotential values (Fig. 12c).236,237 Therefore, adding a second metal to modify the electronic properties and adsorption process can achieve greater electron transfer to improve the reaction performance and product generation. It may explain the efficient activity of Au–Pd alloy nanomaterials.223 Then, the same research group studied the effect of AuM (M = Ag, Pt, Pd) bimetallic nanoparticles on the SOR under alkaline conditions.238 As seen from Fig. 12c, the onset potential of AuPt/C was the lowest (−0.36 V vs. NHE), which was 120 mV lower than that of Au/C. In addition, AuPd/C showed the highest current density (43.65 mA mg−1) at 0.14 V vs. NHE. The two peaks correspond to the SOR and the further oxidation of intermediates such as glucose or the re-oxidation of sorbitol. The effect of sorbitol concentration on the SOR was further studied. From Fig. 12d, it can be seen that AuPd/C showed the highest current density over almost all concentration ranges tested. In addition, all catalysts exhibited the highest performance at 0.1 M sorbitol, and the current density decreased dramatically as the sorbitol concentration increased. To test the stability of AuM bimetallic nanoparticles, the authors conducted CV experiments in 0.1 M sorbitol and 0.3 M KOH electrolyte (Fig. 12e). The Au electrodes had the lowest stability, which remained at 53% of the initial current after 500 cycles. The stability of AuM significantly improved after the addition of the second metal, retaining 71–73% of the initial current after 500 cycles. Fig. 12f shows the I–T curves of all catalysts. It was found that AuPd/C provided more current density over the catalytic process, 8.5, 3.4, and 1.7 times higher than that of Au/C, AuAg/C, and AuPt/C, respectively.
 Fig. 12  CVs for the SOR on (a) Pt/C and Pd/C, and (b) Au–Pd/C and Pt/C in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol. Reproduced with permission from Torres-Pacheco et al.226 Copyright 2019 Elsevier BV. (c) CVs for the SOR on Au/C, AuAg/C, AuPt/C, and AuPd/C in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol. (d) Plot of the effect of sorbitol concentration on current density at 0.14 V vs. NHE. I Loss of current density over 500 cycles, using cycle 2 as the starting point (jpi/jp2). (f) I–T measurements for the SOR at 0.14 V vs. NHE in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol for 60 min. Reproduced with permission from Torres et al.238 Copyright 2020 Elsevier BV. 
A large number of SOR studies on Pt and Au electrodes so far showed that the SOR had great potential in DFCs. Some bimetallic catalysts developed in recent years show better SOR activity than that of single metal electrocatalysts. Unfortunately, the development of highly efficient SOR electrocatalysts is still absent, especially the complex reaction intermediates that make it particularly difficult to study the mechanism. In addition, compared with ethanol and glycerol DFCs, the current density and energy conversion of sorbitol DFCs are relatively poor; this limits the industrial application of the SOR. Moreover, most studies only focus on the electrochemical properties of the SOR but ignore the fact that some value-added chemicals (e.g., GOA and FA) are produced in the electro-oxidation process. Therefore, in future research work on the SOR, preparing more efficient and cheaper electrocatalysts is necessary to improve sorbitol adsorption through C1 to decrease overpotentials and increase current densities. At the same time, efficient SOR electrocatalysts would facilitate the conversion of sorbitol to higher value-added chemicals with shorter chains, such as FA, GOA, and CO2.
Electrochemical xylitol oxidation reaction
Xylitol is a polyalcohol composed of five hydroxyl groups, which is the reducing sugar obtained by the hydrogenation of xylose. Xylitol widely exists in various fruits, vegetables, and cereals, which generally is obtained through industrial neutralization/deacidification or ion exchange methods. It is widely used in the pharmaceutical, food, and cosmetic industries.239 In addition, xylitol is an excellent alternative fuel for DFCs and a very important BDPM. Regrettably, the commercial production of xylitol is limited.
Matos et al. studied the electrochemical xylitol oxidation reaction (XOR) in acidic media using single-crystal Pt (111) and polycrystalline Pt (poly) electrodes.240 The electrocatalytic activity on the Pt (111) electrode surface was better than that on the Pt (poly) electrode surface (Fig. 13a and b black line). Unfortunately, the XOR showed poor stability on both Pt electrodes. In situ FTIR spectra indicated that the poor stability on Pt electrodes was the same as that of the electro-oxidation of other alcohols, mainly due to the poisoning intermediate CO adsorbed on the surface of the Pt electrode decreasing the density of active sites. In addition, CO2, xylonic acid (and corresponding lactone, xylonolactone), and other short-chain aliphatic carboxylic acids resulting from the breaking of the initial molecular carbon skeleton were also observed. The authors hypothesized that the reaction pathway of the XOR was similar to that of the SOR (sorbitol → glucose → gluconic acid/gluconolactone), where oxidation proceeded via the formation of the corresponding sugar (xylitol → xylose → xylonic acid/xylonolactone) leading to the formation of xylonic acid in equilibrium with the corresponding lactone. Then, the same research group studied the effect of the arrangement of the Pt crystal plane on the XOR.239 The electrocatalytic activity followed the order Pt (100) > Pt (111) > Pt (110) (Fig. 13a red line, 13c and d). Pt (100) exhibited the highest current density and less poisonous surface at higher potentials. Additional studies showed that the adsorption and oxidation reactions of xylitol were sensitive to the symmetry of the bidimensional domains and the distribution of oriented defects (monatomic steps) on the Pt surfaces. Thus, increasing the density of steps hinders the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  CVs for the XOR on (a) Pt (poly), (b) Pt (111), (c) Pt (100) and (d) Pt (110) electrodes in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.01 M xylitol. Reproduced with permission from Matos et al.240 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Sequoia. 
Kannan et al. applied polypyrrole/manganese oxyhydroxide/palladium nanocomposite (PPy/MOH/Pd) and manganese–titanium-oxide-hydroxide-supported palladium nanostructure (Pd@MTOH) electrodes to the XOR. Both electrocatalysts showed good catalytic activity and stability;241,242 this was mainly due to the excellent interaction between the catalyst and support, which could improve the catalytic activity and durability by reducing poisoning of the catalyst. Therefore, the development of new and efficient electrocatalysts is of great significance in improving the performance and stability of the XOR. Unfortunately, the catalytic mechanism and XOR products were not analyzed.
The XOR has shown great potential. Unfortunately, studies on the XOR are still scarce. In addition, developing new and efficient XOR electrocatalysts to improve the electrocatalytic activity and stability, and reduce the toxicity of the poisoning intermediate CO to the catalyst surface remain challenges to overcome. It is worth noting that due to the lack of a comprehensive product detection system, study of the mechanism is complicated, and the various value-added chemicals produced by the XOR have not been figured out.
Electrocatalytic upgrading of furans
Electrochemical furfural oxidation/reduction reaction
Furfural is a kind of furan derivative. Furfural is obtained from the dehydration of pentose (xylose and arabinose), commonly obtained by acid hydrolysis of hemicellulose-rich agricultural wastes. It can be used as a liquid fuel, rubber, and doped raw material. Above all, almost 100 value-added chemicals can be directly or indirectly produced from furfural.12,243 Therefore, it has become a very important BDPM. Furfuryl alcohol (FAL), tetrahydrofurfuryl alcohol (THFA), 2-methylfuran (MF), 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (MTHF), furoic acid (FAD), and maleic acid (MA) are the main furan derivatives manufactured (Scheme 4).
 Scheme 4  The main pathways of the furfural oxidation reaction (FOR) (black line) and reduction reaction (FRR) (red line). 

Noble metal catalysts. 
Huber et al. studied the effects of five catalysts (Ni, Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt) on the electrochemical furfural reduction reaction (FRR) in a continuous electrocatalytic membrane reactor. They found that the activity of the Pd catalyst was the highest, which was 4.4 times that of Pt/C at a power input of 0.1 W.16 In addition, the main products of the FRR were FAL (54–100% selectivity) and THFAL (0–26% selectivity). The selectivity for MF and MTHF was also 8%. From an economic viewpoint, it would be desirable to do the FRR in a continuous electrocatalytic membrane reactor using stable electrodes in the absence of liquid electrolyte, which provides a feasible choice for the industrialization of the FRR.
Zhao et al. studied the FRR on Pt, Ni, Cu, and Pb catalysts. They found that the selectivity of all kinds of value-added chemicals was lower on Ni, Cu, and Pb electrodes due to the influence of opening of the furan ring and electro-hydrodimerization.244 Notably, the Pt electrode showed 99% FAL selectivity. Therefore, Pt supported on activated carbon fibers (Pt/ACF) was subsequently prepared. Because of abundant active surface area with Pt/ACF (BET surface area 1360–1862 m2g−1), the conversion of furfural significantly increased. When 0.1 M HCl was used as the electrolyte, the conversion, FAL selectivity, and current efficiency were 82%, 99%, and 78% at −0.5 V vs. a saturated calomel electrode (SCE). In addition, after use three times, the activity remained unchanged.
Román and co-workers investigated the electrochemical furfural oxidation reaction (FOR) in an acidic electrolyte over a Pt catalyst. They found that the selectivity of the FOR depended on the potential.245 The main products below 1.2 V vs. RHE were FAD and 5-hydroxyfuroic acid, while the selectivity was mainly towards 5-hydroxy-furan-2 (5H)-one (HFN) and MA at higher potentials. Afterward, they investigated the FOR on Au under acidic conditions. They found that the activity of the FOR (∼2 mA cm−2Au at 1.0 V vs. RHE) was one order of magnitude higher than that observed for Pt/C, and the selectivity for FAD was 96 ± 6% FE at 0.8 V vs. RHE.246 In addition, they found that different concentrations of furfural showed different selectivity, showing higher selectivity for decarboxylation products at low concentrations (10 mM) but higher selectivity for FAD at higher concentrations (50 and 100 mM). Changing the potential could also affect the selectivity of FAD, as there might be an altered adsorption mode of furfural, or intermediate generation, resulting in the formation of deeper oxidation products at >1.2 V vs. RHE. However, the most abundant surface species formed during the FOR was furoate, which bound in a bidentate conformation and eventually blocked the Au surface, limiting the net oxidation rate. Furthermore, introducing a small amount of FAD (1–10 mM) significantly inhibited the FOR.
Zhang et al. prepared bimetallic AgPd nanoparticles with different metal ratios and applied them to the FRR.247 In a neutral aqueous electrolyte, the AgPd catalyst had a low overpotential (−0.4 V and −0.5 V vs. RHE), and Ag60Pd40 showed a FE of more than 95%, effectively avoiding competition from the HER under acidic conditions. The excellent electrocatalytic performance of bimetallic nanoparticles provided a feasible pathway for electrocatalytic furfural.


Non-noble metal catalysts. 
Since the HER is the main reaction in competition with the FRR, Liu et al. studied the effect of seven electrodes (e.g., Ti, Fe, Ni, Cu, Pt, Pb, and graphite) on the FRR in 0.1 M Na2Co3–NaHCO3 buffer solution (pH = 10) (Fig. 14a).248 They found that the Cu electrode was the best electrode for the FRR. Although the HER on the Cu electrode was more accessible than that on the Pb electrode, the Cu electrode produced the simplest carbon free radicals and had the highest selectivity for FAL. At the same time, it was further converted into MF on the Pb electrode. The current efficiency for the FRR is 71%, and the selectivity of FAL is 87% on the Cu electrode. In 2013, Nilges and Schroder showed the product distribution for the FRR over Al, Fe, Ni, Pt, and Pb electrodes in the highly acidic electrolyte (Fig. 14b).249 At a constant current of −10 mA cm−2, the dimer produced from a pinacol coupling reaction was the superior product over Al, Pb, Fe, and C. The dimer was a much smaller portion of the products on Ni, and no dimers were detected on Pt or Cu. Over Pt, FAL was the primary FRR product, followed by a much smaller quantity of MF. The product ratio was nearly equal between FAL and MF over Ni.
 Fig. 14  (a) Selectivity of FAL and current efficiency on Cu, Pb, Ni, Fe, Ti, C, and Pt electrodes. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.248 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Sequoia. (b) Product distribution for the FRR on Cu, Ni, Pt, C, Fe, Pb, and Al electrodes. Reproduced with permission from Nilges et al.249 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. Note: “Green” represents “pinacol”; “blue” represents “FA”; “red” represents “FAL”; “black” represents “MF”. (c) Two pathways for the electrochemical conversion of furfural (direct electroreduction and electrocatalytic hydrogenation) on a Cu electrode in acidic electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from Chadderdon et al.250 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
In recent years, many studies have been conducted on the FRR over Cu-based catalysts under acidic conditions, and high catalytic activity has been achieved.251–255 Jung and Biddinger studied the effect of pH values on the distribution of electro-reduction products toward furfural. They found that the FRR mainly produced FAL in mildly acidic electrolytes, while MF was produced in strongly acidic electrolytes.253 In addition, product yield and selectivity increased as the current density increased. Therefore, the pH value is the main factor determining product selectivity.
Li et al. studied the mechanism of the FRR on Cu electrodes.250 They determined two different mechanisms for Cu electrodes in acidic electrolytes: (i) electrocatalytic hydrogenation and (ii) direct electro-reduction (Fig. 14c). They used Cu electrodes covered with different organothiol molecules to explore its catalytic activity for the FRR. If the adsorption of electroactive substances on the electrode surface were prevented, inner-sphere electron transfer and hence electrocatalytic hydrogenation would be inhibited; thus, the outer layer electron transfer would only be slightly affected by electron tunneling if the organic mercaptan layer were very thin. Specifically, three organothiols were utilized to modify the Cu electrodes: 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA), 12-mercaptododecanoic acid (MDA), and 2-mercaptobenzothiazole (MBT). Current suppression of the FRR at modified Cu electrodes followed the order MPA < MBT ≪ MDA, where MDA almost entirely occurred during faradaic and non-faradaic processes. In addition, they conducted constant-potential electrolysis of furfural in an electrolyte of pH = 0.5 to investigate the product distribution of Cu electrodes with different surface modifications. The MDA-modified Cu electrode only yielded negligible FRR products and a tiny amount of H2, indicating that the long-chain (C12) MDA self-assembly layer effectively blocked all the electrochemical reactions on Cu. This result suggested that both the hydrogenation and hydrogenolysis of furfural to form FAL and MF required the direct interaction of reactants on the Cu surface. In addition, the production rate of hydrofuroin was nearly unchanged on Cu electrodes modified with MPA and MBT compared to that on the pristine Cu electrode. This result implied that another parallel outer-sphere electron transfer process occurred during the FRR, which did not require an intimate interaction between furfural, a proton, and the Cu electrode surface. However, the contribution of this direct electro-reduction is relatively tiny.
In recent years, transition metal sulfide,255,256 oxide,257 phosphide,252 and other electrocatalyst materials have also been widely used in furfural electrocatalysis. Zhang et al. successfully synthesized self-supported Cu3P nanosheets and Ni2P nanoparticles (Cu3P/CFC and Ni2P/CFC) on the surface of commercial carbon fiber cloth (CFC) by the gas-phase hydrothermal method. They were then used as cathodes and anodes, respectively, for the FOR and FRR under alkaline conditions.252 Cu3P/CFC exhibited a higher FRR activity, with the FAL selectivity reaching almost 100% and the FE reaching above 90% in the range of −0.05 to −0.55 V vs. RHE. Ni2P/CFC exhibited a higher FOR activity, with the selectivity of FAD being close to 100% and the FE reaching up to 90% in the range of 1.2 to 1.7 V vs. RHE. They believed that Cu3P could obtain higher hydrogen coverage but limited hydrogen desorption so that the adsorptive active of hydrogen (H) atoms could be used efficiently in the FRR to obtain high FE and current density. The superior FOR activity of Ni2P/CFC mainly resulted from the high valence Ni species formed during electrocatalysis. However, the influence of the Cannizzaro reaction of furfural has not been eliminated under strong base conditions of pH = 14, which resulted in a higher FE of FAL. Therefore, blank control experiments should be carried out in future experiments to obtain an accurate FE.
Choi's group investigated the FOR to MA catalyzed by PbO2, MnO2, and Pt in an acidic medium, and they found that PbO2 was the only catalyst capable of converting furfural into MA.258 In addition, 2-furanol was an intermediate in the electrochemical conversion of furfural to MA. PbO2 had the best performance, and the yield of MA was 65.1%. At the same time, MnO2 and Pt were not suitable as anodes for the FOR because the predominant aqueous oxidation at these electrodes not only made FOR inefficient but also promoted the conversion of furfural into undesirable and undetectable products.
The electrocatalytic conversion of furfural is a promising biorefinery process. As an essential BDPM, value-added chemicals can be generated at oxidation and reduction ends, widely used in various fields. In recent years, Cu-based phosphide, oxide, and nitride showed excellent catalytic performance, as promising electrocatalysts for the FRR. In addition, in the absence of the Cannizzaro reaction, furfural will be converted into FAL and FAD through non-electrochemical conversion under strong base conditions, which will affect the accuracy of data. Therefore, determining an appropriate electrolyte to achieve high electrochemical activity and FE is also a challenge to overcome. Finally, the excellent catalysts for furfural electrocatalysis in recent years were compared (Table 2).
Table 2 Representative catalysts for FFR and their effect on product selectivity and conversion




Catalyst
Electrolyte
Potential
Conversion (%)
Yield/selectivity (%)
FE (%)
Reaction time (h)
Ref.




Note: “—” represents “not available”; “*” represents “the amount of charges passed”.




AgPd/C
Phosphate buffer solution (pH = 6.8) + 100 mM furfural
−0.5 V vs. RHE
18
FAL (13)
96
1 h

247



Cu1/PC
Acetate buffer solution (pH = 5) + 40 mM furfural
−0.75 V vs. RHE
—
FAL (—)
94
10 C*

259



Cu1/PC
Acetate buffer solution (pH = 5) + 40 mM furfural
−0.90 V vs. RHE
—
MF (—)
62
10 C*

259



Cu3P/CFC
50 mM furfural + 1.0 M KOH
−0.35 V vs. RHE
99
FAL (99)
98
—

252



Ni2P/CFC
50 mM furfural + 1.0 M KOH
1.3 V vs. RHE
99
FA (99)
99
—

252



Ru/C
Acetate–acetic acid buffer (pH = 5.2) + 20mM furfural
−0.1 V vs. RHE
4–5
—
24
2 h

260



Pd/C
—
42
2 h

260



Rh/C
−0.5 V vs. RHE
—
12
2 h

260



Cu/C
—
8
2 h

260



Ti/La nano/TiO2
DMF + 100 mM furfural + 100 mM tetrabutylammonium bromide
Constant current density 50 mA cm−2 (3.5–4.8 V)
—
FAL (88.6)
85.7
—

257



3%Pt/ACF
Furfural + 0.1 M H2SO4
−0.5 V vs. SCE
82
FAL (99)
78
—

244



Cu–NPNi/NF
10 mM furfural + 0.5 M KOH
−0.45 V vs. RHE
75
FAL (74.3)
—
1 h

261



Ed-Ag/NF
50 mM furfural + 0.5 M KOH
−0.45 V vs. RHE
70
FAL (29.6)
—
1 h

261






Electrochemical 5-hydroxymethylfurfural oxidation/reduction reaction
5-Hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF), known as the “sleeping giant”, is an important BDPM produced by glucose/fructose dehydration.262–264 HMF contains a furan ring, an aldehyde group, and a hydroxymethyl group, making its chemical properties relatively active. HMF occupies a very important position in the field of bio-based materials as well as in the market; the HMF market could reach 627 billion USD by 2025. Therefore, it can be converted into high-value-added chemicals and fuels, such as oxidation products (furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA) and 5-formyl-furancarboxylic acid (FFCA)), reduction products (2,5-hexanedione (HD) and maleic acid (MA)) and so on (Scheme 5). FDCA is one of the critical biomass-derived molecules that could be a promising alternative to petroleum-derived terephthalic acid to produce poly(ethylene furandicarboxylate).12
 Scheme 5  The main pathways of the HMFOR (black line) and HMFRR (red line). 

Noble metal catalysts. 
Up to now, Pt-, Au-, and Pd-based noble metal nanomaterials were considered the most used catalysts to produce FDCA from HMF since they could accelerate the sluggish kinetics of selective alcohol group oxidation, thus producing carboxylic acids.265,266
The electrochemical HMF oxidation reaction (HMFOR) was first carried out on a Pt electrode.267 Although the experiment was carried out in methanol solution, it still provided an enlightening idea for subsequent electrocatalytic work on HMF. Strasser et al. investigated the HMFOR on a Pt electrode, focusing on the effect of electrolyte pH values on the reaction.266 In the alkaline electrolyte (pH = 10), the conversion of HMF on the Pt electrode was only 70%. The yield of FDCA was less than 1%. In addition, they found that the strongly alkaline electrolyte (pH > 13) could facilitate the selective HMFOR to FDCA. However, it would be rapidly degraded into various humins without any catalyst, such as levulinic acid, FAL, furfural, and furan. Therefore, developing highly active electrocatalysts to obtain a high conversion of HMF and yield of FDCA in a short time has become extremely important. Zhou and co-workers prepared Fe3O4/rGO composites supported on a Pt nanocatalyst (Pt/Fe3O4/rGO) for the HMFOR.268 The introduction of Fe3O4 improved the dispersity of Pt and the utilization rate of Pt and realized high catalytic activity and stability for the HMFOR. Under mild conditions, the conversion of HMF reached 100% after the reaction of the Pt/Fe3O4/rGO catalyst in an aqueous solution for 8 h. The yield of FDCA was 98%, and no apparent loss of activity was observed after 5 cycles. The combination of Fe3O4 with graphene improved the hydrophilicity of the catalyst and made the separation and recovery of the catalyst easier due to the magnetic properties of Fe3O4.
Many studies have also been conducted on HMF electrocatalysis at Au- and Pd-based electrodes. Chadderdon et al. studied the HMFOR over Au and Pd nanoparticles supported on carbon black.265 They found that the Au-based electrocatalyst favored the oxidation of HMF to 5-hydroxymethyl-2-furancarboxylic acid (HMFCA) (Scheme 5, Pathway I). In the case of a Pd-based electrode, the formation of FDCA could proceed through HMFCA or DFF (Scheme 5, Pathway II). When the ratio of Pd to Au was 1:2, the conversion of HMF was close to 100% and the FDCA yield reached 83%. Although bimetallic materials show better catalytic activity than single metal materials, HMFCA intermediates will accumulate during the oxidation process, which is not conducive to the subsequent separation and purification of FDCA. Park et al. prepared three-dimensional hybrid electrocatalytic electrodes via LBL assembly by immobilizing multilayers of positively charged Au and Pd nanoparticles (NPs) on nanosized and negatively charged graphene oxide as the building block (Fig. 15a).269 They found that the formyl group of HMF was oxidized more easily on Au/C than the hydroxyl group, while the hydroxyl group of HMF was more easily oxidized on Pd/C. These results were consistent with the understanding of Pd and Au electrodes by Chadderdon et al. (Fig. 15b).265 By changing the nanostructure of the electrode, including the thickness and position of the metal NPs, the internal structure of the LBL-assembled multilayer electrode could be precisely controlled (Fig. 15c and d). For instance, even with identical compositions of NPs, when Au NPs were located in the outer layer (as in the case of the Pd7/Au7 electrode), the yield of FDCA was higher than that for Au7/Pd7. This may be due to the enhanced mass transfer of HMFCA to inner-layer Pd NPs (Fig. 15e and f).
 Fig. 15  (a) Bifunctional HMFOR and HER on LBL-assembled multilayer electrode. (b) Schematic pathways for the HMFOR on Pd and Au NPs and putative mechanisms on (c) Pd7/Au7 and (d) Au7/Pd7 multilayer electrodes for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA. (e) LSVs for the HMFOR on Au7/Pd7 and Pd7/Au7 multilayer electrodes, and the corresponding (f) FDCA yield. Reproduced with permission from Park et al.269 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. 
Choi et al. employed Au electrodes in a photoelectrochemical cell with 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl (TEMPO); these were prepared on a clean glass slide by sputter coating of titanium (20 nm) as an adhesion layer followed by deposition of Au (100 nm).18 Since the applied potential was between the potential of electrolytic water and the HMFOR, the yield and FE of FDCA (96.7%) were achieved at ambient conditions. TMEPO can largely avoid competition from electrolytic water; thus, the electrons are used mainly in the HMFOR to produce value-added chemicals. However, a considerable amount of TEMPO is required so that it does not limit the overall oxidation reaction rate.270,271 Besides, using TEMPO will increase downstream separation costs,272 and therefore, effective TEMPO recycling strategies need to be researched.


Ni-based catalysts. 
To reduce economic problems related to noble metal catalysts and mediators, the development of some efficient non-noble catalysts is urgently needed. In recent years, non-noble metal catalysts showed high efficiency and high conversion potential for the electrocatalysis of HMF.
The first detailed study of the HMFOR to prepare FDCA in the aqueous phase was reported by Skowroński et al. in 1991.267 A nickel (hydro)oxide-based (Ni(OH)2/NiOOH) electrode was used as the anode in a divided H-shaped cell. However, without a better understanding of the usefulness of FDCA, the pioneering electro-oxidation process was shelved. Transition metal sulfides and phosphides in bifunctional electrocatalysts for water splitting showed prominent activity in recent years. Sun's group used Ni2P273 and Ni2S3274 as anodic catalysts for the HMFOR to replace the alkaline conditions and slow electrolysis of water through the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Afterward, a hierarchically porous Ni (hp-Ni) catalyst prepared by facile template-free cathodic electrodeposition on Ni foam was used for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA.275 Since then, Ni-based catalysts have re-entered the field of vision due to abundant 3d electron numbers and unique eg orbitals, which significantly enhance the covalency of transition metal–oxygen bonds. Various Ni-based compounds, including borides,276,277 nitrides,278 oxides,279,280 sulfides,281 hydroxides,282 and other Ni-based materials283 have been widely investigated for the HMFOR. Schuhmann and colleagues used Ni foam modified with high-surface-area nickel boride (NixB) as an electrode for the HMFOR to produce FDCA. The yield of FDCA was 98.5%, achieving a high FE of nearly 100%.277 Later, through high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) and electrochemistry-coupled attenuated total reflection infrared (EC-ATR-IR) spectroscopy, it was found that in 1 M KOH the HMFOR yielded FDCA through the HMFCA pathway (Scheme 5, Pathway I), rather than the DFF pathway (Scheme 5, Pathway II). The intermediate HMFCA did not accumulate in this process and was directly converted into FDCA within 30 minutes (Fig. 16a and b). Wang and colleagues obtained Ni3N/carbon nanosheets (Ni3N@C) through hydrothermal and nitridation processes (Fig. 16c),278 and then applied them to the HMFOR. When the oxidation potential was 1.38 V vs. RHE, the current density could reach 50 mA cm−2 (Fig. 16d). In addition, the yield of FDCA remained stable at 98% after 6 cycles (Fig. 16e). Such excellent electrochemical properties and catalytic activity were mainly due to the strong interactions between Ni3N and carbon, which modified the electronic structure of Ni+ and maintained the morphology of the precursor. The strong interactions between Ni3N and carbon were crucial for improving the charge-transfer rates and stability of Ni3N@C.
 Fig. 16  (a) HPLC chromatograms recorded at different electrolysis times on NixB. (b) Concentration profiles of HMF, FDCA, and corresponding intermediates of the HMFOR on NixB with increasing electrolysis times. Reproduced with permission from Barwe et al.277 Copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) Diagram for the synthesis of Ni3N and Ni3N@C. (d) LSVs for the HMFOR on Ni3N@C in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mm HMF. (e) Possible pathways of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on Ni3N@C. (e) The yields of FDCA on Ni3N@C for six cycles. Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al.278 Copyright 2019 Wiley. 
In recent years, more and more heterogeneous Ni-based electrocatalysts have been reported for efficient oxidation of HMF to FDCA. The actual catalytically active species of these catalysts is likely to be NiOOH,282 which follows the “electrochemical–chemical” oxidation pathway, and then the Ni2+/Ni3+ redox couple participates in the sequential HMFOR to produce HMFCA, FFCA, and finally FDCA.277,284 The overall process involves the electrochemical dehydrogenation of the Ni(OH)2 catalyst and spontaneous oxidation of the substrates. Lu et al. developed a novel hybrid catalyst with Ni nanosheet forests anchored on carbon paper (Ni/CP).285 Ni nanosheets with small grain sizes and rich edge sites could provide an effective HMFOR to yield FDCA (selectivity >99%). The catalyst achieved 99.7% HMF conversion and 95.3% FE for H2 production under a low potential of 1.36 V vs. RHE with high stability. To reveal the physical–chemical properties of the reaction pathway, mechanistic information about the reaction at the atomic level was investigated through DFT calculations. As shown in Fig. 17a, they first established a series of typical structural models for Ni, NiO, interstitial oxygen doped NiO (NiO–O), oxygen vacancy NiOOH (NiOOH–Vo), NiOOH with different Ni valence states and chemical structures, and optimized the structures and different charge densities of HMF adsorbed on catalysts. The adsorption energy increased with Ni valence, which indicated that the interaction between Ni species and HMF strengthened with an increase in the Ni valence states. In addition, electron transfer from the oxygen atoms of HMF to Ni species, and the number of electron transfers increased with the valence state of Ni (from 0.41e for metallic Ni to 0.79e for NiOOH). As shown in Fig. 17b, the electron localization function value at the junction of NiOOH and HMF was higher than those in the other four catalyst systems, suggesting stronger bonding in this system. Fig. 17d exhibits the partial density of states of the d orbital of Ni and NiOOH and the p orbital of HMF. The overlap of the conduction band at 0.5 to 1 eV and the valence band at −1 to −1.5 eV for NiOOH and HMF also indicated a strong bonding cooperation between them. Finally, the energy profiles for the HMFOR on NiOOH and NiOOH–Vo surfaces were calculated by DFT (Fig. 17c). The activation energy of the rate-determining step of pathway B was slightly lower than that of pathway A, which indicated that the oxidation of HMF was more inclined to pathway B, which was different from the previous reports.266,268 Combined with product analysis, it was believed that the HMFOR to yield FDCA might take place in two ways (Scheme 5, Pathway I, II and Fig. 17c, Pathway A, B). Therefore, this work provided a theoretical basis for the rational design of efficient Ni-based catalysts.
 Fig. 17  DFT calculations of the (a) optimized structure and charge density difference of HMF adsorbed on Ni, NiO, NiO–O, NiOOH–Vo, and NiOOH. (b) Electron-localization function for optimized HMF adsorption on Ni, NiO, NiO–O, NiOOH–Vo, and NiOOH, respectively. (c) Partial density of states of HMF adsorption on Ni and NiOOH. (d) Energy profiles of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on the NiOOH surface. Reproduced with permission from Lu et al.285 Copyright 2021 Wiley. Note: “gray” represents “C”; “white” represents “H”; “red” represents “O”; “blue” represents “Ni”. 


Co-based catalysts. 
In 2016, Sun's research group also studied the catalytic activity of the CoP electrocatalyst for the HMFOR,286 which could achieve a current density of 20 mA cm−2 for the HMFOR in 1.0 M KOH with 50 mM HMF at 1.38 V vs. RHE. Long-term I–T measurements demonstrated nearly 100% conversation of HMF and ∼90% yield of FDCA. Since its catalytic performance was close to that of the Ni-based catalyst, the Co-based catalyst became a prominent catalytic material in the HMFOR. Han et al. found that the electrocatalytic performance of cobalt oxide (CoO) could be significantly improved by introducing oxygen vacancies via Se doping.287 As-obtained CoO–CoSe2 with a molar ratio of 23:1 showed excellent performance and stability for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA; a FDCA yield of 99% could be achieved with a FE of 97.9% at 1.43 V vs. RHE. Co-based spinel catalysts have also been developed in recent years.288–290 Kang et al. developed Co3O4 and NiCo2O4 filament nanoarchitectures with spinel structures for use as electrochemical catalysts for the HMFOR.288 The NiCo2O4 filamentous nanoarchitecture showed an enhanced HMFOR efficiency compared with that of Co3O4 with a record 99.6% HMF conversion efficiency and 90.8% selectivity of FDCA.
Unlike the mechanism of Ni-based electrocatalysts, the catalytic mechanism of Co-based materials for the HFMOR remains unclear. Although Co2+/Co3+ was claimed to exhibit negligible activity toward the HMFOR, while Co4+ might be involved at higher applied potential, no experimental evidence or detailed mechanistic insights were provided.282 Therefore, it is necessary to explore the active sites and reaction mechanisms of Co-based catalysts in the HMFOR. Luo et al. conducted an experimental and theoretical study to show that the Co3+ and Co4+ species acted as chemical oxidants and had distinct roles in the HMFOR. Co3+ was only capable of oxidizing the formyl group to produce carboxylate, while Co4+ was required for the initial oxidation of the hydroxyl group with significantly faster kinetics. In addition, the oxidation products could be conveniently adjusted between HMFCA and FDCA by adjusting the applied potential. Mechanistic insights might facilitate the rational design of highly-efficient electrocatalysts for selective transformations of value-added organic substrates.
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) have been widely studied in recent years.291–293 One type of critical SAC is metal-oxide-supported/confined noble metal single atoms (SAs).294 The electron interaction between SAs and oxides leads to the redistribution of electron density for different atomic sites. The spatial isolation of metal atoms can modulate the adsorption energy of the reaction substrates and intermediates, thus accelerating the reaction process.295,296 Recently, Lu et al. used single-atom-Ir-loaded Co3O4 (Ir–Co3O4) to enhance the adsorption of the CC groups of HMF, achieving 98% yield and FE of FDCA.290 This work paved a feasible pathway for the application of SACs in the electrocatalytic reaction of HMF.


Cu-based catalysts. 
HMF degrades at a rate of 10% h−1 under strong base conditions of pH = 14, and thereby the development of highly efficient non-noble metallic catalysts that work well at pH ≤ 13 remains an urgent requirement (Fig. 18a and b). Cu is one of the cheapest transition metals. The oxidized Cu surface is not active for water oxidation, which can suppress competition from the OER.297 Cu-based catalysts perfectly solve the above problems. Using Cu-based oxides or hydroxides may achieve the preparation of FDCA through the HMFOR with a high FE at pH ≤ 13. Choi et al. studied the stability of HMF at room temperature and ambient pressure in an alkaline electrolyte (pH = 13 and 14) (Fig. 18a and b).297 At pH = 14, an increase in HMF concentration or longer reaction time would lead to the rapid loss of HMF. At pH = 13, although the degradation of HMF could not be avoided entirely, the loss of HMF could be slowed down. When the catalyst was soaked in 0.5 M HMF solution for 8 hours, only about 20% HMF was degraded. Then, they studied the performance of nanocrystalline Cu electrodes for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA. During the HMFOR, HMF conversion and FDCA production on nanocrystalline electrodes were almost entirely proportional to the amount of charge without any accumulation of intermediate oxidation products. After passing a stoichiometric amount of charge, the nanocrystalline electrodes achieved 96.4% FDCA yield.
 Fig. 18  Stability tests on the HMFOR in (a) 1.0 M KOH (pH = 14) and (b) 0.1 M KOH (pH = 13) solution at room temperature and ambient pressure for different HMF concentrations. Reproduced with permission from Nam et al.297 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Note: “black line” represent “0.5 M HMF”; “red line” represent “0.1 M HMF”; “blue line” represent “0.01 M HMF”. Conversion of HMF and yield of oxidation products on (c) MnOx anodes at 1.6 V vs. RHE and (d) Pt anodes at 2.0 V vs. RHE at 60 °C in pH = 1 H2SO4 + 20 mM HMF for different amounts of charge passed. Reproduced with permission from Kubota et al.298 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag. 
In addition, Cu-based catalysts were used for the electrochemical HMF reduction reaction (HMFRR).299 Fan et al. investigated a non-noble CuNi bimetallic electrode in the HMFRR to synthesize 2,5-dimethyl-furan (DMF) using water as the hydrogen source. 88.0% FE of DMF and 91.1% conversion selectivity of DMF were achieved.


Mn-based catalysts. 
Most of the reported HMFORs to prepare FDCA are carried out under strongly alkaline conditions, but this is not conducive to further expansion of production at the industrial level. FDCA is generally separated from the solution by lowering the pH value, which increases the cost of acid and base reagents and increases the cost of salt waste treatment. Therefore, the direct HMFOR under acidic conditions is more beneficial for further expansion of the production scale. MnOx is the only known catalyst for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA under acidic conditions. Choi et al. reported the preparation of FDCA through the HMFOR in a strongly acidic solution (pH = 1) using MnOx as a catalytic anode; this was the first demonstration of the production of FDCA in acidic media as the primary product, which enabled spontaneous FDCA precipitation from the same reaction solution.298 Notably, they found that the by-product of the HMFOR in acidic media was mainly MA maleate, which was not found under alkaline conditions (Fig. 18c and d).


Zn-based catalysts. 
Choi et al. successfully prepared 2,5-hexanedione (HD) by enabling hydrogenolysis and Clemmensen reduction coupled with furan ring-opening of HMF in an aqueous electrolyte using a Zn electrode.300 However, DMF was not detected, indicating that HD was not necessarily generated by the hydrolysis of DMF in an acidic medium and could be consistent with opening of the furan ring by Clemmensen reduction (Fig. 19a) and hydrogenolysis (Fig. 19b). To exclude the influence of alcohol groups in HMF on HD formation, they substituted 5-methylfurfural (5-MF) for HMF. They found that HD was still the only product, indicating that the absence of an alcohol group in 5-MF did not affect the reductive ring-opening process of the furan ring. Therefore, the researchers proposed a predictive model for reducing 5-MF to HD by combining the ring-opening mechanisms of electrocatalytic hydrogenolysis and Clemmensen reduction (Fig. 19c). It was found that steps 1, 2, 3, and 7 were related to Clemmensen reduction, while steps 4, 5, and 6 were associated with ring-opening.
 Fig. 19  (a) The mechanism of Clemmensen reduction on the Zn electrode. Note: Zn is used as the electron source; “+” on Zn represents “the number of consumed electrons in each step”. (b) A ring-opening mechanism of DMF to HD by hydrolysis. (c) A predictive model for the reduction of 5-MF to HD constructed by combining the mechanisms shown in (a) and (b). Reproduced with permission from Roylance et al.300 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


V-based catalysts. 
V-based materials with many oxidation states are considered ideal electrocatalysts. Li et al. prepared 3D vanadium nitrite hollow nanospheres (3D VN HNs) and applied them to HMF electrocatalysis, finally achieving 98% HMF conversion, 96% selectivity, and 84% FE of FDCA.301 In addition, Pd/VN was applied to the cathode for the HMFRR, with HMF conversion ≥90%, ≥88% selectivity, and FE ≥86% for 2,5-bishydroxymethyl-tetrahydrofuran (DHMTHF). DFT calculations showed that the adsorption energies of HMF on VN were larger than that on V2O5 or VOOH, indicating a stronger interaction between HMF and VN, thus endowing HMF with greater reactivity on the VN surface (Fig. 20). Moreover, VN and Pd/VN were incorporated into a membrane electrode assembly in a paired electrolysis system (Fig. 20f), which shortened the electron transport pathway and maximized the electrocatalytic activity of the electrocatalysts in incompatible electrolytes but also paired electrosynthesis. The paired electrosynthesis performance was evaluated at a constant current of 100 mA and within a voltage range of 2.5 to 3.0 V. After 180 min of electrolysis, the conversions of the HMFOR and HMFRR were 92% and 87%, respectively. The flow cell of HMF paved the way for developing paired electrosynthesis technology with the potential for biomass utilization and energy conversion.
 Fig. 20  (a) The optimized structure (top) and charge density difference (bottom) of HMF on VN and V2O5, respectively. (b and c) Electron-localization function of the (100) section for optimized HMF on VN and V2O5. (d) Density of states plots for VN and V2O5. (e) Energy profiles of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on the VN surface. Note: the initial state of HMF + 6OH* on the VN surface is chosen as the zero point for pathway A and pathway B. The large balls in gold and orange are V and N, respectively. The small balls in grey, white and red are C, H, and O, respectively. (f) Scheme of VN and Pd/VN paired electrolysis electrodes for the HMFOR and HMFRR, respectively. Reproduced with permission from Li et al.301 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag. 


Layered double hydroxide catalysts. 
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are layered compounds with the chemical formula [M(II)1−xM(III)x(OH)2]x+(Anx/n−)·mH2O, where M(II) and M(III) are metal cations and An− is the interlayer anion.302 Since almost all transition metal sulfides, phosphates, nitride, and borides are thermodynamically unstable and easily converted into their corresponding oxides/hydroxides at anodic bias, LDHs can theoretically electrochemically activate HMF. In theory, LDHs are active for electrochemical HMF conversion.303 NiFe LDHs have been considered the most catalytically active LDH materials for the OER and HMFOR. In 2018, Huber and co-workers applied NiFe LDHs to the HMFOR for the first time.271 They found that the onset potential of the HMFOR was 1.25 V vs. RHE, and the current density was 20 mA cm−2 at 1.32 V vs. RHE. In electrolytes without HMF, the onset potential of NiFe LDHs was 1.37 V vs. RHE, and the current density was 20 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.53 V vs. RHE (Fig. 21a and b), indicating that NiFe LDHs had a wide window to inhibit OER competition. The yield of FDCA could reach 98% at a potential of 1.23 V vs. RHE with a FE up to 99.4%. However, the reasons for such excellent catalytic performance were vague, and the main factor could be the incorporation of Fe ions, which increased the number of active sites. Deng and colleagues argued that the exposure of the active sites and mass transfer were the key factors in realizing high catalytic performance. They prepared copper sulfide nanowire@NiCo-LDH nanosheet core–shell nanoarrays (Fig. 21c).304 Although they failed to confirm whether Co ions could affect the catalytic activity, they confirmed that the tuned electronic structure of Ni could promote the adsorption of HMF on the electrode surface (Fig. 21d and e). In addition, the transformation of Cu(OH)2 to CuxS nanoarrays provided sufficient conductivity, which was not only suitable for the electrodeposition of ultra-thin NiCo LDHs as active species but also exposed a large number of active sites. Thus, a current density of 87 mA cm−2 was achieved at 1.30 V vs. RHE with a FE of FDCA of nearly 100%. Xie et al. prepared the CoFe@NiFe catalyst by combining CoFe LDHs and NiFe LDHs. Such hierarchical and fine nanostructures increased the density of active sites and mass transfer ability but also adjusted the electronic structure of active species. Finally, at 1.40 V vs. RHE, HMF could be wholly transformed into FDCA with 100% selectivity and 99.8% FE. The H2 production rate and FE at the cathode were close to 100%, with a hydrogen production volume of 901 mol cm−2. Although they demonstrated that Ni3+ was the main factor for this 100% selective oxidation reaction, the identification and detection of active species and reaction pathways in such systems are unclear.305
 Fig. 21  (a) LSVs for HMFOR on the NiFe LDHs in 1.0 M KOH with or without 10 mM HMF, and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from Huber et al.271 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CuxS@NiCo-LDHs core–shell composites. (d) Schematic illustration of the electronic configuration of the Ni cations with valence states of +2 and +3. (e) Schematic illustration of factors contributing to the high HMFOR activity. Reproduced with permission from Deng et al.,304 Copyright 2020 Royal Soc Chemistry. 
Musella et al. prepared CoAl and CoFe LDHs based on potentiodynamic cathodic reduction and applied them to the HMFOR. However, the selectivity and FE of FDCA were not satisfactory, even for better performing CoAl LDHs, with only 49% selectivity and 40.8% FE of FDCA.302 An ultrathin CoAl LDH nanosheet array (E-CoAl-LDH-NSA) was synthesized by Song et al. by an electrochemical intercalation method, with high electrochemical activity and high FE (99.4%) at 1.52 V vs. RHE. Moreover, after 7 cycles, the FE of FDCA remained above 95%. They believed that E-CoAl-LDH-NSA had a higher activity than that of a bulk CoAl LDH nanosheets array (B-CoAl-LDH-NSA) synthesized by a hydrothermal method, mainly since the ultrathin structure exposed a large number of active sites, increased Al etching and the number of oxygen vacancies.306
Some trimetallic LDHs materials have been developed and applied to the HMFOR. Zhang et al. prepared NiCoFe LDHs, which needed an ultralow overpotential of only 280 mV to reach 20 mA cm−2, and the HMF conversion reached 95.5% within 1 h with a high yield of FDCA (84.9%).308 Liu and colleagues prepared ultra-thin NiCoMn LDHs (1.15 nm), which achieved a high FDCA yield (91.7%) in 2.5 h.307 The ultrathin nanosheets exposed more Co–NiOOH active sites with abundant oxygen vacancies, facilitating the synergistic effect between the HMFOR on Co–Ni and Mn2+ states, consistent with ternary LDHs reported by Zhang's group.307
In summary, LDH materials are hot and efficient HMFOR catalysts so far. However, the active sites and catalytic mechanisms have not been studied, and long-term exposure to alkaline conditions is not conducive to the continuous catalysis of LDHs. Therefore, how to reduce the thickness of LDHs and expose more active sites for manufacturing defects is a problem to be solved for the preparation of advanced LDH catalytic materials.
HMF is a very important BDPM. The processes for the HMFOR and HMFRR act as very efficient biorefinery technology that could produce a variety of value-added chemicals, which have wide applications in various fields. Although related research in the 1990s has been developed, these reactions were not further studied due to a lack of understanding of the catalytic mechanisms. In recent years, with increasing attention, electrocatalysis technology has gradually become one of the hot spots in biomass electrocatalysis. However, advanced catalytic materials still need to be improved. This part introduces some advanced electrode materials with excellent performance in the furfural and HMF electrocatalysis field, which can inspire the development of highly-efficient electrocatalysts. Finally, we compare advanced catalytic materials in the HMF electrocatalysis field (Table 3).
Table 3 Representative catalysts developed for HMFOR and their effect on product selectivity and conversion




Catalyst
Electrolyte

E
onset


E
j = 20 mA cm−2
Potential
HMF conversion (%)
Yield/selectivity (%)
FE (%)
Reaction time (h)
Ref.




Note: “—” represents “not available”; "*" represents "the amount of charges passed".




Pt/Fe3O4/rGO
0.5 mM HMF + 0.05 M H2SO4
∼0.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl
—
0.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl
7.2
DFF (—/94.4)
—
20 h

268



Au/C
20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
0.29V vs. RHE
—
0.90 V vs. RHE
100.0
HMFCA (—/98.0)
—
1 h

265



Pd/C
20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
0.55 V vs. RHE
—
0.90 V vs. RHE
97
HMFCA (—/70.0)
—
1 h

265



Au14
5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
0.34 V vs. RHE
—
0.82 V vs. RHE
41.5
HMFCA (23.6/—)
45.8
2 h

269



Pd14
5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
0.25 V vs. RHE
—
0.82 V vs. RHE
16.0
HMFCA (2.5/—)
85.8
2 h

269



Pd1Au2/C
20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
0.30 V vs. RHE
—
0.90 V vs. RHE
100
FDCA (—/83.0)
—
1 h

265



Pd7/Au7
5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
0.13 V vs. RHE
—
0.82 V vs. RHE
42.4
FDCA (16.4/—)
85.8
2 h

269



NiO/Ni(OH)2
5 mM HMF + 1.0 M NaOH
—
—
0.016 A cm−2
—
FDCA (71.0/—)
84
4 h

267



Ni2P NPA/NF
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
∼1.35 V vs. RHE
∼1.37 V vs. RHE
1.423V vs. RHE
100.0
FDCA (—/100.0)
98.0
2.5 h

273



Ni3S2/NF
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
∼1.35 V vs. RHE
∼1.36 V vs. RHE
1.423V vs. RHE
100
FDCA (98.0/—)
98.0
58 C*

274



hp-Ni
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
<1.30 V vs. RHE
∼1.37 V vs. RHE
1.423V vs. RHE
∼100.0
FDCA (∼95.0/—)
98.0
58 C*

275



NixB-modified NF
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
∼1.38 V vs. RHE
∼1.41 V vs. RHE
1.45V vs. RHE
100.0
FDCA (98.5/—)
100.0
0.5 h

277



Ni3N@C
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
∼1.30 V vs. RHE
∼1.36 V vs. RHE
1.45V vs. RHE
∼100.0
FDCA (98.0/—)
99.0
174 C*

278



NiOOH
5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
∼1.20 V vs. RHE
—
1.47V vs. RHE
99.8
FDCA (96.0/—)
96.0
4.7 h

282



CoP/Cu foam
50 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.30 V vs. RHE
1.38 V vs. RHE
1.423 V vs. RHE
∼100.0
FDCA (∼90.0/—)
—
6.0 h

286



CoO–CoSe
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.30 V vs. RHE
∼1.38 V vs. RHE
1.43 V vs. RHE
∼100.0
FDCA (∼99.0/—)
97.9
∼1.0 h

287



Co3O4 NW/NF
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
0.89 V vs. RHE
∼1.40 V vs. RHE
1.47 V vs. RHE
100.0
FDCA (∼96.8/—)
96.6
∼5.7 h

288



NiCo2O4
5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.26 V vs. RHE
—
1.50 V vs. RHE
99.6
FDCA (—/90.8)
87.5
∼1.0 h

288



Ir–NiCo2O4
50 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.15 V vs. RHE
∼1.47 V vs. RHE
—
98
FDCA (98/—)
98
58 C*

290



CoOOH
5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
∼1.00 V vs. RHE
—
1.56 V vs. RHE
95.5
FDCA (35.1/—)
35.1
22.0 h

282



FeOOH
5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
∼1.64 V vs. RHE
—
1.71 V vs. RHE
16.0
FDCA (∼1.6/—)
∼1.6
2.3 h

282



Nanocrystalline CuF
5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH
1.25 V vs. RHE
—
1.62 V vs. RHE
99.9
FDCA (96.4/—)
95.3
41 C*

297



MnOx
20 mM 1.0 M H2SO4
∼1.35 V vs. RHE
—
1.60 V vs. RHE
99.9
FDCA (53.8/—)
33.8
—

298



3D VN HNs
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
∼1.34 V vs. RHE
∼1.37 V vs. RHE
20 mA
98.0
FDCA (—/96.0)
84.0
∼0.9 h

301



NiFe LDH
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.25 V vs. RHE
1.32 V vs. RHE
1.33 V vs. RHE
98
FDCA (98.0/—)
98.6
1.5 h

271



CuxS@NiCo LDH
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.19 V vs. RHE
∼1.24 V vs. RHE
1.32 V vs. RHE
∼100.0
FDCA (99.0/—)
99.0
58 C*

304



CoFe@NiFe LDH
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH
1.28 V vs. RHE
∼1.34 V vs. RHE
1.40 V vs. RHE
100
FDCA (—/∼100)
99.8
3.5 h

305



CoAl LDH
10 mM HMF + 0.1 M NaOH
—
—
0.5 V vs. SCE
100
FDCA (—/49)
40.8
—

302



E-CoAl-LDH-NSA
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M
1.30 V vs. RHE
—
1.52 V vs. RHE
—
—
99.4
60 C*

306



NiCoFe LDH
10 mM HMF + 1.0 M NaOH
∼1.23 V vs. RHE
1.51 V vs. RHE
1.52 V vs. RHE
95.5
FDCA (84.9/—)
∼90.0
1.0 h

308






Electrocatalytic upgrading of carboxylic acids
Electrochemical levulinic acid reduction reaction
Levulinic acid is a bio-based difunctional short-chain fatty acid produced from lignocellulosic biomass. Because of its simple preparation process and its keto and carboxyl groups, it has become an essential BDPM in producing value-added chemicals or fuels (Scheme 6). Western Europe and the United States are the main production areas of levulinic acid in the world, on a scale of about 200000 tons. The future annual global demand for 2-methyltetrahydrofuran, a biomass fuel additive derived from levulinic acid, is 14 billion liters.
 Scheme 6  The main pathways (primary (A and B) and secondary (C) electrochemical conversion) of the LAOR (black line) and LARR (red line). Note: “×” represents “no repetition”. 
Although the electrochemical levulinic acid reduction reaction (LARR) was reported more than a century ago, there is still a lack of research.309 Nilges et al. first applied electrochemistry technology to convert levulinic acid into n-octane via valeric acid over Pb- and Pt-based electrodes. Two possible ways were proposed to convert levulinic acid into octane, opening up a promising way to electro-catalyze levulinic acid (Scheme 7).249,310 In subsequent experiments, it was found that the electrolyte compositions, educt concentrations, and nature of the electrode materials had strong influences on the selectivities of product formation in the reaction system and led to the proposed pathways for the primary and secondary electrochemical conversion of levulinic acid (Scheme 7).
 Scheme 7  The two pathways for the conversion of levulinic acid to octane. Reproduced with permission from Nilges et al.249 Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Li et al. conducted the LARR in a single-polymer electrolyte membrane electrocatalytic (flow) cell reactor. They found that the conversion of levulinic acid at 1.5 V vs. RHE could reach 96.8% over a Pb electrode in 10 h through a four-electron transfer process.311 Furthermore, the addition of FA could also increase the conversion of levulinic acid.312 Han et al. designed PbS-based electrocatalysts for the electrocatalysis of levulinic acid.313 The FE of γ-valerolactone over PbS could reach 78.6% with a current density of 13.5 mA cm−2, and γ-valerolactone was the only product of the LARR. Bisselink et al. prepared three additional cathode materials (e.g., Cd, In, Zn), which selectively and efficiently produced valeric acid. They found that the selectivity of valeric acid on In and Zn electrodes was 99% and 96%, respectively, better than that of the known Pb electrodes.314
Electrochemical lactic acid reduction reaction
Lactic acid is an oxyacid with a hydroxyl group in the molecule, an α-hydroxyl acid, mainly produced by sugar under the action of lactic acid bacteria or as a by-product in the biorefinery processing of other biomass raw materials.315,316 Lactic acid is a vital BDPM because it has excellent applications in the food, medicine, cosmetics, and other industries. In addition, it can be used to synthesize many other critical organic chemicals.12,317,318 Currently, global lactic acid producers are mainly concentrated in the United States and China. Nearly 70% of the manufacturers use microbial fermentation for production. China produces about 30% of the market share of lactic acid, with a combined annual capacity of about 200000 tons. The electrochemical lactic acid oxidation reaction (LOR) on Pt-based electrodes under acidic conditions has been investigated. A mechanism has been proposed for the initial LOR to yield pyruvic acid, but the final product was mainly acetic acid or CO2 (Scheme 8, Mechanism I).319
 Scheme 8  Proposed mechanistic pathways for LOR. Reproduced with permission from Chen et al.320 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Chen et al. studied the LOR in acidic media using iridium oxide electrodes to remove lactic acid from industrial wastewater.320 They proposed two possible pathways using two Ir-based catalysts (Scheme 8, Mechanisms II and III). In Mechanism II, the Ir catalyst was first coordinated with lactic acid at a hydroxyl group, followed by β-hydride elimination resulting in a pyruvic acid–Ir complex. Proton-coupled electron transfer through the Ir catalyst and isomerization of ligated pyruvic acid led to a κ2-coordination complex, which could decarboxylate under oxidative electrochemical conditions. The resulting Ir–acetyl complex could react with a hydroxyl radical or generate acetic acid. In Mechanism III, lactic acid was first coordinated to Ir in a κ2 pattern through a carboxylate group. CO2 could then be eliminated under electrochemical conditions, giving a secondary Ir–alkyl complex. β-Hydride elimination of the Ir–alkyl complex then resulted in an Ir–acetaldehyde complex. Subsequently, in situ oxidation of Ir–aquo was conducted to generate a hydroxyl equivalent, which could be transferred in either an intermolecular or intramolecular rearrangement to the Ir–acetaldehyde, forming a hemiacetal Ir complex. The final β-hydride elimination of the hemiacetal resulted in the desired acetic acid on the active Ir sites. Mechanism II explained the LOR to yield acetic acid without pyruvic acid formation, which was similar to the end result of Mechanism I.319 After product analysis, acetic acid and formic acid were found to be intermediates in the primary reaction, and pyruvic acid was absent. Meanwhile, the CO2 selectivity was 89% at 2.7 V vs. SHE.
Yuksel et al. reported the reaction pathway for the LOR in subcritical water using Ti electrodes.321 They found that the conversion of lactic acid increased with increasing applied current, with a maximum conversion of 55% achieved. However, the main product remained acetaldehyde (24.73%), while the yields of acetic acid and acrylic acid were less than 2%. Zhu et al. used a titanium wire wrapped around the surface of a graphite felt anode to achieve 58% pyruvic acid selectivity under alkaline conditions (pH = 11.74) at 5.0 V applied voltage with H2 generated at the cathode. However, due to cleavage of the C–C bond, the selectivity of acetaldehyde (the main by-product) was as high as 16%.322 Martin-Yerga et al. studied the LOR with an electrodeposited PdNi catalyst on Ni foam in an alkaline medium, achieving a pyruvic acid yield of 88%.323
Electrochemical succinic acid reduction reaction
Succinic acid is a kind of dicarboxylic acid, and its natural source is the amber formed from the resin of Pinus. In addition, it widely exists in the tissues of many plants and animals, so it is also a very important BDPM. It is used as an important intermediate for the production of everyday consumer products with a considerable market share of billions. The global annual production and consumption are about 20000 and 30000 tons of succinic acid. Succinic acid is commercially produced from petrochemicals, while economically viable catalytic processes are absent for its large-scale production from biomass.
Because succinic acid contains two carboxylic acids and is easily oxidized to CO2, it is challenging to study the electrocatalysis of succinic acid. Many scientific research teams tried to make these molecules more stable toward complete oxidation and achieve better selectivity by employing lipidation or other protective groups to protect one of the groups.115,324,325 Several value-added products can be obtained, such as adipic acid, 3-hydroxypicolinic acid, acrylic acid, and other ether–ester molecules.
Palkovits et al. found that adipic acid diethyl ester and ethyl acrylate were available with high selectivities of 74% and 58% during Kolbe and non-Kolbe dimerization electrolysis (Scheme 9).326 The Ti/RuO2 anode could be an ideal alternative to convert mono-ethyl succinic acid (MESA) into diethyl adipate (DEA). In addition, they found that the same succinic acid monoethyl ester could be converted into ethyl acrylate (EA) by using a carbon electrode.
 Scheme 9  The two pathways of MESA to EDA (Kolbe dimerization electrolysis, black line) and EA (non-Kolbe dimerization electrolysis, red line), respectively. Reproduced with permission from Creusen et al.326 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Conclusions
In summary, with the excessive consumption of non-renewable energy sources such as petroleum, coal, and natural gas, relieving the dependence of industrial production on conventional fossil fuels and utilizing biomass energy has become a new trend in energy development. Despite the substantial advances in biomass utilization, the direct conversion of biomass into high-value-added chemicals and fuels remains challenging due to the lack of efficient biorefinery technology. The electrocatalytic upgrading of biomass-derived platform molecules (BDPMs) has emerged as tantalizing technology because of the mild operating conditions, controllable activity, and selectivity, providing a feasible vision for further industrialization. By focusing on the alcohol, furan, and carboxylic acid BDPMs, this review highlights the rational design and recent development of novel and efficient electrode materials for their upgrading into high-value-added chemicals and fuels in the past 20 years. Specifically, the strategies for advanced catalyst designs and modifications have been discussed to provide sufficient guidance to tailor the catalytic activities, selectivity, and stability of different heterogeneous catalysts. In addition, we concentrate on the reaction pathways and mechanisms, which will further direct the establishment of catalytic systems and the design of efficient electrocatalysts for the practical implementation of the technique.
Notably, such dedicated electrochemical biorefinery technology is still in its infancy, which provides intriguing opportunities, although substantial efforts are required to advance the field further.
(1) The developments in the electrocatalytic upgrading of “10 + 4” kinds of BDPMs are uneven. Various short-chain alcohol (e.g., ethanol and glycerol) direct fuel cells have been commercialized successfully, but due to the complexity of C–C bond breaking, the catalytic conversion of long-chain alcohols (e.g., xylitol and sorbitol) remains barely explored, which should be a key research direction in the future. As for furan compounds, research on electrochemical 5-hydroxymethylfurfural (HMF) oxidation reaction is exploding. However, studies on the transformation of other furans, such as the electrocatalytic oxidation or reduction of furfural, are limited. As one of the upstream raw materials for the production of various high-value-added chemicals, the development and utilization of furan compounds should focus more on the value of the product itself rather than on the hotness of the research topic. In the case of carboxylic acids, levulinic acid, lactic acid, and succinic acid showed great promise several decades ago. However, their efficient conversion is far from satisfactory due to limited understanding levels, which are necessary for the development and utilization of some new research systems and could be the focus of future developments in organic acid catalysis. Electrocatalytic biorefinery technology for isoprenes, biohydrocarbons, and hydroxypropionic acid/aldehyde has not been developed yet; researchers need to focus on the value of downstream products and rationally develop efficient research systems to promote the development of such platform molecule compounds. Accordingly, a comprehensive understanding of electrocatalytic biorefinery technology will lead to a better research direction for BDMPs at the vigorous development stage and find a development prospect for BDPMs at the stagnant development stage.
(2) Considering the scarcity of noble metals, it is essential to develop efficient non-noble metal catalysts such as Co, Fe, Ni, etc. Currently, electrode materials based on noble metals are still dominant in alcohol and carboxylic acid electrocatalysis. For example, despite being easily poisoned by the intermediate CO and expensive, commercial Pt/C electrodes remain the most successful catalysts for electrochemical ethanol and glycerol oxidation reactions. Although it is possible to reduce the load or control the morphology to reduce the economic burden, the development of non-noble metal catalysts and more efficient synthesis methods is the ultimate way to lower the costs. Non-noble-based electrocatalysts are gradually showing great potential. Therefore, the rational development of non-noble-based metal catalysts with optimized performance will attract significant research interest.
(3) It is necessary to develop highly active, selective, and poison-tolerant electrode materials. For instance, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are unique materials with intrinsically high activity for HMF electrooxidation; therefore, delamination into a few layers or even a single layer and the large-scale preparation of defective LDHs are very promising for further enhancing the performance of the electrocatalytic oxidation of HMF. However, successful demonstrations are limited to only a few biomass-derived platform molecules, which makes the rational design of more efficient and versatile catalysts for a broad scope of substrates with high commercialization potential desirable.
(4) The reaction pathways and mechanisms for the electrocatalytic upgrading of BDPMs are complex and obscure. There are many intermediates during the electrochemical biorefining process, resulting in low selectivities and FE towards target products, making the compositions of the value-added chemicals complex and challenging to separate. Therefore, more efforts should be devoted to elucidating the reaction mechanisms and conducting a detailed analysis of intermediates.
(5) Coupling reactions (e.g., hydrogen evolution reaction, CO2 reduction reaction, and N2 reduction reactions) showed great potential for the electrocatalytic upgrading of value-added fuels and chemicals, which provided a direction for the development of electrocatalytic BDPMs. In addition, there is excellent potential for catalyst designs, the conversion of coupling reactions, and product recovery and cost.
(6) Theoretical studies through density functional theory calculations and in situ spectroscopic analysis are significant for investigating the reaction pathways and mechanisms, the correlations between the intermediate species and active sites, and the roles of additives during the electrosynthesis process. In addition, the catalyst composition/structure–activity relationship of the system can be revealed. Therefore, the rational use of modern characterization tools and appropriate theoretical computation methods can promote basic research into electrocatalytic biomass-derived platform molecule valorization.
(7) The design of a continuous flow reactor is a vital step toward industrialization because it increases the interaction between the electrode materials and BDPMs and facilitates the facile separation of products. The use of a flow reaction can effectively avoid the overoxidation of the products and enable high selectivity. Furthermore, establishing photoelectrochemical cells is another efficient strategy that uses infinite solar energy to alleviate the requirement for electricity.
(8) Last but not least, the development of catalysts and catalytic systems with high current density and superior target product selectivity is the top priority for industrialization. Many researchers currently focus on how to improve a specific indicator (high current density, high FE, high selectivity and yield), which is not conducive to the industrial development of electrocatalytic biomass-derived platform molecule valorization. We hope to appeal to researchers to focus on the synergistic development of various indicators, which is essential for industrialization.
In conclusion, this review comprehensively introduces the reaction pathways/mechanisms of “10 + 4” kinds of BDPMs that have been reported for electrocatalytic biorefinery technology and calls for more research attention on high-value-added bio-chemicals and fuels by presenting various reaction intermediates and significant competing reactions in specific reactions. Importantly, we summarize excellent catalysts for each electrocatalytic system in detail, focusing on comparing the synthesis and modification of advanced electrode materials to explore the effects on the activities and selectivities/yields of the target products, to promote the practical application of the technique and provide guidance for future research directions. Although much progress has been made in BDPM electrocatalysis upgrading fields, the highly uneven development trend and low economic benefits have hindered commercialization. The challenges and prospects we present in this field may inspire the design of efficient electrocatalysts and guide the future optimization and commercial application of electrocatalytic systems. With continued research and development, biomass and BDPM electrocatalytic biorefinery technology coupled with renewable energy could substantially impact on the energy transition to a zero-carbon economy.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22205113, 22202105); the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20210626, BK20210608); the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions of China (21KJB150027, 21KJA150003); and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2022M711645).
References
I. W. Davies, Nature, 2019, 570, 175–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Qi, M. Conte, M. Anpo, Z. R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 13051–13085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Saidur, E. A. Abdelaziz, A. Demirbas, M. S. Hossain and S. Mekhilef, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 2262–2289 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Stradiotto, K. E. Toghill, L. Xiao, A. Moshar and R. G. Compton, Electroanalysis, 2009, 21, 2627–2633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, N. Kumar, P. Baredar and A. Shukla, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 45, 530–539 CrossRef .
C. Bianchini and P. K. Shen, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 4183–4206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Ho, H. H. Ngo and W. Guo, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 169, 742–749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li and Y. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18258–18270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Werpy and G. Petersen, Top Value Added Chemicals from Biomass: Volume I – Results of Screening for Potential Candidates from Sugars and Synthesis Gas, United States,  2004 Search PubMed .
J. J. Bozell and G. R. Petersen, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 539–554 RSC .
A. Corma, S. Iborra and A. Velty, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2411–2502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbaş, Energy Convers. Manage., 2001, 42, 1357–1378 CrossRef .
P. Gallezot, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 734–737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Li and B. M. Trost, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 13197–13202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Green, J. Lee, H. J. Kim, G. A. Tompsett, W. B. Kim and G. W. Huber, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 1869–1879 RSC .
J. J. Roylance, T. W. Kim and K. S. Choi, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1840–1847 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Cha and K. S. Choi, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 328–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dodekatos, S. Schünemann and H. Tüysüz, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 6301–6333 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, K. J. P. Schouten, J. C. van der Waal, E. de Jong and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6704–6717 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Camara, R. B. de Lima and T. Iwasita, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 585, 128–131 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Deluga, J. R. Salge, L. D. Schmidt and X. E. Verykios, Science, 2004, 303, 993–997 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haruta, N. Yamada, T. Kobayashi and S. Iijima, J. Catal., 1989, 115, 301–309 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. F. Kamarudin, S. K. Kamarudin, M. S. Masdar and W. R. W. Daud, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 9438–9453 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. F. Akhairi and S. K. Kamarudin, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 4214–4228 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. S. Badwal, S. Giddey, A. Kulkarni, J. Goel and S. Basu, Appl. Energy, 2015, 145, 80–103 CrossRef CAS .
C. Busó-Rogero, V. Grozovski, F. J. Vidal-Iglesias, J. Solla-Gullón, E. Herrero and J. M. Feliu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7068–7076 RSC .
A. E. Russell, Faraday Discuss., 2008, 140, 9–10 RSC .
M. C. Morin, C. Lamy, J. M. Léger, J. L. Vasquez and A. Aldaz, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1990, 283, 287–302 CrossRef CAS .
R. Benítez, J. Soler and L. Daza, J. Power Sources, 2005, 151, 108–113 CrossRef .
M. Alvisi, G. Galtieri, L. Giorgi, R. Giorgi, E. Serra and M. A. Signore, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2005, 200, 1325–1329 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, M. C. Lefebvre and P. G. Pickup, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 459, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu and J. Xi, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 67, 166–171 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. García-Mateos, T. Cordero-Lanzac, R. Berenguer, E. Morallón, D. Cazorla-Amorós, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 211, 18–30 CrossRef .
G. A. Camara and T. Iwasita, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 578, 315–321 CrossRef CAS .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Seredych, G. Q. Lu, N. K. Kodiweera, P. E. Stallworth, S. Greenbaum and T. J. Bandosz, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1576–1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Hulicova-Jurcakova, M. Kodama, S. Shiraishi, H. Hatori, Z. H. Zhu and G. Q. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1800–1809 CrossRef CAS .
R. Berenguer, R. Ruiz-Rosas, A. Gallardo, D. Cazorla-Amorós, E. Morallón, H. Nishihara, T. Kyotani, J. Rodríguez-Mirasol and T. Cordero, Carbon, 2015, 95, 681–689 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Cho, B. Choi, Y. H. Cho, H. S. Park and Y.-E. Sung, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 378–381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, J. Qiao, J. Yuan, J. Shen, A. J. Wang and S. Huang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 4902–4911 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, K. Wang, Q. Yuan, Z. Shen, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2963–2968 RSC .
A. Velázquez-Palenzuela, E. Brillas, C. Arias, F. Centellas, J. A. Garrido, R. M. Rodríguez and P.-L. Cabot, J. Power Sources, 2013, 225, 163–171 CrossRef .
P. Song, L. P. Mei, A. J. Wang, K. M. Fang and J. J. Feng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 1645–1653 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, N. Wang, Y. Han, C. Gao, Y. Xu, M. Li and Y. Shao, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ataee-Esfahani, M. Imura and Y. Yamauchi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13611–13615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Porter, H. Wu, Z. Quan and J. Fang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1867–1877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, M. Waje, W. Li and Y. Yan, Angew. Chem., 2007, 119, 4138–4141 CrossRef .
B. Lim, M. Jiang, P. H. Camargo, E. C. Cho, J. Tao, X. Lu, Y. Zhu and Y. Xia, Science, 2009, 324, 1302–1305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Serpell, J. Cookson, D. Ozkaya and P. D. Beer, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 478–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, H. Zang, G. Sun and Q. Xin, Chin. J. Catal., 2006, 27, 15–19 CrossRef CAS .
F. Vigier, C. Coutanceau, F. Hahn, E. M. Belgsir and C. Lamy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 563, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, G. Sun, S. Sun, J. Liu, S. Tang, H. Li, B. Zhou and Q. Xin, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 50, 5384–5389 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamy, S. Rousseau, E. M. Belgsir, C. Coutanceau and J. M. Léger, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3901–3908 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Tusi, N. S. O. Polanco, S. G. da Silva, E. V. Spinacé and A. O. Neto, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 143–146 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Freitas, E. C. Pereira and P. A. Christensen, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1147–1150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, J. Wu, J. Xi, J. Wang, W. Zhu, L. Chen and X. Qiu, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 1087–1090 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Zhang, T. Sheng, Y. X. Wang, X. M. Qu, J. M. Zhang, Z. C. Zhang, H. G. Liao, F. C. Zhu, S. X. Dou, Y. X. Jiang and S. G. Sun, ACS Catal., 2016, 7, 892–895 CrossRef .
Z. Xu, L. Rao, H. Song, Z. Yan, L. Zhang and S. Yang, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 305–312 CrossRef CAS .
B. Jin, H. Sun, M. Huang and L. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 142, 223–227 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ahmad, A. T. Mohamed, K. M. Youssef, S. Kundu, K. A. Mkhoyan and S. Y. Al-Qaradawi, Electrochem. Commun., 2019, 101, 61–67 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kowal, M. Li, M. Shao, K. Sasaki, M. B. Vukmirovic, J. Zhang, N. S. Marinkovic, P. Liu, A. I. Frenkel and R. R. Adzic, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 325–330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Monyoncho, S. N. Steinmann, C. Michel, E. A. Baranova, T. K. Woo and P. Sautet, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4894–4906 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Yang, J. Ren, Q. X. Li, Z. Y. Zhou, S. G. Sun and W. B. Cai, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 798–803 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, X. Y. Ma, H. Wang, R. Feng, J. Zhou, P. N. Duchesne, P. Zhang, F. Chen, N. Han, F. Zhao, J. Zhou, W. B. Cai and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703057 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Qiu, J. Zhang, J. Jin, J. Sun, H. Tang, Q. Chen, Z. Zhang, W. Sun, G. Meng, Q. Xu, Y. Zhu, A. Han, L. Gu, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 5273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Richter, C. Essbach, I. Senkovska, S. Kaskel and E. Brunner, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6042–6045 RSC .
P. A. Christensen, S. W. M. Jones and A. Hamnett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24681–24689 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, L. Xin, K. Sun and W. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 12686–12697 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X.-L. Yuan, F.-L. Lyu, X.-C. Wang, X.-J. Jiang, M.-H. Cao and Q. Zhang, Rare Met., 2020, 39, 792–799 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, S. C. Lai, P. Rodriguez and M. T. Koper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 6914–6917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tremiliosi-Filho, E. R. Gonzalez, A. J. Motheo, E. M. Belgsir, J. M. Léger and C. Lamy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1998, 444, 31–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Feng, A. Q. Li, Z. Lei and A. J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 2570–2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Han, D. Wang, D. Liu and T. You, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9148–9154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. F. Yu, N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, L. Huang, J. Xiao, Y. H. Wen and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5097–5101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Kang, Q. Xue, Y. Zhao, X. F. Li, P. J. Jin and Y. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1801239 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Feng, S. Long, B. Chen, W. Jia, S. Xie, Y. Sun, X. Tang, S. Yang, X. Zeng and L. Lin, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 6398–6405 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Daryakenari, D. Hosseini, Y. L. Ho, T. Saito, A. Apostoluk, C. R. Muller and J. J. Delaunay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15975–15984 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hassen, S. A. El-Safty, K. Tsuchiya, A. Chatterjee, A. Elmarakbi, M. A. Shenashen and M. Sakai, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 24330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Chen, Y. Luo, L. X. Ding and H. Wang, ACS Catal., 2017, 8, 526–530 CrossRef .
M. Pagliaro, R. Ciriminna, H. Kimura, M. Rossi and C. D. Pina, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 4434–4440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Badia-Fabregat, L. Rago, J. A. Baeza and A. Guisasola, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17204–17213 CrossRef CAS .
Y. K. Leong, P. L. Show, C. W. Ooi, T. C. Ling and J. C. Lan, J. Biotechnol., 2014, 180, 52–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Feng, S. Long, X. Tang, Y. Sun, R. Luque, X. Zeng and L. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6042–6093 RSC .
S. Cui, J. Borgemenke, Z. Liu, H. M. Keener and Y. Li, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 198–206 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ahmad, M. H. Ab Rahim, T. M. Alqahtani, T. Witoon, J. W. Lim and C. K. Cheng, Chemosphere, 2021, 276, 130128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Falase, M. Main, K. Garcia, A. Serov, C. Lau and P. Atanassov, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 66, 295–301 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Fernández, C. A. Martins, M. E. Martins and G. A. Camara, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 686–691 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Y. Feng, X. Zhu, S. Guo, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703057 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Matsuoka, Y. Iriyama, T. Abe, M. Matsuoka and Z. Ogumi, J. Power Sources, 2005, 150, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Johnson and K. A. Taconi, Environ. Prog., 2007, 26, 338–348 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ciriminna, G. Palmisano, C. D. Pina, M. Rossi and M. Pagliaro, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 6993–6995 CrossRef CAS .
E. Habibi and H. Razmi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 16800–16809 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. Kim, Y. Kwon, J. Lee, T. W. Kim, Y. Noh, W. B. Kim, M. H. Seo, K. Kim and H. J. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 555–568 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Kim, D. H. K. Jackson, H. Chang, H. W. Kim, J. Lee, J.-R. Kim, Y. Noh, W. B. Kim, K.-Y. Lee and H. J. Kim, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 273, 119037 CrossRef CAS .
C. He, J. Tao, G. He, P. K. Shen and Y. Qiu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7316–7322 RSC .
I. Bar-On, R. Kirchain and R. Roth, J. Power Sources, 2002, 109, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Zhu, C. Liu, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, M. N. Hedhili, A. Fratalocchi and Y. Han, Small, 2015, 11, 5214–5221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Du, G. Yang, E. Wong, N. A. Deskins, A. I. Frenkel, D. Su and X. Teng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 10862–10865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Borup, J. Meyers, B. Pivovar, Y. S. Kim, R. Mukundan, N. Garland, D. Myers, M. Wilson, F. Garzon, D. Wood, P. Zelenay, K. More, K. Stroh, T. Zawodzinski, J. Boncella, J. E. McGrath, M. Inaba, K. Miyatake, M. Hori, K. Ota, Z. Ogumi, S. Miyata, A. Nishikata, Z. Siroma, Y. Uchimoto, K. Yasuda, K.-i. Kimijima and N. Iwashita, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 3904–3951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sharma and B. G. Pollet, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 96–119 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-L. Naidoo, S. Naidoo, L. Petrik, A. Nechaev and P. Ndungu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 9459–9469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xie, X. Zhou, W. Zhou, K. Cai, W. Li, S. Luo and C. Yao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 189, 215–223 CrossRef CAS .
C. Susut, T. D. Nguyen, G. B. Chapman and Y. Tong, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 6135–6142 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Song, S. B. Han and K. W. Park, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1981–1984 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, W. Zhou, Y. Du, P. Yang and C. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 882–885 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Caneppele, T. S. Almeida, C. R. Zanata, É. Teixeira-Neto, P. S. Fernández, G. A. Camara and C. A. Martins, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 200, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zubiaur and N. Job, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 225, 364–378 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. P. Oliveira, J. Milikić, E. Daş, A. B. Yurtcan, D. M. F. Santos and B. Šljukić, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 238, 454–464 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim, S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo, S. Green, G. W. Huber and W. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 890–893 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Seo, S. M. Choi, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 182–185 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Choi, M. H. Seo, H. J. Kim and W. B. Kim, Carbon, 2011, 49, 904–909 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ning, X. Zhou, J. Luo, L. Ma, X. Xu and L. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 319, 129–137 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezaei, S. Saeidi-Boroujeni, E. Havakeshian and A. A. Ensafi, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 203, 41–50 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, L. Sun, H. Liao, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, A. C. Fisher and Z. J. Xu, J. Catal., 2017, 356, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Sun, F. Gao, Y. Zhang, C. Wang, X. Zhu and Y. Du, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 441–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Z. Yang, X. X. Lin, X. F. Zhang, A. J. Wang, X. Y. Zhu and J. J. Feng, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 735, 2123–2132 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, Q. Shao, D. Zhao, L. Bu, J. Guo and X. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700830 CrossRef .
Y. Qin, M. Luo, Y. Sun, C. Li, B. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Li, L. Wang and S. Guo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5581–5590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Roca-Ayats, O. Guillén-Villafuerte, G. García, M. Soler-Vicedo, E. Pastor and M. V. Martínez-Huerta, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 382–391 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Frota, V. V. Silva de Barros, B. R. S. de Araújo, Â. G. Purgatto and J. J. Linares, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 23095–23106 CrossRef .
A. C. Garcia, M. J. Kolb, C. van Nierop y Sanchez, J. Vos, Y. Y. Birdja, Y. Kwon, G. Tremiliosi-Filho and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4491–4500 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. Kim, H. Han, W. B. Kim, H. Chang, T.-M. Chung, J. H. Han, H. W. Kim and H. J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15992–16005 RSC .
J. Han, Y. Kim, D. H. K. Jackson, K.-E. Jeong, H.-J. Chae, K.-Y. Lee and H. J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2018, 96, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Kim, H. W. Kim, D. H. K. Jackson, D. Lee, H. Chang, H.-J. Chae, K.-Y. Lee and H. J. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 83, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, W. Jing, F. Wang, S. Liu, X. Liu and Z. Lei, J. Power Sources, 2018, 399, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Ahmad, S. Singh, C. K. Cheng, H. R. Ong, H. Abdullah, M. R. Khan and S. Wongsakulphasatch, Catal. Commun., 2020, 139, 105964 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ran, Q. Qu, C. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Qian, Q. Wang, C. Jiang, L. Yang and L. Li, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 4631–4638 RSC .
A. Nakova, M. Ilieva, T. Boijadjieva-Scherzer and V. Tsakova, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 643–650 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, T. Li, Y. Li, L. Yan and L. An, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 209, 271–279 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yuan, J. Zhang, P. K. Shen, C. M. Li and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 817–828 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Garcia, E. B. Ferreira, V. V. Silva de Barros, J. J. Linares and G. Tremiliosi-Filho, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 793, 188–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Zanata, P. S. Fernández, H. E. Troiani, A. L. Soldati, R. Landers, G. A. Camara, A. E. Carvalho and C. A. Martins, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 445–455 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang and D. S. Su, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 3639–3645 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shi, B. Zhang, Y. Lin, Q. Wang, Q. Zhang and D. S. Su, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7844–7854 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Choi, M. Kim, H. C. Kwon, S. J. Cho, S. Yun, H. T. Kim, K. J. Mayrhofer, H. Kim and M. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Arrigo, M. E. Schuster, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, G. Wowsnick, L. L. Sun, K. E. Hermann, M. Friedrich, P. Kast, M. Hävecker, A. Knop-Gericke and R. Schlögl, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2740–2753 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bulushev, M. Zacharska, A. S. Lisitsyn, O. Y. Podyacheva, F. S. Hage, Q. M. Ramasse, U. Bangert and L. G. Bulusheva, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3442–3451 CrossRef CAS .
Z. He, B. Dong, W. Wang, G. Yang, Y. Cao, H. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Wang, F. Peng and H. Yu, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2893–2901 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Z. Liu, H. Yang, Q. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Fang, S. Zou and K. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4217–4221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Zhou, Z. Z. Huang, D. J. Chen, Q. Wang, N. Tian and S. G. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 411–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liang, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11496–11500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, O. Metin, D. Su and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3681–3684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, J. Wang and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9481–9487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, S. Zhang, X. Sun and S. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15354–15357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, D. Li, H. Zhu, S. Zhang, N. M. Markovic, V. R. Stamenkovic and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3465–3468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Hong, C. Shang, J. Wang and E. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2910–2915 RSC .
H. Zhang, M. Jin and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8035–8049 RSC .
K. Y. Cho, Y. S. Yeom, H. Y. Seo, P. Kumar, A. S. Lee, K. Y. Baek and H. G. Yoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1524–1535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jin, J. Zhu, R. Dong and Q. Huo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 829–834 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, Y. Qin, X. Chen, W. Xu, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 114, 740–748 CrossRef CAS .
C. Koenigsmann, A. C. Santulli, K. Gong, M. B. Vukmirovic, W. P. Zhou, E. Sutter, S. S. Wong and R. R. Adzic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9783–9795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Guo and S. Dong, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2326–2331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Yan, J. Wang, K. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Xiong, C. Wang, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Du and P. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15932–15939 RSC .
J.-h. Zhang, Y.-j. Liang, N. Li, Z.-y. Li, C.-w. Xu and S. P. Jiang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 156–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Shen, J. Xi and X. Luo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28953–28959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Song, F. Gao, Y. Zhang, C. Chen, C. Wang, S. Li, H. Shang and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9842–9848 RSC .
F. Gao, Y. Zhang, P. Song, J. Wang, B. Yan, Q. Sun, L. Li, X. Zhu and Y. Du, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4831–4836 RSC .
M. C. Moraes, G. G. Junco, T. F. M. Moreira, C. J. G. Pinheiro, P. Olivi, D. Profeti and L. P. R. Profeti, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102922 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, H. Yan, C. Zeng, P. S. Thapa, B. Subramaniam and R. V. Chaudhari, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 13157–13164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, K. Wang, P. Tsiakaras and P. K. Shen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117951 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Castagna, J. M. Sieben, A. E. Alvarez and M. M. E. Duarte, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 5970–5982 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. C. de Souza, V. Y. Yukuhiro, R. A. Vicente, C. T. G. V. M. T. Pires, J. L. Bott-Neto and P. S. Fernández, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2131–2137 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. R. Silva, F. E. López-Suárez, M. Perez-Cadenas, S. F. Santos, L. P. da Costa, K. I. B. Eguiluz and G. R. Salazar-Banda, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 198, 38–48 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, Y. Birdja, I. Spanos, P. Rodriguez and M. T. M. Koper, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 759–764 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Garcia, Y. Y. Birdja, G. Tremiliosi-Filho and M. T. M. Koper, J. Catal., 2017, 346, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. C. de Souza, R. A. Vicente, V. Y. Yukuhiro, C. T. G. V. M. T. Pires, W. Cheuquepán, J. L. Bott-Neto, J. Solla-Gullón and P. S. Fernández, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 5104–5110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, H. J. Kim, E. J. Lim, Y. Kim, Y. Noh, G. W. Huber and W. B. Kim, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2877–2887 RSC .
Z. Li, G. Qiu, Z. Jiang, W. Zhuang, J. Wu and X. Du, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 22538–22547 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Shen and J. Xi, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 604–612 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, J. Ye, Q. Yuan, X. Yang, Z. Xie, F. Zhao, Z. Zhou, L. Gu and X. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908235 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, Y. Shen, X. Luo, G. Liu and Y. Cao, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 3423–3430 RSC .
J. Zhao, W. Jing, T. Tan, X. Liu, Y. Kang and W. Wang, New J.
Chem., 2020, 44, 4604–4612 RSC .
C. Zhai, J. Hu, H. Gao, L. Zeng, M. Xue, Z.-Q. Liu and M. Zhu, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 93, 477–484 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chamorro-Coral, A. Caillard, P. Brault, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Nanoscale Adv., 2021, 3, 1730–1740 RSC .
B.-C. Liu, S.-L. Chen, X.-Y. Ling, Q.-X. Li, C.-W. Xu and Z.-L. Liu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 24705–24711 RSC .
M. Wang, H.-S. Tsai, C. Zhang, C. Wang and S.-H. Ho, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2022, 33, 2807–2816 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zalineeva, S. Baranton and C. Coutanceau, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 705–717 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jin, H. Zhang, Z. Xie and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7850–7854 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-E. Guima, L. M. Alencar, G. C. da Silva, M. A. G. Trindade and C. A. Martins, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 1202–1207 CrossRef .
A. Kahyaoglu, B. Beden and C. Lamy, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kwon, K. J. P. Schouten and M. T. M. Koper, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1176–1185 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valter, M. Busch, B. Wickman, H. Grönbeck, J. Baltrusaitis and A. Hellman, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10489–10494 CrossRef CAS .
K. I. B. Eguiluz, G. R. P. Malpass, M. M. S. Pupo, G. R. Salazar-Banda and L. A. Avaca, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 4012–4024 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cheng, J. Liu, M. N. Banis, D. Geng, R. Li, S. Ye, S. Knights and X. Sun, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 15967–15974 CrossRef CAS .
N. Y. Suzuki, P. V. B. Santiago, T. S. Galhardo, W. A. Carvalho, J. Souza-Garcia and C. A. Angelucci, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 780, 391–395 CrossRef CAS .
N. Benipal, J. Qi, Q. Liu and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 121–130 CrossRef CAS .
R. Boukil, N. Tuleushova, D. Cot, B. Rebiere, V. Bonniol, J. Cambedouzou, S. Tingry, D. Cornu and Y. Holade, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 8848–8856 RSC .
M. Zhao, Z. Lyu, M. Xie, Z. D. Hood, Z. Cao, M. Chi and Y. Xia, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900843 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Chen, Z. Z. Yang, A. J. Wang, K. M. Fang and J. J. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 509, 10–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Liu, L. X. Chen, D. N. Li, A. J. Wang, Q. L. Zhang and J. J. Feng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 508, 551–558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Y. Shen and X. Luo, J. Catal., 2020, 381, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yongprapat, A. Therdthianwong and S. Therdthianwong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 847, 113225 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Dong, W. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Wang, L. Zhang and Z. Lei, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 93, 500–508 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rezaei, E. Havakeshian and A. A. Ensafi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 782, 108–116 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inoue, S. Kimura, Y. Teraoka, M. Chiku, E. Higuchi and B. T. X. Lam, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 18664–18671 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, Z. Liu, B. Zhao and J. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 117, 107976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nandenha, C. E. D. Ramos, S. G. Silva, R. F. B. Souza, E. H. Fontes, C. A. Ottoni and A. O. Neto, Electroanalysis, 2021, 33, 1115–1120 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, B. Yan, K. Zhang, J. Wang, S. Li, C. Wang, Y. Shiraishi, Y. Du and P. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 245, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qi, N. Benipal, C. Liang and W. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 494–503 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Holade, D. P. Hickey and S. D. Minteer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17154–17162 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Kang, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, D. Chai and Z. Lei, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 1272–1280 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, L.-Y. Jiang, J.-J. Feng, W.-D. Liu, J. Yuan and A.-J. Wang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 6695–6704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Duan, Z. Liu, B. Zhao and J. Liu, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 15769–15774 RSC .
N. Xaba, R. M. Modibedi, M. K. Mathe and L. E. Khotseng, Electroanalysis, 2020, 32, 2852–2859 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, P. Song, C. Fernandez, J. Wang, M. Zhu, Y. Shiraishi and Y. Du, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 12659–12665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ashok and A. Kumar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2021, 46, 4788–4797 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kang, W. Wang, Y. Pu, J. Li, D. Chai and Z. Lei, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 308, 419–427 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lin, Y. Wei, W. Liu, Y. Yu and J. Hu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 1403–1411 CrossRef CAS .
B. Habibi and N. Delnavaz, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 31797–31806 RSC .
M. E. Ghaith, G. A. El-Nagar, M. G. A. El-Moghny, H. H. Alalawy, M. E. El-Shakre and M. S. El-Deab, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 9658–9668 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. E. Houache, E. Cossar, S. Ntais and E. A. Baranova, J. Power Sources, 2018, 375, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bott-Neto, T. S. Martins, S. A. S. Machado and E. A. Ticianelli, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 30810–30818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Ding, P. Kannan, P. Subramanian and S. Ji, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 28821–28835 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xiao, Y. Miao, W. Li, Y. Yang and X. Liang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 209–216 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sivasakthi and M. V. Sangaranarayanan, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 8352–8362 RSC .
M. S. E. Houache, R. Safari, U. O. Nwabara, T. Rafaïdeen, G. A. Botton, P. J. A. Kenis, S. Baranton, C. Coutanceau and E. A. Baranova, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 8725–8738 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, D. Ma, J. Pérez-Ramírez and Z. Chen, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 3, 2100169 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Z. Jin and Z. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2022, 9, e2105204 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lam, A. J. Bloomfield and P. T. Anastas, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1958–1968 RSC .
X. Han, H. Sheng, C. Yu, T. W. Walker, G. W. Huber, J. Qiu and S. Jin, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 6741–6752 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, M. Hirohara, T. Maekawa, R. Chang, T. Hayashi and C.-Y. Chiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118543 CrossRef CAS .
P. Andersson, J. Verendel and T. Church, Synthesis, 2011, 1649–1677 CrossRef .
L. J. Torres-Pacheco, A. De Leon-Rodriguez, L. Álvarez-Contreras, M. Guerra-Balcázar and N. Arjona, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 353, 136593 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xi, Y. Zhang, Q. Xia, X. Liu, J. Ren, G. Lu and Y. Wang, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 459, 52–58 CrossRef CAS .
L. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes, I. Fonseca, F. Hahn and C. Lamy, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 1423–1430 CrossRef .
L. J. Torres-Pacheco, L. Álvarez-Contreras, V. Lair, M. Cassir, J. Ledesma-García, M. Guerra-Balcázar and N. Arjona, Fuel, 2019, 250, 103–116 CrossRef CAS .
O. Enea and J. P. Ango, Electrochim. Acta, 1989, 34, 391–397 CrossRef CAS .
L. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes, I. Fonseca, J. M. Léger and C. Lamy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 432, 193–198 CrossRef .
I. Fonseca, M. I. S. Lopes, J. L. Santos and L. Proença, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2701–2706 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Yang and T.-C. Wen, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 44, 207–218 CrossRef CAS .
L. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes, I. Fonseca, K. B. Kokoh, J. M. Léger and C. Lamy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1997, 432, 237–242 CrossRef .
J. M. Léger, F. Hahn, B. Beden, C. Lamy, M. F. Bento, I. Fonseca and M. I. S. Lopes, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1993, 356, 255–267 CrossRef .
J. M. Léger, I. Fonseca, F. Bento and I. Lopes, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1990, 285, 125–131 CrossRef .
A. Oyarce, C. Gonzalez, R. B. Lima, R. W. Lindström, C. Lagergren and G. Lindbergh, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 116, 379–387 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zadick, L. Dubau, N. Sergent, G. Berthomé and M. Chatenet, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4819–4824 CrossRef CAS .
N. Arjona, G. Trejo, J. Ledesma-García, L. G. Arriaga and M. Guerra-Balcázar, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15630–15638 RSC .
C. Wang, H. Wang, C. Zhai, F. Ren, M. Zhu, P. Yang and Y. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4389–4398 RSC .
L. J. Torres-Pacheco, A. Osornio-Villa, N. A. García-Gómez, A. Olivas, R. Valdez, M. Guerra-Balcázar, L. Álvarez-Contreras and N. Arjona, Fuel, 2020, 274, 117864 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. F. Matos, L. F. A. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes, I. T. E. Fonseca, A. Rodes and A. Aldaz, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 609, 42–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. F. Matos, L. Proença, M. I. S. Lopes and I. T. E. Fonseca, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2004, 571, 111–117 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kannan, A. R. Kim and D. J. Yoo, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 893–902 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kannan, A. R. Kim, K. S. Nahm and D. J. Yoo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 6787–6797 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barrett, J. N. Chheda, G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Appl. Catal., B, 2006, 66, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, M. Chen, Q. Guo and Y. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Román, J. C. Hasse, J. W. Medlin and A. Holewinski, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10305–10316 CrossRef .
A. M. Román, N. Agrawal, J. C. Hasse, M. J. Janik, J. W. Medlin and A. Holewinski, J. Catal., 2020, 391, 327–335 CrossRef .
J. T. Brosnahan, Z. Zhang, Z. Yin and S. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 2312–2316 RSC .
L. Liu, H. Liu, W. Huang, Y. He, W. Zhang, C. Wang and H. Lin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 804, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
P. Nilges, T. R. dos Santos, F. Harnisch and U. Schröder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5231–5235 RSC .
X. H. Chadderdon, D. J. Chadderdon, J. E. Matthiesen, Y. Qiu, J. M. Carraher, J. P. Tessonnier and W. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 14120–14128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jung, A. N. Karaiskakis and E. J. Biddinger, Catal. Today, 2019, 323, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Han, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 899–908 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jung and E. J. Biddinger, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 6500–6508 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. May and E. J. Biddinger, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 3212–3221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, J. Song, H. Liu, Z. Xie, C. Xie, Y. Hu, X. Huang, M. Hua and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 4692–4698 RSC .
N. Jiang, X. Liu, J. Dong, B. You, X. Liu and Y. Sun, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 3, 491–495 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, M. Xu, L. Wei, Y. Wei, Y. Hu, W. Fang and C. G. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kubota and K.-S. Choi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 9596–9600 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhou, Y. Chen, P. Luan, X. Zhang, Z. Yuan, S.-X. Guo, Q. Gu, B. Johannessen, M. Mollah, A. L. Chaffee, D. R. Turner and J. Zhang, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3028–3038 RSC .
U. Sanyal, K. Koh, L. C. Meyer, A. Karkamkar and O. Y. Gutiérrez, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2020, 51, 27–36 CrossRef .
R. J. Dixit, K. Bhattacharyya, V. K. Ramani and S. Basu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4201–4212 RSC .
M. J. Climent, A. Corma and S. Iborra, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 520–540 RSC .
B. Kamm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5056–5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Roman-Leshkov, J. N. Chheda and J. A. Dumesic, Science, 2006, 312, 1933–1937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Chadderdon, L. Xin, J. Qi, Y. Qiu, P. Krishna, K. L. More and W. Li, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3778–3786 RSC .
K. R. Vuyyuru and P. Strasser, Catal. Today, 2012, 195, 144–154 CrossRef CAS .
G. Grabowski, J. Lewkowski and R. Skowroński, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 1995 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, W. Shi, X. Wan, Y. Meng, Y. Yao, Z. Guo, Y. Dai, C. Wang and Y. Yang, Catal. Today, 2019, 330, 92–100 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, M. Gu and B. S. Kim, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 6812–6822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Cardiel, B. J. Taitt and K.-S. Choi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11138–11149 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, L. Dang, Z. Xu, H.-Q. Yu, S. Jin and G. W. Huber, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5533–5541 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Beejapur, Q. Zhang, K. Hu, L. Zhu, J. Wang and Z. Ye, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2777–2830 CrossRef CAS .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9913–9917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, N. Jiang and Y. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13639–13646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, X. Liu and Y. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 4564–4570 CrossRef CAS .
X. Song, X. Liu, H. Wang, Y. Guo and Y. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 17348–17356 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barwe, J. Weidner, S. Cychy, D. M. Morales, S. Dieckhofer, D. Hiltrop, J. Masa, M. Muhler and W. Schuhmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11460–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, Y. Zou, L. Tao, W. Chen, L. Zhou, Z. Liu, B. Zhou, G. Huang, H. Lin and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15895–15903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. J. Holzhäuser, T. Janke, F. Öztas, C. Broicher and R. Palkovits, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2020, 4, 1900151 CrossRef .
L. Gao, Z. Liu, J. Ma, L. Zhong, Z. Song, J. Xu, S. Gan, D. Han and L. Niu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 261, 118235 CrossRef .
F. Kong and M. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 1182–1188 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Taitt, D.-H. Nam and K.-S. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 660–670 CrossRef .
M. Cai, S. Ding, B. Gibbons, X. Yang, M. C. Kessinger and A. J. Morris, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 14361–14364 RSC .
X. Deng, G. Y. Xu, Y. J. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Zhang, J. F. Li, X. Z. Fu and J. L. Luo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 20535–20542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lu, K. H. Wu, B. Zhang, J. Chen, F. Li, B. J. Su, P. Yan, J. M. Chen and W. Qi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 14528–14535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, R. Boonstra, I. M. T. Rodriguez and Y. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 386–390 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Song, M. Hua, Z. Xie, S. Liu, T. Wu, G. Yang and B. Han, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 843–849 RSC .
M. J. Kang, H. Park, J. Jegal, S. Y. Hwang, Y. S. Kang and H. G. Cha, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 242, 85–91 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, H. J. Bongard, M. Yu and F. Schuth, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 5199–5206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, T. Liu, C. L. Dong, Y. C. Huang, Y. Li, J. Chen, Y. Zou and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, e2007056 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zhao, Z. Zhuang, X. Cao, C. Zhang, Q. Peng, C. Chen and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2215–2264 RSC .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z.-Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C.-R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Kaiser, Z. Chen, D. F. Akl, S. Mitchell and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11703–11809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Huang, Z. L. Zhao, M. Wang, B. Xiang, J. Li, Z. Feng, H. Xu and M. Gu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7425–7433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Chen, S. Ji, Y. Tang, W. Chen, A. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiong, Y. Wu, Y. Gong, T. Yao, W. Liu, L. Zheng, J. Dong, Y. Wang, Z. Zhuang, W. Xing, C. T. He, C. Peng, W. C. Cheong, Q. Li, M. Zhang, Z. Chen, N. Fu, X. Gao, W. Zhu, J. Wan, J. Zhang, L. Gu, S. Wei, P. Hu, J. Luo, J. Li, C. Chen, Q. Peng, X. Duan, Y. Huang, X. M. Chen, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Chem., 2020, 12, 764–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, H. Jiang, Y. Lin, H. Liu, Q. He, S. Chen, T. Duan and L. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707522 CrossRef PubMed .
D.-H. Nam, B. J. Taitt and K.-S. Choi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 1197–1206 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kubota and K. S. Choi, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2138–2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-R. Zhang, B.-X. Wang, L. Qin, Q. Li and Y.-M. Fan, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1108–1113 RSC .
J. J. Roylance and K.-S. Choi, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2956–2960 RSC .
S. Li, X. Sun, Z. Yao, X. Zhong, Y. Cao, Y. Liang, Z. Wei, S. Deng, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904780 CrossRef CAS .
E. Musella, I. Gualandi, E. Scavetta, A. Rivalta, E. Venuti, M. Christian, V. Morandi, A. Mullaliu, M. Giorgetti and D. Tonelli, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11241–11249 RSC .
Y. Yang and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4228–4254 RSC .
X. Deng, X. Kang, M. Li, K. Xiang, C. Wang, Z. Guo, J. Zhang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1138–1146 RSC .
Y. Xie, Z. Zhou, N. Yang and G. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, Z. Li, K. Fan, Z. Ren, W. Xie, Y. Yang, M. Shao and M. Wei, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 299, 120669 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, S. Xu, M. Zhang, X. Li, D. Decarolis, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, E. K. Gibson, C. R. A. Catlow and K. Yan, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4034–4043 RSC .
M. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Liu, Z. Chen, H. Xu and K. Yan, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 5179–5189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Swann, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1932, 62, 177 CrossRef .
T. R. dos Santos, P. Nilges, W. Sauter, F. Harnisch and U. Schröder, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 26634–26643 RSC .
L. Xin, Z. Zhang, J. Qi, D. J. Chadderdon, Y. Qiu, K. M. Warsko and W. Li, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 674–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, L. Xin, D. J. Chadderdon, J. Qi, C. Liang and W. Li, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1305–1315 RSC .
H. Wu, J. Song, C. Xie, Y. Hu, P. Zhang, G. Yang and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 1754–1759 RSC .
R. J. M. Bisselink, M. Crockatt, M. Zijlstra, I. J. Bakker, E. Goetheer, T. M. Slaghek and D. S. van Es, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 3285–3290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dusselier, P. Van Wouwe, A. Dewaele, E. Makshina and B. F. Sels, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1415–1442 RSC .
Y. Fan, C. Zhou and X. Zhu, Catal. Rev., 2009, 51, 293–324 CrossRef CAS .
P. Maki-Arvela, I. L. Simakova, T. Salmi and D. Y. Murzin, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 1909–1971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Maleki and M. Eiteman, Fermentation, 2017, 3, 8 CrossRef .
G. Horányi, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1981, 117, 131–137 CrossRef .
C. Chen, A. J. Bloomfield and S. W. Sheehan, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 3560–3567 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yuksel, M. Sasaki and M. Goto, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 728–734 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xixi, P. Qian and B. Wang, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2019, 103, 4045–4052 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Martin-Yerga, J. White, G. Henriksson and A. Cornell, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 1902–1912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. H. Hancock and R. P. Linstead, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1953, 3490–3496,  10.1039/JR9530003490 .
F. J. Holzhäuser, G. Creusen, G. Moos, M. Dahmen, A. König, J. Artz, S. Palkovits and R. Palkovits, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2334–2344 RSC .
G. Creusen, F. J. Holzhäuser, J. Artz, S. Palkovits and R. Palkovits, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 17108–17113 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† This paper is dedicated to Prof. Matthias Beller on the occasion of his 60th birthday.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Ziyi Fan	Ziyi Fan received his B.S. degree from Nanjing Forestry University (China) in 2021. He is now pursuing his Master's degree under the supervision of Prof. Zupeng Chen and Prof. Wenjun Zhang at the School of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). His main interests are the design and fabrication of nanocatalysts for the catalytic conversion of biomass and the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide.
Wenjun Zhang	Wenjun Zhang received her Ph.D. degree under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Jin from the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Nanjing University, P.R. China. Since 2020, she has worked in the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). Her main interests are the design and fabrication of nano-catalysts for the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide and catalytic conversion of biomass.
Yuqin Zou	Yuqin Zou received her Ph.D. degree from the University of Manchester (Manchester, UK), in May 2017. Since 2017, she has worked in the College of Chemical Engineering, Hunan University (China). Her research activities embrace the study of the mechanisms of electrocatalytic biomass conversion, the design of spinel, layered double hydroxide and metal–organic framework nanomaterials and their applications in electrocatalysis and electrosynthesis.
Shuangyin Wang	Shuangyin Wang received his B.S. degree in 2006 from Zhejiang University and his Ph.D. degree in 2010 from Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. He is currently a professor of the Key Laboratory for Graphene Materials and Devices and College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University. His research interests are in plasma technology, defects in various crystals, and their application for electrochemical energy storage and conversion.
Zupeng Chen	Zupeng Chen received his Ph.D. degree from the Max Planck Institute of Colloids and Interfaces (Potsdam, Germany), in December 2015, under the supervision of Prof. Markus Antonietti. He then joined the group of Prof. Javier Pérez-Ramírez, ETH Zurich, as a postdoctoral fellow from 2016 to 2019. Since 2020, he has taken up a full professorship position in the College of Chemical Engineering, Nanjing Forestry University (China). His research activities embrace the design of efficient and stable heterogeneous catalysts and their applications in photo(electro)catalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction, biomass valorization, and industrially relevant transformations such as alkyne selective hydrogenations and Suzuki C–C couplings.

 	Fig. 1  Chronology of the development of electrode materials for the upgrading of biomass-derived platform molecules in the last 20 years.18,21,23,27,51,61,64,65,70,72,75,78,79,91,93,94,120,164,165,185,225,234,238,239,241,242,249,253,258,267,269,271,273,286,290,298,301,311,313,319,323,326	 
C2H6O + 3H2O → 2CO2 + 12H+ + 12e−	(1)

 	Scheme 1  The main pathways of the ethanol oxidation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  CVs for the EOR on (a) Pt (100), (b) Pt (110) and (c) Pt (111) electrodes in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 0.2 ethanol (black line) and 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.2 M ethanol (red line). Reproduced with permission.27 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. CVs for the EOR on (d) CF and € PCF electrodes with variable Pt contents (“LPt” and “HPt” represent low and high Pt concentrations, respectively) in 0.5 M H2SO4. Steady-state CVs of the EOR on (f) CFHPt electrode with or without ethanol. Reproduced with permission.34 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Specific activity and (b) I–T measurements for the EOR on PtAu ANFs, PtAu NCs, PtAu NPs and commercial Pt/C at 0.8 V vs. RHE in 1.0 M KOH + 0.5 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Song et al.43 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (c) Catalytic activity for the EOR as a function of PtRu composition at 0.5 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Camara et al.21 Copyright 2005 Elsevier. (d) LSVs for the EOR on PtSn and Pt in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Vigier et al.51 Copyright 2004 Elsevier. I CVs and (f) I–T measurements (applied potential is 0.45 V vs. SCE) for the EOR on Pt3Co@Pt/PC and Pt/C in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al.57 Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  LSVs for the EOR on (a) PtRhSnO2/C and PtSnO2/C, and (b) PtRhSnO2/C and PtRu/C deposited on a glassy carbon electrode in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.2 M ethanol. (c) DFT calculated adsorption energies of H2O on the surfaces of SnO2, RhSnO2, PtSnO2, and PtRhSnO2 with (red dots) and without (black dots) H2O saturating the SnO2 sites, and (d) possible pathways for cleavage of the C–C bond of the ethanol molecule on the PtRhSnO2 surface. Reproduced with permission from Kowal et al.61 Copyright 2009 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) CVs and (b) cycling stability (−0.2 V vs. SCE) for the EOR on Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO, Pd/rGO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. (c) Long-time durability of Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO. Note: “↑” represents “the catalyst was reactivated and electrolyte was replaced”. (d) FE for C1 (CO2, CO and CHx) or C2 (acetate) on Pd/Ni(OH)2/rGO, Pd/rGO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Huang et al.64 Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag. (e) CVs and (f) I–T measurements (−0.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl) for the EOR on PdZn/NC@ZnO and Pd/C in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Qiu et al.65 Copyright 2021 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Measured current density (jp) minus the background current density (j0) for the EOR on the Au electrode at peak potential (black curve) or 1.2 V vs. RHE (red curve) in different pH values of 0.1 M phosphate buffer (PBS) + 0.5 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Kwon et al.70 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. (b) CVs for the EOR on the Au ND electrode in 1.0 M KOH with and without 1.0 M ethanol. (c) CVs for the EOR on the Au–dendrite-modified glassy carbon electrode in 1.0 M NaOH with and without 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Huang et al.73 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (d) CVs and (e) I–T measurements (0.65 V vs. RHE) for the EOR on Au0.5/rGO/Au0.5/rGO/CF, Au/rGO/CF and Au/CF electrodes in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Feng et al.72 Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (f) Metal mass-normalized CVs for the EOR on the Rh H-NSs and commercial Pt/C in 1 M KOH + 1 M ethanol. Reproduced with permission from Kang et al.75 Copyright 2018 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.	 
C3H8O3 + 12OH− → C3O52− + 10H2O + 10e−	(2)
C3H8O3 + 20OH− → 3CO32− + 14H2O + 14e−	(3)

 	Scheme 2  The main pathways of the glycerol oxidation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 7  CVs for the GOR on Pt electrodes (a) with different carbon supports and (b) synthesis methods. (c) I–T measurements for the GOR on different Pt electrodes at 0.4 V vs. Ag/AgCl in 0.5 M formic acid + 0.5 M H2SO4. Product distributions from the GOR under different applied potentials on (d) Pt/CNT (H2), (e) Pt/SCNT (200-H2), and (f) Pt/SCNT (100-EG) catalysts in 1.0 M KOH + 1.0 M glycerol after 8 h I–T tests. Reproduced with permission from Ning et al.112 Copyright 2019 ENGLAND. Note: “black” represents “OA”; “orange” represents “TA”; “pink” represents “GLA”; “blue” represents “GOA”; “green” represents “FA”.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) CVs for GOR on the PdPt NNW and commercial Pt/C. (b) CVs for GOR on (b) Pd55Pt30 NNW and (c) Pt/C before and after I–T tests. Reproduced with permission from Hong et al.146 Copyright 2019 The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) LSVs for GOR on different AuPt nanoparticles and Au, Pt nanoparticles. The product distribution of GOR under different applied potentials (e) and different surface compositions (f) on AuPt. Reproduced with permission from Dai et al.114 Copyright 2017 Elsevier. Product distribution under different applied potentials on Pt/C (g) and PtAg (h). (i) Effects of glycerol concentration with 0.5 M KOH. Reproduced with permission from Zhou et al.155 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. Note: “steel blue” represents “TA”; “navy” represents “OA”; “green” represents “GLA”; “purple” represents “GCA”; “light sky blue” represents “AA”; “red” represents “FA”; “orange” represents “LA”; “yellow” represents “GOA”; “magenta” represents “GALD”; “black” represents “DHA”.	 

 	Fig. 9  CVs for GOR on Pd/CNT, PdAg/CNT, PdAg3/CNT and Ag/CNT in 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M (a) GLA, (b) MOA, (c) TA, (d) LA, (e) OA, and (f) GCA. Reproduced with permission from Qi et al.199 Copyright 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) LSVs and (b) I–T measurements (0.52 V vs. MMO) for the GOR on the Ni electrode in 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol before and after electrochemical sinusoidal-wave treatment. Reproduced with permission from Houache et al.211 Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (c) LSVs for the GOR on NixM1−x/C (M = Pd, Au, and Bi) catalysts in N2-purged 1.0 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol. (d) The co-electrolysis performance of NixPd1−x/C in 2.0 M KOH + 2.0 M glycerol. Reproduced with permission from Houache et al.216 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) LSVs for the GOR on the MCo2O4 (M = Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn) nanostructures grown on carbon fiber paper and bare carbon fiber paper in 0.1 M KOH with (solid lines) and without (dashed-dotted lines) 0.1 M glycerol. (b) Concentration profiles of glycerol and corresponding oxidation products of the GOR on CuCo2O4 with increasing charge at 1.30 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH + 0.1 M glycerol. Reproduced with permission from Han et al.220 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. LSVs for both the GOR and OER at pH = 13 (c) and pH = 9 (e). Product selectivity of the GOR at 1.69 V vs. RHE at pH = 13 (d) and 2.06 V vs. RHE at pH = 9 (f). Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.221 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. Note: “red” represents “DHA”; “green” represents “GCA”; “yellow” represents “FA”; “black solid line” represents “yield of DHA”.	 


TEMPO	0.05 M glycerol + 0.2 M NaHCO3	—	—	DHA (30), HPA (35)	
91

40% Pt/C	1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	—	—	TA (70)	
120

Pt (111)	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M HClO4	0.5 V vs. RHE	—	HPA (—)	
121

Pt (100)	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M HClO4	0.6 V vs. RHE	—	GALD (—)	
121

ALD (TiO2)-Pt/C (150 HT)	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4	—	12.7	GALD (39), GLA (29.3), GCA (23.5)	
94

ALD(SnO2)-Pt/C (150 HT)	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4	0.56 V vs. SHE	8.6	GALD (42), GLA (53.4)	
114

AU-Pt/PMC	0.5 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH	0.32 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	—	
125

Pt/3D-GLC	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4	1.14 V vs. NHE	7.7	GLA (42.7), GALD (56)	
93

Pt/SCNTs(100-EG)	1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	—	—	GLA (∼85)	
112

Pt/porous PANI	0.5 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4	—	—	—	
102

PdPt NNW	0.1 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH	—	—	—	
146

AuPt NPs	0.5 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	—	—	LA (>70)	
114

3D porous Pt@Ag	1 M glycerol + 0.5 M KOH	0.51 V vs. RHE	—	DHA (82.6)	
155

Bi–Pt/C	0.1 M glycerol + 0.5 M H2SO4	0.65 V vs. NHE	—	DHA (100)	
164

PtxAuy@Ag	0.5 M glycerol + 0.5 M KOH	0.43–0.54 V vs. RHE	—	DHA (77.1)	
169

Pd nanocube	0.2 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH	—	—	TA (99)	
179

Pd dendrites/PEDOT	0.1 M + 1.0 M NaOH	—	—	—	
128

Au/CeO2/PC-MWNT (MW)	1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	−0.43 V vs. SCE	—	—	
130

PdAg/CNT	1 M glycerol + 4 M KOH	−0.39 V vs. MMO	55	OA (35.9), GCA (20.9), TA (26.4)	
186

PdAg3/CNT	1 M glycerol + 4 M KOH	−0.44 V vs. MMO	33	OA (39.2), GCA (37.9), TA (13.7)	
186

GDE@AgAu	0.1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	0.3 V vs. RHE	—	FA (66), GCA (32)	
187

Pd–NiOx–P/C	0.5 M glycerol + 0.1 M KOH	−0.48 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	—	
207

Ni/C	0.1 M glycerol + 1 M KOH	—	—	—	
211

Co–DPPE	0.25 M glycerol + 0.5 M NaOH	—	—	LA (43)	
219

CuO	0.1 M glycerol + 1 M Na2B4O7	1.2 V vs. RHE	—	DHA (60)	
221


 	Scheme 3  The main pathways of the sorbitol oxidation reaction (SOR) in an acidic medium.	 

 	Fig. 12  CVs for the SOR on (a) Pt/C and Pd/C, and (b) Au–Pd/C and Pt/C in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol. Reproduced with permission from Torres-Pacheco et al.226 Copyright 2019 Elsevier BV. (c) CVs for the SOR on Au/C, AuAg/C, AuPt/C, and AuPd/C in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol. (d) Plot of the effect of sorbitol concentration on current density at 0.14 V vs. NHE. I Loss of current density over 500 cycles, using cycle 2 as the starting point (jpi/jp2). (f) I–T measurements for the SOR at 0.14 V vs. NHE in 0.3 M KOH + 0.1 M sorbitol for 60 min. Reproduced with permission from Torres et al.238 Copyright 2020 Elsevier BV.	 

 	Fig. 13  CVs for the XOR on (a) Pt (poly), (b) Pt (111), (c) Pt (100) and (d) Pt (110) electrodes in 0.1 M HClO4 + 0.01 M xylitol. Reproduced with permission from Matos et al.240 Copyright 2020 Elsevier Sequoia.	 

 	Scheme 4  The main pathways of the furfural oxidation reaction (FOR) (black line) and reduction reaction (FRR) (red line).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Selectivity of FAL and current efficiency on Cu, Pb, Ni, Fe, Ti, C, and Pt electrodes. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.248 Copyright 2017 Elsevier Sequoia. (b) Product distribution for the FRR on Cu, Ni, Pt, C, Fe, Pb, and Al electrodes. Reproduced with permission from Nilges et al.249 Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. Note: “Green” represents “pinacol”; “blue” represents “FA”; “red” represents “FAL”; “black” represents “MF”. (c) Two pathways for the electrochemical conversion of furfural (direct electroreduction and electrocatalytic hydrogenation) on a Cu electrode in acidic electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from Chadderdon et al.250 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 


AgPd/C	Phosphate buffer solution (pH = 6.8) + 100 mM furfural	−0.5 V vs. RHE	18	FAL (13)	96	1 h	
247

Cu1/PC	Acetate buffer solution (pH = 5) + 40 mM furfural	−0.75 V vs. RHE	—	FAL (—)	94	10 C*	
259

Cu1/PC	Acetate buffer solution (pH = 5) + 40 mM furfural	−0.90 V vs. RHE	—	MF (—)	62	10 C*	
259

Cu3P/CFC	50 mM furfural + 1.0 M KOH	−0.35 V vs. RHE	99	FAL (99)	98	—	
252

Ni2P/CFC	50 mM furfural + 1.0 M KOH	1.3 V vs. RHE	99	FA (99)	99	—	
252

Ru/C	Acetate–acetic acid buffer (pH = 5.2) + 20mM furfural	−0.1 V vs. RHE	4–5	—	24	2 h	
260

Pd/C	—	42	2 h	
260

Rh/C	−0.5 V vs. RHE	—	12	2 h	
260

Cu/C	—	8	2 h	
260

Ti/La nano/TiO2	DMF + 100 mM furfural + 100 mM tetrabutylammonium bromide	Constant current density 50 mA cm−2 (3.5–4.8 V)	—	FAL (88.6)	85.7	—	
257

3%Pt/ACF	Furfural + 0.1 M H2SO4	−0.5 V vs. SCE	82	FAL (99)	78	—	
244

Cu–NPNi/NF	10 mM furfural + 0.5 M KOH	−0.45 V vs. RHE	75	FAL (74.3)	—	1 h	
261

Ed-Ag/NF	50 mM furfural + 0.5 M KOH	−0.45 V vs. RHE	70	FAL (29.6)	—	1 h	
261


 	Scheme 5  The main pathways of the HMFOR (black line) and HMFRR (red line).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Bifunctional HMFOR and HER on LBL-assembled multilayer electrode. (b) Schematic pathways for the HMFOR on Pd and Au NPs and putative mechanisms on (c) Pd7/Au7 and (d) Au7/Pd7 multilayer electrodes for the HMFOR to prepare FDCA. (e) LSVs for the HMFOR on Au7/Pd7 and Pd7/Au7 multilayer electrodes, and the corresponding (f) FDCA yield. Reproduced with permission from Park et al.269 Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) HPLC chromatograms recorded at different electrolysis times on NixB. (b) Concentration profiles of HMF, FDCA, and corresponding intermediates of the HMFOR on NixB with increasing electrolysis times. Reproduced with permission from Barwe et al.277 Copyright 2018 Wiley. (c) Diagram for the synthesis of Ni3N and Ni3N@C. (d) LSVs for the HMFOR on Ni3N@C in 1.0 M KOH with and without 10 mm HMF. (e) Possible pathways of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on Ni3N@C. (e) The yields of FDCA on Ni3N@C for six cycles. Reproduced with permission from Zhang et al.278 Copyright 2019 Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 17  DFT calculations of the (a) optimized structure and charge density difference of HMF adsorbed on Ni, NiO, NiO–O, NiOOH–Vo, and NiOOH. (b) Electron-localization function for optimized HMF adsorption on Ni, NiO, NiO–O, NiOOH–Vo, and NiOOH, respectively. (c) Partial density of states of HMF adsorption on Ni and NiOOH. (d) Energy profiles of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on the NiOOH surface. Reproduced with permission from Lu et al.285 Copyright 2021 Wiley. Note: “gray” represents “C”; “white” represents “H”; “red” represents “O”; “blue” represents “Ni”.	 

 	Fig. 18  Stability tests on the HMFOR in (a) 1.0 M KOH (pH = 14) and (b) 0.1 M KOH (pH = 13) solution at room temperature and ambient pressure for different HMF concentrations. Reproduced with permission from Nam et al.297 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Note: “black line” represent “0.5 M HMF”; “red line” represent “0.1 M HMF”; “blue line” represent “0.01 M HMF”. Conversion of HMF and yield of oxidation products on (c) MnOx anodes at 1.6 V vs. RHE and (d) Pt anodes at 2.0 V vs. RHE at 60 °C in pH = 1 H2SO4 + 20 mM HMF for different amounts of charge passed. Reproduced with permission from Kubota et al.298 Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) The mechanism of Clemmensen reduction on the Zn electrode. Note: Zn is used as the electron source; “+” on Zn represents “the number of consumed electrons in each step”. (b) A ring-opening mechanism of DMF to HD by hydrolysis. (c) A predictive model for the reduction of 5-MF to HD constructed by combining the mechanisms shown in (a) and (b). Reproduced with permission from Roylance et al.300 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) The optimized structure (top) and charge density difference (bottom) of HMF on VN and V2O5, respectively. (b and c) Electron-localization function of the (100) section for optimized HMF on VN and V2O5. (d) Density of states plots for VN and V2O5. (e) Energy profiles of the HMFOR to yield FDCA on the VN surface. Note: the initial state of HMF + 6OH* on the VN surface is chosen as the zero point for pathway A and pathway B. The large balls in gold and orange are V and N, respectively. The small balls in grey, white and red are C, H, and O, respectively. (f) Scheme of VN and Pd/VN paired electrolysis electrodes for the HMFOR and HMFRR, respectively. Reproduced with permission from Li et al.301 Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) LSVs for HMFOR on the NiFe LDHs in 1.0 M KOH with or without 10 mM HMF, and (b) the corresponding Tafel plots. Reproduced with permission from Huber et al.271 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation of CuxS@NiCo-LDHs core–shell composites. (d) Schematic illustration of the electronic configuration of the Ni cations with valence states of +2 and +3. (e) Schematic illustration of factors contributing to the high HMFOR activity. Reproduced with permission from Deng et al.,304 Copyright 2020 Royal Soc Chemistry.	 


Pt/Fe3O4/rGO	0.5 mM HMF + 0.05 M H2SO4	∼0.30 V vs. Ag/AgCl	—	0.60 V vs. Ag/AgCl	7.2	DFF (—/94.4)	—	20 h	
268

Au/C	20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	0.29V vs. RHE	—	0.90 V vs. RHE	100.0	HMFCA (—/98.0)	—	1 h	
265

Pd/C	20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	0.55 V vs. RHE	—	0.90 V vs. RHE	97	HMFCA (—/70.0)	—	1 h	
265

Au14	5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	0.34 V vs. RHE	—	0.82 V vs. RHE	41.5	HMFCA (23.6/—)	45.8	2 h	
269

Pd14	5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	0.25 V vs. RHE	—	0.82 V vs. RHE	16.0	HMFCA (2.5/—)	85.8	2 h	
269

Pd1Au2/C	20 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	0.30 V vs. RHE	—	0.90 V vs. RHE	100	FDCA (—/83.0)	—	1 h	
265

Pd7/Au7	5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	0.13 V vs. RHE	—	0.82 V vs. RHE	42.4	FDCA (16.4/—)	85.8	2 h	
269

NiO/Ni(OH)2	5 mM HMF + 1.0 M NaOH	—	—	0.016 A cm−2	—	FDCA (71.0/—)	84	4 h	
267

Ni2P NPA/NF	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	∼1.35 V vs. RHE	∼1.37 V vs. RHE	1.423V vs. RHE	100.0	FDCA (—/100.0)	98.0	2.5 h	
273

Ni3S2/NF	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	∼1.35 V vs. RHE	∼1.36 V vs. RHE	1.423V vs. RHE	100	FDCA (98.0/—)	98.0	58 C*	
274

hp-Ni	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	<1.30 V vs. RHE	∼1.37 V vs. RHE	1.423V vs. RHE	∼100.0	FDCA (∼95.0/—)	98.0	58 C*	
275

NixB-modified NF	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	∼1.38 V vs. RHE	∼1.41 V vs. RHE	1.45V vs. RHE	100.0	FDCA (98.5/—)	100.0	0.5 h	
277

Ni3N@C	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	∼1.30 V vs. RHE	∼1.36 V vs. RHE	1.45V vs. RHE	∼100.0	FDCA (98.0/—)	99.0	174 C*	
278

NiOOH	5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	∼1.20 V vs. RHE	—	1.47V vs. RHE	99.8	FDCA (96.0/—)	96.0	4.7 h	
282

CoP/Cu foam	50 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.30 V vs. RHE	1.38 V vs. RHE	1.423 V vs. RHE	∼100.0	FDCA (∼90.0/—)	—	6.0 h	
286

CoO–CoSe	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.30 V vs. RHE	∼1.38 V vs. RHE	1.43 V vs. RHE	∼100.0	FDCA (∼99.0/—)	97.9	∼1.0 h	
287

Co3O4 NW/NF	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	0.89 V vs. RHE	∼1.40 V vs. RHE	1.47 V vs. RHE	100.0	FDCA (∼96.8/—)	96.6	∼5.7 h	
288

NiCo2O4	5 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.26 V vs. RHE	—	1.50 V vs. RHE	99.6	FDCA (—/90.8)	87.5	∼1.0 h	
288

Ir–NiCo2O4	50 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.15 V vs. RHE	∼1.47 V vs. RHE	—	98	FDCA (98/—)	98	58 C*	
290

CoOOH	5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	∼1.00 V vs. RHE	—	1.56 V vs. RHE	95.5	FDCA (35.1/—)	35.1	22.0 h	
282

FeOOH	5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	∼1.64 V vs. RHE	—	1.71 V vs. RHE	16.0	FDCA (∼1.6/—)	∼1.6	2.3 h	
282

Nanocrystalline CuF	5 mM HMF + 0.1 M KOH	1.25 V vs. RHE	—	1.62 V vs. RHE	99.9	FDCA (96.4/—)	95.3	41 C*	
297

MnOx	20 mM 1.0 M H2SO4	∼1.35 V vs. RHE	—	1.60 V vs. RHE	99.9	FDCA (53.8/—)	33.8	—	
298

3D VN HNs	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	∼1.34 V vs. RHE	∼1.37 V vs. RHE	20 mA	98.0	FDCA (—/96.0)	84.0	∼0.9 h	
301

NiFe LDH	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.25 V vs. RHE	1.32 V vs. RHE	1.33 V vs. RHE	98	FDCA (98.0/—)	98.6	1.5 h	
271

CuxS@NiCo LDH	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.19 V vs. RHE	∼1.24 V vs. RHE	1.32 V vs. RHE	∼100.0	FDCA (99.0/—)	99.0	58 C*	
304

CoFe@NiFe LDH	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M KOH	1.28 V vs. RHE	∼1.34 V vs. RHE	1.40 V vs. RHE	100	FDCA (—/∼100)	99.8	3.5 h	
305

CoAl LDH	10 mM HMF + 0.1 M NaOH	—	—	0.5 V vs. SCE	100	FDCA (—/49)	40.8	—	
302

E-CoAl-LDH-NSA	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M	1.30 V vs. RHE	—	1.52 V vs. RHE	—	—	99.4	60 C*	
306

NiCoFe LDH	10 mM HMF + 1.0 M NaOH	∼1.23 V vs. RHE	1.51 V vs. RHE	1.52 V vs. RHE	95.5	FDCA (84.9/—)	∼90.0	1.0 h	
308


 	Scheme 6  The main pathways (primary (A and B) and secondary (C) electrochemical conversion) of the LAOR (black line) and LARR (red line). Note: “×” represents “no repetition”.	 

 	Scheme 7  The two pathways for the conversion of levulinic acid to octane. Reproduced with permission from Nilges et al.249 Copyright 2012 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 8  Proposed mechanistic pathways for LOR. Reproduced with permission from Chen et al.320 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 9  The two pathways of MESA to EDA (Kolbe dimerization electrolysis, black line) and EA (non-Kolbe dimerization electrolysis, red line), respectively. Reproduced with permission from Creusen et al.326 Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† This paper is dedicated to Prof. Matthias Beller on the occasion of his 60th birthday.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
