A review on silicon nanowire-based anodes for next-generation high-performance lithium-ion batteries from a material-based perspective  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9SE01165J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9SE01165J
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 1577-1594A review on silicon nanowire-based anodes for next-generation high-performance lithium-ion batteries from a material-based perspective

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Wenquan 
            Kang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yintong 
            Ye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qiqi 
            Pan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuzhi 
            Ke
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chun 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Qiu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Tang
          
        
      
School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: mewyuan@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      29th November 2019
    , Accepted 10th January 2020First published on 13th January 2020AbstractThe lithium-ion battery (LIB) is an efficient electrochemical energy storage device with high voltage, long life, good safety, etc. Silicon has a high theoretical specific capacity (4200 mA h g−1), due to which it is considered a promising anode material for next-generation LIBs. However, the huge volume change (400%) of the Si material during the lithiation/delithiation processes destroys its structure, which greatly reduces the initial coulombic efficiency, cycle stability and rate performance of the battery. Accordingly, constructing nanostructured Si, particularly silicon nanowires (SiNWs), can help to address the above issues. Additionally, it is important to further improve the electrochemical performance by incorporating some additives in SiNW-based electrodes. Therefore, this review focuses primarily on SiNW-based materials as anodes for LIBs from a material-based perspective. Various materials incorporated into SiNW-based anodes through doping or compositing are reported. The electrochemical effects of diverse additives, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials and other special substances, are comprehensively reviewed.Yang YangYang Yang received his BS degree at Hebei University of Science and Technology in 2015, and started studying for a Master's Degree at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of South China University of Technology (SCUT) in 2017. He is currently a PhD student at School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT under the supervision of Professor Wei Yuan. His current research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries.Wei YuanWei Yuan is a professor of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT. Prof. Yuan received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Manufacturing in 2012 from SCUT. He is also the director of Guangdong Engineering and Technology Research Center of Advanced Electric Vehicle Power Supply and Thermal Control System, a member of the Battery Committee of the Chinese Electrical Society and a senior member of the Chinese Mechanical Engineering Society. His current research interests are focused on fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, micro-reactors and surface functional structures for enhanced heat transfer.
1. Introduction
The lithium-ion battery (LIB) is an efficient electrochemical energy storage device with a high voltage, long life, high cycling stability, good safety, etc.1 Thus, LIBs have been widely used in electronics, electric vehicles and energy storage plants.2 With the development of energy technology, the demand for high-performance LIBs has become quite tangible and ubiquitous. The LIB is mainly composed of four parts: positive electrode, negative electrode, separator and electrolyte.3 To improve the overall electrochemical performance of LIBs, researchers are mostly concerned about how to improve or modify these four aspects. The electrode of LIBs generally consists of a current collector and electrode materials attached on the current collector.4 Electrode materials usually comprise active materials, adhesives and conductive additives.5 At present, almost all the commercial LIB anode active materials are made of carbon-based materials, among which graphite is a mainstream material. Although graphite has the advantages of high stability, low lithiation voltage, high conductivity and good safety, its low theoretical specific capacity (372 mA h g−1) is a fatal problem, limiting its real application.6
Thus, many substitutes for graphite, such as metal oxides and alloys, have been explored.7,8 Among these materials, silicon (Si) has a high theoretical specific capacity (4200 mA h g−1, calculated according to Li22Si5), which is ten-fold more than that of graphite. Accordingly, it is considered a promising anode material for next-generation LIBs.9–11 Besides, Si also has a low lithiation voltage of about 0.4 V relative to Li.12 Although this voltage is higher than that of graphite (0.1 V relative to Li), it is lower than that of most metal oxides and alloys, and can help to inhibit the formation of Li dendrites.13 Moreover, Si is the second richest element in the Earth's crust, which is cheap and safe. In addition, Si is widely used in solar cells, CPUs and other fields.14–16 There have been various mature technologies for Si processing, laying a solid foundation for the commercialization of Si-based materials for LIBs. Despite these advantages, Si also has obvious defects, e.g., poor conductivity of ions and electrons.17–19 The most troublesome issue is its huge volume change (400%, calculated in terms of Li22Si5) during the lithiation/delithiation processes.20 This leads to the destruction of the material structure, electronical isolation, instability of the SEI membrane, etc., which eventually decreases the initial coulombic efficiency (ICE), cycle stability and rate performance.17
With regard to the lithiation/delithiation behaviours of Si, it is generally believed that in the first charge process (at room temperature), the crystalline Si transforms into LixSi (x ≤ 3.75) alloy rather than Li22Si5.21 A higher electrical conductivity and Li+ diffusivity of the electrode relate to a higher stoichiometric number of x, which also means a higher discharge capacity. Among the many phases of LixSi, Li3.75Si is the only crystalline phase, while the others are amorphous.22 During the first discharge process, the LixSi alloys are all converted to amorphous Si. In the subsequent cycles, the dealloying and alloying reactions take place between LixSi and amorphous Si, instead of crystalline Si.23 When Si is totally converted to Li3.75Si, the volume expansion degree is nearly 300%, and the discharge capacity for this case is about 3600 mA h g−1, as tested at room temperature.21
One effective way to overcome the natural shortcomings of Si materials is to realize nanocrystallization. There is already evidence showing that the intrinsic physical and chemical properties of Si can be significantly improved by nanocrystallization.24–26 Many Si-based nanomaterials have been developed, including Si nanoparticles (SiNPs),27 Si nanowires (SiNWs),28 Si nanotubes (SiNTs)29 and Si nanorods (SiNRs).30 SiNWs have attracted much attention due to their advantages in providing one-dimensional conductive paths, large specific surface area, short diffusion paths for charge carriers, reduced internal stress by radial and axial expansion, more space to buffer volume changes and high crack resistance. Moreover, SiNW-based electrodes tend to exhibit high mechanical strength because SiNWs usually grow directly on the surface of the current collector. It is also convenient to conduct theoretical observation and analysis on nanowire structures.17
However, the use of SiNWs electrode materials still faces many problems. In particular, the severe volume change of Si during cycling is likely to cause the destruction and continuous growth of SEI membranes. Although the battery performance can be improved by using SiNWs compared to bulk Si materials, there is still plenty of scope to optimize their electrochemical characteristics, especially high-rate capability.
Incorporating additives in the electrode is an important strategy to further improve the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based electrodes.31 Incorporation does not mean simple mixing but combining SiNWs with other materials by doping or compositing to take advantage of the synergetic effects of these materials. This helps enhance the electrochemical performance of the electrodes, e.g., carbon-coated Si materials. The carbon shell helps avoid direct contact between the Si material and electrolytes, protect the active material, stabilize the SEI membrane, provide more conductive paths, and improve the electrical conductivity.32 Therefore, it is of great importance to know what materials can be reasonably added to SiNW-based electrodes and how they affect the electrochemical performance of the battery. This highlights the key point of the present review. Herein, it should be noted that the main subject is focused on the active materials instead of binders and conductive additives.
Although many previous reviews33–45 have discussed various Si nanomaterials and their applications, there is scarcely dedicated discussion oriented to the material functionally incorporated into SiNW-based anodes and their electrochemical effects on the final electrodes. Here, we attempt to provide a comprehensive review on this aspect. Fig. 1 illustrates various additive materials for SiNW-based LIB anodes. Accordingly, the main content is divided into seven parts. The first part mainly describes the dopants and their electrochemical effects. The following six sections are about various materials combined with SiNWs and their relevant electrochemical effects, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials and other special materials. The final part presents the conclusions and future perspectives about SiNW-based LIB electrodes.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of various additives incorporated into SiNW-based LIB anodes. 
2. Doping materials
Material doping is a popular technique to significantly enhance the performance of targeted materials. Typically, the crystalline structures of substrate materials are stable after undergoing the doping process, instead of transforming into other crystal structure types. This can be mostly seen in the characterization based on X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the same materials with and without doping.46–48 Additionally, material doping influences the intrinsic chemical/physical properties and external morphologies of the object materials.49 For the SiNWs in LIBs, boron (B) and phosphorus (P) doping has been extensively investigated.
Generally, the methods for the synthesis of SiNWs can be classified into two categories, including bottom-up and top-down fabrication methods.50–53 Most of the bottom-up growth methods are based on the vapor–liquid–solid (VLS) mechanism, such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD), molecular beam epitaxy (MBE), laser ablation and supercritical-fluid–liquid–solid (SFLS) method.54 For the top-down synthetic method, metal-assisted chemical etching (MACE) is the most popular technique. Ge et al. used the MACE method to make B-doped porous SiNWs via direct chemical etching of B-doped Si wafers with the aid of silver nitrite (AgNO3).55 The prepared sample had an average pore diameter of 8 nm. The pore size of the porous SiNWs depends on the AgNO3 concentration in the etchants. The etching solutions with 0.04 and 0.02 M AgNO3 yielded average pore diameters of 10.5 ± 0.1 and 7.8 ± 0.1 nm, respectively. Therefore, the pore size can be enlarged with an increase in the AgNO3 concentration during the synthetic process. The porous structure can provide a large surface area for SiNWs to adhere to the electrolyte, short Li-ion/electron diffusion paths, and a large space to buffer the severe volume change of Si during cycles. The element B not only helps to improve the intrinsic property SiNWs, but also influences its surface structure. B-doped SiNWs are endowed with better electrical conductivity than pure samples. The B dopants in SiNWs provide many defective sites, which promote the etching process to generate holes on the surface of SiNWs. Besides, the PVDF binder in the tested anodes was replaced by alginate because of its high viscosity to further improve the structural stability during continuous cycling tests. Under the coupled effects of the composition and structure of the porous B-doped SiNW-based electrodes, the cell exhibited an excellent electrochemical performance and a long cycle life. It maintained a coulombic efficiency (CE) of around 90% during the initial several cycles at current densities of 0.6, 1.2, 2.4, 3.6, 4.8, and 9.6 A g−1 with discharge capacities of above 3400, 2600, 2000, 1900, 1700 and 1300 mA h g−1, respectively. The CE reached above 99.5% after 20 cycles. The cell maintained stable capacities of around 2000, 1600, and 1100 mA h g−1 at 2, 4, 18 A g−1 respectively, even after the 250th cycle.
The above research qualitatively describes the effects of B doping in porous SiNWs. For the sake of quantitative analysis, Hwang et al. prepared B-doped porous SiNWs with different doping levels.56 The MACE method was also used to synthesize an electrode using AgNO3 to create B-doped SiNWs. Different concentrations of the dopant, e.g. 1.2 × 1012, 2.7 × 1015 and 5.7 × 1019 cm−3, were used with the relevant samples denoted as l-SiNWs, m-SiNWs and h-SiNWs (see Fig. 2a–c), respectively. The porosity and electrical conductivity of these SiNWs were dependent on the B doping concentration. The Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface areas of the l-, m- and h-SiNWs are 16, 16 and 260 m2 g−1, respectively. It should be noted that although the BET results of the l- and m-SiNWs are at the same level, the m-SiNWs became porous after repeated alloying and dealloying processes even though it seems to be nonporous with a rough surface before being alloyed with Li. However, the structure of l-SiNWs did not change during cycling. Hence, the m-SiNW-based battery delivered a higher cyclic performance than the l-SiNW-based sample. The h-SiNW-based battery showed the best cyclability among the three types. However, the excessive surface area of the h-SiNWs resulted in a lower ICE. Moreover, in the full cell test with lithium manganese oxide (LMO) as the cathode, the highest porosity of the h-SiNWs also led to the lowest specific capacity compared with the other two types, while the m-SiNW-based electrode shows the highest specific capacity at 0.8 mA cm−2 (see Fig. 2d). Additionally, the electron transfer ability of the B-doped SiNWs was proportional to the doping level. The l- and h-SiNWs are supposed to have the highest and lowest electrical conductivity, respectively. However, the m-SiNWs showed the highest conductivity among the three types. The conductivities of the l-, m- and h-SiNWs characterized using a semiconductor parameter analyzer are 0.06 × 10−3, 7 × 10−3 and 6 × 10−3 S cm−1, respectively. The reason for this result is that of the abundant oxides generated on the large surface of h-SiNWs lower the electrical conductivity of the whole h-SiNW electrode. It is noteworthy that the intrinsic electrical conductivity of h-SiNWs is higher than that of m-SiNWs. Besides, the electrical conductivity of both m- and h-SiNWs is 100 times higher than that of l-SiNWs, while there is no big difference between the values for two doping concentrations (Na = 2.7 × 1015 and 5.7 × 1019). This provides a guideline for the fabrication of doped materials. Consequently, m-SiNWs with appropriate conductivity and porosity, are regarded as the optimal B-doped porous SiNWs with satisfactory electrochemical performances for advanced LIB anodes. Specifically, the m-SiNWs produced a capacity of 920 mA h g−1 at 6C. However, the h- and l-SiNWs only showed 310 mA h g−1 and 110 mA h g−1 under the same testing conditions, respectively.
 Fig. 2  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of (a) l-SiNW (a and b) m-SiNW and (c) h-SiNW. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the full LIBs based on LMO as the cathode and one of the above SiNWs as the anode at 0.8 mA cm−2. (Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright© 2017, The Electrochemical Society.) 
Salihoglu et al. also investigated B-doped porous SiNWs.57 They made similar conclusions to the above studies toward the effects of B doping. Besides, they also fabricated highly arsenic (As)-doped SiNWs, which also delivered comparable electrochemical performances to the highly B-doped SiNWs owing to the porous and electrically conductive nature of the resulting highly-doped nanowires. The SiNWs with a high concentration of As dopant showed a discharge capacity of 3635 mA h g−1 for the first cycle, and maintained a capacity retention of more than 75% after 15 cycles.
Like the B dopant, P also affects the porosity of SiNWs during the MACE process. Chen et al. prepared P-doped porous SiNWs using the MACE method to create P-doped Si wafers with the use of AgNO3.58 The P dopant accelerates the etching process by providing electrons, forming pores on the SiNWs surface. As a result, the P-doped porous SiNWs yielded an extremely high specific surface area of 323.47 m2 g−1. Under the coupled effects of the porous structure and P dopants, the P-doped porous SiNWs maintained a reversible discharge capacity of 2061.1 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 even after the 1000th cycle. Furthermore, a discharge capacity of 586.7 mA h g−1 was obtained with the P-doped porous SiNWs at 16.0 A g−1 even after the 5000th cycle.
The roles of the P dopants in SiNWs were also quantitatively evaluated by Liu et al.59 They employed a bottom-up growth method to fabricate P-doped SiNWs. The P-doped SiNWs possessed a solid structure without pores. This facilitates a better understanding of the effects of P doping regardless of the interference from the porous structure. It was observed that the low-speed electron transport in the pure SiNWs is the reaction-limiting step during continuous cycles, instead of the Li+ diffusion procedure. Heavy P doping drastically improves the electrical conductivity of SiNWs, which promotes the consumption of Li+ in the electrolyte over the surface of SiNWs, consequently resulting in an ultrafast charge transfer process. The average axial charging rates of the pure and P-doped SiNWs were 2.3 and 20.5 nm s−1 during the first charging process, respectively. Thus, it is clear that using P-doping is beneficial for improving the first-cycle charging rate by one order of magnitude compared with pure SiNWs. The P-doped SiNWs are fully transformed to crystalline Li15Si4 during the first charging process, whereas the undoped SiNWs are only subject to partial transformation. Consequently, the P-doped SiNWs exhibit a higher capacity performance and rate capability than the pure SiNWs. Moreover, the P-doped SiNWs also have outstanding structural stability under high-rate conditions. The integrity of P-doped SiNWs was well maintained during the ultrafast lithiation/delithiation processes, which helps to enhance the cyclic performance. This also indicates that the use of P doping assists in sustaining the structural stability of SiNW-based LIB anodes, which was also studied by Kim et al.,60 who fabricated P-doped SiNWs via plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The P-doped SiNWs displayed a discharge capacity of above 1933 mA h g−1 at 2C after 30 cycles, which was significantly higher than that of the undoped-SiNWs (1170.34 mA h g−1) under the same conditions.
3. Carbon materials composited with SiNWs
Composite materials typically show higher performances than simply mixed hybrids with the same composition. Carbon materials are the most popular species composited with SiNWs to form SiNW-based composite LIB anodes. As is well known, carbon materials have many types of allotropes, such as amorphous carbon, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphite and carbon aerogels.61–66 Each type of carbon allotrope has unique properties. Additionally, although there are various heterostructures (HSs) such as radial HSs, axial HSs and branched HSs,67 SiNW/carbon composites are mostly made in the form of core/shell HSs. For this structure, the SiNWs are mostly used as the core with the carbon material as the shell.
Liu et al.59 investigated the electrochemical performance of amorphous carbon-coated SiNWs, quantitatively analyzing the effects of the carbon coating. The SiNW core had a uniform diameter of 100 nm, which was coated with a 3 nm-thick amorphous carbon layer. This amorphous carbon coating drastically enhanced the reaction kinetics during cycling by promoting electron transport, increasing the electrical contact points, and providing more paths for charge carrier transfer. The average axial charging rates of the amorphous carbon-coated and pure SiNWs were 27.5 and 2.3 nm s−1, respectively. In contrast to the pure SiNWs with slow kinetics and partial lithiation, the carbon-coated samples were fully lithiated (transforming to Li15Si4) in a short time during the first charging process. Besides, even under high-rate conditions, the structural integrity of the carbon-coated SiNWs was still well maintained. This verifies the positive effects of the amorphous carbon coating in stabilizing the structures of SiNWs in the case of severe volume changes. Improving the structural stability is preferred to sustain the formed solid–electrolyte interface (SEI) layers on the carbon coating, thus yielding an excellent capacity performance and cyclability. Despite the buffering effect, the carbon coating cannot suppress the radial volume increase, which is ascribed probably to the featured thin and amorphous carbon coating. Contrarily, a thicker amorphous carbon coating is likely to suppress the radial volume expansion. Besides, the existence of the amorphous carbon coating inhibits direct contact between the electrolyte and SiNWs, which helps to protect the architecture of the SiNWs. The same conclusions were also presented by many other researchers. For example, Huang et al. engineered amorphous carbon-coated SiNWs using MACE.68 Owing to the positive effects of the carbon coating, the modified SiNWs manifested an excellent discharge capacity of 3344 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 84% at 150 mA g−1 during the first cycle. A reversible discharge capacity of 1326 mA h g−1 was still maintained after the 40th cycle. By contrast, the SiNWs without a carbon coating exhibited a higher initial discharge capacity of 3657 mA h g−1 and a lower charge capacity of 2267 mA h g−1, corresponding to an ICE of 62%. The electrochemical performance of the amorphous carbon-coated SiNWs can be further enhanced by adding dopants. For example, the average axial charging rate of the amorphous carbon-coated sample with P doping reached 117.4 nm s−1, which is more than four times higher than that of the SiNWs with only an amorphous carbon coating.59
Graphene-wrapped SiNWs are the most studied SiNW/carbon composite. Graphene is a type of carbon material comprising a 2D single layer of sp2 hybridized carbon atoms with a hexagonal crystalline structure.69 It allows fast electron transfer and quick heat dissipation, depending on its large specific area with light weight. It also has high mechanical flexibility and strength. For LIB applications, graphene is mostly used as the active material in the electrode. It has excellent Li storage capability with a high theoretical capacity of 744 mA h g−1 and high intrinsic mobility for Li+ diffusion.70 Li+ can be stored not only on both sides of graphene sheets, but also at the covalent sites, edges and defects of the graphene surfaces.71 Typically, graphene can be prepared through chemical or physical methods. Some functional groups, such as epoxy, hydroxyl and carboxyl groups, can be generated on both sides of the graphene sheets during the chemical fabrication process.72 In the presence of these functional groups, graphene can be easily combined with other materials. These groups provide nucleation sites for guest materials when they are composited with graphene through in situ or self-assembly synthesis.73 The Li+ storage capacity of graphene can be also enhanced when more defects are formed by these functional groups. The single-layer graphene sheets are able to stack with each other. Hence, the prepared graphene is mostly made up of more than one layer of carbon atoms.74 Consequently, the electrochemical performance of graphene for LIBs is associated with many factors, such as the spacing between graphene sheets, layer number, nanovoids and nanocavities within the material and functional groups.75,76 Thus, introducing graphene with the above merits into SiNWs is supposed to promote the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based electrodes of LIBs.77–82 For this case, Super-P carbon black is generally used as the conductive additive in the electrode.
Wang et al. replaced carbon black with graphene to prepare SiNW-based porous electrodes.77 Owing to the 2D structure of graphene sheets, they provide both linear and facial contact with SiNWs, whereas carbon black particles only provide point contact. Thus, a large portion of the SiNW surface is connected with graphene, which enhances the electrical connection inside the electrode, and provides more electron transport paths, thus leading to better electrical integrity of the electrode during cycling tests. The porous SiNW-based electrode with graphene as the additive conductor maintained a capacity of 2470 mA h g−1, which was much higher than that (1256 mA h g−1) of the porous SiNW-based electrode with carbon black. Lee et al. prepared graphene-coated SiNWs with excellent cyclability (90% CE) even after 50 cycles.78 This is ascribed to the enhanced electrical conductivity and good buffering effect of graphene. It is noteworthy that no binder needs to be added to the graphene encapsulated SiNW-based electrode, which indicates the excellent adhesion properties of graphene. Wang et al. fabricated reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and overlapped graphene-coated SiNWs (SiNW@G@rGO) (see Fig. 3).79 The middle graphene layer helps prevent direct contact between the SiNW core and electrolyte, which improves the interfacial stability and maintains the as-formed SEI films. The role of the outer flexible rGO layer with excellent electrical conductivity is to alleviate the severe volume expansion of the SiNW core and facilitate the charge transfer process during continuous lithiation/delithiation processes. Consequently, the electrode demonstrated both remarkable cyclability (1600 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 with 80% capacity retention after 100 cycles) and a rate performance (500 mA h g−1 at 8.4 A g−1).
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the fabrication (upper panel) and adapting (lower panel) of SiNW@G@rGO. (Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society.) 
CNT is a rolled-up single-layer material with hexagonally oriented carbon atoms.83 CNTs are usually categorized into two types, including single-walled nanotubes (SWCNTs) and multiwalled nanotubes (MWCNTs).84 This type of carbon allotrope also has many favourable characteristics, such as high electron diffusion ability, low density, high specific area and excellent mechanical strength.85 Like graphene, the surfaces of CNTs can be also decorated with functional groups for engineering HSs.86 SWCNT-coated SiNWs were studied by Zang et al.87 Coating SWCNTs on the surfaces of SiNWs does not hamper the penetration of Li+ from the electrolyte to the SiNWs. Meanwhile, it shows positive effects to suppress the volume change of SiNWs during cycling. Of particular note, using SiNWs with a smaller diameter is more helpful in enhancing limiting effects. The MWCNTs can also assist in enhancing the mechanical strength and restraining the volume expansion of SiNW-based electrodes.88
Other carbon materials such as carbon nanofibers (CNFs),89 and graphite,90,91 have also been investigated to improve the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based materials for LIBs by enhancing the electrical conductivity and structural integrity. Specifically, the basic principle of introducing carbon materials into SiNW-based electrodes is derived from their intrinsic soft, flexible and conductive properties.
4. Metallic materials composited with SiNWs
Metallic materials with remarkably high electrical conductivity and mechanical strength have also been utilized for improving the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based electrodes. Cu-coated SiNWs (see Fig. 4a and b) were initially investigated by Chen et al.,92 who prepared this composite using CVD and magnetron sputtering. The diameter of the Cu-coated SiNW was about 100 nm, and the thickness of the Cu coating was 10 nm. It was found that CuO, copper silicide (Cu3Si) and Si oxides (SiO and SiO2) are formed in the Cu-coated SiNWs during the preparation process. The Cu-coated SiNWs maintained the highest ICE compared to the pristine and carbon-coated SiNWs. At a current density of 210 mA g−1 within the voltage range of 0.02–2.0 V, the SiNWs with the Cu coating generated a discharge capacity of 2967 mA h g−1 and charge capacity of 2679 mA h g−1 in the first cycle, with an ICE of 90.3% (see Fig. 4c). In contrast, the discharge and charge capacities of the pure SiNWs were 3125 and 2171 mA h g−1 during the first cycle, respectively, corresponding to an ICE of 69.5%. Moreover, the SiNWs with a carbon coating delivered an initial discharge capacity of 3702 mA h g−1 and initial charge capacity of 3082 mA h g−1, leading to an ICE of 83.2%. It is worth noting that despite the highest ICE, the SiNWs with a Cu coating showed both lower charge and discharge capacities than the carbon-coated SiNWs. This phenomenon is attributed to the decrease in side reactions on the surfaces of the SiNWs after being coated with Cu. Another reason may be the consumption of some active Si to form inactive Cu3Si during the fabrication process. Although the Cu/SiNW composite had a little lower capacity, it showed a relatively higher cycling performance. The discharge capacity of the Cu-coated SiNWs (2562 mA h g−1) was maintained at 86.3% of their initial discharge capacity at 0.05C after 15 cycles, while that for pristine and carbon-coated SiNWs was 63.7% (1992 mA h g−1) and 75.0% (2776 mA h g−1), respectively. This result can be attributed to the better electrical conductivity and structural stability of the Cu-coated SiNWs. It is known that Cu has higher ability to transport electrons than carbon. In this case, using a Cu coating layer is helpful for depressing the volume change of SiNWs during cycling, thus resulting in less pulverization, better structural integrity and more stable SEI films. The average diameter of the Cu-coated SiNWs was around 120 nm after the 100th cycle at 0.5C, while the average diameter of the pure SiNWs reached about 200 nm. Owing to the beneficial effects of the Cu coating, the rate capability of the Cu-coated SiNWs was also superior to the SiNWs with either a carbon coating or not. At 0.5C after 50 cycles, the SiNWs with a Cu coating delivered a discharge capacity of 1750 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 59%, while the sample with a carbon coating only exhibited a discharge capacity of 1504 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 40.6% (see Fig. 4d). Additionally, the Cu coating with different thicknesses and homogeneity has distinct effects on the electrochemical performance of SiNWs. An excessively thin Cu coating cannot restrain the cracks of SiNWs. Using a thicker Cu coating layer is able to promote the cyclic performance of the coated SiNWs, while the capacity performance may decay. Thus far, it is inferred that a trade-off between the cycling and capacity performances should be realized by optimizing the Cu layer thickness or by other means such as doping and adding additives with a high theoretical capacity. In this regard, Vlad et al. fabricated a Cu layer with a homogeneous thickness by using the electroless growth method to fabricate Cu-coated SiNWs.93
 Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and (b) TEM images of Cu-coated SiNWs. (c) Initial charge–discharge curves of the pristine SiNWs, SiNWs with carbon-coating and Cu-coating at the rate of 0.05C. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the carbon- and Cu-coated SiNWs at 0.5C. (Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright© 2011, Elsevier B.V.) 
Al-coated SiNWs were quantitatively studied by Memarzadeh et al.94 who created SiNWs on a TiN-coated stainless substrate and coated the SiNWs with an Al coating through magnetron sputtering. Since the thickness of the Al coating was not homogeneous, the authors used the term “Al content” instead of “Al layer thickness”. The Al-coated SiNWs with different Al contents were studied. The theoretical capacity of Al, i.e. 993 mA h g−1, is relatively lower than that of Si. Hence, the capacity performance of the SiNWs with a thicker Al coating was lower than the thinner sample with the same weight. The Al coating with good electrical conductivity and mechanical strength can enhance both the charge transfer process and structural integrity of SiNWs during cycling. Under this condition, the SiNWs are separated from the electrolyte. This is good for stabilizing the formed SEI and lessening the usage of both electrolyte and SiNWs. However, the Al content in the Al-coated SiNWs should be maintained at a certain level. It must be noted that the pulverization of SiNWs with a thinner coating is still an intractable issue. On the other hand, a relatively thicker Al coating poses the risk of exfoliating from the surface of SiNWs, producing a lower specific energy density. Therefore, an appropriate Al content within the range of 3–8 wt% is recommended. The results indicated that both the 3 wt% and 8 wt% samples manifested higher capacity retention than the pristine sample. The 3 wt% Al-coated SiNWs produced the best cyclic performance, demonstrating a stable discharge capacity of nearly 1300 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of about 40%, whereas the pure SiNWs only yielded 1090 mA h g−1 and 30%. However, the existence of an Al coating seems not be able to avoid the capacity decline of the electrode, which is proven by the fact that the capacity retention of the SiNWs with 3 wt% Al coating and pristine SiNWs was 55% and 42%, respectively, of their initial discharge capacity after the 75th cycle. Moreover, different from the carbon and Cu coating, the Al coating has less effect on the ICE of SiNWs.
Both Mg- and Mg2Si-coated SiNWs were explored by Kohandehghan et al.95 During the cycling operation, the Mg coating in the electrode cannot react with Li. However, this is not the case for Mg2Si. The measured discharge capacity of Mg2Si is about 1363 mA h g−1. Similarly, using a thicker coating of both materials on the surface of SiNWs may yield a lower capacity performance. Both Mg- and Mg2Si-coated SiNWs deliver a higher capacity than pure SiNWs. In addition to the improvement in electrical conductivity and structural stability, both Mg and Mg2Si coatings can well restrain the decomposition of the electrolyte during cycling. However, it has been proven that a thin Mg coating may obstruct the kinetics during cycling.
Kohandehghan et al. fabricated SiNWs with a 3 nm-thick Sn coating layer.96 The merit of Sn coating lies in its excellent electrical conductivity and ductility, which are beneficial for enhancing the cyclic and rate performances of electrodes. Sn has a theoretical capacity of 996 mA h g−1 based on the Li storage mechanism of alloying/de-alloying, accompanied with about 260% volume change. The reactions between Sn and Li mostly occur at a higher voltage than Si with Li. Hence, the Sn coating can suppress the volume expansion of SiNWs during cycles, thus restraining the cracks of SiNWs and the formation of an SEI. As reported, the Sn-coated SiNWs displayed a reversible capacity of 1865 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles, while the pristine SiNWs only delivered a reversible capacity of 1046 mA h g−1.
Some researchers attempted to use other metals such as Au,97,98 Ag99 and Ge100 to modify SiNWs in order to improve the electrochemical performance of the battery. As aforementioned, the cycling and rate capability of the coated SiNWs can be significantly enhanced by these coated materials because of their excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical strength.
5. Metal oxides composited with SiNWs
Metal oxides can be also coupled with SiNWs to obtain more excellent performances. The broadly investigated metal oxide coupled with SiNWs is Al2O3, which is typically coated on the surface of SiNWs. Many researchers have studied the effects of Al2O3 coating on the electrochemical performance of SiNWs.101–105 The functions of Al2O3 coating can be summarized as follows.101 Firstly, the Al2O3 coating can be lithiated during the first cycle in the electrode. The surface of the Al2O3 coating connected with the electrolyte will transform to LiAlO2 alloy with much higher Li+ diffusivity than Si, while the internal part of the Al2O3 coating will change to Al2O3/AlF3 with higher Li transport ability than Si but much lower than LiAlO2. Hence, the lithiated coating can facilitate Li+ diffusion during cycling. Secondly, the lithiated Al2O3 coating is not only a good Li+ conductor, but also an electron insulator. It also exhibits good mechanical strength. This enables the Al2O3 coating to act as a stable artificial SEI film, thus inhibiting the deformation of electrolytes to form an SEI. Moreover, owing to its good stability, the structural integrity of SiNW-based electrodes can be remarkably enhanced. Based on these positive effects of Al2O3 coating, the coated-SiNWs are prone to harvesting a higher cycling performance, rate capability and CE. The Al2O3-encapsulated SiNWs prepared by Sadeghipari et al. exhibited a high reversible discharge capacity of 2760 mA h g−1 at C/16 after the 30th cycle with a capacity retention of 92%.102 The electrode also demonstrated a discharge capacity of 965 mA h g−1 at 2C after 120 cycles with a capacity retention of 94%. However, the Al2O3 coating is unable to completely prevent the cracking of SiNWs. It is noted that even if the Al2O3 coating fractures during cycling, it may still protect the electrode to some extent and prolong its cycle life.103 The reasons underlying the cracking of the Al2O3 coating were investigated by Luo et al.,104 who coated SiNWs with a conformal 5 nm-thick Al2O3 layer by atomic layer deposition (ALD). It was found that the pulverization of the Al2O3-coated SiNWs was asymmetric, which is ascribed to the asymmetric lithiation kinetics (see Fig. 5) and the presence of a twin boundary between the two parts (close to or away from the electrolyte) in the SiNWs.
 Fig. 5  (a–d) Time sequential TEM images of the failure process of an Al2O3-coated SiNW. (e) Enlarged TEM image of the SiNW divided into upper and bottom half and corresponding to the electron diffraction patterns. The upper half is fully amorphized, while the lower half is only partially lithiated, manifesting the asymmetry of lithiation kinetics. (f) Schematic showing asymmetry breaking which results in pulverization of the SiNWs. Red arrows represent the Li flow; Li source on the outer surface is displayed by red, lithiated coating layer by cyan, lithiated amorphous shell by gray, unlithiated Si core by black, and the twin boundary by yellow. (Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.) 
The Li storage mechanism of SnO2 is based on two types of reactions, including conversion and alloying/de-alloying.106 The former reaction is partially irreversible. When both types of reactions are considered, the theoretical capacity of SnO2 reaches 1494 mA h g−1. An SiNW/SnO2 composite (see Fig. 6) was studied by Song et al.107 They fabricated a branched HS composite with SnO2 NWs as the trunk framework and SiNWs as the branch. The SnO2 NWs were first formed on a stainless-steel substrate through CVD. Then, the SiNWs were grown on the SnO2 NW backbones through plasma enhanced chemical vapor deposition (PECVD). The SnO2 NWs possessed a diameter ranging from 40 to 100 nm with a length of more than several hundred microns. This large scale of SnO2 NWs permits a high loading of SiNWs. The diameter, length and number of branched SiNWs are all related closely to the diameter of the SnO2 NWs combined with the SiNWs. With an increase in the diameter of the SnO2 NWs, the diameter and length of the formed SiNWs decrease with its amount increasing. The SnO2 NWs in such large scale grow directly from the current collector, which provides strong electrical contact between the SiNWs and current collector. It is found that an amorphous Si:H layer is coated on the bare surfaces of the SnO2 trunk and the interconnected joints between SiNWs and SnO2. This amorphous layer not only helps to strengthen the connection between the branched SiNWs and SnO2 backbones, but also benefits maintaining the structural integrity of the SnO2 NWs during cycling. Both SnO2 and metallic Sn generated during cycling have better electrical conductivity than SiNWs. This structure provides plenty of electron transport paths, thereby improving both the capacity and rate performance. Moreover, the branched SiNWs on the SnO2 NWs are also preferred to sustain the structural stability of SnO2 during continuous lithiation/delithiation processes. Besides, the large space among the numerous SiNWs can buffer the severe volume change during the cycling operation. Under the synergetic effects of both SiNWs and SnO2 NWs, the Si/SnO2 composite with a branched HS yielded a discharge capacity of 1200 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles, corresponding to a capacity retention of 67%. Remarkably, both the SnO2 backbones and SiNW branches contribute to keeping their structural integrity after 160 cycles.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the fabrication process of the Si/SnO2 NW hierarchical structures, which contain (a) SnO2 NWs, (b) Sn-droplet-decorated SnO2 NWs after hydrogen treatment, (c) Sn-catalyzed SiNWs growth on SnO2 NW and (d) amorphous Si:H thin film-coated SnO2 NWs. (e and f) Si/SnO2 NW electrode and battery configuration, respectively. (Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright© 2015, Elsevier Ltd.) 
Transition metal oxides are also potential candidates to be incorporated into SiNWs as LIB anodes, including Co3O4, NiO and TiO2. Co3O4 has a theoretical capacity of 890 mA h g−1. Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs (see Fig. 7a and b) can be fabricated using a simple combined method.108 Firstly, the SiNWs are fabricated by traditional chemical etching. Secondly, the Co nanoparticles are grafted on the surfaces of the SiNWs. After the oxidation thermal treatment, the Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs are formed. This method ensures solid contact between the Co3O4 nanoparticles and SiNWs, which helps to maintain the structural integrity of the composite electrode during cycling (see Fig. 7c and d). NiO nanoparticle-coated SiNWs can be also made using the above synthetic method, which facilitates tight and firm contact between the NiO nanoparticles and SiNWs.109
 Fig. 7  Scheme of the synthetic processes for Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs: (a) as-prepared electroless-etched Si nanowires and (b) Co3O4 nanoparticles grafted onto Si nanowires, and the enlarged image is the mechanism for lithium-ion battery. (c) TEM image and (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright© 2012, Elsevier B.V.) 
TiO2 has excellent structural stability, which has been widely used for LIBs. The volume change of TiO2 during lithiation/delithiation processes is only 3–4%. This feature helps gain remarkable safety. TiO2-coated SiNWs were reported by Lotfabad et al.,110 who prepared SiNWs using the traditional VLS-based method. They used the ALD technique to deposit a conformal TiO2 layer onto the entire surface of the SiNWs, even including part of the SiNWs near the substrate. This full coating on the SiNW surface has evident ability in preventing material agglomeration followed by cracking from the current collector. The TiO2 coating has the function of maintaining the structural stability of the SiNWs and restraining the decomposition of electrolytes to form an SEI. In this case, the amorphous TiO2 coating with a thickness of 10 nm is recommended. To be specific, TiO2-coated SiNWs achieved an ICE of 99% at 0.1C. Moreover, the composite achieved a capacity retention of 60% at 0.1C after 100 cycles, which is two times higher than that of the pristine SiNWs (30%). Even at 5C, the capacity retention of the TiO2/Si composite was still more than 30%, while the pure SiNWs only generated 10% of their initial discharge capacity.
6. Polymers composited with SiNWs
Polymers with good electrical conductivity and flexibility have been widely utilized for improving the electrochemical performance of LIBs.111–113 Poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)-coated SiNWs were studied by Yao et al.,114 who validated their good electron transport ability and stable electrochemical properties. PEDOT has a conductivity of ca. 0.1 S cm−1 at a negative voltage (n-doped state), which is much higher than that of pristine Si. They firstly prepared SiNWs via CVD, and subsequently deposited a PEDOT layer onto the SiNWs via electropolymerization. The X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis suggests that the pure SiNWs have Si (2s) and Si (2p) peaks, which were not detected in the case of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs. The XPS result indicates that the entire surface of SiNWs is covered with a conformal PEDOT coating comprising tightly-connected nanoparticles instead of a PEDOT film (see Fig. 8a and b). This morphology is formed due to heterogeneous nucleation on the SiNW surface during the electropolymerization procedure. The average diameter of the PEDOT nanoparticles is around 50 nm. The PEDOT-coated SiNWs have an outer diameter of ca. 300 nm with a coating thickness of 100 nm. The use of PEDOT coating drastically enhances the structural integrity of the SiNWs and also the kinetics during cycling. As a result, the PEDOT-coated SiNWs yielded a reversible discharge capacity of 2510 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 100 cycles, corresponding to a capacity retention of 80% (see Fig. 8c). By comparison, the pristine SiNWs only kept 30% of their initial discharge capacity. The original structures of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs could be well retained after 40 cycles, while some cracking was found in the pure SiNWs. Moreover, the SEI formation mechanism of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs may be different from single SiNWs. This factor is supposed to be helpful to enhance the cycling performance of the electrode. Additionally, it is worth noting that the ICE of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs was not obviously improved compared to the pristine SiNWs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Magnified SEM image of PEDOT-coated SiNWs. (b) Schematic of a PEDOT (blue)-coated SiNW (brown) with the molecular structure of PEDOT shown. (c) Cycling performance of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright© 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Comparison of the cyclability of the SiNPs, disordered SiNWs and SiNW/PDMS composite. (Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright© 2015, Elsevier Ltd.) 
Some other polymers with good mechanical flexibility but insufficient electrical conductivity have been also combined with SiNWs for LIBs. Wang et al. investigated the electrochemical performance of an SiNW/poly-dimethylsiloxane (SiNW/PDMS) composite.115 The SiNWs were synthesized via the disproportionation reaction of SiO. The SiNWs were partially embedded in the PDMS matrix with the contacting length ranging from tens to hundreds of micrometers. The use of PDMS not only effectively limits the agglomeration of SiNWs by preventing their direct connection with each other, but also buffers the volume change during cycling, thus improving the structural stability. Besides, a decrease in the interface area between the SiNWs and electrolyte helps to suppress the formation of an SEI, consequently leading to an improved ICE of the SiNWs/PDMS composite. This composite exhibited excellent long-term cycling ability with a capacity retention of 83.4% over 350 cycles at 0.5C, which is much better than that of both SiNPs and disordered SiNWs (see Fig. 8d).
Polymers can be combined with some other special materials to further improve the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based anodes. For example, Luo et al. coated SiNWs using an Al–polymer composite with a three-dimensional network of –Aln(–OCH2–CHO–CH2O)m (n:m = 1) (alucone) layer with a thickness of 5 nm. Molecular layer deposition (MLD) was used for this case.104 This alucone composite coating can be lithiated and tightly combined with the SiNWs during cycles. The authors compared the alucone-coated SiNWs and Al2O3-coated SiNWs, concluding that the lithiation process of the former SiNWs seems faster than the latter. Besides, asymmetric cracking of the alucone-coated SiNWs was not found during cycling because of the smoother Li ion diffusion and higher mechanical flexibility of the alucone coating than Al2O3 coating.
7. Si-based materials composited with SiNWs
Si-based materials, such as Si oxides, metal silicides and Si carbides, can also be incorporated into SiNW-based anodes to optimize the electrochemical performance of batteries.
7.1 Nanostructured Si
In addition to SiNWs, there are various nanostructured Si materials, including SiNPs, SiNTs and SiNRs. Each of these nanomaterials has unique functions, which can be introduced to SiNW-based anodes to enhance the performance of electrodes. For example, SiNP-decorated SiNW networks (see Fig. 9a) were studied by Hu et al.116 using a relatively lower areal loading of SiNWs based on the traditional VLS-based method. By coating the SiNWs with SiNPs after CVD growth, the areal loading increases by a factor of 4 compared to the single SiNW anode. An overcoating layer of Si is deposited onto the entire SiNP-decorated SiNW networks to achieve a tight and stable combination between the two materials. This Si anode with different nanostructures demonstrated a reversible discharge capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 at 0.2C over 30 cycles and achieved a high areal capacity of about 2.5 mA h cm−2 at 0.2C (see Fig. 9b and c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Scheme, (b) voltage profile and (c) cycling performance at 0.2C of a network of SiNP-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright© 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
7.2 Si oxides
Si oxides are typically classified into three types including SiO, SiO2 and SiOx (x < 2). SiOx is virtually a mixture of Si oxides including SiOy (0 < y < 1), SiO, SiO2 and SiOz (1 < z < 2). When the O content is lower than 1, SiOx mostly shows a remarkable electrochemical performance.117,118 All these Si oxides can react with Li+ under specific conditions. With an increase in the O content, its Li storage ability decreases, while the volume change during the lithiation/delithiation processes becomes small, accompanied with better mechanical strength and stability. More information about the crystalline structures, Li storage behaviours and electrochemical performances of various Si oxides for LIB applications has been comprehensively discussed in a previous review paper.118 Based on the above advantages, the introduction of Si oxides in SiNW-based LIB anodes benefits hindering the volume change of SiNWs and enhancing the cycling life.
Si oxide-coated SiNWs are commonly-used composites in this field. The Si oxide shell should be thin enough to allow the penetration of Li+. Otherwise, both the cyclic and rate performance of the composite will be reduced compared with the pristine SiNWs. For example, Chen et al. fabricated SiOx-coated porous SiNWs via chemical etching.119 The SiOx coating possessed a thickness of ca. 3 nm. This composite demonstrated both excellent long-term cycling performance and rate capability. It retained a reversible capacity of 1503 mA h g−1 at a current density of 600 mA g−1 after 560 cycles with a capacity retention of nearly 78%. In terms of the rate performance, it yielded a discharge capacity of 1297, 976, 761, 548 and 282 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1200, 2400, 3600, 4800 and 7200 mA g−1, respectively. Lim et al. engineered a core–shell structured SiOx@SiNW composite by CVD.120 The average thickness of the SiOx coating layer was 5.8 ± 1.3 nm. The composite delivered a reversible capacity of 1910 mA h g−1 at 0.2C, which is 95% of the initial discharge capacity. Even at the rate of 20, 30 and 50C, the composite still maintained a specific capacity of 1735, 1200 and 750 mA h g−1, respectively.
7.3 Metal silicides
Metal silicides, such as Mg2Si and NiSix, have been investigated for LIBs. The electrochemical performance of Mg2Si-coated SiNWs was discussed above.95 NiSix may be the most attractive silicide owing to its low resistivity and strong connection with Si. Amorphous-Si/NiSix composite NWs with a core/shell structure were fabricated by Kang et al.121 For this composite, the amorphous-Si is used to create the shell, while the NiSix serves as the core. The NiSix NW core was synthesized via CVD, followed by thermal decomposition of SiH4 to form the amorphous Si shell. The NiSix NW core functions as a mechanical backbone to support the Si shell and a kinetically unlimited charge supplier to accommodate the volume change of Si during cycling. The amorphous-Si/NiSix composite maintained a reversible discharge capacity of over 3000 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles with a capacity retention of ca. 83%. However, the Si shell may be detached from the NiSix core during continuous cycling. Moreover, the inherent interfacial potential barrier between NiSix and Si shell obstructs the electron transport from one side to the other, consequently limiting its rate capability. To solve these problems, Han et al. incorporated metallic Ge with the Si/NiSix composite (see Fig. 10a and b) to enhance the electrochemical performance.122 Unlike the above core/shell NiSix/Si, in this case, an amorphous Ge layer was deposited onto the surface of NiSix using a radio frequency magnetron sputtering system. Then an amorphous Si layer was coated on the surface of the Ge layer using the same method. Compared to the core/shell NiSix/Si, the new composite was endowed with much better electrical conductivity and structural ability due to the existence of amorphous Ge. The Ge layer herein mediates the potential barrier between the amorphous-Si and NiSix, thus enormously facilitating the electron transfer process. Additionally, the Ge interlayer improves the interfacial connection between the amorphous-Si and NiSix by decreasing void fraction, which is conducive to enhancing the structural integrity during cycling. Under the combined effects of the amorphous Ge, amorphous-Si and NiSix, the composite integrated with a 5 nm-thick Ge interlayer retained a reversible discharge capacity of 877 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles (see Fig. 10c). Even at an ultrahigh current density of 40 A g−1, a discharge capacity of 477 mA h g−1 was still maintained (see Fig. 10d). In addition, the thickness of the Ge interlayer in the range of 2–5 nm is recommended. A Ge layer with a thickness of 2 nm is not stiff enough to sustain the structural integrity of the electrode under high-rate working conditions. A stable structure is obtained with a thickness of above 5 nm. However, the capacity retention may decline when the thickness of the Ge interlayer scales up to 10 nm.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of stabilizing high-rate NiSix/Si anode by inserting an ultrathin amorphous Ge layer: (a) amorphous Si grows directly on NiSix nanowires, which cracks and detaches form the NiSix nanowires during cycling and (b) amorphous Ge interlayer provides an electron highway and improves structural stability during continuous cycles. Comparison of the (c) cycling performance and (d) rate capability of the NiSix/Ge/Si composite and NiSix/Si composite. (Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.) 
7.4 Si carbides
Graphene-coated SiNWs embedded with SiC were fabricated by Yang et al.123 They utilized the electrochemical etching technique to synthesize the SiNWs. The graphene coating grows directly on the surface of the SiNWs through a microwave plasma chemical vapor deposition (MPCVD) process, during which the SiC is also formed inside the SiNWs. Using a graphene coating helps to provide more electrical contact points among SiNWs and more electron diffusion paths. It is able to avoid direct contact between the electrolyte and SiNWs, thus reducing the consumption of SiNWs and limiting the decomposition of electrolytes. As is well known, SiC is electrochemically inert. It cannot react with Li+, which means that SiC can remain stable during continuous lithiation/delithiation processes of SiNWs. Moreover, it possess excellent mechanical strength and hardness. All these alluring properties of SiC are considered to be the major reasons for the remarkable improvement in the cycling performance of the graphene-coated and SiC-embedded SiNWs. As a result, the composite retained a reversible capacity of 1650 mA h g−1 at C/3 after 500 cycles.
8. Other materials combined with SiNWs
In addition to the aforementioned materials, there are also several other types of additive materials that have been incorporate in SiNW-based LIB anodes. For instance, TiN possesses excellent electrical conductivity with a resistivity of 25 μΩ cm, which is mechanically tough to be a preferable candidate for improving the electrochemical performance of SiNWs. TiN-coated SiNWs were synthesized by Kohandehghan et al.124 They also compared the electrochemical performance of the SiNW/TiN composites made via two different coating methods (i.e. ALD and magnetron sputtering) with different coating thicknesses. For both cases, the TiN coating with a thickness of 5 nm contributes most to enhancing the cycling performance. The TiN-coated SiNWs based on ALD produced a better electrochemical performance than the samples coated by magnetron sputtering. The ALD-deposited coating is conformal and smooth, which covers the entire surface of the SiNWs from the tip to the bottom connecting to the current collector. However, the sputtered TiN coating is geometrically less conformal and has a coarser surface than the ALD-based coating, owing to the effect of flux shadowing during sputtering. Besides, the intrinsic directional deposition flux of the sputtering processes prevents the coating material from penetrating in all ways to the substrate. All these effects tend to cause increased site-to-site variability in mechanical (fracture) and chemical (SEI growth) protection, especially in the uncoated areas. In addition, the rate capability of the sputtered coated SiNWs is similar to that of the pristine SiNWs due to the lack of TiN near the current collector. The ALD-coated SiNWs with a TiN coating of 5 nm exhibited both high cyclability and rate performance. The composite demonstrated a reversible capacity of 1566 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 53.7%, while the pristine SiNWs only retained 29.8% (i.e. 1065 mA h g−1) of their initial discharge capacity. Furthermore, the composite still maintained a capacity of 740 mA h g−1 at 5C, which is more than two times that of the pure SiNWs. The TiN coating with a thickness of 5 nm significantly enhances the electrical conductivity, provides more electron diffusion paths, improves the mechanical integrity, and limits the generation of SEI, thereby leading to excellent capacity, cycling and rate performances. Additionally, the Li+ diffusivity of the TiN coating with a thickness of 1 nm is equivalent to that with 5 nm. However, it is not recommended to use a coating thickness of 1 nm since it is not sufficient to support the SiNWs during continuous lithiation/delithiation processes. On the other hand, the TiN coating with a thickness of 15 nm is tough enough but fragile, and is difficult for Li+ to cross over. Therefore, the introduction of a TiN coating with a thickness of 15 nm is detrimental to the electrochemical performance of SiNWs. For this example, using a thickness of 5 nm is preferred.
Besides doping and compositing, SiNWs can be decorated with functional groups on their surface. Xu et al. fabricated three types of surface-functionalized SiNWs/graphite composites (15% SiNWs and 85% graphite) including hydride-terminated (Si–H), methylated (Si–CH3) and trimethoxymethylsilane-treated siloxane (Si–O–Si–R) SiNWs/graphite (see Fig. 11a).125 The composite with a hydride surface yielded a much higher electrochemical performance than the other two types. Under the same operating conditions, the hydride-modified composite exhibited a reversible capacity of 1364 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles, while the methylated and trimethoxymethylsilane-treated composite anode only reaches 383 and 368 mA h g−1, respectively (see Fig. 11b). Hydride surface functionalization is of great significance to improve the mechanical integrity of the composite by increasing the adhesion property between the SEI and SiNWs. However, the surface modification of SiNWs with methyl or siloxane has the risk of reducing the electrochemical reactivity, consequently inhibiting the cycling and rate performances. Furthermore, the authors also added 5% trimethoxymethylsilane as an additive to the EC/DMC-based electrolyte. The hydride-treated composite in the new electrolyte exhibited a much higher electrochemical performance than its original form. It was able to retain a remarkable reversible capacity of 2348 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles (see Fig. 11b). This electrolyte additive is also helpful to improve the mechanical connection between the SEI and SINWs. The contact stiffness seemed to be 125% greater with the additive in the electrolyte. Likewise, Zhou et al. investigated the electrochemical effects of different functional groups on decorated SiNWs.126 It was found that different surface terminations will endow the SEI with different compositions, which further affects the cycling performance of SiNW-based electrodes. The SEI films generated during the first cycle on the surface of Si–OH or Si–H functionalized SiNWs have better conductivity compared to that of the phenylsilane and Si–C surface-modified SiNWs. Moreover, a more stable SEI layer can be formed on the Si–F-treated surface of SiNWs. This is ascribed to the shortened length of oligomer chains caused by F in the SEI, leading to a compact passivation film, which assists in enhancing the cyclability.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representations of functionalized silicon surfaces. (b) Cycling performance of the functionalized SiNWs and the hydride-treated SiNWs in the new electrolyte with 5% trimethoxymethylsilane additives. (Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright© 2011, Elsevier B.V.) 
9. Conclusion and outlook
This review focused on SiNW-based materials as anodes for LIBs from the aspect of composition. Various materials incorporated into SiNW-based anodes through doping or compositing were enumerated and discussed in detail. The electrochemical effects of various additives, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials and other special substances, were comprehensively described. Each of these materials shows distinct physical or electrochemical features. The electrochemical performances of various SiNW-based anodes containing the above additives are summarized in Table 1, including a series of representative examples. Generally, the major problems causing the low electrochemical performance of SiNW-based anodes include big volume changes, unstable SEI, pulverization, electrical insulation and low charge diffusion rates, which can be solved by the incorporated materials to some extent. The SiNWs integrated with these additives achieve improved structural stability, increased mechanical strength, accelerated charge transfer processes, restrained SEI deposition and strengthened electrical connection. These advantages consequently lead to long-term cycling and excellent rate performance of the SiNW-based hybrids for LIB anodes. Particularly, the core/shell structure with SiNWs as the core and additives as the shell is the most popular combination pattern. Almost all of the above discussed materials can be coated on the surface of SiNWs to improve their electrochemical performance. This can be ascribed to the inherent merits of the coating structure, such as preventing the direct contact between electrolytes and SiNWs, directly suppressing the volume change, and providing more charge carrier diffusion paths.
Table 1 Summary of the electrochemical performance and relevant information of SiNW-based LIB anodes containing the discussed additives




Section
SiNW-based anode
Rate performance
Cycling performance
Ref.





2. Doping materials





B-doped SiNWs
1100 mA h g−1 at 18 A g−1 after 250 cycles
2000 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 250 cycles

55



As-doped SiNWs


2730 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles

57



P-doped SiNWs
586.7 mA h g−1 at 16.0 A g−1 after 5000 cycles
2061.1 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

58







3. Carbon materials composited with SiNWs





Amorphous carbon-coated SiNWs


1326 mA h g−1 at 150 mA g−1 after 40 cycles

68



SiNW@G@rGO
500 mA h g−1 at 8.4 A g−1
1600 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles

79



SiNWs/MWCNTs


1695 mA h g−1 at C/15 after 100 cycles

88







4. Metallic materials composited with SiNWs





Cu-coated SiNWs
1750 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 50 cycles
2138 mA h g−1 at 0.05C after 30 cycles

92



Al-coated SiNWs


1300 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles

94



Sn-coated SiNWs


1865 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles

96







5. Metal oxides composited with SiNWs





Al2O3-coated SiNWs
965 mA h g−1 at 2C after 120 cycles
2760 mA h g−1 at C/16 after 30 cycles

102



Branched SiNWs/SnO2


1200 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles

107



TiO2-coated SiNWs
30% of its initial discharge capacity at 5C
60% of its initial discharge capacity at 0.1C after 100 cycles

110







6. Polymers composited with SiNWs





PEDOT-coated SiNWs


2510 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 100 cycles

114



SiNWs/PDMS


83.4% of its initial discharge capacity at 0.5C after 350 cycles

115







7. Si-based materials composited with SiNWs



7.1 Nanostructured Si
SiNP-decorated SiNWs


1600 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 30 cycles

116



7.2 Si oxides
SiOx-coated SiNWs
1297, 976, 761, 548 and 282 mA h g−1 at 1200, 2400, 3600, 4800 and 7200 mA g−1, respectively
1503 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1 after 560 cycles

119



7.3 Metal silicides
Amorphous-Si/NiSix


Over 3000 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles

121



NiSix/Ge/amorphous Si
477 mA h g−1 at 40 A g−1
877 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles

122



7.4 Si carbides
Graphene-coated SiNWs embedded with SiC


1650 mA h g−1 at C/3 after 500 cycles

123







8. Other materials combined with SiNWs





TiN-coated SiNWs
740 mA h g−1 at 5C
1566 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles

124



Hydride-terminated SiNWs


1364 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles

125





The status quo of SiNW-based anodes from the perspective of materials was presented above. One can learn about what additives have been incorporated into SiNW-based anodes and how they affect the electrochemical performance. This is helpful to facilitate the development of SiNW-based LIB anode materials by optimizing the composition.
Although some progress has been made in enhancing the electrochemical performance of SiNW-based anodes by adding additives, there are still many intractable issues to be addressed, such as low specific energy density, low mass loading and high processing cost. For example, despite the merits of material coating, the capacity performance tends to be decreased by the inactive coating layer. Thus, future studies on SiNW-based anodes should focus on these problems. One effective way is to further optimize the composition of SiNW-based materials according to the pros and cons of the various additives described above. Another viable method is to modify the other components of the battery-like electrolytes and current collectors, thus indirectly improving the electrode performance. Moreover, optimizing the structure of SiNW-based materials, such as constructing yolk/shell and hierarchical structures, is also effective in improving the battery performance. For instance, SiNWs grafted onto the surface of some conductive backbones may assist in achieving a high mass loading without sacrificing the cycle life and rate capability. In conclusion, with continuous and intensive efforts from researchers, theoretical and technical breakthroughs in SiNW-based anode materials can be expected in the near future. Meanwhile, we also believe that SiNW-based anode materials will play an increasingly important and active role in next-generation LIBs with high energy density.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51975218 and 51722504), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (2015A030306013), Science and Technology Plan Program of Guangdong Province (2017KZ010105 and 2017B090901012), and Key R&D Program of Guangdong Province (2019B090909001). In addition, Yang Yang especially wants to thank the patience, care and support from Tingting Li over the past decade.
References
M. Idrees, S. Batool, J. Kong, Q. Zhuang, H. Liu, Q. Shao, N. Lu, Y. Feng, E. K. Wujcik, Q. Gao, T. Ding, R. Wei and Z. Guo, Polyborosilazane derived ceramics – Nitrogen sulfur dual doped graphene nanocomposite anode for enhanced lithium ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 925–937 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, 30 years of lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Yuan, J. Luo, Z. Yan, Z. Tan and Y. Tang, High-performance CuO/Cu composite current collectors with array-pattern porous structures for lithium-ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 226, 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, W. Yuan, X. Zhang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Ye, Y. Huang, Z. Qiu and Y. Tang, Overview on the applications of three-dimensional printing for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, Appl. Energy, 2020, 257, 114002 CrossRef .
J. Luo, W. Yuan, S. Huang, B. Zhao, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Y. Tang, From checkerboard-like sand barriers to 3D Cu@CNF composite current collectors for high-performance batteries, Adv. Sci., 2018, 1800031 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Dou, Z. Wei, J. Ma, Y. Deng, Y. Li, H. Liu and S. Dou, Recent progress in graphite intercalation compounds for rechargeable metal (Li, Na, K, Al)-ion batteries, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700146 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Iron-oxide-based advanced anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300958 CrossRef .
J. Ma, X. Guo, Y. Yan, H. Xue and H. Pang, FeOx-based materials for electrochemical energy storage, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700986 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Teki, M. K. Datta, R. Krishnan, T. C. Parker, T.-M. Lu, P. N. Kumta and N. Koratkar, Nanostructured silicon anodes for lithium ion rechargeable batteries, Small, 2009, 5, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Chan, R. Ruffo, S. S. Hong and Y. Cui, Surface chemistry and morphology of the solid electrolyte interphase on silicon nanowire lithium-ion battery anodes, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 1132–1140 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, N. Lin, T. Xu, T. Li, J. Tian, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, An amorphous Si material with a sponge-like structure as an anode for Li-ion and Na-ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3153 RSC .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Designing nanostructured Si anodes for high energy lithium ion batteries, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, V. M. H. Ng, F. Wang, Z. Xiao, C. Li, L. B. Kong, W. Que and K. Zhou, Synthesis and application of iron-based nanomaterials as anodes of lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9332 RSC .
J. Li, H. Y. Yu and Y. Li, Aligned Si nanowire-based solar cells, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 4888 RSC .
T. Song, S.-T. Lee and B. Sun, Silicon nanowires for photovoltaic applications: The progress and challenge, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 654–673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, T. Wang, P. Da, M. Xu, H. Wu and G. Zheng, Silicon nanowires for biosensing, energy storage, and conversion, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5177–5195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Silicon-based nanomaterials for lithium-ion batteries: a review, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 CrossRef .
P. Namdari, H. Daraee and A. Eatemadi, Recent advances in silicon nanowire biosensors: synthesis methods, properties, and applications, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 406 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Joyce, J. L. Boland, C. L. Davies, S. A. Baig and M. B. Johnston, A review of the electrical properties of semiconductor nanowires: insights gained from terahertz conductivity spectroscopy, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2016, 31, 103003 CrossRef .
W. Wang, M. K. Dattaa and P. N. Kumta, Silicon-based composite anodes for Li-ion rechargeable batteries, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 3229–3237 RSC .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, 25th anniversary article: Understanding the lithiation of silicon and other alloying anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4966–4985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Chevrier and J. R. Dahn, First principles model of amorphous silicon lithiation, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A454–A458 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Hwang, Y. M. Lee, B.-S. Kong, J.-S. Seo and J. W. Choi, Electrospun core-shell fibers for robust silicon nanoparticle-based lithium ion battery anodes, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 802–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Ng, J. Wang, D. Wexler, K. Konstantinov, Z.-P. Guo and H. Liu, Highly reversible lithium storage in spheroidal carbon-coated silicon nanocomposites as anodes for lithium-ion batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6896–6899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, B. Scrosati and J.-M. Tarascon, Nanomaterials for rechargeable lithium batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2930–2946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, Y. Cui, L. Huynh, C. J. Barrelet, D. C. Bell and C. M. Lieber, Controlled growth and structures of molecular-scale siliconnanowires, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 433–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gan, C. Zhang, P. Liu, Y. Liu, W. Wen, B. Liu, Q. Xie, L. Huang and X. Luo, Polymeric carbon encapsulated Si nanoparticles from waste Si as a battery anode with enhanced electrochemical properties, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 307, 107–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Hainey and J. M. Redwing, Aluminum-catalyzed silicon nanowires: Growth methods, properties, and applications, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 040806 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen and Z. Xie, First-principles investigation on cluster-assembled silicon nanotubes with Eu atoms encapsulation, J. Mol. Model., 2019, 25, 226 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhou, X. Jiang, L. Chen, J. Yue, H. Xu, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Novel mesoporous silicon nanorod as an anode material for lithium ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 127, 252–258 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hao, J. Hou, J. Ye, H. Yang, J. Du and C. Xu, Hierarchical macroporous Si/Sn composite: Easy preparation and optimized performances towards lithium storage, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 306, 427–436 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, X. Deng, J. Zou and X. Zeng, Amorphous/ordered dual carbon coated silicon nanoparticles as anode to enhance cycle performance in lithium ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 295, 498–506 CrossRef CAS .
D. Andre, H. Hain, P. Lamp, F. Maglia and B. Stiaszny, Future high-energy density anode materials from an automotive application perspective, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17174 RSC .
Y. Sun, K. Liu and Y. Zhu, Recent progress in synthesis and application of low-dimensional silicon based anode material for lithium ion battery, J. Nanomater., 2017, 4780905 Search PubMed .
D. Liu, J. Ma, R. Long, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Silicon nanostructures for solar-driven catalytic applications, Nano Today, 2017, 17, 96–116 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, J. Shi, W. Zi, P. Wang and S. Liu, Recent advances in photoelectrochemical applications of silicon materials for solar-to-chemicals conversion, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4324–4341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu, X. Pan, G. Zhang, X. Liao, X. Zhou, M. Yan, L. Xu and L. Mai, Nanowires in energy storage devices: structures, synthesis, and applications, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802369 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Fan, J. Gu, L. Wu, S. Passerini and L. Mai, One-dimensional nanomaterials for energy storage, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 113002 CrossRef .
S. Chakraborti, R. N. Basu and S. K. Panda, Vertically aligned silicon nanowire array decorated by Ag or Au nanoparticles as SERS substrate for bio-molecular detection, Plasmonics, 2018, 13, 1057–1080 CrossRef CAS .
H. Feng, L. Tang, G. Zeng, Y. Zhou, Y. Deng, X. Ren, B. Song, C. Liang, M. Wei and J. Yu, Core-shell nanomaterials: Applications in energy storage and conversion, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 267, 26–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and H. Liu, Nanowires for high-efficiency, low-cost solar photovoltaics, Crystals, 2019, 9, 87 CrossRef .
X. Weng, Review of the preparation and structures of Si nanowires, Ge quantum dots and their composites, Nano, 2019, 14, 1930004 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, X. Hu, S. Kundu, A. Nag, N. Afsarimanesh, S. Sapra, S. C. Mukhopadhyay and T. Han, Silicon-based sensors for biomedical applications: a review, Sensors, 2019, 19, 2908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, T. Wang and J. Gong, Single-crystal silicon-based electrodes for unbiased solar water splitting: current status and prospects, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2158 RSC .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu, P. Müller-Buschbaum and Y.-J. Cheng, Silicon based lithium-ion battery anodes: a chronicle perspective review, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113–143 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qi, Z. Yan, Y. Liu, X. Li, G. He and S. Komarneni, Ni and Co doped yolk-shell type Fe2O3 hollow microspheres as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 211, 452–461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, J. Hou, Y. Niu, W. Li, F. Yi, S. Liu, G. Li and M. Xu, Improved cycle capability of Titanium-doped Fe2O3 anode material for Li-ion batteries, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 722, 414–419 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, L. Chen, X. Zhang, X. Zhou, G. Wang and B. Jiang, Tungsten doping magnetic iron oxide and their enhanced lithium ion storage properties, Mater. Lett., 2013, 106, 304–307 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, C. Fang and G. Chen, The developments of SnO2/graphene nanocomposites as anode materials for high performance lithium ion batteries: A review, J. Power Sources, 2016, 304, 81–101 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barth, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, J. D. Holmes and A. Romano-Rodriguez, Synthesis and applications of one-dimensional semiconductors, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55, 563–627 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ramanujam, D. Shiri and A. Verma, Silicon nanowire growth and properties: a review, Mater. Express, 2011, 1, 105–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Qiu, W. Zhang and P. K. Chu, Recent progress in patterned silicon nanowire arrays: fabrication, properties and applications, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 5, 62–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, R. Zou, L. Yu and J. Hu, Recent research on one-dimensional silicon-based semiconductor nanomaterials: synthesis, structures, properties and applications, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2011, 36, 148–173 CrossRef CAS .
V. Schmidt, J. V. Wittemann, S. Senz and U. Gösele, Silicon nanowires: a review on aspects of their growth and their electrical properties, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2681–2702 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ge, J. Rong, X. Fang and C. Zhou, Porous doped silicon nanowires for lithium ion battery anode with long cycle life, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2318–2323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hwang, K. Lee, H.-D. Um, Y. Lee, K. Seo and H.-K. Song, Conductive and porous silicon nanowire anodes for lithium ion batteries, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1564–A1568 CrossRef CAS .
O. Salihoglu and Y. E. Kahlout, Doped silicon nanowires for lithium ion battery anodes, Mater. Res., 2019, 22, e20180303 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Q. Bi, M. Sajjad, X. Wang, Y. Ren, X. Zhou, W. Xu and Z. Liu, One-dimensional porous silicon nanowires with large surface area for fast charge–discharge lithium-ion batteries, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8, 285 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, H. Zheng, J. W. Wang, J.-H. Cho, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, J. P. Sullivan, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Ultrafast electrochemical lithiation of individual Si nanowire anodes, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, W. Choi, D. Byun and J. K. Lee, Electrochemical characteristics of phosphorus doped silicon for the anode material of lithium secondary batteries, Solid State Ionics, 2012, 212, 43–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Anjali, V. K. Jose and J.-M. Lee, Carbon-based hydrogels: synthesis and their recent energy applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15491 RSC .
T. Liu, L. Zhang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Hollow carbon spheres and their hybrid nanomaterials in electrochemical energy storage, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803900 CrossRef .
C. Hu, M. Li, J. Qiu and Y.-P. Sun, Design and fabrication of carbon dots for energy conversion and storage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315 RSC .
C. Li, X. Zhang, C. Sun, K. Wang, X. Sun and Y. Ma, Recent progress of graphene-based materials in lithium-ion capacitors, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2019, 52, 143001 CrossRef .
L. S. Roselin, R.-S. Juang, C.-T. Hsieh, S. Sagadevan, A. Umar, R. Selvin and H. H. Hegazy, Recent advances and perspectives of carbon-based nanostructures as anode materials for Li-ion batteries, Materials, 2019, 12, 1229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-F. Liu, Y.-C. Liu, T.-Y. Yi and C.-C. Hu, Carbon materials for high-voltage supercapacitors, Carbon, 2019, 145, 529–548 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ghosh and P. K. Giri, Silicon nanowire heterostructures for advanced energy and environmental applications: a review, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 012001 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Huang, X. Fan, W. Shen and J. Zhu, Carbon-coated silicon nanowire array films for high-performance lithium-ion battery anodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 133119 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, F. Yang, G. G. X. Wang, T. Zhang and P. Wang, Recent development of graphene-based materials for cathode application in lithium batteries: a review and
outlook, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 5961–5971 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan, H. Yen, K. Wu, Q. Lin, M. Zhou, X. Guo, D. Wu, H. Zhang, G. Wu and H. Wang, Functionalized fullerenes for highly efficient lithium ion storage: Structure-property-performance correlation with energy implications, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 327–335 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pumera, Graphene-based nanomaterials for energy storage, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668–674 RSC .
M. Keppeler, N. Shen, S. Nageswaran and M. Srinivasan, Synthesis of α-Fe2O3/carbon nanocomposites as high capacity electrodes for next generation lithium ion batteries: a review, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18223–18239 RSC .
X. Y. Li, L. Z. Chen, Y. Q. Qu and Y. Y. Ma, Carbon-assisted conversion reaction-based oxide nanomaterials for lithium-ion batteries, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1124–1140 RSC .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Graphene oxide, highly reduced graphene oxide and graphene: versatile building blocks for carbon-based materials, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Wang, X. P. Shen, J. Yao and J. Park, Graphene nanosheets for enhanced lithium storage in lithium ion batteries, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2049–2053 CrossRef CAS .
P. Guo, H. H. Song and X. H. Chen, Electrochemical performance of graphene nanosheets as anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1320–1324 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Wang and W.-Q. Han, Graphene enhances Li storage capacity of porous single-crystalline silicon nanowires, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 2, 3709–3713 CrossRef PubMed .
S. E. Lee, H.-J. Kim, H. Kim, J. H. Park and D.-G. Choi, Highly robust silicon nanowire/graphene core-shell electrodes without polymeric binders, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8986–8991 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang, B. Luo, M. Jin, M. Liang, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux and L. Zhi, Adaptable silicon-carbon nanocables sandwiched between reduced graphene oxide sheets as lithium ion battery anodes, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1437–1445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Salvatierra, A.-R. O. Raji, S.-K. Lee, Y. Ji, L. Li and J. M. Tour, Silicon nanowires and lithium cobalt oxide nanowires in graphene nanoribbon papers for full lithium ion battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600918 CrossRef .
J.-G. Ren, C. Wang, Q.-H. Wu, X. Liu, Y. Yang, L. He and W. Zhang, A silicon nanowire–reduced graphene oxide composite as a high-performance lithium ion battery anode material, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3353 RSC .
B. Wang, X. Li, B. Luo, X. Zhang, Y. Shang, A. Cao and L. Zhi, Intertwined network of Si/C nanocables and carbon nanotubes as lithium-ion battery anodes, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6467–6472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kumar, M. Nehra, D. Kedia, N. Dilbaghi, K. Tankeshwar and K.-H. Kim, Carbon nanotubes: a potential material for energy conversion and storage, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2018, 64, 219–253 CrossRef .
H. Kim, J. W. Lee, D. Byun and W. Choi, Coaxial-nanostructured MnFe2O4 nanoparticles on polydopamine-coated MWCNT for anode materials in rechargeable batteries, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 18949–18960 RSC .
X. Pan, Y. Liu, X. Z. Wang, Z. B. Zhao and J. S. Qiu, Nanofibers with MoS2 nanosheets encapsulated in carbon as a binder-free anode for superior lithium storage, New Carbon Mater., 2018, 33, 544–561 CrossRef .
N. Karousis, N. Tagmatarchis and D. Tasis, Current progress on the
chemical modification of carbon nanotubes, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 5366–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Zang and Y.-P. Zhao, Silicon nanowire reinforced by single-walled carbon nanotube and its applications to anti-pulverization electrode in lithium ion battery, Composites, Part B, 2012, 43, 76–82 CrossRef .
G. Sandu, M. Coulombier, V. Kumar, H. G. Kassa, I. Avram, R. Ye, A. Stopin, D. Bonifazi, J.-F. Gohy, P. Leclère, X. Gonze, T. Pardoen, A. Vlad and S. Melinte, Kinked silicon nanowires-enabled interweaving electrode configuration for lithium-ion batteries, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 9794 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, Q. Fang, J. Li, H. Wu, Y. Liu and P. Wen, Analytical model for sandwich-lithiation in hollow amorphous silicon nano-anodes coated on carbon nanofibers, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, A163–A170 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu and J. C. Flake, Composite silicon nanowire anodes for secondary lithium-ion cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A41–A45 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lim, S. Chae, S.-H. Jung, Y. Hyeon, W. Jang, W.-S. Yoon, J.-Y. Choi and D. Whang, Loose-fit graphitic encapsulation of silicon nanowire for one-dimensional Si anode design, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2017, 33, 1120–1127 CrossRef .
H. Chen, Y. Xiao, L. Wang and Y. Yang, Silicon nanowires coated with copper layer as anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6657–6662 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vlad, A. L. M. Reddy, A. Ajayan, N. Singh, J.-F. Gohy, S. Melinte and P. M. Ajayan, Roll up nanowire battery from silicon chips, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 15168–15173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. L. Memarzadeh, W. P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, B. Zahiri, C. M. B. Holt and D. Mitlin, Silicon nanowire core aluminum shell coaxial nanocomposites for lithium ion battery anodes grown with and without a TiN interlayer, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6655 RSC .
A. Kohandehghan, P. Kalisvaart, M. Kupsta, B. Zahiri, B. S. Amirkhiz, Z. Li, E. L. Memarzadeh, L. A. Bendersky and D. Mitlin, Magnesium and magnesium-silicide coated silicon nanowire composite anodes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1600 RSC .
A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, E. Memarzadeh, P. Kalisvaart and D. Mitlin, Nanometer-scale Sn coatings improve the performance of silicon nanowire LIB anodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11261 RSC .
C.-Y. Chou, J.-H. Seo, Y.-H. Tsai, J.-P. Ahn, E. Paek, M.-H. Cho, I.-S. Choi and G. S. Hwang, Anomalous stagewise lithiation of gold-coated silicon nanowires: a combined in situ characterization and first-principles study, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 16976–16983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Kim, S. E. Lee, J. Lee, J.-Y. Jung, E.-S. Lee, J.-H. Choi, J.-H. Jung, M. Oh, S. Hyun and D.-G. Choi, Gold-coated silicon nanowire–graphene core–shell composite film as a polymer binder-free anode for rechargeable lithium-ion batteries, Phys. E, 2014, 61, 204–209 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Baek, J.-S. Park, Y.-M. Jeong and J. H. Kim, Facile synthesis of Ag-coated silicon nanowires as anode materials for high-performance rechargeable lithium battery, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 660, 387–391 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lin, D. Kim, Z. Li, B.-M. Nguyen, N. Li, S. Zhang and J. Yoo, Strain-induced structural defects and their effects on the electrochemical performances of silicon core/germanium shell nanowire heterostructures, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1213 RSC .
X. Xiao, P. Lu and D. Ahn, Ultrathin multifunctional oxide coatings for lithium ion batteries, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3911–3915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sadeghipari, A. Mashayekhi and S. Mohajerzadeh, Novel approach for improving the performance of Si-based anodes in lithium-ion batteries, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 055403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Nguyen, M. R. Zamfir, L. D. Duong, Y. H. Lee, P. Bondavalli and D. Pribat, Alumina-coated silicon-based nanowire arrays for high quality Li-ion battery anodes, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24618 RSC .
L. Luo, H. Yang, P. Yan, J. J. Travis, Y. Lee, N. Liu, D. M. Piper, S.-H. Lee, P. Zhao, S. M. George, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Cui, S. Zhang, C. Ban and C.-M. Wang, Surface-coating regulated lithiation kinetics and degradation in silicon nanowires for lithium ion battery, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5559–5566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, S. Wang, X. Song, H. Yang, G. Du, L. Yu, J. Xu, P. He, H. Zhou and K. Chen, A bottom-up synthetic hierarchical buffer structure of copper silicon nanowire hybrids as ultra-stable and high-rate lithium-ion battery anodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7877 RSC .
Q. Zhao, L. Ma, Q. Zhang, C. Wang and X. Xu, SnO2-based nanomaterials: synthesis and application in lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors, J. Nanomater., 2015, 850147 Search PubMed .
H. Song, H. X. Wang, Z. Lin, L. Yu, X. Jiang, Z. Yu, J. Xu, L. Pan, M. Zheng, Y. Shi and K. Chen, Hierarchical nano-branched c-Si/SnO2 nanowires for high areal capacity and stable lithium-ion battery, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 511–521 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sun, K. Huang, Y. Liu, T. Gao, Y. Han and J. Zhong, Hierarchical structure of Co3O4 nanoparticles on Si nanowires array films for lithium-ion battery applications, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 266, 300–305 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Qiu, L. W. Yang, X. Qi, J. Li and J. X. Zhong, Fabrication of ordered NiO coated Si nanowire array films as electrodes for a high performance lithium ion battery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 3614–3618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, K. Cui, A. Kohandehghan, M. Kupsta, B. Olsen and D. Mitlin, ALD TiO2 coated silicon nanowires for lithium ion battery anodes with enhanced cycling stability and coulombic efficiency, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13646 RSC .
X. Cao, J. Liu, L. Zhu and L. Xie, Polymer electrode materials for high-performance lithium/sodium-ion batteries: a review, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1800759 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Xie, Z. J. Xu, S. Zhang and Q. Zhang, Recent progress in metal–organic polymers as promising electrodes for lithium/sodium rechargeable batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4259 RSC .
B. John and G. Cheruvally, Polymeric materials for lithium-ion cells, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2017, 28, 1528–1538 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, M. Pasta and Y. Cui, Improving the cycling stability of silicon nanowire anodes with conducting polymer coatings, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7927 RSC .
J. Wang, H. Wang, B. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Lu and X. Zhang, A stable flexible silicon nanowire array as anode for high-performance lithium-ion batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 176, 321–326 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, H. Wu, S. S. Hong, L. Cui, J. R. McDonough, S. Bohy and Y. Cui, Si nanoparticle-decorated Si nanowire networks for Li-ion battery anodes, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 367–369 RSC .
C.-Y. Chou and G. S. Hwang, Lithiation behavior of silicon-rich oxide (SiO1/3): a first-principles study, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3435–3440 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Yu, Y. Zhao, R. He, M. Xu, S. Feng, S. Li, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Silicon oxides: a promising family of anode materials for lithium-ion batteries, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 285 RSC .
Y. Chen, L. Liu, J. Xiong, T. Yang, Y. Qin and C. Yan, Porous Si nanowires from cheap metallurgical silicon stabilized by a surface oxide layer for lithium ion batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6701–6709 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Lim, J.-I. Lee, J. Yang, Y.-K. Kim, H. Y. Jeong, S. Park and H. S. Shin, Catalyst-free synthesis of Si-SiOx core-shell nanowire anodes for high-rate and high-capacity lithium-ion batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 6340–6345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, K. Song, H. Heo, S. Yoo, G.-S. Kim, G. Lee, Y.-M. Kang and M.-H. Jo, Kinetics-driven high power Li-ion battery with a-Si/NiSix core-shell nanowire anodes, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1090 RSC .
X. Han, H. Chen, X. Li, S. Lai, Y. Xu, C. Li, S. Chen and Y. Yang, NiSix/a-Si Nanowires with Interfacial a-Ge as Anodes for High-Rate Lithium-Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 673–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J.-G. Ren, X. Wang, Y.-S. Chui, Q.-H. Wu, X. Chen and W. Zhang, Graphene encapsulated and SiC reinforced silicon nanowires as an anode material for lithium ion batteries, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8689 RSC .
A. Kohandehghan, P. Kalisvaart, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, E. Memarzadeh and D. Mitlin, Silicon nanowire lithium-ion battery anodes with ALD deposited TiN coatings demonstrate a major improvement in cycling performance, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12850 RSC .
W. Xu, S. S. S. Vegunta and J. C. Flake, Surface-modified silicon nanowire anodes for lithium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 8583–8589 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, J. Nanda, S. K. Martha, R. R. Unocic, H. M. Meyer, Y. Sahoo, P. Miskiewicz and T. F. Albrecht, Role of surface functionality in the electrochemical performance of silicon nanowire anodes for rechargeable lithium batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7607–7614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yang Yang	Yang Yang received his BS degree at Hebei University of Science and Technology in 2015, and started studying for a Master's Degree at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of South China University of Technology (SCUT) in 2017. He is currently a PhD student at School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT under the supervision of Professor Wei Yuan. His current research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries.
Wei Yuan	Wei Yuan is a professor of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT. Prof. Yuan received his Ph.D. in Mechanical Manufacturing in 2012 from SCUT. He is also the director of Guangdong Engineering and Technology Research Center of Advanced Electric Vehicle Power Supply and Thermal Control System, a member of the Battery Committee of the Chinese Electrical Society and a senior member of the Chinese Mechanical Engineering Society. His current research interests are focused on fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, micro-reactors and surface functional structures for enhanced heat transfer.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of various additives incorporated into SiNW-based LIB anodes.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of (a) l-SiNW (a and b) m-SiNW and (c) h-SiNW. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the full LIBs based on LMO as the cathode and one of the above SiNWs as the anode at 0.8 mA cm−2. (Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright© 2017, The Electrochemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the fabrication (upper panel) and adapting (lower panel) of SiNW@G@rGO. (Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright© 2013, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and (b) TEM images of Cu-coated SiNWs. (c) Initial charge–discharge curves of the pristine SiNWs, SiNWs with carbon-coating and Cu-coating at the rate of 0.05C. (d) Comparison of the cycling performance of the carbon- and Cu-coated SiNWs at 0.5C. (Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright© 2011, Elsevier B.V.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a–d) Time sequential TEM images of the failure process of an Al2O3-coated SiNW. (e) Enlarged TEM image of the SiNW divided into upper and bottom half and corresponding to the electron diffraction patterns. The upper half is fully amorphized, while the lower half is only partially lithiated, manifesting the asymmetry of lithiation kinetics. (f) Schematic showing asymmetry breaking which results in pulverization of the SiNWs. Red arrows represent the Li flow; Li source on the outer surface is displayed by red, lithiated coating layer by cyan, lithiated amorphous shell by gray, unlithiated Si core by black, and the twin boundary by yellow. (Reproduced with permission.104 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the fabrication process of the Si/SnO2 NW hierarchical structures, which contain (a) SnO2 NWs, (b) Sn-droplet-decorated SnO2 NWs after hydrogen treatment, (c) Sn-catalyzed SiNWs growth on SnO2 NW and (d) amorphous Si:H thin film-coated SnO2 NWs. (e and f) Si/SnO2 NW electrode and battery configuration, respectively. (Reproduced with permission.107 Copyright© 2015, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Scheme of the synthetic processes for Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs: (a) as-prepared electroless-etched Si nanowires and (b) Co3O4 nanoparticles grafted onto Si nanowires, and the enlarged image is the mechanism for lithium-ion battery. (c) TEM image and (d) charge/discharge voltage profiles of the Co3O4 nanoparticle-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright© 2012, Elsevier B.V.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Magnified SEM image of PEDOT-coated SiNWs. (b) Schematic of a PEDOT (blue)-coated SiNW (brown) with the molecular structure of PEDOT shown. (c) Cycling performance of the PEDOT-coated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright© 2012, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Comparison of the cyclability of the SiNPs, disordered SiNWs and SiNW/PDMS composite. (Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright© 2015, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Scheme, (b) voltage profile and (c) cycling performance at 0.2C of a network of SiNP-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright© 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of stabilizing high-rate NiSix/Si anode by inserting an ultrathin amorphous Ge layer: (a) amorphous Si grows directly on NiSix nanowires, which cracks and detaches form the NiSix nanowires during cycling and (b) amorphous Ge interlayer provides an electron highway and improves structural stability during continuous cycles. Comparison of the (c) cycling performance and (d) rate capability of the NiSix/Ge/Si composite and NiSix/Si composite. (Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic representations of functionalized silicon surfaces. (b) Cycling performance of the functionalized SiNWs and the hydride-treated SiNWs in the new electrolyte with 5% trimethoxymethylsilane additives. (Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright© 2011, Elsevier B.V.)	 


2. Doping materials


	B-doped SiNWs	1100 mA h g−1 at 18 A g−1 after 250 cycles	2000 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 after 250 cycles	
55

As-doped SiNWs	
	2730 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles	
57

P-doped SiNWs	586.7 mA h g−1 at 16.0 A g−1 after 5000 cycles	2061.1 mA h g−1 at 1.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
58



3. Carbon materials composited with SiNWs


	Amorphous carbon-coated SiNWs	
	1326 mA h g−1 at 150 mA g−1 after 40 cycles	
68

SiNW@G@rGO	500 mA h g−1 at 8.4 A g−1	1600 mA h g−1 at 2.1 A g−1 after 100 cycles	
79

SiNWs/MWCNTs	
	1695 mA h g−1 at C/15 after 100 cycles	
88



4. Metallic materials composited with SiNWs


	Cu-coated SiNWs	1750 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 50 cycles	2138 mA h g−1 at 0.05C after 30 cycles	
92

Al-coated SiNWs	
	1300 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
94

Sn-coated SiNWs	
	1865 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
96



5. Metal oxides composited with SiNWs


	Al2O3-coated SiNWs	965 mA h g−1 at 2C after 120 cycles	2760 mA h g−1 at C/16 after 30 cycles	
102

Branched SiNWs/SnO2	
	1200 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
107

TiO2-coated SiNWs	30% of its initial discharge capacity at 5C	60% of its initial discharge capacity at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
110



6. Polymers composited with SiNWs


	PEDOT-coated SiNWs	
	2510 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 100 cycles	
114

SiNWs/PDMS	
	83.4% of its initial discharge capacity at 0.5C after 350 cycles	
115



7. Si-based materials composited with SiNWs

7.1 Nanostructured Si	SiNP-decorated SiNWs	
	1600 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 30 cycles	
116

7.2 Si oxides	SiOx-coated SiNWs	1297, 976, 761, 548 and 282 mA h g−1 at 1200, 2400, 3600, 4800 and 7200 mA g−1, respectively	1503 mA h g−1 at 600 mA g−1 after 560 cycles	
119

7.3 Metal silicides	Amorphous-Si/NiSix	
	Over 3000 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles	
121

NiSix/Ge/amorphous Si	477 mA h g−1 at 40 A g−1	877 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 after 1000 cycles	
122

7.4 Si carbides	Graphene-coated SiNWs embedded with SiC	
	1650 mA h g−1 at C/3 after 500 cycles	
123



8. Other materials combined with SiNWs


	TiN-coated SiNWs	740 mA h g−1 at 5C	1566 mA h g−1 at 0.1C after 100 cycles	
124

Hydride-terminated SiNWs	
	1364 mA h g−1 after 15 cycles	
125


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
