2D library beyond graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides: a focus on photodetection  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00255J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00255J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6296-63412D library beyond graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides: a focus on photodetection

        
          
            Feng 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhenxing 
            Wang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Yin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ruiqing 
            Cheng
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Junjun 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yao 
            Wen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Tofik Ahmed 
            Shifa
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fengmei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xueying 
            Zhan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Jun 
            He
          
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hej@nanoctr.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. R. China
Received 
      3rd April 2018
    First published on 10th July 2018AbstractTwo-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs) have attracted a tremendous amount of attention as photodetectors due to their fascinating features, including high potentials in new-generation electronic devices, wide coverage of bandgaps, ability to construct van der Waals heterostructures, extraordinary light–mass interaction, strong mechanical flexibility, and the capability of enabling synthesis of 2D nonlayered materials. Until now, most attention has been focused on the well-known graphene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs). However, a growing number of functional materials (more than 5619) with novel optoelectronic and electronic properties are being re-discovered, thereby widening the horizon of 2D libraries. In addition to showing common features of 2DLMs, these new 2D members may bring new opportunities to their well-known analogues, like wider bandgap coverage, direct bandgaps independence with thickness, higher mechanical flexibility, and new photoresponse phenomena. The impressive results communicated so far testify that they have shown high potentials with photodetections covering THz, IR, visible, and UV ranges with comparable or even higher performances than well-known TMDs. Here, we give a comprehensive review on the state-of-the-art photodetections of two-dimensional materials beyond graphene and TMDs. The review is organized as follows: fundamentals of photoresponse first are discussed, followed by detailed photodetections of new 2D members including both layered and non-layered ones. After that, photodiodes and hybrid structures based on these new 2D materials are summarized. Then, the integration of these 2D materials with flexible substrates is reviewed. Finally, we conclude with the current research status of this area and offer our perspectives on future developments. We hope that, through reading this manuscript, readers will quickly have a comprehensive view on this research area.
Feng Wang
Dr Feng Wang received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Yanshan University in 2010, and Zhejiang University in 2013, respectively. Then he worked as a Research Assistant in the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. After receiving PhD degree in 2013, he continued doing research in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology. His current research interest is developing two-dimensional materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications.
Zhenxing Wang
Dr Zhenxing Wang received his BS and PhD degrees from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2002 and 2009, respectively. After two-year postdoctoral work at Peking University, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST) in 2011, where currently he is a Professor. His current research interests focus on low dimensional materials, properties and optoelectronic devices.
Jun He
Dr Jun He received his PhD in Semiconductor Physics from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Then he worked successively at Applied Physics Department of Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Netherlands, Material Department of University of California, Santa Barbara, and California NanoSystem Institute (CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, USA. He joined the “100-Talents” Program of CAS in Nov. 2010 and became a Full Professor of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology since then. His main research interest is the synthesis, characterization, and devices of low dimensional semiconductor materials.
1. Introduction
Photodetectors are sensors that detect photons (or electromagnetic waves) and transfer them to electric signals. According to the wavelength of the responsive spectra, photodetectors can work at UV (ultraviolet, 10–300 nm), visible (400–700 nm), IR (infrared, 700 nm–1 mm), and THz (0.1 to 1 mm, or 0.3 to 30 THz) ranges with various applications that play indispensable roles in our daily life.1–3 Several conventional semiconductors with appreciable properties like suitable bandgaps have been used as photo-sensitive materials to construct photodetectors. For instance, Si has been widely used for visible and NIR (near infrared) light detection because of the ease of synthesis and, more importantly, its compatibility with well-developed Si-based circuits technologies. However, Si has a bandgap of ∼1.1 eV, which means it can’t absorb most of the IR spectrum. In addition, due to its indirect bandgap nature which gives rise to a quadratic dependence of absorption coefficient on photon energy, Si has a relatively weak absorption (only exceeding 104 cm−1 at 500 nm).4 In another case, HgxCd1−xTe has been commercially utilized for IR detection owing to a tailorable bandgap over the 1–30 μm range, large optical coefficients that enable high quantum efficiency, and favourable inherent recombination mechanisms that lead to high operating temperatures.5 Nevertheless, an additional cooling system (at least 77 K) is still needed, which largely restricts their applications in portable devices. As a result, new strategies including the use of novel materials with advanced structures are crucially sought.
Two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs), or van der Waals materials, referring to the materials family that naturally have van der Waals gaps between chemically bonded atomic layers (in some special cases like the Bi2O2Se family, there is no van der Waals gap but weak electrostatic forces exist6), are one of the recently developed candidates for these new-generation photodetectors.7–10 Sharing the feature of van der Waals structure, 2DLMs have the following advantages in photodetections: the first is the potentials they have shown on constructing these new-generation electronic devices, which is mainly because of their high charge carrier mobility, nearly perfect switching performance, strong gate voltage controllability, and immunity to the short-channel effect, etc.11 Hence, photodetectors based on these new stars are straightforward expected. The second advantage relies on the wide coverage of their bandgaps originating from both the extremely diversified members in this family and extraordinary tunability by thickness, external strain, electric field, etc. Furthermore, different 2DLMs building blocks can even be stacked together to form so-called van der Waals heterostructures (vdWHs) through weak wan der Waals forces, whereby the lattice mismatch requirement is waived, hence providing a platform that can combine different properties of the components together to achieve outcomes that individual(s) can’t accomplish.12–14 In addition, even though they have atomically thin thickness, many 2DLMs may have strong light–matter interaction due to their special band structures. For instance, due to the existence of Dirac cones, the absorption of monolayer graphene (G) is independent with the wavelength of the incident white light but solely determined by the fine structure constant, which gives rise to a high absorption of ∼2.3%.15 On the other hand, most TMDs have the so-called van Hove singularities in their band structures, also leading to strong light–matter interactions.16 Moreover, considering the beam theory, the ultrathin body thickness of 2DLMs brings them high flexibility providing an opportunity to fabricate wearable devices.17 Besides, novel photoresponse phenomena and new mechanisms may result with these materials, like a strong photogating effect which can induce high gain,18 polarization selected photodetection due to strong anisotropic properties,19 and naturally hyperbolic properties which can be utilized for nano-imaging,20etc. Finally, but not the end, the rise of 2DLMs also makes the synthesis of 2D non-layered materials (which are isotopically bonded by strong chemical bonds) possible, which further extends the definition and properties of 2D materials.21 Meanwhile, 2DLMs also enable transferable synthesis of conventional semiconductor nanostructures and/or films, like GaAs and GaN in the III–V group,22via using ultrathin 2DLMs as van der Waals buffer layers, which further makes possible the integration of these traditional materials with arbitrary substrates like flexible polymers.
Initially, 2DLMs-based photodetectors mainly focused on the well-known G and TMDs (transition metal dichalcogenides).23–31 However, as time went on, more and more materials with novel optoelectronic and electronic properties were being re-discovered and joined the big 2D family. Very recently, Mounet and his colleagues predicted that about 5619 compounds naturally appear layered and 1036 of them can be easily exfoliated like G.32 These identified compounds include (semi)metals, semiconductors with variable band structures, magnets, ferroelectrics, etc. Hence, it is eagerly anticipated to see what these 2DLMs beyond G and TMDs can bring to us. As candidates for photodetectors, these new 2D members (both layered and non-layered) may possess additional advantages/features compared with their well-known analogues. For example, most TMDs become direct bandgap semiconductors only while thinning down to monolayers. However, many of the newcomers have intrinsic direct bandgaps, such as GaTe and BP.33,34 In addition, the bandgaps of semiconducting TMDs only cover a finite range of ∼1–2.4 eV, which largely restricts their applications. As a result, other 2D materials can provide an important supplement. Fig. 1a summarizes bandgaps distributions of selected 2DLMs, which clearly demonstrates the supplementary role of these new 2DLMs. Furthermore, these new members may even bring new possibilities. For instance, the topologically protected surface states (SS) of 2D topological insulators like Bi2Se3 endow wavelength-independent high absorption in the IR to THz range.35 In another case, some of these newcomers may have better mechanical flexibility than TMDs. Based on the common advantages of 2DLMs and special properties that the new members have, studies of their photodetections are really anticipated.
 Fig. 1  Summary of the (a) bandgaps as well as responsivities to the (b) visible and IR and (c) THz ranges of selected 2DLMs. Data are extracted from the literatures. Please see the corresponding sections for details. 
Until now, a number of these new 2DLMs have been studied by both theoretical and experimental methods. They include elementals, main group metal chalcogenides (MMCs), transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTs), tetradymites, metal halides (MHs), transition metal chalcogenophosphates (TMCPs), etc. However, due to their relatively short history, some of them are recently rediscovered and their photoresponse properties have not been fully studied. Nevertheless, based on the finite results, they have shown high potentials in photodetections covering THz, IR, visible, and UV ranges with comparable or even higher performances than well-known TMDs (Fig. 1b and c summarize reported values of responsivity of selected members). As a result, a comprehensive overview on this arising area is needed.
Here, we give a brief review on state-of-the-art photodetections of two-dimensional materials beyond graphene and TMDs with the manuscript's organization stated as below. Fundamentals of photoresponse, including response mechanisms and figure of merits to evaluate their photodetection performances are first introduced. After that, the photodetections of these new 2D members that are divided into two big categories, i.e., 2DLMs and 2D non-layered materials, will be discussed in detail. In each part of this section, basic properties, including the crystalline structures, band structures, and absorptions, are illustrated before discussions of the corresponding photodetections. Here, considering the variety of figure of merits and calculation methods (detectivity for example) used to evaluate performances of photodetectors on 2D materials, the most basic parameter of responsivity is used as the main clue. In the fifth part, we give an overview on photodiodes and hybrid structures based on these new 2D materials. Then, the integration of these 2D materials with flexible substrates is discussed. Finally, conclusions on the conditions of the research area and perspectives on future developments are provided.
2. Fundamentals
According to the mechanisms of switching from photons to electrical signals, a photoresponse can be classified as several types: photovoltaic effect, photoconductive effect, photogating effect, photo-thermoelectric effect, and bolometric effect, etc. Here, a brief introduction of the various detection mechanisms will be given. Following that, commonly used parameters to evaluate the performances of photodetectors are summarized.
2.1 Mechanisms of photoresponse

2.1.1 Photovoltaic effect (PVE). 
This refers to the generation of electrical potential difference at the existence of built-in junctions (space area), like p–n and Schottky junctions, under light illumination. Taking p–n junction as an example, when the incident photon energy (hν, where h and ν are Planck constant and frequency of the light) is higher than the semiconductor bandgap (Eg), then photo-generated carrier (electron–hole) pairs can be separated spontaneously by built-in electric fields at the interface of the junction and accumulated on the edge of the junction. As a result, a photostimulated electric field opposite to the direction of the built-in electric field will be formed, which is equivalent to producing a positive photovoltage (open-circuit voltage, Voc). On the other hand, photo-generated carriers could flow along the external circuit and generate a photocurrent (short-circuit current, Isc) when a p–n junction is short-circuit connected (VDS = 0 V, here VDS refers to the source–drain voltage). On the basis of the photovoltaic effect, photodiodes (PN photodiodes, PIN photodiodes, Schottky photodiodes, etc.) have been developed for photodetection.
In general, photodiodes work at a modest reverse bias condition i.e., avalanche breakdown voltage < VDS < 0 V, that benefits a shortened carrier transit time and lower diode capacitance. Besides, owing to the rectification characteristic of p–n and Schottky junctions, the dark current under reverse bias is low so that a high detectivity (D*, see below) can be realized. Note that there is no gain in a majority of photodiodes (due to the fast sweep of carriers in the space area) except for avalanche photodiodes (APDs). An APD is based on the avalanche effect under a large reverse bias. Under illumination, photo-generated carriers will be accelerated by the larger reverse bias, giving rise to additional electron–hole pair generation through collisional ionization. As a result, high current gain can be achieved in APDs.36 In addition, phototransistors (here this refers to bipolar junction transistors) working with a photovoltaic effect also exhibit a considerable photocurrent gain.37


2.1.2 Photoconductive effect. 
Different from PVE, a photoconductive effect (PCE) stems from the light-induced modification of carrier density of photosensitive materials, thus leading to a change in its conductivity. Photodetectors based on PCE are usually known as photoconductors (and photo-field effect transistors, photo-FETs). We note that some literature references call the PCE at the existence of an external field also as PVE. However, for a better distinction, here we separate them into two categories. Owing to the large amount of photo-generated carriers produced in the channel, recombination between the electrons and holes also are usually prominent. And the recombination rate increases with its quantity. For an effective separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs by VDS, ohmic contact is generally desired.
As for practical applications of photoconductive detectors, photoconductive gain and relaxation are two important aspects. The former reflects the magnitude of photoconductance and the latter shows the response speed of photoconductance to light intensity variation, both of which are related to the accumulation and disappearance processes of photo-generated carriers. Generally, the photoconductive gain (G) can be described as the ratio of the photo-generated carrier lifetime (τphotocarries) over the transit time (τtransit):38 (1)Here, the transit time is quantified by the formula: τtransit = L2/μVDS, where L and μ are the separation distances of source–drain electrodes and the carrier mobility, respectively. Thus, the longer the carrier lifetime and the larger the carrier mobility the photosensitive materials have, the higher the photoconductive gain the photodetectors will have. However, a longer carrier lifetime will give rise to a prolonged relaxation time, reducing the response speed of the device. Therefore, it is essential to eclectically select the appropriate parameters according to the actual needs.


2.1.3 Photogating effect. 
Actually, a photogating effect (PGE) is a special case of the PCE. It generally exists in defective semiconductors or hybrid structures. According to the position of photo-electron–hole pairs generation, two cases can be differentiated. In the first case, photoexcited electron–hole pairs are generated in the semiconductor serving as a conducting channel. Subsequently, one type of the charge carriers (electrons or holes) is captured by the trap states inside the semiconductor or at the surface adsorbates. Using a defective n-type semiconductor with hole trap states as an example, photo-generated electrons contribute to the photocurrent, whereas photo-generated holes are trapped in the defects that cannot participate in photo-conducting but induce an extra gate voltage on the channel. In the second case, electron–hole pairs generate only in the surface adsorbates, and subsequently one type of charge carriers is transferred into the channel material. Both of these cases share a fact that the charge carriers captured/kept could apply an additional gate voltage on the conducting channel, hence effectively modulating the resistance of channel. It's worth noting that the negative photoresponse may occur in PGE4,39 with ambipolar channel materials.39,40 Due to additional gate voltage resulting from the captured/kept charge carriers, gate voltage corresponding to the minimum current (Vmin) in a transfer characteristic curve could be horizontally shifted. Consequently, the current on one side of Vmin increases (positive photoresponse), whereas a decrease of current (negative photoresponse) takes place in the opposite direction. In other words, if the increase in conductivity caused by the increase of carrier density is not higher than the decrease by the gating effect, a negative photoresponse will occur. Additionally, the lifetime of excess carriers becomes longer because of the capture of opposite carriers. Therefore, considering eqn (1), a large photogain can be achieved. This effect is particularly pronounced in low dimensional semiconductors due to a large surface-to-volume ratio and reduced screening effects.41 Besides the PGE mentioned above, there are also other mechanisms that use a gating effect to achieve a photoresponse, like photovoltage field-effect transistor33 and interfacial effect.42,43


2.1.4 Photo-thermoelectric effect. 
A photo-thermoelectric effect (PTE) involves a process in which a heat gradient from light-induced heating produces a temperature difference (ΔT) at the two ends of a photosensitive channel and leads to a photo-thermoelectric voltage difference (ΔVPTE) by the Seebeck effect. The magnitude of the photo-thermoelectric voltage difference is determined by ΔVPTE = ΔT·(S1 − S2), where S1,2 is the Seebeck coefficient.44 To acquire an effective photo-thermoelectric signal in a photo-thermoelectric device with a homogeneous semiconductor, it must be locally illuminated with a focused laser spot to form a ΔT between both of its ends. However, a photo-thermoelectric effect within the devices would not have been observed under global illumination due to uniform temperature distribution.


2.1.5 Bolometric effect. 
In a bolometric effect (BE), the resistivity of photosensitive materials is modified by the light heating effect. Under homogeneous illumination, the magnitude of this effect is associated with the conductance change of photosensitive materials with temperature (dG(dT)) and the homogeneous temperature increase (ΔT) caused by laser heating. When the gradient (dG/dT) is greater than zero, a positive photoresponse (PP) arises and leads to an increasing photocurrent (IPP). On the contrary, a negative photoresponse (NP) is observed deriving from the negative gradient.45,46


2.1.6 Pyro-phototronic effect. 
The pyro-phototronic effect is a recently proposed photodetection mechanism based on pyroelectric effects.47–50 It generally occurs in a crystal with spontaneous polarization properties. Under illumination, the transient temperature increase of photosensitive semiconductors will produce pyroelectric polarization potentials (Vpyro), promoting photogenerated carrier separation. Until a new thermal equilibrium is established due to the sustained illumination, the Vpyro disappear gradually. Similarly, when shutting off light, the transient temperature reduction generates an opposite Vpyro with respect to light-induced Vpyro. As a result, a bump up in current is observed before backing to a dark state.


2.1.7 THz detection. 
Three main types of detectors, including homodyne (or direct), heterodyne, and optoelectronic detectors, have been utilized for THz response. Each is composed of a few numbers of subtypes.51 For example, Golay cells, pyroelectric detectors, thermoelectric detectors, plasma-waves in field effect transistors (FETs), and bolometers are common types for homodyne detectors. So far, both thermoelectric and bolometric effects, and plasma-wave-assisted FET have been demonstrated in THz detectors based on two-dimensional materials.52–54
While there is an incoming THz radiation, ac current will be induced in a FET channel due to the excitation of 2D electron plasma in it. Hence, a photoresponse in the form of dc voltage may appear if the induced ac current was rectified by asymmetry in the FET.55,56 This asymmetry can be due to different electrode contact conditions, or artificially designed asymmetric metal antennas. Especially, radiation applied between source and gate modulates both charge density and velocity. Depending on the radiation frequency and parameters of FET (life time and effective mass of charge carrier, gate length, and voltage bias), the THz detectors can work in resonant and nonresonant overdamped regimes. For the former, a plasma wave launched from one end of the channel can reach the other side before damping and forming a standing wave; hence, the channel acts as a resonator for plasma oscillations. In this regime, a FET exhibits a strong photoresponse. As for the latter, the plasma wave damps at a distance smaller than the channel length. However, from the point of view of practical applications, this regime is the most important case because FET detectors can show a broad band response and operate at room temperature.51 THz detectors based on 2D FETs are also mainly focused on an overdamped regime. In addition, a properly designed metal antenna is usually used to enhance coupling capability between THz radiation and the devices. According to a diffusive hydrodynamic model, the generated photovoltage (ΔUF) follows the relation:57 (2)where a is the coupling efficiency of the THz radiation to the antenna, RCH is the resistance of the channel, Z is the complex impedance of the measurement setup, VGS is the gate voltage, and IDS is the drain current.
For a bolometric effect, the generated photovoltage (ΔUB) is determined by:54,58 (3)where IB is the bolometric effect induced current, σ is the conductivity, and β = dσ/dT is the bolometric coefficient with a positive/negative value meaning the positive/negative contribution to the current.
For a thermoelectric effect, the generated photovoltage (ΔUT) is determined by the Seebeck coefficient (S). Usually, S has the form of:54 (4)where kB is the Boltzmann constant, q is the elementary electron charge, and EF is the Fermi energy.
For a practical FET-based THz detector, a photoresponse is usually a combination of mechanisms mentioned above. To elucidate the dominant or the contribution of each mechanism, a commonly adopted way is to compare experimentally measured results with theoretically predicted ones.52–54

2.2 Figure of merits

2.2.1 Photocurrent (Iph). 
The photocurrent of a photodetector can be defined by a phenomenological formula:38 (5)where Pin is the incident light power, h is Planck constant, ν is the frequency of incident light, η is quantum efficiency, i.e., is the ratio between the number of generated electron–hole pairs and the amount of incident photons, E is the strength of electric field, and L is the separation distance of source–drain electrodes. For photodetectors without trap states, the photocurrent exhibits a linear dependence on the incident light power before saturated absorption is reached. In other words, the exponent α, calculated by Iph ∝ Pαin, is equal to 1 or very close to 1. Otherwise, a nonlinear photoresponse (0 < α < 1) implies the intricate process of carrier generation, trapping, and recombination within semiconductors.41


2.2.2 Responsivity (R). 
Responsivity is the ratio of the photocurrent (Iph) or photovoltage (Vph) to the incident power density (Pin), in units of A W−1 or V W−1. It can be expressed as: (6)where A is the effective illumination area of devices. This parameter describes the ability of photoelectric conversion in photodetectors.33,59


2.2.3 Gain (G). 
Gain represents the number of detected charge carriers per single incident photon and is given by: (7)where c is the light velocity and λ is the excitation wavelength, and η is quantum efficiency. When η is ignored (assuming 100%), then gain is equivalent to the external quantum efficiency.


2.2.4 External quantum efficiency (EQE). 
External quantum efficiency is equal to the number of electron–hole pairs producing a photocurrent divided by the number of incident photons. The formula can be written as: (8)In many cases, the calculated EQE or G is larger than one, i.e., more than one carrier is induced by an incident photon. Actually, this is because the photo-generated carrier lifetime is longer than the transit time, stemming from the charge trapping and/or mobility difference between electron and hole. As a result, electron (hole) repeatedly contributes to the current until recombination or hole (electron) extraction.


2.2.5 Internal quantum efficiency (IQE). 
IQE is the ratio of the number of electron–hole pairs producing a photocurrent to the number of absorbed photons. Note that photon absorption in an ultrathin photosensitive layer can be strengthened through optical interference effects.60,61 To accurately assess the number of photon absorptions and IQE, these effects should be considered.


2.2.6 Signal to noise ratio (SNR). 
Signal to noise ratio refers to the ratio of signal power and noise power in a photodetector. It is in units of decibel (dB) and described as: (9)Low noise is beneficial to extend the lower limit value of detectable signals. Therefore, a highly sensitive photodetector requires a high value of SNR.


2.2.7 Noise equivalent power (NEP). 
Noise equivalent power is defined as the minimum incident radiation power demanded to realize an SNR of 1 in a 1 Hz bandwidth. Normally, it is commonly expressed in W Hz−1/2. The NEP also can be calculated by: (10)where  and  is the mean-square noise current and mean-square noise voltage measured at the bandwidth of 1 Hz in darkness (in A Hz−1/2 and V Hz−1/2). From this equation we see that a smaller NEP implies a low noise signal and a large responsivity. As a result, the smaller the NEP is, the better the performance a detector has.


2.2.8 Specific detectivity (D*). 
Specific detectivity characterizes the capacity of detection for the lowest optical singles. The D* of a photodetector is expressed as: (11)where A and B are the area and bandwidth of photodetectors. It is expressed in units of Jones (cm Hz1/2 W−1). When normalizing per square root of the area and bandwidth of the photodetector, the specific detectivity is equal to the reciprocal of NEP. If the total noise is assumed to be principally contributed by shot noise from the dark current, the D* can be given by: (12)where Id is the dark current. Thus, a photosensitive material with a low dark current will benefit achieving a large D* in a photodetector. Notably, a calculated D* according to the assumption is at least one order of magnitude larger than the true measured values.62


2.2.9 Response time (τ). 
Response time reflects the speed of photodetectors to follow a light intensity variation. Generally, there are two methods to determine the rise time (τr) and decay/fall time (τd). In the first, the rise time and decay time are defined as the required time that photocurrent rise (decay) from 10% (90%) to 90% (10%) of the entire current increment. In the second, they are extracted by fitting the rising and falling parts of the time-resolved photoresponse using a single exponential function:63 I = Iph0e−(τ/t)β(13)where Iph0 is the photocurrent when switching off the light and β is an exponent reflecting the relaxation mechanism. Response time is strongly associated with trap states and metal contact.64,65 The response time of photodetectors based on layered material is universally in a micro- to millisecond level nowadays.66

3. Photodetectors based on 2D layered materials
These materials share a layered structure with intrinsic van der Waals gaps like G and TMDs, including elementals, main group metal chalcogenides (MMCs, with stoichiometric ratios between metals and chalcogenides of 1:1, 1:2, and 2:3), transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTs), tetradymites, metal halides (MHs), transition metal chalcogenophosphates (TMCPs), Bi-based oxychacogenides (BOCs), metal oxides, etc. Some of them, like MCs, were studied soon after TMDs and others like TMCPs were re-discovered very recently. In this section, we review the photodetections of these 2D members organized by material categories. And in each category, the basic properties of the corresponding materials, including crystalline structure, band structures, and absorption, are first discussed followed by photodetection applications.
3.1 Elementals
Elemental 2D layered materials, including group IVA materials (silicene, germanene, stanene), group VA ones (black phosphorus, arsenene, antimonene, bismuthene), and tellerene in group VIA, are the most similar analogues of graphene. Unlike the planar hexagonal structure of graphene, these elemental 2D layered materials share a buckled structure composed of puckered atomic sheets (see the structure of BP in Fig. 2a as an example) with the so-called “chair, boat, and washboard” like crystalline structures.67 According to theoretical and experimental results, the electric band gaps of these materials cover a very wide range of from 0 eV for semimetal to ∼2.5 eV. In addition, their simple composition makes synthesis of high-quality 2D elementals feasible which is very important for controllable scaling up. The two advantages mentioned above, but not limited, make this family of 2D layered materials stand out. However, due to the difficulty of synthesis and bad stability in ambient conditions, only a few kinds of these materials (BP and Te) based photodetectors have been fabricated and studied. Hence, in this subsection, we will introduce the basic properties of 2D elementals with the main focus on BP and Te.
 Fig. 2  (a) Atomic structure of black phosphorus. (b) The angle-resolved DC conductance (solid dots) and the polarization-resolved IR relative extinction (at 2700 cm−1, hollow squares) of a BP flake shown in the inset. Scale bar: 50 mm. (c) Polarization resolved Raman scattering spectra of monolayer black phosphorus with linearly polarized laser excitation. Right panel shows the intensity of the A2g mode as a function of the excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. (d) Photoluminescence peak intensity as a function of polarization detection angle for excitation laser polarized different directions. (a) is reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014. (b) is reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014. (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015. 

3.1.1 Black phosphorus. 
Since its rediscovery in 2014, black phosphorus (BP) has become the favourite among the big family of 2D layered materials because of its wide thickness-tunable direct bandgaps (∼0.3 to 2 eV), strong intralayer anisotropy, and potentials in FETs with high mobility.68,69,71–73 Bulk BP has an orthorhombic structure with a D2h18 space group symmetry (see Fig. 2a).68 In the atomic layer, each phosphorous atom connects to three neighboring atoms, leading to two special directions: armchair and zigzag directions along the x and y axis, respectively. This highly anisotropic arrangement of phosphorous atoms leads to anisotropic electric band dispersion, further bringing the anisotropic electronic and optical properties, hence optoelectronic properties. Electrodes with circular symmetry (the inset in Fig. 2b for example) have been widely used to study anisotropy in electrics of 2D layered materials.69 Utilizing this simple method, Xia et al. found BP with the best/worst conductivity along armchair (x)/zigzag (y) directions (solid dots in Fig. 2b), which agrees well with what was found by Liu et al.34 And the directional conductivity σθ can be quantitatively defined as σθ = σxcos2(θ − ϕ) + σysin2(θ − ϕ), where θ and ϕ are the angle differences between the electric field and reference direction and that between reference direction and x axis; σx and σy are the conductivities along x and y axis, respectively. At the same time, an anisotropic IR absorption has been also found (hollow squares in Fig. 2b).70 On the other hand, the light emission of BP is also anisotropic. Using photoluminescence microscopy with isolated polarized excitation and detection sources, Wang et al. found the anisotropic PL spectra of monolayer BP (Fig. 2c). The highest PL intensity occurs when both excitation and detection are along the armchair (x) direction. They ascribed this anisotropy to two aspects: the anisotropic light absorption with x as the strongest absorption direction, and the anisotropic exciton which is due to the anisotropic mobile ability of charge carriers (also highest along the x axis). Considering the strong anisotropy of BP mentioned above, it is necessary to identify the orientation of BP flakes before fabricating devices like photodetectors. To do this, polarized Raman microscopy is a feasible tool through which the obvious direction-dependent Raman intensity has been widely observed. Fig. 2d shows Wang and his colleagues’ work as an example.70 Among the three main Raman peaks, A2g mode shows the strongest anisotropy with the maximum intensity along the armchair (x) direction. It is based on this method that orientation-controlled photodetectors could be fabricated and studied (as discussed in following part).
The second feature of BP is its wide thickness-dependent bandgaps which come from the relatively strong interlayer interaction of buckled BP atomic sheets. Fig. 3a summarizes its thickness-dependent bandgaps from both first-principle calculation and experimental results.34,74–77 For the former method, there is variability in the calculated values because of the different approximation methods and parameters used. A commonly used value is based the GW method which gives ∼0.3 and 2 eV for bulk and monolayer, corresponding to light with wavelength of ∼4 μm and 600 nm wavelength, respectively. No matter what methods are used, the bandgap of BP exhibits a huge blue shift while decreasing the number of layers. More importantly, BP always keeps its direct-bandgap nature while changing its thickness. Fig. 3b shows Castellanos-Gomez et al.'s work as an example, where band edges of conduction and valence bands always locate at the Γ point.75 It is because of the above two advantages that makes BP one of the most promising candidates for detecting wide range spectra (from UV to middle and far IR).
 Fig. 3  (a) Bandgaps of BP as a function of thickness extracted from literatures. The calculation methods and optical bandgaps (OP) are denoted. (b) Calculated electronic band structures of BP with different numbers of thickness. (c) Bandgaps of b-AsxP1−x with various compositions. (d) Bandgaps plotted as a function of strain. (e) Measured bandgaps of 11-layer BP as a function of electrical field with the inset showing calculated values in the presence of electrical fields. (a) Data are extracted from ref. 34 and 74–77; (b) is reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, Copyright 2014; (c) is reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015; (d) is reproduced from ref. 79, and (e) is reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Besides thickness, the bandgap of BP can also be modulated by other strategies, including applying strain,79–83 electric field,80,84–86 and composition alloying.78 Liu et al. used arsenic, an element in the same group with P, as the alloying component to synthesize black arsenic–phosphorous (b-AsxP1−x).78 Multilayer b-AsxP1−x with various compositions were obtained by exfoliating the corresponding bulks synthesized through a chemical vapor transport reaction method. The authors found that the as-obtained b-AsxP1−x have a similar crystalline structure with pure BP and, more importantly, a wide-range bandgap of 0.3–0.15 eV (Fig. 3c). On the other hand, calculations have shown that the deformation in the structure along the armchair direction can affect the bandgap of monolayer BP dramatically due to a special energy dispersion.81 And, considering the superior mechanical flexibility of an ultrathin 2D configuration, applying moderate stain has been a special means to modulate bandgaps of 2D layered materials. With this in mind, Zhang et al. fabricated flexible BP FETs on PET substrates and found a continuous modulation of the multilayer BP bandgap from ∼0.31 eV to ∼0.42 eV (Fig. 3d).79 Another interesting method to tune the bandgap of semiconductors is the so-called Stark effect, i.e., the shifting/splitting of atomic/molecular energy levels due to the presence of an external electric field. This effect is usually negligible in conventional materials; however, it becomes noticeable for 2D layered materials due to a significantly reduced electric screening. For instance, Liu et al. found a monotonic narrowing of the bandgap of multilayer BP from ∼0.31 eV to 0.2 eV.80 From the above analysis, we can see that the bandgap of BP (and its compounds) itself covers an extremely wide range of ∼0.15–2 eV, corresponding to ∼8–0.6 μm, which definitely has not been achieved in any other 2D layered materials.
Owing to the features mentioned above, photodetectors based on BP were studied immediately after its rebirth. Buscema et al. fabricated phototransistors based on few-layer BP (3–8 nm) and demonstrated a wide-range photoresponse from visible (475 nm) to near infrared (940 nm) region with a highest R of 0.7 and 4.8 mA W−1, respectively.71 At the same time, a fast response with τr and τd of 1 ms and 4 ms were demonstrated, respectively. A wider-range (532–1220 nm) photoresponse and higher R (5 and 20 mA W−1, respectively) were found by Engel and his colleagues.72 Notably, they utilized the as-fabricated BP photodetector for point-by-point imaging in both the visible and near-infrared spectral regimes and demonstrated the diffraction-limited imaging capability. To further enhance photoresponse performance, Huang et al. adopted nickel as an electrode metal to fabricate few-layer BP photodetectors, in which R as high as 6.7 × 105 A W−1 and 103 A W−1 for 633 nm and 900 nm lights could be achieved.87 The large variation in responsivity is probably due to: different contact qualities through using different electrode metals (Ni or Ti), hence a different extraction capability of photo-generated charge carriers; different thickness of BP; and different trap densities at the flake/substrate interface, which may induce totally different photoresponse mechanisms (the photogating or PV effect as has been discussed in the Fundamentals section).
By maximizing the photo-absorption and photo-stimulated charge carriers, extraction capability through designing photodetectors along the armchair direction (both for electrodes and polarization of incidence light), high R of ∼103 A W−1 and gain of ∼104 to 532 nm light were also demonstrated by Guo et al.18 More importantly, R as high as 82 A W−1 and NEP as low as 10−12 W Hz−1/2 can be achieved for 3.39 μm light at room temperature (Fig. 4a–c), which is already at the level of commercialization. In addition, the authors found that the relationship between Iph (R) and Pin (incident light power) can be described by the Hombeck–Haynes model:Iph = qγ(τphotocarries/τtransit)[F/(1 + F/F0)],where γ and F are the absorption of BP and photon absorption rate in units of s−1, respectively, and F0 is the photon absorption rate when trap saturation occurs. In this model, the photo-generated charge carriers first fill the many trap states, giving rise to a remarkable PGE (photogating effect), then it changes to the conventional PCE (photoconductive effect) after the traps are fully filled at higher illumination density, inducing a decreased Iph (R) due to the increased probability of electron–hole recombination. In total, this model displays a feature of a platform followed with monotonous decrease in the Iph (R)–Pin curves (Fig. 4b). This transition can be also observed from the Pin dependent Iph–VGS curves (Fig. 4c). At low illumination, the Iph–VGS follows exactly the same trend with conductance–VGS (a feature of PGE that has been discussed in the Fundamentals section), and gradually deviates from it while at higher Pin.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the BP photodetector operating at 3.39 μm. (b) Power dependence of the responsivity. Solid lines: fitting results with Hornbeck–Haynes model. (c) Upper panel: Photocurrents as a function of gate voltage under various incident optical powers. The dashed line sketches the gate-dependent channel trans-conductance. Lower panel: Transistor transfer characteristic for reference. (d) Optical image of the BP photodetector with a ring-shaped photocurrent collector. The corresponding photocurrent microscopy image is shown in (e). (f) Polarization dependence of responsivity; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016; (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015. 
Various mechanisms have been claimed for BP photodetectors in the wavelength range of visible to IR (∼500 nm to 3.39 μm), including PCE,87 PGE,18 PTE, and BE.73 Actually, for photodetectors based on low-dimensional materials like BP, the photoresponse usually comes from a combination of different mechanisms and may switch from one type domination to another while changing the measurement parameters (the power density for example). Hence, it will be more accurate to provide details, such as temperature, flake thickness, charge carrier density, incident light wavelength, power density, and voltage bias, while speaking of the photoresponse mechanism. For BP, it has been found that Pin plays a considerable role. For Pin at the level of 10−3 – a few W cm−2 (varies for different cases), PGE may play a dominant role. And PCE gradually stand out for ∼ a few-100 W cm−2. Finally, PTE and BE may predominate for Pin of 1000 W cm−2 or higher. Meanwhile, voltage bias may also affect the result. For instance, Yuan et al. found that the PTE and PCE will mainly contribute to photocurrents for low (0–0.15 V) and high VDS (>0.15 V) ranges, respectively.70 To elucidate the proportion of each mechanism, measurements/analysis of relationships between Iop and Pin, VGS, channel length, and position are usually needed.
The response range of BP can be further expanded, even down to the UV region. Wu et al. found the R of photodetectors based on few-layer BP (∼4.5 nm) could achieve as high as 175 A W−1 at 390–310 nm light, which is almost 3 orders higher than that of visible light (∼90 mA for 800 nm) at the same condition.88 By applying VGS (−80 V), this value could reach ∼9 × 104 A W−1. With the help of theoretical calculations, they found this high UV photoresponse of BP is due to the so-called band nesting effect, i.e., the existence of points in a band with ∇k = (EC − EV) = 0, where EC and EV are the conduction and valence bands respectively.
Besides high response to wide-spectra light, BP-based photodetectors have another feature – polarization-sensitivity – which originates from the in-plane crystalline anisotropy induced linear dichroism (as discussed in Fig. 2). To verify the role of anisotropic absorption on the polarized photoresponse, devices with ring-shape electrodes which can eliminate the possible effects of asymmetric contacts (as shown in Fig. 4d and e) are essential. Utilizing this device configuration combined with a series of optical studies, Yuan and his colleagues demonstrated BP-based photodetectors with polarization-sensitive photoresponse capability to a wide-spectra range of ∼400 nm to 3.75 μm (Fig. 4f).70
BP can be also utilized for THz detection. Miriam S. Vitiello's research group has done a series of works on this research field.52–54 They found that both plasma-wave rectification, thermoelectric, and bolometric effects can dominate the mechanism of BP-based THz detectors. And the contributions of them can be modulated by using different device configurations, tuning the incident radiation frequency, and applying VGS, etc. For example, under radiation with a resonant frequency of ∼0.29 THz (Fig. 5d shows the optical image of the BP FET device); a plasma-wave rectification effect dominates the photovoltage verified by the coincidence between experimental and calculation results (as shown in Fig. 5a and b, respectively). However, it turns to a thermoelectric effect while detuning the radiation frequency to ∼0.32 THz (Fig. 5c). Through these strategies, R as high as ∼5–8 V W−1 can be achieved for radiation with frequency of around 0.3 THz. Based on this, BP-based THz detectors have been exploited for practical imaging as illustrated in Fig. 5e.54
 Fig. 5  Gate-bias dependent (a) experimental R and (b) predicted photovoltage using overdamped plasma-wave regime. Inset: Schematics of the overdamped plasma-wave dynamics. Here 0.29 THz radiation is used. (c) Gate bias dependences of the experimental R (left axis) and measured photovoltage (right axis). Inset: Schematics of the thermoelectric dynamics. Here 0.32 THz radiation is used. (d) False-colored scanning electron microscope image of the BP FET. (e) Transmission THz imaging (obtained at 0.29 THz radiation) of a box of two tablets before (left) and after (right) injecting 3 μL water. Figures (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 54. 
Although BP has shown promising photodetection properties, poor stability has become one of the greatest concerns and limit its further development.89–95 It has been shown that BP flakes will quickly degrade after exfoliation and lose their electrical properties after a few hours/days at atmosphere conditions.89,96,97 This situation gets more serious for thinner flakes, which heavily restricted their exploration. The underlying mechanism has not been totally understood yet. But it seems that the exposure to O2 and moisture, as well as light, may play a key role.93,98 Up to now, only a few strategies have been developed to enhance the stability of BP, including passivation with protecting layers like Al2O3,89,97,99 TiOx,100 hBN,53 graphene,101 and even MoS2;102 surface modifications with molecular through chemical and/or physical interactions;90,96,103 and doping with specific elements.91Table 1 summarizes the reported strategies, stability after treatments, and the methods used to evaluate performances. As we can see, the stability of BP can be much enhanced after the treatments. However, for most of these proposed strategies, one issue needs to be considered: the inevitable modifications on the electrical properties of BP after the treatments. Taking this into consideration, encapsulation with stable 2DLMs like hBN and/or graphene may be one of the most promising ways, plus it won’t considerably increase the thickness of the hybrid structures.
Table 1 Comparison of different strategies to stabilize BP




Methods
Stability duration
Tools
Ref.




Few-layer MoS2 as a vdW passivation layer
① exposing to the ambient environment for 3 weeks; ② annealing at 350 °C for 2 h.
Raman spectroscopy

102



[BMIM][BF4] ionic liquid treated, which can sequester reactive oxygen species
Remain stable for over 13 weeks
Electrical characteristics

104



Aryl diazonium modification, which can form covalent phosphorus–carbon bonds.
① improved on/off current ratio; ② three weeks of ambient exposure.
AFM; electrical characteristics

96



Atomic layer deposited AlOx overlayers
Over 2 weeks in ambient conditions.
AFM; electrical characteristics

89



Forming h-BN/BP/h-BN heterostructure
Reaching record mobility, 1350 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature
Electrical characteristics

53



Graphene as an encapsulation layer
60 days under ambient conditions
Photoresponse characteristics

101



Solvation (CHP) shell protecting the nanosheets from reacting with water/O2
Stable for ∼200 h in ambient conditions
Absorbance, AFM, Raman and TEM

90



Solvation (DPPC) shell passivated
Kept in air for more than two weeks.
AFM, electrical characteristics

105



Al2O3 encapsulation
At least eight months.
Electrical characteristics

99



Metal ion (Ag+) modification
Enhanced ON/OFF ratio; exposed to air for 5 days
AFM, electrical characteristics

106



Electrochemical molecular intercalation approach
300 h exposure in ambient conditions, high on/off current ratio exceeding 107, high mobility of 328 cm2 V−1 s−1
Electrical characteristics

107



Plasma treatment and PMMA passivation
15 days exposure; high on/off current ratio of 105, high mobility of 1150 cm2 V−1 s−1
AFM, Raman, electrical characteristics

92



Oxygen plasma etching followed by passivation with an Al2O3 coating
30 days in ambient condition
PL, OM

97



Depositing a passivating organic monolayer (CA, M)
Under ambient conditions over a month.
AFM, XPS

103



Doping with tellurium (Te)
Three weeks exposure to air and moisture at ambient conditions
AFM, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), electrical characteristics

91



Titanium suboxide (TiOx) as an encapsulation layer
Exposure in air for 5 days, n-type doping
AFM, electrical characteristics

100







3.1.2 Te. 
Very recently, another elemental 2D layered material – Te – has received growing attention. Unlike its analogues, at normal conditions bulk Te is a so-called one-dimensional van der Waals material in which covalently bonded Te atom chains, not planes, are connected by weak van der Waals forces (α phases as shown in Fig. 6a).108 Inside a chain, each Te atom is bonded with its neighboring two forming a repeating unit consisting of three atoms. Interestingly, three more phases will appear while decreasing the dimensionality down to 2D: β, γ (2H MoS2-like), and 1T phases, which can be seen as reconstructions based on the α phase (note that different names may be used in different literatures).108,109 This multi-phase character originates from the multivalent feature of Te element. For example, in the 2H and 1T like MoS2 structures, the central-layer Te behaves more metal-like and the two outer layers more semiconductor-like. And the thermodynamically stable phase may switch among them while varying body thickness. For example, according to Qiao et al.'s work, α phase is always the most stable when the number of layers is larger than 1; however, the 1T phase becomes more stable for monolayer tellerene.108 In addition, the energy differences between these phases are rather small (only a few meV) for a few-layer sample, meaning that they could change from one phase to another easily. Consequently, external field tunable electronic and optoelectronic properties are predictable. Like its analogues, Te also exhibits thickness tunable bandgaps. For instance, α-phase Te experiences a wide Eg tunability of from ∼0.3 eV for bulk to ∼1.2 eV for 2L (Fig. 6b), while monolayer tellerene with 1T phase becomes a metal, which is almost comparable with BP.108 In addition, bulk α-phase has a nearly direct bandgap with the conduction and valence band edges located around the H point in the Brillouin zone. While thinning down to 2L, Te becomes an indirect bandgap semiconductor with the conduction band edge changing to locate at the Z point and the valence band edge at a point on the S–G line. Note that spin orbit coupling plays an important role on defining the band structures of Te. Strain has also been demonstrated to show the capability of modulating Eg of Te. For example, Zhu et al. predicted that a −10% strain along the zigzag or biaxial direction will modulate the Eg of tellerene down to zero.110 All the results mentioned above predict Te with similar features as BP, but with larger numbers of freedom like phase transition and higher potential in optoelectronic applications like photodetectors.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a bulk Te unit cell. (b) Evolution of the bandgaps as a function of the body thickness. (c) Optical image of solution-grown Te flakes. Inset: Optical image of the Te solution dispersion. The scale bar is 20 μm. (d) AFM image of a 10 nm Te flake. The scale bar is 30 μm. (e) Typical optical image of 2D Te hexagonal nanoplates with scale bar of 30 μm. Left inset: AFM image of a Te hexagonal nanoplate with thickness of 32 nm. The scale bar is 2 μm. Right inset: SEM image of a single 2D Te hexagonal nanoplate. The scale bar is 4 μm. (f) Time-dependent photoresponse of Te hexagonal nanoplate device with VDS of 2 V. (b) Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press, Copyright 2018; (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2018; (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014. 
Up to now, α-phase Te as thin as 1L has been successfully synthesized by a MBE and solution method. Zhu et al. and Chen et al. independently demonstrated the synthesis of α-phase Te films on HOPG via MBE and studied the corresponding electronic properties.109,113 These two works have shown that the as-grown 1L Te have a thickness of ∼0.4 nm, well matched with the theoretical prediction. Wang et al. reported a high-production solution method, in which Na2TeO3, N2H4, and PVP are used as Te source, reductant, and surface passivation agent, respectively.111 Through this method, α-phase Te flakes with thicknesses from 10 to 100 nm and lateral dimension from 50 to 100 μm have been obtained (see Fig. 6c and d), based on which the Raman and magneto-transport properties were studied.114 The as-grown Te shows three main Raman peaks located at ∼94, 122, and 142 cm−1, corresponding to the E1 (x-axis rotation), E2 (mainly z-axis asymmetric stretching), and A1 (chain expansion) modes, respectively. Due to its strong anisotropic crystalline structure, Te shows obvious anisotropic Raman-strain response and magneto-resistance behaviors, providing a feasible method to define sample alignments. Unfortunately, according to the best of our knowledge, no study about the photodetection property of these 2D layered Te has been reported, which is probably because of the short history (only about half a year before this manuscript was prepared). However, the related research must be just around the corner considering the handy synthesis method and the high potentials theoretically predicted.
One thing should be noted is that, even though the photoresponse of 2D layered Te has not been studied, the ‘non-layered’ 2D Te have been. Here, the so-called layered or non-layered Te is determined by the viewing direction on the crystalline structure: ‘non-layered’ for cross section along the x–y plane, and ‘layered’ along the z direction (Fig. 6a). Even though having the ‘non-layered’ crystalline structure, nanostructures with 2D morphology can be synthesized. Using a van der Waals epitaxy method, Wang et al. grew hexagonal non-layered Te nanoplates with a thickness of 30–80 nm and lateral dimension of 6–10 μm on flexible mica substrate (Fig. 6e). The in situ fabricated photodetectors show R of ∼162–390 A W−1 to 473 nm light and good bending stability (Fig. 6f).112


3.1.3 Others. 
Besides BP and Te, elemental 2D layered materials also include silicone, germanene,115,116 and stanene117 in group IVA, and asenene,118 antimonen,119,120 and bismuthene121–123 in group VA,124,125etc. However, photodetection properties of practical devices based on these materials have not been reported due to a few issues. The first is bad stability. For group IVA materials, their monolayers are artificially predicted without knowing their natural 3D parents, making them unable to survive in ambient conditions by themselves. Although there have been some strategies to enhance their stability, such as interaction with substrates126,127 and encapsulation,128 based on which practical FET devices have been fabricated, there is still a long way to go for studying photodetection properties with real cases. On the other hand, the issue of stability is not that serious for the group VA materials family.119,120,123 However, these materials show metallic properties in bulk and become semiconductors only while thinning down to 2L (for As and Bi) or 1L (for Sb), which largely limits their photodetection study.129,130
Nevertheless, there is still something worth expecting based on the following considerations. Group IVA materials, especially silicone and germanene, show high compatibility with existing technologies due to a long history of commercialized devices based on their 3D parents.131 For group VA, especially Bi and Sb, air-stable monolayers have been synthesized by MBE and/or van der Waals epitaxy.119,120,123 In addition, monolayers of both of these two material families have shown appealing properties.132 For example, silicone, germanene, stanene and bismuthene have shown strong substrate-tunable properties, and bismuthene on a SiC substrate has been demonstrated to have a quantum spin Hall wide-gap state.121,122

3.2 Main group metal chalcogenides
Main group metal chalcogenides (MMCs) in the forms of MX, MX2, and M2X3, where M = Ga, In, Ge, and Sn, and X = S, Se, and Te, are the analogues of well-studied TMDs. Unlike TMDs which are mainly studied as candidates for FETs, MMCs have attracted great attention due to their novel optoelectronic properties. In this subsection, we will discuss the photodetection properties of this material family organized by the types of main metals.

3.2.1 Ga-Based MMCs. 
GaS, GaSe, and GaTe compose the Ga-based 2D layered MMCs. Compared with TMDs like MoS2, they have more complex layered structures and totally different thickness dependence of Eg. For GaS/Se, first principle calculation predicts that their electric bandgaps change from 1.59/2.34 to 2.50/3.89 eV keeping their indirect nature while tuning the thickness from bulk to monolayer.133,134 For bulk GaS, the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM) locate at Γ and M points, respectively. Interestingly, for GaS with thickness less than 4L, the VBM changes to be a saddle-like shape around the Γ point. This double peaks feature improves the density of charge carriers involved in the photo-adsorption process, enhancing their photodetection performance.133 A similar phenomenon was also found in few-layer GaSe.134 On the other hand, monoclinic GaTe has a direct bandgap for all the thicknesses (∼1.7 eV for bulk), making it more appealing for photodetection.33,135 In addition, for hexagonal GaTe, even though the indirect bandgap nature for all the thickness range, the VBM shifts quickly towards the Γ point as the thickness goes beyond 1L. This allows for a considerable photo-absorption at the local band position, indicating reasonable photodetection performance for multilayer hexagonal GaTe.
Research on the photoresponse properties of Ga-based MMCs began soon after that of TMDs. In a pioneering work, Hu et al. found few-layer GaS flakes had a wide-spectra response with R gradually increasing from ∼10−4 A W−1 to 4.24 A W−1 to 610–254 nm light.133 In addition, bendable photodetectors were demonstrated by fabricating devices on PET substrate. Yang et al. studied the influence of gas environments on the photoresponse performances of mechanically exfoliated few-layer GaS.137 Higher R were observed in NH3 environment (as high as ∼64 A W−1) compared with that in air or O2 environments. Very recently, Carey et al. reported a two-step method to achieve controllable large-scale synthesis of bilayer (∼1.5 nm) GaS films, with a schematic of the synthesis process shown in Fig. 7a.136 Utilizing Ga with a low melting point and the naturally existing thin oxide layer (GaO) on the liquid–air interface, they could print this thin GaO layer onto the substrates with high adhesion. After removing the extra Ga liquid and sulfurizing the GaO layer, bilayer GaS films can be then obtained. Based on this scalable method, the authors fabricated arrays of photodetectors with R of ∼6 A W−1 to solar simulator as shown in Fig. 7b and c.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of the synthesis process for 2D GaS. First, a pattern of the photoresist is done by lithography. After that, the exposed area of the substrate is covered with vaporized FDTES. Then, place Ga liquid and remove it by PDMS. The final step is a chemical vapour treatment: GaCl3 layer is formed via exposure to HCl vapour followed by sulfurization through exposure to S vapour to form GaS. (b) Device schematic GaS FET with tungsten/WS2 electrodes. The inset features the band alignment of the system. (c) The distribution of R with insets showing the optical image of the fabricated devices and two electrodes. The scale bars are 500 and 20 mm, respectively; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017. 
Hu et al. also studied the photoresponse properties of few-layer GaSe.138 Similar with GaS, wide-spectra response to 620–254 nm, with a highest R of 2.8 A W−1 to 254 nm light, was demonstrated. Lei at al. studied the photodetection of CVD-grown GaSe (4–6 layers in thickness), and found a peak response to 380 nm light with R of 17 mA W−1. Zhou et al. synthesized GaSe nanoplates on mica by van der Waals epitaxy and in situ fabricated bendable photodetectors with R of 30 mA W−1 to halogen light.139 Based on a thicker mechanically exfoliated GaSe flake (∼12 nm), Huang et al. improved the R to 2.2 A W−1 under the illumination of 510 nm light.140 Through localized illumination, Cao et al. found that the as-fabricated GaSe devices with Ti contact are actually photodiodes, evidenced by the phenomenon that the photocurrent is mainly focused in the contact area.141 With this in mind, R as high as 5000 A W−1 to 410 nm light and response time as fast as 270 μs were achieved by shrinking the channel length and using graphene contact, respectively.
Taking advantage of the direct bandgap nature, Liu et al. demonstrated an exfoliated multilayer GaTe-based photodetector with responsivity of 104 A W−1 to 532 nm light.33 Later after that, R as high as 244 A W−1 and 800 A W−1 to 490 nm and 473 nm lights were subsequently demonstrated by Hu et al. and Wang et al., respectively.135,142 Stimulated by the high performances that GaTe had shown, Wang et al. successfully synthesized GaTe nanoflakes on mica through van der Waals epitaxy, based on which flexible photodetectors were demonstrated.143


3.2.2 In-Based MMCs. 
In-Based MMCs refer to InxXy, where x = 1 or 2, and y = 1 or 3. Specifically, InxSey has been the main focus which has diverse structures in bulk state, including α, β, γ, δ, and κ (β and γ) phases for In2Se3 (InSe).147,151–153 Up to now, α-, β-, and γ-phase In2Se3, and γ-phase InSe have been experimentally proven to have layered structures, while the formers/latter are van der Waals connected by Se–In–Se–In–Se quintuple layers or Se–In–In–Se quadruple layers (Fig. 8a–e).147 Depending on the atom stacking configuration inside the quintuple layer, In2Se3 can be divided into α (Fig. 8a and d), β (Fig. 8e), and γ phases (defective wurtzite structure based on Fig. 8d). On the other hand, γ-InSe (or InSe for simplicity) has a structure as shown in Fig. 8f.148 Companied with this diversity in crystalline structure, InxSey covers a wide-range of bandgaps. For instance, InSe has a direct bandgap of ∼1.26 eV in bulk, and gradually increases to ∼2.72 eV for monolayer (Fig. 8g) along with a direct-to-indirect transition at thickness of ∼5 nm.144,148,154 while α-In2Se3 has a thickness-independent direct bandgap with values covering from ∼1.3 eV for bulk to 2.8 eV for ∼bilayer as shown in Fig. 8g and h.145,146,149 Note that there may be big differences between optical bandgaps and electric ones because of the considerable exciton binding energy in 2D systems. For example, the PL signal of monolayer α-In2Se3 was found to locate at ∼801 nm, corresponding to ∼1.55 eV. β-In2Se3 was predicted to have an indirect bandgap for all thicknesses with values covered from ∼1.45 eV for bulk and 1.58 eV for 6.2 nm (Fig. 8h).149,152 And γ-In2Se3 was found to have a direct bandgap for the thickness range of 125–6 μm with the value changing from ∼2.1 eV to ∼2.5 eV (Fig. 8i). Besides, similar with its layered analogues, the bandgaps of InxSey can also be modulated by applying in-plane stress. For example, it has been shown that the bandgap of few-layer InSe can decrease/increase by 160/79 meV while applying uniaxial tensile/compressive strain of 1.06%/0.62%.155
 Fig. 8  (a) Three-dimensional crystal structure of layered α-In2Se3, with the top view of the system along the vertical direction shown in (b). The atoms arrange in three types indicated as A, B and C. The representative structures of the quintuple layer for (c) zincblende crystals, (d) α phase, and (e) β phase. (f) Crystal structure InSe with purple and red spheres corresponding to indium and selenium atoms, respectively. (g) Thickness dependent bandgaps of InSe and α-In2Se3 with data collected from ref. 144 and 145. (h) Dependence of the PL energy on the layer thickness of β-In2Se3 (black dots), exfoliated α-In2Se3 (blue stars) and α-In2Se3 thin layers grown by a CVD method with data collected from ref. 146 (red stars). The lines show the calculated exciton recombination energy. (i) Thickness-dependent bandgaps of γ-In2Se3. The inset shows a possible application for wide-spectra absorption; (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (f) is reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (h) is reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, Copyright 2016, and (i) is reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013. 
Based on the thickness-tunable Eg, Lei et al. systematically studied the photoresponses of InSe with different thicknesses.157 They found that InSe flakes with 3–4 layers in thickness had an obvious response to light with a wide-range wavelength of ∼400–800 nm with a peak located at ∼500 nm. As the thickness increased, the photoresponse became stronger to a wider range. Using a 10L flake, they demonstrated a photodetector with R of 34.7 mA W−1 and response time of 488 μs to 532 nm light. Combined with resonant Raman spectra and temperature-dependent photocurrent measurements, the authors found that, due to the suppression of an interlayer interaction and the coupling between electrons and in-plane phonons, more localized orbitals will be involved in the photo-absorption for few-layer samples. This broad spectral response feature was also demonstrated by Tamalampudi and his colleagues where the R reached up to 12.3/3.9 A W−1 to 450/633 nm light.158 Mudd et al. brought graphene as contact electrodes to construct InSe-based photodetectors.156 Owing to the higher electron mobility in G and better band alignment of InSe/G, better photoresponse performances were achieved in G contact devices compared with that using traditional metal (Au) (Fig. 9). Under the illumination of 633 nm light, R of as high as 105 A W−1 could be achieved. A similar structure was adopted by Luo et al., where the response time was decreased down to 120 μs.159 Notably, the response time of an InSe-based photodetector can be further decreased to 87 μs by utilizing high voltage bias (50 V) where an avalanche photodetector is formed.160 From the point view of synthesis, wafer-scale InSe film with a thickness down to 1 nm has been achieved by pulsed laser deposition (PLD), on the basis of which photodetectors with broad spectral response (370–1000 nm) and R of as high as 27 A W−1 were demonstrated.161
 Fig. 9  (a) R versus incident laser power at λ = 633 nm for graphene/InSe/graphene (top) and Au/InSe/Au devices (bottom) (VDS = 2 V and VGS = 0 V). The inset sketches the band alignments of the two devices. (b) Work functions of Au and InSe, and the electron affinity of graphene; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015. 
The ultrathin body thickness brings 2DLMs many advantages like strong gate voltage controllability; however, it also makes properties modulation through conventional strategies like chemical doping very difficult. Hence, functionalization by surface decorating has been one of the most widely studied methods to tune the properties of 2DLMs. As for InSe, Lei et al. used Ti4+-based Lewis acids to decorate the surface of InSe and found that the as-treated flakes showed conduction transition from n- to p-type.162 In addition, the Ti4+ cations anchored on the surface of InSe can also be used as a bridge to connect extra functional groups. The authors used a ruthenium-based dye molecule (N719) to the InSe–Ti complex as an example (Fig. 10a). After each step of surface decoration, the photo-absorption and photoresponse would change accordingly (Fig. 10b–d). Quantitatively, the R increased from 17 to 250, and further to 330 mA W−1 after the treatments of Ti4+ and dye molecules. On the other hand, the response became slower after the treatment but still kept in the range of microseconds (Fig. 10d).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the N719-functionalized InSe–Ti complex. (b) Photo-absorption of InSe–Ti complex, InSe–Ti–N719, and N719 molecules. (c) Photocurrent of InSe before (black), after Ti treatment (red) and N719 treatment (blue). Inset: Magnified InSe photocurrent. (d) Response time of InSe–Ti and InSe–Ti–N71; (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016. 
The photoresponses of In2Se3 have also been studied. Jacobs-Gedrim et al. used a mechanically exfoliated α-In2Se3 flake with 10 nm in thickness to fabricate a photodetector.164 The device exhibited photoresponse to light with wavelengths of ∼300–1100 nm, with R of 103 to 59 A W−1 to 300 and 500 nm lights. On the basis of synthesized α-In2Se3 with thickness of ∼10 nm through van der Waals epitaxy, Lin et al. demonstrated a photodetector with R of ∼2.5 A W−1.165 Zhou et al. reported photodetectors based PVD-grown few-layer α-In2Se3 with R up to 340 A W−1 to 532 nm light.146 To approach a step further to practical applications, Zheng et al. synthesized single-crystal α-In2Se3 micro-patterns at centimeter scale by combining a soft imprinting method (using PDMS as stamp) with van der Waals epitaxy, based on which the photodetector arrays were fabricated (Fig. 11a and b).163 Under 633 nm laser illumination, the devices showed R of as high as 1650 A W−1 at VDS = 5 V with good uniformity (Fig. 11c and d). Furthermore, the feasible packaging process of the as-synthesized arrays and the mechanical flexibility of the photodetectors after packaging were also demonstrated (Fig. 11e and f). On the other hand, wafer-scale α-In2Se3 films have been synthesized by PLD, based on which the broad spectral photoresponse (370 to 1064 nm) with a highest R of 44 A W−1 was illustrated.166
 Fig. 11  (a) Photograph and (b) optical microscope image of α-In2Se3 photodetector arrays on mica substrate. Scale bars in (a) and (b) are 1 cm and 20 mm, respectively. (c) Dependence of R on illumination intensities and voltage bias. (d) Statistic distribution of R α-In2Se3 photodetectors. (e) Schematic of device packaging. (f) Current as a function of bending cycles (10 mm radius) of the packaged α-In2Se3 photodetector devices at a bias voltage of 5 V. The inset shows the photograph of packaged device; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015. 
β-In2Se3 obtained from both mechanical exfoliation and bottom-up synthesis also have been found to show high-performance photoresponses. Using an exfoliated flake with a thickness of ∼14 nm, Island et al. reported a broad-spectra response (400–960 nm) of β-In2Se3.167 Due to a strong photogating effect, the R of the device could reach 105 A W−1 under the illumination of 640 nm light. On the other hand, the high-performance wide-band response was also demonstrated in devices based on grown flakes.153


3.2.3 Ge-Based MMCs. 
Ge-Based MMCs, including GeS and GeSe, have a distorted NaCl-type crystalline structure. GeS has a direct electric bandgap of ∼1.68 eV in bulk, and gradually changes to an indirect bandgap of ∼2.64 eV for monolayer.168,169 On the other hand, GeSe has an indirect bandgap of ∼1.10 eV in bulk, and gradually increases to 1.87 eV along with transition to direct bandgap in monolayer.170 Research on photodetection of Ge-based MMCs started relatively later than its analogues, which is probably due to the difficulties of synthesizing/exfoliating atomically thin flakes with high-enough crystalline quality. Even now, reports on high-quality bottom-up synthesis of Ge-based MMCs is still rare. It has been shown that GeS/Se usually grew in a vertical way through a CVD method, which is probably due to poor control of the sources.171–173 Photodetectors with planar configurations based materials usually need an additional transfer method.173 Ulaganathan et al. fabricated a photodetector based on a mechanically exfoliated GeS flake with a thickness of ∼28 nm showing response to wide spectra of ∼400–800 nm with a highest R of ∼655 A W−1 at 633 nm light.169 Similar wide-spectra response (300–800 nm) has been found by Tan et al., but with higher R of 2.3 × 104 A W−1 for 500 nm light.174 Recently, Hsueh et al. studied the polarized light dependent band-edge absorption behavior of GeS.168 Due to a special band dispersion, the bandgaps of GeS show a sinusoidal variation of Eg = 1.6 + 0.05·|sinθ| eV with the polarization angle (θ) changes. Compared to GeS, GeSe may have more appealing photoresponse properties due to its special band structure. For GeSe, the CBM and VBM mainly consisted of Ge 4p and Se 4p orbits, respectively, leading to a large number of bands at the band extrema (which leads to a high DOS) and large directionally averaged effective masses. Consequently, GeSe has a large absorption for visible light even down to monolayer (38%).170 This was more or less demonstrated by Ramasamy et al.'s study, in which a higher R for GeSe (870 A W−1) compared with GeS (173 A W−1) at 405 nm light was found.175


3.2.4 Sn-Based MMCs. 
Similar with In-based MMCs, the Sn-based materials family has a variety of forms with stoichiometric ratios of 2:1 and 1:1, including SnS/Se2 and SnS/Se. The former has a 1T MoS2-like structure while the latter shares a similar structure with buckled BP.176–178 This multi-formation brings Sn-based MMCs an additional freedom of property tunability. For example, SnS2 and SnS exhibit n- and p-type conductions, respectively, making the fabrication of functional heterojunctions through only changing the stoichiometry available.176 This potential is further enabled considering that controllable synthesis of SnSe/SnSe2 and SnS/SnS2 have been achieved by Huang et al. and Ahan et al. independently.176,178 From the point view of band structure, SnSe2/SnSe keep an indirect bandgap nature while tuning the thickness from bulk (∼1.2/0.89 eV) to monolayer (∼2.04/1.63 eV). On the other hand, the bandgaps of SnS2/SnS can be modulated from 2.55/0.89 to 2.81/2.61 eV while decreasing down to monolayer.179–181 For SnS/Se2, it has been calculated that VBMs reside at a point along the line Γ–M, and the CBMs reside at the M point. While thinning down to monolayers, they both experience a slight flattening of the VBMs, which induces an increase in DOS (density of states). In addition, DOS of their monolayers and bilayers have van Hove singularities. Both of these characters may bring high photo-absorption to SnS/Se2.179 Due to the large polarizabilities of Sn atoms, the exciton binding energies of their monolayers are 0.91 eV and 0.86 eV for SnS2 and SnSe2, respectively, which is substantially more than those of MoS2, indicating that excitations may play a dominant role in their optoelectronic properties.179 Notably, for SnSe, it has been shown that its CBM and VBM mainly consist of Sn 5p and Se 4p orbits, respectively, inducing a high DOS and large directionally averaged effective masses like GeSe. As a result, SnSe has a large absorption for visible light even down to bilayer (47%).170
Among various forms, the photoresponse properties of SnSe2 and SnS2 have been mainly studied. Zhou et al. fabricated a photodetector using CVD-grown SnSe2 flakes with a thickness of ∼3 nm.177 An optical bandgap of ∼1.78 eV and obvious response to light with wavelengths lower than ∼600 nm was found. The as-fabricated device showed R and G as high as 1.1 × 103 A W−1 and 5000, respectively, to 530 nm light. At the same time, fast rise and decay times of 14.5 and 8.1 ms were observed, which the authors ascribed to the high quality of the as-synthesized samples as well as existence of a Schottky barrier at the contact regions. Using micro-absorption spectra, Wu and his colleagues extracted an indirect bandgap of ∼1 eV for a CVD synthesized SnSe2 with a thickness of 50 nm. On the basis of the same device, they observed fast photoresponse speed with rise and decay times of 17 and 45 μs, respectively, which leads to a large bandwidth that can sustain frequency as high as 2 kHz.182 Yu et al. fabricated a photodetector based on a bilayer exfoliated SnSe2 flake which displayed R of 0.5 A W−1 to 633 nm light.183 Raman spectroscopy has been shown to be a feasible tool to define the thickness of SnSe2, in which the difference between the two Raman peaks, namely Eg and A1g (located at ∼110 and ∼188 cm−1, respectively), increases as the thickness decreases.184 The photoresponse range of SnSe2 can extend to the IR range. Using thick films, Mukhokosi et al. demonstrated SnSe2 photodetectors with R as high as ∼2 mA W−1 to 1064 nm light. On the other hand, Huang et al. fabricated photodetectors based on a mechanically exfoliated SnS2 with a thickness of ∼10 nm which showed R of ∼100 A W−1 to 532 nm light.185 On the basis of successful synthesis of SnS2 flakes, Ahan et al. studied their thickness-dependent photodetection properties.176 They also fabricated p–n junctions using the synthesized n-type SnS2 and p-type SnS and demonstrated a photodetector and photodiode with R of 4.56 and 27.09 mA W−1 (405 nm light) at forward and reverse bias, respectively. Recently, Zhou et al. further improved the R of photodetectors based on CVD-grown SnS2 (10 nm in thickness) to 722 A W−1 (350 nm light).186
All the photodetectors mentioned above utilized a planar configuration based on individual single-crystal flakes, which has been the most commonly used strategy to study the intrinsic photodetection properties of 2DLMs. Nevertheless, this kind of device structure can only be used as a prototype because of its limited active area. To achieve practical applications, large-scale synthesis of 2DLMs films is necessary. However, 2D-film morphology may still suffer from strong light reflection of the substrate. On the other hand, vertically grown 2DLMs could be an alternative choice considering the high probability of light scattering inside the vertical “walls” and the higher in-plane charge carrier mobilities.187,188 Recently, devices based on vertically grown SnS, SnS2, and SnSe have been reported.188–191 For example, Liu et al. synthesized free-standing vertical SnS2 on SiO2/Si and FTO substrates through a modified CVD method.188 Using a FTO substrate and deposited Au with 20 nm in thickness as bottom and top electrodes, respectively, the authors fabricated photodetectors in vertical geometry. The devices showed R as high as 1.85 A W−1 with fast response times of τr/τd ∼ 43.4/64.4 ms to 490 nm light.188 In another case, Patel et al. synthesized a wafer-scale SnS with vertical morphology through a two-step sulfurization method. By combining with an n-type Si substrate, a SnS–Si photodiode was fabricated which showed R as high as 0.25 A W−1 with a fast response time of τr/τd ∼ 34/15.1 μs to 850 nm light.189

3.3 Transition metal trichalcogenides
Besides the well-known TMDs with a stoichiometric ratio of 1:2, transition metal trichalcogenides (TMTs) in the form of MX3, where M and X represent transition metals like Ti, Zr, or Hf, and chalcogens of S, Se, or Te, respectively, also have a layered structure.192–194 Two types of crystalline structures (with small differences) have been reported for this materials family, i.e., TiS3 type and ZrSe3 type.194Fig. 12a shows TiS3 as an example. Especially, each monolayer (a–b atomic plane) can be seen as a connection of [TiS6] triangle prisms along the b-axis (dashed red rectangle), which leads to a strong in-plane anisotropy or the so-called quasi-1D properties that is similar with Te.195–197 For example, a theoretical calculation has shown that the effective mass of electrons are 1.47 and 0.41 along a and b directions, respectively, resulting a two-order difference in mobility.195 Experimentally, in-plane anisotropy of 2.1 in conductivity at RT (4.4 at 25 K) was found using a circular electrodes configuration (Fig. 12b). In addition, TiS3 also shows anisotropic light absorption with photon energy of 1.5 to 3 eV where a higher absorption can be observed for light polarized along E//b.195 These features suggest TiS3 may have similar properties with the well-studied BP.
 Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of TiS3. (b) Polar plot of conductance measured for all 12 pairs of electrodes at back gate voltages of −40 V, 0 V, and 40 V, respectively. The inset shows the AFM scan of the device. Computed bandgaps of (c) ZrS3, (d) ZrSe3, (e) ZrTe3, (f) HfS3, (g) HfSe3, and (h) HfTe3 monolayers versus the biaxial or uniaxial tensile strain. (i) The top panel shows the AFM image of a device, while the bottom panel shows the photocurrent measured as a function of different laser wavelengths; (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 195; (c–h) are reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015, and (i) is reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2014. 
In bulk states, most of TMTs, including (Ti, Zr, or Hf) (S or Se)3, are semiconductors with indirect bandgaps covering from ∼0.21 to 1.87 eV, whereas transition metal tritellurides (Ti/Zr/HfTe3) are metals.192 While decreasing the thickness, the bandgaps increase due to quantum confinement just like its 2D analogues, as summarized in Table 2. Among them, one specialty is TiS3, which undergoes an indirect-to-direct bandgap transition without a big change in value. TMTs also show strain-tunable bandgaps.193,199 Through a DFT calculation, Li et al. predicted monolayers of TMTs can be modulated from 0.68 eV to 2.34 eV at a small tensile strain (<8%).193Fig. 12c and d show their results in detail. Interestingly, they found ZrS3 and HfS3 monolayers will exhibit an indirect-to-direct bandgap transition, while TiS3 keep the direct bandgap feature for the whole strain range, and metallic ZrTe3 and HfTe3 monolayers can change to be semiconductors at ε = 4% and ε = 6%, respectively.
Table 2 Bandgaps of bulk and monolayer Ti- and Zr-based TMTs, respectively. The data are extracted from ref. 192







E
g (eV) bulk

E
g (eV) 1L



E
g (eV) bulk

E
g (eV) 1L




i and d: indirect and direct bandgap. 1L: monolayer.




Ti
S
1.02i
1.06d
Zr
S
1.83i
1.90i


Se
0.21i
0.57i
Se
0.75i
1.17i


Te
0
0
Te
0
0




Until now, research on TMTs is still rare and most of the works are done from a theoretical direction. As time goes on, a number of works on TMTs have recently been published with TiS3 as the representative prototype. This is mainly because of its moderate bandgap (comparable with Si) and high theoretical mobility. Both bottom-up and top-down methods have been used to obtain nanostructured TiS3.198,200 For the former, the as-synthesized TiS3 usually appears in the morphology of a nanobelt due to its quasi-one dimensional crystalline structure as we have shown above.198,201–203 For example, Island et al. grew TiS3 nanobelts by in situ sulfurizing Ti disks, on the basis of which (22 nm in thickness) phototransistors were fabricated.198 Broad-spectra response (∼500 nm to 900 nm) with a highest R of 2910 A W−1 to 640 nm light was demonstrated (Fig. 12i). In addition, the device was found to show fast response and could keep a R of ∼16 A W−1 at 1 kHz switching frequency. On the other hand, Liu et al. studied the anisotropic photoresponse properties of TiS3 flakes obtained by a mechanical exfoliation method.200 As expected, the devices showed stronger response to light (532 to 808 nm) with polarization along the b axis.
3.4 Tetradymites
Tetradymites refer to compounds with a form of M2X3, where M stands for Bi or Sb, and X stands for chalcogens (S, Se, or Te).204 Among them, Bi2S3, Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and Sb2Te3 are archetypical ones which share a similar layered structure: covalently bonded quintuple layers of X1–M–X2–M–X1 are connected by a weak van der Waals force.204 Theoretical and experimental studies have shown that Bi2S3, Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and Sb2Te3 have direct bandgaps of ∼1.3, 0.35, 0.21, and 0.45 eV in bulk form, respectively, which makes them promising candidates for broad-spectra photodetection.205–208 More importantly, another feature makes three members of them (Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and Sb2Te3) stand out, i.e., the gapless surface states consisting of odd number of Dirac cones – the so-called topological insulators (TIs) – due to their strong spin-orbit.209–211 These natural 2D TIs with macroscopic quantum-entanglement effects, like the quantum spin Hall (QSH) effect, have been predicted to show potential applications on brand-new electronic (low-power electronics and error-tolerant quantum computing, etc.) and optoelectronic devices.212
Holding small direct bandgaps in bulk states, tetradymites have been utilized to construct photodetectors and/or as light absorbers for broad-spectra wavelengths. For instance, Qiao et al. fabricated photodetectors using a G/Bi2Te3 hybrid structure with Bi2Te3 nanoplates uniformly dispersed on the G channel.213 With assistance of Bi2Te3 light absorbers, the device showed obvious photoresponse to wide-wavelength light of ∼400 to 1500 nm with a highest R of 3.5 A W−1 at 532 nm, which is about two orders higher than from pure G photodetectors. In another case, Kim et al. fabricated Bi2Se3/G heterostructure and demonstrated good response to mid-infrared light (1.3 to 3.5 μm) with a highest R of 1.97 A W−1 at 3.5 μm.214 More importantly, the device exhibited a fast response speed (4 μs), which is remarkable for photodetectors working in the IR range. Zhang et al. synthesized Bi2Se3 film on the top of a Si wafer, on the basis of which photodiodes were fabricated in situ and their photoresponse properties were studied.215 Due to the sharp interface between Bi2Se3 and n-doped Si, the photodiodes showed high-performance broadband photoresponse (300–1100 nm). Under reverse bias conditions, the devices showed fast response speed (a few microseconds) and high R (24.48 A W−1 to 808 nm light). A similar structure was also studied for Bi2Te3 but with the main focus on the IR range (1064 to 1550 nm), where Bi2Te3 dominates photo-absorption.216 All the works mentioned above demonstrate the high compatibility of tetradymites, whether in the forms of nanostructures or films, with both the widely studied 2DLMs and conventional semiconductors.
The second feature of tetradymites is their outstanding thermoelectric (TE) properties.204 Simultaneously having high electron mobility/conductivity due to a strong SOC-induced small effective mass, and high thermopower, because of the high valley degeneracy and small phonon group velocities etc., tetradymites, especially Bi2T3-based ones, have been proven to show high ZT values for thermoelectric devices. As a result, tetradymites-based photodetectors utilizing PTE are expected soon. Very recently, Mauser et al. proposed a new-type of photodetector by combining PTE and plasmonic resonance.217 The photodetector was composed of a Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 p–n array in an inter-finger configuration while two electrode pads independently connected to the p- and n-type materials (Fig. 13a). The periodic array acts as a resonator strongly enhancing coupling between the TE device and incident light with specific wavelengths. On the other hand, the electrode pads reflect most of the light and keep cooling for the whole period. As a result, a steep temperature gradient will be induced at the array and pads parts (Fig. 13b). PTE current is then produced due to the opposite flow directions of charge carrier between p- and n-type TE materials. One key advantage of this photodetector is tunable resonant light wavelength from the parameters of the array, which potentially offers broadband photodetection without a cut-off energy (Fig. 13c and d). In addition, high sensitivity (R and NEP as high/low as a few V W−1 and nW Hz−1/2) and fast response (in the scale of microseconds) have been demonstrated by the authors (Fig. 13e and f).
 Fig. 13  (a) Conceptual design of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (b) A thermal simulation of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 structure at peak absorption with input power of 20 μW. Scale bars, 500 μm (main image); 50 μm (inset). (c) Geometry of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (d) Calculated absorption of 60 nm-wide wires with thicknesses of 40 nm and varying pitch on suspended 50 nm SiO2/100 nm SiNx waveguides. (e) Time response of a Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (f) Responsivity (left) and NEP as a function of wavelength for unfocused, spatially uniform illumination; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017. 
The role of tetradymites, specifically TIs, goes beyond the traditional photoresponse process while considering the topologically protected surface states (SS). One of the specialties lay on the SS-related IR to THz detection. Zhang et al. first predicted this potential from a theoretical perspective.35 Due to the Dirac nature of SS in Bi2Se3 thicker than 6 QLs, the absorption of light with energy ranging from 0 to 0.3 eV (the bulk bandgap) is solely determined by the fine structure constant, just like what has been found in G.15 For suspended samples, the absorption is ∼1.15%, which is two orders higher than the commercially used Hg1−xCdxTe with an equivalent thickness. For Bi2Se3 thinner than 6 QLs, the opened gap at SS will lead to a further increase in absorption around the band edge (1.8%, 2.05%, 3.85%, and 6.22% for 2, 3, 4, and 5 QLs, respectively). With this high absorption, Bi2Se3 has been predicted to show higher SNR than Hg1−xCdxTe detectors.
Due to the strong relationship between THz response and gapless Dirac SS, THz technology was used as a tool to detect SS signals at an early age of TIs.219–222 As research progressed, their role in room-temperature THz-IR detection began to attract growing attention. However, to explicitly define the contribution of SS is not easy because of the mixed role of intraband transition from the bulk gap and the complex mechanisms underlying THz-IR detection.223 Recently, Viti et al. fabricated THz detectors based on Bi2Te2.2Se0.8 FETs (Fig. 14a and b).218 The THz detectors were found to work under the rectification plasma-wave mechanism in an overdamped range, with a highest (lowest) R (NEP) of ∼210 mV W−1 (10 nW Hz−1/2) at 332.6 GHz radiation (Fig. 14c and d). In addition, the detectors were also applied for practical imaging (Fig. 2e and f). The contribution of SS to the THz response was defined by comparing the properties with Bi2Se3-based devices, in which a photothermoelectric effect dominates the response process. And the reason(s) for the increased contribution of SS in Bi2Te2.2Se0.8 is probably decreased conductivity of the bulk states due to composite doping. Based on this high-performance THz detector, practical imaging has been demonstrated (Fig. 14e and f). Notably, besides chemical doping, the SS related photocurrent can be further enhanced by introducing a magnetic field into the device.224,225
 Fig. 14  (a and b) False-colored SEM images of the top-gated FET. (c) Gate dependent responsivity (left vertical axis) and photovoltage (right vertical axis) measured at RT with a 332.6 GHz radiation. Inset: Background signal. (d) Left vertical axis: extrapolated photovoltage as predicted by the Dyakonov–Shur overdamped plasma-wave theory, divided by the antenna coupling constant. Right vertical axis: difference between the source–drain currents measured while focusing the THz beam on the sample and without it, multiplied by the channel resistance. Inset: Transconductance curve collected while shining the 332.6 GHz radiation on the detector. VDS = 0.6 mV. (e) RT THz imaging of a (f) glue jar obtained at 332.6 GHz radiation; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015. 
Another feature caused by the SS of TIs is a spin polarized photocurrent that is sensitive to circular light (circular photogalvanic effect, CPGE). For the SS, the spin is strongly locked with momentum due to spin–orbit coupling. Hence, circularly polarized light can induce inter-band transitions of electrons with a probability that is sensitive to the momentum dependent spin orientation. As a result, the SS can be asymmetrically depopulated in k-space, which converts the pure spin currents to a net spin-polarized electrical current.227,228 Theoretical works have shown that the CPGE is experimentally detectable on TIs like Bi2Se3 (Fig. 15d).227 However, effectively isolating the spin-polarized SS current from the spin-degenerate bulk current is challenging in practice. Mclver et al. achieved this goal by carefully designing the experimental parameters.226 They used Bi2Se3 (Fig. 15a) as the TI and polarized 795 nm light as the radiation. At a particular incident angle, they found the photocurrent shows a strong polarization dependency (Fig. 15b and c), which is ascribed to the CPGE. This result shows the potential role of TIs on opto-spintronic applications.
 Fig. 15  (a) AFM image of a typical two-terminal Bi2Se3 device. (b) Schematics of the SS-related CPGE at a specular incident condition. (c) Polarization dependent spin current. The solid red line is a fit to the equation shown in the graph. (d) k-Space depiction of photon helicity-induced currents from the Dirac cone via the circular photogalvanic effect including contributions from excited states; (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2011. 
3.5 hBN
Hexagonal BN (hBN) is a special 2DLM which has a crystalline structure with a honeycomb arrangement of alternating boron and nitrogen atoms. The similarity in structure with G makes hBN also known as “white graphene”. With a wide bandgap (∼6 eV), large dielectric breakdown strength (∼8 MV cm−1), high chemical stability, and atomically flat surface, hBN has been widely used for tunnelling barriers, encapsulation layers, and substrates/buffer layers to protect 2DLMs from interface scatterings to achieve high mobility. The bandgap nature of hBN experienced a long history of debating. Theoretical calculations showed that hBN has an indirect bandgap while light emission measurements indicated a direct nature.229–232 Recently, this long-debated issue was resolved by two-photon spectra which demonstrated the indirect bandgap nature with a value of 5.955 eV.233 Meanwhile, an exciton binding energy of 130 meV was revealed giving rise to a single-particle bandgap of 6.08 eV.
hBN itself has also been studied as a UV optoelectronics and natural hyperbolic material. It was first studied as a UV light-emitting material. In a pioneering work, Watanabe et al. demonstrated hBN room-temperature UV lasing at 215 nm, which was ascribed to the direct bandgap nature of hBN.232 A step further, a far-ultraviolet (FUV, 225 nm) plane-emission device that emits FUV light from an hBN fluorescent screen source was fabricated.234,235 On the other hand, hBN-based UV photodetectors have also been explored. Jiang and his colleagues synthesized wafer-scale hBN epitaxial layers on sapphire substrates through MOCVD,236 on the basis of which MSM photodetector arrays with a sharp cut-off wavelength of ∼230 nm were fabricated.237 Feng et al. used PLD to grow nanostructured hBN and demonstrated UV detectors with an output power of ∼2 μW.238–240 Very recently, nanostructured hBN with an improved connection with substrates was synthesized by adding a flat 5 nm hBN buffer layer before PLD depositing.241 Due to better hBN-substrates properties, UV detectors with high temperature endurance of up to 400 °C have been achieved. Although the potentials of hBN in UV-detection have been shown, the photoresponse properties of few-layer or even monolayer samples are rarely studied. This is probably due to two reasons: the first is that most of the so-far attentions about hBN have been paid on its role as passivation and dielectric layers for other 2DLMs because of its good stability and high dielectric breakdown strength. On the other hand, controlled growth and the transfer method of high-quality 2D hBN layers continue to be a big challenge, which becomes the main obstacle that limits the development of UV-detectors based on hBN.236,238,242–244 Nevertheless, a number of emerging reports have studied the photodetection behavior of hBN layers on the basis of high-quality synthesis. For example, Wang et al. synthesized high-quality hBN domains by ion beam supporting deposition, based on which UV-detectors were fabricated.244 Those devices showed low off-state current and a high on-state current to 190 nm light, giving a high on/off ratio of 103. From the point view of synthesis, hBN films with thickness down to single layer have been achieved. For instance, Cun et al. recently reported the wafer-scale growth of h-BN with single orientation on Rh(111) substrates and subsequent high-quality transfer onto arbitrary substrates like SiO2.242
As a natural hyperbolic material, hBN is sustainable with hyperbolic phonon-polaritons modes. Although this research area is more or less beyond the scope of photodetectors, this technology is very promising for applications beyond conventional optoelectronics, like nano-imaging. Hence, here we will give a short overview on this area related to hBN. Polaritons, referring to the collective excitations resulting from the coupling of photons with matter (like phonons, excitons, and plasmons), can sustain at the interface between materials with positive and negative permittivity.245 With the feature of confinement of electromagnetic waves on a space much smaller than the wavelength, polaritons have been one of the focuses in nano-photonics. As one kind of polariton, phonon-polaritons (PPs) are collective oscillations originating from the coupling of photons with optical phonons. In hyperbolic materials like hBN, the permittivity tensor exhibits sign inversion between the in- and out-of-plane directions providing the possibility of polaritons (hyperbolic phonon-polaritons, HPPs). Specifically, hBN has two sets of infrared-active optical phonon modes denoted as upper and lower Reststrahlen bands.246 Pioneering works done by Dai et al. and Caldwell et al. in 2014 have shown that hBN is sustainable for HPPs with low losses compared with polaritons based on InGaAs, graphene, and SiO2.20,246 Recently, Giles et al. synthesized isotopically pure hBN to decrease the amount of point defect and increase the phonon lifetimes.247 Through this method, the propagation length of HPPs in hBN can be enhanced three times reaching as high as 3.5 μm. One promising application of HPPs is direct imaging of deeply subdiffractional sized objects.248 Taking Li and his colleagues’ work as an example, Au arrays underneath a hBN flake (150 nm in thickness) can be clearly identified with infrared scattering scanning near-field optical microscope (s-SNOM).249
3.6 Metal halides
Metal halides (MHs) in the form of MH2, here M = Mg, Ca, Zn, Cd, Ge, or Pb, and H = Cl, Br, or I, are another group of 2DLMs. With a same stoichiometric ratio of 1:2 as with TMDs, MHs share a 1T MoS2 like structure as shown in Fig. 16a. Compared with its analogue of TMDs, the properties of MHs have been rarely studied so far. However, they began to cause attention very recently due to the synthesis of Pb-based MHs, which can be used as precursors to grow Pb-based organic–inorganic perovskites.250–252 MHs themselves are semiconductors with bandgaps covering the visible to UV range. While decreasing down to monolayers, the response spectra modulate to a wider range. Fig. 16b shows Lu et al.'s work as an example.253 According to the GGA calculation, the electric bandgaps of MHs monolayers range from 2.03 eV of ZnI2 to 6.08 eV of MgCl2, and monolayer MgCl/Br2 are direct bandgap while the others are indirect. This predicts the potential application of MHs in UV and deep-UV photodetectors.
 Fig. 16  (a) Side view (top) and top view (bottom) of the MHs crystal structure. The unit cell is outlined by solid blue lines. (b) Band alignments of monolayer metal halogenides MHs. The “0” energy level is chosen as the vacuum level. For clarity, the absolute values of band edges are labeled. (c) Transfer characteristics of a few-layered PbI2 device. The inset shows the schematic diagram of the measurement system and an optical photograph of the device. (d) Time dependent response of the PbI2 device. Rise (e) optical image of the synthesized PbI2 flakes. And its spectrum response to 400–600 nm is shown in (f); (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, Copyright 2016, (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, and (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press, Copyright 2017. 
Until now, both solution and PVD methods have been used to synthesize 2D MHs flakes. However, considering the high water solubility of MHs, which greatly restricts the devices fabrication process, there are few experimental works on the photoresponse properties of 2D MHs. And most works adopted a shadow mask method to fabricate the devices. For instance, Zheng et al. grew hexagonal PbI2 flakes through a facile solvent evaporation method.254 Using Pb(NO3)2 and KI2 aqueous solutions as sources, PdI2 with a thickness of tens of nanometers can be synthesized without any special requirements on the substrates. The as-obtained PbI2 mainly showed two Raman peaks located at ∼76 and 96 cm−1, corresponding to the Eg and A1g modes, respectively. In addition, a strong PL peak centered at 496 nm was observed at 80 K, demonstrating the high quality of the synthesized samples. The as-obtained PbI2 were found to show a weak p-type conduction with a fast response speed (55 and 110 μs for the rise and decay process, respectively) to 450 nm light (Fig. 16c and d). On the other hand, Lan et al. grew PbI2 nanosheets through a PVD method and fabricated photodetectors with R of ∼0.4 A W−1 to 405 nm light.256 Recently, monolayer PbI2 flakes with a triangle shape were synthesized by Wang et al.255 The as-grown PbI2 flakes show obvious response to blue light with a peak at ∼475 nm light (Fig. 16e and f).
3.7 Transition metal chalcogenophosphates
Transition metal chalcogenophosphates (TMCPs) in the form of MPX3, where M = V, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Cd, and X = S, Se, and Te, are an emerging 2DLMs group.257–260 From the point of view of crystalline structure, the repeating layers inside TMCPs can be seen as a transformation from H-phase TMDs but with P atoms replacing the positions of transition metals in TMDs forming P–P dimers. The P–P dimers are covalently bonded with 6 neighboring S atoms forming [P2S6] units which are ionically connected by the interspersed M atoms.260Fig. 17a and b use NiPS3 as an example.261 The atomic layers then can stack in the C2/m (for MPS3) or R3 (MPSe3) space groups to construct the corresponding bulks.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of NiPS3 crystal structure from side view. (b) Atomic-level HAADF-STEM image of an ultrathin NiPS3 nanosheet with the corresponding structural schematic. (c) SEM image of NiPS3 nanosheets grown on carbon fibers. (d) Light response curve of the device under 254 and 473 nm light illuminations. (e) The wavelength- and dependent R of NiPS3 device. (f) Time-dependent photocurrent of NiPS3 device; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, Copyright 2017 and (c)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017. 
Research on TMCPs dates back to 100 years ago but renewed interests very recently have been stimulated by big successes of other 2DLMs like G, TMDs, and so on. There are mainly three specialties that make this materials family very attractive compared with its analogues: the first is the large spanning bandgaps. For example, bulk FePS3, NiPS3, and FePSe3 have bandgaps of 1.5, 1.7, and 1.3 eV, respectively, which covers the visible light range. On the other hand, bulk MnPS3, CdPS3, and ZnPS3 have bandgaps of 3.0, 3.0, and 3.4, respectively, corresponding to the UV light range.257 In addition, this wide-spectra coverage can be maintained while decreasing down to monolayers.263 The second is that appropriate band positions of monolayers with band edges straddle the redox potentials of water, which makes them very appealing as photocatalysts for water splitting.260 Finally, both theoretical and experimental works have predicted/demonstrated the existence of magnetic properties of some peculiar TMCPs monolayers (see Table 3), which makes them promising candidates for recently developed 2D magnetics.263,264 As a “new” member of 2DLMs, studies on the 2D TMCPs are relative few, and theoretical works are ahead of experimental ones with most of the focus on basic properties explorations. Very recently, Chu et al. fabricated photodetectors based on CVD synthesized NiPS3 single flakes (Fig. 17c).262 They found a NiPS3 flake (4.7 nm in thickness) had obvious response to light with a wavelength smaller than 360 nm. In addition, the device showed R as high as 126 mA W−1 and a fast response time of ∼3.2 ms to 254 nm light (Fig. 17d–f). As with many other new 2DLMs, TMCPs are still at their early stage with many properties and applications yet to be explored. However, with the features mentioned above, their potentials are really worthwhile to look forward to.
Table 3 Summary of the bandgaps and magnetic properties of selected TMCPs monolayers. Data were collected from ref. 263




Materials

E
g (eV)
Magnetic properties
Materials

E
g (eV)
Magnetic properties




FM, AFM, and NM: ferromagnetic, anti-ferromagnetic, and non-magnetic, respectively.




V2P2X3
S
2.50
AFM
Co2P2X3
S
0
NM


Se
2.10
AFM
Se
0
NM


Te
1.57
NM
Te
0
NM






Cr2P2X3
S
0
FM
Ni2P2X3
S
2.83
AFM


Se
0
FM
Se
2.22
AFM


Te
0
FM
Te
0.27
NM






Mn2P2X3
S
3.05
AFM
Cu2P2X3
S
1.76
NM


Se
2.24
AFM
Se
0.56
NM


Te
1.06
NM
Te
0
NM






Fe2P2X3
S
2.07
AFM
Zn2P2X3
S
3.11
NM


Se
1.48
NM
Se
2.19
NM


Te
1.35
NM
Te
1.26
NM




3.8 Bi-Based oxychacogenides
Bi-Based oxychacogenides (BOCs), including Bi2O2S, Bi2O2Se, and Bi2O2Te, are new members that were recently rediscovered and joined the big 2DLMs family.6 It should be noted that BOCs share a special 2DL structure: two neighboring covalently bonded [Bi2O2] layers are connected by one column of interfacial chalcogen anions (S2−, Se2−, or Te2−) through weak electrostatic interactions rather than the van der Waals forces in common 2DLMs.6,265,266Fig. 18a uses the structure of Bi2O2Se as an example. Hence, BOCs are actually quasi-2DLMs which are absent from van der Waals gaps. However, the weak electrostatic forces can also enable exfoliation from the planes of chalcogen anions layers but probably with atomic rearrangements at the surfaces. In bulk states, Bi2O2S, Bi2O2Se, and Bi2O2Te are semiconductors with bandgaps of ∼1.5, 0.85, and 0.23 eV, respectively.6,229,265 This materials family has been attracting growing attention because of the outstanding electronic properties recently found in Bi2O2Se by Peng et al.6,229,267 Through a van der Waals epitaxy method, they synthesized Bi2O2Se nanoflakes with thickness down to a monolayer for the first time. Two typical Raman peaks located at ∼131 and 174 cm−1 (corresponding to the E2g and A21g modes, respectively) were observed. These as-synthesized Bi2O2Se were found to have an indirect bandgap of ∼0.85 eV in bulk form, and this value gradually increased to ∼1.9 eV as the thickness thinned to a monolayer (Fig. 18b and c).268 The CBM located at the Γ point mainly consists of Bi p orbits and disperses strongly along the Γ–X and Γ–M directions. More importantly, a small in-plane electron effective mass (0.14 ± 0.02m0) was predicted from the band structure, which finally leads to high intrinsic electron mobility. FETs based on Bi2O2Se have been demonstrated with remarkable performances at room temperature, including high mobility of ∼450 cm2 V−1 s−1, large on/off ratios of 106, and near-ideal SS of 65 mV dec−1, which is among the highest performances that have been achieved in 2DLMs.6 At the same time, they also show the controllable synthesis of large-scale arrays of Bi2O2Se microplates (Fig. 18d).267 All these results push Bi2O2Se to the very front edge of 2DLMs.
 Fig. 18  (a) Crystal structure of Bi2O2Se; for clarity, the weak electrostatic interactions between Se and the [Bi2O2] layer are not presented. (b) Calculated band structure of Bi2O2Se with a bandgap of ∼0.85 eV. (c) Extracted optical band gaps as a function of layer number, and deduction of the band gap for bulk Bi2O2Se is shown in the inset. (d) Typical OM image of centimeter-scale 2D Bi2O2Se arrays fabricated with the help of photolithography. (e) Time dependent photoresponse of Bi2O2Se photodetector. (f) Temperature-dependent responsivity and detectivity of Bi2O2Se photodetector; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (c) is reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017, (d) is reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Copyright 2017, and (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 269 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017. 
With these superiorities, interesting photoresponse properties of Bi2O2Se are anticipated. Recently, Li et al. reported their preliminary study. They fabricated photoconductors based on synthesized Bi2O2Se flakes and demonstrated a broadband response to 365–808 nm light. Without voltage gating, the response time and responsivity at 808 nm light reached up to 2.8 ms and 6.5 A W−1, respectively (Fig. 18d and f).269 At the same time, the flexibility of the as-fabricated photoconductors was also exhibited. The performances of Bi2O2Se in Peng et al.'s work were extensively enhanced.270 They found the R of Bi2O2Se can reach 104–10−1 A W−1 covering an extremely wide spectrum range of ∼500–1550 nm with a fast response speed of picoseconds. These parameters are also among the superb performances that have been achieved in 2DLMs. Up to now, the properties of Bi2O2Se and other BOCs still have been unclear due to their short history. However, considering the outstanding performances they have shown, it is very worthwhile expecting to see what this newcomer may bring.
4. Photodetectors based on 2D non-layered materials
Besides the layered materials with natural van der Waals gaps mentioned above, there are also many important semiconductors with three-dimensional isotropic crystal structures, such as III–V group (GaN, GaAs), II–VI group (ZnO, CdTe), and IV–VI group (PbS). Different from layered crystals, non-layered materials generally have bulk crystals formed via covalent bonding. As a result, lots of unsaturated dangling bonds will be formed on the surface of 2D non-layered structures, inducing a highly active surface. With a high optical absorption coefficient and direct band gaps, these traditional semiconductor materials have been widely used in optoelectronic devices. Inspired by the great success of 2D layered materials, more and more attention is being paid to obtain artificial 2D thin layers from non-layered materials, which will not only greatly expand the scope of 2D materials, but also bring us exotic optoelectronic properties and heterostructure building blocks due to the strong 2D confinement effect of charge carriers, phonons, and photons. In a typical example, S. Ithurria et al. demonstrated that the absorption and emission spectra of 2D non-layered colloidal CdSe, CdS, and CdTe nanosheets strongly depend on their thickness.271 Besides, the 2D planar structure also makes these materials more compatible with current film microfabrication techniques and flexible substrates. However, due to the 3D bonded structures, there is no intrinsic driving force for 2D anisotropic growth of non-layered structures. Although certain nanometer-thick non-layered materials, such as Te and Se,272,273 have been fabricated by a liquid-phase exfoliation technique, their average lateral size was around 100 nm, which is not suitable for practical applications. Thus, most strategies for preparing 2D non-layered materials are based on a bottom-up method. In this section, we will give a brief review of photodetectors based on 2D nonlayered materials taking the synthesis method as a clue.
The most common strategy uses wet chemistry methods, which have been widely applied in high-throughput synthesis of 2D non-layered noble metals, metal chalcogenides, and metal oxides.274 For example, Sun et al. reported a generalized molecular self-assembly synthesis method to prepare various ultrathin 2D nanostructures of transition metal oxides, such as TiO2, ZnO, Co3O4, WO3, Fe3O4, and MnO2.275 The lateral sizes of ZnO, Co3O4, and WO3 nanosheets could reach up to 1–10 μm while maintaining a thin thickness around 1.6–5.2 nm. However, products fabricated by wet chemistry methods are always randomly distributed and easily aggregated, bringing huge challenges to device fabrication. A practicable method is depositing suspensions of ultrathin 2D metal oxide nanosheets by spin-coating techniques. Fig. 19a shows a flexible 2D nanosheet photodetector fabricated on a transparent polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate where single-layer graphene was designed as the back and counter electrode. By controlling the coating process, the thickness of the deposited 2D metal oxide layer is around 50 nm. With their wide bandgaps, these 2D metal oxide photodetectors exhibit good response to 325 nm ultraviolet light. As shown in Fig. 19b, by periodically switching on and off the 325 nm ultraviolet light, photodetectors display highly stable and reproducible photoresponse behavior. Although the spin-coating method shows great potential in photodetection applications, the crystalline quality of products is relatively poor and the optoelectronic properties of individual 2D single-crystalline layer can’t be effectively studied.
 Fig. 19  (a) Optical image of a fabricated flexible 2D nanosheet photodetector. Inset: The SEM cross-section image. (b) Photoresponse behaviors of various 2D metal oxide photodetectors under periodically switching on and off the 325 nm ultraviolet light. (c) Schematic illustration of the epitaxial growth of 2D ZnO nanosheets directed by a surfactant monolayer. (d) AFM image of typical ZnO nanosheets on a Si substrate. Scale bar, 5 μm. (e) Schematic illustration of the van der Waals exfoliation technique. An optical image of exfoliated 2D metal oxide nanosheet is displayed at the right; (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014, (c and d) are reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016 and (e) is reproduced from ref. 277, with permission from AAAS, Copyright 2017. 
A template-assisted synthesis method is considered as a feasible way to guide planar epitaxial growth of 2D materials. By introducing suitable organic surfactants or inorganic ions, the morphology of products can be effectively controlled. For example, Wang et al. demonstrated the synthesis of one to 2 nm-thick single-crystalline ZnO nanosheets by employing sodium dodecyl sulfate at the water–air interface as soft templates.276 The sizes of these nanosheets can reach up to tens of micrometers. A corresponding schematic illustration and AFM images was displayed in Fig. 19c and d, respectively. However, due to the specific bonding between Zn2+ ions and sulfate groups, the surfactants are difficult to remove from the surfaces of nanosheets, thus impacting their optoelectronic performance.
2D layered material provides a natural template to prepare certain 2D non-layered structures under solid-state conditions. For example, Feng et al. demonstrated the synthesis of 2D single-crystalline non-layered CuGaSe2 nanosheets by a templated solid-state reaction from GaSe nanosheets.278 In brief, 50 nm thick copper was deposited on the surface of 2D GaSe thin layers (obtained by mechanical exfoliation) by thermal evaporation. After annealing in a tube furnace and removing the residual Cu with 3 M aqueous FeCl3, 2D non-layered CuGaSe2 nanosheets were obtained and share the same morphology with GaSe. Correspondingly, the PL peak value takes a blue shift from 2.05 eV (GaSe) to 1.71 eV (CuGaSe2). The fabricated photodetectors exhibit a sensitive photoresponse from a UV to visible spectrum. Under 490 nm laser illumination, the photoresponsivity and approximate detectivity are as high as 102 A W−1 and 1012 Jones, respectively. Similarly, a 2D polycrystalline non-layered Ga2O3 nanosheet, which is an important wide bandgap semiconductor (Eg: 4.9 eV), was synthesized by directly oxidizing a 2D GaSe thin layer in air and it showed a sensitive and fast photoresponse to 254 nm ultraviolet light.279 The photoresponsivity and approximate detectivity of this photodetector are 3 A W−1 and 1012 Jones, respectively.
Recently, Zavabeti et al. proposed that gallium-based eutectic alloys can be utilized as a reaction solvent to produce ultrathin 2D polycrystalline metal oxide nanosheets at room temperature.277 As shown in Fig. 19e, by adding appropriate metal (Hf, Al, and Gd) which has a lower Gibbs free energy for oxide formation than Ga, corresponding metal oxides (HfO2, Al2O3, and Gd2O3) will form on the surface of a liquid metal droplet and can be transferred onto specific solid substrates using a van der Waals exfoliation method. In addition, they also developed a gas injection method for high-yield production of 2D oxide suspensions.
All the above products either own a polycrystalline structure or contain residual surfactants/impurity atoms, which are inevitable due to the strong interaction between the products and templates/surfactant agents. Besides, considering the general lattice mismatch problem and high surface energy of 2D non-layered materials, developing a new technology which can guarantee the 2D anisotropic crystal growth of non-layered materials in a highly passivated synthesis environment is needed. One of the strategies is van der Waals epitaxy (vdWE), which is based on relatively weak van der Waals interactions between the epitaxial layer and substrates.280–283 To prepare 2D non-layered crystals by vdWE, two conditions need to be satisfied:282 (1) the 2D anisotropic growth of non-layered materials can be activated through modulating growth parameters, such as temperature and pressure; (2) the substrates should have a passivated atomically flat surface without dangling-bonds, such as mica and 2DLMs like graphene. Thus, lattice matching is not strictly required during vdWE growth, which is totally different from traditional epitaxial methods. In addition, this weak interaction makes it easy to release and transfer the epilayers onto other substrates. Many 2D single-crystalline non-layered materials have been successfully synthesized by a vdWE method, including elemental semiconductors (Te), binary (PbS and CdS), and ternary semiconductors (Pb1−xSnxSe).281,282,284,285 With a large planar structure and high crystalline quality, these epitaxial nanosheets are very suitable for fabricating optoelectronic devices like photodetectors.
Cadmium chalcogenides, CdX (X = S, Se, Te), are important visible light-absorbing materials, which have been widely used in optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, photodetectors, and light emitting diodes. For example, Zhao et al. reported that single-crystalline CdTe solar cells exhibit a high open-circuit voltage of up to 1.096 V and high power conversion efficiency of 17%.288 So, the synthesis of 2D cadmium chalcogenide nanosheets is highly desired. CdX has two different crystal structures, wurtzite and zinc-blende structures, both of which are three-dimensional and covalent bonded. Taking advantage of van der Waals epitaxy, the planar anisotropic growth of CdX has been realized.

Fig. 20a displays the typical wurtzite structure of CdX using CdTe as an example. Zheng et al. reported 2D anisotropic growth of CdS on the surface of monolayer MoS2 and studied the optoelectronic properties of CdS/MoS2 heterostructures.285Fig. 20b shows the SEM image of the epitaxial CdS nanosheets. Their lateral size and thickness are mainly distributed in 1–3 μm and 10–60 nm, respectively. Compared with a monolayer MoS2 nanosheet, the heterostructure shows a broader spectral response and larger photoresponsivity. To study the optoelectronic properties of an individual CdX nanosheet, Zhu et al. demonstrated the synthesis of 2D CdSe nanosheets, with an average lateral size of several microns and thickness of 60 nm, on insulating layered mica substrates.289 On the basis of that, they also in situ fabricated two-terminal 2D CdSe photodetectors. The photodetector showed a high photoresponsivity of 500 A W−1 and high EQE of 1.4 × 103 under 450 nm laser illumination.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of CdX (X = S, Se, Te) with a wurtzite structure using CdTe as an example. (b) SEM image of epitaxial CdS nanosheets on a monolayer MoS2. (c) Optical image of epitaxial CdTe nanosheets on a mica substrate. (d) AFM image of a typical CdTe nanosheet with thickness of 4.8 nm. (e and f) IDS–VDS output curves and time-dependent photoresponse of 2D CdTe photodetector under 473 nm laser illumination. (g) Normalized PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x alloy nanosheets with different compositions; (a and c–f) are reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017, (b) is reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, and (g) is reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017. 
Recently, Cheng and his colleagues reported the preparation of nanometer-thick 2D CdTe nanosheets.286Fig. 20c and d display typical optical and AFM images of epitaxial CdTe nanosheets on a mica substrate, respectively. Lateral size and thickness are mainly distributed in 5–11 μm and 5–10 nm, indicating that the planar preparation of nanometer-thick non-layered structures can be realized in a low-cost CVD system. Fig. 20e and f show the IDS–VDS (drain current–voltage bias) output curves and time-dependent photoresponse of a 2D CdTe photodetector under 473 nm laser illumination, which exhibited ultralow dark current (∼100 fA under 1 V bias) and high photoswitching ratio (∼27). Lower dark current (less than 10 fA under 2 V bias) and higher photoswitching ratio (∼104) can be obtained when the temperature goes down to 80 K. Although the photodetectors based on CdSe and CdTe nanosheets exhibit distinct dark current and photoswitching ratios due to their different thicknesses, they both present a similar photoresponse time of ∼20 ms. Furthermore, FETs based on transferred CdTe nanosheets exhibit stable photoresponses and p-type conduction behavior with an on/off ratio over two orders, indicating its high compatibility with the current Si-based electronic techniques. Besides these binary materials, a band engineering based on 2D CdSxSe1−x alloys was also reported.287 As shown in Fig. 20g, with increasing S content (x), the alloy shows a tunable PL peak energy varying from 1.8 eV to 2.3 eV. This composition-dependent band gap provides large tunability for their practical applications. Moreover, having a similar crystal structure to CdX, zinc chalcogenides (ZnX, X = S, Se, Te) should also be noted.
Pb-Based semiconductors like PbS, Pb1−xSnxSe, and Pb1−xSnxTe have received great attention due to their direct narrow bandgaps (0.4 eV for PbS for example) which makes them promising candidates for IR detection. These materials share a cubic structure as shown in Fig. 21a, making the synthesis of their 2D nanomaterials very difficult. Stimulated by the research on 2DLMs, various strategies have been proposed to achieve the 2D morphology. The 2D anisotropic growth for ultrathin PbS sheets was first reported by Weller and coworkers.291 Using oleic acid ligands to cap the facets of PbS, ultrathin single-crystal PbS with lateral size at micrometer scale and thickness of 2.2 nm were synthesized. Benefiting from missing in-plane ligands, the photon-triggered on/off ratio was over 100 with a power intensity of 2.0 mW cm−2, and the rise time was about 0.032 s. However, the carrier injection was still restrained owing to ligands in the vertical direction. In total, the PbS nanosheets showed a moderate photoresponse with a responsivity of 0.472 A W−1. vdWE was also used to synthesize this material family, including Pb1−xSnxSe and PbS.282,284 For instance, using graphene as a van der Waals buffer layer, PbS nanoplates with a minimum thickness of less than 10 nm were synthesized (Fig. 21b). A step further, orientation-controlled single-crystalline PbS nanoplates arrays have been realized using mica as substrates (Fig. 21c and d).284 Compared with random distributed nanosheets obtained by a solution method, van der Waals epitaxial nanoplates arrays possess great superiority for integrated optoelectronic circuits. In addition, photodetectors based on as-obtained PbS arrays showed an obvious infrared photoresponse with high sensitivity to lasers with wavelengths of 800, 1064, and 1340 nm, respectively as shown in Fig. 21g. The responsivity, detectivity and response time could reach 1621 A W−1, 1.72 × 1011 Jones and 0.3 s, respectively (Fig. 21g and h).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of PbS with a cubic structure. (b) SEM image of epitaxial PbS nanosheets on graphite. (c) SEM image of a 3 × 3 PbS array. (d) AFM image of a typical Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet with thickness of 21 nm. (e) Schematic illumination of the epitaxial growth of 2D Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheets on a SiO2/Si substrate by designing a BN buffer layer. (f) SEM image of epitaxial Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheets on few-layer BN. (g) Photoresponse behavior of a single PbS nanosheet with irradiation of 800, 1064, and 1340 nm laser, respectively. (h) Plots of responsivity and detectivity of a PbS nanosheet versus laser power. (i) IDS–VDS curves of a single Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet photodetector in the dark and in the presence of 375, 473, and 632 nm laser, respectively. (j) Time-dependent photoresponse of Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet photodetector with laser wavelength of 800 nm; (a–c, g and h) are reproduced from ref. 284 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, (d, i and j) are reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015, and (e and f) are reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015. 
2D Pb1−xSnxSe nanoplates with thickness ranging from 15 to 45 nm were also synthesized by vdWE, based on which bendable photodetectors on a flexible substrate were demonstrated.282 The Pb1−xSnxSe photodetector showed a wide-spectra response to UV-IR light with a highest responsivity and response time of 5.95 A W−1 and 0.90 s, respectively (Fig. 21i and j). In addition, by using BN as a van der Waals buffer layer, 2D Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheets could be even synthesized on SiO2 substrates (Fig. 21e and f), which exhibit great potential for integration with Si-based optoelectronic circuits.290 These as-obtained devices showed sensitive infrared photoresponse with a photon-triggered on/off ratio of 82.5 and responsivity of 0.19 A W−1.
III–V semiconductors, including GaAs, GaN, and InP, have a variety of specialties, such as direct bandgaps covering the visible light range, tunable compositions, and high mobility, making them the heart of a wider range of modern electronic and optoelectronic devices. As a result, 2D nanostructured III–V semiconductors have been always the focus of the 2D materials research community. As research progressed, there have been a few strategies that can bring III–V semiconductors into 2D geography. For instance, Kim et al. demonstrated the wafer-scale vdWE growth of high-quality single-crystalline GaN films on a graphene/SiC substrate by a modified two-step growth.283Fig. 22a shows the low-magnification (left) and high-resolution (right) cross-sectional TEM images of GaN/graphene/SiC which exhibits well aligned and ordered crystal lattices. The products have a low dislocation density of ∼1 × 109 cm−2, which is comparable with that obtained from conventional epitaxial methods. AFM was applied to investigate their surface morphologies. As shown in Fig. 22b, the epitaxial GaN film shows an atomistically smooth surface with a small root mean square (RMS) roughness of 3 Å. With the aid of a Ni stressor and thermally released tape, GaN films can be released and transferred onto arbitrary substrates. And LEDs with emission at 440 nm were fabricated on the basis of the as-fabricated GaN.
 Fig. 22  (a) Low-magnification (left) and high-resolution (right) cross-sectional TEM image of GaN/G/SiC system. The scale bar of left and right are 1 mm and 2 nm, respectively. (b) AFM image of GaN films grown by van der Waals epitaxy. Scale bar, 1 μm. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D GaN via the migration-enhanced encapsulated growth (MEEG) technique. (d) STEM cross-section image of 2D GaN composed of two gallium sub-layers. (e) SEM image of 2D GaN concentrated near networks of graphene wrinkles; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 283 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014, and (c–e) are reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016. 
Although research on thin film single-crystalline III–V materials has achieved great success, obtaining nanometer-thick III–V nanosheets still remains a great challenge. Through a migration-enhanced encapsulated growth (MEEG) technique, Balushi et al. demonstrated the synthesis of atomically thin 2D GaN on the SiC substrates.292 As shown in Fig. 22c, by using bilayer graphene as a capping layer, gallium atoms generated by decomposing trimethylgallium can diffuse onto the surface of graphene and intercalate into the highly passivated SiC/graphene interface facilitated by point defects and wrinkles in the graphene. As a result, the intercalated gallium atoms are stabilized and can transform into 2D GaN via ammonolysis. Fig. 22d displays the STEM cross-section image of a 2D GaN composed of two gallium sub-layers, indicating that the 2D planar growth of GaN was realized at the interface of graphene and SiC. It should be noted that the products are not in 1:1 stoichiometry and exhibit covalent bonding to the SiC substrate while preserving a vdW gap with the graphene capping layer. Fig. 22e shows a SEM image of 2D GaN layers with lateral sizes of several hundred nanometers. Compared to bulk GaN (Eg: 3.42 eV), 2D GaN still retains a direct band gap but exhibits a larger gap value of ∼5 eV due to a strong quantum confinement.
Organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite, which can be described by the formula CH3NH3PbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I), is another important non-layered material system. With optimal bandgap, high optical absorption coefficient, and ultra-long carrier diffusion length, these perovskite materials are expected to exhibit superior photodetection properties in their two-dimensional scenarios. Xiong et al. reported the synthesis of a high-quality 2D lead halide perovskite family with lateral sizes of 5–30 μm and thicknesses from several atomic layers to several hundred nanometers.293 Briefly, layered lead halide nanosheets (PbCl2, PbBr2, and PbI2) were first grown on a mica substrate via vdWE. And then, the as-grown nanosheets were converted to perovskites via a gas–solid hetero-phase reaction. Bao et al. demonstrated the preparation of 2D single-unit-cell lead halide perovskite with a thickness of ∼1.3 nm.294 Under the illumination of 405 and 532 nm lasers, the fabricated ultrathin photodetector exhibits high responsivities of 22 and 12 A W−1, respectively. Note that, besides these non-layered perovskite materials, some naturally layered perovskite crystals, such as (C4H9NH3)2PbX4 and CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I), are also attracting people's attention.295–298 P. D. Yang, A. G. Dong, and H. B. Zeng's groups reported the synthesis of (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 and CsPbBr3 nanosheets with a thickness down to few monolayers via a simple solution-phase method.295–297 Solution-processed 2D CsPbBr3 photodetectors exhibit a high photoswitching ratio and fast response time. In addition, by introducing an interdigital graphene electrode, Peng et al. demonstrated the photodetection properties of an individual 2D (C4H9NH3)2PbBr4 nanosheet, which showed low dark current, high photoswitching ratio, and ultrahigh responsivity up to ∼2100 A W−1.298
5. Photodiodes/hybrid phototransistors based on heterostructures
As discussed in previous sections, photodetectors based on 2D materials beyond G and TMDs have exhibited novel phenomena and achieved many high performances.7,299,300 However, device optimizations to further enhance light absorption, decrease dark current, and increase photocurrent are still needed. As one of several promising strategies, heterostructure engineering with atomically sharp interfaces offers great opportunities to modulate optoelectronic properties. Various 2D–2D van der Waals heterostructures have been extensively investigated,13 while other mixed-dimensional (2D–nD, where n is 0, 1, 3) heterostructures are attracting growing attention.301 Particularly, photodiodes and hybrid phototransistors based on these heterostructures have been realized with different structures and principles. Performances of some representative devices are summarized in Table 4. In this section, we will review achievements involving photodiodes/hybrid phototransistors based on 2D materials beyond graphene and TMDs.
Table 4 Performance of photodetectors based on 2D heterostructures




2D materials beyond graphene and TMDs
Heterostructure
Performance
Operation mechanism
Operation voltages (V)
Ref.


Spectral range
Responsivity (A W−1)
EQE (%)
Response time (s)
Detectivity (Jones)




ML: multilayer; FL: few-layer; G: graphene; Vis: visible; NIR: near infrared; MIR: middle infrared; QD: quantum dot; NP: nanoparticle.




Elementals
BP
FL BP/1L MoS2
Vis
3.54
0.3%
—
—
Photoconductive

V
DS = 2; VGS = 40

302



FL BP/FL MoS2
Vis-NIR
0.17
—
—
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = −2; VGS = 0

303



FL BP/FL MoS2
Vis-NIR
22.3
—
1.5 × 10−5
3.1 × 1011
Photoconductive

V
DS = 3

304



ML BP/1L Gr
Vis-NIR
3.3 × 103
—
—
—
Photogating

V
DS = 1; VGS = 0

101



ML WSe2/ML BP/ML MoS2
Vis-NIR
6.32
—
—
1.25 × 1011
Photoconductive

V
DS = 3

80



FL BP/MoS2 NPs
Vis
5000
1.2 × 108
0.02
1.6 × 1010
Photogating

V
DS = 0.1; VGS = 0

305







Group III–VI MMCs
InSe
Gr/ML InSe/Gr
Vis-NIR
∼105
107
10−3
1013
Photoconductive

V
DS = 2; VGS = 0

156



FL InSe/FL GaSe
UV-NIR
2.1 × 10−2
9.3
2 × 10−6
2.2 × 1012
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

306



ML InSe/1L Gr
Vis
940
2.1 × 105
—
—
Photogating

V
DS = −0.05; VGS = 0

307



GaSe
1L GaSe/1L MoSe2
Vis-NIR
5.5 × 10−3
—
—
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0; VGS = 0

308



GaSe/Gr
UV-Vis
3.5 × 105
—
0.01
1.1 × 1010
Photogating

V
DS = 1; VGS = 0

309



FL GaSe/n-Si
Vis
—
23.6
6 × 10−5
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

310



GaTe
FL GaTe/FL MoS2
Vis
21.83
61.68
<7 × 10−3
8.4 × 1013
Photovoltaic/photoconductive

V
DS = 1; VGS = 70

311



FL GaTe/FL MoS2
Vis
1.365
266
<0.01
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

312



GaTexSe1−x
FL GaTexSe1−x/n-Si
Vis
0.21
50
—
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

313







Group IV–VI MMCs
SnS
ML SnS/1L WS2
Vis
24.2
—
—
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 5; VGS = 0

314



SnS2
FL SnS2/FL WSe2
Vis
244
—
0.013
1.29 × 1013
Direct tunneling

V
DS = −1; VGS = −20

315



lL SnS2/1L WSe2
Vis
0.108
—
5 × 10−4
4.71 × 1010
Photoconductive

V
DS = 5

316



FL SnS2/FL WSe2
Vis
—
—
<0.02
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

317



FL SnS2/CIS QDs
Vis
630
—
<0.1
—
Photogating

V
DS = 3; VGS = 50

318



SnSe
FL SnSe/FL MoS2
Vis
100
2.3 × 104
<0.01
—
Photovoltaic

V
DS = 0

319







Tetradymites
Bi2Se3
ML Bi2Se3/FL graphene
NIR-MIR
1.97
—
4 × 10−6
1.7 × 109
Photogating

V
DS = 0.3; VGS = 0.02

214



ML Bi2Se3/n-Si
Vis-NIR
24.28
—
2.5 × 10−6
4.39 × 1012
Photovoltaic

V
DS = −1

215



Bi2Te3
ML Bi2Te3/1L Gr
Vis-NIR
35
—
8.7 × 10−3
—
Photogating

V
DS = 1

213



FL Bi2Te3/FL WS2
UV-NIR
30.4
—
0.02
2.3 × 1011
Photogating
Vds = 1

320



ML Bi2Te3/n-Si
UV-THz
1
—
0.1
2.5 × 1011
Photovoltaic

V
DS = −5

321





5.1 Photodiodes
Photodetectors working under a photovoltaic mechanism are generally called photodiodes.31 Typically, photodiodes are composed of p–n junctions formed between two semiconductors with different major carrier types, or Schottky barrier contacts between metals and semiconductors with different work functions. Because of the built-in electric field, a photodiode generally displays a rectifying characteristic and mainly two modes can be adopted for photodetection. In the photovoltaic mode, the photodiode is usually reversely biased (the external electric field direction is same with the built-in electric field) enhancing extraction capability of photo-generated carriers, inducing a lower dark current, higher detectivity, and faster response speed. On the other hand, in the photoconductive mode, the photodiode is forwardly biased (the external electric field has the opposite direction to the built-in one), leading to a high gain. Notably, a photodiode can also work without applying any external voltage bias due to the existence of built-in potential, which has been named as the so-called self-driven mode. In this mode, the device is considerably energy-efficient because of theoretical zero power consumption. This feature is much more intriguing for photodiodes based on 2DLMs considering their ultrathin nature which brings the device a complete depletion region and the absence of lattice match requirement.322–325
As previously discussed, BP, which is featured with wide coverage of bandgaps and high mobility, has been a promising candidate for wide-spectra photodetections.34,68,71,87,88,326–328 Recently, several photodiodes based on BP have been studied.80,302–304 Deng et al. demonstrated a p–n photodiode by attaching a 11 nm thick BP on a MoS2 monolayer by van der Waals interaction, as shown in Fig. 23a.302Fig. 23b shows that responsivity reaches 1.27 mA W−1 and 11 mA W−1 for forward and reverse bias, respectively. Its maximum responsivity could be up to 418 mA W−1 at a reverse bias of −2 V, which is nearly 100 times larger than that of a pristine BP phototransistor.71 In addition, the device also shows an ability for photovoltaic energy conversion with an external quantum efficiency of 0.3%, as shown in Fig. 23c. Similarly, Ye et al. constructed a BP–MoS2 (22 nm thick/12 nm thick) p–n photodiode and investigated the photodetection properties from visible to near-infrared range.304 The devices worked at a forward bias condition in a photoconductive mode, which brings up large photoresponsivity. In detail, the photoresponsivity of the device is about 22.3 A W−1 and 153.4 mA W−1 at λ = 532 nm and 1.55 μm, respectively, with a response time of ∼15 μs. They further designed a n–p–n bipolar junction transistor formed by a multilayer n-type MoS2/p-type BP/slightly n-type WSe2.80 Here, BP is the base because of its high mobility and narrow bandgap, MoS2 is the emitter injecting a large number of electrons into the base region, and lightly n-doped WSe2 is used as the collector. Based on the amplification function of the bipolar junction transistor, the responsivities reach up to 6.32 A W−1 at 532 nm light and 1.12 A W−1 at 1.55 μm, respectively, both of which are by tens of times higher than that of WSe2–BP.
 Fig. 23  (a) Optical image of the fabricated device. The dark purple region is monolayer MoS2, while the blue flake is few-layer black phosphorus. The light purple region is SiO2. Scale bar, 10 μm. (b) Photodetection responsivity (R) calculated as a function of incident power. (c) IDS as a function of function of VDS under various laser powers. The Isc and Voc can be obtained from the intercepts of the curves on IDS and VDS axes. (d) SEM image of a device made on a 1L MoSe2 partially covered by 1L GaSe domains. Electrodes 1 and 2 were made on the GaSe/MoSe2 vdW heterostructure region, whereas electrode 3 was made on a bare 1L MoSe2 region. Inset shows the corresponding optical micrograph. (e) IDS–VDS curves across the p(GaSe)–n(MoSe2) heterojunction (measured using electrodes 2 and 3) at different back-gate voltages (without illumination). The inset shows the IDS–VGS curve (with VDS fixed at 10 V) across the heterojunction. (f) JDS–VDS curves with white light illumination across the heterojunction at different back-gate voltages; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 302 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 308 with permission from AAAS, Copyright 2016. 
In- and Ga-based MMCs, such as InSe, GaSe, and GaTe, have also shown great potentials for high-performance electronic and optoelectronic applications.135,139,148,299 Based on them, Yan et al. recently fabricated a p-GaSe/n-InSe (19 nm thickness/12 nm thickness) photodiode with a type II band alignment; meanwhile, graphene was used as the contact electrode.306 More importantly, the devices demonstrated self-driven ability with low energy consumption. Attributed to the type II band alignment, low contact resistance, and suitable band alignment, the photodiodes working at zero or reverse bias displayed fast response speed (∼2 μs), high detectivity (2.2 × 1012 Jones), and great potential for broad spectral photodetections. Similarly, Yang et al. realized a self-driven photodiode based on a few-layer p-type GaTe and few-layer n-type MoS2.312 At zero bias, the photoresponsivity, response time, and EQE of the devices were measured to be 1.36 A W−1, <10 ms and 266%, respectively. The energy-efficient photodiode was also demonstrated in a p-type GaTe/n-type InSe heterojunction. Under 405 nm light, the device showed self-driven photodetection with R, EQE, and response time of 12.8 mA W−1, 4.2%, and 20 μs, respectively.329 Wang et al. reported a photodiode based on a p-type GaTe/n-type MoS2 (14 nm/5.5 nm thickness) with strong temperature and gate-tunable optoelectronic behaviors.311 By optimizing the parameters, including the temperature, gate voltages, and incident light power, a high-performance photodetector was demonstrated. The photoresponsivity, EQE, response time, and detectivity reached up to 21.83 A W−1, 61.68%, 7 ms, and 8.4 × 1013 Jones, respectively.
The photodiodes mentioned above306,311,312 are all based on 2D materials made by a mechanically exfoliation method. Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a powerful tool to massively grow 2D materials and their vertical/lateral heterostructures, such as graphene/h-BN,330 MoS2/MoSe2,331 WS2/WSe2,331 and WS2/MoS2.332 However, heterostructures based on these new 2DLMs are still limited. Li et al. realized a vertical stacked GaSe/MoSe2 (monolayer/monolayer) heterostructure with a large lattice mismatch (13%) by a two-step CVD process using a van der Waals epitaxial growth mechanism.18 The device structure, rectifying behavior, and photovoltaic effect are shown in Fig. 23d–f. Photon-to-electron conversion efficiency, fill factor, and photoresponsivity of the device (at zero bias and gate voltage 60 V) were estimated to be 0.3%, 0.43, and 25.3 mA W−1, respectively.
In addition to 2D–2D vdWHs, GaSe was also used to form a 2D–3D photodiode. Yuan et al. developed a wafer-scale few-layer GaSe/n-Si photodiode array using a molecular beam epitaxy.310 Transparent indium-tin oxide arrays were deposited on the top of GaSe as anode electrodes. Under the illumination of a laser (532 nm) and at a zero bias, EQE and response speed of the photodiode achieved 23.6% and 60 μs, respectively. Importantly, their devices show high stability i.e., no performance degradation after 1 million cycles of operation. Based on the above research, researchers from the same group fabricated a 2 inch few layer GaTexSe1−x/n-Si photodiode array by molecular beam epitaxy.313 A typical GaTe0.64Se0.36/Si photodiode has a responsivity of 0.21 A W−1 and EQE of 50%. These wafer-scale Si-integration photodiode techniques may pave a new way for practical applications of 2D materials in the future.
SnS2 is another important n-type 2DLM beyond graphene and TMDs.176,333–335 Zhou et al. constructed a p-WSe2/p-SnS2 (1.5 nm/4 nm thickness) photodiode on a 30 nm thick h-BN thin film by a mechanical exfoliation method combined with a dry transfer method.315 The device and rectifying curves are shown in Fig. 24a and b, respectively. The WSe2/SnS2 photodiode achieved both high responsivity (∼244 A W−1) and high photodetectivity (1.29 × 1013 Jones) at reverse bias conditions, which was attributed to a high direct tunneling current when the device was illuminated; Fig. 24c confirms this fact that the photogenerated carriers followed a direct tunneling mechanism. Very recently, Yang et al. reported a WSe2/SnS2 (monolayer/monolayer) vertical heterostructure, with a lateral size up to millimeter scale, by a van der Waals epitaxial method.316Fig. 24d shows the optical image of a WSe2/SnS2 photodiode while Fig. 24e reveals that the responsivity is up to 108 mA W−1 and the detectivity reached up to 4.71 × 1010 Jones at a forward bias of 5 V. Through a time-resolved photoresponse measurement (Fig. 24f), the rising time was estimated to be 500 μs. Because of the type-II band alignment and high carrier separation efficiencies based on the built-in electrical field, the WSe2/SnS2 heterostructure also demonstrated self-driven photoswitching performance.317 Besides, the SnS2, SnSe-based heterostructure has also been studied. For example, Yang et al. realized a self-powered SnSe/MoS2 (28 nm/7 nm thickness) photodiode, which exhibits <10 ms response time. When applying a forward bias of 1 V, the device exhibited a high photoresponsivity of 100 A W−1 and a high EQE of 2.33 × 104%.319
 Fig. 24  (a) Optical image of the WSe2/SnS2 van der Waals heterostructure. (b) IDSversus VDS at different bottom gate bias. (c) ln(I/V2)–1/V curve in the reverse drain voltages and the energy band diagram of the WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure at reverse drain voltage. (d) An optical image of a fabricated WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure device. Scale bar, 60 μm. (e) Photoresponsivity and detectivity of the photodetector at various illumination power intensities. (f) Photocurrent response of the device; the laser light is turned on/off by a chopper worked at 1 Hz (520 nm, 101 mW cm−2, VDS = 1 V); (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Inc., Copyright 2018 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017. 
2D TIs in tetradymites, like Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3, are featured with small bandgaps and topologically protected surface states.336,337 Yao et al. reported a vertically-constructed Bi2Te3/n-Si (100 nm thick/n-Si) photodiode fabricated by a pulse laser deposition method.321 Importantly, this kind of device demonstrates a strong ability to detect ultra-broadband light ranged from the ultraviolet (370.6 nm) to terahertz (118 μm) with good reproducibility. In contrast to the high-cost molecular beam epitaxy and pulsed laser deposition used in the fabrication of GaSe/n-Si,310 GaTexSe1−x/n-Si,313 and Bi2Te3/n-Si,321 Zhang et al. employed a low-cost physical vapor deposition method to grow Bi2Se3 thin films on a Si wafer by a van der Waals epitaxial mechanism.215 The Bi2Se3/Si heterostructure exhibited excellent diode characteristics. At a reverse bias of −1 V and under 808 nm laser illumination, the Bi2Se3/Si photodiode has a high light responsivity of 24.28 A W−1, a high detectivity of 4.39 × 1012 Jones, and a fast response speed of approximately 2.5 μs.
5.2 Hybrid phototransistors
A phototransistor generally operates with a photoconductive effect, photogating effect, or two effects combined, so it usually possesses a higher photogain than a photodiode. Typically, it is composed of a semiconducting channel material bridging the two ends of a source and drain, encapsulated with top and/or bottom dielectric layers.338 The channel materials, including their crystal quality, crystal symmetry, doping degree, and thickness, strongly affect the performance of the phototransistors. And it also can be modified by forming hybrid structures with other chemical species, in which light is efficiently absorbed while photogenerated electrons or holes can transfer into the conducting channel. Here, we name the devices using hybrid channel materials as “hybrid phototransistors,” and their photoresponse performances will be discussed in this section.
One typical hybrid structure is shown in Fig. 25a and b,101,307,309,320 where one top layer (for example, graphene) covers the bottom layer (for instance, BP) and both layers connect with two electrodes. In this case,101 the top G acts not only as an encapsulation layer but also as a high speed pathway for highly efficient charge carrier extraction because G has very good contacts with gold electrodes. As shown in Fig. 25c, under light illumination, electron–holes separate in BP with holes injected into G, thus leading to a photocurrent generation. The negative charges in a BP function as negative gates and result in a positive shift of the neutral point of graphene. So, the photogating effect plays a dominant role to on photocurrent generation. Because of these effects, a BP/G hybrid phototransistor exhibits an ultrahigh responsivity (up to 3.3 × 103 A W−1), a photoconductive gain (up to 1.13 × 109), and a rise time of about 4 ms at near infrared wavelength (1550 nm).101 Meanwhile, due to the involvement of G, the device exhibits a long-term stability. Using a similar structure, Chen et al. fabricated a G/few-layer InSe heterostructure by transferring G to the top of mechanically exfoliated InSe. In comparison with pristine InSe devices, the performance of this hybrid structure achieved a four order of magnitude improvement in responsivity and EQE. Under illumination of a 532 nm laser, the responsivity and EQE reached 940 A W−1 and 2.18 × 105%, respectively.307 A G/GaSe hybrid phototransistor has been also developed.309 Attributed to the perfect interface between G and GaSe, the responsivity, detectivity, and response time reached up to 3.5 × 105 A W−1, 1.1 × 1010 Jones, and 10 ms.
 Fig. 25  (a) Three-dimensional schematic diagram of the G/BP heterostructure photodetector, in which monolayer graphene is coated on top of a BP flake to enhance photocurrent response at 1550 nm and protect BP from the external environment. (VDS: source–drain voltage, IDS: source–drain current, and Vg: gate voltage.) (b) Schematic of the graphene–BP heterostructure-based photodetector and the circuit used to perform the two-terminal electrical measurements. (c) Band diagram of the G/BP heterostructure and the photoexcited hot carrier transport process under illumination corresponding to zero gate voltage (VGS); the dotted line represents the Fermi levels (EF). (d) Optical microscope image of the graphene–Bi2Se3 heterostructure photodetector based on an MBE-grown Bi2Se3 topological insulator and wet-transferred CVD graphene. (e) Schematic band diagram and photoexcited hot-carrier transfer mechanism under light illumination. Electrons and holes are represented by red and blue dots, respectively. Vertical arrows represent photoexcitation, and lateral arrows represent tunneling of hot electron (red arrow) and hole (blue arrow). (f) IDS–VGS characteristics of the measured graphene photodetector with (red, Iillumination) and without (black, Idark) 50 μW mid-IR light illumination; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
Another type of hybrid phototransistor is based on the modification of the channel materials using some special light sensitizers, including 2D, 1D, and 0D nanomaterials. Kim et al. reported a mid-IR photodetector based on Bi2Se3 decorated graphene,318 as shown in Fig. 25d. Similar to a G/BP hybrid phototransistor,101 in this device, the Bi2Se3 layer is the IR light absorber to supply holes to graphene and graphene functions as a high speed carrier transport pathway. Fig. 25e shows a photogenerated holes tunnel from Bi2Se3 to graphene, leaving electrons accumulated at the bottom of the conduction band. Therefore, the so called photogating effect would be induced, as shown in Fig. 25f where a clearly positive shift of the neutral point can be observed. Attributed to the narrow band gap of Bi2Se3 (∼0.3 eV), the device showed strong mid-IR photodetecting performance. The responsivity, detectivity, and response speed under mid-IR (3.5 μm) illumination is 1.97 A W−1, 1.7 × 109 Jones and 4 μs, respectively.214 Qiao et al. employed Bi2Te3 as light absorbers to form a Bi2Te3–graphene heterostructure by in situ growth of Bi2Te3 on the top of graphene.213 The epitaxial interfaces between Bi2Te3 and graphene enable effective transfer and separation of photoexcited carriers; thus, the photodetector has high responsivity (35 A W−1) and high photogain (83) under 532 nm laser. The detection wavelength range can be also expanded to near-IR (1550 nm).
In addition, nanoparticles can also enhance the performance of phototransistors due to strong light absorption of the nanoparticles, effective charge separation and transfer, and additional photogating effects. For example, Jia et al. developed a MoS2 nanoparticle–BP hybrid phototransistor.305 In comparison with pristine BP photodetectors, the responsivity showed a 40 times enhancement. Huang et al. constructed SnS2–CIS quantum dots hybrid structures. Their responsivity reached 630 A W−1, which is six times higher than the pristine SnS2.318
In total, we discussed photodiodes and hybrid phototransistors based on 2D materials beyond graphene and TMDs, including BP, SnS2, GaSe, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3. Photodiodes based on them show photoresponsivity distributed from several mA W−1 to ∼105 A W−1, while the response times were in a wide range from several μs to 0.1 s. The responsivities of most photodiodes or phototransistors based on 2D materials beyond graphene and TMDs are still smaller than those based on TMDs and graphene hybrids, such as graphene/MoS2,339 MoS2/PbS,340 ITO/MoS2/Cu2O,341 and graphene/PbS heterostructures.342 Especially, the responsivity of graphene/MoS2 is up to ∼108.339 These results should be related the high crystal quality, high carrier mobility, and relatively high light absorption of TMDs and graphene. Meanwhile, we also noted that the response times and detectivities of them are comparable and even better than those based on TMDs and graphene. Of course, this also strongly depends on the device configuration and photodetection mechanism. In addition, some of the current results have been comparable with commercial photodetectors (such as Si and GaAs). However, large-scale, uniform fabrication processed are still an obstacle to realize practical applications. At this point, because of the high compatibility with Si, Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 may be closer to practical applications. On the other hand, hybrid phototransistors generally generate large photoresponsivity (up to 105 A W−1 as seen from Table 3), but usually suffer from a relatively slow response speed. Nevertheless, graphene with extremely high carrier mobility may be helpful.
6. Enabling flexibility
Flexible, including bendable, twistable, and stretchable, device systems are a hot research topic in the areas of mechanics, electronics, and optoelectronics, as well as medicine, due to their potential applications like wearable health monitoring devices, diagnostic implements that can be integrated with human bodies, and flexible displays.343 To enable flexibility, strategies including device configuration design (from the perspective of mechanics) and using materials with higher mechanical flexibility (from the perspective of materials science) are usually utilized. For the former, pre-designed special device structures that can release and/or offset applied stress have been widely adopted. For example, wavy and mesh shape devices based on silicon membranes (∼100 nm in thickness) have been fabricated and show good flexibility.344–346 As for the latter, both materials morphology and types can be parameters that modulate their flexibility. According to the beam theory, deflection is inversely proportional to material thickness, i.e., for a same material, the thinner the material the more flexible (bendable) it is. This is actually a fundamental of flexible devices based on polycrystalline Si thin films. From this point of view, 2DLMs with atomically thin thicknesses have a naturally huge advantage. In addition, well-studied flexible devices based on polycrystalline Si thin films and organic semiconductors usually suffer from low charge carrier mobility (∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1), which further gives 2DLMs an opportunity.17 Flexible FETs and photodetectors based on G and TMDs have been subsequently fabricated and studied.347–349 On the other hand, considering the novel optoelectronic properties of 2DLMs other than G and TMDs that have been discussed above, they are also expected to have good photoresponse performances while integrated with flexible substrates.
Materials with high elastic limit strain (εm) and stress (σm) are needed if they are expected to keep working while undergoing large transformation. Fig. 26 summarizes the values of εm and σm of selected 2DLMs. As we can see, some of the ‘new’ members of 2DLMs have comparable or even higher flexibility, especially the elastic limit strain, than TMDs and/or G, making them more appealing for flexible devices like photodetectors.
 Fig. 26  Summarization of the mechanical properties at RT of selected 2DLMs. The values of conventional semiconductors like Si and Ge are also provided for reference. The values of Bi2Se3, Si nanowires, and Ge nanowires are obtained from experiments, while the others are calculated. The data are extracted from ref. 350–360. 
A pioneering work on flexible devices was done in 2012,361 which is almost the same time as the rising of TMDs and 5 years later than the first flexible TFTs achieved on graphene.347,362 In this work, Peng et al. synthesized a topological insulator, Bi2Se3 nanosheets, through van der Waals epitaxy showed their potentials as flexible transparent electrodes. These flexible devices were fabricated in situ by taking advantage of bendable mica substrates. Notably, a 10 nm thick device (on a 0.05 mm thick substrate) could keep the conductivity with bending radius down to 2 mm and exhibited long-term durability, which is much better than the commonly used ITO electrodes. This direct synthesis of 2DLMs on flexible substrates followed by in situ device fabrication has been widely adopted for preliminary demonstrations of the compatibility between 2DLMs and flexible substrates, which has been extended to many other 2D members such as GaSe, Te, and In2Se3 (in which synthesis of arrays and flexible packaging were further studied) and PbxSn1−xSe (please see Sections 3.2, 3.1, and 4.1 for details).112,139,163 Here, mica was chosen because of the dangling bond free nature of its surface and its stability at high temperature (>900 °C). However, compared with widely used pliable polymer substrates like PET, which have an elastic limit of 50–150%, mica exhibits relatively lower mechanical flexibility. On the other hand, a relatively higher temperature with the substrate is needed for usual synthesis methods, including not only 2DLMs but also other low-dimensional materials, such as CVD and MOCVD. To combine with these polymer substrates, an additional process like transfer is needed. Of course, some 2D materials like metal oxides (see Section 4 for details) have been synthesized through solution methods, where a relatively low temperature is required.363 But these methods usually suffer from bad product quality which especially limits their application with high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices like photodetectors.
As for 2DLMs, the capability of mechanical exfoliation makes direct positing of flakes onto flexible polymer substrates capable. This, at least, satisfies the requirements of fundamental studies and has been utilized on GaS, InSe, (see Section 3.2) and BP.79,133,158Fig. 27 uses Miao and his colleagues’ work as an example.58 Using rigid SiO2/Si and PI as the initial rigid and flexible support, and PET as the final flexible substrates, respectively, they fabricated flexible IR photodetectors based on BP (Fig. 27a and b). The device could sustain mobility and on/off ratios with a bending radius down to 6 mm, and still showed obvious photoresponse to 830 nm light after bending 1000 times (Fig. 27c). Note that the photoresponse mechanism changed from photoconducting to a bolometric effect, with R as high as 52 A W−1, by introducing polyimide which has a low thermal conductivity.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic flowchart illustrating the fabrication process of flexible BP devices. (b) Photograph of a flexible BP device attached on a transparent PET substrate in its bending state. The schematic in the right inset shows the enlarged view of the device structure. (c) Characteristics of a flexible BP photodetector measured in the dark and illumination states before and after 1000 bending cycles; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017. 
For practical applications, mechanical exfoliation is definitely not the choice. The large-area controlled growth of 2DLMs (graphene not included of course, but the synthesis of large-size single-crystal graphene is still ongoing) has actually become one of the most serious bottlenecks that limit further progress, not only for flexible devices but also the whole area. Fortunately, it seems that the integration with flexible polymer substrates on the basis of successful massive growth of 2DLMs is not difficult. For example, the roll-to-roll transfer of graphene onto polymer substrates has been commercialized benefitting from the relative flexibility of metal foils which are utilized as substrates for graphene synthesis.364 On the other hand, the synthesis of other 2DLMs (excluded hBN) is usually carried out on rigid substrates such as Si, SOI, sapphire, and silica, which disables the R-2-R process. However, the ease of chemical etching the substrates, like dipping them into corrosive solutions including KOH and HF, makes the detaching of as-grown 2DLMs and arbitrary transfer to any flexible substrates viable.365–368 Additionally, the chemical etching process is sometimes unneeded because of the weak adhesion of 2DLMs on the substrates coming from weak van der Waals forces.369,370 Moreover, the detaching process can be completed without any assistance from solutions which brings transferred 2DLMs with high-quality interfaces.371,372 For example, through using a photoresist/thermal release tape (TRT) combination, Kang et al. achieved the detaching process by direct peeling.373 On the basis of the successful growth of wafer-scale TMDs monolayers and developed programmed vacuum stack (PVS) method, the authors could fabricate large-scale vdWHs and transfer them onto arbitrary substrates including flexible ones.
One thing worthy of being mentioned is that 2DLMs also bring a new opportunity to flexible optoelectronic devices based on conventional semiconductors like III–V groups.375,376 The above-mentioned detaching, combined with a following transfer process, is usually impractical for conventional materials because of the strong bonds between substrates and grown materials. However, it becomes feasible by introducing 2DLMs buffer layers on the top of rigid substrates before materials growth. Due to weak van der Waals forces at the substrates/2DLMs/grown materials interfaces, the as-grown materials can be easily peeled off and transferred to flexible substrates. This idea was first realized with GaN-based LEDs in 2010.375 Very recently, this method was successfully extended to the epitaxy growth of the III–V semiconductors group by Kim et al., which lies at the heart of a wider range of modern optoelectronics. Fig. 28a illustrates the basic idea. The authors transferred a single-layer graphene onto a GaAs substrate, and then achieved epitaxy growth of GaAs film using industrial MOCVD. The epitaxy growth mode (Fig. 28b and c) can be realized because of the transparent role of single-layer graphene on the interaction between grown GaAs and the substrate beneath graphene. Additionally, the interlayer graphene also enables peeling off and the subsequent transfer of GaAs films onto flexible substrates (Fig. 28d).22
 Fig. 28  (a) Schematics of G-enabled remote epitaxy of III–V semiconductors like GaAs. (b) Left: EBSD map of GaAs grown exfoliated from G/GaAs(001) substrate. Right: Low-angle annular dark field STEM image of the GaAs/G/GaAs system showing no dislocations. (c) High-resolution STEM images of the system showing an excellent remote alignment of the GaAs(001) lattices through the graphene. (d) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process and photographs of single-crystalline GaAs(001), InP(001), and GaP(001) films exfoliated from substrates; (a) is reproduced from ref. 374 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017 and (b–d) are reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017. 
7. Summary and perspective
In summary, we have reviewed the state-of-the-art research situations of photodetection based on two-dimensional materials beyond graphene and TMDs, including elementary materials (BP, Te, Si, Ge, and Sn, etc.), main group metal chalcogenides (Ga-based, In-based, Ge-based, and Sn-based, etc.), transition metal trichalcogenides (TiS3, ZrS3, and HfS3, etc.), tetradymites (Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, and Sb2Te3, etc.), h-BN, metal halides (CrCl2, MgCl2, and PbI2, etc.), transition metal chalcogenphosphates (MPS3, MPSe3, etc.), Bi-based oxychacogenides (Bi2O2Se, etc.), 2D non-layered materials (ZnO, CdTe, PbS, GaN, etc.), and their hybrid structures. Some of them, such as BP, Ga-/In-/Sn-based MMCs, Bi2Se3 in tetradymites, and 2D PbS, have been studied for years. The basic properties, synthesis, and applications as photodetectors of these materials have been relatively well studied. Others, like Te, TMCPs, and BOCs, are recently rediscovered and only their basic properties are revealed. However, based on the finite results, we can see that these new members of 2D materials have shown comparable, or even higher photoresponse performances, than the well-known TMDs.
BP is one of most widely studied elementary 2D materials. It has displayed features of high carrier mobility and widely tunable direct bandgap, making BP a very promising candidate for high-performance optoelectronic applications, especially for the IR detection. Until now, photodetectors based on BP have shown response to UV (310 nm)-IR (3.75 μm) and THz (∼0.3 THz) ranges with responsivity up to a few orders of A W−1. Notably, NEP as low as 10−12 W Hz−1/2 has been demonstrated for 3.39 μm light at room temperature, which is already at the level of commercialization. However, BP still suffers from its bad stability in ambient environments. Various methods, such as encapsulation, surface passivation, ion doping, and others, have been used to improve its stability. Among them, using graphene or h-BN as a protection layer to construct van der Waals heterostructures may be the most promising choice, which is still waiting for deeper studies Actually, considering the success of synthesizing large-scale graphene and hBN (and TMDs), controllable growth of BP has become a bottleneck that limits the further development. With narrow bandgaps and topologically protected surface states (which gives rise to higher absorption than HgxCd1−xTe at IR range), 2D topological insulators in tetradymites are additional promising candidates for IR detection. Remarkably, these materials including Bi2Se3 and Bi2Te3 have been grown on silicon substrates in wafer scale via PLD and MBE methods. Additionally, they show high air-stability which is strongly in contrast to BP. However, until now, they have caused limited attention and their possibility is still waiting to be fully developed.
With suitable bandgap coverage (∼0.9–3.9 eV), main group metal chalcogenides, such as In-based, Ga-based, Ge-based and Sn-based, are very promising for visible light range detection. They also have other features like high composition tunability and good flexibility, which further makes them stand out in the big 2D family. Among them, Ga-based MMCs should be more interesting due to their intrinsic properties and the fact that their wafer-scale growth has been realized on silicon by MBE and PLD methods, which is beneficial for practical applications. However, there are still variations in the photodetection performances between reported values. And systematic studies are needed.
The other 2DLMs have a relatively shorter history than that mentioned above. Nevertheless, theoretical or primary experimental works have predicted their potentials. In the elementary 2DLMs, Te is recently rediscovered and few studies of its photodetection properties have been reported. However, research must be around the corner considering the promising potentials Te has. Other elementary 2D materials, such as Si, Ge, Sn, Bi, and Sb, seem to be still too far from true photodetectors due to their poor stability and dominant metallic properties. One rising star is Be2O2Se which has been featured with suitable bandgap, high charge carrier mobility, and high photoresponse performances. However, such a limited number of works has been published on them and so many of their properties, even the most basic ones, are still unclear. Clearly, more attention is needed.
Photodetection properties of a few transition metal trichalcogenides and metal halides have been studied. The former seem to have opportunity with UV detection considering their wide bandgaps. However, similar with BP, the issue of their stability must be resolved by further exploration. On the other hand, transition metal chalcogenophosphates usually exhibit low carrier density, thus low photocurrent. For these three kinds of materials, the prospect is still unclear. Their magnetic properties and interactions between lights and 2D magnets may show something unexpected.
Non-layered 2D materials can be a very big group while current research is mainly focusing on the group III–V and group II–V semiconductors. Because of recent breakthroughs in 2D GaN, InAs, InP, GaAs, ZnO, and CdTe, this research area is attracting intensely growing attention. Unlike 2D layered materials, they own rich surface states originating from the large amounts of dangling bonds when the thickness approaches a several atoms scale. So, it is a great challenge to maintain their high carrier mobility and stability at this scale. Hence, there should be a trade-off between purchasing ultrathin thickness and high performance.
Strategies like photodiodes and hybrid phototransistors based on constructing heterostructures can be used to further improve photodetection performance and bring unexpected properties. Photodiodes generally have fast response time, low dark current and high detectivity, but low photogain. Hybrid phototransistors generally generate large photoresponsivity. However, they suffer from a relatively slow response time. In the future, on one side, development of growth methods for high quality crystals, large area, and importantly, integration with silicon wafers, is highly desired. On the other side, combination with graphene is an effective route to enhance device performance, where 2D semiconducting materials act as a light absorber while graphene works as a high carrier transport pathway.
In total, research on photodetection based on these new 2D materials is still at its initial stage. Although some of them have been studied for a few years, there are always new members that keep joining the big family. And a number of issues/questions need to be addressed in the near future. As with the whole 2D family and any other newly developed materials, the first thing is to achieve controllable synthesis with high quality. Synthesizing bulks through chemical vapor transport (CVT) plus a mechanical exfoliation method may be a smart choice for initial property exfoliations, but definitely cannot support long-term development. On the other hand, CVD could be a promising candidate which has shown high potential. Especially, the recently-developed molten-salt-assisted method has unlocked the synthesis of a considerable number of 2DLMs flakes with thickness down to a monolayer. Nevertheless, the synthesis of 2DLMs through CVD seems still to suffer from a few problems: the random distribution of 2D flakes, poor uniformity of thickness, and relatively low quality for large-scale films. This is probably due to unsatisfied control over the reaction dynamics where solids are usually used as sources. For a better controllability, sources in liquid and/or gaseous phases could be taken into consideration, just like what have been done in the CVD growth of graphene and MOCVD growth of traditional semiconductors.
A second important area is mechanism exploration. Many 2DLMs have been found with high photoresponse performances with, for example, R as high as hundreds and even thousands A W−1, which is orders higher than conventional photodetectors. Although a great number of works have been done on related fields, the picture behind these high values is relatively rarely studied. In addition, a figure of merit with more practical meanings, like NEP and specific detectivity, should be used to evaluate the “true” performances of photodetectors based on 2DLMs studied. And these parameters, with measured rather than approximated values, are strongly recommended.
The light absorption of individual few-layer 2DLMs, even monolayer ones, is considerable, but the absolute value is still low. Even though many methods have been proposed, an effective strategy without significantly introducing fabrication complexities is still absent. The authors believe that, utilizing advantages of van der Waals heterostructures, the vertical integration of devices based on individual 2DLMs layers may be a choice. To do this, controllable synthesis and targeted transfer with high-quality interfaces are the main prerequisites. For the latter, strategies that are accomplished without involving polymer/liquid, and processes that are done in a vacuum/inert gas protected atmosphere are helpful. These can be achieved by using substrates with inert surfaces, like H-passivated SOI and van der Waals substrates (like mica), for the synthesis process.
One main specialty of 2DLMs lies on constructing van der Waals heterostructures, which has resulted in numerous novel properties and functionalities. Examples include energy-efficient photodetectors based on self-driven van der Waals heterostructures. In the conventional regime, this is due to a built-in potential coming from the interacting of p- and n-type semiconductors. However, there has been evidence showing that the conduction behaviors of 2DLMs are determined by injection/extraction of charge carriers at the contact regions. A result is the change (or combination) of the mechanism underlying the self-driven capability from the p–n junction to the band alignment. A clear picture is still absent, but, no matter which mechanism it is, the coming of new members will definitely expand the choices of materials to construct energy-efficient photodetectors with more suitable combinations.
Finally, it should be noted that, besides the materials mentioned in this manuscript, there are still a large number of materials that exist and/or can be synthesized in a 2D morphology. For a better exploration of these potential members with desired properties, first principle calculations are really needed. Considering the big successes that 2D materials have already achieved, it is worth looking forward to what they will bring to us in the near future.
List of symbols

2DLMSTwo-dimensional layered materials
vdWHSvan der Waals heterostructures
GGraphene
BPBlack phosphorous
TMDsTransition metal dichalcogenides
MMCSMain group metal chalcogenides
TMTsTransition metal trichalcogenides
MHsMetal halides
TMCPsTransition metal chalcogenophosphates
TisTopological insulators
UVUltraviolet
IRInfrared

E
g
Band gap

V
oc
Open-circuit voltage

I
sc
Short-circuit current

V
DS
Source–drain voltage

I
DS
Source–drain current

V
GS
Gate voltage
PVEPhotovoltaic effect
PCEPhotoconductive effect
PGEphotogating effect
PTEphoto-thermoelectric effect
BEbolometric effect

S
Seebeck coefficient

h
Planck constant

ν
Frequency of incident light

λ
Wavelength of incident light

k
B
Boltzmann constant

q
Elementary electron charge

E
Electric field

ε
Strain

E
F
Fermi energy

σ
Conductivity

T
Temperature

t
Time

R
Responsivity

I
ph
Photocurrent

I
d
Dark current

P
in
Incident light power

η
Quantum efficiency

L
Separation distance of source–drain electrodes

G
Gain
EQEExternal quantum efficiency
IQEInternal quantum efficiency
SNRSignal to noise ratio
NEPNoise equivalent power

D*Specific detectivity

τ
r
Rise time

τ
d
Decay time

Author contributions
J. H., F. W. and Z. W. discussed the outline of the manuscript. F. W., Z. W., L. Y., R. C., and Y. W. wrote the manuscript. J. W., F. W, Y. Z, and X. Z. helped with the literature research. T. A. S. helped revising the manuscript. J. He supervised the work. All the authors gave discussions about the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 61625401, 61474033, 61574050, 11674072 and 21703047), Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2016YFA0200700), Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant No. XDA09040201), and CAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication. The authors also gratefully acknowledge the support of Youth Innovation Promotion Association CAS.
References
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391–400 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Rogalski, J. Antoszewski and L. Faraone, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 091101 CrossRef .

          B. Nabet, Photodetectors: Materials, Devices and Applications, Woodhead Publishing,  2016 Search PubMed .
C. M. Herzinger, B. Johs, W. A. McGahan, J. A. Woollam and W. Paulson, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 3323–3336 CrossRef .
A. Rogalski, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2005, 68, 2267–2336 CrossRef .
J. X. Wu, H. T. Yuan, M. M. Meng, C. Chen, Y. Sun, Z. Y. Chen, W. H. Dang, C. W. Tan, Y. J. Liu, J. B. Yin, Y. B. Zhou, S. Y. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Y. Cui, H. Y. Hwang, Z. F. Liu, Y. L. Chen, B. H. Yan and H. L. Peng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 530–534 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Buscema, J. O. Island, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3691–3718 RSC .
F. H. L. Koppens, T. Mueller, P. Avouris, A. C. Ferrari, M. S. Vitiello and M. Polini, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 780–793 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. H. Sun and H. X. Chang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4133–4156 CrossRef PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768–779 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. D. Duan, H. C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. C. Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5678 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. S. Guo, A. Pospischil, M. Bhuiyan, H. Jiang, H. Tian, D. Farmer, B. C. Deng, C. Li, S. J. Han, H. Wang, Q. F. Xia, T. P. Ma, T. Mueller and F. N. Xia, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4648–4655 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Yuan, X. G. Liu, F. Afshinmanesh, W. Li, G. Xu, J. Sun, B. Lian, A. G. Curto, G. J. Ye, Y. Hikita, Z. X. Shen, S. C. Zhang, X. H. Chen, M. Brongersma, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 707–713 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, Z. Fei, Q. Ma, A. S. Rodin, M. Wagner, A. S. McLeod, M. K. Liu, W. Gannett, W. Regan, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, G. Dominguez, A. H. C. Neto, A. Zettl, F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler and D. N. Basov, Science, 2014, 343, 1125–1129 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Y. Wen, F. M. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, Q. S. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Huang, L. Yin, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603254 CrossRef .
Y. Kim, S. S. Cruz, K. Lee, B. O. Alawode, C. Choi, Y. Song, J. M. Johnson, C. Heidelberger, W. Kong, S. Choi, K. Qiao, I. Almansouri, E. A. Fitzgerald, J. Kong, A. M. Kolpak, J. Hwang and J. Kim, Nature, 2017, 544, 340–343 CrossRef PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. B. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. N. Xia, Y. L. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Gan, H. Q. Li, J. Xiong and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600177 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 1–27 CrossRef .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Y. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. X. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lee, Y. Liu, Y. Lee, B. K. Sharma, S. M. Shinde, S. D. Kim, K. Nan, Z. Yan, M. D. Han, Y. G. Huang, Y. H. Zhang, J. H. Ahn and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1417 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lou, Z. Liang and G. Shen, J. Semicond., 2016, 37, 9 Search PubMed .
M. J. Bojdys, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 232–241 CrossRef .
C. Xie, C. Mak, X. M. Tao and F. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603886 CrossRef .
N. Mounet, M. Gibertini, P. Schwaller, D. Campi, A. Merkys, A. Marrazzo, T. Sohier, I. E. Castelli, A. Cepellotti, G. Pizzi and N. Marzari, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 246–252 CrossRef PubMed .
F. C. Liu, H. Shimotani, H. Shang, T. Kanagasekaran, V. Zolyomi, N. Drummond, V. I. Fal'ko and K. Tanigaki, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 752–760 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. F. Xu, D. Tomanek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef PubMed .
X. A. Zhang, J. Wang and S. C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 245107 CrossRef .
S. Lei, F. Wen, L. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. Gong, W. Gao, Z. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Agnihotri, P. Dhakras and J. U. Lee, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4355–4360 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Buscema, J. O. Island, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3691–3718 RSC .
C. H. Liu, Y. C. Chang, T. B. Norris and Z. H. Zhong, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 273–278 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yin, X. Zhan, K. Xu, F. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Q. Wang, C. Jiang and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 043503 CrossRef .
H. Fang and W. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700323 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Xia, J. He and Z. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 93 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, W. Wang, H. Nan, Y. Yu, J. Jiang, W. Zhao, J. Li, Z. Zafar, N. Xiang, Z. Ni, W. Hu, Y. You and Z. Ni, Optica, 2016, 3, 1066–1070 CrossRef .
X. Xu, N. M. Gabor, J. S. Alden, A. M. van der Zande and P. L. McEuen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 562–566 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Freitag, T. Low, F. N. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 53–59 CrossRef .
M. Engel, M. Steiner and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6414–6417 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Dai, X. Wang, W. Peng, C. Xu, C. Wu, K. Dong, R. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705893 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kumar, M. Patel, T. T. Nguyen, J. Kim and J. Yi, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6928–6935 RSC .
M. Kumar, M. Patel, J. Kim and D. Lim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19201–19208 RSC .
W. Peng, X. Wang, R. Yu, Y. Dai, H. Zou, A. C. Wang, Y. He and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606698 CrossRef PubMed .

          D. Saeedkia, Handbook of terahertz technology for imaging, sensing and communications, Woodhead Publishing,  2013 Search PubMed.
L. Viti, J. Hu, D. Coquillat, W. Knap, A. Tredicucci, A. Politano and M. S. Vitiello, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5567–5572 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Viti, J. Hu, D. Coquillat, A. Politano, C. Consejo, W. Knap and M. S. Vitiello, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7390–7396 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Viti, J. Hu, D. Coquillat, A. Politano, W. Knap and M. S. Vitiello, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20474 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dyakonov and M. Shur, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1993, 71, 2465–2468 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Dyakonov and M. Shur, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 1996, 43, 380–387 CrossRef .
M. Sakowicz, M. B. Lifshits, O. A. Klimenko, F. Schuster, D. Coquillat, F. Teppe and W. Knap, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 054512 CrossRef .
J. S. Miao, B. Song, Q. Li, L. Cai, S. M. Zhang, W. D. Hu, L. X. Dong and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6048–6056 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y. Y. Lu, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, C. D. Liao, B. K. Moorthy, C. H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Casiraghi, A. Hartschuh, E. Lidorikis, H. Qian, H. Harutyunyan, T. Gokus, K. S. Novoselov and A. C. Ferrari, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2711–2717 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7307–7313 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zhang, J. K. Huang, C. H. Chen, Y. H. Chang, Y. J. Cheng and L. J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3456–3461 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, D. K. Polyushkin, A. Pospischil and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6165–6170 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Huang, F. Wang, L. Yin, C. Jiang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7881–7887 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Bie, G. Grosso, M. Heuck, M. M. Furchi, Y. Cao, J. Zheng, D. Bunandar, E. Navarro-Moratalla, L. Zhou, D. K. Efetov, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, J. Kong, D. Englund and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 1124–1129 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef PubMed .
L. K. Li, Y. J. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Q. Ge, X. D. Ou, H. Wu, D. L. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. B. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef PubMed .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang and Y. C. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. C. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. D. Xu and F. N. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Engel, M. Steiner and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6414–6417 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, M. Engel, M. Steiner and P. Avouris, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 081408 CrossRef .
V. Tran, R. Soklaski, Y. F. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, L. Vicarelli, E. Prada, J. O. Island, K. L. Narasimha-Acharya, S. I. Blanter, D. J. Groenendijk, M. Buscema, G. A. Steele, J. V. Alvarez, H. W. Zandbergen, J. J. Palacios and H. S. J. van der Zant, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 025001 CrossRef .
J. Yang, R. J. Xu, J. J. Pei, Y. W. Myint, F. Wang, Z. Wang, S. Zhang, Z. F. Yu and Y. R. Lu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e312 CrossRef .
J. S. Qiao, X. H. Kong, Z. X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef PubMed .
B. L. Liu, M. Kopf, A. N. Abbas, X. M. Wang, Q. S. Guo, Y. C. Jia, F. N. Xia, R. Weihrich, F. Bachhuber, F. Pielnhofer, H. Wang, R. Dhall, S. B. Cronin, M. Y. Ge, X. Fang, T. Nilges and C. W. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4423–4429 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. C. Zhang, L. K. Li, J. Horng, N. Z. Wang, F. Y. Yang, Y. J. Yu, Y. Zhang, G. R. Chen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, X. H. Chen, F. Wang and Y. B. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 6097–6103 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Liu, Z. Z. Qiu, A. Carvalho, Y. Bao, H. Xu, S. J. R. Tan, W. Liu, A. H. C. Neto, K. P. Loh and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1970–1977 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Rodin, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176801 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. J. Xiang, G. J. Ye, C. Shang, B. Lei, N. Z. Wang, K. S. Yang, D. Y. Liu, F. B. Meng, X. G. Luo, L. J. Zou, Z. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. H. Chen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 186403 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Quereda, P. San-Jose, V. Parente, L. Vaquero-Garzon, A. J. Molina-Mendoza, N. Agrait, G. Rubio-Bollinger, F. Guinea, R. Roldan and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2931–2937 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, S. X. Yang and J. B. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 23970–23976 CrossRef .
K. Dolui and S. Y. Quek, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11699 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. H. Liu, X. W. Zhang, L. B. Abdalla, A. Fazzio and A. Zunger, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1222–1228 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Q. Huang, M. L. Wang, C. Chen, Z. W. Ma, X. F. Li, J. B. Han and Y. Q. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3481–3485 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wu, G. K. W. Koon, D. Xiang, C. Han, C. T. Toh, E. S. Kulkarni, I. Verzhbitskiy, A. Carvalho, A. S. Rodin, S. P. Koenig, G. Eda, W. Chen, A. H. C. Neto and B. Ozyilmaz, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8070–8077 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, D. Jariwala, K. S. Chen, E. Cho, V. K. Sangwan, X. L. Liu, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6964–6970 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. F. Zhang, K. P. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O'Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef PubMed .
B. C. Yang, B. S. Wan, Q. H. Zhou, Y. Wang, W. T. Hu, W. M. Lv, Q. Chen, Z. M. Zeng, F. S. Wen, J. Y. Xiang, S. J. Yuan, J. L. Wang, B. S. Zhang, W. H. Wang, J. Y. Zhang, B. Xu, Z. S. Zhao, Y. J. Tian and Z. Y. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9408–9415 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, S. K. Jang, S. Lai, J. Xu, Y. J. Choi, J. H. Park and S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8729–8736 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Favron, E. Gaufres, F. Fossard, A. L. Phaneuf-L'Heureux, N. Y. W. Tang, P. L. Levesque, A. Loiseau, R. Leonelli, S. Francoeur and R. Martel, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 826–832 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Miao, B. Song, Z. H. Xu, L. Cai, S. M. Zhang, L. X. Dong and C. Wang, Small, 2018, 14, 1702082 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Chen, X. B. Lu, B. C. Deng, O. Sinai, Y. C. Shao, C. Li, S. F. Yuan, V. Tran, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Naveh, L. Yang and F. N. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1672 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Pei, X. Gai, J. Yang, X. B. Wang, Z. F. Yu, D. Y. Choi, B. Luther-Davies and Y. R. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10450 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Walia, Y. Sabri, T. Ahmed, M. R. Field, R. Ramanathan, A. Arash, S. K. Bhargava, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran, V. Bansal and S. Balendhran, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 015025 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Illarionov, M. Waltl, G. Rzepa, J. S. Kim, S. Kim, A. Dodabalapur, D. Akinwande and T. Grasser, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9543–9549 CrossRef PubMed .
P. H. Ho, M. K. Li, R. Sankar, F. Y. Shih, S. S. Li, Y. R. Chang, W. H. Wang, F. C. Chou and C. W. Chen, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 1102–1108 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, B. N. Shivananju, Y. S. Wang, Y. P. Zhang, W. Z. Yu, S. Xiao, T. Sun, W. L. Ma, H. R. Mu, S. H. Lin, H. Zhang, Y. R. Lu, C. W. Qiu, S. J. Li and Q. L. Bao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36137–36145 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Son, D. Kozawa, A. T. Liu, V. B. Koman, Q. H. Wang and M. S. Strano, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025091 CrossRef .
V. V. Korolkov, I. G. Timokhin, R. Haubrichs, E. F. Smith, L. X. Yang, S. H. Yang, N. R. Champness, M. Schroder and P. H. Beton, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1385 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Walia, S. Balendhran, T. Ahmed, M. Singh, C. El-Badawi, M. D. Brennan, P. Weerathunge, M. N. Karim, F. Rahman, A. Rassell, J. Duckworth, R. Ramanathan, G. E. Collis, C. J. Lobo, M. Toth, J. C. Kotsakidis, B. Weber, M. Fuhrer, J. M. Dominguez-Vera, M. J. S. Spencer, I. Aharonovich, S. Sriram, M. Bhaskaran and V. Bansal, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700152 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. K. Zhang, Y. A. Liu, J. W. Lai, S. M. Qi, C. H. An, Y. Lu, X. X. Duan, W. Pang, D. H. Zhang, D. Sun, J. H. Chen and J. Liu, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 025012 CrossRef .
Z. N. Guo, S. Chen, Z. Z. Wang, Z. Y. Yang, F. Liu, Y. H. Xu, J. H. Wang, Y. Yi, H. Zhang, L. Liao, P. K. Chu and X. F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703811 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wang, Q. Y. He, U. Halim, Y. Y. Liu, E. B. Zhu, Z. Y. Lin, H. Xiao, X. D. Duan, Z. Y. Feng, R. Cheng, N. O. Weiss, G. J. Ye, Y. C. Huang, H. Wu, H. C. Cheng, I. Shakir, L. Liao, X. H. Chen, W. A. Goddard, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nature, 2018, 555, 231–236 CrossRef PubMed .
J. S. Qiao, Y. Pan, F. Yang, C. Wang, Y. Chai and W. Ji, Sci. Bull., 2018, 63, 159–168 CrossRef .
Z. L. Zhu, X. L. Cai, S. H. Yi, J. L. Chen, Y. W. Dai, C. Y. Niu, Z. X. Guo, M. H. Xie, F. Liu, J. H. Cho, Y. Jia and Z. Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef PubMed .

          Z. Zhu, C. Cai, C. Niu, C. Wang, Q. Sun, X. Han, Z. Guo and Y. Jia, 2017, arXiv:1605.03253.
Y. Wang, G. Qiu, Q. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Du, R. Wang, W. A. Goddard, M. J. Kim, P. D. Ye and W. Wu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228–236 CrossRef .
Q. S. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. X. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Chen, Y. W. Dai, Y. Q. Ma, X. Q. Dai, W. K. Ho and M. H. Xie, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15945–15948 RSC .
Y. C. Du, G. Qiu, Y. X. Wang, M. W. Si, X. F. Xu, W. Z. Wu and P. D. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3965–3973 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Takeda and K. Shiraishi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 14916–14922 CrossRef .
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Akturk, H. Sahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 236804 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Xu, B. H. Yan, H. J. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Xu, P. Z. Tang, W. H. Duan and S. C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 136804 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Kamal and M. Ezawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 085423 CrossRef .
J. P. Ji, X. F. Song, J. Z. Liu, Z. Yan, C. X. Huo, S. L. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. H. Wang, Z. H. Ni, Y. F. Hao and H. B. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y. L. Wang, J. T. Sun, C. Liu, J. O. Wang, Z. L. Liu, S. Y. Zhu, Y. Q. Wang, S. X. Du, Y. G. Shi, K. Ibrahim and H. J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schafer and R. Claessen, Science, 2017, 357, 287–290 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Sun, M. X. Wang, F. F. Zhu, G. Y. Wang, H. Y. Ma, Z. A. Xu, Q. Liao, Y. H. Lu, C. L. Gao, Y. Y. Li, C. H. Liu, D. Qian, D. D. Guan and J. F. Jia, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3035–3039 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Akturk, O. U. Akturk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 014115 CrossRef .
G. Wang, R. Pandey and S. P. Karna, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 11490–11496 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ersan, E. Akturk and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 245417 CrossRef .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
F. F. Zhu, W. J. Chen, Y. Xu, C. L. Gao, D. D. Guan, C. H. Liu, D. Qian, S. C. Zhang and J. F. Jia, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1020–1025 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227–231 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. Zhang, S. Y. Guo, Z. F. Chen, Y. L. Wang, H. J. Gao, J. Gomez-Herrero, P. Ares, F. Zamora, Z. Zhu and H. B. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 982–1021 RSC .
S. L. Zhang, M. Q. Xie, F. Y. Li, Z. Yan, Y. F. Li, E. J. Kan, W. Liu, Z. F. Chen and H. B. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1666–1669 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Zhang, A. Rubio and G. Le Lay, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 053004 CrossRef .
L. Lu, X. Tang, R. Cao, L. M. Wu, Z. J. Li, G. H. Jing, B. Q. Dong, S. B. Lu, Y. Li, Y. J. Xiang, J. Q. Li, D. Y. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700301 CrossRef .
P. A. Hu, L. F. Wang, M. Yoon, J. Zhang, W. Feng, X. N. Wang, Z. Z. Wen, J. C. Idrobo, Y. Miyamoto, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1649–1654 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Rybkovskiy, N. R. Arutyunyan, A. S. Orekhov, I. A. Gromchenko, I. V. Vorobiev, A. V. Osadchy, E. Y. Salaev, T. K. Baykara, K. R. Allakhverdiev and E. D. Obraztsova, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 085314 CrossRef .
Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, Y. C. Li, X. Y. Zhan, M. Safdar, Q. S. Wang, F. M. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4859–4865 CrossRef PubMed .
B. J. Carey, J. Z. Ou, R. M. Clark, K. J. Berean, A. Zavabeti, A. S. R. Chesman, S. P. Russo, D. W. M. Lau, Z. Q. Xu, Q. L. Bao, O. Kevehei, B. C. Gibson, M. D. Dickey, R. B. Kaner, T. Daeneke and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14482 CrossRef PubMed .
S. X. Yang, Y. Li, X. Z. Wang, N. J. Huo, J. B. Xia, S. S. Li and J. B. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2582–2587 RSC .
P. A. Hu, Z. Z. Wen, L. F. Wang, P. H. Tan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5988–5994 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Zhou, Y. F. Nie, Y. J. Liu, K. Yan, J. H. Hong, C. H. Jin, Y. Zhou, J. B. Yin, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1485–1490 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Huang, P. Wang, Y. Q. Gao, X. D. Wang, T. Lin, J. L. Wang, L. Liao, J. L. Sun, X. J. Meng, Z. M. Huang, X. S. Chen and J. H. Chu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 143112 CrossRef .
Y. F. Cao, K. M. Cai, P. G. Hu, L. X. Zhao, T. F. Yan, W. G. Luo, X. H. Zhang, X. G. Wu, K. Y. Wang and H. Z. Zheng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8130 CrossRef PubMed .
P. G. Hu, J. Zhang, M. N. Yoon, X. F. Qiao, X. Zhang, W. Feng, P. H. Tan, W. Zheng, J. J. Liu, X. N. Wang, J. C. Idrobo, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 694–703 CrossRef .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, M. Mirza, K. Xu, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, F. M. Wang, X. Y. Zhan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7252–7258 RSC .
S. J. Magorrian, V. Zolomi and V. I. Fal'ko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2017, 96, 079905 CrossRef .
J. Quereda, R. Biele, G. Rubio-Bollinger, N. Agrait, R. D'Agosta and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1939–1943 CrossRef .
J. D. Zhou, Q. S. Zeng, D. H. Lv, L. F. Sun, L. Niu, W. Fu, F. C. Liu, Z. X. Shen, C. H. Jin and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6400–6405 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Ding, J. B. Zhu, Z. Wang, Y. F. Gao, D. Xiao, Y. Gu, Z. Y. Zhang and W. G. Zhu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14956 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Bandurin, A. V. Tyurnina, G. L. Yu, A. Mishchenko, V. Zolyomi, S. V. Morozov, R. K. Kumar, R. V. Gorbachev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, S. Pezzini, Z. D. Kovalyuk, U. Zeitler, K. S. Novoselov, A. Patane, L. Eaves, I. V. Grigorieva, V. I. Fal'ko, A. K. Geim and Y. Cao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 223–227 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Balakrishnan, C. R. Staddon, E. F. Smith, J. Stec, D. Gay, G. W. Mudd, O. Makarovsky, Z. RKudrynskyi, Z. D. Kovalyuk, L. Eaves, A. Patane and P. H. Beton, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 025030 CrossRef .
C. H. Ho and Y. C. Chen, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 24896–24899 RSC .
V. Zolyomi, N. D. Drummond and V. I. Fal'ko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 205416 CrossRef .
L. Debbichi, O. Eriksson and S. Lebegue, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3098–3103 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Almeida, S. Dogan, G. Bertoni, C. Giannini, R. Gaspari, S. Perissinotto, R. Krahne, S. Ghosh and L. Manna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3005–3011 CrossRef PubMed .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, T. Ren, A. Patane, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, P. H. Beton, Z. D. Kovalyuk, G. V. Lashkarev, Z. R. Kudrynskyi and A. I. Dmitriev, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5714–5718 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, T. M. Wang, M. Wu, T. Cao, Y. W. Chen, R. Sankar, R. K. Ulaganathan, F. C. Chou, C. Wetzel, C. Y. Xu, S. G. Louie and S. F. Shi, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 021002 CrossRef .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, L. Hague, O. Makarovsky, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, C. J. Mellor, P. H. Beton, L. Eaves, K. S. Novoselov, Z. D. Kovalyuk, E. E. Vdovin, A. J. Marsden, N. R. Wilson and A. Patane, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3760–3766 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Lei, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, R. Kappera, J. Lou, M. Chhowalla, H. Yamaguchi, G. Gupta, R. Vajtai, A. D. Mohite and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1263–1272 CrossRef PubMed .
S. R. Tamalampudi, Y. Y. Lu, U. R. Kumar, R. Sankar, C. D. Liao, B. K. Moorthy, C. H. Cheng, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2800–2806 CrossRef PubMed .
W. G. Luo, Y. F. Cao, P. G. Hu, K. M. Cai, Q. Feng, F. G. Yan, T. F. Yan, X. H. Zhang and K. Y. Wang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1418–1423 CrossRef .
S. D. Lei, F. F. Wen, L. H. Ge, S. Najmaei, A. George, Y. J. Gong, W. L. Gao, Z. H. Jin, B. Li, J. Lou, J. Kono, R. Vajtai, P. Ajayan and N. J. Halas, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3048–3055 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. B. Yang, W. J. Jie, C. H. Mak, S. H. Lin, H. H. Lin, X. F. Yang, F. Yan, S. P. Lau and J. H. Hao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4225–4236 CrossRef PubMed .
S. D. Lei, X. F. Wang, B. Li, J. H. Kang, Y. M. He, A. George, L. H. Ge, Y. J. Gong, P. Dong, Z. H. Jin, G. Brunetto, W. B. Chen, Z. T. Lin, R. Baines, D. S. Galvao, J. Lou, E. Barrera, K. Banerjee, R. Vajtai and P. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 465–471 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Zheng, T. Xie, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Chen, W. Jiang, S. L. Zhao, J. X. Wu, Y. M. Jing, Y. Wu, G. C. Chen, Y. F. Guo, J. B. Yin, S. Y. Huang, H. Q. Xu, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6972 CrossRef PubMed .
R. B. Jacobs-Gedrim, M. Shanmugam, N. Jain, C. A. Durcan, M. T. Murphy, T. M. Murray, R. J. Matyi, R. L. Moore and B. Yu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 514–521 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lin, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Jiang, W. S. Zheng, S. L. Zhao, C. H. Jin, Y. F. Guo, H. L. Peng and Z. F. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13274–13277 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Yao, Z. X. Deng, Z. Q. Zheng and G. W. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20872–20879 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Island, S. I. Blanter, M. Buscema, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7853–7858 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Hsueh, J. X. Li and C. H. Ho, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701194 CrossRef .
R. K. Ulaganathan, Y. Y. Lu, C. J. Kuo, S. R. Tamalampudi, R. Sankar, K. M. Boopathi, A. Anand, K. Yadav, R. J. Mathew, C. R. Liu, F. C. Chou and Y. T. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2284–2292 RSC .
G. S. Shi and E. Kioupakis, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6926–6931 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, L. Huang, G. P. Snigdha, Y. F. Yu and L. Y. Cao, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8868–8877 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi and Y. M. Dai, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2014, 47, 527 CrossRef .
B. Mukherjee, Y. Q. Cai, H. R. Tan, Y. P. Feng, E. S. Tok and C. H. Sow, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9594–9604 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Z. Tan, W. J. Zhang, X. F. Wang, S. Koirala, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12425–12431 RSC .
P. Ramasamy, D. Kwak, D. H. Lim, H. S. Ra and J. S. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 479–485 RSC .
J. H. Ahn, M. J. Lee, H. Heo, J. H. Sung, K. Kim, H. Hwang and M. H. Jo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3703–3708 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. Gan, W. M. Tian, Q. Zhang, S. Y. Jin, H. Q. Li, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8035–8041 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, K. Xu, Z. X. Wang, T. A. Shifa, Q. S. Wang, F. Wang, C. Jiang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17375–17380 RSC .
J. M. Gonzalez and I. I. Oleynik, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 125443 CrossRef .
L. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Hu, X. W. Wang, T. Zhang, W. Chen and Q. B. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1213–1216 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Lorenz, J. O. Joswig and G. Seifert, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2014, 29, 064006 CrossRef .
J. J. Wu, Z. L. Hu, Z. H. Jin, S. D. Lei, H. Guo, K. Chatterjee, J. Zhang, Y. C. Yang, B. Li, Y. Liu, J. W. Lai, R. Vajtai, B. Yakobson, M. Tang, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600383 CrossRef .
P. Yu, X. C. Yu, W. L. Lu, H. Lin, L. F. Sun, K. Z. Du, F. C. Liu, W. Fu, Q. S. Zeng, Z. X. Shen, C. H. Jin, Q. J. Wang and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 137–145 CrossRef .
M. Krishna, S. Kallatt and K. Majumdar, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 035205 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, H. X. Deng, K. Xu, Z. X. Wang, Q. S. Wang, F. M. Wang, F. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, S. S. Li, J. W. Luo and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14093–14099 RSC .
X. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Gan, H. Q. Li and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4405–4413 CrossRef .
B. Peng, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 128–137 CrossRef .
G. B. Liu, Z. H. Li, X. S. Chen, W. Zheng, W. Feng, M. J. Dai, D. C. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. A. Hu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9167–9174 RSC .
M. Patel, H. S. Kim and J. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15804–15812 RSC .
G. Liu, Z. Li, T. Hasan, X. Chen, W. Zheng, W. Feng, D. Jia, Y. Zhou and P. A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1989–1995 RSC .
J. L. Cao, Z. X. Wang, X. Y. Zhan, Q. S. Wang, M. Safdar, Y. J. Wang and J. He, Nanotechnology, 2014, 25, 105705 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. D. Jin, X. X. Li and J. L. Yang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18665–18669 RSC .
M. Li, J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15385–15391 RSC .
J. Dai, M. Li and X. C. Zeng, WIREs Comput. Mol. Sci., 2016, 6, 211–222 CrossRef .
J. O. Island, R. Biele, M. Barawi, J. M. Clamagirand, J. R. Ares, C. Sanchez, H. S. J. van der Zant, I. J. Ferrer, R. D'Agosta and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22214 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Dai and X. C. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7572–7576 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wu, E. Torun, H. Sahin, B. Chen, X. Fan, A. Pant, D. P. Wright, T. Aoki, F. M. Peeters, E. Soignard and S. Tongay, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12952 CrossRef PubMed .
J. O. Island, M. Buscema, M. Barawi, J. M. Clamagirand, J. R. Ares, C. Sanchez, I. J. Ferrer, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 641–645 CrossRef .
R. Biele, E. Flores, J. R. Ares, C. Sanchez, I. Ferrer, G. Rubio-Bollinger, A. Castellanos-Gomez and R. D'Agosta, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 225–232 CrossRef .
S. Liu, W. Xiao, M. Zhong, L. Pan, X. Wang, H. X. Deng, J. Liu, J. Li and Z. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 184002 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Tao, X. C. Wu and W. W. Xiong, Small, 2014, 10, 4905–4911 CrossRef PubMed .
W. W. Xiong, J. Q. Chen, X. C. Wu and J. J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1929–1934 RSC .
Y. R. Tao, J. J. Wu and X. C. Wu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14292–14298 RSC .
J. P. Heremans, R. J. Cava and N. Samarth, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17049 CrossRef .
S. M. Elahi, A. Taghizadeh, A. Hadizadeh and L. Dejam, Int. J. Thin Film Sci. Technol., 2014, 3, 13–18 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, K. He, C. Z. Chang, C. L. Song, L. L. Wang, X. Chen, J. F. Jia, Z. Fang, X. Dai, W. Y. Shan, S. Q. Shen, Q. A. Niu, X. L. Qi, S. C. Zhang, X. C. Ma and Q. K. Xue, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 584–588 Search PubMed .
R. Vogel, P. Hoyer and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 3183–3188 CrossRef .
M. Nair and P. Nair, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1990, 5, 1225–1230 CrossRef .
H. J. Zhang, C. X. Liu, X. L. Qi, X. Dai, Z. Fang and S. C. Zhang, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 438–442 Search PubMed .
Y. Xia, D. Qian, D. Hsieh, L. Wray, A. Pal, H. Lin, A. Bansil, D. Grauer, Y. S. Hor, R. J. Cava and M. Z. Hasan, Nat. Phys., 2009, 5, 398–402 Search PubMed .
Y. L. Chen, J. G. Analytis, J. H. Chu, Z. K. Liu, S. K. Mo, X. L. Qi, H. J. Zhang, D. H. Lu, X. Dai, Z. Fang, S. C. Zhang, I. R. Fisher, Z. Hussain and Z. X. Shen, Science, 2009, 325, 178–181 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Qi and S. C. Zhang, Phys. Today, 2010, 63, 33–38 CrossRef .
H. Qiao, J. Yuan, Z. Q. Xu, C. Y. Chen, S. H. Lin, Y. S. Wang, J. C. Song, Y. Liu, Q. Khan, H. Y. Hoh, C. X. Pan, S. J. Li and Q. L. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1886–1894 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, V. Park, H. Jang, N. Koirala, J. B. Lee, U. J. Kim, H. S. Lee, Y. G. Roh, H. Lee, S. Sim, S. Cha, C. In, J. Park, J. Lee, M. Noh, J. Moon, M. Salehi, J. Sung, S. S. Chee, M. H. Ham, M. H. Jo, S. Oh, J. H. Ahn, S. W. Hwang, D. Kim and H. Choi, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 482–488 CrossRef .
H. B. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, C. Liu, S. T. Lee and J. S. Jie, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5113–5122 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Liu, Y. Y. Li, Y. X. Song, Y. J. Ma, Q. M. Chen, Z. Y. S. Zhu, P. F. Lu and S. M. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 141109 CrossRef .
K. W. Mauser, S. Kim, S. Mitrovic, D. Fleischman, R. Pala, K. C. Schwab and H. A. Atwater, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 770–775 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Viti, D. Coquillat, A. Politano, K. A. Kokh, Z. S. Aliev, M. B. Babanly, O. E. Tereshchenko, W. Knap, E. V. Chulkov and M. S. Vitiello, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 80–87 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Park and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 097601 CrossRef PubMed .
A. A. Reijnders, Y. Tian, L. J. Sandilands, G. Pohl, I. D. Kivlichan, S. Y. F. Zhao, S. Jia, M. E. Charles, R. J. Cava, N. Alidoust, S. Y. Xu, M. Neupane, M. Z. Hasan, X. Wang, S. W. Cheong and K. S. Burch, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 075138 CrossRef .
K. W. Post, B. C. Chapler, M. K. Liu, J. S. Wu, H. T. Stinson, M. D. Goldflam, A. R. Richardella, J. S. Lee, A. A. Reijnders, K. S. Burch, M. M. Fogler, N. Samarth and D. N. Basov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 116804 CrossRef PubMed .
R. V. Aguilar, A. V. Stier, W. Liu, L. S. Bilbro, D. K. George, N. Bansal, L. Wu, J. Cerne, A. G. Markelz, S. Oh and N. P. Armitage, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 087403 CrossRef PubMed .
W. S. Whitney, V. W. Brar, Y. B. Ou, Y. M. Shao, A. R. Davoyan, D. N. Basov, K. He, Q. K. Xue and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 255–260 CrossRef PubMed .
X. D. Li, Y. G. Semenov and K. W. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 061116 CrossRef .

          N. H. Lindner, A. Farrell, E. Lustig, F. v. Oppen and G. Refael, 2014, arXiv:1403.0010.
J. W. McIver, D. Hsieh, H. Steinberg, P. Jarillo-Herrero and N. Gedik, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 96–100 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Hosur, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 035309 CrossRef .
H. T. Yuan, X. Q. Wang, B. Lian, H. J. Zhang, X. F. Fang, B. Shen, G. Xu, Y. Xu, S. C. Zhang, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 851–857 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. N. Xu and W. Y. Ching, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1991, 44, 7787–7798 CrossRef .
X. Blase and A. Rubio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 6868–6875 CrossRef .
B. Arnaud, S. Lebegue, P. Rabiller and M. Alouani, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 026402 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 404–409 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Cassabois, P. Valvin and B. Gil, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 262–266 CrossRef .
Y. Kubota, K. Watanabe, O. Tsuda and T. Taniguchi, Science, 2007, 317, 932–934 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, T. Niiyama, K. Miya and M. Taniguchi, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 591–594 CrossRef .
R. Dahal, J. Li, S. Majety, B. N. Pantha, X. K. Cao, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 211110 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. Majety, R. Dahal, W. P. Zhao, J. Y. Lin and H. X. Jiang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 171112 CrossRef .
A. Aldalbahi and P. Feng, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2015, 62, 1885–1890 Search PubMed .
M. Sajjad, W. M. Jadwisienczak and P. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15346 RSC .
A. F. Zhou, A. Aldalbahi and P. Feng, Opt. Mater. Express, 2016, 6, 3286–3292 CrossRef .
M. Rivera, R. Velazquez, A. Aldalbahi, A. F. Zhou and P. Feng, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42973 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Cun, A. Hemmi, E. Miniussi, C. Bernard, B. Probst, K. Liu, D. T. L. Alexander, A. Kleibert, G. Mette, M. Weinl, M. Schreck, J. Osterwalder, A. Radenovic and T. Greber, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1205–1212 CrossRef PubMed .
K. L. Zhang, Y. L. Feng, F. Wang, Z. C. Yang and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 11992–12022 RSC .
H. L. Wang, X. W. Zhang, H. Liu, Z. G. Yin, J. H. Meng, J. Xia, X. M. Meng, J. L. Wu and J. B. You, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8109–8115 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 182–194 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Caldwell, A. V. Kretinin, Y. G. Chen, V. Giannini, M. M. Fogler, Y. Francescato, C. T. Ellis, J. G. Tischler, C. R. Woods, A. J. Giles, M. Hong, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. A. Maier and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5221 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Giles, S. Y. Dai, I. Vurgaftman, T. H. Man, S. Liu, L. Lindsay, C. T. Ellis, N. Assefa, I. Chatzakis, T. L. Reinecke, J. G. Tischler, M. M. Fogler, J. H. Edgar, D. N. Basov and J. D. Caldwell, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 134–139 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dai, Q. Ma, T. Andersen, A. S. Mcleod, Z. Fei, M. K. Liu, M. Wagner, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. Thiemens, F. Keilmann, P. Jarillo-Herrero, M. M. Fogler and D. N. Basov, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6963 CrossRef PubMed .
P. N. Li, M. Lewin, A. V. Kretinin, J. D. Caldwell, K. S. Novoselov, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, F. Gaussmann and T. Taubner, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7507 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Ha, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. H. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef .
H. C. Cheng, G. M. Wang, D. H. Li, Q. Y. He, A. X. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. N. Ding, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef PubMed .
G. M. Wang, D. H. Li, H. C. Cheng, Y. J. Li, C. Y. Chen, A. X. Yin, Z. P. Zhao, Z. Y. Lin, H. Wu, Q. Y. He, M. N. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 Search PubMed .
F. Lu, W. C. Wang, X. G. Luo, X. J. Xie, Y. H. Cheng, H. Dong, H. Liu and W. H. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 132104 CrossRef .
W. Zheng, Z. J. Zhang, R. C. Lin, K. Xu, J. He and F. Huang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600291 CrossRef .
Y. G. Wang, L. Gan, J. N. Chen, R. Yang and T. Y. Zhai, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62, 1654–1662 CrossRef .
C. Lan, R. Dong, Z. Zhou, L. Shu, D. Li, S. Yip and J. C. Ho, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702759 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Susner, M. Chyasnavichyus, M. A. McGuire, P. Ganesh and P. Maksymovych, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. D. Zhao, D. H. Wu, Y. Jing and Z. Zhou, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600062 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Li, X. J. Wu and J. L. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11065–11069 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Z. Du, X. Z. Wang, Y. Liu, P. Hu, M. I. B. Utama, C. K. Gan, Q. H. Xiong and C. Kloc, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1738–1743 CrossRef PubMed .
F. M. Wang, T. A. Shifa, P. He, Z. Z. Cheng, J. W. Chu, Y. Liu, Z. X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Wen, L. R. Liang and J. He, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 673–680 CrossRef .
J. W. Chu, F. M. Wang, L. Yin, L. Lei, C. Y. Yan, F. Wang, Y. Wen, Z. X. Wang, C. Jiang, L. P. Feng, J. Xiong, Y. R. Li and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701342 CrossRef .
B. L. Chittari, Y. Park, D. Lee, M. Han, A. H. MacDonald, E. Hwang and J. Jung, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 184428 CrossRef .
J. U. Lee, S. Lee, J. H. Ryoo, S. Kang, T. Y. Kim, P. Kim, C. H. Park, J. G. Park and H. Cheong, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7433–7438 CrossRef PubMed .
T. R. Waters, V. Putzanderson, A. Garg and L. J. Fine, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 226, 219–223 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. F. Liu, G. H. Zhang, Y. Q. Wang, H. Zhang and F. Q. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 4442–4448 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. Wu, Y. J. Liu, Z. J. Tan, C. W. Tan, J. B. Yin, T. R. Li, T. Tu and H. L. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1704060 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. Wu, C. W. Tan, Z. J. Tan, Y. J. Liu, J. B. Yin, W. H. Dang, M. Z. Wang and H. L. Peng, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3021–3026 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, Z. X. Wang, Y. Wen, J. W. Chu, L. Yin, R. Q. Cheng, L. Lei, P. He, C. Jiang, L. P. Feng and J. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706437 CrossRef .

          J. Yin, Z. Tan, H. Hong, J. Wu, H. Yuan, Y. Liu, C. Chen, C. Tan, F. Yao and Y. Chen, 2017, arXiv:1712.05942.
S. Ithurria, M. D. Tessier, B. Mahler, R. P. S. M. Lobo, B. Dubertret and A. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 936–941 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xie, C. Xing, W. Huang, T. Fan, Z. Li, J. Zhao, Y. Xiang, Z. Guo, J. Li, Z. Yang, B. Dong, J. Qu, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 1705833 CrossRef .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Sun, T. Liao, Y. Dou, S. M. Hwang, M. S. Park, L. Jiang, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3813 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, J. H. Seo, G. Luo, M. B. Starr, Z. Li, D. Geng, X. Yin, S. Wang, D. G. Fraser, D. Morgan, Z. Ma and X. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10444 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, E. L. H. Mayes, C. Xu, O. Kavehei, A. P. O'Mullane, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-Zadeh and T. Daeneke, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Feng, W. Zheng and P. Hu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 19340–19344 RSC .
W. Feng, X. Wang, J. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Zheng, P. Hu, W. Cao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3254–3259 RSC .
M. I. Utama, Q. Zhang, J. Zhang, Y. Yuan, F. J. Belarre, J. Arbiol and Q. Xiong, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3570–3588 RSC .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, K. Xu, Z. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Safdar, X. Zhan, F. Wang, Z. Cheng and J. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1183–1189 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, C. Bayram, H. Park, C. W. Cheng, C. Dimitrakopoulos, J. A. Ott, K. B. Reuter, S. W. Bedell and D. K. Sadana, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4836 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wen, Q. Wang, L. Yin, Q. Liu, F. Wang, F. Wang, Z. Wang, K. Liu, K. Xu, Y. Huang, T. A. Shifa, C. Jiang, J. Xiong and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8051–8057 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Zheng, W. Feng, X. Zhang, X. Chen, G. Liu, Y. Qiu, T. Hasan, P. Tan and P. A. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2648–2654 CrossRef .
R. Cheng, Y. Wen, L. Yin, F. Wang, F. Wang, K. Liu, T. A. Shifa, J. Li, C. Jiang, Z. Wang and J. He, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703122 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xia, Y. X. Zhao, L. Wang, X. Z. Li, Y. Y. Gu, H. Q. Cheng and X. M. Meng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13786–13793 RSC .
Y. Zhao, M. Boccard, S. Liu, J. Becker, X.-H. Zhao, C. M. Campbell, E. Suarez, M. B. Lassise, Z. Holman and Y.-H. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16067 CrossRef .
D. D. Zhu, J. Xia, L. Wang, X. Z. Li, L. F. Tian and X. M. Meng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11375–11379 RSC .
Q. Wang, Y. Wen, F. Yao, Y. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Li, X. Zhan, K. Xu, F. Wang, F. Wang, J. Li, K. Liu, C. Jiang, F. Liu and J. He, Small, 2015, 11, 5388–5394 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Schliehe, B. H. Juarez, M. Pelletier, S. Jander, D. Greshnykh, M. Nagel, A. Meyer, S. Foerster, A. Kornowski, C. Klinke and H. Weller, Science, 2010, 329, 550–553 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Al Balushi, K. Wang, R. K. Ghosh, R. A. Vila, S. M. Eichfeld, J. D. Caldwell, X. Qin, Y. C. Lin, P. A. DeSario, G. Stone, S. Subramanian, D. F. Paul, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta, J. M. Redwing and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1166–1171 CrossRef PubMed .
S. T. Ha, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, D. Giovanni, T. C. Sum and Q. Xiong, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 838–844 CrossRef .
J. Liu, Y. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Q. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Weber, J. Song, Y. Wang, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3536–3542 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L. W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lv, Y. Xu, H. Fang, W. Luo, F. Xu, L. Liu, B. Wang, X. Zhang, D. Yang, W. Hu and A. Dong, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13589–13596 RSC .
J. Song, L. Xu, J. Li, J. Xue, Y. Dong, X. Li and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4861–4869 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tan, Y. Wu, H. Hong, J. Yin, J. Zhang, L. Lin, M. Wang, X. Sun, L. Sun, Y. Huang, K. Liu, Z. Liu and H. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16612–16615 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Xu, L. Yin, Y. Huang, T.
A. Shifa, J. W. Chu, F. Wang, R. Q. Cheng, Z. X. Wang and J. He, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16802–16818 RSC .
J. L. Wang, H. H. Fang, X. D. Wang, X. S. Chen, W. Lu and W. D. Hu, Small, 2017, 13, 1700894 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 170–181 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Hong, B. Chamlagain, T. J. Wang, H. J. Chuang, Z. X. Zhou and Y. Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18537–18541 RSC .
L. Ye, H. Li, Z. F. Chen and J. B. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 692–699 CrossRef .
J. Jia, S. Jeon, J. Jeon, J. Xu, Y. J. Song, J. H. Cho, B. H. Lee, J. D. Song, H. J. Kim, E. Hwang and S. Lee, Small, 2018, 14, 1703065 CrossRef PubMed .
F. G. Yan, L. X. Zhao, A. L. Patane, P. A. Hu, X. Wei, W. G. Luo, D. Zhang, Q. S. Lv, Q. Feng, C. Shen, K. Chang, L. Eaves and K. Y. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 27LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. S. Chen, J. Biscaras and A. Shukla, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5981–5986 RSC .
X. F. Li, M. W. Lin, J. H. Lin, B. Huang, A. A. Puretzky, C. Ma, K. Wang, W. Zhou, S. T. Pantelides, M. F. Chi, I. Kravchenko, J. Fowlkes, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2(4), e1501882 Search PubMed .
R. T. Lu, J. W. Liu, H. F. Luo, V. Chikan and J. Z. Wu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19161 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Yuan, L. Tang, S. S. Liu, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, Y. C. Zou, C. Liu, N. Guo, J. Zou, P. Zhou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3571–3577 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, F. M. Wang, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Yin and J. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7558–7566 CrossRef PubMed .
S. X. Yang, C. Wang, C. Ataca, Y. Li, H. Chen, H. Cai, A. Suslu, J. C. Grossman, C. B. Jiang, Q. Liu and S. Tongay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2533–2539 CrossRef PubMed .
S. S. Liu, X. Yuan, P. Wang, Z. G. Chen, L. Tang, E. Z. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. W. Liu, W. Y. Wang, C. Liu, C. Chen, J. Zou, W. D. Hu and F. X. Xiu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8592–8598 CrossRef PubMed .
A. S. Aji, M. Izumoto, K. Suenaga, K. Yamamoto, H. Nakashima and H. Ago, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 889–897 RSC .
X. Zhou, X. Z. Hu, S. S. Zhou, H. Y. Song, Q. Zhang, L. J. Pi, L. Li, H. Q. Li, J. T. Lu and T. Y. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703286 CrossRef PubMed .
T. F. Yang, B. Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, T. Xu, C. Pan, J. Zou, X. H. Zhang, Z. Y. Qi, H. J. Liu, Y. X. Feng, W. D. Hu, F. Miao, L. T. Sun, X. F. Duan and A. L. Pan, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1906 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. X. Zhou, L. Huang, C. X. Xia, L. M. Tang, H. X. Deng, Y. T. Li, K. Q. Chen, J. B. Li and Z. M. Wei, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 025097 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, X. Y. Zhan, K. Xu, L. Yin, Z. Z. Cheng, C. Jiang, Z. X. Wang and J. He, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 013101 CrossRef .
S. X. Yang, M. H. Wu, B. Wang, L. D. Zhao, L. Huang, C. B. Jiang and S. H. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42149–42155 CrossRef PubMed .
J. D. Yao, Z. Q. Zheng and G. W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7831–7840 RSC .
J. D. Yao, J. M. Shao, Y. X. Wang, Z. R. Zhao and G. W. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 12535–12541 RSC .
G. Eda and S. A. Maier, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5660–5665 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Zhang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Wang and A. T. S. Wee, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 2 Search PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 202–204 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Takao and A. Morita, Physica B+C, 1981, 105, 93–98 CrossRef .
H. Asahina, K. Shindo and A. Morita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1982, 51, 1193–1199 CrossRef .
Y. Akahama, S. Endo and S. Narita, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 1983, 52, 2148–2155 CrossRef .
W. Feng, Z. Jin, J. Yuan, J. Zhang, S. Jia, L. Dong, J. Yoon, L. Zhou, R. Vajtai, J. M. Tour, P. M. Ajayan, P. Hu and J. Lou, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 2 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Park, D. A. Siegel, K. F. McCarty, K. W. Clark, W. Deng, L. Basile, J. C. Idrobo, A. P. Li and G. Gu, Science, 2014, 343, 163–167 CrossRef PubMed .
X. D. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. L. Li, X. P. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. L. Zhang, A. L. Pan, J. H. Jiang, R. Q. Yu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Gong, J. H. Lin, X. L. Wang, G. Shi, S. D. Lei, Z. Lin, X. L. Zou, G. L. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef PubMed .
W. P. Sun, X. H. Rui, D. Yang, Z. Q. Sun, B. Li, W. Y. Zhang, Y. Zong, S. Madhavi, S. X. Dou and Q. Y. Yan, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11371–11381 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Huang, E. Sutter, J. T. Sadowski, M. Cotlet, O. L. A. Monti, D. A. Racke, M. R. Neupane, D. Wickramaratne, R. K. Lake, B. A. Parkinson and P. Sutter, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10743–10755 CrossRef PubMed .
G. X. Su, V. G. Hadjiev, P. E. Loya, J. Zhang, S. D. Lei, S. Maharjan, P. Dong, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou and H. B. Peng, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 506–513 CrossRef PubMed .
F. X. Xiu and T. T. Zhao, Chin. Phys. B, 2013, 22, 96104–96117 CrossRef .
M. Z. Hasan and C. L. Kane, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 3045–3067 CrossRef .
F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, C. Jiang, L. Yin, R. Q. Cheng, X. Y. Zhan, K. Xu, F. M. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. He, Small, 2017, 13, 1604298 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kufer, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 176–180 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kallatt, S. Nair and K. Majumdar, Small, 2018, 14, 1702066 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. G. de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. G. Huang, Science, 2010, 327, 1603–1607 CrossRef PubMed .
S. I. Park, Y. J. Xiong, R. H. Kim, P. Elvikis, M. Meitl, D. H. Kim, J. Wu, J. Yoon, C. J. Yu, Z. J. Liu, Y. G. Huang, K. Hwang, P. Ferreira, X. L. Li, K. Choquette and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2009, 325, 977–981 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, N. S. Lu, R. Ma, Y. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, S. D. Wang, J. Wu, S. M. Won, H. Tao, A. Islam, K. J. Yu, T. I. Kim, R. Chowdhury, M. Ying, L. Z. Xu, M. Li, H. J. Chung, H. Keum, M. McCormick, P. Liu, Y. W. Zhang, F. G. Omenetto, Y. G. Huang, T. Coleman and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2011, 333, 838–843 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Kim, J. Z. Song, W. M. Choi, H. S. Kim, R. H. Kim, Z. J. Liu, Y. Y. Huang, K. C. Hwang, Y. W. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 18675–18680 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Chen, M. Ishigami, C. Jang, D. R. Hines, M. S. Fuhrer and E. D. Williams, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3623–3627 CrossRef .
S. Das, R. Gulotty, A. V. Sumant and A. Roelofs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2861–2866 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Withers, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, A. Mishchenko, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, A. I. Tartakovskii and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 301–306 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yagmurcukardes, R. T. Senger, F. M. Peeters and H. Sahin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2016, 94, 245407 CrossRef .
J. W. Li, N. V. Medhekar and V. B. Shenoy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 15842–15848 CrossRef .
L. Song, L. J. Ci, H. Lu, P. B. Sorokin, C. H. Jin, J. Ni, A. G. Kvashnin, D. G. Kvashnin, J. Lou, B. I. Yakobson and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3209–3215 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wei and X. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 372–398 Search PubMed .
H. M. Yan, C. Vajner, M. Kuhlman, L. L. Guo, L. Li, P. T. Araujo and H. T. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 032103 CrossRef .
Y. Tong, F. J. Yi, L. S. Liu, P. C. Zhai and Q. J. Zhang, Physica B, 2010, 405, 3190–3194 CrossRef .
B. Mortazavi, O. Rahaman, M. Makaremi, A. Dianat, G. Cuniberti and T. Rabczuk, Physica E, 2017, 87, 228–232 CrossRef .
J. V. N. Sarma, R. Chowdhury and R. Jayaganthan, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2013, 75, 29–34 CrossRef .
D. Roundy and M. L. Cohen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 212103 CrossRef .
H. T. Zhang, J. Tersoff, S. Xu, H. X. Chen, Q. B. Zhang, K. L. Zhang, Y. Yang, C. S. Lee, K. N. Tu, J. Li and Y. Lu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501382 Search PubMed .
D. A. Smith, V. C. Holmberg and B. A. Korgel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2356–2362 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Peng, W. H. Dang, J. Cao, Y. L. Chen, W. Wu, W. S. Zheng, H. Li, Z. X. Shen and Z. F. Liu, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 281–286 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Zhou, B. Deng, Y. Zhou, X. B. Ren, J. B. Yin, C. H. Jin, Z. F. Liu and H. L. Peng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2103–2107 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kang, S. E. Xie, L. J. Huang, Y. M. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C. J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef PubMed .
K. K. Liu, W. J. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, Y. C. Lin, M. T. Chang, C. Su, C. S. Chang, H. Li, Y. M. Shi, H. Zhang, C. S. Lai and L. J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef PubMed .
A. M. van der Zande, P. Y. Huang, D. A. Chenet, T. C. Berkelbach, Y. M. You, G. H. Lee, T. F. Heinz, D. R. Reichman, D. A. Muller and J. C. Hone, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 554–561 CrossRef PubMed .
L. B. Gao, W. C. Ren, H. L. Xu, L. Jin, Z. X. Wang, T. Ma, L. P. Ma, Z. Y. Zhang, Q. Fu, L. M. Peng, X. H. Bao and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 699 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, J. M. T. Wu, X. Huang, Z. Y. Yin, J. Q. Liu and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6563–6570 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Q. Xu, Y. P. Zhang, S. H. Lin, C. X. Zheng, Y. L. Zhong, X. Xia, Z. P. Li, P. J. Sophia, M. S. Fuhrer, Y. B. Cheng and Q. L. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6178–6187 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. X. Lu, L. F. Sun, G. C. Xu, J. Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Y. Wang and L. Y. Jiao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5237–5242 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Buscema, R. Molenaar, V. Singh, L. Janssen, H. S. J. van der Zant and G. A. Steele, 2D Mater., 2014, 1, 011002 CrossRef .
K. Kang, K. H. Lee, Y. M. Han, H. Gao, S. E. Xie, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2017, 550, 229–233 CrossRef PubMed .
M. L. Lee, Nature, 2017, 544, 301–302 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chung, C. H. Lee and G. C. Yi, Science, 2010, 330, 655–657 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kim, C. Bayram, H. Park, C.
W. Cheng, C. Dimitrakopoulos, J. A. Ott, K. B. Reuter, S. W. Bedell and D. K. Sadana, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4836 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These two authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Feng Wang
	Dr Feng Wang received his Bachelor's and Master's degrees from Yanshan University in 2010, and Zhejiang University in 2013, respectively. Then he worked as a Research Assistant in the Department of Mechanical and Automation Engineering, the Chinese University of Hong Kong. After receiving PhD degree in 2013, he continued doing research in the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology. His current research interest is developing two-dimensional materials for electronic and optoelectronic applications.

Zhenxing Wang
	Dr Zhenxing Wang received his BS and PhD degrees from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2002 and 2009, respectively. After two-year postdoctoral work at Peking University, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology (NCNST) in 2011, where currently he is a Professor. His current research interests focus on low dimensional materials, properties and optoelectronic devices.

Jun He
	Dr Jun He received his PhD in Semiconductor Physics from the Institute of Semiconductors, Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS), in 2003. Then he worked successively at Applied Physics Department of Technische Universiteit Eindhoven, Netherlands, Material Department of University of California, Santa Barbara, and California NanoSystem Institute (CNSI), University of California, Los Angeles, USA. He joined the “100-Talents” Program of CAS in Nov. 2010 and became a Full Professor of the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology since then. His main research interest is the synthesis, characterization, and devices of low dimensional semiconductor materials.

 	Fig. 1  Summary of the (a) bandgaps as well as responsivities to the (b) visible and IR and (c) THz ranges of selected 2DLMs. Data are extracted from the literatures. Please see the corresponding sections for details.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)
I = Iph0e−(τ/t)β	(13)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Atomic structure of black phosphorus. (b) The angle-resolved DC conductance (solid dots) and the polarization-resolved IR relative extinction (at 2700 cm−1, hollow squares) of a BP flake shown in the inset. Scale bar: 50 mm. (c) Polarization resolved Raman scattering spectra of monolayer black phosphorus with linearly polarized laser excitation. Right panel shows the intensity of the A2g mode as a function of the excitation laser polarization angle in the x–y plane. (d) Photoluminescence peak intensity as a function of polarization detection angle for excitation laser polarized different directions. (a) is reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014. (b) is reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014. (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Bandgaps of BP as a function of thickness extracted from literatures. The calculation methods and optical bandgaps (OP) are denoted. (b) Calculated electronic band structures of BP with different numbers of thickness. (c) Bandgaps of b-AsxP1−x with various compositions. (d) Bandgaps plotted as a function of strain. (e) Measured bandgaps of 11-layer BP as a function of electrical field with the inset showing calculated values in the presence of electrical fields. (a) Data are extracted from ref. 34 and 74–77; (b) is reproduced from ref. 75 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, Copyright 2014; (c) is reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015; (d) is reproduced from ref. 79, and (e) is reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 
Iph = qγ(τphotocarries/τtransit)[F/(1 + F/F0)],

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the BP photodetector operating at 3.39 μm. (b) Power dependence of the responsivity. Solid lines: fitting results with Hornbeck–Haynes model. (c) Upper panel: Photocurrents as a function of gate voltage under various incident optical powers. The dashed line sketches the gate-dependent channel trans-conductance. Lower panel: Transistor transfer characteristic for reference. (d) Optical image of the BP photodetector with a ring-shaped photocurrent collector. The corresponding photocurrent microscopy image is shown in (e). (f) Polarization dependence of responsivity; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2016; (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 19 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 5  Gate-bias dependent (a) experimental R and (b) predicted photovoltage using overdamped plasma-wave regime. Inset: Schematics of the overdamped plasma-wave dynamics. Here 0.29 THz radiation is used. (c) Gate bias dependences of the experimental R (left axis) and measured photovoltage (right axis). Inset: Schematics of the thermoelectric dynamics. Here 0.32 THz radiation is used. (d) False-colored scanning electron microscope image of the BP FET. (e) Transmission THz imaging (obtained at 0.29 THz radiation) of a box of two tablets before (left) and after (right) injecting 3 μL water. Figures (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 54.	 

Few-layer MoS2 as a vdW passivation layer	① exposing to the ambient environment for 3 weeks; ② annealing at 350 °C for 2 h.	Raman spectroscopy	
102

[BMIM][BF4] ionic liquid treated, which can sequester reactive oxygen species	Remain stable for over 13 weeks	Electrical characteristics	
104

Aryl diazonium modification, which can form covalent phosphorus–carbon bonds.	① improved on/off current ratio; ② three weeks of ambient exposure.	AFM; electrical characteristics	
96

Atomic layer deposited AlOx overlayers	Over 2 weeks in ambient conditions.	AFM; electrical characteristics	
89

Forming h-BN/BP/h-BN heterostructure	Reaching record mobility, 1350 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature	Electrical characteristics	
53

Graphene as an encapsulation layer	60 days under ambient conditions	Photoresponse characteristics	
101

Solvation (CHP) shell protecting the nanosheets from reacting with water/O2	Stable for ∼200 h in ambient conditions	Absorbance, AFM, Raman and TEM	
90

Solvation (DPPC) shell passivated	Kept in air for more than two weeks.	AFM, electrical characteristics	
105

Al2O3 encapsulation	At least eight months.	Electrical characteristics	
99

Metal ion (Ag+) modification	Enhanced ON/OFF ratio; exposed to air for 5 days	AFM, electrical characteristics	
106

Electrochemical molecular intercalation approach	300 h exposure in ambient conditions, high on/off current ratio exceeding 107, high mobility of 328 cm2 V−1 s−1	Electrical characteristics	
107

Plasma treatment and PMMA passivation	15 days exposure; high on/off current ratio of 105, high mobility of 1150 cm2 V−1 s−1	AFM, Raman, electrical characteristics	
92

Oxygen plasma etching followed by passivation with an Al2O3 coating	30 days in ambient condition	PL, OM	
97

Depositing a passivating organic monolayer (CA, M)	Under ambient conditions over a month.	AFM, XPS	
103

Doping with tellurium (Te)	Three weeks exposure to air and moisture at ambient conditions	AFM, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), electrical characteristics	
91

Titanium suboxide (TiOx) as an encapsulation layer	Exposure in air for 5 days, n-type doping	AFM, electrical characteristics	
100


 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of a bulk Te unit cell. (b) Evolution of the bandgaps as a function of the body thickness. (c) Optical image of solution-grown Te flakes. Inset: Optical image of the Te solution dispersion. The scale bar is 20 μm. (d) AFM image of a 10 nm Te flake. The scale bar is 30 μm. (e) Typical optical image of 2D Te hexagonal nanoplates with scale bar of 30 μm. Left inset: AFM image of a Te hexagonal nanoplate with thickness of 32 nm. The scale bar is 2 μm. Right inset: SEM image of a single 2D Te hexagonal nanoplate. The scale bar is 4 μm. (f) Time-dependent photoresponse of Te hexagonal nanoplate device with VDS of 2 V. (b) Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press, Copyright 2018; (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2018; (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 281 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematics of the synthesis process for 2D GaS. First, a pattern of the photoresist is done by lithography. After that, the exposed area of the substrate is covered with vaporized FDTES. Then, place Ga liquid and remove it by PDMS. The final step is a chemical vapour treatment: GaCl3 layer is formed via exposure to HCl vapour followed by sulfurization through exposure to S vapour to form GaS. (b) Device schematic GaS FET with tungsten/WS2 electrodes. The inset features the band alignment of the system. (c) The distribution of R with insets showing the optical image of the fabricated devices and two electrodes. The scale bars are 500 and 20 mm, respectively; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Three-dimensional crystal structure of layered α-In2Se3, with the top view of the system along the vertical direction shown in (b). The atoms arrange in three types indicated as A, B and C. The representative structures of the quintuple layer for (c) zincblende crystals, (d) α phase, and (e) β phase. (f) Crystal structure InSe with purple and red spheres corresponding to indium and selenium atoms, respectively. (g) Thickness dependent bandgaps of InSe and α-In2Se3 with data collected from ref. 144 and 145. (h) Dependence of the PL energy on the layer thickness of β-In2Se3 (black dots), exfoliated α-In2Se3 (blue stars) and α-In2Se3 thin layers grown by a CVD method with data collected from ref. 146 (red stars). The lines show the calculated exciton recombination energy. (i) Thickness-dependent bandgaps of γ-In2Se3. The inset shows a possible application for wide-spectra absorption; (a–e) are reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (f) is reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (h) is reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from IOP Publishing Ltd, Copyright 2016, and (i) is reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) R versus incident laser power at λ = 633 nm for graphene/InSe/graphene (top) and Au/InSe/Au devices (bottom) (VDS = 2 V and VGS = 0 V). The inset sketches the band alignments of the two devices. (b) Work functions of Au and InSe, and the electron affinity of graphene; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the N719-functionalized InSe–Ti complex. (b) Photo-absorption of InSe–Ti complex, InSe–Ti–N719, and N719 molecules. (c) Photocurrent of InSe before (black), after Ti treatment (red) and N719 treatment (blue). Inset: Magnified InSe photocurrent. (d) Response time of InSe–Ti and InSe–Ti–N71; (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photograph and (b) optical microscope image of α-In2Se3 photodetector arrays on mica substrate. Scale bars in (a) and (b) are 1 cm and 20 mm, respectively. (c) Dependence of R on illumination intensities and voltage bias. (d) Statistic distribution of R α-In2Se3 photodetectors. (e) Schematic of device packaging. (f) Current as a function of bending cycles (10 mm radius) of the packaged α-In2Se3 photodetector devices at a bias voltage of 5 V. The inset shows the photograph of packaged device; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 163 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Crystal structure of TiS3. (b) Polar plot of conductance measured for all 12 pairs of electrodes at back gate voltages of −40 V, 0 V, and 40 V, respectively. The inset shows the AFM scan of the device. Computed bandgaps of (c) ZrS3, (d) ZrSe3, (e) ZrTe3, (f) HfS3, (g) HfSe3, and (h) HfTe3 monolayers versus the biaxial or uniaxial tensile strain. (i) The top panel shows the AFM image of a device, while the bottom panel shows the photocurrent measured as a function of different laser wavelengths; (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 195; (c–h) are reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2015, and (i) is reproduced from ref. 198 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2014.	 


Ti	S	1.02i	1.06d	Zr	S	1.83i	1.90i
Se	0.21i	0.57i	Se	0.75i	1.17i
Te	0	0	Te	0	0

 	Fig. 13  (a) Conceptual design of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (b) A thermal simulation of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 structure at peak absorption with input power of 20 μW. Scale bars, 500 μm (main image); 50 μm (inset). (c) Geometry of the Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (d) Calculated absorption of 60 nm-wide wires with thicknesses of 40 nm and varying pitch on suspended 50 nm SiO2/100 nm SiNx waveguides. (e) Time response of a Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 PTE device. (f) Responsivity (left) and NEP as a function of wavelength for unfocused, spatially uniform illumination; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a and b) False-colored SEM images of the top-gated FET. (c) Gate dependent responsivity (left vertical axis) and photovoltage (right vertical axis) measured at RT with a 332.6 GHz radiation. Inset: Background signal. (d) Left vertical axis: extrapolated photovoltage as predicted by the Dyakonov–Shur overdamped plasma-wave theory, divided by the antenna coupling constant. Right vertical axis: difference between the source–drain currents measured while focusing the THz beam on the sample and without it, multiplied by the channel resistance. Inset: Transconductance curve collected while shining the 332.6 GHz radiation on the detector. VDS = 0.6 mV. (e) RT THz imaging of a (f) glue jar obtained at 332.6 GHz radiation; (a–f) are reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) AFM image of a typical two-terminal Bi2Se3 device. (b) Schematics of the SS-related CPGE at a specular incident condition. (c) Polarization dependent spin current. The solid red line is a fit to the equation shown in the graph. (d) k-Space depiction of photon helicity-induced currents from the Dirac cone via the circular photogalvanic effect including contributions from excited states; (a–d) are reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Side view (top) and top view (bottom) of the MHs crystal structure. The unit cell is outlined by solid blue lines. (b) Band alignments of monolayer metal halogenides MHs. The “0” energy level is chosen as the vacuum level. For clarity, the absolute values of band edges are labeled. (c) Transfer characteristics of a few-layered PbI2 device. The inset shows the schematic diagram of the measurement system and an optical photograph of the device. (d) Time dependent response of the PbI2 device. Rise (e) optical image of the synthesized PbI2 flakes. And its spectrum response to 400–600 nm is shown in (f); (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 253 with permission from AIP Publishing LLC, Copyright 2016, (c) and (d) are reproduced from ref. 254 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, and (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 255 with permission from Elsevier B.V. and Science China Press, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic representation of NiPS3 crystal structure from side view. (b) Atomic-level HAADF-STEM image of an ultrathin NiPS3 nanosheet with the corresponding structural schematic. (c) SEM image of NiPS3 nanosheets grown on carbon fibers. (d) Light response curve of the device under 254 and 473 nm light illuminations. (e) The wavelength- and dependent R of NiPS3 device. (f) Time-dependent photocurrent of NiPS3 device; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 261 with permission from Elsevier Ltd, Copyright 2017 and (c)–(f) are reproduced from ref. 262 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017.	 


V2P2X3	S	2.50	AFM	Co2P2X3	S	0	NM
Se	2.10	AFM	Se	0	NM
Te	1.57	NM	Te	0	NM


Cr2P2X3	S	0	FM	Ni2P2X3	S	2.83	AFM
Se	0	FM	Se	2.22	AFM
Te	0	FM	Te	0.27	NM


Mn2P2X3	S	3.05	AFM	Cu2P2X3	S	1.76	NM
Se	2.24	AFM	Se	0.56	NM
Te	1.06	NM	Te	0	NM


Fe2P2X3	S	2.07	AFM	Zn2P2X3	S	3.11	NM
Se	1.48	NM	Se	2.19	NM
Te	1.35	NM	Te	1.26	NM

 	Fig. 18  (a) Crystal structure of Bi2O2Se; for clarity, the weak electrostatic interactions between Se and the [Bi2O2] layer are not presented. (b) Calculated band structure of Bi2O2Se with a bandgap of ∼0.85 eV. (c) Extracted optical band gaps as a function of layer number, and deduction of the band gap for bulk Bi2O2Se is shown in the inset. (d) Typical OM image of centimeter-scale 2D Bi2O2Se arrays fabricated with the help of photolithography. (e) Time dependent photoresponse of Bi2O2Se photodetector. (f) Temperature-dependent responsivity and detectivity of Bi2O2Se photodetector; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017, (c) is reproduced from ref. 268 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017, (d) is reproduced from ref. 267 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Copyright 2017, and (e) and (f) are reproduced from ref. 269 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Optical image of a fabricated flexible 2D nanosheet photodetector. Inset: The SEM cross-section image. (b) Photoresponse behaviors of various 2D metal oxide photodetectors under periodically switching on and off the 325 nm ultraviolet light. (c) Schematic illustration of the epitaxial growth of 2D ZnO nanosheets directed by a surfactant monolayer. (d) AFM image of typical ZnO nanosheets on a Si substrate. Scale bar, 5 μm. (e) Schematic illustration of the van der Waals exfoliation technique. An optical image of exfoliated 2D metal oxide nanosheet is displayed at the right; (a and b) are reproduced from ref. 275 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014, (c and d) are reproduced from ref. 276 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016 and (e) is reproduced from ref. 277, with permission from AAAS, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic illustration of CdX (X = S, Se, Te) with a wurtzite structure using CdTe as an example. (b) SEM image of epitaxial CdS nanosheets on a monolayer MoS2. (c) Optical image of epitaxial CdTe nanosheets on a mica substrate. (d) AFM image of a typical CdTe nanosheet with thickness of 4.8 nm. (e and f) IDS–VDS output curves and time-dependent photoresponse of 2D CdTe photodetector under 473 nm laser illumination. (g) Normalized PL spectra of CdSxSe1−x alloy nanosheets with different compositions; (a and c–f) are reproduced from ref. 286 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2017, (b) is reproduced from ref. 285 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, and (g) is reproduced from ref. 287 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of PbS with a cubic structure. (b) SEM image of epitaxial PbS nanosheets on graphite. (c) SEM image of a 3 × 3 PbS array. (d) AFM image of a typical Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet with thickness of 21 nm. (e) Schematic illumination of the epitaxial growth of 2D Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheets on a SiO2/Si substrate by designing a BN buffer layer. (f) SEM image of epitaxial Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheets on few-layer BN. (g) Photoresponse behavior of a single PbS nanosheet with irradiation of 800, 1064, and 1340 nm laser, respectively. (h) Plots of responsivity and detectivity of a PbS nanosheet versus laser power. (i) IDS–VDS curves of a single Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet photodetector in the dark and in the presence of 375, 473, and 632 nm laser, respectively. (j) Time-dependent photoresponse of Pb1−xSnxSe nanosheet photodetector with laser wavelength of 800 nm; (a–c, g and h) are reproduced from ref. 284 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2016, (d, i and j) are reproduced from ref. 282 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2015, and (e and f) are reproduced from ref. 290 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Low-magnification (left) and high-resolution (right) cross-sectional TEM image of GaN/G/SiC system. The scale bar of left and right are 1 mm and 2 nm, respectively. (b) AFM image of GaN films grown by van der Waals epitaxy. Scale bar, 1 μm. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D GaN via the migration-enhanced encapsulated growth (MEEG) technique. (d) STEM cross-section image of 2D GaN composed of two gallium sub-layers. (e) SEM image of 2D GaN concentrated near networks of graphene wrinkles; (a) and (b) are reproduced from ref. 283 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2014, and (c–e) are reproduced from ref. 292 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2016.	 



Elementals	BP	FL BP/1L MoS2	Vis	3.54	0.3%	—	—	Photoconductive	
V
DS = 2; VGS = 40	
302

FL BP/FL MoS2	Vis-NIR	0.17	—	—	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = −2; VGS = 0	
303

FL BP/FL MoS2	Vis-NIR	22.3	—	1.5 × 10−5	3.1 × 1011	Photoconductive	
V
DS = 3	
304

ML BP/1L Gr	Vis-NIR	3.3 × 103	—	—	—	Photogating	
V
DS = 1; VGS = 0	
101

ML WSe2/ML BP/ML MoS2	Vis-NIR	6.32	—	—	1.25 × 1011	Photoconductive	
V
DS = 3	
80

FL BP/MoS2 NPs	Vis	5000	1.2 × 108	0.02	1.6 × 1010	Photogating	
V
DS = 0.1; VGS = 0	
305



Group III–VI MMCs	InSe	Gr/ML InSe/Gr	Vis-NIR	∼105	107	10−3	1013	Photoconductive	
V
DS = 2; VGS = 0	
156

FL InSe/FL GaSe	UV-NIR	2.1 × 10−2	9.3	2 × 10−6	2.2 × 1012	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
306

ML InSe/1L Gr	Vis	940	2.1 × 105	—	—	Photogating	
V
DS = −0.05; VGS = 0	
307

GaSe	1L GaSe/1L MoSe2	Vis-NIR	5.5 × 10−3	—	—	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0; VGS = 0	
308

GaSe/Gr	UV-Vis	3.5 × 105	—	0.01	1.1 × 1010	Photogating	
V
DS = 1; VGS = 0	
309

FL GaSe/n-Si	Vis	—	23.6	6 × 10−5	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
310

GaTe	FL GaTe/FL MoS2	Vis	21.83	61.68	<7 × 10−3	8.4 × 1013	Photovoltaic/photoconductive	
V
DS = 1; VGS = 70	
311

FL GaTe/FL MoS2	Vis	1.365	266	<0.01	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
312

GaTexSe1−x	FL GaTexSe1−x/n-Si	Vis	0.21	50	—	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
313



Group IV–VI MMCs	SnS	ML SnS/1L WS2	Vis	24.2	—	—	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 5; VGS = 0	
314

SnS2	FL SnS2/FL WSe2	Vis	244	—	0.013	1.29 × 1013	Direct tunneling	
V
DS = −1; VGS = −20	
315

lL SnS2/1L WSe2	Vis	0.108	—	5 × 10−4	4.71 × 1010	Photoconductive	
V
DS = 5	
316

FL SnS2/FL WSe2	Vis	—	—	<0.02	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
317

FL SnS2/CIS QDs	Vis	630	—	<0.1	—	Photogating	
V
DS = 3; VGS = 50	
318

SnSe	FL SnSe/FL MoS2	Vis	100	2.3 × 104	<0.01	—	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = 0	
319



Tetradymites	Bi2Se3	ML Bi2Se3/FL graphene	NIR-MIR	1.97	—	4 × 10−6	1.7 × 109	Photogating	
V
DS = 0.3; VGS = 0.02	
214

ML Bi2Se3/n-Si	Vis-NIR	24.28	—	2.5 × 10−6	4.39 × 1012	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = −1	
215

Bi2Te3	ML Bi2Te3/1L Gr	Vis-NIR	35	—	8.7 × 10−3	—	Photogating	
V
DS = 1	
213

FL Bi2Te3/FL WS2	UV-NIR	30.4	—	0.02	2.3 × 1011	Photogating	Vds = 1	
320

ML Bi2Te3/n-Si	UV-THz	1	—	0.1	2.5 × 1011	Photovoltaic	
V
DS = −5	
321


 	Fig. 23  (a) Optical image of the fabricated device. The dark purple region is monolayer MoS2, while the blue flake is few-layer black phosphorus. The light purple region is SiO2. Scale bar, 10 μm. (b) Photodetection responsivity (R) calculated as a function of incident power. (c) IDS as a function of function of VDS under various laser powers. The Isc and Voc can be obtained from the intercepts of the curves on IDS and VDS axes. (d) SEM image of a device made on a 1L MoSe2 partially covered by 1L GaSe domains. Electrodes 1 and 2 were made on the GaSe/MoSe2 vdW heterostructure region, whereas electrode 3 was made on a bare 1L MoSe2 region. Inset shows the corresponding optical micrograph. (e) IDS–VDS curves across the p(GaSe)–n(MoSe2) heterojunction (measured using electrodes 2 and 3) at different back-gate voltages (without illumination). The inset shows the IDS–VGS curve (with VDS fixed at 10 V) across the heterojunction. (f) JDS–VDS curves with white light illumination across the heterojunction at different back-gate voltages; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 302 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2014 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 308 with permission from AAAS, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Optical image of the WSe2/SnS2 van der Waals heterostructure. (b) IDSversus VDS at different bottom gate bias. (c) ln(I/V2)–1/V curve in the reverse drain voltages and the energy band diagram of the WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure at reverse drain voltage. (d) An optical image of a fabricated WSe2/SnS2 vdW heterostructure device. Scale bar, 60 μm. (e) Photoresponsivity and detectivity of the photodetector at various illumination power intensities. (f) Photocurrent response of the device; the laser light is turned on/off by a chopper worked at 1 Hz (520 nm, 101 mW cm−2, VDS = 1 V); (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 315 with permission from John Wiley & Sons Inc., Copyright 2018 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 316 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Three-dimensional schematic diagram of the G/BP heterostructure photodetector, in which monolayer graphene is coated on top of a BP flake to enhance photocurrent response at 1550 nm and protect BP from the external environment. (VDS: source–drain voltage, IDS: source–drain current, and Vg: gate voltage.) (b) Schematic of the graphene–BP heterostructure-based photodetector and the circuit used to perform the two-terminal electrical measurements. (c) Band diagram of the G/BP heterostructure and the photoexcited hot carrier transport process under illumination corresponding to zero gate voltage (VGS); the dotted line represents the Fermi levels (EF). (d) Optical microscope image of the graphene–Bi2Se3 heterostructure photodetector based on an MBE-grown Bi2Se3 topological insulator and wet-transferred CVD graphene. (e) Schematic band diagram and photoexcited hot-carrier transfer mechanism under light illumination. Electrons and holes are represented by red and blue dots, respectively. Vertical arrows represent photoexcitation, and lateral arrows represent tunneling of hot electron (red arrow) and hole (blue arrow). (f) IDS–VGS characteristics of the measured graphene photodetector with (red, Iillumination) and without (black, Idark) 50 μW mid-IR light illumination; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 101 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017 and (d–f) are reproduced from ref. 214 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 26  Summarization of the mechanical properties at RT of selected 2DLMs. The values of conventional semiconductors like Si and Ge are also provided for reference. The values of Bi2Se3, Si nanowires, and Ge nanowires are obtained from experiments, while the others are calculated. The data are extracted from ref. 350–360.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic flowchart illustrating the fabrication process of flexible BP devices. (b) Photograph of a flexible BP device attached on a transparent PET substrate in its bending state. The schematic in the right inset shows the enlarged view of the device structure. (c) Characteristics of a flexible BP photodetector measured in the dark and illumination states before and after 1000 bending cycles; (a–c) are reproduced from ref. 58 with permission from American Chemical Society, Copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Schematics of G-enabled remote epitaxy of III–V semiconductors like GaAs. (b) Left: EBSD map of GaAs grown exfoliated from G/GaAs(001) substrate. Right: Low-angle annular dark field STEM image of the GaAs/G/GaAs system showing no dislocations. (c) High-resolution STEM images of the system showing an excellent remote alignment of the GaAs(001) lattices through the graphene. (d) Schematic illustration of the exfoliation process and photographs of single-crystalline GaAs(001), InP(001), and GaP(001) films exfoliated from substrates; (a) is reproduced from ref. 374 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017 and (b–d) are reproduced from ref. 22 with permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd, Copyright 2017.	 
2DLMS	Two-dimensional layered materials
vdWHS	van der Waals heterostructures
G	Graphene
BP	Black phosphorous
TMDs	Transition metal dichalcogenides
MMCS	Main group metal chalcogenides
TMTs	Transition metal trichalcogenides
MHs	Metal halides
TMCPs	Transition metal chalcogenophosphates
Tis	Topological insulators
UV	Ultraviolet
IR	Infrared

E
g
	Band gap

V
oc
	Open-circuit voltage

I
sc
	Short-circuit current

V
DS
	Source–drain voltage

I
DS
	Source–drain current

V
GS
	Gate voltage
PVE	Photovoltaic effect
PCE	Photoconductive effect
PGE	photogating effect
PTE	photo-thermoelectric effect
BE	bolometric effect

S
	Seebeck coefficient

h
	Planck constant

ν
	Frequency of incident light

λ
	Wavelength of incident light

k
B
	Boltzmann constant

q
	Elementary electron charge

E
	Electric field

ε
	Strain

E
F
	Fermi energy

σ
	Conductivity

T
	Temperature

t
	Time

R
	Responsivity

I
ph
	Photocurrent

I
d
	Dark current

P
in
	Incident light power

η
	Quantum efficiency

L
	Separation distance of source–drain electrodes

G
	Gain
EQE	External quantum efficiency
IQE	Internal quantum efficiency
SNR	Signal to noise ratio
NEP	Noise equivalent power

D*	Specific detectivity

τ
r
	Rise time

τ
d
	Decay time
Footnote
† These two authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
