Functionalized gold-nanoparticles enhance photosystem II driven photocurrent in a hybrid nano-bio-photoelectrochemical cell   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA03350F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA03350F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 17231-17241Functionalized gold-nanoparticles enhance photosystem II driven photocurrent in a hybrid nano-bio-photoelectrochemical cell†

        
          
            Hagit 
            Shoyhet‡
, 
      
        
          
            Nicholas G. 
            Pavlopoulos‡§
, 
      
        
          
            Lilac 
            Amirav
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Noam 
            Adir¶
*
      Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, The Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, The Nancy and Stephen Grand Technion Energy Program, Technion − Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel. E-mail: lilac@technion.ac.il; nadir@technion.ac.il;  Web: http://www.twitter.com/mscachemist Web: http://facebook.com/AmiravGroupAmirav Web: http://www.amiravlab.comAdir Web: http://nadir@net.technion.ac.il
Received 
      21st April 2021
    , Accepted 21st June 2021First published on 24th June 2021AbstractThe use of photosystem II (PSII) in hybrid bio-photoelectrochemical cells for conversion of solar energy to electrical current is hampered by PSII's narrow absorption cross-section and the generally poor electrical connection between isolated complex and different anode materials. Here, we merge isolated market-grade spinach PSII with 25 nm cystamine-2,6-dichlorobenzoquinone (cys-DCBQ) modified Au-nanoparticles (PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ) to obtain one of the highest reported photocurrent values to date (35 mA cm−2 mg−1 chlorophyll), retaining the native oxygen evolution properties of PSII. More than 80% of the PSII in solution assembles stably onto the AuNPCys-DCBQ. Spectroscopic studies show strong functional association in these hybrid particles. Mechanistic investigations reveal a dual role of the quinone-modified AuNPs, harvesting and transference of the excitation energy to PSII (resulting in ∼10-fold enhancement of anodic photocurrent in the 500–550 nm irradiation range) and simultaneously improving the electron transfer from PSII into the graphite anode (by almost 6-fold over the entire visible range of light).
Introduction
The wiring of bio-macromolecules to synthetic systems such as electrodes, polymers, and nanocrystals, holds great potential in applications such as medicine, energy production, and catalysis. This is especially true for redox enzymes, which are a large group of proteins that catalyze vital redox reactions between molecules. Among systems that have been studied thus far, some of the most well-known redox enzymes operate in respiratory and photosynthetic electron transfer chains.1–3 Photosynthesis is perhaps the most fundamental process on earth, by which plants, cyanobacteria, and algae perform solar to chemical energy conversion. Photosynthesis takes place within the thylakoid membranes that contain photosynthetic complexes that make up the electron transfer chain. Oxygenic photosynthesis that is found in cyanobacteria, algae and plants, is initiated by the activity of photosystem II (PSII), (∼220 kD per monomer), a water oxidizing enzyme that operates with remarkable efficiency, especially in ambient light.4,5 As such, PSII is an exceptional model system for efficient redox activity and electron transfer.
Over the past few years, numerous efforts to mimic, utilize, or enhance the activity of PSII and other photosynthetic complexes have been reported.6–18 With the growth and development of nano-chemistry and nanotechnology, there has been an increasing interest in the ability to conjugate redox enzymes in general and specifically, photosynthetic reaction centers (RC), to carefully designed nanoparticles, with the hope of enhancing activity, stability, or broadening the range of applications to areas such as solar energy production.19–22 Despite challenges in the wiring RCs that are large, hydrophobic complexes to electrodes and discreet nanoparticle surfaces, the potential in constructing a hybrid bio-photoelectrochemical (BPEC) cell composed of PSII and synthetic nanoparticles (NPs) has driven a number of works in the past few years.23–25 In particular, plasmonic gold and silver nanoparticles (AuNP and AgNP, accordingly) have evoked significant interest due to their unique optical and catalytic properties.26,27 Plasmonic metal nanostructures support strong collective free electron excitations, known as plasmons, and exhibit characteristic absorption in the visible frequency region.28 The strong optical resonances and intense near-fields generated in plasmonic nanostructures are known to enhance a range of optical processes by orders of magnitude,28–31 and may be exploited to improve light-induced photochemical and photophysical processes of interest. Literature demonstrations of plasmon-enhanced photocatalysis32–34 and photovoltaic device35–37 are typically assigned to direct charge injection from the excited plasmonic-metal into the semiconductor,38–40 or linear near-field electromagnetic enhancement of visible-absorption, generally in a UV-band-gap semiconductor.41–43
Here, we report on the successful construction of stable and active PSII–AuNP conjugate, comprised of PSII complexes isolated from market purchased spinach and cysteamine protected AuNPs. A modified PSII electron acceptor facilitated both physical linking and electron transfer between PSII to the nanoparticle. The resulting PSII–AuNP conjugate achieves a steady-state anodic photocurrent up to 6 times higher than unconjugated PSII (over the entire visible light range) when utilized in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cell. Furthermore, the oxygen-evolving activity of PSII is demonstrated to survive the conjugation step, testifying to efficient hole extraction in this hybrid nano-bio-PEC (N-BPEC) cell. This is reflected by photocurrents of up to 185 μA cm−2 (35 mA cm−2 mg−1 chlorophyll) representing a relatively high fraction of the available electrons.
Results
General strategy
The impressive photocurrent activity presented here is attributed to the functionalization of the AuNP's ligand shell with a chloroquinone. This small molecule introduced a strong-binding interaction between the AuNP and PSII, while not imposing limitations on PSII orientation or dynamics. Furthermore, it enables efficient electron injection from charge separated PSII to the AuNP, thus mitigating the need for exogenous electron acceptors (that are generally required in BPEC systems) and allowing preservation of native PSII enzymatic activity. To our knowledge, the results reported in this work represent one of the largest enhancements in photocurrent activity for isolated PSII reported to date.15,44 The preparation of the PSII–AuNP conjugate system that afforded high anodic photocurrent is comprised of a four step process, as illustrated in Scheme 1: (1) synthesis of cysteamine coated AuNP (AuNPCys); (2) modification of the AuNPCys ligand shell with 2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone (AuNPCys-DCBQ); (3) conjugation of isolated PSII with the AuNPCys-DCBQ to generate the active composite; and (4) isolation of the hybrid particle and its utilization in a photoelectrochemical cell without additional sacrificial reagents (see the Experimental section for more details of each of these steps). We envisioned that electron transfer from PSII to the AuNP under illumination facilitates enhancement of both electron–hole separation, and electron transport to the collecting electrode as detailed in Scheme 1 and Fig. S1.†
 Scheme 1  Steps in synthesis of PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ. (A) Transmission electron microscope image and schematic of synthesized cysteamine coated AuNP (scale bar is 20 nm) and (B) their surface functionalization with 2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone followed by (C) complexation with spinach derived PSII and (D) subsequent use in a hybrid nano-bio photoelectrochemical cell. 
PSII–AuNP conjugate design & physical connectivity
AuNPs have been extensively studied for their unique optical, electronic, and catalytic properties.45–48 The ability to control their size and surface chemistry, as well as the fact that they are non-cytotoxic, makes AuNPs an intriguing candidate to examine in hybrid systems and particularly in bio-photoelectrochemical cells.49,50Fig. 1A presents the absorbance spectra of 25 nm AuNPs, isolated PSII and the PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ conjugate. The AuNPs show a maximum absorbance peak at 530 nm, originating from the surface plasmon resonance. The AuNP size, which dictates the material's optical properties, was deliberately tuned to match the gap in the absorbance spectrum of isolated PSII. The concentration of the as synthesized AuNPCys-DCBQ was determined from the optical spectrum of the nanoparticles dispersed in aqueous media, and was found to be 3.1 nM.51,52 Upon reaction with DCBQ (200 μM; 1:10 ratio relative to cysteamine), a slight shift in the plasmonic peak maximum to 532 nm is observed, consistent with alteration of the refractive index of the medium immediately surrounding the AuNP (Fig. S2A†).53 A further slight red shift in the SPR peak is observed upon conjugation with PSII (15 μg ml−1 chl a + b, ∼50 chl a per PSII monomer) in MES buffer. The absorption of the combined PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugate contains the two chlorophyll peaks of PSII at ∼450 and ∼680 nm, as well as the AuNP SPR band at 534 nm (Fig. S3†). To further assess the quality of the PSII binding to the AuNP, the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugate was pelleted by mild centrifugation (5000 rpm), resulting in a nearly transparent and colorless supernatant, including at the absorption peak of DCBQ at 345 nm (Fig. S2B†). When the same treatment was applied to isolated unconjugated PSII in solution, no pellet was obtained. Upon redispersion of the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ pellet in MES buffer, absorption bands were observed at 436 nm, 535 nm, and 675 nm, corresponding to the chlorophyll Soret transition in the blue, the AuNP SPR band in the green, and the chl Qy band in the red (Fig. 1B). The presence of the chlorophyll bands in the re-dispersed pellet provides strong evidence for the coupling of AuNP through the cysteamine-dichlorobenzoquinone ligand shell (Fig. S2A†). Remnants of unbound DCBQ are removed by washing the AuNPcys-DCBQ particles (Fig. S2B†).
 Fig. 1  (A) Representative absorbance spectra of PSII (green line), AuNPCys-DCBQ (purple line) and the conjugated system (red line) following the reaction between the two components. (B) PSII–AuNPs binding by centrifugation assay. The colored curves indicate PSII absorbance in the supernatant after centrifugation with increasing concentration of AuNPs from 0 (green) to 1.2 nM (red). Insert pictures show the solutions of PSII in the absence (0 nM) or presence (1.2 nM) of AuNPs after centrifugation. The insert box shows the relative absorbance of the supernatant at 652 nm as a function of AuNP concentration used in the conjugation step. 
The number of PSII monomers bound to a AuNP was estimated using a modified approach adopted from Noguchi et al.25 First, the complexed chl a concentration was calculated to be 165 nM by subtraction of the supernatant absorption and the total chl (a + b) extinction coefficient at 652 nm.54 From this, the concentration of complexed PSII was calculated to be 3.3 nM, based on the protein X-ray crystallographic structure and the assumption of a mixture of monomers and dimers, for which an average of ∼50 chlorophylls (including minimal amounts of light harvesting II) would be associated with each PSII RC.5,55–57 As no absorption band for AuNP was observed in the supernatant, a concentration of 1.2 nM AuNP was calculated to have conjugated with PSII, based on the plasmon absorption band of the AuNP in the dispersion prior to precipitation and the reported size-dependent extinction coefficient.51 The AuNPs concentration was also confirmed by Inductively Coupled Plasma Optical Emission Spectroscopy (ICP-OES). Thus, an average 1:2.75 ratio of AuNP:PSII, was observed, suggesting the coupling of 2–3 PSII monomers per AuNP. To assess the maximum stable number of PSII moieties for a single AuNP, AuNPCys-DCBQ were titrated into a solution of PSII, followed by mild centrifugation, and the optical density of the supernatant and re-dispersed pellets were studied. Fig. 1B shows the absorption spectra of the supernatants following centrifugation. With increasing concentration of AuNPCys-DCBQ, the relative absorbance of the supernatant measured at 652 nm (corresponding to free PSII concentration) exhibited a linear decrease (Fig. 1B insert). These results support a consistent ratio of PSII binding to AuNP at each concentration. Indeed, at each point along the titration curve, the amount of PSII bound to the AuNP was calculated to be 2–3 PSII per AuNP from the ratio of AuNP added and the difference between the initial PSII concentration and the remainder of PSII in the supernatant, as described above. When a similar experiment was run for citrate coated AuNP, no significant decrease in the PSII absorption at 652 nm was observed (Fig. S4†), suggesting the modified cysteamine-DCBQ ligand is vital for the strong interaction observed herein.
From these experiments, it is clear that the physical connectivity between AuNPCys-DCBQ and PSII relies on modification of the AuNPCys with DCBQ, likely through reaction with the native cysteamine ligands. One possibility is the formation of a covalent bond between the cysteamine ligand and DCBQ, which would tether the DCBQ to the ligand shell and allow it to serve as a redox shuttle between the NP and PSII. Indeed, the reaction of chloroquinones with primary and secondary amines is known to result in rapid formation of covalent C–N bonds at room temperature via nucleophilic addition.58 As noted above, only remnants of DCBQ could be found in the supernatants of washes of the AuNPcys-DCBQ (Fig. S2B†). In order to further confirm that DCBQ binds irreversibly to the cysteamines on the AuNPs surface, we prepared a dispersion of AuNPCys-DCBQ, precipitated the nanoparticles by centrifugation as described above, and then measured the photocurrent produced by PSII when mixed with the supernatant (i.e., with possible loss of DCBQ). Photocurrent measurements (Fig. S5†) were performed using a potentiostat and a screen-printed electrode (SCE) with an optimized bias voltage of 250 mV as obtained from cyclic voltammetry measurements in light and dark (Fig. S6†). Commercially available screen-printed electrodes were chosen to obtain greater measurement sensitivity, better connectivity between the electrode and the solution, and due to their small material quantity requirements. When compared to the photocurrent produced by PSII mixed with free DCBQ (of the same concentration used to react with the AuNP's cysteamine ligand shell), only ∼30% of the control photocurrent was measured. The results confirm most of the DCBQ remains bound to the AuNP upon precipitation. Upon repeated dispersion of the AuNPCys-DCBQ pellet, followed by precipitation a second time and dispersion of PSII in the supernatant, less than 10% of the control photocurrent was observed. Taken together, these results confirm that most of the DCBQ is bound sufficiently well to the particle surface (for further experimental descriptions and photocurrent data, see Fig. S5†).
Assessment of PSII–AuNP electronic communication via excited state quenching
To explore the functional communication between the PSII excited state and the AuNP, fluorescence quenching and lifetime experiments for both PSII–AuNPscys-DCBQ (Fig. 2) and PSII–AuNPsCys (also measured without the DCBQ modification, Fig. S7†) were carried out. Fig. 2A displays the fluorescence spectra of PSII in MES buffer in the presence of varying concentrations of AuNPCys-DCBQ. The emission maximum at 682 nm corresponds to the fluorescence of chlorophyll a bound to PSII, and a progressive quenching of the fluorescence signal is observed with increasing amounts of added AuNPCys-DCBQ. At concentrations as low as 2.4 nM (relative to 2.5 nM PSII) we observe >70% quenching of the PSII emission. Such emission response to a low concentration of quencher suggests strong coupling of the AuNP to the PSII. We further analyzed the fluorescence data by considering an equilibrium between PSII and AuNPCys-DCBQ (reaction 1). (1)Here Kapp is the apparent association constant for complexation between PSII and AuNPCys-DCBQ. We employed double reciprocal plot analysis [[1/(ϕ0 − ϕobs)] vs. 1/[AuNPCys-DCBQ] to obtain Kapp, where ϕ0 is the initial fluorescence intensity of PSII and ϕobs is the observed intensity upon addition of quencher (Fig. S8†).59 The plot is linear in the concentration range of 0–2.5 nM of AuNPCys-DCBQ, revealing a Kapp of 5.2 × 108 M−1 (Fig. 2A inset). This value is ∼7× higher than that obtained for AuNPcys (7.5 × 107 M−1, Fig. S7†). Time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) experiments (excitation at 405 nm) reveal that the PSII emission in the presence of DCBQ possesses an average lifetime τavg of 2.6 ns, consistent with previous studies.60 Upon addition of AuNPCys-DCBQ, a greater than two-fold reduction in lifetime to 1.2 ns is seen, which is not observed in the case when either AuNPCys, or DCBQ in the absence of NPs, are added (Fig. 2B). All decay traces were fit to triexponential decay, and the results of the kinetic analysis are presented in Table S1.† These results demonstrate that the PSII excited state is quenched by the AuNP, with notable enhancement facilitated by the cysteamine-DCBQ linker. The measurements show the presence of a small fraction (∼5%) of PSII that most likely represent a “closed” fraction that performs fast charge recombination, irrespective of presence or absence of NPs. The two other phases most likely represent two active PSII phases, and both of their lifetimes are shortened by the binding to the AuNPcys-DCBQ. Binding shifts a large proportion of the second phase to the third phase, indicating a decrease in PSII heterogeneity.
 Fig. 2  AuNPs are functionally linked to PSII excited states. Isolated PSII associated with different concentrations of AuNPcys-DCBQ were excited at 405 nm (the Soret band) and the emission at 682 nm was monitored. (A) Representative measurements of quenching of PSII fluorescence by increasing concentrations of AuNPs. The colored curves show PSII emission spectrum following conjugation with increasing concentration of AuNPCys-DCBQ. The data was further analyzed using double reciprocal analysis (inset). (B) Excited state lifetime measurements, following excitation at 405 nm, for PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ (red line), PSII–AuNPCys (blue line), and unconjugated PSII (green). Only when the PSII complexes are tightly associated to the AuNP via the Cys-DCBQ linker is there a significant decrease in fluorescence lifetime, indicating excited state coupling. 
DCBQ has been extensively employed as a redox shuttle for PSII, accepting electrons at the QB (the secondary electron acceptor of PSII) site and subsequently being oxidized at the electrode surface.23,61–63 In the current system, the DCBQ linker enables enhanced electron injection from PSII into the AuNP, resulting in enhanced PL quenching and shorter lifetime. Notably, as the reduction potential of bound quinones in the QB site (∼0.09 V vs. NHE)64 and the Fermi level of Au (∼0.5 V vs. NHE)65 could indeed provide the required driving force for charge transfer across the PSII–AuNP interface. The joint precipitation, photoluminescence quenching, and lifetime studies suggest a strong binding interaction between the AuNPCys-DCBQ and PSII, which does not exist if one of the linker components is missing. Previous studies have found that chl a can bind to AuNP through its nitrogen sites, resulting in efficient quenching of chl photoluminescence via a static binding mechanism, with a Kapp on the order of 104 and a 30% reduction in lifetime.66 Our studies of the PSII–AuNP composite seem to suggest a static binding mechanism, as well. Due to the reversible nature of the DCBQ reduction at the QB site, covalent binding is not expected to occur at this site, along the electron transfer pathway. The possibility of the formation of strong secondary interactions (hydrogen bonding) between PSII amines and quinone carbonyl oxygen atoms, as has been previously observed for quinone based redox polymers, or the existence of hydrophobic interactions between the AuNP surface and PSII.67 In either case, PSII may be tethered to the AuNP surface through some DCBQ linkers, while others would be free to participate as electron shuttles from the QB site to the AuNP. In addition, this would be expected to result in enhanced anodic photocurrent when placed in an electrochemical cell, due to charge transfer to the proximal AuNP, assuming the binding mechanism does not disrupt the PSII oxygen-evolution complex vital for hole-extraction and charge balancing.
Oxygen evolution is retained post AuNP – PSII complexation
To confirm the integrity of the oxygen–evolution complex (OEC), the precipitated PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ pellets described above were redispersed in the presence of detergent which released the bound PSII, and tested for dichlorophenol indophenol (DCPIP) reduction activity.68 Over 80% of the reduction activity relative to unconjugated PSII was retained (Fig. S9†). In light of the strong binding between PSII and the AuNPs, it was important to examine the effect that such conjugation might have on PSII catalytic oxygen evolution while functionally linked to the AuNP. To this end, we measured oxygen evolution activity using a Clark-type oxygen electrode on either the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugates or PSII, both in solution, in the presence of 0.5 mM DCBQ. As shown in Fig. 3A, the PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ conjugate exhibits comparable oxygen evolution activity (127 ± 18 μmol O2 mg Chl−1 h−1) to those of the unconjugated PSII (147 ± 9 μmol O2 mg Chl−1 h−1). The small difference between the two samples may be due to the presence of the bound cys-DCBQ moiety occupying the QB site, which lowers the rate of electron transfer from QA to soluble DCBQ (Fig. S1†) necessary for O2 evolution in the oxygen electrode. It should be reiterated here that the isolated PSII complexes used in this study were obtained from spinach leaves that represent typical field grown plants that are used days following harvesting. PSII isolated from thermophilic cyanobacteria can indeed produce significantly higher O2 evolution activity (>20 times higher in some cases) but these complexes are more difficult to isolate and are far more expensive to obtain in large quantities. It was encouraging to find that even with the oxygen activity obtained from these PSII isolated from these market-purchased spinach plants, we were able to reach impressive currents, emphasizing furthermore the potential of the dynamic conjugation system we present here. Since the half-life of isolated PSII, due to the unavoidable process of photoinhibition69 is 10–30 minutes,23,70 the element of effort and cost in future utilization of photosynthetic complexes cannot be ignored.
 Fig. 3  (A) PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugate oxygen evolution rates compared to isolated PSII complexes (solid colors). DCMU (10 μM) was used to inhibit PSII activity as a negative control (striped bars). (B) A typical photocurrent density measurement (CA) of the complete conjugated system (red curve), PSII with citrate capped AuNPs (blue curve), isolated unconjugated PSII (green curve) or PSII with cysteamine capped AuNPs without DCBQ (purple curve). 
DCMU (3-(3,4-dichlorophenyl)-1,1-dimethylurea) is a known inhibitor of PSII, which inhibit the protein activity by blocking the QB site and thus interrupting the electron transport chain. Indeed, upon the addition of 10 μM DCMU, both systems (either the conjugated or unconjugated PSII) exhibited a similar reduction in photocatalytic oxygen evolution (Fig. 3A), down to approximately 25 μmol O2 mg Chl−1 h−1. These results indicate that the bound DCBQ does not fully occupy the entire QB site. It can be concluded that both the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ and unconjugated PSII undergo similar mechanisms of catalysis on the acceptor side of the complex, and the OEC remains intact post complexation.
Photocurrent performance of PSII–AuNP complex
The ability of the AuNP to accept and shuttle electrons from the excited PSII indicates the potential for enhanced charge separation, which could be employed to improve energy conversion in photoelectrochemical cells (Fig. S1†). To study this effect, photocurrent measurements were performed as described previously. When we measured current over time (chronoamperometry, CA) upon illumination for unconjugated PSII with 200 μM DCBQ added as an electron acceptor and mediator, a maximum photocurrent of 6000 μA cm−2 mg Chl−1 was obtained (Fig. 3B). This value increased to 11000 μA cm−2 mg Chl−1 upon addition of citrate coated AuNP, which were chosen as a control as they lack the ability to conjugate with DCBQ (unlike cysteamine). Remarkably, when the same experiment was repeated for the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugate, without addition of soluble DCBQ or any other additional electron mediator, a continual increase in photocurrent to an average level of 35000 μA cm−2 mg Chl−1 was observed (in some cases currents of up to 45000 μA −cm−2 mg Chl−1 were also obtained) over the course of several minutes, until photoinhibition of PSII caused decrease in the current and the light was turned off. Thus, association with the AuNPcys-DCBQ resulted in a 6–10 fold higher photocurrent compared to the unconjugated PSII control. Our results represent a nearly 10 fold enhancement in photocurrent relative to previous studies, highlighting the key role that the PSII–AuNP ligand interface plays in directed charge transport.23 The role of DCBQ in the photocurrent production was tested as well when the PSII–AuNPCys conjugate (without DCBQ) was measured as a control and as expected, performed poorly compared to the other samples. The absence of an electron shuttle caused rapid accumulation of charges in the protein, which resulted in its inhibition in about half the time compared to the systems containing DCBQ as an electron shuttle (Fig. 3B). It should be stressed that the presence of the tethered DCBQ shuttle enhances PSII activity as opposed to the soluble DCBQ. Conversion of the average current density values obtained here are equivalent to an average oxygen evolving rate of 330 μmol O2 mg Chl−1 h−r1, more than twice the value obtained from either free or conjugated PSII in solution, as the slow DCBQ binding/dis-binding step is no longer required.
Additionally, in order to establish that the electrons are mostly originated in PSII OEC, the measurement was repeated in the presence of 10 μM DCMU as a PSII inhibitor. The results (Fig. S10†) show a drastic decrease in photocurrent production when DCMU is added and confirm the electrons supply is PSII dependent.
Furthermore, when absolute photocurrents are compared (Fig. S11†), we see a maximum steady state photocurrent values of 5 μA cm−2 for AuNP with DCBQ, 22 μA cm−2 for unconjugated PSII with DCBQ, and 130 μA cm−2 for the PSII–AuNPCsys-DCBQ conjugated system. Higher currents of 185 μA cm−2 were sometimes obtained (Fig. S11B†) when the intrinsic O2 evolution rates were higher. The results presented here are comparable to the highest photocurrent generation that has been reported to date for isolated protein based photovoltaic devices, in either the presence or absence of exogenous mediator molecules.15,44 Finally, in order to confirm normal PSII photocurrent behavior, we have also performed light–dark photocurrent cycles (Fig. S12†).
It is important to note that although oxygen evolution and the production of photocurrent share similarities in the electron transfer pathways, they are different processes in many respects. The oxygen evolution process, which is the result of enzymatic activity of PSII, depends on the substantial redox potential difference required for water splitting and is limited by it. As a result, an increase in oxygen evolution activity is not expected upon conjugation with AuNP. On the other hand, the production of photocurrent is far more promiscuous, with a substantial portion of excited electrons being lost to different oxidation–reduction reactions throughout the electron transport chain, in addition to radiative and non-radiative recombination events. Abstracting electrons from any of these pathways is expected to result in an increase in photocurrent, without enhancing the oxygen evolution activity, consistent with the results obtained herein.
It should also be noted that despite all samples reaching maximum photocurrent in a similar amount of time (∼5.5 minutes), the initial onset in photoactivity is slower for the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugated system relative to unconjugated PSII. In the case of unconjugated PSII and AuNPcys, rapid electron transport to the electrode surface is expected due to an excess of free DCBQ redox shuttles present in solution. Indeed, for these samples roughly 50% of the maximum photocurrent is achieved within the first 30 seconds of illumination. In the case of the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ, where no freely diffusible DCBQ exists in the solution, a longer initiation time is required, with 50% of the maximum photocurrent being reached only after 1.5 minutes of continued irradiation. This observation is consistent with the requirement for the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ complex to diffuse/settle on the electrode surface, due to the absence of free DCBQ in solution as an electron shuttle. In addition to these differences, we expect that slight variances may result from the increased complexity of the AuNP containing systems, wherein multiple simultaneous electron transfer pathways may be occurring as well, in addition to rate limiting steps at the cathodic side of the photoelectrochemical cell.
The average values (oxygen evolution rates and current transfer) that are reported here are not only of the different independent experiments, but also a reflection of the unknown heterogeneity of PSII. Isolated PSII has been shown to contain inherent native heterogeneities due to a number of sources: (1) due to the procedure of isolation from the thylakoid membrane that includes three different detergent treatments; (2) due to heterogeneities arising from the method of the chemical conjugation to the modified AuNPs and the physical association of the PSII–AuNPs to the anode; and (3) due to the inherent heterogeneities that occur during normal PSII activity, that eventually leads to the damage of the D1 protein (photoinhibition, PI)69 and cessation of oxygen evolution and electron transfer. However even with these caveats, we can calculate the activity of the PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ with respect to turn over frequency and number (TOF and TON, respectively). The rate limiting step in the oxygen evolution at the optimal functional temperature has been shown to be about 1–4 ms, leading to a TOF of ∼1000–250 e− s−1 (depending on organism and optimal temperatures).71,72 While the actual oxygen evolution rate over time is much lower, this is only a result of the aforementioned heterogeneities and the increased appearance of closed and/or damaged reaction centers within the PSII population. If the overall kinetics of the water splitting reaction slows due to deficiencies in the actual catalytic cycle, a fast increase in the appearance of radical species would occur, leading to PI, which cannot be repaired due to the isolated state of the sample. The number of charge-separation events that occur in each PSII has been estimated to be on average ∼1.4 × 106 before the D1 protein in damaged and thus provides an upper limit on the TON of PSII.73 During the peak transfer of electrons to the BPEC, we report obtaining a constant current of 130 μA cm−2 (Fig. S11†) equivalent to 8.1 × 1014 electrons s−1 cm−2. Assuming that all of the PSII associated with the AuNPcys-DCBQ particles are active, the maximum amount of PSII associated with the anodes is 1.25 nmol cm−2. Taking these values together we calculate that on average each PSII complex transfers ∼1.0 electron s−1. The actual number is most likely higher as a fraction of the PSII is inactive, and not all of the particles may be in functional contact with the graphite anode. This is comparable (or better) than many other reported BPECs based on PSII.15 Recently, a BPEC that connected isolated PSII from the thermophilic cyanobacterium T. elongatus with PbS quantum dots and conducting osmium polymers to inverse opal TiO2 architecture anodes was shown to transfer ∼5 electrons s−1.21 However, these PSII complexes are known to possess ∼20-fold greater oxygen evolving rates than the spinach PSII used in this study.
This comparison shows the potential of using the simple method to isolate PSII from market spinach (and indeed can be used to isolate PSII from almost any plant or algae available), which can be made without complicated column purification steps or genetically added affinity tags. PSII such as the type used here can essentially be made in almost any quantity required at a fraction of the cost of that needed for the highly active T. elongatus PSII. We propose that the improvement reported here is due to the dual role that the modified AuNPs have on PSII activity and faster electron transfer to the BPEC.
Mechanism of photocurrent enhancement
To shed light on the mechanism of photocurrent enhancement, we first consider the effect of the AuNP SPR on the overall system (Fig. S1†). The localized near field of AuNP surface plasmons has been shown to enhance the electronic excitation of surface-anchored molecules in a variety of systems in regions of plasmon and photosensitizer absorption overlap.74–77 As the AuNP surface plasmon absorption appears primarily in the green, we wished to further assess the effect of SPR enhancement. For this, we synthesized an additional type of cysteamine capped plasmonic NP-silver NPs (AgNPs), with an SPR peak near 450 nm, overlapping the PSII absorbance, primarily in the blue (and slightly in the green), but not in the red (Fig. 4A). Fig. 4B shows the maximum anodic photocurrents, obtained under irradiation with a 250 mW white light source, for PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ, PSII–AgNPCys-DCBQ, and unconjugated PSII. The AuNP system can be seen to have a 6× enhancement in maximum activity relative to PSII, whereas the AgNP conjugate only results in a less than 2× enhancement in photocurrent. This result implies that plasmonic enhancement of photocurrent via excitation in the green plays a key role in the high photocurrent obtained for the AuNP conjugate. The lower enhancement obtained with plasmonic Ag can likely be explained due to the metal obscuring the PSII absorption.
 Fig. 4  (A) Absorption spectra of AgNP, AuNP, and PSII demonstrating absorption overlap of the AgNP SPR with chlorophyll in the blue, and AuNP overlap in the green. (B) Maximum photocurrent values obtained for AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and unconjugated PSII under actinic light irraditation (250 mW) (C) Wavelength dependent photocurrent measurements of AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and unconjugated PSII under 660 nm and 530 nm irradiation (5.0 mW). (D) Zero current potential measurements of AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and isolated PSII deposited on screen printed electrodes under actinic light. 
To further study to effect of the NP SPR overlap with the chlorophyll absorption of PSII, the relative anodic photocurrents obtained for PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ, PSII–AgNPcys-DCBQ, and unconjugated PSII at irradiation wavelengths of 530 nm and 660 nm and a nominal power of 50 mW were measured (Fig. 4C). When excited at 530 nm (near the AuNP SPR band, distinct from any chlorophyll absorption), a 10× enhancement in maximum photocurrent is observed for the AuNP containing system (1866 ± 249 nA) relative to unconjugated PSII (203 ± 78 nA), while the AgNP conjugate demonstrates only a 2× enhancement (430 ± 66 nA). It is important to note that this measurement is performed with irradiation in the region of minimal PSII absorption (Fig. 4A), thus providing a lower limit to the photocurrent enhancement in the region of PSII–AuNP spectral overlap. Upon excitation at 660 nm (further from the AuNP SPR band), only a 2× enhancement is seen for the AuNP, while a 3× enhancement is observed for the AgNP containing system, though the absolute currents are higher in this region due to significant chlorophyll absorption in the red. The AuNPCys-DCBQ and AgNPCys-DCBQ showed no appreciable photocurrent on their own under the present conditions. These results demonstrate a strong correlation between the SPR absorption spectra and conjugate photocurrent response, with a substantial portion of the enhanced photocurrent in the PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ system likely arising from the region of NP SPR and PSII absorption overlap in the green/yellow (500–600 nm), where unconjugated PSII has little absorption and photocurrent response. Thus, we can conclude that irradiation near the plasmon band of the AuNP used herein induces plasmonic near-field electromagnetic enhancement of visible-absorption of the PSII.
It should be noted however that this does not fully account for the enhanced photocurrent, as in the absence of the cysteamine-DCBQ ligand, substantially lower photocurrent is observed under actinic light for the same metal nanoparticles (Fig. 3B). Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4C, there is additional photocurrent enhancement in regions where little SPR overlap occurs for either the AuNP or AgNP conjugates (i.e., 660 nm). We postulate that by incorporating the redox shuttle DCBQ into the ligand shell, we further enable charge separation across the enzyme–nanoparticle interface, resulting in charging of the metal nanoparticles and mitigation of non-radiative and radiative relaxation pathways for the PSII excited state.
To probe this, we studied the zero-current potential (ZCP), i.e. the potential at which the current is zero based on linear sweep voltammetry for screen-printed electrodes that were deposited with unconjugated PSII, PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ, and PSII–AgNPCys-DCBQ and irradiated with actinic light (Fig. 4D). At the ZCP potential, all photogenerated charge carriers recombine without producing any net current flow, and any driving force within the PSII or PSII–NP conjugates for transferring electrons to the electrode surface is neutralized by the applied negative bias. As such, this technique can be used to study overall driving force for charge transfer in complex systems, and has been used for this purpose in earlier studies of AuNP-chlorophyll based photoanodes.66 The ZCP of the system with unconjugated PSII shifts from −32 mV to −98 mV upon modification with AuNPCys-DCBQ, and a comparable value is obtained for the AgNPcys-DCBQ (−112 mV). These negative shifts in ZCP translates to a larger negative bias needed to neutralize the photoinduced potential produced in the PSII–NP systems versus unconjugated PSII and is indicative of a higher driving force for charge injection to the electrode in the conjugate systems. The negative increase in ZCPs can be attributed to the presence of the cysteamine-DCBQ coated metal nanoparticles, which facilitate electron transport by accepting electrons from PSII (charging) and shuttling them to the electrode. Upon electron injection from PSII to the metal NP during our photocurrent measurements, the Fermi level of the metal NP (in contact with the electrode) is raised to more negative potentials until it reaches the energy level of the electrode, at which point a quick transfer of electrons from the metal NP to the electrode takes place. This process separates photoexcited electrons from the transient holes in the PSII OEC (until completion of O2 formation and evolution), allowing them to escape recombination and resulting in larger photocurrents. The direct electron injection process would result in enhanced photocurrent even in regions distinct from the SPR absorption bands – precisely what is observed under 660 nm irradiation (Fig. 4C).
Thus, we can conclude that the substantial photocurrent measured for the PSII–AuNP conjugate herein results from a combination of AuNP surface plasmon enhancement and direct electron injection enabled by the metal NP-ligand shell, improving overall photocurrent by both enhancing electronic excitation and preventing deleterious charge recombination pathways in PSII, respectively.
The present study has demonstrated a simple approach of electronically linking PSII with plasmonic gold nanoparticles, resulting in order of magnitude increases in anodic photocurrent when assembled into a hybrid nano-bio photoelectrochemical cell. Utilizing a small-molecule cysteamine-DCBQ linker, successful conjugation to isolated PSII enabled improved electronic communication across the PSII–NP interface. We demonstrate that the addition of AuNP result in enhanced photocurrent through both improved light harvesting in the 500–550 nm range not absorbed by chl a, and direct electron injection facilitated through a cysteamine-DCBQ ligand shell. This combination resulted in one of the highest anodic photocurrent reported for isolated PSII to date, certainly from normal market obtained spinach. Importantly, the coupling has proven to have no detrimental effects on the enzymatic oxygen evolution activity of PSII, opening the door for more complex bio-hybrid systems with enzymatic activity coupled to current production or other processes simultaneously. To this end, future work will focus on the coupling of PSII to hydrogen evolution photocatalysts via a similar motif, with the end goal of enabling overall water splitting at near neutral pH.
Experimental
Photosystem II isolation
PSII complexes were isolated from spinach leaves as described in Ghanotakis and co-workers78 with slight modifications. Briefly, fresh spinach leaves purchased from a local market were washed and cooled at 4 °C in the dark. The leaves were ground in a blender with 50 mM HEPES buffer (pH = 7.5) supplemented with 5 mM MgCl2, 400 mM NaCl, 5 mM Ascorbic acid and 1 mM EDTA. The slurry was then filtered twice through cheesecloth and centrifuged 15 minutes at 6000g, after which the supernatant was removed and the pellet redispersed in a 50 mM MES buffer supplemented with 15 mM NaCl, 5 mM MgCl2. Following treatment with Triton-X and octyl glucoside, the resulting supernatant was sedimented with polyethylene glycol 6000 at a final concentration of 5%. The mixture was centrifuged at 40000g for 30 minutes and resuspended in a 50 mM MES buffer supplemented with 10 mM CaCl2, 5 mM NaCl and 0.05% dodecyl β D-maltoside (Buffer E) at a final chlorophyll concentration of 1 mg ml−1. Chlorophyll a/b ratio following the procedure ranges 3.8–5 on average.
AuNPs synthesis
Cysteamine capped gold nanoparticles were synthesized via the method of Zare and co-workers.79 Prior to synthesis, all glassware was washed with aqua regia, ethanol, and distilled water. Briefly, 400 μl of a 214 mM stock of cysteamine in DDW was added to a flask containing 20 ml of 1.5 mM HAuCl4 solution in DDW and stirred for 20 minutes. Next, 20 μl of a 10 mM solution of NaBH4 at 0 °C was quickly added to the solution. The dispersion was allowed to stir for 2 hours at room temperature, after which the solution was stored at 4 °C until further use. Citrate capped AuNPs were prepared by heating to boil under vigorous stirring (on a hot plate) 50 ml of 1 mM HAuCl4. Once boiling, 5 ml of pre-heated (50–60 °C) sodium citrate were added. Solution would turn blue-black and then deep red after which the solution was stirred for additional 15 minutes and left to reach room temperature.
AgNPs synthesis
Cysteamine capped Silver nanoparticles were prepared according to the method of Zaderenko and coworkers.80
Linker construction
Cysteamine-DCBQ linker was prepared on the AuNP (the same for all types of particles tested) surface by adding 5 μl ml−1 of a 100 mM DCBQ stock in ethanol to a solution of the ∼3 nM cysteamine capped AuNPs. The dispersion was allowed to incubate for 30 minutes, after which the nanoparticles were precipitated at 6000 rpm 10 minutes and re-dispersed in DDW at a concentration of 5 nM. The particles were then stored at 4 °C until further use.
Electrochemical measurements
Chronoamperometry (CA) measurements were performed using a Palmsens3 (Palmsens) potentiostat and screen-printed electrodes (SCE, DropSense). All measurements were performed with a graphite WE, Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and Pt counter electrode. To perform the measurements, 4 μg chl PSII (equivalent to ∼90 pmol PSII), conjugated to the AuNPcys-DCBQ in a total of 35 μl of solution was placed on the SCE (A = 7 mm2) and illuminated from above by an optical fiber light source. For PSII control measurements, DCBQ at final concentration of 200 μM was added to the solution as an electron acceptor. For PSII–NP conjugate measurements, no additional DCBQ was added. The AuNPs-DCBQ solution was incubated with PSII for 20 minutes after which it was used for CA measurements. For single wavelength CA measurements, Thorlabs Mounted High Power LEDs with 530 and 660 nm wavelengths were used at 50 mW. Temperature was monitored during illumination using a thermocouple, making sure that the system temperature did not change.
Oxygen evolution measurements
PSII oxygen evolution activity was measured using a Clark-type oxygen electrode (Hansatech). The 1 ml solution in the cell contained 10 μg of chlorophyll, ∼500 μM DCBQ and buffer E (pH = 6.0). The reaction cell was allowed to stabilize under stirring, as the measurement began in the dark, after which a white light source (250 mW) was turned on and oxygen evolution rate was measured in light–dark cycles.
Optical characterization
Steady-state absorption measurements were carried out on an Agilent Cary 5000 UV-Vis-NIR spectrophotometer using a standard 10 mm pathlength fluorimeter cuvettes. Photoluminescence measurements were performed on a Horiba Jobin Yvon Fluorolog 3 spectrophotometer. Time-resolved photoluminescence decay (PL decay) was performed using an Edinburgh Instruments Life Spec II time-correlated single-photon counting (TCSPC) system with 405 nm excitation.
Microscopy
Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM) imaging was performed on a FEI Tecnai G2 T20 S-Twin TEM operated at 200 kV with a LaB6 electron source using carbon coated copper grids (Cu, square, 200 mesh) purchased from Electron Microscopy Sciences.
ICP-OES
AuNPs concentration was determined using an Agilent 5110 ICP-OES.
Statistical analysis
All experiments were repeated at least three times (biological repeats) and analyzed using simple average and standard deviation.
Author contributions
HS, NGP, LA and NA conceived the idea. HS, NGP, LA and NA designed the experiments. HS and NGP performed the main experiments. HS, NGP, LA and NA wrote the paper. NGP, LA and NA supervised the entire research project.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
Funding was provided by a grant from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DIP project LU315/17-1), the Israeli Ministry of National Infrastructures, Energy and Water Resources (grant number 218-11-044), a “Nevet” grant from the Grand Technion Energy Program (GTEP) and a Technion VPR Berman Grant for Energy Research. N.G.P. acknowledges support from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No. 798409-HMST-PC. The authors acknowledge Mr Jeffrey T. Dubose for useful discussions in development of the research disclosed herein.
References 

          A. Heller, Electrical Wiring of Redox Enzymes Relaying of Electrons in Enzymes,  1990, vol. 23 Search PubMed .
N. Kornienko, J. Z. Zhang, K. K. Sakimoto, P. Yang and E. Reisner, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 890–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          X. Fang, S. Kalathil and E. Reisner, Semi-biological approaches to solar-to-chemical conversion, Royal Society of Chemistry,  2020, vol. 49 Search PubMed .
J. P. McEvoy and G. W. Brudvig, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4455–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Miyachi, S. Ikehira, D. Nishiori, Y. Yamanoi, M. Yamada, M. Iwai, T. Tomo, S. I. Allakhverdiev and H. Nishihara, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 1351–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Teodor and B. D. Bruce, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 1329–1342 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, C. Ding, M. Liu, A. Wang, Q. Huang and C. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Suzuki, J. Xie, O. Tomita, D. J. Martin, M. Higashi, D. Kong, R. Abe and J. Tang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5201–5241 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tschörtner, B. Lai and J. O. Krömer, Frontiers in Microbiology, 2019, 10, 866 CrossRef PubMed .

          N. Plumeré and M. M. Nowaczyk, in Advances in Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology, Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH,  2016, vol. 158, pp. 111–136 Search PubMed .
V. Hartmann, D. Harris, T. Bobrowski, A. Ruff, A. Frank, T. Günther Pomorski, M. Rögner, W. Schuhmann, N. Adir and M. M. Nowaczyk, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14463–14471 RSC .
K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, J. Warnan, N. Kornienko, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 944–951 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Zhang, P. Bombelli, K. P. Sokol, A. Fantuzzi, A. W. Rutherford, C. J. Howe and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 6–21 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater, I. Zebger, S. Hofmann, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, C. B. Park and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10595–10599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang, K. P. Sokol, N. Heidary, T. A. Kandiel, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1844–1850 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badura, B. Esper, K. Ataka, C. Grunwald, C. Woll, J. Kuhlmann, J. Heberle and M. Rogner, Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 82, 1385–1390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Utterback, J. L. Ruzicka, H. R. Keller, L. M. Pellows and G. Dukovic, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2020, 71, 335–359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Riedel, J. Wersig, A. Ruff, W. Schuhmann, A. Zouni and F. Lisdat, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 801–805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Prima, D. K. Lee, I. Ock, S. Yatman, B. Yuliarto and J. K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400470 CrossRef .
R. I. Pinhassi, D. Kallmann, G. Saper, H. Dotan, A. Linkov, A. Kay, V. Liveanu, G. Schuster, N. Adir and A. Rothschild, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–10 Search PubMed .
O. Yehezkeli, R. Tel-Vered, J. Wasserman, A. Trifonov, D. Michaeli, R. Nechushtai and I. Willner, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 742 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Noji, H. Suzuki, T. Gotoh, M. Iwai, M. Ikeuchi, T. Tomo and T. Noguchi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2448–2452 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Holland, C. Lau, S. Brozik, P. Atanassov and S. Banta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19262–19265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Hondred, J. C. Breger, N. T. Garland, E. Oh, K. Susumu, S. A. Walper, I. L. Medintz and J. C. Claussen, Analyst, 2017, 142, 3261–3271 RSC .
S. Link and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 8410–8426 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gersten and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1980, 73, 3023–3027 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Weitz, S. Garoff, J. I. Gersten, A. Nitzan, S. Garott and A. Nitzan, J. Chem. Phys., 1983, 78, 509 CrossRef .
H. A. Atwater, Sci. Am., 2007, 296, 53–56 CrossRef .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 7729–7744 CrossRef CAS .
G. Baffou and R. Quidant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3898–3907 RSC .
H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 205–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Ferry, M. A. Verschuuren, H. B. T. Li, E. Verhagen, R. J. Walters, R. E. I. Schropp, H. A. Atwater and A. Polman, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, A237–A245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lahav, T. Gabriel, A. N. Shipway and I. Willner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 258–259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tian and T. Tatsuma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 7632–7637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kowalska, O. O. P. Mahaney, R. Abe and B. Ohtani, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 2344–2355 RSC .
C. G. Silva, R. Juá rez, T. Marino, R. Molinari and H. García, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 595–602 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Awazu, M. Fujimaki, C. Rockstuhl, J. Tominaga, H. Murakami, Y. Ohki, N. Yoshida and T. Watanabe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 1676–1680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Ingram and S. Linic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5202–5205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, W. Hou, P. Pavaskar, M. Aykol and S. B. Cronin, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Ravi and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2551–2573 RSC .
W. Hou and S. B. Cronin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1612–1619 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Kelly, E. Coronado, L. L. Zhao and G. C. Schatz, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 668–677 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Murphy, T. K. Sau, A. M. Gole, C. J. Orendorff, J. Gao, L. Gou, S. E. Hunyadi and T. Li, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13857–13870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Murphy, A. M. Gole, S. E. Hunyadi, J. W. Stone, P. N. Sisco, A. Alkilany, B. E. Kinard and P. Hankins, Chem. Commun., 2008, 5, 544–557 RSC .
X. Huang and M. A. El-Sayed, J. Adv. Res., 2010, 1, 13–28 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Xianyu and X. Jiang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Atwater, J. Wang and Q. Huo, Colloids Surf., B, 2007, 58, 3–7 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hinterwirth, S. Kappel, T. Waitz, T. Prohaska, W. Lindner and M. Lämmerhofer, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1129–1136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Willets and R. P. Van Duyne, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2007, 58, 267–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Porra and H. Scheer, Photosynth. Res., 2019, 140, 215–219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guskov, J. Kern, A. Gabdulkhakov, M. Broser, A. Zouni and W. Saenger, Nat. Struct. Mol. Biol., 2009, 16, 334–342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rukhman, N. Lerner and N. Adir, Photosynth. Res., 2000, 65, 249–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Kutyrev, Tetrahedron, 1991, 47, 8043–8065 CrossRef CAS .

          P. V Kamat, J.-P. Chauvet and R. W. Fessenden, Photoelectrochemistry in Particulate Systems. 4. Photosensitization of a Ti02 Semiconductor with a Chlorophyll Analogue,  1986, vol. 90 Search PubMed .
E. Belgio, M. P. Johnson, S. Jurić and A. V. Ruban, Biophys. J., 2012, 102, 2761–2771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. I. Pinhassi, D. Kallmann, G. Saper, S. Larom, A. Linkov, A. Boulouis, M.-A. M. A. M.-A. Schöttler, R. Bock, A. Rothschild, N. Adir and G. Schuster, PLoS One, 2015, 10, e0122616 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Y. Fu, D. Picot, Y. Choquet, G. Longatte, A. Sayegh, J. Delacotte, M. Guille-Collignon, F. Lemaýtre, F. Rappaport and F. A. Wollman, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15274 CrossRef .
P. D. Ogilvie, L. B. Reschl and S. P. Berg, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1983, 220, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, R. Nagao and T. Noguchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 620–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barazzouk, P. V. Kamat and S. Hotchandani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 716–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Barazzouk, L. Bekalé and S. Hotchandani, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25316–25324 RSC .
A. M. Navarro-Suárez, J. Carretero-González, T. Rojo and M. Armand, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23292–23298 RSC .
A. Trebst, Methods Enzymol., 1972, 24, 146–165 CAS .
N. Adir, H. Zer, S. Shochat and I. Ohad, Photosynth. Res., 2003, 76, 343–370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Larom, F. Salama, G. Schuster and N. Adir, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 9650–9655 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Ananyev and G. C. Dismukes, in Photosynthesis Research, Photosynth Res,  2005, vol. 84, pp. 355–365 Search PubMed .

          N. Plumeré and M. M. Nowaczyk, in Advances in Biochemical Engineering/Biotechnology, Springer Science and Business Media Deutschland GmbH,  2016, vol. 158, pp. 111–136 Search PubMed .
E. Tyystjärvi and E. M. Aro, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1996, 93, 2213–2218 CrossRef .
K. Sugawa, T. Akiyama, H. Kawazumi and S. Yamada, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 3887–3893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cushing, J. Li, F. Meng, T. R. Senty, S. Suri, M. Zhi, M. Li, A. D. Bristow and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15033–15041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Thomann, B. A. Pinaud, Z. Chen, B. M. Clemens, T. F. Jaramillo and M. L. Brongersma, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3440–3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sukharev, T. Seideman, R. J. Gordon, A. Salomon and Y. Prior, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 807–817 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Ghanotakis, C. M. Waggoner, N. R. Bowlby, D. M. Demetriou, G. T. Babcock and C. F. Yocum, Photosynth. Res., 1987, 14, 191–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Asadzadeh-Firouzabadi and H. R. H. H. R. Zare, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 3852–3861 RSC .
J. M. Oliva, J. M. Ríos De La Rosa, M. J. Sayagués, J. A. Sánchez-Alcázar, P. J. Merkling and A. P. Zaderenko, Adv. Nat. Sci.: Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 15001 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional data for spectroscopic characterization, photoelectrochemical performance, and control experiments. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta03350f‡ Both authors contributed equally.§ Senior author.¶ Lead contact.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Steps in synthesis of PSII–AuNPcys-DCBQ. (A) Transmission electron microscope image and schematic of synthesized cysteamine coated AuNP (scale bar is 20 nm) and (B) their surface functionalization with 2,6-dichloro-1,4-benzoquinone followed by (C) complexation with spinach derived PSII and (D) subsequent use in a hybrid nano-bio photoelectrochemical cell.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A) Representative absorbance spectra of PSII (green line), AuNPCys-DCBQ (purple line) and the conjugated system (red line) following the reaction between the two components. (B) PSII–AuNPs binding by centrifugation assay. The colored curves indicate PSII absorbance in the supernatant after centrifugation with increasing concentration of AuNPs from 0 (green) to 1.2 nM (red). Insert pictures show the solutions of PSII in the absence (0 nM) or presence (1.2 nM) of AuNPs after centrifugation. The insert box shows the relative absorbance of the supernatant at 652 nm as a function of AuNP concentration used in the conjugation step.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  AuNPs are functionally linked to PSII excited states. Isolated PSII associated with different concentrations of AuNPcys-DCBQ were excited at 405 nm (the Soret band) and the emission at 682 nm was monitored. (A) Representative measurements of quenching of PSII fluorescence by increasing concentrations of AuNPs. The colored curves show PSII emission spectrum following conjugation with increasing concentration of AuNPCys-DCBQ. The data was further analyzed using double reciprocal analysis (inset). (B) Excited state lifetime measurements, following excitation at 405 nm, for PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ (red line), PSII–AuNPCys (blue line), and unconjugated PSII (green). Only when the PSII complexes are tightly associated to the AuNP via the Cys-DCBQ linker is there a significant decrease in fluorescence lifetime, indicating excited state coupling.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) PSII–AuNPCys-DCBQ conjugate oxygen evolution rates compared to isolated PSII complexes (solid colors). DCMU (10 μM) was used to inhibit PSII activity as a negative control (striped bars). (B) A typical photocurrent density measurement (CA) of the complete conjugated system (red curve), PSII with citrate capped AuNPs (blue curve), isolated unconjugated PSII (green curve) or PSII with cysteamine capped AuNPs without DCBQ (purple curve).	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Absorption spectra of AgNP, AuNP, and PSII demonstrating absorption overlap of the AgNP SPR with chlorophyll in the blue, and AuNP overlap in the green. (B) Maximum photocurrent values obtained for AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and unconjugated PSII under actinic light irraditation (250 mW) (C) Wavelength dependent photocurrent measurements of AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and unconjugated PSII under 660 nm and 530 nm irradiation (5.0 mW). (D) Zero current potential measurements of AuNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, AgNPCys-DCBQ–PSII, and isolated PSII deposited on screen printed electrodes under actinic light.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional data for spectroscopic characterization, photoelectrochemical performance, and control experiments. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta03350f
‡ Both authors contributed equally.
§ Senior author.
¶ Lead contact.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
