Nanostructured Co-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage: current status and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA04949E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA04949E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18674-18707Nanostructured Co-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for energy conversion and storage: current status and perspectives

        
          
            Shasha 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaogang 
            Hao
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Abuliti 
            Abudula
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Guoqing 
            Guan
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Taiyuan University of Technology, Taiyuan 030024, China. E-mail: xghao@hirosaki-u.ac.jp
bEnergy Conversion Engineering Laboratory, Institute of Regional Innovation (IRI), Hirosaki University, 2-1-3, Matsubara, Aomori 030-0813, Japan. E-mail: guan@hirosaki-u.ac.jp
cGraduate School of Science and Technology, Hirosaki University, 1-Bunkyocho, Hirosaki 036-8560, Japan
Received 
      12th May 2019
    , Accepted 10th July 2019First published on 10th July 2019AbstractElectrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are three typical reactions in energy conversion devices, such as water electrolyzers, metal–air batteries and fuel cells. However, the sluggish kinetics of the HER/OER/ORR and their dependency on noble-metal-based catalysts (e.g. Pt, Ir and Ru) hinder the large-scale commercial applications of these devices. Hence, the development of low-cost, efficient, stable and scalable electrocatalysts, especially bifunctional HER/OER or OER/ORR electrocatalysts that could simultaneously catalyze HER/OER or OER/ORR, is highly desired but full of great challenges. To date, non-noble cobalt (Co)-based materials, including cobalt oxide, cobalt phosphides, cobalt chalcogenides (sulfide and selenides), Co-included layered double hydroxides, Co–N–C, Co-based single atoms and their composites, have been widely investigated as bifunctional electrocatalysts owing to their innate electrochemical capabilities and structural adjustability by mixing, doping or combining with other materials, such as carbon materials. In this review, the fundamental mechanisms of the bifunctional electrocatalysis of ORR/OER and OER/HER are introduced and analyzed, and recent progress in the design, synthesis and emerging applications of Co-based materials as bifunctional electrocatalysts for ORR/OER or OER/HER in alkaline electrolytes are summarized and discussed. Finally, the strategies and perspectives for designing novel highly efficient bifunctional cobalt-based electrocatalysts are analyzed. This analysis is expected to highlight the challenges faced by bifunctional noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for the study and development of next-generation electrocatalysts for the HER/ORR/OER.
1. Introduction
The excessive consumption of fossil fuels has caused a serious decrease in traditional energy resources and also deteriorated our environment. There is an urgent need to explore the use of abundant, clean and renewable energy sources.1–3 A promising development in this direction is the use of sustainable energy sources to convert molecules in the environment (e.g. water, carbon dioxide and nitrogen) into high-value-added products (e.g. hydrogen, hydrocarbons and ammonia) via electrochemical conversion pathways.4–6 It would be an attractive option to establish “zero emission” clean energy conversion systems based on “water”, “hydrogen” and “oxygen”. In fact, several advanced energy conversion systems, such as water electrolysis, fuel cells and rechargeable metal–air batteries, have already been widely studied.7–10 Notably, these systems highly depend on a series of electrochemical reactions, including the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in the energy storage system by electrocatalytic water splitting, the hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) in fuel cells, and the ORR and OER in electrochemically rechargeable metal–air batteries (Fig. 1).10–13 However, these hydrogen-based and oxygen-based electrochemical reactions are always limited by slow kinetics, which leads to a large overpotential and a low round-trip efficiency.12–14 Consequently, it is necessary to devote substantial effort focused on the development of highly efficient electrocatalysts for HER/OER/ORR to increase the reaction rate and the efficiency of the total system. Various electrocatalysts have been developed for the improvement of single electrocatalytic reactions. It would be more interesting if the developed electrocatalysts could work well for both ORR and OER or for both the HER and OER because this would decrease the fabrication and operational costs of devices. However, as the HER, OER and ORR occur in completely different conditions, particularly the different electric potentials present during the reaction, only a small number of materials have been found able to act as bifunctional electrocatalysts for catalyzing both reactions.12,13,15,16 In particular, fabricating electrocatalysts with high activity as well as superior durability towards bifunctional activities in the same electrolyte is still a major challenge.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of hydrogen and oxygen cycles in the renewable energy storage and conversion system. 
Currently, Pt-based electrocatalysts are the most efficient ones for HER and ORR, whereas Ir- and Ru-based electrocatalysts exhibit the highest OER activity among the developed catalysts.4,7,17,18 Moreover, it should be noted that the best OER catalyst usually has poor HER activity, while the best ORR catalyst does not offer the best OER catalysis performance, and vice versa. Meanwhile, the limited resources and high cost of noble-metal-based electrocatalysts present a big obstacle to their widespread commercial application. Consequently, it would be more attractive to design efficient non-precious-metal-based electrocatalysts for these electrochemical reactions. Nowadays, transition metal oxides or perovskites are regarded as such a type of cost-effective electrocatalysts for metal–air batteries with reasonable catalytic activity and structural stability.19–23 Meanwhile, transition metal (e.g. Co, Ni and Fe)-based sulfides, phosphides and hydro(oxy)oxides have shown excellent catalytic performances for water splitting.24–28 In particular, carbonaceous nanomaterials with heteroatom doping, especially N-doped carbon materials, have been found to be promising alternative ORR/OER/HER tri-functional electrocatalysts.6,29–31
Cobalt (Co), as one of most abundant elements on the earth, has attracted the most extensive attention for non-precious Co-based electrocatalysts for electrochemical reactions. Co is one of transition metals with different oxidation states (CoII/CoIII), and its metal redox potential is closer to the potential in oxygen reduction to water (E = 1.23 V vs. RHE).32 These Co-based electrocatalysts include oxides,33,34 sulfides,35–38 phosphides,39,40 nitrides,41,42 layered double hydroxides (LDHs),43,44 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)45,46 and single atoms.47,48 They have been applied as potential catalyst candidates for the ORR, OER and HER and shown comparable or even higher activities and superior electrochemical stability in comparison with those of precious metal (e.g. Pt, Ru and Ir)-based electrocatalysts. In particular, Co-containing compounds supported on carbonaceous materials, such as nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs),49,50 reduced graphene oxide (rGO)51–53 and porous carbon,54 have shown greatly boosted electrocatalytic activity together with enhanced electrical conductivity, facilitated mass transport, improved dispersion and exposure of catalytic sites. Moreover, various synthetic strategies have also been developed for the nanostructure engineering of Co-based composites to improve the catalytic performance for the OER in water splitting,55,56 wherein, such nanostructure engineering could result in superior electrical conductivity, high carrier mobility and high electrochemical activity and stability for the electrocatalysts.
In this review, particular attention is paid to the recent progress on the design, synthesis and emerging applications of Co-based materials as bifunctional electrocatalysts for ORR/OER or OER/HER in alkaline electrolytes. First, based on the electrochemical characteristics and the possible reaction pathways of HER, OER and ORR, respectively, the fundamental mechanisms in the bifunctional electrocatalysis of ORR/OER and OER/HER are introduced and analyzed. Then, the synthesis strategy, activity and durability of the various developed Co-based electrocatalysts, including cobalt oxides, cobalt phosphides, cobalt chalcogenides (sulfide, selenides), Co-LDHs, Co–N–C, cobalt-based single atoms and their composites (see Fig. 2), applied for the bifunctional electrocatalysis of OER/HER or ORR/OER are critically reviewed. Finally, the strategies and perspectives for designing novel highly efficient bifunctional cobalt-based electrocatalysts are analyzed. This analysis is expected to highlight the challenges faced in developing bifunctional noble-metal-free electrocatalysts for the study and development of next-generation catalysts for the OER/ORR/OER.
 Fig. 2  Cobalt-based electrocatalysts, including cobalt oxide, cobalt phosphides, cobalt chalcogenides, Co-LDH, Co–N–C, cobalt-based single atom and their composites, in energy conversion applications. 
2. Fundamental aspects of electrocatalytic reactions
2.1 Reaction mechanism for the ORR
The ORR is the cathodic reaction that occurs in electrochemical hydrogen fuel cells and metal–air batteries. The atomic-level understanding of the ORR mechanism is still in its early stage owing to the high complexity of ORR kinetics.10,18 However, it is well known that the electrochemical ORR involves multistep net coupled proton and electron transfers to molecular oxygen at the cathode. Furthermore, there are different four-electron and/or two-electron pathways for O2 electron reduction at different pH values of the electrolytes.57–59
The following presents the pathways demonstrated in alkaline conditions.
(1) A “direct” four-electron reduction to OH−: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− = 4OH− (Eo = 0.41 V)(1)
(2) Alternatively, a two-electron pathway involving reduction via the formation of HO2− intermediates: O2 + H2O + 2e− = HO2− + OH− (Eo = −0.065 V)(2) HO2− + H2O + 2e− = 3OH− (Eo = 0.0867 V)(3)
In acidic solutions, the ORR pathway includes the following steps,
(1) A “direct” four-electron reduction to H2O: O2 + 4H+ + 4e− = 2H2O (Eo = 1.229 V)(4)
(2) A two-electron pathway involving reduction via the formation of H2O2 intermediates: O2 + 2H+ + 2e− = H2O2 (Eo = 0.7 V)(5) H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− = 2H2O (Eo = 1.76 V)(6)
The selectivity towards the four-electron ORR requires improving the efficiency of the electrocatalyst for an increase in the reaction rate. Generally, the ORR involves either a four-electron transfer to reduce oxygen, which is desired in fuel cells and metal–air batteries, or a two-electron pathway, which is attractive for the production of hydrogen peroxide. Moreover, from the above standard thermodynamic potential analysis, it should be mentioned that the ORR reaction with a lower overpotential and better kinetics in alkaline electrolytes is more favourable than that in acidic ones.2,12,18
In the ORR process, multistep electron-transfer processes and complicated oxygen-containing species, such as OOH*, OH* and O*, are involved.10,60,61 The ORR pathways and mechanisms may vary with the different nanostructures of the electrocatalysts. Even for the same catalyst, the ORR behaves as a structure-sensitive reaction. Meanwhile, the O2-adsorption configurations and the O2-surface interactions also affect the ORR pathways.58,62 Herein, understanding how to control the binding energies of the reactive intermediates on the surface is a key issue to design efficient ORR electrocatalysts. Based on the free energies of all the above intermediates on a variety of metal surfaces, a “volcano plot” of the theoretical ORR catalytic activity to ΔEO was obtained (see Fig. 3a).10,18,57 It could be observed that the noble metal Pt displays the theoretically best ORR electrocatalytic activity. If the binding energy of a metal with oxygen is too weak, the ORR catalytic activity will be limited by the proton–electron transfer to  (i.e. associative mechanism) or by the splitting of the O–O bond in O2 (i.e. dissociative mechanism). In contrast, if the binding energy of the metal with oxygen is too strong, the ORR activity will be restricted by the proton–electron transfer to O* and OH*. In this case, the generated H2O is difficult to be desorbed, which means it will continue to occupy the active sites so that O2 cannot be adsorbed on these active sites, thus reducing the ORR electrocatalytic activity. It should be noted that Pt is not located at the “summit of the volcano” (Fig. 3a), but alloying with other 3d transition metals has been identified as a good way to further improve its performance.63–65
 Fig. 3  (a) ORR volcano plot for metals, and (b) OER volcano plot for metal oxides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER volcano plot for metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
2.2 Reaction mechanism for the OER
The OER is the reverse process of the ORR. It is the anode reaction in electrochemical water splitting and metal–air batteries. Compared with the ORR, the OER also involves a more complex process. As stated above, Pt is the best pure metal ORR catalyst; however, the experimental results have indicated that it is not so good for OER, indicating that the OER has a different reaction mechanism from the ORR on Pt. In general, the microscopic reversibility for the reverse reactions only exists in a process taking place close to the equilibrium state. In electrochemical reactions, when a large overpotential is used to drive the reverse reactions, the requirement for the catalysis in each direction could be substantially different.17,66 Moreover, the OER needs a higher positive potential, and in this case, the metals, even Pt, generally undergo oxidation, which results in a different surface state from that under ORR conditions.57,67
In the OER process, oxygen is evolved from a metal oxide surface at a high potential, but not from the bare metal surface, and as such, the OER mechanism is different for metal oxides with different surface structures.66,68 Even for metal oxides with identical compositions, as the thickness and structure of their oxide surface layers and synthesis methods are different, different electrokinetic profiles could be obtained. Consequently, the OER mechanism over metal oxides is till ambiguous. Herein, to study the mechanism of the OER electrocatalytic reaction, it is very important to develop various experimental or theoretical methods to quickly and accurately determine the surface structure and active chemical composition of the electrocatalyst. The general mechanisms for the OER over metal oxides in acidic and alkaline electrolytes are shown as follows.11,69,70
In an alkaline solution,
Anode reaction: 4OH− → 2O2 + 2H2O (l) + 4e− (E0a = −0.4 V)(7)
With the following two intermediate processes at first: OH− + * → OHads + e−(8) OHads + OH− → Oads + H2O + e−(9)where * and “ads” represent the active sites of the catalyst surface and the adsorption on the catalyst surface, respectively. Then, the formation of O2 could be via two possible pathways. One is through the direct combination of two Oads intermediates to produce O2 (g): 2Oads → O2(10)
The other one involves the generation of the OOHads intermediate first by the reaction of Oads with OH−, which is subsequently combined with OH− and decomposed to O2 (g). Here, the thermodynamic barrier of reaction (10) is always larger than those of reactions (11) and (12): Oads + OH− → OOHads + e−(11) OOHads + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−(12)
In an acidic medium,
Anode reaction:2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e− (E0a = 1.23 V)
With the following proposed reaction processes: H2O + * → OHads + H+ + e−(13) OHads → Oads + H+ + e−(14) 2Oads → O2(15) Oads + H2O → OOHads + H+ + e−(16) OOHads → O2 + H+ + e−(17)
Although the OER mechanisms are different in alkaline and acidic media, OHads and Oads intermediates are always involved in the OER process so that ΔGO − ΔGOH can be used as a descriptor for OER electrocatalysts. To date, the most common electrocatalysts for OER are generally metal oxides, and their volcano plots have been also constructed by ΔGO − ΔGOH for a wide variety of metal oxide surfaces, including rutile, perovskite, spinel, rock salt and bixbyite oxides (Fig. 3b). It has been found that the experimental overpotentials at 1 mA cm−2 for some electrocatalysts agree well with the theoretical overpotential volcano peak when plotted against this simple descriptor (Fig. 3b).17,57,71
2.3 Reaction mechanism for HER
The HER occurs on the cathodic reaction in electrochemical water splitting, which is a classic two-electron transfer reaction.4,7,72 A good understanding of the HER process is also greatly necessary to gain an insight into how to determine the reaction rate, how to decrease the reaction overpotential and accordingly how to design and synthesize efficient electrocatalysts. Here, the HER rate is highly dependent on the pH of the electrolyte. In different electrolytes, the HER can be performed chemically by different routes, which are shown in the following.7,73,74
In an acidic electrolyte, the HER generally follows the following steps:
(1) Reaction of an electron with a proton to produce an adsorbed hydrogen atom (Hads) on the electrocatalyst surface.
Volmer step: H3O+ + e− → Hads + H2O(18)
(2) The Hads combines with a proton and electron to produce a hydrogen molecule.
Heyrovsky step: H3O+ + e− + Hads → H2 + H2O(19)
(3) Or, two adsorbed hydrogen atoms are coupled together to produce a hydrogen molecule.
Tafel step: Hads + Hads → H2(20)
In an alkaline electrolyte, the HER proceeds via a different Volmer reaction and a different Heyrovsky reaction.
(1) Due to the lack of H+, molecular H2O instead of H+ couples with an electron to convert into an adsorbed OH− and an adsorbed hydrogen atom on the catalyst.
Volmer step: H2O + e− → OH− + Hads(21)
(2) The Hads combines with molecular H2O and an electron to produce a hydrogen molecule.
Heyrovsky step: Hads + H2O + e− → OH− + H2(22)
(3) The Tafel step is the same as that occurring in acid electrolytes by the coupling of two adsorbed hydrogen atoms to produce a hydrogen molecule.
Tafel step: Hads + Hads → H2(23)
It can be clearly seen from the above HER mechanism in different media that the Volmer reaction in the alkaline solution needs to break the H–O–H bond before adsorbing Had, which is more difficult to achieve than the reduction of H3O+ in acidic conditions. Therefore, an acidic electrolyte is more favourable for the HER than an alkaline one.
In the acidic solution, it is known that Pt is the best catalyst for HER. Combining the experimentally measured exchange current densities with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, it was found that the free energy of hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH) on Pt is approximately zero (Fig. 3c).57,74,75 Therefore, an optimal non-noble HER electrocatalyst should also provide appropriate surface properties with a free energy for hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH) near zero.
It is noteworthy from the “volcano plots” shown in Fig. 3a–c that compared with the similar transition metals Fe and Ni, the metal Co theoretically exhibits superior ORR and HER activities. Meanwhile, the theoretical OER activity of CoOx is higher than that of NiOx. Therefore, Co-based catalysts could have higher activity and electrochemical stability towards the ORR/OER/HER. In this review, for the novel Co-based electrocatalysts, particular attention was paid to the corresponding synthesis methods, electrocatalytic performance towards ORR/OER/HER, and potential strategies for improving the activity.
3. Criteria for efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts
3.1 Water splitting (HER/OER) catalysts
Regardless of the electrolytes in which water splitting takes place, the theoretically thermodynamic voltage of water splitting is 1.23 V at 25 °C and 1 atm, i.e.
Total reaction: H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 (Eo = −1.23 V)(24)
In an acidic electrolyte,
Cathode: 2H+ + 2e− → H2(25)
Anode: H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e−(26)
In neutral and alkaline electrolytes,
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−(27)
Anode: 2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e−(28)
However, the real water splitting process always requires a higher applied potential than the thermodynamic potential value (i.e. 1.23 V at 25 °C). This excess potential is known as the overpotential (η), which is the voltage required for overcoming adverse issues, such as the intrinsic activation barriers present on both the anode (ηa) and cathode (ηc), and other resistances (ηother), including the solution resistance and contact resistance.4,7 Thus, the practical operational voltage (Eop) for water splitting can be expressed as.7,12,75,76 Eop = 1.23 + ηa + ηc + ηother(29)
In order to make the water splitting reaction energy efficient, as indicated in eqn (29), the overpotentials related to the performances of the anode (ηa) and cathode (ηc) and other resistances (ηother) should be clearly decreased. Herein, ηother is directly dependent on optimizing the design of the electrolytic cell, whereas ηa and ηc can be significantly reduced by using highly active OER and HER electrocatalysts, respectively. That is to say, developing efficient and earth-abundant water splitting electrocatalysts is highly desirable in order to make the overall water splitting more economical. Besides electrode materials, the effective active area of an electrode is also important for reduction of the overpotential. Herein, an improvement of the effective active area can be achieved by optimization of the electrode preparation method (e.g. nanostructuring) for the general materials. In addition, during the water splitting process, lots of bubbles are generated on the electrode surface, but some of them do not get away from the electrode surface immediately, which directly leads to a loss of the effective active area, thus the increasing the overpotential. The benchmark electrocatalysts for the OER are Ru- and Ir-based oxides catalysts in both alkaline and acidic electrolytes, whereas for HER, it is Pt. It should be noted that good OER catalysts always have poor HER activity, and vice versa.11,13,57,72 In particular, bi-functional catalysts for OER/HER can reduce the fabrication cost and simplify the synthetic approach. Thus, it is highly imperative to develop highly efficient bifunctional non-noble electrocatalysts towards both HER and OER in the same electrolyte in terms of simplifying the system and reducing the cost.
According to the above reaction mechanism for the HER process in alkaline conditions, it involves an HO–H dissociation reaction, which proceeds slower than in acidic media, thus affecting the overall performance in water electrolysis.12,56,72 The OER involves four sequential proton-coupled electron transfer steps, so it is more difficult to accomplish the OER compared to the HER.17,66 Moreover, most nonprecious OER electrocatalysts cannot work in acidic electrolytes owing to their acid-soluble characteristics.11,13,77 In other words, in the overall acidic water splitting process, scarce and expensive acid-insoluble noble metal-based OER electrocatalysts are currently needed to be used. In this regard, highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts that could concurrently catalyze the HER and OER in alkaline electrolytes may be the best choice to overcome the instability issue of OER catalysts and definitely to improve the overall water-splitting efficiency, but this remains a grand challenge.
For water splitting, the dependence of the steady-state current density on the anodic or cathodic overpotentials (ηa, ηc) can be depicted by Tafel plots. The overpotential (η) is logarithmically related to the current density (j) and its linear portion can be fitted to the Tafel equation (η > 0.05 V):12,14,72η = a + blog(j)where b is the Tafel slope, which is related to the mechanism of the electrode reaction. From this Tafel equation, when η = 0, the obtained current density is called the exchange current density (j0), which represents the intrinsic activity of the electrode material in the equilibrium state. Thus, a bifunctional catalytic material possessing a high j0 and a small b is desirable for both the HER and OER. Generally, when the bifunctional electrocatalytic performance is evaluated for water splitting, it is better to maintain a similar mass loading of the active material on both the anodic and cathodic electrodes and to then compare the relevant overpotentials at the standard current density of 10 mA cm−2 (this current density value is that expected for a solar water splitting device to achieve a 12.3% efficiency).7,78
3.2 Oxygen (ORR/OER) catalysts
For low-temperature fuel cells (LTFCs), unitized regenerative fuel cells (URFCs) and metal–air batteries, both ORR (discharge) and OER (charge) are important in parallel (Fig. 1). Therefore, the development of efficient bifunctional catalysts for both the OER and ORR has also become a hotspot nowadays. However, as the ORR and OER have slow kinetics, to improve the performance, a high overpotential is always required to drive them. Meanwhile, good ORR catalysts, such as Pt-based catalysts, are always ineffective for OER because the catalysts, even Pt, generally undergo oxidation at the high positive potential required for the OER, which limits their catalytic ability for the OER. Likewise, the most active catalyst for the OER does not offer the best ORR catalysis performance.10,60
The ORR and OER over bifunctional electrocatalysts always involve four elementary reaction steps, in which the ORR proceeds via the formation of OOH* from the adsorbed O2, followed by its further reduction to O* and OH*, whereas OER proceeds in the reverse direction, as the following equations:13,57,60,79* + O2 (g) + H2O (l) + e− ↔ HOO* + OH−HOO* + e− ↔ O* + OH−O* + H2O (l) + e− ↔ HO* + OH−HO* + e− ↔ OH− + *
Overall in an alkaline solution:O2 + 2H2O (l) + 4e− ↔ 4OH−

Fig. 4 depicts the theoretical activity on the metal oxide surface and the metal surface as a function of the oxygen binding energy. One can see that the ORR activity is limited by the OH* reduction step (black line) and O2 reduction step (blue line). In contrast, the OER activity is restricted by the OOH* (green line) and O* formation steps (red line). It should be noted that the binding energies of the intermediates (e.g. O*, OH* and OOH*) for the most active ORR and OER catalysts are not identical, and thus the most active catalysts for the OER are also much less effective for the ORR, and vice versa.80,81
 Fig. 4  Early activity volcano trends of the ORR and OER. The theoretical activity on (a) the metal oxide surface and (b) the metal surface is depicted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Based on the above analyses, excellent ORR/OER bifunctional catalysts require moderate adsorption energies of the oxygen-containing groups close to the theoretical equilibrium potential (dashed line in Fig. 4). In experiments for the ORR, the current density at −3 mA cm−2 is close to the half-wave potential of the best ORR catalyst (Pt/C), and for OER, the current density at 10 mA cm−2 is equivalent to the expected current density for an ideal solar cell device with 10% efficiency. The potential gap parameter (ΔE) between the ORR current density of −3 mA cm−2 (Ej=−3) and the OER current density of 10 mA cm−2 (Ej=10) is often regarded as the main evaluation factor for the overall oxygen activity of bifunctional electrocatalysts. In some previous studies, the potential gap between the ORR half-wave potential (E1/2) and OER potential at 10 mA cm−2 was also considered as a criterion for assessing the overall bifunctional activity. It should be pointed out that the comparison of the potential gap should be made based on similar catalyst loading amounts.82–84
To obtain bifunctional electrocatalysts with better performances, various strategies, such as morphology engineering, interface engineering and defect engineering, have been considered to make them suitable for water splitting, fuel cells, and metal–air batteries. The important criteria for efficient bifunctional electrodes can be summarized as follows: (i) the electrocatalyst should be low-cost materials with highly dispersed active sites; (ii) the electrocatalyst should have a high surface area in contact with the electrolyte and have an appropriate surface adsorption energy in contact with H2, O2 and H2O; (iii) the electrocatalyst should have high conductivity for electron transportation; (iv) the electrocatalyst should have high corrosion resistance under strong oxidizing conditions as well as a high applied potential; and (v) the electrocatalysts should be prevented from peeling off from the electrode during the long-term electrocatalysis process. In this account, we focus on Co-based electrocatalysts in the following section. By reviewing the research and development progress on bifunctional electrocatalysts for efficient HER/OER, and ORR/OER, it is expected that we could provide some insights for the future design of more efficient bifunctional electrocatalysts.
4. Cobalt-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for HER and OER
4.1 Cobalt-based oxides
Co-based oxides are considered as highly efficient alternative OER electrocatalysts, but their solubility in acidic electrolytes and sluggish kinetics for HER in alkaline electrolytes remain issues.33,85,86 Therefore, it is still a challenge to exploit novel strategies to obtain bifunctional Co-based oxide electrocatalysts with high efficiency for both HER and OER, even in alkaline electrolytes.
Morphology engineering is one effective way to increase the catalytic activity as well as the reaction rate. Compared with the bulk solid structure, constructing a special nanostructure could endow the catalysts with a higher specific surface area to expose more active sites and to simultaneously accelerate the subsequent surface reactions. For instance, Zhang et al.87 fabricated novel self-assembled hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids with 1D nanowire subunits (Fig. 5a), and found that the obtained NiCo2O4-based electrode displayed excellent activity towards overall water splitting with a 10 mA cm−2 current density achieved by applying a cell voltage of only 1.65 V potential across the two NiCo2O4-based electrodes. Zheng et al.88 prepared CuCoO nanowires (CuCoO-NWs) (Fig. 5b), which showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity for overall water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage 1.61 V. Herein, the excellent electrocatalytic capability of CuCoO-NWs is attributed to the formation of a uniform 1D porous architecture with a high exposed surface area, efficient electron transfer and enhanced mechanical stability. Kim et al.89 deposited a hierarchical spinel iron cobalt oxide with a layer structure on nickel foam (FeCoO-NF) (Fig. 5c), and used this for overall water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte. A current density of 10 mA cm−2 was achieved at a cell voltage of 1.62 V. It was considered that the layered morphology of FeCoO favoured effective charge transfer from the electrolyte and allowed the facile dissipation of the gaseous product, thereby enhancing the whole water-splitting performance. Thus, a well-designed morphology could increase the specific surface area, tailor the surface active sites, improve electron transfer and enhance dissipation of the gaseous product. This is a promising route to enhance the kinetics and to reduce the overpotential for bifunctional Co-based oxide electrocatalysts.
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of the CuCoO-NWs from ref. 88, copyright 2016, Wiley. (c) The morphology analysis of FeCoO-NF from ref. 89, copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) TEM images of the CoMnO@CN superlattices from ref. 91, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of NC/CuCo/CuCoOx nanowires. (f) Illustration model and the highway of the continuous electron transfer of the integrated Mott–Schottky bifunctional electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Another way is the combination of Co-based oxides with high conductivity materials, including metals, metal alloys and heteroatom-doped carbon-based materials. Although Co oxides have essentially lower electrocatalytic activity for HER in alkaline electrolytes, Wang et al.90 designed a multi-component bifunctional electrocatalyst (CoOx@NC) by using nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) to protect Co oxide, which showed excellent HER and OER performances with a relatively high current density of 20 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.55 V. It was considered that the improved performance could be primarily attributed to the high conductivity of carbon, the synergistic effect of metallic cobalt and cobalt oxide, the incorporation of rich nitrogen into the carbon architecture and the stability of carbon-encapsulated CoOx nanoparticles. Furthermore, Zheng's group91 reported a highly ordered NC-coated nano Co-Mn oxide catalyst with a superlattice structure (CoMnO@CN) (Fig. 5d), which exhibited much better HER performance than some metal sulfides, selenides and phosphates. It was found that the catalyst with a Co/Mn ratio of 1/1 displayed the best electrocatalytic activity in alkaline electrolytes with low overpotentials of 71 and 263 mV to achieve a high current density of 20 mA cm−2 for the HER and OER, respectively. In comparison with the corresponding MnO@CN, CoO@CN and CoMnO@C catalysts, the CoMnO@CN electrocatalysts showed a lower overpotential with a higher current density. Moreover, when this electrocatalyst was used in both the anode and cathode for overall water splitting, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low cell voltage of 1.5 V was obtained. Herein, the synergistic interaction between Co and Mn in the bimetal oxides of CoMnO nanoparticles displayed a higher activity for OER than the mono-metal oxides of MnO or CoO. Meanwhile, the surrounding nitrogen-doped carbon framework provided active sites for the HER and simultaneously enhanced the conductivity for electron transfer and improved the structural stability. As a result, the electrocatalytic activity for overall water splitting was improved. Zhang et al.92 embedded a NiCo-NiCoO2 heterostructure in NC (NiCo-NiCoO2@NC), which exhibited good activities towards HER, with an overpotential of 94 mV, and OER, with an overpotential 318 mV at 10 mA cm−2. In particular, for overall water splitting, a current density of 20 mA cm−2 at a low cell voltage of only 1.44 V was obtained, which was even superior to the pair of noble metal systems Pt (−) and RuO2 (+). Herein, the prominent synergistic effect of the Ni-Co alloy and NiCoO2, and the protecting function of the NC coating on the NiCo-NiCoO2 nanoparticles made this catalyst display remarkable water-splitting performance in an alkaline electrolyte. In addition, Sun et al.93 developed the integration of a metal and semiconductor as Mott–Schottky hybrids by utilizing metallic nanoalloys doped on various defective oxide nanowire arrays of CuCo/CuCoOx as a typical Mott–Schottky electrocatalyst embedded in N-doped carbon (NC/CuCo/CuCoOx) (Fig. 5e), which exhibited an overpotential of 112 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for HER, and simultaneously delivered an overpotential of 190 mV at 10 mA cm−2 for OER. Most importantly, when the NC/CuCo/CuCoOx architecture was applied for overall water splitting, it presented a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.53 V with excellent stability due to the channel for continuous electron transport among the metal alloy, semiconductor and nitrogen-doped carbon (NC), as demonstrated in Fig. 5f.
Notably, cobalt-based oxides are great prospective electrocatalysts for OER in alkaline solutions, while cobalt based layered double hydroxides (LDHs) and phosphides have been extensively studied as efficient electrocatalysts for HER also in alkaline electrolytes. Therefore, it is expected that integrating them together would create more active bifunctional electrocatalysts with a hierarchical nanostructure for overall water splitting. In this view, Zhao et al.94 designed and synthesized a 3D hierarchical porous NiFe/NiCo2O4 catalyst with an intermediate layer of vertically aligned macroporous NiCo2O4 nanoflakes and top-most NiFe(oxy) hydroxide (NiFe-LDH) mesoporous nanosheets on nickel foam (NF) with a supermacroporous structure (Fig. 6a). This required a cell voltage of 1.67 V to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for overall water splitting. The excellent bifunctional catalytic activity could be attributed to the strong synergistic interactions between the NiFe-LDH and NiCo2O4 layers. Similarly, Geng et al.95 fabricated a novel hierarchical hybrid electrode by growing NiFe-LDH ultrathin sheets on NiCo2O4 nanowires (Fig. 6b) as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst towards overall water splitting. Due to the unique hieratical architecture and strong chemical coupling between NiCo2O4 and NiFe-LDH at the interface, the hybrid electrode showed superior catalytic activity with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low cell voltage of 1.60 V. The above two studies clearly indicate that varying the morphology of the same materials could result in different activities. In our recent study,96 CoNi-LDH ultrathin sheets were grown on CoFe2O4 nanosheets coated on 3D porous nickel foam (CoNi/CoFe2O4/NF) (Fig. 6c), which showed dramatically increased bifunctional electrocatalytic activity for OER and HER with a low cell voltage of 1.57 V to achieve 10 mA cm−2 in overall water splitting with an alkaline electrolyte. Herein, the synergistic effect between the CoNi-LDH and CoFe2O4 layers also played an important role in the performance. In addition, Gu et al.97 synthesized a hierarchical NiCo2O4/Ni2P core@shell nanocone array on NF (Fig. 6d). They was considered that the synergetic effect between the NiCo2O4 “core” and the Ni2P “shell” resulted in the enhanced catalytic performance.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of NiFe nanosheets/NiCo2O4 nanoflakes/NF composites from ref. 94, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of NiFe-LDH supported on the topmost NiCo2O4 nanowires from ref. 95, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of CoNi nanosheets/CoFe2O4 flowers/NF composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of NiCo2O4/Ni2P nanocone arrays from ref. 97, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
4.2 Cobalt-based nitrides
Recently, cobalt-based nitrides as non-noble metal electrocatalysts have been extensively studied because of their unique 3d electron numbers.98,99 By integrating nitrogen atoms into the Co–Co framework, cobalt nitride shows a characteristic metallic behaviour and unique electron structure, which can strongly absorb H2O molecules, thus improving the electrocatalytic activity for water splitting in alkaline electrolytes.100 Cobalt nitrides with a binary state, such as CoN, Co2N, Co3N and Co4N, have been theoretically and experimentally identified to have outstanding and impressive OER activity. However, they are rarely used as electrocatalysts for HER. As a case study, Balogun et al.99 tuned the d-orbital of metallic Co4N nanowire via the rapid formation of iron oxyhydroxide (FeOOH) on it. Experimental analysis showed that an overall water-splitting device assembled based on such a bifunctional FeOOH@Co4N/SSM delivered an overpotential of 1.59 V at 10 mA cm−2 with excellent stability at different current densities ranging from 10 to 100 mA cm−2 for up to 4 days. Theoretical analysis showed that the hybridization of Co4N with FeOOH could optimize and promote the free energy of H adsorption due to the tuning of the d-orbital (Fig. 7a and b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Comparison of the charge density distributions on FeOOH@Co4N/SSM compared with the pristine Co4N/SSM. (b) Polarization curves comparison of bifunctional FeOOH@Co4N/SSM, Co4N/SSM and Pt-C/IrO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of the preparation of NSP-Co3FeNx nanowires by annealing with NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Crystal structure model of Co5.47N from ref. 98, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Among various cobalt-based nitrides, some bimetallic nitrides have been found to have better performance in overall water splitting because the bimetallic metal atoms bring in more variation in the atomic arrangement with more favourable electron structures. Meanwhile, the morphologies and substrates of cobalt based nitrides also significantly affect the activity. Recently, Wang et al.101 developed Co3FeNx nanowires deposited on NF (denoted NSP-Co3FeNx/NF) by a hydrothermal approach followed with an annealing process in NH3 atmosphere (Fig. 7c), which exhibited excellent OER and HER activity towards overall water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.539 V. Ma et al.102 designed NiCo2N nanosheets on NF through a facile electrodeposition process followed by a one-step annealing process in NH3 atmosphere. The alkaline water electrolyzer using a NiCo2N/NF electrode as both the cathode and anode afforded 1.7 V to drive 10 mA cm−2 with superior durability during bulk water electrolysis. Chen et al.103 fabricated porous CoN nanowires on carbon cloth (CC) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst, which exhibited a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.587 V for overall water splitting in alkaline solution and a long-term stability at a high current density (∼360 mA cm−2) over 37 h. Notably, Jun et al.104 prepared CoNi3N nanograss on the carbon cloth (NCN/CC), which demonstrated superior overall water splitting performance in alkaline solution with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.56 V and tremendous stability over 240 h. The above results indicate that the optimized structure could greatly enhance both the OER and HER performances, and that bimetallic nitrides are more favourable as electrocatalysts than the individual metal ones owing to their specific electronic structures.
Cobalt-based nitride composites derived by combining different metal nitrides, metal or carbon materials have been widely investigated to further improve the OER and HER performances. For example, Kong et al.105 designed and fabricated N-doped carbon@CoN/Cu3N nanoarrays with a hollow tubular structure on copper foam (CF) (namely, NC@CoN/Cu3N/CF), which displayed improved electrical conductivity, abundant exposed active catalytic sites, numerous “highways” for charge transport and synergistic effects of each component. As an electrocatalyst for overall water splitting in alkaline solution, NC@CoN/Cu3N/CF served as both the anode and cathode, delivering a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a quite low cell voltage of 1.62 V, and displayed excellent long-term stability (15 h at 20 mA cm−2). Wang et al.106 developed a self-supported 3D CuCoNx-based porous nanosheet array with a conductive nitrogen-doped carbon shell grown on carbon fibre (NC@CuCo2Nx/CF) as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for both the OER and HER, which yielded a voltage of 1.55 V at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Combined with density functional theoretical calculations, it was found that the robust conjugation of CoN and CuN could modify the electronic structure and optimize the intermediate adsorption energy, thus improving the electrocatalytic activity. Wu et al.98 encapsulated cobalt nitride (Co5.47N) nanoparticles within three-dimensional (3D) N-doped porous carbon (Co5.47N NP@N-PC) via a simultaneous nitridation and carbonization procedure using ZIF-67 MOF as a self-assembly template, and used this as a highly active bifunctional electrocatalyst. Only the N atoms fully occupied the octahedral interstitials of the Co metal lattice, while some N atoms were absent in the octahedral interstitials and formed corresponding vacancies in Co5.47N (Fig. 7d). Such an occupation of N atoms in Co5.47N not only provided the cobalt nitride metallic property but also strengthened the tendency for electron donation via the formation of Co–N bonds as well as provided more active sites via the generation of vacancies. An electrolyzer with the Co5.47N NP@N-PC electrode as both the cathode and anode catalyst in alkaline solution drove a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of only 1.62 V. The impressive electrocatalytic activity of Co5.47N NP@N-PC was mainly ascribed to the rich nitrogen vacancies in the Co5.47N lattice and the electronic modulation of the N-doped carbon.
4.3 Cobalt-based layered double hydroxides
As a family of 2D layered materials, layered double hydroxides (LDHs) are regarded as promising electrocatalyst candidates for water splitting and other energy conversions due to their favourable activity, low cost, abundance and ease of scale-up. The general formula of LDHs is , in which M2+ and M3+ are metal cations, and An− is a charge balancing anion107,108 (Fig. 8a). In particular, metallic cations from a transition group can improve the charge transport of the material. Herein, the charge-transport process could be realized as follows: “electron hopping” along the layers occurs owing to an inner redox reaction of the M2+ and M3+ couple. Moreover, it should be noted that the LDH possesses a unique layered structure with the anions and water located in the interlayer of metal cations, which are favourable for the diffusion of water molecules, ensuring intimate contact with the electrocatalyst.107,109 In addition, the interlayer spacing is beneficial for the release of gaseous products.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structural model of the typical LDH with different M2+/M3+ molar ratios from ref. 107, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of hierarchical Cu@CoFe LDH core–shell nanostructure catalyst, and (c) schematic illustration of the bifunctional catalytic of 3D core–shell Cu@CoFe LDH electrocatalysts from ref. 108, copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the materials' structures. After being vigorously stirred in DMF–ethanol solution, the high-affinity CO32− interlayers of the CoFe LDHs were dissolved and exchanged for HCOO− ions. The consequent exfoliated process exposes more oxygen vacancies as active sites and improves the electronic conductivity. Note, d1 and d2 are the interlayer distances, d2 > d1 from ref. 112, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Li et al.110 reported NiCo-LDH ultrathin nanosheets grown on NF as a bifunctional electrocatalyst, which achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.66 V for overall water splitting in an alkaline solution. Herein, the 2D ultrathin nanosheets of NiCo LDH exposed more active sites, and simultaneously promoted charge transport and diffusion of the reactants and produced gases. Bao et al.111 synthesized a new type of CoMo-LDH ultrathin nanosheet as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. Remarkably, compared with the CoMn-LDH bulk electrocatalyst, the ultrathin structure could expose more active sites. Moreover, the doping of Mo6+ could also tune the electronic structure of LDH. As a result, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.63 V with excellent stability for 30 h was obtained in an overall water splitting cell. Notably, Ren et al.108 designed a novel hierarchical Cu@CoFe LDH core–shell nanostructure catalyst (Fig. 8b) for efficient overall water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte. The optimized composite afforded a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.681 V for overall water splitting. Herein, the unique layered structure of CoFe-LDH nanosheets as the shell was favourable for the diffusion of water molecules and release of gaseous products, ensuring intimate contact between the electrocatalyst and electroactive species. In addition, the Cu NWs cores provided highways for electron transportation, decreasing the electron transport distance and barrier, and hence facilitated the reaction kinetics (Fig. 8c).
Commonly, LDH materials have a lamellar or platy morphology, which can be directly exfoliated or delaminated into lamellar nanosheets through several chemical procedures, exposing more edge sites. Yang et al.112 first reported the delamination and exfoliation of CoFe LDHs in DMF–ethanol solvent (CoFe LDH-F) (Fig. 8d), resulting in enhanced catalytic activity for both OER and HER. Strikingly, a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.63 V with long-term stability was achieved when used as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting. Herein, benefiting from the exfoliation process, more coordinatively unsaturated metals were created so that the intrinsic electronic conductivity was improved. However, the exfoliation was complicated and time-consuming, which makes it incompatible for practical application.
4.4 Cobalt-based phosphides
Transition metal phosphides (TMPs) have received enormous attention due to their comparable electrocatalytic properties to noble metals. The activity of TMP catalysts is mainly attributed to their proper surface with proton and hydride acceptor sites, resulting in moderate bonding energy between the phosphorus in the structure and the reaction intermediates during water splitting.56,113,114 Among the TMP electrocatalysts, cobalt-based phosphides have been widely studied as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the HER and OER due to their excellent electrical conductivity and good durability in both acidic and basic electrolytes.
It is well known that the catalytic activity of a catalyst is significantly affected by the density of its active sites. The exposure of more active sites from the bulk materials is an effective way to achieve an enhancement in electroreaction performance.114–116 In general, nanostructuring of the catalysts can help to expose more active sites. To date, various strategies for the nanostructuring of Co-based phosphides have been developed. For example, Li et al.117 designed a kind of hollow polyhedral cobalt phosphide (CoP hollow polyhedron) (Fig. 9a) by using Co-centred metal–organic frameworks as a template with simple oxidation and phosphorization calcinations. The as-prepared CoP hollow polyhedron, which had a large specific surface area and high porosity providing rich catalytic active sites, showed excellent electrocatalytic performances for both the HER and OER in both acidic and alkaline media, respectively, and a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 159 and 400 mV for the HER and OER, respectively. Wang et al.118 reported a cobalt phosphide with a leaf-like nanoarray topology assembled on carbon cloth (CoP NS/CC) via annealing a template precursor of the ZIF-L-Co nanosheet array on CC followed by phosphorization (Fig. 9b), which exhibited satisfactory overall water-splitting efficiency in an alkaline solution, with a voltage of 1.67 V needed to afford a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, the nanosheet array structure endowed the CoP NS/CC with more catalytically active sites, improved the charge-transfer kinetics and facilitated electrolyte penetration and diffusion of the generated gas in the water-splitting process. Meanwhile, Liao et al.119 synthesized cobalt phosphide on carbon cloth (CoP@CC) (Fig. 9c) via a simple electrochemical deposition method followed by a phosphorization process, which presented superior HER performance in both acid and alkaline electrolytes and excellent OER activity in an alkaline electrolyte. When applied as both anode and cathode catalysts to overall water splitting, the CoP@CC only required a low cell voltage of 1.68 V to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, inspired by its satisfying ORR activity, the CoP@CC was also used as an air-electrode in zinc–air batteries, which outputted an open-circuit potential of 0.6 V and a power density of ∼30 mW cm−2. Chen et al.116 fabricated porous cobalt poly-phosphide nanoneedle arrays on carbon fibre paper (CoP3 NAs/CFP) (Fig. 9d) via a topotactic phosphidation of the Co(OH)F/CFP precursor. As a result, the CoP3 NAs/CFP electrocatalyst exhibited outstanding HER activity over a wide range of pH values, including an overpotential of 65 mV in acidic solution, 165 mV in neutral solution and 119 mV in alkaline solution, respectively, to afford the standard current density of 10 mA cm−2. Furthermore, the electrocatalytic activities of the CoP3 NAs/CFP for the OER under 1.0 M KOH conditions showed an overpotential of 334 mV to drive a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Deng et al.120 synthesized Co2P nanorods (Fig. 9e) through a substrate- and template-free facile phosphating reaction. The prepared Co2P nanorods exhibited superior bifunctional activity with overpotentials of 87 mV for HER and 310 mV for OER at 10 mA cm−2, respectively, when compared with Co2P/CoP with a branched nanostructure, CoP nanoparticles and commercial Co2P in an alkaline electrolyte. The excellent bifunctional activity was attributed to a high charge transfer efficiency, large contact area with the electrolyte and a large number of exposed active sites provided by the rod-like nanostructure. Recently, Lou and co-workers121 fabricated open and hierarchical Ni–Co–P hollow nanobricks (HNBs) via the assembly of oriented 2D nanosheets (Fig. 9f). Benefiting from the unique nano-architecture with a large electrolyte-accessible surface and abundant mass diffusion pathways, the as-prepared Ni–Co–P HNBs exhibited a low cell voltage of 1.62 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 when used as both the anode and cathode in an alkaline electrolyte.
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of CoP hollow polyhedron from ref. 117, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of leaf-like CoP NS/CC from ref. 118, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of CoP nanosheet supported on carbon cloth (CoP/CC) from ref. 119, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of CoP3 NAs/CFP ref. 116, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of Co2P nanorods from ref. 120, copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) FESEM image of as-prepared hierarchical Ni–Co–P HNBs from ref. 121, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Electroconductivity is an important parameter for electrocatalytic reactions since it can effectively affect the electron and proton transfer during the electrocatalytic process. Increasing the intrinsic conductivity of phosphide materials is considered a good strategy to promote the catalytic performance towards the OER and HER. In general, the conductivity of phosphides changes along with their crystal structure and stoichiometric form.12,56 Blanchard et al.122 found that metal-rich phosphides had less ionic but more metallic characteristics through X-ray photoelectron and absorption spectroscopy (XPS) analysis along with a charge potential model, and that the metal-rich phosphides exhibited higher catalytic activity than the corresponding less-metallic ones. Xiao et al.123 observed a similar phenomenon in the case of cobalt phosphide. Two different cobalt phosphides (Co2P and CoP) with the same morphology were prepared with the assistance of microwave irradiation. Compared with CoP nanowire (NW), the metallic Co2P nanowires exhibited higher efficiency for overall water splitting due to its metallic properties with improved conductivity. As a result, the Co2P NW-based electrolysis in an overall water-splitting cell was realized only at a potential of 1.5 V. Moreover, mechanistic studies revealed that cobalt oxo/hydroxide with phosphate units were in situ generated during the OER.
An electrocatalyst containing multiple redox-active metal ions can buffer the multi-electron transfer processes, which can enhance both the OER and HER activity. In general, metal doping is also an effective strategy to achieve multiple redox-active metal ions in the catalysts.12,114 Typically, Ye et al.124 reported a series of highly active and inexpensive Co–Ni–P films by a one-step constant current density electrodeposition method. The Co–Ni–P electrode achieved a water-splitting current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small cell voltage of 1.65 V in an alkaline electrolyte. The remarkable electrocatalytic activity of the Co–Ni–P film could be mainly attributed to the addition of Ni, which enhanced the electron transportation, improved the ionic conductivity and reduced the internal resistance. Song et al.113 supported new skutterudite-type ternary cobalt nickel phosphide (Co1−xNixP3) nanoneedle arrays (NAs) on carbon cloth for the splitting of water, in which the electronic structure was tuned by doping an appropriate amount of Ni, and as a result, the obtained Co0.93Ni0.07P3 displayed good catalytic activity towards the HER with an overpotential of 87 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, whereas an overpotential of 221 mV at a current density of 20 mA cm−2 was obtained for the OER. By DFT calculations, it was found that the moderation of Ni doping on CoP3 reduced the ΔGH* value close to zero, thus greatly enhancing the HER activity on the much more favourable P-sites (as displayed in Fig. 10a). Kim et al.125 reported Fe-doped porous cobalt phosphide polyhedrons as an efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst for both the HER and OER. By varying the doping level of Fe, it was found that the Co0.68Fe0.32P electrocatalyst exhibited the smallest overpotential at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 (i.e. 116 mV for HER; 289 mV for OER). Herein, since Fe doping can tailor the OH and H adsorption energy on the surface of the electrocatalyst, the dissociations of H2O and OH were accelerated. Meanwhile, Fe doping can also make the P species in the electrocatalyst more stable in the air environment. Lin et al.126 synthesized Cu0.3Co2.7P/nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) with a well-defined polyhedral structure by carbonizing zeolitic imadazolate frameworks, followed with phosphidation, which exhibited an ultralow overpotential of 190 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and satisfying stability for the OER. The Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC also showed good HER activity, affording a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low overpotential of 220 mV. Impressively, based on DFT calculations, control of the Cu content in the Co-host lattice could effectively alter the Gibbs free energy for H* adsorption (Fig. 10b), which was favourable for facilitating the reaction kinetics. Wang et al.127 rationally designed hollow Mo-doped CoP (Mo-CoP) nanoarrays. Owing to the modified electronic structure via Mo doping, an electrolyzer using Mo-CoP as both the anode and cathode generated a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low operating voltage of 1.56 V. Combined with DFT calculations (Fig. 10c and d), Mo doping on CoP reduced the ΔGH* value close to zero, thus, it could greatly enhance the HER activity of the P-sites. Meanwhile, the Mo-induced electron transfer towards the H could reduce the strength of the H–O bond in the adsorbed HO*, thus facilitating the potential-limiting deprotonation process and enhancing the OER activity.
 Fig. 10  (a) Hydrogen adsorption free energy ΔGH of CoP3 (200) surface with one Ni atom doped on the terminated atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Dramatic lower H* adsorption energy of both CoP and Co2P host structures upon Cu doping from ref. 126, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER free energy diagrams for the P- and Co-sites on pristine and Mo-doped CoP (111) surfaces, and (d) atomic structure of a model Mo-doped β-CoOOH (001) surface with HO* adsorption on an O-site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Supporting Co-based phosphide on carbon-based materials has attracted great attention since it can enhance the conductivity and anti-corrosive property when they work in both acid and alkaline electrolytes. Specially, the abundant functional groups on the surface of the carbon material can help to disperse the electrocatalysts uniformly, attributed to the full use of active sites on catalysts. Nanda et al.128 encapsulated Co2P nanoparticles in N, P dual-doped carbon nanotubes (denoted as Co2P/CNT). An alkaline water electrolyzer constructed by employing Co2P/CNT as the catalysts on both the anode and cathode delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with an applied voltage of 1.53 V. This remarkable performance of Co2P/CNTs could be attributed to the intrinsic catalytic activity of Co2P nanoparticles fortified with heteroatom-doped CNTs, which resulted in enhanced electrical conductivity as well as long-term stability. Zheng and co-worker129 embedded CoP quantum dots (QDs) in S, N-co-doped graphite carbon (CoP@SNC) using organophosphoric acid as both the phosphorus and carbon sources. Benefiting from the strong coupling and synergistic effect between the CoP QDs and highly conductive S, N-codoped carbon and the well-structured porosity and high specific surface area, the resulting CoP@SNC exhibited excellent activities for HER/OER/ORR, making it a trifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting as well as useful for rechargeable Zn–air batteries. In particular, when CoP@SNC was used as the electrocatalysts on both the anode and cathode for overall water splitting, a cell voltage as low as 1.64 V was required to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
The construction of heterostructured electrocatalysts could also fully utilize the advantage of each component to generate outstanding bifunctional electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. Wehrspohn et al.130 successfully fabricated a 3D hierarchical heterostructured NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF electrode. Herein, NiCoP had a relatively poor OER performance when compared with NiFe LDH. However, after they were combined together, the obtained electrode required overpotentials as low as 120 and 220 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2 for HER and OER in 1.0 M KOH, respectively. Specifically, the NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF electrodes were simultaneously used as the cathode and anode for overall water splitting, and achieved a cell voltage of 1.57 V at 10 mA cm−2 as shown in Fig. 11a. Fig. 11b and c show the XPS spectra of the NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF before and after HER and OER tests. It could be found that, compared with the HER operating in a reducing potential environment, strong anodic oxidation in the OER potential range led to an evident and irreversible phase transformation of metal phosphides to metal oxide/oxyhydroxide. Sun et al.131 also reported that cobalt-phosphorous-derived film (Co-P) could serve as a bifunctional catalyst for overall water splitting, and exhibited remarkable catalytic performance for both the HER and OER in an alkaline electrolyte with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at overpotentials of 94 mV for HER and 345 mV for OER. When the Co-P film was used as an electrocatalyst for both the anode and cathode (Fig. 11d), the rapid catalytic current density exceeded 100 mA cm−2 at 1.744 V. Moreover, it was found that the major compositions of the as-prepared and the post-HER films were metallic cobalt and cobalt phosphide (Fig. 11e–g); however, more cobalt oxide phases were detected for the post-OER film. Thus, it is still necessary to find novel strategies to improve the stability of such bifunctional electrocatalysts in harsh operating conditions. In addition, Yoo et al.132 confirmed that the true electrocatalytic sites of the metal phosphides for OER were not the bulk phase phosphide but its surface oxidized compounds. That is to say, the surface state of the electrocatalysts could play a crucial role in determining the electrocatalytic activity. Therefore, many researchers have proposed using metal phosphides as precursors or scaffolds to prepare oxide/hydroxide OER catalysts on the surface of the original nanostructured materials, and these have been implemented and have achieved significantly enhanced catalytic performance. However, the true OER-active species of metal phosphides involved in water splitting are still unclear. More studies to be performed using advanced material characterization techniques (e.g. in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy and Mössbauer spectrum) are necessary to gain a deeper understanding of the catalytic mechanisms.
 Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves of NiFe LDH@NiCoP nanowires. Notably, XPS spectra of the NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF electrode before and after OER and HER tests (b) O 1s and (c) P 2p, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Polarization curves of Co-P (red), IrO2 (blue) and blank Cu foil (black) in 1.0 M KOH at a scan rate 2 mV s−1 and rotating rate 2000 rpm. XPS spectra of the Co-P film electrode before (e) and after OER and HER tests (f and g) of Co 2p region and P 2p region, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
4.5 Cobalt-based chalcogenides catalysts

4.5.1 Cobalt-based sulfides. 
Metal-based sulfides with diverse structural types have many similar physico-chemical properties as metal-based phosphides such that they are also a prominent class of electrocatalyst materials for water splitting and for other electrochemical processes. Co-based sulfides with different phases, such as Co9S8, Co3S4 and Co1−xS, have been widely investigated as both OER and HER electrocatalysts.133–135
The nanostructuring of Co-based sulfides could provide a much higher specific surface area and expose more active sites as compared with their bulk counterparts. To date, various Co-based sulfides with different nanostructures have been synthesized using various methods. For instance, Lu et al.136 rationally designed hollow core-branch arrays of TiO2@Co9S8 (Fig. 12a) by growing cross-linked Co9S8 nanoflakes on a TiO2 core via a facile and powerful sulfurization strategy. Since the obtained electrocatalysts had a larger active surface area, richer/shorter transfer channels for ions/electrons and reinforced structural stability, an electrolysis cell based on the TiO2@Co9S8 arrays as both the cathode and anode exhibited a remarkably low water-splitting voltage of 1.56 V at 10 mA cm−2 current density and long-term durability without decay after 10 days. Furthermore, Li et al.137 fabricated different Co9S8/WS2 hybrids with nanobelt, nanoneedle and nanorhombus arrays by tuning the reaction parameters, and found that the Co9S8/WS2 nanobelt hybrid material (Fig. 12b) displayed good performance as an alkaline water electrolyzer with 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.65 V. Hu et al.138 synthesized zinc cobalt mixed sulfides (Zn–Co–S) with controlled morphologies and nanoarchitectures, including nanosheets (NSs), nanoplate (NPs) and nanoneedles (NNs), on conductive carbon fibre paper (CFP) and investigated the micro- and nanostructure-dependent electrochemical efficiency for catalyzing the electrochemical reactions in zinc–air batteries and in water splitting. Compared to Zn–Co–S NS/CFP and NP/CFP, Zn–Co–S NN/CFP exhibited superior multifunctional catalytic performance for ORR/OER/HER in an alkaline electrolyte. The Zn–Co–S NN/CFP was applied as both the cathode and anode to electrolyze water, presenting a cell voltage of 1.71 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Remarkably, the Zn–Co–S NN/CFP enabled the assembly of rechargeable Zn–air batteries with a low overpotential (∼0.85 V), high efficiency (∼58.1%) and prolonged operational life (∼200 cycles) at 10 mA cm−2. Herein, the superior performance was attributed to the integrated nanoneedle/CFP nanostructure, which not only provided an enhanced electrochemical active area, but also facilitated ion and gas transfers between the catalyst surface and electrolyte, thus maintaining an effective solid–liquid–gas interface necessary for the electrocatalysis. Recently, Yamauchi et al.133 rationally prepared a cost-effective heterostructured Co3S4@MoS2 catalyst via the hydrothermal synthesis of hollow Co3S4 nanoboxes (Fig. 12c) at first, followed by in situ growth of MoS2 nanosheets on the surface of the Co3S4 nanoboxes. The synergistic effect of the active and stable HER catalyst of MoS2 and the efficient OER catalyst of Co3S4 with the morphological superiority of hollow and core–shell structures endowed the Co3S4@MoS2 with remarkable electrocatalytic performance and robust durability towards overall water splitting. As a result, a low cell voltage of 1.58 V was achieved at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 by using the heterostructure as both anode and cathode catalysts. Zou et al.139 supported NixCo3−xS4-decorated Ni3S2 nanosheet arrays on NF (Fig. 12d) via a partial cation exchange reaction between NF-supported Ni3S2 nanosheet arrays and cobalt(II) ions. The alkaline water electrolyzer using it as both the anode and cathode delivered current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2 at the applied voltages of 1.53 and 1.80 V, respectively, with remarkable stability for >200 h in both cases. Chen et al.140 supported CuCo2S4 nanowire arrays on NF as both the anode and cathode in the alkaline water electrolyzer, which generated a current density of 100 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.65 V. These results indicate that the nanostructuring of Co-based sulfides is an effective way to improve the bifunctional catalytic activity.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of TiO2@Co9S8 hollow core-branch arrays from ref. 136, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM images of Co9S8/WS2 nanobelt arrays from ref. 137, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM images of hollow Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructure from ref. 133, copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) SEM images of NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF from ref. 139, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Since elemental sulfur has six outer electrons with moderate electronegativity, the metal sulfide has a rich tunable crystal structure. Generally, the phase and composition of cobalt sulfide (CoSx) can greatly affect the electrocatalytic performances for OER and HER. Recently, Han et al.141 investigated the catalytic efficiencies of three CoSx compounds, i.e. Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 hollow nanospheres (HNSs), for both HER and OER in alkaline electrolytes (Fig. 13). It was found that the as-prepared CoS2 HNSs had superior OER and HER catalytic performances than Co9S8 and Co3S4 HNSs with an overpotential of 290 mV for the OER and 193 mV for the HER at the current density of 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, an alkaline electrolyzer assembled using it as both anode and cathode electrocatalysts achieved a 10 mA cm−2 current density at a low cell voltage of 1.54 V at 60 °C with a faradaic efficiency of 100% for overall water splitting. Further analysis demonstrated that the surface morphology, crystallographic structure and coordination environment of Con+ active sites comprehensively determined the HER/OER activities.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedures for Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs, respectively. (b) Corresponding TEM images of Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs, respectively. (c) Crystal structures of CoS2, Co3S4, Co9S8, CoS4 tetrahedron and CoS6 octahedron, respectively. (d) OER and HER LSVs of bare CP, Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs in 1.0 M KOH at a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, many researchers have focused on constructing a high concentration of defect sites in electrocatalysts to enhance the HER and OER activities. Gong et al.142 fabricated ultrathin defect-enriched 3D Se-(NiCo)Sx/(OH)x nanosheets for overall water splitting through a facile Se-induced (NiCo)S/OH hydrothermal treatment. As a result, the defects and disorder of Se-(NiCo)S/OH promoted the adsorption of OH− and enhanced the OER and HER performances. Interestingly, the as-prepared hybrids exhibited relatively low overpotentials of 155 and 103 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the OER and HER, respectively. Moreover, an overall water-splitting device incorporating such nanosheets delivered a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V for ≈66 h without obvious degradation. Jiang et al.143 reported Co9S8-Ni3S2 heterointerfaced nanotubes on Ni foam (Co9S8-Ni3S2 HNTs/Ni) via a two-step hydrothermal method, in which the inner 1D Co9S8 nanotube was surrounded by outer 2D Ni3S2 nanosheets. Furthermore, a comparison study was carried out using the mixed Co9S8 and Ni3S2 phases on Ni foam (Co9S8 + Ni3S2/Ni), and it was found that the defect-rich heterointerfacial sites between Co9S8 NT and Ni3S2 NS were the active sites for the reaction and that the structure of the Co9S8-Ni3S2 HNTs/Ni electrode maintained high stability. The quick adsorption/desorption of HO− on the defect-rich heterointerfacial sites could enhance the utilization efficiency of active sites, promoting the kinetics of the HER and OER processes. Thus, the Co9S8-Ni3S2 HNTs/Ni electrodes-based electrolyzer achieved a low cell voltage of 1.59 V at 10 mA cm−2 for 18 h with negligible change.
As reviewed above, when cobalt active species, such as metallic cobalt, cobalt oxide and cobalt phosphides, are combined with carbon materials (e.g. graphene and carbon nanotubes), they always exhibit superior electrocatalytic activities for potential applications in energy conversion and storage technologies. Likewise, Co-based sulfides grown on carbon materials have also attracted much attention as water-splitting electrocatalysts. Recently, Wang et al.144 anchored Co/Co9S8 with a core–shell structure onto S, N co-doped porous graphene sheets (Co/Co9S8@SNGS) by the pyrolysis of Co-based metal–organic frameworks (Co-MOFs) in situ grown on graphene oxide sheets (Co-MOFs@GO) at different temperatures. It was found that the Co/Co9S8@SNGS obtained at a pyrolysis temperature of 1000 °C (Co/Co9S8@SNGS-1000) showed superior bifunctional catalytic activities for the OER and HER in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, affording an overpotential of 290 mV for OER at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and 350 mV for HER at a current density of 20 mA cm−2. Meng et al.134 synthesized N-, O-, and S-tridoped carbon-encapsulated Co9S8 (Co9S8@NOSC) nanomaterials via a simple pyrolysis of S- and Co(II)-containing polypyrrole solid precursors and used these as bifunctional electrocatalysts for water splitting in an alkaline electrolyte. A two-electrode electrolyzer assembled using the material synthesized at 900 °C (Co9S8@NOSC-900) as the electrocatalyst in both electrodes gave current densities of 10 and 20 mA cm−2 at cell voltages of 1.60 and 1.74 V, respectively. It was proposed that this excellent electrocatalytic activity mainly resulted from the synergistic effects between the Co9S8 nanoparticles core and the heteroatom-doped carbon shell. Meanwhile, Liu et al.145 reported a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst of cobalt sulfide (Co9S8) and molybdenum carbide (Mo2C) nanoparticles anchored on metal–organic frameworks (MOFs)-derived nitrogen, sulfur-codoped graphitic carbon (Co9S8-NSC@Mo2C). For HER, this had low overpotentials of 74, 89 and 121 mV to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 0.5 M H2SO4, 1.0 M KOH and 1.0 M phosphate-buffered saline solutions, respectively. For OER, it showed a small overpotential of 293 mV to reach 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH solution. It was also considered that the significantly enhanced HER and OER activities mainly resulted from the synergistic effect between the anchored Co9S8 and Mo2C nanoparticles in the porous NSC.


4.5.2 Cobalt-based selenides. 
Similar to Co-based phosphide and sulfides, Co-based selenides with a variety of crystal forms and features have also attracted considerable attention as bifunctional electrocatalysts for water splitting due to their earth abundance and low cost. To date, the construction of different morphologies of Co-based selenides is a key topic in attempts to improve the catalytic performance toward HER and OER. For instance, Chen et al.146 uniformly anchored CoSe2 nanoparticles on carbon fibre paper (CoSe2/CF) (Fig. 14a) via the pyrolysis and selenization of in situ grown zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67). At a low cell potential, i.e. 1.63 V, a water electrolyzer equipped with two CoSe2/CF electrodes gave a water-splitting current density of 10 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, Zhang's group147 fabricated a porous CoSe2 nanosheet array on carbon cloth (p-CoSe2/CC) (Fig. 14b) by vapour-selenizing a preprepared α-Co(OH)2 nanosheet array precursor. Given the large active surface area, fast diffusion of generated gas and strong structural stability, the obtained p-CoSe2/CC was assembled as an alkaline electrolyzer, it only needed a cell voltage of 1.62 V at 10 mA cm−2 and showed long-term stability for 20 h. Wang et al.148 reported a series of peapod-like composites with component-controllable Co(SxSe1−x)2 nanoparticles encapsulated in carbon fibres obtained using Co(CO3)0.5(OH)·0.11H2O nanowires as the precursor and followed by carbon fibre coating and an adjustable sulfuration/selenylation process. Due to the increased exposure of active sites and improved charge and mass transport capability derived from the unique structure and morphology, the Co(SxSe1−x)2 samples displayed favourable catalytic activities. It was found that Co(S0.71Se0.29)2 exhibited the best HER performance, while Co(S0.22Se0.78)2 showed the highest activity for OER. When using Co(S0.71Se0.29)2 as a cathode and Co(S0.22Se0.78)2 as an anode, durable activity was demonstrated for overall water splitting to deliver 10 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of 1.63 V. Interestingly, Li's group149 synthesized hollow bimetallic cobalt-based selenide (Zn0.1Co0.9Se2), as shown in Fig. 14c, by using a cobalt-based bimetallic organic frameworks (BM-ZIFs) template. The as-prepared hollow Zn0.1Co0.9Se2 exhibited low overpotentials of 140 mV and 340 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with robust catalytic stability for HER in acidic electrolytes and for OER in alkaline electrolytes, respectively. These MOF-derived materials generated a hollow porous structure, and greatly increased the specific surface area and active sites, thus improving the catalytic activity owing to the more uniform dispersion of CoSe2 particles. The introduction of transition metal ions could change the crystal structure of CoSe2, making its structure weakly distorted, thus exposing more active sites and enhancing the conductivity and catalytic activity of the catalyst. Tan et al.150 directly fabricated ultrathin ternary selenide nanorods (CoNiSe2 NRs) (Fig. 14d) with hierarchical nano-architectures grown on nickel foam (NF). The integrated CoNiSe2/NF demonstrated an extremely high activity and stability for the OER and HER in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte, and required low overpotentials of 307 and 170 mV at a current density of 100 mA cm−2. The experimental results revealed that the electronic structure of the ternary CoNiSe2 NRs was changed with respect to the mixture of monometallic CoSe2 and NiSe2, which was one of the factors accounting for the improved electroactivity towards the OER and HER, caused by the bimetallic component. Huang et al.151 fabricated an amorphous cobalt–cobalt oxide/cobalt selenide composite film (CoOx–CoSe) directly on a three-dimensional macro-porous Ni foam (NF) substrate by a facile electrodeposition method. In 1.0 M KOH solution, as a robust 3D OER anode electrocatalyst, only overpotentials of 300 mV and 380 mV were needed to achieve 100 mA cm−2 and 500 mA cm−2, respectively. When used as a HER catalyst, this electrode showed remarkable catalytic performance, and needed an overpotential of 90 mV to deliver 10 mA cm−2. This bifunctional electrode allowed a fabricated alkaline electrolyzer to obtain a water-splitting current density of 20 mA cm−2 at a cell voltage of around 1.66 V. This confirmed that the hybridizing strategy was an effective strategy to improve the catalyst performance.
 Fig. 14  (a) FESEM image of CoSe2 nanoparticles anchored on CFs from ref. 146, copyright 2016, Springer. (b) SEM images p-CoSe2 grown on carbon cloth from ref. 147, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of CoSe2 nanosheet array on carbon cloth from ref. 149, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High-magnification SEM images of CoNiSe2 nanorods directly grown on the Ni foam from ref. 150, copyright 2018, Springer. 

5. Cobalt-based bifunctional electrocatalysts for the ORR and OER
5.1 Cobalt-based oxides
Currently, the activities of some developed noble-free ORR/OER bifunctional electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions have even surpassed those of the state-of-the-art noble-based catalysts (e.g. Ru, Ir and Pt). In particular, Co-oxide-based electrocatalysts are emerging as attractive ORR/OER bifunctional catalysts in alkaline electrolytes due to their high electrocatalytic activity and environmental friendliness.10,12,85 To achieve the expected catalytic performance, the morphology, active sites and electronic structures of these catalysts are always rationally designed and elaborately tuned during the synthesis processes. For instance, Strasser et al.152 prepared Co3O4 nanochains by a relatively low temperature degradation of the cobalt oxalate dihydrate (CoC2O4·2H2O) precursor. The nanochains of Co3O4 achieved the current density of 0.50 mA cm−2 at 1.44 V in pH 13 electrolyte and at 1.64 V in pH 7 electrolyte for the OER. In particular, Co3O4 nanochains supported on carbon (Co3O4/C) showed a half-wave potential of 0.84 V for the ORR, which was very similar to the reference Pt/C (0.86 V) catalyst in 0.1 M KOH solution.
Recently, it was found that doping foreign atoms, such as transition metals, on Co-based oxides can effectively improve the electrocatalytic performance for the OER and ORR as the improved charge transfer between the foreign atoms and the host and their modified electronic structures can lower the kinetic energy barriers of the catalytic processes. Song et al.153 reported that cobalt oxide with 5% Ni doping showed promising catalytic activities for both the ORR and OER, with a half-wave potential of 0.83 V for the ORR (at −3 mA cm−2) and 381 mV (at 10 mA cm−2) for the OER. Herein, it is considered that the enhancement of the ORR activity with Ni incorporation was from the increase in the surface oxygen defects and surface areas, while the improvement of the OER catalytic activity and stability resulted from the facilitation of the oxidation of surface Co3+ to Co4+.

5.1.1 Co-based spinel-type oxides. 
Spinel structure metal oxides, with the general formula AB2X4 have aroused widespread attention for the ORR and OER in alkaline solutions as such a structure enables good electrical conductivity due to the efficient ready electron hopping between metals at different valence states and as it simultaneously provides surface redox centres for the adsorption and activation of oxygen.12,13 To date, a number of Co-based spinel-type oxides, including binary oxides (Co3O4) and ternary oxides (CoMn2O4, MnCo2O4, NiCo2O4, CoFe2O4, CuCo2O4, LiCo2O4, etc.),154–156 have been widely investigated as promising bifunctional catalysts for the OER and ORR. For example, Wang et al.157 developed self-assembled 3D foam-like NiCo2O4 spinels with compositions including Co2+, Co3+, Ni2+ and Ni3+, which provided good electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR/OER reactions. The foam-like NiCo2O4 spinel delivered ORR onset (Eonset) and half-wave potentials (E1/2) of −0.15 and −0.34 V (vs. AgCl/Ag), respectively, and only needed an onset potential of 0.6 V (vs. AgCl/Ag) for the OER. Notably, Zhong et al.158 reported shape-controllable hexagon nickel cobalt oxide spinel nanosheets (NiCo2O4) as an excellent bifunctional catalyst for the ORR/OER. Specifically, it was found that the oxide treated at 250 °C (NCO-250) resulted in the greatest number of Ni3+/Ni2+ sites and the lowest Co3+/Co2+ sites, leading to superior OER/ORR activity in an alkaline electrolyte. NCO-250 as an OER electrocatalyst presented a low overpotential of ∼320 mV at 10 mA cm−2, while for the ORR, the catalyst showed a half-wave potential of 0.75 V vs. RHE. Geng et al. developed159 a mesoporous MnCo2O4 spinel, which showed remarkably high activity as a bifunctional catalyst for a potential gap value between the ORR (E1/2) and OER (η = 10 mA cm−2) of 0.83 V in an alkaline electrolyte. The ready electron hopping between metals (MnIV and CoII) at the valence states and the rich surface redox centres is the source of the high OER and ORR activity. More importantly, Chen et al.160 synthesized ultrasmall cobalt manganese spinels with tunable structures via a facile solution-based oxidation–precipitation technique (Fig. 15a). It was found that the crystallographic phase and the bifunctional catalytic activity of the mixed-metal oxide spinel sensitively correlated with the Co/Mn ratio. Furthermore, when the spinel was combined with carbon, the obtained nanocomposites delivered significantly enhanced OER and ORR performances with comparable activity and superior durability to Pt/C, which serve as efficient catalysts in rechargeable Zn–air and Li–air batteries (Fig. 15b and c).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of cubic (I) and tetragonal (II) spinel phases, including two steps: oxidation precipitation and crystallization. (b) The ORR and OER activities of c-CoMn2/C mixture, c-CoMn2/C hybrid and Pt/C electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution. (c) Electrochemical performance of rechargeable Zn–air battery using c-CoMn2/C and Pt/C as cathode ORR catalysts at a cycling rate of 10 mA cm−2 and a duration of 400 s per cycle. Inset schematically depicts the structure of assembled rechargeable Zn–air cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Illustration of the fabrication of NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs. (e) Overall polarization curve of the NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs in the entire ORR and OER region. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, Co-based spinel-type oxides with suitable nanostructures usually exhibit superior mass transport properties and improved activities for the ORR/OER. However, the spinel oxides always have poor electronic conductivity and weak oxygen absorption ability on the surface, which in turn leads to their poor activity in ORR/OER catalysis. Moreover, small Co-based spinel-type oxide particles are always prone to agglomeration, which reduces the exposure of the catalytic active sites.12,13,154 Consequently, tremendous endeavours have been devoted to developing new synthetic methods to ensure a good dispersion of Co-based spinel-type oxides on conducting materials. Herein, carbonaceous materials (e.g. graphene, carbon nanotubes and porous carbon) are widely considered as superior conductive supports due to their large surface area, superior electronic conductivity, good mechanical properties and excellent chemical stability.20,156,161,162 In 2011, Dai et al.163 reported a general two-step method to synthesize Co3O4/N-doped reduced graphene oxide (Co3O4/N-rmGO) nanomaterials as bifunctional catalysts for the ORR and OER. Here, the half-wave potential of the ORR was 0.83 V, similar to that of Pt/C (0.86 V vs. RHE) and the same sample used for ORR containing Co3O4/N-rmGO loaded on CFP afforded higher OER currents than Co3O4 nanocrystals. The N-doping of GO led to increased favourable nucleation and anchoring sites for Co3O4 nanocrystals and afforded stronger coupling between Co and graphene in Co3O4/N-rmGO, which improved the catalytic activity for the ORR and OER. In the following years, a series of hybrid catalysts with highly effective bifunctional activity were fabricated, including Co3O4/carbon nanotubes (Co3O4/CNTs),161 Co3O4/nitrogen-doped graphene aerogel (Co3O4/N-Gas),164 Co3O4/nitrogen-doped carbon nanotube arrays (Co3O4/N-CNTA),165 Co3O4/nitrogen, boron-doped graphene hollow microspheres (Co3O4/NBGHSs)155 and mesoporous Co3O4 nanopetals in nitrogen-doped multiwalled carbon nanotubes (Co3O4-NCNTs).166
Co-based bimetallic oxides with a spinel structure supported on carbon materials have also been widely investigated as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both the ORR and OER. Guo et al.156 developed manganese cobalt oxide/nitrogen-doped multiwalled carbon nanotube hybrids (MnCo3−xO4@NCNTs) with highly reversible ORR and OER activities. Herein, the hybrid structure was rationally obtained by a fine control of the surface chemistry and synthesis conditions, including the tuning of functional groups at surfaces, the congruent growth of nanocrystals with controllable phases and particle sizes and by ensuring strong coupling across catalyst-support interfaces. A series of MnxCo3−xO4@NCNTs were synthesized with different ratios of Mn and Co. Among these, MnCo2O4@NCNTs showed superior ORR and OER activities, with an overall potential gap value of 0.93 V (i.e. the potential gap parameter between the ORR current density of −3 mA cm−2 and the OER current density of 10 mA cm−2). Meanwhile, Chen and co-workers167 also reported spinel-type CoMn2O4 nanodots (NDs, i.e. below 3 nm) monodispersed on graphene as highly efficient ORR/OER electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution. Remarkably, CoMn2O4/rGO showed a half-wave potential of 0.89 V for ORR, which was 20 mV higher than that of Pt/C, and afforded electrocatalytic OER with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a low potential of 1.54 V. The CoMn2O4 NDs were homogeneously distributed on carbonaceous substrates, which showed strong coupling and facile charge transfer, thereby significantly enhancing the bifunctional electrocatalytic activities for both the ORR and OER. Yang et al.168 designed FeCo2O4/hollow reduced graphene oxide spheres (FCO/HrGOS) hybrid. The covalent coupling between FeCo2O4 and hollow reduced graphene oxide spheres along with the 3D architecture not only provided an efficient electron transport path but also facilitated the transportation of the electrolyte and O2, whereby the as-designed FCO/HrGOS hybrid demonstrated greatly enhanced electrocatalytic activities for both the ORR and OER as compared with FCO and HrGOS in 0.1 M KOH aqueous solution. Recently, Jiang et al.169 also developed spinel NixCo(3−x)O4 supported on aminated carbon nanotubes (NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs), which exhibited remarkably bifunctionality for the OER and ORR with a potential gap value of 0.764 V between the OER current density at 10 mA cm−2 and the ORR current density at 3 mA cm−2. Herein, the electrocatalytic activities of spinel bimetallic structure oxides could be improved through their strong electronic coupling with carbonaceous substrates (Fig. 15d and e). Therefore, the integration of Co-based spinel-type oxides with highly conductive carbonaceous materials could enhance the charge transfer rate, thereby promoting fast reaction kinetics and facilitating the exposure of more active sites to catalytic reactions and the increase in the surface metallicity.
To enhance the performance of bifunctional electrocatalysts towards the ORR and OER, the generation of more oxygen vacancies on Co-based spinel-type oxides is also an effective way because a surface with oxygen vacancies is much more activated.10,12 Many researchers have shown that vacancy defects can enhance the electron transfer from O-vacancies to the metal d band, which can further effectively tune the adsorption of surface species for catalysis and help the material exhibit excellent performance for electrocatalytic water oxidation.170–172 Xie et al.173 reported that NiCo2O4 ultrathin nanosheets rich in oxygen vacancies (Fig. 16a) were suitable for enhancing electrocatalytic water oxidation. Liu et al.174 synthesized oxygen-vacancy-bearing CoO (CoO-A) through a simple calcination of Co(Ac)2·4H2O in Ar. Compared to oxygen-vacancy-free CoO, CoO-A dramatically promoted both ORR and OER activities and showed much better cycling performance in a rechargeable Li–O2 battery. The enhanced performances of the CoO-A based cathode could be largely attributed to the synergetic effect of CoO itself and oxygen vacancies for the promotion of both the ORR and OER. Here, CoO provided catalytic activity for the ORR, and at the same time the oxygen vacancies not only facilitated electron and Li+ migration but also acted as active sites for binding O2 and Li2O2, which accelerated the OER process. Meanwhile, Kim et al.175 prepared CoMn2O4 spinel oxides with oxygen vacancies by heat treatment in pure Ar, and these have been widely applied in Li–O2 batteries (Fig. 16b). Herein, the oxygen-vacancy sites ameliorated the bifunctional electrocatalysis activity for the ORR/OER via the excellent mobility of oxygen molecules/ions, facile O–O bond dissociation and the discharge product nucleation and growth sites.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with oxygen vacancies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Highlighted are the crystallographic planes, while the yellow dotted circles/ellipses and inset indicate the intra/inter-crystalline sites and surface oxygen vacancies. Cyclic performance of oxygen vacancy-free electrocatalysts compared to the oxygen-vacancy-containing electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2017, Elsevier. 


5.1.2 Co-based perovskite oxides. 
Recently, perovskite-type oxides with excellent electrochemical properties and abundant active sites have attracted great attention as strong candidates for bifunctional OER and ORR catalysts with outstanding activity and stability in alkaline electrolytes.176,177 Perovskite-type metal oxides have the general formula ABO3, where the “A” sites are rare earth or alkali metal ions and the “B” sites are transition metal ions, thus they have advantages associated with the flexibility for tuning the electronic structure and metal cations, a defective structure with oxygen vacancies and/or excess and superior oxygen release/uptake kinetics.12,13,178,179 Previous studies have indicated that a near unity eg orbital occupancy in a transition metal cation, closer transition metal d-band and oxygen p-band centre relative to the Fermi level, high covalence of the metal–oxygen bond and oxygen deficiencies in the perovskites are favourable for the ORR/OER activity.180,181 Moreover, the versatile structures of A1−xA′xB1−xB′xO3±δ perovskites with controlled electronic and geometric structures are also very suitable for the development of ORR/OER catalysts.12,179 Therefore, perovskite-type metal oxides might yield some unique reactivity towards both the ORR and OER in comparison with other types of non-noble metal oxides.
Recently, Luo et al.182 reported transition-metal-doped perovskite oxides LaNi0.9M0.1O3 (M = Cu, Co) nanosheets grown on 3D microporous NF as a complete carbon- and binder-free air electrode for lithium oxygen batteries. Compared with pure LaNiO3 and LaNi0.9Co0.1O3, LaNi0.9Co0.1O3 perovskite oxide with the substitution of Ni3+ sites by Cu2+ ions showed dramatically enhanced ORR and OER catalytic activities because of the combination of abundant lattice strain and the oxygen vacancy. Meanwhile, Lee et al.183 explored CaO-doped NdBaCo2O5 (NdBa0.75Ca0.25Co2O5+δ) perovskite oxide with high catalytic activity for the oxygen electrode and found that the electrochemical performance of the NdBa0.75Ca0.25Co2O5+δ catalyst could be effectively improved by doping a transition metal (Fe2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, and Mn2+) into the B-sites of the double perovskite oxides, facilitating the movement of electrons and oxygen-ions through the oxygen vacancies formed by the replacement of the metal cations. Among these perovskite oxides, NdBa0.75Ca0.25Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ (NBCCFe) displayed the highest electrocatalytic activity for the OER and ORR, and NBCCFe could be hybridized with nitrogen-reduced graphene oxide (N-rGO) to further improve its catalytic activity together with excellent durability. The hybridization of NBCCFe with N-rGO further enhanced its bifunctional oxygen electrode activity with a low potential gap parameter of 0.761 V between the ORR current density of −3 mA cm−2 and the OER current density of 10 mA cm−2. Therefore, the replacement of metal cations can easily result in the formation of oxygen deficiencies/vacancies, which are favourable for boosting the catalytic activity of the ORR/OER.
More importantly, a balance between the catalytic activity and durability can be achieved by tailoring the phase structures of perovskite oxides. In this regard, Cho et al.184 fabricated a series of highly active Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (BSCF5582)-based materials as advanced ORR/OER electrocatalysts. They investigated the effect of heat-treating BSCF5582 in an oxygen environment at 950 °C as a function of the annealing time on the electrocatalytic performance, and compared this with that of pristine BSCF5582. They found that the oxygenation proceeded upon the heat treatment in an oxygen atmosphere, whereby the crystallinity of the overall cubic perovskite structure was increased, and simultaneously, the ultrathin surface-layer spinel phase (ca. 30 nm) between the top amorphous layer and the cubic perovskite bulk was removed (Fig. 17a), which in turn contributed to an enhancement of the electrocatalytic performance of the BSCF5582-based catalyst. Thus, it is expected that engineering perovskites by controlling the surface chemical structure via heat treatment could play an important role in the application of such electrocatalysts in the future. Furthermore, they prepared La-doped Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (La0.3-5582) as an effective bifunctional electrocatalyst,178 and found that rhombohedral LaCoO3 particles sized 10 nm were distributed on the surface of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ (Fig. 17b), which significantly improved its ORR and OER performances due to the charge imbalance from the replacement of A− site cations with a La3+ site sub-lattice in the cubic perovskite structure. Their group177 also reported nano-sized perovskite particles with a nominal composition of Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ as a bifunctional electrocatalyst. They found that the La concentration and calcination temperature could influence the oxide defects and particle growth (Fig. 17c). As a result, the obtained bifunctional perovskite electrocatalysts sized ∼50 nm exhibited excellent activity and stability for both the ORR and OER. Meanwhile, Wu et al.176 demonstrated that nano-sized La0.6Sr0.4Co0.2Fe0.8O3−δ (LSCF) perovskite could be obtained through controllable surface structure engineering by using a lithium reduction method. They found that such a strategy caused the formation of a structurally disordered layer on the surface of the LSCF nanoparticles (Fig. 17d), allowing higher catalytic activity and better stability for both the OER and ORR. Thus, it could be concluded that the electrocatalytic activities of Co-based perovskite oxides can be mainly optimized through the substitution of metal cations and/or the formation of more oxygen deficiencies/vacancies.
 Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the effect of heat treatment of oxygen on BSCF5582 from ref. 184, copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (b) Representation of the bifunctional catalytic performance of the perovskite catalyst (La0.3-5582). On the surface of cubic based grains, the rhombohedral phase LaCoO3 grains are segregated from ref. 178, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagrams of the phase against the calcination temperature and La concentration in Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ, which describes the zone of stable cubic perovskite phases between high critical temperatures and low critical temperatures, denoting grain growth from ref. 177, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram for the surface engineering of LSCF nanoparticles by lithium reduction from ref. 176, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Combining Co-based perovskite oxide with other perovskite oxides to prepare novel perovskite composites is another way to further improve the activity. For example, Shao-Horn et al.185 took advantage of the high intrinsic ORR activity of La0.8Sr0.2MnO3−δ and the high intrinsic OER activity of Ba0.5Sr0.5Co0.8Fe0.2O3−δ to develop a novel bifunctional electrocatalyst with enhanced activity and stability for both ORR and OER. Meanwhile, similar to the other electrocatalysts shown above, the combination of perovskite oxide with conductive carbon materials can also reinforce the synergistic effect to suppress the dissolution and agglomeration of oxide nanoparticles, thus enhancing the electrocatalytic activity and stability. For instance, Chen et al.186 reported a novel LaCoO3/N-doped reduced graphene oxide (LaCoO3/N-rGO) nanohybrid with improved performance as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for the ORR and OER, and considered that the enhanced electrocatalytic performances originated from the diminished size of LaCoO3 on rGO, the boosted synergistic effect between LaCoO3 and rGO and the efficient N-doping of rGO for the significant improvement of the reaction kinetics. Bu et al.187 highlighted a new composite electrocatalyst, P-3G, consisting of a cation-ordered perovskite (PrBa0.5Sr0.5)0.95Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ (PBSCF) and 3D porous N-doped graphene (3DNG), which exhibited outstanding versatile catalytic activities for the OER, ORR and HER. Specifically, P-3G could deliver ORR half-wave potentials (E1/2) of 0.82 V vs. RHE, i.e. near to that of Pt/C, and only needed an OER overpotential of 320 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, for the HER, the overpotentials of P-3G and Pt/C were 230 and 20 mV, respectively, at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in alkaline solution. In addition, Cho et al.188 rationally designed porous perovskite-type Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ hollow nanofibres hybridized with cross-linked, 3D, N-doped graphene (SSC-HG), which also exhibited remarkable performance for ORR/OER in an alkaline electrolyte. Through DFT calculations, it was found that the electron transportation from 3DNG to O2 and SSC increased the activity of electrocatalytic reactions (ORR and OER) by activating O2 with the increasing of the covalent bonding of lattice oxygen.

5.2 Co–N-C based structured catalysts
Co–N–C composites have also been widely studied as the most promising candidates for the ORR and OER in alkaline electrolytes due to their low price, high activity, excellent durability and resistance to the methanol cross-over effect. Since Raymond in 1964 first discovered that cobalt phthalocyanine featuring a metal-N4 centre was able to catalyze the ORR under alkaline conditions, great progress has been made to immobilize the metal-N complex (mainly Co-N and Fe-N) to improve the catalytic performance.18 Notably, numerous efficient ORR and OER electrocatalysts based on metal-N–C sources have been developed. In general, three synthesis methods are applied to obtain the Co–N–C structure: (i) the carbonization of mixtures of Co salt, N-containing compounds, such as urea, melamine or polyaniline, and carbon materials under an inert atmosphere, (ii) using NH3 as a N source to replace those shown in (i), and (iii) the direct carbonization of Co-based MOFs or Co-containing phthalocyanine compounds under an inert atmosphere. Herein, method (iii) is the most typical method used to produce highly porous Co–N–C structures.18,55,56,189 During the carbonization, nitrogen-rich ligands are transformed into pyridinic, graphitic and pyrrolic nitrogen species, which can chemically bond to the metal centres and carbon atoms in the carbon framework.56,190,191 This method can not only ensure the homogeneous distribution of catalytically active sites, but can also improve the electronic connectivity within the whole system. It is also noteworthy that metal nanoparticles could be protected by the carbon layers, promising resistance to the harsh environment, thus further enhancing the stability of the electrocatalysts.192 The DFT calculations also demonstrated that the decreased local work function on the carbon surface, resulting from nitrogen doping as well as the electron transfer from the embedded metallic nanoparticle to the outer carbon layer, could result in impressive catalytic activity.56,193 Therefore, by taking advantage of the formation of Co-Nx active sites and the strong coupling between the N-doped carbon layer and Co nanoparticles could largely promote interfacial electron transfer between the catalyst surface and reaction intermediates, which could dramatically boost the bifunctional ORR/OER performance. For instance, Kim et al.194 prepared hollow microspheres with a thin shell composed of mixed cobalt nitride (Co-N) and cobalt oxide (Co-O) nanofragments encapsulated in thin layers of nitrogen-doped carbon (N–C) nanostructure (Co-N/Co-O@N–C) arrays by using the Co salt as the mental source and aniline or pyrrole as the nitrogen source for pyrolysis at 300 °C under an oxygen atmosphere, which showed excellent bifunctional oxygen electrochemical performance. Noticeably, the Co-N/Co-O@N–C displayed a high onset potential of 0.93 V vs. RHE for the ORR, and afforded an OER overpotential of 370 mV to deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, the electronic interaction between the thin N–C layer and the encapsulated Co-N and Co-O nanofragments efficiently optimized oxygen adsorption properties on the Co-N/Co-O@N–C, and thereby it exhibited excellent ORR and OER performances. Meanwhile, Yuan et al.195 successfully prepared cobalt-iron bimetallic nitrides with N-doped multi-walled carbon nanotubes (Co-Fe-N@MWCNTs) as a robust bifunctional electrocatalyst through the carbonization of mixtures of Co and Fe salts, polyvinyl pyrrolidone and MWCNTs under the mixture of ammonia and an argon atmosphere. The obtained Co-Fe-N@MWCNT exhibited a potential gap value (ΔE) between the E1/2 of ORR and EOER at 10 mA cm−2 (Ej=10) (the potential gap value between OER and ORR, i.e. ΔE = Ej=10 − E1/2, is often used to evaluate the overall bifunctional activity) was 0.74 V. Furthermore, our group196 reported ultrathin N-doped carbon (1–3 graphitic carbon layers)-coated Fe1.2Co nanoparticles and supported N-doped carbon nanotubes (Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs), which was synthesized through a high temperature calcination of the precursor under a nitrogen atmosphere (Fig. 18a). The precursor was prepared from the metal sources of cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc), iron phthalocyanine (FePc) and the nitrogen source of melamine supported on CNTs. Thus, the metal nanoparticles were encapsulated into an ultrathin carbon layer to prevent the corrosion of metal nanoparticles from harsh environments and simultaneously promoted catalytic reactions on the carbon surface due to the electron transfer from the encapsulated metal nanoparticles. Moreover, it benefitted from the strong electronic coupling between the Fe1.2Co nanoparticles and the N doped-CNTs and the formation of Fe-Nx and Co-Nx bonds, which are helpful to generate more efficient catalytically active sites for ORR and OER. As a result, the potential gap value (ΔE) for the Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs was 0.765 V. Wang et al.197 used a facile procedure to prepare a unique nitrogen-rich sandwich-architectured electrocatalyst (CoNP@NC/NG) by the thermal pyrolysis of graphene and cobalt phthalocyanine (CoPc) under a (NH4)2HPO4 and NH3 atmosphere, as illustrated in Fig. 18b. The obtained CoNP@NC/NG-700 exhibited highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalytic activity for both the ORR and OER, which showed that the value of the potential gap value (ΔE) was 0.84 V. As such, the positive synergistic effect of the existence of Co-N bonding, and the strong coupling between the NC and CoNP nanoparticles increased the interfacial electron transfer between the catalyst surface and reaction intermediates, thus improving the catalytic activity. In addition, Jiao et al.198 designed and developed a molecule-level graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) coordinated transition metals Co (Co-C3N4/CNT), which possessed comparable electrocatalytic activity to that of the precious metal benchmarks for the ORR and OER in alkaline electrolytes. The correlation of the experimental and DFT computational results confirmed that this high activity originated from the precise Co-N2 coordination in the g-C3N4 matrix.
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs synthesis. HRTEM image of Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs and overall polarization curve of the Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs in the entire ORR and OER region. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of CoNP@NC/NG hybrids and oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential windows of various catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Synthesis, structural and electrochemical characteristics of CoxZn100−x-ZIF-8. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have emerged as promising materials for electrocatalysis, and are composed of small ligand molecules as linkers with metal centres to produce regularly ordered open frameworks with a high specific surface area. The carbonization of MOFs can yield new highly nanoporous carbons with the simultaneous incorporation of intrinsic ligand heteroatoms and metal centres within the carbon matrix. The advantage of this approach is that functional and conductive metal-incorporated nitrogen-doped carbon catalysts can be easily obtained from rationally designed MOFs. Zhou et al.199 fabricated an interconnected and conducting Co-N/C framework on bamboo-like hollow MnO nanowires (MnO@Co-N/C) by using MnO2@ZIF-67 as the precursor. This hybrid demonstrated prominent ORR/OER activity and the potential gap value (ΔE) of MnO@Co-N/C was 0.93 V. The abundant Co-Nx active sites and high specific surface area afforded by the unique hollow nanowire structure contributed to its favourable kinetics and outstanding electrolytic activity. Verpoort et al.200 encapsulated Co nanoparticles into nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (Co–N-CNTs) by the pyrolysis of a 2D dual-metal (Co/Zn) and leaf-like zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-L). Herein, the reasonable Co/Zn molar ratio in the ZIF-L was the key to the emergence of the encapsulated microstructure. As a result, the Co–N-CNTs exhibited a small potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.79 V. This superior catalytic activity was speculated to originate from the following: (i) Co nanoparticles increased the graphitization degree of the surface carbon layer during the carbonization, and the surface carbon shells prevented the acid leaching, oxidation and aggregation of Co nanoparticles, which promised excellent durability in the electrocatalytic process and fast electron transfer to the surface; (ii) the strong coordination structure between the cobalt and nitrogen atoms could also play a key role in the activity and stability of the Co-N-CNTs. Yin et al.201 developed MO-Co@N-doped carbon (NC, M = Zn or Co) as a highly active ORR/OER bifunctional catalyst via the pyrolysis of a bimetal MOF containing Zn and Co, i.e. the precursor CoZn-MOF. Herein, the vital roles of inactive Zn in developing highly active bifunctional oxygen catalysts were unravelled. That is, when the precursors include Zn species, the surface contents of pyridinic N for the ORR and the surface contents of Co-Nx and Co3+/Co2+ ratios for the OER were enhanced with the achievements of a high specific surface area, high porosity and highly electrochemical active surface areas. As a result, CoZn-NC-700 had a low ΔE value of ≈0.78 V. Meanwhile, Gadipelli's group202 developed a simple synthesis approach to prepare high performance Co–N–C-based electrocatalysts for the ORR/OER, as displayed in Fig. 18c. They found that the sample derived from bimetallic CoxZn100−x-ZIF-8 at a mild graphitization temperature of 900 °C showed the highest activity for the ORR, but the lowest activity for the OER. However, balanced ORR and OER activities were obtained with a further graphitization at 1000 °C, whereas the highest activity for th OER occurred for the sample graphitized at 1100 °C. Interestingly, this simple control over the graphitization and Co, Zn-concentration produced the balanced graphitic, nitrogen-doping and cobalt-embedded nanoporous carbon. Interestingly, Zhang et al.203 prepared a highly efficient bifunctional electrocatalyst of NiFe-LDH/Co, N-CNF, comprising 3–5 nm NiFe-LDH particles anchored on a Co, N-CNF support. The Co, N-CNF support was synthesized using a mesoporous silica protection strategy procedure using Zn, Co-ZIF crystals as a carbon, nitrogen and Co-rich precursor. The obtained NiFe-LDH/Co, N-CNF showed the potential gap value (ΔE) between the E1/2 of the ORR and EOER at 10 mA cm−2 (Ej=10) was 0.752 V. The remarkable performance of NiFe-LDH/Co, N-CNF stemmed from the coupling of the outstanding OER activity of NiFe-LDH nanocrystals and the excellent conductivity and ORR activity of Co, N-CNF. The Co, N-CNF possessed high conductivity and a homogeneous distribution of N-doping defects, with the latter nucleating the growth of and anchoring of nano-sized NiFe-LDH nanoparticles with highly exposed active sites.
Summarizing the above work, the selection of different precursor and synthesis process parameters (e.g. pyrolysis temperature, holding time and post-treatment process) can greatly affect the performances of Co–N–C-based electrocatalysts. However, it should be pointed out that direct evidence of transition metal Co-Nx participation in the active units of the M-Nx-C system is still lacking. Furthermore, in any situation, nitrogen species bonded within the carbon networks are likely important for enhancing the activity performance, but the nature of the active sites has not yet been conclusively identified. This requires the combination of theoretical calculations and advanced material characterization techniques (e.g. X-ray absorption spectroscopy, Mössbauer spectrum) with the experiment results to gain a deeper understanding.
Besides Co–N–C composites, Guo et al.204 prepared porous NiO/CoN interface nanowire arrays (PINWs) with both oxygen vacancies and strongly interconnected nanointerfaces between NiO and CoN domains by the calcination of NiCo2O4 nanowires under a NH3 atmosphere, which also showed excellent electrocatalytic performance and stability for both the OER and ORR, with a ΔE value of 0.85 V. In addition, Zhang et al.205 fabricated mesoporous cobalt molybdenum nitride (Co3Mo3N) by calcination of the precursor of CoMoO4 under an ammonia atmosphere, and found that many active sites were generated on the mesoporous nanostructure and the obtained intrinsically electronic configuration led to an excellent electrocatalytic performance for the ORR/OER in Li–O2 cells.
5.3 Cobalt-based layered double hydroxides (Co-based LDHs)
Although LDHs are regarded as promising bifunctional catalysts towards overall water splitting, the extremely low conductivity of LDHs seriously hinders the electron transfer and degrades their electrocatalytic performance. Fortunately, by combining the catalytic active LDHs and heteroatoms-doped carbon materials with excellent electron conductivity, the composites could have both high electrocatalytically active sites and suitable conductivity as an electrocatalyst with high performance. For instance, Sun et al.206 grafted the array-like ternary NiCoFe-LDH with Co3+ (NiCoIIIFe-LDH) on nitrogen-doped graphene oxide (N-GO) by an in situ growth route (NiCoIIIFe-LDH/N-GO). When it was used as a bifunctional catalyst for the OER/ORR in an alkaline electrolyte, a small potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.769 V was obtained. Herein, the key factors for excellent bifunctional catalytic performance were Co with a high valence, the N-doping of graphene and highly exposed Ni and Fe active sites in the array-like composite.
5.4 Cobalt-based phosphides
Similarly, combining Co-based phosphides with carbon-based materials is also an efficient strategy to boost the electroconductivity and stability of OER/ORR catalysts. Song et al.207 combined defective carbon with CoP to obtain CoP-DC nanohybrids as bifunctional oxygen electrocatalysts for both the ORR and OER, and simultaneously probed the interfacial charge distribution behaviour. Notably, a low potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.76 V was obtained. By combining multiple synchrotron-based X-ray spectroscopic characterizations with DFT calculations, it was revealed that the interfacial charge polarization with the electrons was concentrated on the defective carbon surface, whereas the holes were gathered on the CoP surface due to the strong interfacial coupling, which simultaneously facilitated either the ORR or OER with remarkable bifunctional activity (Fig. 19a and b). Manthiram et al.208 supported cobalt phosphide nanoparticles on a nitrogen-, sulfur-, phosphorus-doped carbon matrix (CoP@mNSP-C), which showed remarkable bifunctional activity towards the OER and ORR. The potential gap value (ΔE) of CoP@mNSP-C was 0.74 V, which was drastically smaller than those of the other cobalt-based catalysts. Importantly, it was found that the CoP nanoparticles were in situ converted to cobalt oxide under the accelerated conditions during the OER (and/or ORR), which reduced the anodic current applied to the carbon. This contributed to the stability of the carbon material, which maintained the highly initial catalytic properties of the hybrid catalyst. Jiang et al.209 confined a novel bimetallic phosphide (CoMnP4 nanoparticles) within P, N co-doped carbon layers (CMP@PNC) through a space-confinement phosphorization strategy, as shown in Fig. 19c. Serving as a bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalyst, a small potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.75 V in 0.1 M KOH solution along long-term catalytic durability was obtained. Herein, the P, N co-doped carbon layers endowed the confined bimetallic phosphide with abundant catalytic sites and a stable spatial structure, thereby allowing it to achieve remarkable electrocatalytic performance. Although the mechanisms of the ORR and OER have been widely studied, the real mechanisms of the reactions over metal phosphides in the oxygen electrode for ORR/OER are not yet fully understood. The cause of the varied OER and ORR catalysis performances after the in situ oxidation processes of metal phosphide materials remains unclear, and therefore, this should be considered in future studies.
 Fig. 19  (a) Diagrammatic drawing of the morphology structure of the CoP-DC. (b) The overall LSV curves of the CoP-DC sample in the whole ORR and OER region in 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Illustration of the synthesis route to obtain the confined bimetallic phosphide-based hybrid CMP@PNC and schematic of the ORR and OER main performance origins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5.5 Cobalt-based sulfides
Tremendous efforts have been made to develop Co-based sulfides as ORR/OER bifunctional cost-effective electrocatalysts. For instance, Zhang and co-workers210 first hydrothermally synthesized hydrangea-like NiCo2S4 microspheres with a sheet-on-sheet self-assembled structure and then studied their bifunctional catalytic activity for the ORR/OER. As a result, a lowest potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.69 V was obtained. Moreover, the as-prepared NiCo2S4 also exhibited advanced discharge properties in aluminium/air batteries and a more stable charge–discharge curve over 60 cycles in zinc/air batteries when compared to a single-metal sulfide.
Similar to other electrocatalysts, it is well known that rationally designing the nanostructure to expose more active sites for Co-based sulfides is also crucial to enhance the ORR/OER catalytic performance close to or even better than that of noble metals. In general, catalytically favourable surface atomic structures always exist on the high-index facets. Owing to their high surface energy, these facets often evolve or disappear rapidly during the preparation of the materials or during their usage in electrocatalysis. Thus, making high-index faceted nanocatalysts with excellent structural stability is a great challenge yet appealing conundrum to solve in order to achieve the goal of making efficient precious-metal-free electrocatalysts. Bao et al.211 prepared non-layered ternary thiospinel compound-CuCo2S4 nanosheets (NSs) via a “levelling metal activity and structure-directed one-pot sulfurization” strategy to expose the main (111), (022) and (004) planes. As a result, the CuCo2S4 NSs catalyst showed high catalytic activity for both the ORR and OER, with a potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.835 V. Combined with spin-polarized DFT computations, it was found that the excellent bifunctional catalytic property originated from the presence of the two special facets (022) and (004), which have different preferences for the ORR/OER.
Also, the combination of Co-based sulfides with multiple heteroatom-doped carbon materials could significantly boost the catalyst activity and durability. It was reported that graphene co-doped with heteroatoms (e.g. N, S and P) could cause a synergistic effect for enhancing the catalytic activity by introducing larger asymmetrical spin and charge density, which in turn makes these catalysts non-electron-neutral, which consequently affects the adsorption of oxygen/OH− and its reduction/oxidation.6,10,12,13 Furthermore, together with the doping-induced defects, the chemical activity of the hybrid nanomaterials could be further improved. For instance, Wang and co-workers212 developed a novel efficient bifunctional OER/ORR catalyst of Co9S8/CNT by using an advanced technique of atomic layer deposition (ALD) for coating a uniform thin layer of Co9S8 on a carbon-nanotube (CNT) network scaffold. Benefitting from the much enlarged surface area of the CNT scaffold and the merits of ALD for achieving a highly conformal coating, the Co9S8/CNT electrocatalyst exhibited very good ORR activity, as both the onset and half-wave potentials (E1/2) were fairly high at 0.94 and 0.82 V vs. the RHE, respectively, and an outstanding performance towards the OER with an overpotential of 369 mV for achieving a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Meanwhile, Wang et al.213 designed an advanced bifunctional electrocatalyst for the ORR and OER by simultaneously etching and doping a cobalt sulfides–graphene hybrid with NH3-plasma (N-Co9S8/G), which not only led to nitrogen doping into both Co9S8 and graphene, but also partially etched the surface of both Co9S8 and graphene. The N-Co9S8/G electrode showed an onset potential of 0.941 V vs. RHE for ORR and required an OER overpotential of 409 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Herein, the heteroatom doping could efficiently tune the electronic properties of Co9S8 and graphene, while the surface etching could expose more active sites for electrocatalysis. Fan et al.214 designed a bifunctional catalyst with a hierarchical meso–macroporous structure by embedding cobalt sulfide hollow nanospheres in nitrogen and sulfur co-doped graphene nanoholes (Co1−xS/N-S-G), which showed a potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.76 V. The enhanced catalytic activity was attributable to the synergistic effect induced by the presence of multiple types of active sites included in the cobalt sulfide hollow nanospheres, nitrogen and sulfur dopants, and possible Co–N–C sites, as well as the rich edge defects associated with the existence of nanoholes on the graphene basal plane, the high surface area and efficient mass transfer arising from the hierarchical porous structure. In addition, Shen et al.215 developed cobalt-iron double sulfides entrapped in nitrogen-doped mesoporous graphitic carbon (Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC), which showed better electrocatalytic activity towards the ORR in alkaline electrolytes in comparison to their monometallic counterparts. The Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC catalyst displayed a positive half-wave potential of 0.808 V vs. RHE for the ORR, whereas it needed an overpotential of 410 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH electrolyte for the OER. Herein, the moderate substitution and good dispersion of CoFe in bimetallic sulfide composites were considered to have a positive effect on the adsorption and activation of oxygen-containing species, thus leading to a conspicuous ORR and OER activity enhancement when compared to their monometallic counterparts. Moreover, the covalent bridge between the active sulfide particles and mesoporous carbon shells also provided a facile pathway for electron and mass transportation. Therefore, the intimate interactions rendered prolonged electrocatalytic performance to the composite.
5.6 Co-based single-atom catalysts
Single-atom catalysts (SACs), with the metal atoms distributed on the support surface, have recently emerged as a new frontier in catalysis and have consequently attracted extensive research attention. Traditional catalysts usually contain a mixture of a broad size distribution of metal particles, although in this case, only a small fraction of metal particles with a suitable size dispersion can perform efficient catalytic activity, while particles with other sizes are either inert or may trigger undesired reactions. Thus, many traditional catalysts suffer from a low metal utilization efficiency, leading to a high metal consumption along with cumbersome and often expensive product purification and waste disposal.47,216 In contrast, SACs always demonstrate the maximum atom-utilization efficiency. However, many difficulties still exist in the preparation of SACs because the decrease in the metal particle size results in a clear increase of the surface free energy of the metal particle such that the metal atoms will be prone to aggregate to form clusters in the synthesis process. To solve this problem, it is necessary to select a suitable support that could efficiently anchor the isolated atoms and further prevent the aggregation of SACs. It was found that carbon nanomaterials with a high surface area are such a type of carrier material.217,218 Recently, Deng and co-workers219 controllably synthesized multiscale Co metallic single atoms on N-doped carbon (Co-SAs@NC) through regulating the spatial isolation of Co species by heteroatom Zn doping, and then investigated their size-dependent electrocatalytic properties. This Co-SAs@NC hybrid delivered outstanding bifunctional activity for both the ORR and OER, as well as reversibility in Zn–air batteries. More importantly, this work shed light on the regulation of the particle size through spatial separation and improved our understanding of the size–performance effect of atomically dispersed materials for chemical and electrochemical reactions. Meanwhile, Cao et al.217 reported a single-atom cobalt electrocatalyst with CoN4 moieties dispersed on nitrogen-doped graphitic nanosheets (CoN4/NG) by a surfactant-assisted approach, which exhibited superb electrocatalytic activities towards the ORR and OER with a potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.74 V. In addition, Pennycook et al.220 anchored Co single atoms in porous nitrogen-doped carbon nanoflake arrays (NC-Co SA) by using a Co-MOF precursor followed by removal of the unwanted Co clusters (Fig. 20). Herein, the well-defined Co single atoms were attached to the carbon network through N-Co bonding, and extra porosity and active surface area were then simultaneously created by the removal of the Co metal clusters. Compared with Co nanoparticles grown on NC (NC-Co), the NC-Co SA catalyst displayed a potential gap value (ΔE) of 0.72 V, which was smaller than that of NC-Co (0.77 V), indicating that it is a promising electrocatalyst for use with the reversible oxygen electrode.
 Fig. 20  Illustration of the formation of NC-Co SAC nanoflake arrays on carbon cloth and STEM image of the samples obtained at different representative stages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Based on the above published results, we assess that cobalt-based materials in an alkaline electrolyte should have good potential as alternatives to replace noble metals (e.g. Pt, Ir and Ru)-based electrocatalysts due to their high activities, superior electrochemical stability and durability. Notably, in the study of electrocatalysis, there are two main strategies to improve the catalytic performance or the rate of reaction: (i) increasing the number of active sites on a given electrode through an increase in the loading amount or by an improvement of the catalyst structure to expose more active sites per gram (extrinsic); and (ii) increasing the intrinsic activity of each active site (intrinsic).57 These two strategies are not always mutually exclusive but can be ideally addressed simultaneously, leading to the greatest improvement in activity. Various nanostructuring Co-based materials, fabricated either by attaining the optimal morphology or by exfoliating the material into thinner and smaller nanoflakes (e.g. Co-based layered double hydroxides catalysts), have been developed to increase the density of active sites for bifunctional catalysis of the OER/HER in water splitting. Moreover, loading cobalt metal compounds on conducting carbonaceous materials, or by directly growing them on a 3D conductive support (e.g. Cu foil, Ni foam and carbon fibre paper) to avoid using polymer binders, could further improve the accessibility of the active sites. Heteroatom doping (e.g. N, S, and P) to fabricate topological defects has been demonstrated to be the most effective strategy for the enhancement of the intrinsic activity of individual active sites in metal-free nanocarbon materials. Taking advantage of the active sites of nanocarbon-supported Co-based materials (e.g. cobalt-based oxide, layered double hydroxides, phosphides, chalcogenides, single-atom and Co–N–C structure catalysts) through space-confinement, core–shell designing or other strategies could allow achieving a uniform active species dispersion in the nanoscale with a strongly coupled interface, thereby ensuring electron transfer and boosting the bifunctional OER/HER or OER/ORR electrocatalytic and stability. Importantly, the catalytic activity of Co-based spinel and perovskites oxides can be tuned by varying the mixture of metals and dopants or by introducing defects (e.g. vacancies, topological defects and lattice defects) for bifunctional OER/ORR electrocatalysts. In particular, fine-tuning the crystal structure and exposing the high-index crystal plane for Co-based spinel oxides and sulfides are the most interesting goal-oriented strategies to enhance the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity. Moreover, it should be noted that the surface of Co-based phosphides can inevitably be oxidized to form new oxide/hydroxide-based active phases, which can also increase the intrinsic electrocatalytic activity.
6. Summary and outlook
Nowadays, a great challenge to the widespread applications of clean and renewable energy is the design and synthesis of highly-efficient, earth-abundant electrocatalysts with superior durability for catalyzing the energy-related electrochemical reactions (e.g. HER, OER, ORR) involved in various clean energy conversions and storage devices, such as water splitting, metal–air batteries and fuel cells. In particular, the development of bifunctional electrocatalysts towards HER/OER or ORR/OER has great virtue for reducing the cost and simplifying the system. Cobalt, as one of the most abundant elements in the earth's crust, has emerged as an attractive non-precious element in catalysts applied for electrochemical reactions. In this review, the recent progress on advanced non-noble Co-based materials as effective HER/OER or OER/ORR bifunctional electrocatalysts and the various nanostructuring strategies to improve the catalytic activity of these bifunctional electrocatalysts were summarized and discussed. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, all the developed electrocatalysts seemed to have excellent HER/OER or OER/ORR bifunctional activity on the lab scale.
Table 1 Summary of non-noble Co-based bifunctional electrocatalysts towards both the HER and OER in an alkaline electrolyte (1.0 M KOH solution)




Catalyst

η
HER/mV vs. RHE 10 mA cm−2

η
OER/mV vs. RHE 10 mA cm−2
Overall voltage/V @ 10 mA cm−2 except for special noting
Reference




NiCo2O4
110
290
1.65

87



CuCoO-NWs
140
270@25
1.61

88



FeCoO-NF
205
244
1.62

89



CoOx@CN
232
260
1.55@20

90



CoMnO@CN
71
263
1.5

91



NiCo-NiCoO2@NC
94
318
1.44@20

92



NC/CuCo/CuCoOx
112
190
1.53

93



NiFe/NiCo2O4/NF
105
340@1200
1.67

94



NiFe/NiCo2O4/NF
192
290@50
1.60

95



CoNi/CoFe2O4/NF
82
360@1000
1.57

96



NiCo2O4/Ni2P/NF
45
250
1.59

97



FeOOH@CoN4


254@20
1.59

99



NSP-Co3FeNx/NF
23
222@20
1.539

101



NiCo2N/NF
180
290
1.7

102



CoN-400/CC
97
251
1.587

103



NCN/CC
68
247
1.56

104



NC@CoN/Cu3N/CF
134
303@50
1.62

105



NC@CuCo2Nx/CF
105
230
1.55

106



Co5.47N NP@N-PC
149
284
1.62

98



NiCo-LDH/NF
162
271
1.66

110



CoMo-LDH
115
290
1.63

111



Cu@CoFe LDH
171
240
1.681

108



CoFe LDH-F/NF
166
260
1.63

112



CoP hollow polyhedron
159
400



117



CoP NS/CC
90
310
1.67

118



CoP@CC


300
1.68

119



CoP3 NAs/CFP
119
334
1.60

116



Co2P nanorods
87
310
1.65

120



Ni–Co–P HNBs
107
207
1.62

121



Co–Ni–P
103
340
1.65

124



Co0.93Ni0.07P3
87
221@20



113



Co0.68Fe0.32P
116
289



125



Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC
220
190



126



Mo-CoP
40
305
1.56

127



Co2P/CNTs
132
292
1.53

128



CoP@SNC
174
350
1.64

129



NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF
120
220
1.57

130



CoP film
94
345
1.744@100

131



TiO2@Co9S8
139
240
1.56

136



Co9S8/WS2 nanobelt
138


1.65

137



Zn–Co–S nanoneedle/CFP
234
320
1.71

138



Co3S4@MoS2
136
280
1.58

133



NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF
136
160
1.53

139



CuCo2S4 nanowire arrays
65
310@100
1.65@100

140



CoS2 HNSs
193
290
1.54

141



Se-(NiCo)Sx/(OH)x
103
155
1.6

142



Co9S8-Ni2S3 HNTs/Ni
85
281@50
1.59

143



Co/Co9S8@SNGS-1000 (0.1 M KOH)
350@20
290@20



144



Co9S8@NOSC-900


340
1.60

134



Co9S8-NSC@Mo2C
89
293
1.61

145



CoSe2/CF
95
297
1.63

146



p-CoSe2/CC
138
243
1.62

147



Co(SxSe1−x)2
122
283
1.63

148



CoNiSe2 NRs/NF
170@100
307@100
1.591

150



CoOx-CoSe/NF
90
380@500
1.66@20

151





Table 2 Summary of non-noble Co-based bifunctional electrocatalysts towards both the ORR and OER in an alkaline electrolyte (0.1 M KOH solution)




Catalyst

E
0/V vs. RHE for ORR

E
1/2 or E−3/V vs. RHE for ORR

E
10/V vs. RHE for OER
ΔE/V vs. RHE (E10 − E1/2 or E−3)
Reference




5% Ni doped mesoporous


0.83
1.611
0.781

153



NiCo2O4-250


0.75
1.55
0.8

158



MnCo2O4
0.95
0.8
1.63
0.83

159



MnCo3−xO4@NCNTs


0.76
1.70
0.94

156



CoMn2O4 nanodots/rGO


0.89
1.54
0.65

167



NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs
0.954
0.858
1.616
0.764

169



NdBa0.75Ca0.25Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ/N-rGO


0.848
1.609
0.761

183



(PrBa0.5Sr0.5)0.95Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ/3DNG


0.82
1.55
0.73

187



Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/3DND
0.86


1.63



188



Co-N/Co-O@N-C
0.93


1.60



194



Co-Fe-N@MWCNT
0.92
0.78
1.52
0.74

195



Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs






0.765

196



CoNP@NC/NG-700
0.93
0.78
1.62
0.84

197



MnO@Co-N/C


0.83
1.76
0.93

199



Co-N-CNTs
0.97
0.90
1.69
0.79

200



CoZn-NC-700


0.84
1.62
0.78

201



NiFe LDH/Co, N-CNF
0.893
0.79
1.542
0.752

203



NiO/CoN


0.78


0.85

204



NiCoIIIFe-LDH/N-GO array






0.769

206



CoP-DC


0.81
1.55
0.76

207



CoP@mNSP-C


0.9
1.64
0.74

208



CoMnP4@P, N co-doped carbon
0.89
0.81
1.56
0.75

209



NiCo2S4 microspheres






0.69

210



CuCo2S4 NSs
0.9
0.74
1.567
0.835

211



Co9S8/CNT
0.94
0.82
1.599
0.779

212



N-Co9S8/G
0.941


1.639



213



Co1−xS/N-S-G
0.978
0.862
1.601
0.76

214



Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC


0.808





215



Co-SAs@NC
0.96
0.82





219



CoN4/NG
0.91
0.87
1.61
0.74

217



NC-Co SA
1.00
0.87
1.59
0.72

220





When the HER/OER bifunctional electrocatalytic performance was evaluated for overall water splitting, it was better to maintain a similar mass loading of the same active material on both the anodic and cathodic electrodes and to compare the relevant cell voltage or overpotential at the standard current density of 10 mA cm−2. The smaller the cell voltage or overpotential value, the better the catalyst performance as an overall water-splitting electrode. Generally, excellent electrocatalysts exhibit cell voltages ranging from 1.5 to 1.6 V, with the water splitting durability test of at least 12 h. The potential gap (ΔE) between the ORR half-wave potential (E1/2) and the OER potential Ej=10 taken at 10 mA cm−2 is often used as a descriptor to judge the overall oxygen activity of bifunctional ORR/OER electrocatalysts; whereby the lower the ΔE value, the better the bifunctional activity of the catalyst. Most strikingly, high-performance electrocatalysts display ΔE values ranging from 0.7 to 0.8 V. However, some of them have low durability in alkaline electrolytes, especially at high applied potentials. In addition, the preparation process is still complex and ineffective for some electrocatalysts. In particular for SACs, more effective and simpler ways should be considered in the future. Moreover, how to scale them up for practical applications has seldom been mentioned by researchers.
To optimize the electrocatalytic activity of Co-based materials, the following strategies are typically adopted: (i) the engineering of different nanostructures (e.g. nanorods, nanowires and nanosheets) to expose rich catalytic active sites; (ii) enhancing the electronic conductivity via integrating with extra conductive materials, like metal and carbon-based materials; (iii) combining different active materials to achieve strongly coupled interfaces and by maximizing the synergistic effects; (iv) enhancing the mass-transfer efficiency between the reductant and product in the electrocatalytic process by introducing mesoporous materials and 3D architectures; and (v) maximizing the atom-utilization efficiency by designing single-atom catalysts and importantly stabilizing single metal atoms on the supports, thus further improving the dispersion of single-atom catalysts. As reviewed above, doping Co-based metal oxides and spinel or perovskite-type oxides with one or more extra metal element (e.g. Ni, Fe, Co) could lead to a noticeably different electronic structure and the formation of abundant defect sites or oxygen vacancies, thereby inducing increased electrochemical activities towards HER/OER or OER/ORR. Meanwhile, due to their high electrical conductivity and excellent chemical stability, carbon-containing hybrid catalysts generally offer superior catalytic activities. In particular, doping carbon nanomaterials with heteroatoms, such as N, P and S, could cause electron modulation to change the charge distribution and electronic properties of the carbon skeletons, which in turn affects their interaction with hydrogen or oxygen intermediates and ultimately their electrocatalytic activities. In addition, the primary focus to date has been driven by the development of low-cost and high-efficiency electrocatalysts, such as perovskites, metal phosphides, metal sulphides, nitrides and carbon-based catalysts, for the oxygen electrode.
To understand the operation mechanism is very important for the design of effective Co-based electrocatalysts. To date, a great amount of effort has been devoted to achieving impressive enhancements of Co-based electrocatalysts in HER/OER or in OER/ORR. It should be pointed out that most of these bifunctional electrocatalysts were first explored for an effective single half-cell reaction (HER, OER or ORR), but the electrocatalytic performances of these bifunctional electrocatalysts are difficult to compare with the separate HER, OER or ORR catalysts. It remains necessary to further study the sluggish kinetics of HER/OER and OER/ORR with specific bifunctional electrocatalysts. Furthermore, identification of the nature of the active sites is really important for the design of efficient and stable bifunctional electrocatalysts. However, due to the lack of theoretical prediction and in situ experimental characterizations, the mechanism on the bifunctional electrocatalysts is still unclear. For this reason, the development of in situ characterization techniques (i.e. scanning probe microscopy, ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and soft X-ray absorption spectroscopy) is crucial as they could disclose more key information related to the intermediate and active sites, and provide guidance for the catalyst design. In addition, combining these with DFT computations could provide more intuitive and accurate insights into the whole electrocatalytic reaction process and assist making practicable predictions.
The above design strategies of Co-based bifunctional electrocatalysts may be further applied in other electrocatalysts. More novel bifunctional electrocatalysts with low-cost, earth-abundant, high activity and excellent durability should be developed and explored for their potential applications. In fact, the morphology engineering, heteroatom-doping, oxygen-vacancies tuning and hybridization engineering strategies have also been applied for enhancing the performance other earth-abundant-based bifunctional electrocatalysts; however, the ultimate development of such catalysts for commercial energy-related devices still remains a great challenge. Until now, these bifunctional electrocatalysts have been only investigated as “catalysts”, and it remains necessary to apply them in large-scale devices for clean and renewable energy conversion and storage.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Jiku Chemical Co., Ltd. S. Li greatly acknowledge China Scholarship Council and Shanxi Graduate Innovation Project Fund (2018BY045).
Notes and references
I. S. Amiinu, Z. Pu, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 17023000 CrossRef .
P. Gu, M. Zheng, Q. Zhao, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7651–7666 RSC .
N. K. Chaudhari, H. Jin, B. Kim and K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12231–12247 RSC .
X. Zou and Y. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5148–5180 RSC .
W. Zhu, R. Zhang, F. Qu, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1721–1743 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736–11758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11973–12000 RSC .
Z. P. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279 CrossRef .
N. Tian, B. A. Lu, X. D. Yang, R. Huang, Y. X. Jiang, Z. Y. Zhou and S. G. Sun, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 54–83 CrossRef .
Z. F. Huang, J. Wang, Y. Peng, C. Y. Jung, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700544 CrossRef .
V. Vij, S. Sultan, A. M. Harzandi, A. Meena, J. N. Tiwari, W.-G. Lee, T. Yoon and K. S. Kim, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7196–7225 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ghosh and R. N. Basu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11241–11280 RSC .
M. Kuang and G. Zheng, Small, 2016, 12, 5656–5675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, S. Ci, Y. Ding, G. Wang and Z. Wen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8006–8029 RSC .
C. Zhu, H. Li, S. Fu, D. Du and Y. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 517–531 RSC .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fabbri, A. Habereder, K. Waltar, R. Kötz and T. J. Schmidt, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3800–3821 RSC .
Y. Nie, L. Li and Z. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2168–2201 RSC .
M. Prabu, K. Ketpang and S. Shanmugam, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3173–3181 RSC .
A. Aijaz, J. Masa, C. Rosler, W. Xia, P. Weide, A. J. Botz, R. A. Fischer, W. Schuhmann and M. Muhler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 4087–4091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, W. Bian, C. Jin, J. H. Tian and R. Yang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 177, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, W. Li, Q. Guo, H. Gao, Y. You, Y. Li, Z. Cui, K. C. Jiang and H. Long, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5543–5550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. U. Lee, H. W. Park, M. G. Park, V. Ismayilov and Z. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 7, 902–910 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Zhang, M. Jiang, Y. Kuang, X. Sun and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2251–2259 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rao, Y. Wang, H. Ning, P. Li and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 33601–33607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. M. Patil, J. S. Sohn, S. B. Kulkarni, S. C. Lee, H. G. Park, K. V. Gurav, J. H. Kim and S. C. Jun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2450–2458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, A. N. Gandi, C. Xia, M. N. Hedhili, D. H. Anjum, U. Schwingenschlögl and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1035–1042 CrossRef .
X. Zou, Y. Liu, G. D. Li, Y. Wu, D. P. Liu, W. Li, H. W. Li, D. Wang, Y. Zhang and X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700404 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604942 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, S. E. Lowe, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, K. Pang, Y. Wang, Y. Zhong, P. Liu, K. Zhao, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16511–16515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, H. L. Wang and S. Guo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1273–1307 RSC .
H. Zhong, X. Gong, S. Zhang, P. Tang, D. Li and Y. Feng, Chem. Rec., 2018, 18, 840–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, X. Du, X. Ma, Z. Wang, X. Hao, A. Abudula, A. Yoshida and G. Guan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 250, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Guan, X. Du, A. D. Jagadale, J. Cao, X. Hao, X. Ma and A. Abudula, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 76026–76031 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Liu, C. Sun, P. Xi, S. Peng, D. Gao and D. Xue, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 779–786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jia, W. Zhou, Z. Wei, T. Xiong, G. Li, L. Zhao, X. Zhang, H. Liu, J. Zhou and S. Chen, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 749–757 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Zhang, P. Wan, T. Xu, X. Wu and X. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 148, 170–174 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, Y. Hu, R. Chen, G. Zhu, T. Chen, H. Lv, Y. Wang, J. Liang, H. Liu, C. Yan, H. Zhu, Z. Tie, Z. Jin and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 139–147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xue, H. Su, Q. Y. Yu, B. Zhang, H. H. Wang, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602355 CrossRef .
X. Li, S. Li, A. Yoshida, S. Sirisomboonchai, K. Tang, Z. Zuo, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 4407–4412 RSC .
S. H. Cho, K. R. Yoon, K. Shin, J. W. Jung, C. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, D. Y. Youn, S. W. Song, G. Henkelman and I. D. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 5941–5950 CrossRef CAS .
T. Varga, G. Ballai, L. Vásárhelyi, H. Haspel, Á. Kukovecz and Z. Kónya, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 237, 826–834 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song and X. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16481–16484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, F. Meng, M. Cabán-Acevedo, L. Li, A. Forticaux, L. Xiu, Z. Wang and S. Jin, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1421–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Chen, C. Wang, Z. Y. Wu, Y. Xiong, Q. Xu, S. H. Yu and H. L. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5010–5016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Song, N. Cheng, A. Lushington and X. Sun, Catalysts, 2016, 6, 116 CrossRef .
H. Fei, J. Dong, M. J. Arellano-Jimenez, G. Ye, N. Dong Kim, E. L. Samuel, Z. Peng, Z. Zhu, F. Qin, J. Bao, M. J. Yacaman, P. M. Ajayan, D. Chen and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8668 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, Q. Shi, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, G. Wan, C. Yang, S. Yao, J. Song, H. Zhou, D. Du, S. P. Beckman, D. Su and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801956 CrossRef .
S. Li, Z. Jiang, X. Xiao, W. Chen, X. Tian, X. Hao and Z. J. Jiang, Ionics, 2019, 25, 785–796 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morozan, S. Campidelli, A. Filoramo, B. Jousselme and S. Palacin, Carbon, 2011, 49, 4839–4847 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wen, X. Yang, M. Li, L. Bai and J. Guan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 830–841 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Jiang and Z. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Zhong, J. Liu, X. Zeng, S. Qu, X. Han, Y. Deng, W. Hu and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703657 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dou, X. Li, L. Tao, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 9727–9730 RSC .
H. Zhong, C. Campos-Roldán, Y. Zhao, S. Zhang, Y. Feng and N. Alonso-Vante, Catalysts, 2018, 8, 559 CrossRef .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, Z. Liang, R. Zou and S. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2650–2676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Koper, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 1399–1407 RSC .
H. F. Wang, C. Tang and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803329 CrossRef .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1654–1660 CrossRef CAS .
W. He, Y. Wang, C. Jiang and L. Lu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2396–2409 RSC .
V. R. Stamenkovic, B. S. Mun, M. Arenz, K. J. Mayrhofer, C. A. Lucas, G. Wang, P. N. Ross and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 241–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wang, H. L. Xin, R. Hovden, H. Wang, Y. Yu, D. A. Muller, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 81–87 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. Jiao, B. Mei, Y. Tong, Y. Li, M. Ruan, P. Song, G. Sun, L. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang, L. Gu, Z. Zhou and W. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 58, 1163–1167 CrossRef .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
S. Zhuo and K. Sohlberg, Phys. B, 2006, 381, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H.-Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martínez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J. J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Kim, B. Kim, H. Kim and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702774 CrossRef .
F. Lu, M. Zhou, Y. Zhou and X. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701931 CrossRef .
J. Wang, F. Xu, H. Jin, Y. Chen and Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605838 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Zhao, K. Rui, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803291 CrossRef .
N. Mahmood, Y. Yao, J. W. Zhang, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700464 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fang, G. Dong, R. Wei and J. C. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700559 CrossRef .
T. R. Cook, D. K. Dogutan, S. Y. Reece, Y. Surendranath, T. S. Teets and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6474–6502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You and Y. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 8738–8745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, L. Li, J. Li, W. Ding and Z. Wei, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5795–5804 RSC .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2583–2588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, Y. Yao, Y. Zhu, Y. Liu, Y. Su, X. Yang and C. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21511–21520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganesan, M. Prabu, J. Sanetuntikul and S. Shanmugam, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3625–3637 CrossRef CAS .
H. Osgood, S. V. Devaguptapu, H. Xu, J. Cho and G. Wu, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 601–625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, W. Cui, Q. Liu, Z. Xing, A. M. Asiri and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 215–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gao, H. Zhang, Q. Li, X. Yu, Z. Hong, X. Zhang, C. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 6398–6402 CrossRef .
M. Kuang, P. Han, Q. Wang, J. Li and G. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8555–8561 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Bandal, A. R. Jadhav, A. H. Tamboli and H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 249, 253–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, J. Wang, D. Su, Z. Wei, Z. Pang and Y. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2688–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Tang, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14305–14312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xiao, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, X. Dai, Y. Ma, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, M. Liu and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15901–15912 RSC .
J. Hou, Y. Sun, Y. Wu, S. Cao and L. Sun, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704447 CrossRef .
C. Xiao, Y. Li, X. Lu and C. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, S. Zeng, W. Liu, X. Wang, Q. Li, Z. Zhao and F. Geng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 1488–1495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Li, S. Sirisomboonchai, A. Yoshida, X. An, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19221–19230 RSC .
L. Wang, C. Gu, X. Ge, J. Zhang, H. Zhu and J. Tu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700481 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, Y. Ha, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, H. Xu, Y. Li and R. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7134–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, H. Yang, J. Chen, T. Xiong, M.-S. Balogun and Y. Tong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5152–5158 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Han, P. Liu, J. Jiang, L. Ai, Z. Shao and S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19912–19933 RSC .
Y. Wang, D. Liu, Z. Liu, C. Xie, J. Huo and S. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 12614–12617 RSC .
Y. Wang, B. Zhang, W. Pan, H. Ma and J. Zhang, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4170–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xue, J. Kang, D. Guo, C. Zhu, C. Li, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 273, 229–238 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ray, S. C. Lee, B. Jin, A. Kundu, J. H. Park and S. C. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4466–4476 RSC .
J. Li, X. Kong, M. Jiang and X. Lei, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2906–2913 RSC .
J. Zheng, X. Chen, X. Zhong, S. Li, T. Liu, G. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Deng, D. Mei and J. G. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704169 CrossRef .
G. Fan, F. Li, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7040–7066 RSC .
L. Yu, H. Q. Zhou, J. Y. Sun, F. Qin, D. Luo, L. X. Xie, F. Yu, J. M. Bao, Y. Li, S. Chen and Z. F. Ren, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Jia, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung, D. O'Hare and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501974 CrossRef .
W. Liu, J. Bao, M. Guan, Y. Zhao, J. Lian, J. Qiu, L. Xu, Y. Huang, J. Qian and H. Li, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 8372–8376 RSC .
J. Bao, Z. Wang, J. Xie, L. Xu, F. Lei, M. Guan, Y. Huang, Y. Zhao, J. Xia and H. Li, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2964–2970 RSC .
P. F. Liu, S. Yang, B. Zhang and H. G. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 34474–34481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, T. Wu, G. Fu, T. Gao, J. Han, T. Yao, Y. Zhang, W. Zhong, X. Wang and B. Song, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1744–1752 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chang, L. Liang, C. Li, M. Wang, J. Ge, C. Liu and W. Xing, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2287–2295 RSC .
T. Wu, M. Pi, D. Zhang and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14539–14544 RSC .
M. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 2158–2165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, W. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. Yue, M. Ren, Y. Zhang, N. M. Saleh and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24277–24284 RSC .
Y. Cheng, F. Liao, W. Shen, L. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. Li and M. Shao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 18977–18982 RSC .
M. Song, Y. He, M. Zhang, X. Zheng, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Han, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 345–352 CrossRef CAS .
E. Hu, Y. Feng, J. Nai, D. Zhao, Y. Hu and X. W. D. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 872–880 RSC .
P. E. R. Blanchard, A. P. Grosvenor, R. G. Cavell and A. Mar, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7081–7088 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Jin, P. Li and D. Xiao, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 1459–1464 RSC .
Y. Pei, Y. Yang, F. Zhang, P. Dong, R. Baines, Y. Ge, H. Chu, P. M. Ajayan, M. Ye and J. Shen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 31887–31896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Bu, Z. Lv, J. Mahmood, G. F. Han, I. Ahmad, G. Kim, Q. Zhong and J. B. Baek, Small, 2017, 13, 1701167 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
C. Guan, W. Xiao, H. Wu, X. Liu, W. Zang, H. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. P. Feng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 73–80 CrossRef .
D. Das and K. K. Nanda, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meng, Y.-N. Hao, L. Zheng and M. Cao, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 14613–14626 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Li, A. Hähnel, V. Naumann, C. Lin, S. Azimi, S. L. Schweizer, A. W. Maijenburg and R. B. Wehrspohn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706847 CrossRef .
N. Jiang, B. You, M. Sheng and Y. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 6251–6254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, N. Jung, J. H. Jang, H. J. Kim and S. J. Yoo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, Z. Wang, Y. M. Kang, Y. Bando and Y. Yamauchi, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 494–502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Meng, S. He, A. Goswami, Q. Wu, J. Li, S. Tong, T. Asefa and M. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606585 CrossRef .
H. Zhu, J. Zhang, R. Yanzhang, M. Du, Q. Wang, G. Gao, J. Wu, G. Wu, M. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Yao and X. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4752–4759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Deng, Y. Zhong, Y. X. Zeng, Y. D. Wang, X. L. Wang, X. H. Lu, X. H. Xia and J. P. Tu, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700772 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Peng, L. Li, J. Zhang, T. L. Tan, T. Zhang, D. Ji, X. Han, F. Cheng and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23361–23368 RSC .
X. Wu, X. Han, X. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong and W. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12574–12583 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, Y. Liu, G. D. Li, X. Zou, X. Lian, D. Wang, L. Sun, T. Asefa and X. Zou, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 161–170 CrossRef CAS .
S. Czioska, J. Wang, X. Teng and Z. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 11877–11883 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ma, W. Zhang, Y. Deng, C. Zhong, W. Hu and X. Han, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4816–4824 RSC .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, A. Li, X. Chang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705538 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, P. Xu, R. Zhou, R. Li, L. Qiu, S. P. Jiang and D. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 299, 152–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xian, S. Liu, Y. Zang, R. Liu, G. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhang and H. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 93–102 CrossRef .
X. Luo, Q. Zhou, S. Du, J. Li, J. Zhong, X. Deng and Y. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22291–22302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, Q. Dong, J. Yang, Z. Dai, J. Lin, P. Chen, W. Huang and X. Dong, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 2234–2243 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wan, W. Jin, X. Guo, J. Mao, L. Zheng, J. Zhao, J. Zhang, H. Liu and C. Tang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15374–15382 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fang, W. Li, Y. Guan, Y. Feng, H. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701008 CrossRef .
X. Wang, F. Li, W. Li, W. Gao, Y. Tang and R. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17982–17989 RSC .
T. Chen and Y. Tan, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1331–1344 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, P. Du, Z. Chen and M. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10933–10939 RSC .
P. W. Menezes, A. Indra, D. González-Flores, N. R. Sahraie, I. Zaharieva, M. Schwarze, P. Strasser, H. Dau and M. Driess, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2017–2027 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, Z. Ren, S. Y. Chen, Y. Meng, S. Biswas, P. Nandi, H. A. Elsen, P. X. Gao and S. L. Suib, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20802–20813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, T. Fujigaya and N. Nakashima, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, Z. J. Jiang, T. Maiyalagan and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5877–5889 RSC .
T. Zhao, S. Gadipelli, G. He, M. J. Ward, D. Do, P. Zhang and Z. Guo, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1295–1304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Hou, J. Chen, H. K. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Wu, Small, 2016, 12, 602–611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. He, Z. Chen, X. Zheng, X. Han, D. Rao, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 4915–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, L. Kuai, W. Cao, M. Huttula, S. Ollikkala, T. Ahopelto, A. P. Honkanen, S. Huotari, M. Yu and B. Geng, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 15173–15177 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Han, F. Cheng, Y. Hu, C. Chen and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Ahmed, B. Choi and Y. B. Kim, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 2543 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Tong, P. Chen, T. Zhou, K. Xu, W. Chu, C. Wu and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 7227–7231 CrossRef .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, C. Xu, Y. Su, D. Liu and X. He, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2017, 787, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tian, H. Li, B. Qin, Y. Xu, Y. Hao, Y. Li, G. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Sun and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7103–7110 RSC .
J. Fu, F. M. Hassan, J. Li, D. U. Lee, A. R. Ghannoum, G. Lui, M. A. Hoque and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6421–6428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Du, C. Chen, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5467–5474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yan, Z. Yang, W. Bian and R. Yang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, Z. Jiang, J. Huang, B. Deng, L. Zhou, Z. J. Jiang and M. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9517–9527 RSC .
F. Cheng, T. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. Han and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 2534–2537 CrossRef .
T. Ling, D. Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. Zheng, J. Mao, X. W. Du, Z. Hu and M. Jaroniec, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Meng, T. Ling, T. Y. Ma, H. Wang, Z. Hu, Y. Zhou, J. Mao, X. W. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604607 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bao, X. Zhang, B. Fan, J. Zhang, M. Zhou, W. Yang, X. Hu, H. Wang, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7399–7404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, L. Liu, Z. Hu, P. Zhang, X. Cao, B. Wang and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17598–17605 RSC .
Z. Sadighi, J. Huang, L. Qin, S. Yao, J. Cui and J. K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 134–147 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ou, C. Yang, Y. Liang, N. Hussain, B. Ge, K. Huang, Y. Xu, H. Wei, R. Zhang and H. Wu, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800279 CrossRef .
J. I. Jung, M. Risch, S. Park, M. G. Kim, G. Nam, H. Y. Jeong, Y. Shao-Horn and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 176–183 RSC .
J. I. Jung, H. Y. Jeong, J. S. Lee, M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4582–4586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tan, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602674 CrossRef .
Y. Choi, M. e. C. Lin and M. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7214–7219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Malkhandi, B. Yang, A. Manohar, A. Manivannan, G. S. Prakash and S. Narayanan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 967–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. B. Luo, X. W. Gao, D. Q. Shi, S. L. Chou, J. Z. Wang and H. K. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3031–3038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. I. Kim, S. H. Cho, S. H. Park, Y. J. Lee, R. A. Afzal, J. Yoo, Y. S. Seo, Y. J. Lee and J. Y. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17807–17818 RSC .
J. I. Jung, H. Y. Jeong, M. G. Kim, G. Nam, J. Park and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 266–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, S. Maruyama, W. T. Hong, I. Takeuchi and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5229–5232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liu, J. Li, Q. Wang, X. Wang, D. Qian, J. Jiang, J. Li and Z. Chen, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 725, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bu, H. Jang, O. Gwon, S. H. Kim, S. H. Joo, G. Nam, S. Kim, Y. Qin, Q. Zhong and S. K. Kwak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2048–2054 RSC .
Y. Bu, G. Nam, S. Kim, K. Choi, Q. Zhong, J. Lee, Y. Qin, J. Cho and G. Kim, Small, 2018, 14, 1802767 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, Z. Chen, N. Wu, Y. Wang, B. Wang and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 516–526 RSC .
J. S. Li, S. L. Li, Y. J. Tang, M. Han, Z. H. Dai, J. C. Bao and Y. Q. Lan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2710–2713 RSC .
B. B. Kumar and N. K. Kar, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12736–12745 CrossRef .
L. Shang, H. Yu, X. Huang, T. Bian, R. Shi, Y. Zhao, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1668–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, L. Yu, X. Chen, G. Wang, L. Jin, X. Pan, J. Deng, G. Sun and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 389–393 CrossRef .
K. J. Lee, D. Y. Shin, A. Byeon, A. Lim, Y. S. Jo, A. Begley, D. H. Lim, Y. E. Sung, H. S. Park, K. H. Chae, S. W. Nam, K. Y. Lee and J. Y. Kim, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15846–15855 RSC .
T. Gao, Z. Jin, Y. Zhang, G. Tan, H. Yuan and X. Dan, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 51–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, W. Chen, H. Pan, Y. Cao, Z. Jiang, X. Tian, X. Hao, T. Maiyalagan and Z. J. Jiang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8530–8541 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, J. Yu, X. Chen, W. Lei, G. Zhuang, X. Li and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10575–10584 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, Q. Cai, A. Vasileff, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 3336–3339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Guo, H. Cui, Z. Xie, Z. Xin, J. Wei and Z. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9716–9722 RSC .
T. Wang, Z. Kou, S. Mu, J. Liu, D. He, I. S. Amiinu, W. Meng, K. Zhou, Z. Luo, S. Chaemchuen and F. Verpoort, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705048 CrossRef .
B. Chen, X. He, F. Yin, H. Wang, D.-J. Liu, R. Shi, J. Chen and H. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700795 CrossRef .
S. Gadipelli, T. Zhao, S. A. Shevlin and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1661–1667 RSC .
Q. Wang, L. Shang, R. Shi, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, G. I. Waterhouse, L. Z. Wu, C. H. Tung and T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700467 CrossRef .
J. Yin, Y. Li, F. Lv, Q. Fan, Y. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, F. Cheng, P. Xi and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2275–2283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Chen, X. He, X. Wang, S. Dong, P. Han, C. Zhang, S. Wang and L. Gu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 858–865 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Z. Cai, X. Lei, W. Tian, Y. Bi, Y. Jia, N. Han, T. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Kuang, J. Pan, X. Sun and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701905 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, L. Yang, Y. Zhang, H. Jiang, Z. Xiao, C. Wu, G. Zhang, J. Jiang and L. Song, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703623 CrossRef .
S. H. Ahn and A. Manthiram, Small, 2017, 13, 1702068 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, Q. He, C. Wang, H. Jiang, C. Wu, Y. Zhang, T. Zhou, Y. Zhou and L. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11281–11287 RSC .
M. Wang, Y. Lai, F. Jing, F. Qin, Z. Zhang, L. Jie and Z. Kai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 434–437 RSC .
S. Zhao, Y. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Li, L. Gu, Z. Dai, S. Liu, Y. Q. Lan, M. Han and J. Bao, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2016, 3, 1501–1509 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Guo and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 21353–21361 RSC .
S. Dou, L. Tao, J. Huo, S. Wang and L. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1320–1326 RSC .
X. Qiao, J. Jin, H. Fan, Y. Li and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12354–12360 RSC .
M. Shen, C. Ruan, Y. Chen, C. Jiang, K. Ai and L. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1207–1218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, L. Shi, D. Wang, Y. Lv and D. Cao, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, L. Zhang, W. Yan, X. Liu, X. Yang, S. Miao, W. Wang, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 5758–5764 RSC .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1–7 CrossRef .
W. Zang, A. Sumboja, Y. Ma, H. Zhang, Y. Wu, S. Wu, H. Wu, Z. Liu, C. Guan, J. Wang and S. J. Pennycook, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 8961–8969 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of hydrogen and oxygen cycles in the renewable energy storage and conversion system.	 

 	Fig. 2  Cobalt-based electrocatalysts, including cobalt oxide, cobalt phosphides, cobalt chalcogenides, Co-LDH, Co–N–C, cobalt-based single atom and their composites, in energy conversion applications.	 
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− = 4OH− (Eo = 0.41 V)	(1)
O2 + H2O + 2e− = HO2− + OH− (Eo = −0.065 V)	(2)
HO2− + H2O + 2e− = 3OH− (Eo = 0.0867 V)	(3)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− = 2H2O (Eo = 1.229 V)	(4)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− = H2O2 (Eo = 0.7 V)	(5)
H2O2 + 2H+ + 2e− = 2H2O (Eo = 1.76 V)	(6)

 	Fig. 3  (a) ORR volcano plot for metals, and (b) OER volcano plot for metal oxides. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER volcano plot for metals. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56, copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
4OH− → 2O2 + 2H2O (l) + 4e− (E0a = −0.4 V)	(7)
OH− + * → OHads + e−	(8)
OHads + OH− → Oads + H2O + e−	(9)
2Oads → O2	(10)
Oads + OH− → OOHads + e−	(11)
OOHads + OH− → O2 + H2O + e−	(12)
2H2O (l) → O2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e− (E0a = 1.23 V)
H2O + * → OHads + H+ + e−	(13)
OHads → Oads + H+ + e−	(14)
2Oads → O2	(15)
Oads + H2O → OOHads + H+ + e−	(16)
OOHads → O2 + H+ + e−	(17)
H3O+ + e− → Hads + H2O	(18)
H3O+ + e− + Hads → H2 + H2O	(19)
Hads + Hads → H2	(20)
H2O + e− → OH− + Hads	(21)
Hads + H2O + e− → OH− + H2	(22)
Hads + Hads → H2	(23)
H2O → H2 + 1/2O2 (Eo = −1.23 V)	(24)
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(25)
H2O → 2H+ + 1/2O2 + 2e−	(26)
2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−	(27)
2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e−	(28)
Eop = 1.23 + ηa + ηc + ηother	(29)
η = a + blog(j)
* + O2 (g) + H2O (l) + e− ↔ HOO* + OH−
HOO* + e− ↔ O* + OH−
O* + H2O (l) + e− ↔ HO* + OH−
HO* + e− ↔ OH− + *
O2 + 2H2O (l) + 4e− ↔ 4OH−

 	Fig. 4  Early activity volcano trends of the ORR and OER. The theoretical activity on (a) the metal oxide surface and (b) the metal surface is depicted as a function of the oxygen binding energy. Reprinted with permission from ref. 10, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids. Reprinted with permission from ref. 87, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of the CuCoO-NWs from ref. 88, copyright 2016, Wiley. (c) The morphology analysis of FeCoO-NF from ref. 89, copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) TEM images of the CoMnO@CN superlattices from ref. 91, copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of NC/CuCo/CuCoOx nanowires. (f) Illustration model and the highway of the continuous electron transfer of the integrated Mott–Schottky bifunctional electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of NiFe nanosheets/NiCo2O4 nanoflakes/NF composites from ref. 94, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of NiFe-LDH supported on the topmost NiCo2O4 nanowires from ref. 95, copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM image of CoNi nanosheets/CoFe2O4 flowers/NF composite. Reprinted with permission from ref. 96, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of NiCo2O4/Ni2P nanocone arrays from ref. 97, copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Comparison of the charge density distributions on FeOOH@Co4N/SSM compared with the pristine Co4N/SSM. (b) Polarization curves comparison of bifunctional FeOOH@Co4N/SSM, Co4N/SSM and Pt-C/IrO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 99, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (c) Illustration of the preparation of NSP-Co3FeNx nanowires by annealing with NH3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Crystal structure model of Co5.47N from ref. 98, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structural model of the typical LDH with different M2+/M3+ molar ratios from ref. 107, copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of hierarchical Cu@CoFe LDH core–shell nanostructure catalyst, and (c) schematic illustration of the bifunctional catalytic of 3D core–shell Cu@CoFe LDH electrocatalysts from ref. 108, copyright 2017, Elsevier. (d) Schematic representation of the materials' structures. After being vigorously stirred in DMF–ethanol solution, the high-affinity CO32− interlayers of the CoFe LDHs were dissolved and exchanged for HCOO− ions. The consequent exfoliated process exposes more oxygen vacancies as active sites and improves the electronic conductivity. Note, d1 and d2 are the interlayer distances, d2 > d1 from ref. 112, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM image of CoP hollow polyhedron from ref. 117, copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (b) SEM image of leaf-like CoP NS/CC from ref. 118, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM image of CoP nanosheet supported on carbon cloth (CoP/CC) from ref. 119, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM images of CoP3 NAs/CFP ref. 116, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) SEM image of Co2P nanorods from ref. 120, copyright 2018, Elsevier. (f) FESEM image of as-prepared hierarchical Ni–Co–P HNBs from ref. 121, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Hydrogen adsorption free energy ΔGH of CoP3 (200) surface with one Ni atom doped on the terminated atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 113, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Dramatic lower H* adsorption energy of both CoP and Co2P host structures upon Cu doping from ref. 126, copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) HER free energy diagrams for the P- and Co-sites on pristine and Mo-doped CoP (111) surfaces, and (d) atomic structure of a model Mo-doped β-CoOOH (001) surface with HO* adsorption on an O-site. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127, copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Polarization curves of NiFe LDH@NiCoP nanowires. Notably, XPS spectra of the NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF electrode before and after OER and HER tests (b) O 1s and (c) P 2p, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Polarization curves of Co-P (red), IrO2 (blue) and blank Cu foil (black) in 1.0 M KOH at a scan rate 2 mV s−1 and rotating rate 2000 rpm. XPS spectra of the Co-P film electrode before (e) and after OER and HER tests (f and g) of Co 2p region and P 2p region, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM images of TiO2@Co9S8 hollow core-branch arrays from ref. 136, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM images of Co9S8/WS2 nanobelt arrays from ref. 137, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) SEM images of hollow Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructure from ref. 133, copyright 2018, Elsevier. (d) SEM images of NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF from ref. 139, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the synthetic procedures for Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs, respectively. (b) Corresponding TEM images of Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs, respectively. (c) Crystal structures of CoS2, Co3S4, Co9S8, CoS4 tetrahedron and CoS6 octahedron, respectively. (d) OER and HER LSVs of bare CP, Co9S8, Co3S4 and CoS2 HNSs in 1.0 M KOH at a scanning rate of 5 mV s−1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 141, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) FESEM image of CoSe2 nanoparticles anchored on CFs from ref. 146, copyright 2016, Springer. (b) SEM images p-CoSe2 grown on carbon cloth from ref. 147, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) SEM images of CoSe2 nanosheet array on carbon cloth from ref. 149, copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) High-magnification SEM images of CoNiSe2 nanorods directly grown on the Ni foam from ref. 150, copyright 2018, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of cubic (I) and tetragonal (II) spinel phases, including two steps: oxidation precipitation and crystallization. (b) The ORR and OER activities of c-CoMn2/C mixture, c-CoMn2/C hybrid and Pt/C electrocatalysts in 0.1 M KOH solution. (c) Electrochemical performance of rechargeable Zn–air battery using c-CoMn2/C and Pt/C as cathode ORR catalysts at a cycling rate of 10 mA cm−2 and a duration of 400 s per cycle. Inset schematically depicts the structure of assembled rechargeable Zn–air cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 160, copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Illustration of the fabrication of NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs. (e) Overall polarization curve of the NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs in the entire ORR and OER region. Reprinted with permission from ref. 169, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with oxygen vacancies. Reprinted with permission from ref. 173, copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (b) Highlighted are the crystallographic planes, while the yellow dotted circles/ellipses and inset indicate the intra/inter-crystalline sites and surface oxygen vacancies. Cyclic performance of oxygen vacancy-free electrocatalysts compared to the oxygen-vacancy-containing electrocatalysts. Reprinted with permission from ref. 175, copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the effect of heat treatment of oxygen on BSCF5582 from ref. 184, copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH. (b) Representation of the bifunctional catalytic performance of the perovskite catalyst (La0.3-5582). On the surface of cubic based grains, the rhombohedral phase LaCoO3 grains are segregated from ref. 178, copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagrams of the phase against the calcination temperature and La concentration in Lax(Ba0.5Sr0.5)1−xCo0.8Fe0.2O3−δ, which describes the zone of stable cubic perovskite phases between high critical temperatures and low critical temperatures, denoting grain growth from ref. 177, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic diagram for the surface engineering of LSCF nanoparticles by lithium reduction from ref. 176, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs synthesis. HRTEM image of Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs and overall polarization curve of the Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs in the entire ORR and OER region. Reprinted with permission from ref. 196, copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of CoNP@NC/NG hybrids and oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential windows of various catalysts in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 197, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Synthesis, structural and electrochemical characteristics of CoxZn100−x-ZIF-8. Reprinted with permission from ref. 202, copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Diagrammatic drawing of the morphology structure of the CoP-DC. (b) The overall LSV curves of the CoP-DC sample in the whole ORR and OER region in 0.1 M KOH. Reprinted with permission from ref. 207, copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Illustration of the synthesis route to obtain the confined bimetallic phosphide-based hybrid CMP@PNC and schematic of the ORR and OER main performance origins. Reprinted with permission from ref. 209, copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  Illustration of the formation of NC-Co SAC nanoflake arrays on carbon cloth and STEM image of the samples obtained at different representative stages. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220, copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

NiCo2O4	110	290	1.65	
87

CuCoO-NWs	140	270@25	1.61	
88

FeCoO-NF	205	244	1.62	
89

CoOx@CN	232	260	1.55@20	
90

CoMnO@CN	71	263	1.5	
91

NiCo-NiCoO2@NC	94	318	1.44@20	
92

NC/CuCo/CuCoOx	112	190	1.53	
93

NiFe/NiCo2O4/NF	105	340@1200	1.67	
94

NiFe/NiCo2O4/NF	192	290@50	1.60	
95

CoNi/CoFe2O4/NF	82	360@1000	1.57	
96

NiCo2O4/Ni2P/NF	45	250	1.59	
97

FeOOH@CoN4	
	254@20	1.59	
99

NSP-Co3FeNx/NF	23	222@20	1.539	
101

NiCo2N/NF	180	290	1.7	
102

CoN-400/CC	97	251	1.587	
103

NCN/CC	68	247	1.56	
104

NC@CoN/Cu3N/CF	134	303@50	1.62	
105

NC@CuCo2Nx/CF	105	230	1.55	
106

Co5.47N NP@N-PC	149	284	1.62	
98

NiCo-LDH/NF	162	271	1.66	
110

CoMo-LDH	115	290	1.63	
111

Cu@CoFe LDH	171	240	1.681	
108

CoFe LDH-F/NF	166	260	1.63	
112

CoP hollow polyhedron	159	400	
	
117

CoP NS/CC	90	310	1.67	
118

CoP@CC	
	300	1.68	
119

CoP3 NAs/CFP	119	334	1.60	
116

Co2P nanorods	87	310	1.65	
120

Ni–Co–P HNBs	107	207	1.62	
121

Co–Ni–P	103	340	1.65	
124

Co0.93Ni0.07P3	87	221@20	
	
113

Co0.68Fe0.32P	116	289	
	
125

Cu0.3Co2.7P/NC	220	190	
	
126

Mo-CoP	40	305	1.56	
127

Co2P/CNTs	132	292	1.53	
128

CoP@SNC	174	350	1.64	
129

NiFe LDH@NiCoP/NF	120	220	1.57	
130

CoP film	94	345	1.744@100	
131

TiO2@Co9S8	139	240	1.56	
136

Co9S8/WS2 nanobelt	138	
	1.65	
137

Zn–Co–S nanoneedle/CFP	234	320	1.71	
138

Co3S4@MoS2	136	280	1.58	
133

NixCo3−xS4/Ni3S2/NF	136	160	1.53	
139

CuCo2S4 nanowire arrays	65	310@100	1.65@100	
140

CoS2 HNSs	193	290	1.54	
141

Se-(NiCo)Sx/(OH)x	103	155	1.6	
142

Co9S8-Ni2S3 HNTs/Ni	85	281@50	1.59	
143

Co/Co9S8@SNGS-1000 (0.1 M KOH)	350@20	290@20	
	
144

Co9S8@NOSC-900	
	340	1.60	
134

Co9S8-NSC@Mo2C	89	293	1.61	
145

CoSe2/CF	95	297	1.63	
146

p-CoSe2/CC	138	243	1.62	
147

Co(SxSe1−x)2	122	283	1.63	
148

CoNiSe2 NRs/NF	170@100	307@100	1.591	
150

CoOx-CoSe/NF	90	380@500	1.66@20	
151


5% Ni doped mesoporous	
	0.83	1.611	0.781	
153

NiCo2O4-250	
	0.75	1.55	0.8	
158

MnCo2O4	0.95	0.8	1.63	0.83	
159

MnCo3−xO4@NCNTs	
	0.76	1.70	0.94	
156

CoMn2O4 nanodots/rGO	
	0.89	1.54	0.65	
167

NixCo(3−x)O4/NH2-CNTs	0.954	0.858	1.616	0.764	
169

NdBa0.75Ca0.25Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ/N-rGO	
	0.848	1.609	0.761	
183

(PrBa0.5Sr0.5)0.95Co1.5Fe0.5O5+δ/3DNG	
	0.82	1.55	0.73	
187

Sm0.5Sr0.5CoO3−δ/3DND	0.86	
	1.63	
	
188

Co-N/Co-O@N-C	0.93	
	1.60	
	
194

Co-Fe-N@MWCNT	0.92	0.78	1.52	0.74	
195

Fe1.2Co@NC/NCNTs	
	
	
	0.765	
196

CoNP@NC/NG-700	0.93	0.78	1.62	0.84	
197

MnO@Co-N/C	
	0.83	1.76	0.93	
199

Co-N-CNTs	0.97	0.90	1.69	0.79	
200

CoZn-NC-700	
	0.84	1.62	0.78	
201

NiFe LDH/Co, N-CNF	0.893	0.79	1.542	0.752	
203

NiO/CoN	
	0.78	
	0.85	
204

NiCoIIIFe-LDH/N-GO array	
	
	
	0.769	
206

CoP-DC	
	0.81	1.55	0.76	
207

CoP@mNSP-C	
	0.9	1.64	0.74	
208

CoMnP4@P, N co-doped carbon	0.89	0.81	1.56	0.75	
209

NiCo2S4 microspheres	
	
	
	0.69	
210

CuCo2S4 NSs	0.9	0.74	1.567	0.835	
211

Co9S8/CNT	0.94	0.82	1.599	0.779	
212

N-Co9S8/G	0.941	
	1.639	
	
213

Co1−xS/N-S-G	0.978	0.862	1.601	0.76	
214

Co0.5Fe0.5S@N-MC	
	0.808	
	
	
215

Co-SAs@NC	0.96	0.82	
	
	
219

CoN4/NG	0.91	0.87	1.61	0.74	
217

NC-Co SA	1.00	0.87	1.59	0.72	
220


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
