Fabricating ferromagnetic MoS 2 -based composite exposed to simulated sunlight for sodium storage   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR06180K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR06180K
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 21081-21092Fabricating ferromagnetic MoS2-based composite exposed to simulated sunlight for sodium storage†

        
          
            Fusheng 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yaoyao 
            Xiao
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Pinyu 
            Han
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuting 
            Liu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Guohui 
            Qin
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory Base for Eco-Chemical Engineering, College of Chemical Engineering, Qingdao University of Science and Technology, Qingdao 266042, Shandong, China. E-mail: guohuiq163@sina.com
bShandong Collaborative Innovation Center of Eco-Chemical Engineering, Qingdao 266042, China. E-mail: guohuiq163@sina.com
Received 
      20th July 2019
    , Accepted 27th August 2019First published on 27th August 2019AbstractA light- and magnetic stimuli-responsive MoS2 composite electrode material is designed and evaluated as an anode material of sodium ion batteries. Through the assistance of simulated sunlight, suppressed dendritic sodium growth, buffered volume deformation, promoted electrochemical reaction kinetics, and improved structural stability are simultaneously achieved. Meanwhile, ferroelectric polarization enhances the separation efficiency of photogenerated carriers. The collisions among electrons are dramatically decreased; in turn, the thermal stability of the battery is improved via the tailored orientation of active materials. A stable protective solid-state electrolyte interface film is formed via the photogenerated electrons and the magnetohydrodynamics effect, depressing the growth of sodium dendrites. The porous three-dimensional heterostructure is conducive for promoting transmission of charges and the diffusion of ions, effectively reducing the local current density of metals, further inhibiting the growth of sodium dendrites during deposition and peeling processes. Density functional theoretical calculations also verify that the fabricated MoS2 composite possesses intensified electron density, and exhibits fast reaction kinetics in repeated cycles and lowered sodium adsorption energy. The optical field and the rational magnetic fabrication technology can fundamentally solve the bottleneck problems restricting the development of batteries, mitigating the energy crisis.
Introduction
With the depletion of fossil fuels and increasingly serious environmental problems such as dust pollution, scientists endeavor to develop eco-friendly and green sustainable energy storage systems. The exploration of renewable energy is considerably important for satisfying increasing energy demands, such as solar energy, magnetic field energy, wind energy and so on. Lithium ion batteries are in great demand due to their high energy density and good cycle life. However, the excessively consumed lithium sources limit their further development.1 Sodium source is an alternative candidate to lithium because of its facile resources and low cost.2,3 However, deionized Na+ (1.02 Å) is much larger than Li+ (0.76 Å). Therefore, searching for electrode materials that can accommodate larger radius Na+ becomes critically important. For developing sodium ion batteries (SIBs), the sluggish kinetics during (de)sodiation leads to vast volume variations, electric polarization, serious voltage attenuation, rapid capacity degeneration and poor cycle life.4 Other problems are those of safety and poor cycle performances caused by the unstable solid electrolyte interface (SEI). During the electrochemical cycle, it is formed and dissolved continuously, resulting in serious capacity degradation and an increased tendency to form dendrites and in turn a low coulombic efficiency. Reducing the heat production of batteries is also an emergent concern for improving the safety of batteries in order to satisfy the development of green and sustainable energy storage technology.
As for improving the reaction kinetics of SIBs, optimizing the structure and introducing carbon materials with good conductivity can accelerate the reaction kinetics and improve the cyclic stability of materials.5 Design of materials with porous structure can effectively resist the volume variation of electrode materials. Internal hierarchical pores scan reduce the diffusion distance of ions and facilitate the penetration of electrolyte.6 Oxygen defects introduced via heterojunction can improve the electron transfer and ion diffusion capabilities, thus buffering the volume change of materials during charging and discharging process as well as improving the conductivity of materials.7,8
Additionally, the generation of a protective SEI film with low resistance, high mechanical strength and good compliance is critically important to suppress dendritic sodium growth, thus ensuring the superiority SIBs with high energy and power density. Uniform SEI film with high mechanical strength can withstand large volume deformation, avoiding repeated new SEI growth. The spontaneous formation of SEI film is usually uneven, which will lead to an uneven flow of Na+ and further cause the uneven electrodeposition of metals, thus accelerating the consumption of electrolytes, bringing about corrosion of metal electrodes, and reducing the Coulomb efficiency. With the consumption of metal ions, dendrites continue to form, resulting in short circuit of batteries and a series of potential safety hazards such as explosions.
Up to now, much effort has been aimed at preventing dendrite growth on Na metal anodes, such as fabricating three-dimensional Na hosts, employing protective coating on Na metal, introducing dendrite-free separators or interlayers, stabilizing SEI film by optimizing electrolyte components,9–14etc. Among these methods, the design of 3D structures can significantly reduce the current density caused by the large specific surface. Therefore, a 3D structure ensures good rate behaviors at a relatively high current density (>5 mA cm−2); however, 3D structures can result in low volume energy density.15 SEI film growth can be stabilized by introducing passivation layers (TiO2, Al2O3, ZrO2) at a relatively low current density (<3 mA cm−2). The addition of modified components in the electrolyte also can also promote the formation of stable SEI film. Although some effects have been achieved to some extent, the additives in the electrolyte are gradually consumed during long cycling, and it is difficult to completely inhibit the reaction between Na and the electrolyte.16 Recently, scholars have proposed a metal protection strategy. Some scholars have tried to add inorganic compounds, others have tried to use organic compounds (ionic liquids) to achieve this target. Restrained dendrite growth was achieved by electrostatic self-healing strategy. The cations accumulate in dendritic centers in electron-enriched areas and form positive charge centers during Na deposition process. Cations tend to decompose in adjacent areas due to electrostatic force, thus producing a smooth, compact and high-quality SEI film. However, the preparation process of these additives is complex and the cost is high, so it is necessary to find electrolyte additives with simple preparation procedure and low cost to inhibit the growth of dendritic sodium. As a cationic surfactant, N,N-dimethyldodecylamine (DMA) is cheap, easy to synthesize and can effectively inhibit the formation of dendritic sodium via electrostatic healing force.
Considering the great influence of electrostatic force on electron transfer and its strong reduction effect on electrolyte, the predominant role of SEI film formation at a low current density is significantly important. Solar light has been proved to be able to increase the capacity of batteries.17 We were encouraged to investigate the tailoring of SEI film growth via external light stimuli. As the “seed” driving force, photogenerated electrons can improve the reaction kinetics of batteries by promoting the phase transition during the cycling process. Therefore, finding a light-responsive sodium ion electrode material is significantly important. Remarkably, it was reported that introducing an external magnetic field to make the metal concentration relocate on the surface of the electrode material can lead a uniform metal deposition, restricting the growth of sodium dendrites.18 Therefore, it is rational to suppress the growth of sodium dendrites via the optomagnetic tailoring technique.
A typical layered transition metal sulfide, MoS2, composed of three stacked atom layers (S–Mo–S) has attracted increasing attention due to its excellent physical properties and diverse applications, which is widely used in batteries,19 catalysis,20 lubrication,21 electronic transistors,22 and photovoltaic cells.23 As a photocatalyst, due to strong covalent bonds and weak van der Waals forces between layers, MoS2 is prone to be seriously aggregated in photocatalytic processes and the recombination of carriers is inevitable. With a large spacing on the c axis (0.62 nm) for embedding and removal of Na+, MoS2 is an excellent sodium electrode material. However, MoS2 has poor electronic conductivity, weak ion diffusion ability, serious volume expansion, and low first-round Coulomb efficiency.
In order to overcome the above shortcomings of MoS2 as a photocatalyst and battery material, it is an intelligent strategy to couple MoS2 with other heterostructures to inhibit the recombination of photogenerated carriers, which can increase the reactive sites, improve the separation efficiency of carriers, accelerate the ion migration and electron transfer rate, and increase the energy density and power density of a battery. Meanwhile, MoS2 layers deposited over hollow conductive carbon materials inlayed with carbon quantum dots (CQD) can enhance the conductivity, reduce the diffusion distance of Na+ and extend the light absorption spectrum from UV light to visible light. The incorporation of carbon layers improves the conductivity, enhances the separation efficiency of carriers, and thus improves the ion diffusion and electron transfer ability.
A C@CQD@MoS2 composite was observed to display excellent photocatalytic performance and improved electrochemical cycle stability owing to the inhibited recombination of photogenerated carriers, narrowed band gap and the depressed metal dendrite growth. The photogenerated electrons play an important role in improving the coulomb efficiency of batteries, mitigating the volume variation, and enhancing the electrochemical kinetic behaviors, while ferromagnetic polarization promotes photogenerated carrier separation.24 Simultaneously, the redistribution of electrons occurs and their motion track can be modulated via magnetic field. It is particularly important to tailor the movement of electrons, minimize the resultant collisions between them and hence decrease the heat production. Additionally, the rational tailoring of the orientation for such MoS2 composites is beneficial for promoting mass transfer and uniform distribution of sodium deposition and hence preventing sodium dendrite growth. Notably, the suppressed growth of sodium dendrites can be achieved due to the magnetohydrodynamic effect, and the sodium absorption energy for the MoS2-based composite is attenuated owing to the heteroatom doping of Fe.
Herein, an optomagnetic-responding Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite was fabricated to apply in sodium storage with optomagnetic assisted technology. The sodium storage elaborately bridges solar energy and magnetic field energy, which further promotes the development of sustainable energy. The photogenerated carriers including electrons and holes can separate efficiently due to the ingenious design of electromagnetic polarization and typical porous structure. A large number of photogenerated electrons can efficiently reduce electrolytes and generate high-quality SEI film, improving the electrochemical kinetic behaviors via the phase transition of MoS2 involved in (de)sodiation. Under the electrostatic repulsion force, the formation of dendritic sodium can be prevented. Additionally, the porous three-dimensional structure effectively reduces the local current density of the material, further inhibits the dendrite growth during metal plating/striping, and ensures structural stability during repeated cycling. The introduction of a magnetic field not only improves the separation efficiency of carriers, speeds up mass transfer, and guides sodium plating/stripping but also attenuates heat production by limiting the collisions among electrons. This project illuminates the conversion of simulated sunlight and magnetic field to electrochemical energy, promoting the development of green and sustainable optoelectromagnetic synergistic energy storage technology.
Experimental section
Preparing FeOOH@SiO2
Firstly, FeOOH was synthesized. FeCl3·6H2O (0.1 M) was dissolved in 40 mL deionized water and added into a three-necked flask with magnetic stirring for 18 h at 90 °C. The obtained particles were purified by centrifugation, washed with water and ethanol several times and redispersed in 36 mL water. Afterwards, FeOOH was modified with polyacrylic acid (7.2 mg L−1). In the following step, 0.67 mL ammonia solution (28%) was added into 3 ml of the modified FeOOH solution and dispersed in 20 mL isopropanol. Subsequently, 200 μL TEOS was added into the mixture in 30 minutes until the total TEOS reached 0.8 mL and the products were centrifuged by water and ethanol several times and redispersed into 9 ml deionized water.
Preparing FeOOH@SiO2@RF
The obtained FeOOH@SiO2 was modified with polyvinyl pyrrolidone solution. 0.01 ml ammonia water (28%), 0.01 g resorcinol and 0.014 ml formaldehyde were added into the modified FeOOH@SiO2 particles dispersed in 20 ml deionized water, affording FeOOH@SiO2@RF. After stirring for 24 hours, the solid precipitate was centrifuged and partly etched by NaOH solution.
Preparing hollow Fe@C@CQD@MoS2
1.8 g of glucose was dissolved in 20 mL of the obtained FeOOH@SiO2@RF aqueous solution and then transferred to a 50 mL Teflon-lined autoclave, kept at 180 °C for 2 h and then cooled to room temperature. After cooling, the product was purified and dried in an oven at 100 °C for 6 h. The obtained powders were heated to 700 °C under N2 atmosphere and shifted to H2 atmosphere and remained for 2 h. Finally, SiO2 was fully etched via NaOH and the hollow Fe@C@CQD was successfully prepared. The obtained powder was dispersed in 20 mL ethanol by ultrasonication and held for further use. The above Fe@C@CQD solution was dissolved in 30 ml deionized water followed by adding 0.05 g of ammonium molybdate tetrahydrate and 0.01 g thiourea. The obtained mixture was transferred to a reactor, sealed and reacted at 180 °C for 12 h to afford the final product Fe@C@CQD@MoS2.
Characterizations
The X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite were recorded via a PANalytical X-pert diffractometer (PANalytical, Netherlands) with Cu Kα radiation operated at 40 kV and 30 mA. Raman spectrum was obtained via a Renishaw in Via Raman microscope at room temperature with the 532 nm line of an Ar ion laser as an excitation source. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, VGMicro Tech) was used to detect the functional groups. Morphology and structure of the samples were studied via field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S4800, Thermo Fisher) and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, Tecnai G2F20, Philips).
Electrochemical tests
The evaluation of electrochemical performance was conducted with coin-type SIB cells (2025) assembled in an argon-filled glove box. With well-sealed technology support, such cells were perforated allowing sunlight to transmit. Remarkably, when exposed to sunlight, such Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 can only take advantage of visible light due to the weak penetrating ability of UV light. Therefore, in practical operation, only the CQD-based composite can absorb sunlight. The active MoS2-based composite was assembled via a magnet in ethanol solution and dried in a vacuum oven at 80 °C. After being dried, the fabricated active materials were directly applied as working electrodes without addition of any binder or conductive agent (Fig. S1a†). The mass loading of active material was about 2–3 mg cm−2. After being dried in a vacuum oven at 120 °C overnight, such active paste was cast into several circular discs with a thickness of 0.03 mm. SIBs were assembled by introducing sodium as the counter electrode, with 1.0 M NaClO4 in a mixture of ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (EC/DMC, 1:1 by volume) serving as the electrolyte. Such coin shape battery was perforated to afford several holes in order to allow light to transmit. We introduced a Xe lamp (CHF-XM-100 W) (emission wavelength of 300–800 nm) as the simulated sunlight source. The illumination intensity of the light is tuned to around 60 mW cm−2 on the surface of MoS2-based electrode to undergo the electrochemical test. Magnetic tailoring was realized via changing the angles between electric field and magnetic field, in which the orientation of active materials was modulated. The active materials were tailored to be vertical to the coin cell unless otherwise clarified in the text when undertaking the light experiments. Galvanostatic cycling experiments of the cells were carried out with a LAND CT2001A battery test system in the voltage range of 0–3.2 V versus (Na+/Na).
Results and discussion
Structure and morphology
The crystal structure and phase purities of as-synthesized Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (fabricated according to Scheme 1) were investigated. As shown in Fig. 1a, the diffraction peaks of C or Fe are not obvious due to the amorphous state or low content. The peaks at 2θ values of 9.86°, 33.51°, 58.34° and 68.99° corresponded to crystal planes of hexagonal phase MoS2 (JCPDS card no. 37-1492) (002), (101), (110) and (201), respectively, confirming the existence of MoS2. The signal of Fe is too weak to be collected owing to its relatively low concentration. However, Fe and C are demonstrated in pure pattern via the Raman profile (Fig. 1b), XPS (Fig. 2) and element mappings (Fig. 3). Compared to pure MoS2, a blue shift of the (002) peak for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 occurs, reflecting its increased interlayer space after the addition of carbon.
 Scheme 1  The preparation process of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. 
 Fig. 1  (a) The XRD profiles of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and pure MoS2. (b) The Raman profile of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. 
 Fig. 2  (a) XPS spectrum of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2; (b) to (f) those of C, Fe, O, Mo, S, respectively. 
 Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) FeOOH@SiO2@RF, (b) Fe@C@CQD, (c) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and (d) its corresponding magnified TEM image and (e) HRTEM image. (f) SAED image and (g) to (k) element mappings of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. 
Elemental analysis was carried out and it turned out that the concentration of Fe, C, and MoS2 is 6%, 10%, and 84%, respectively. As shown in Fig. 1b, there are two obvious peaks of D and G bands, at 1592 cm−1 (G-band, ascribed to the in-plane stretch vibration of carbon atoms) and 1356 cm−1 (D-band, derived from the breathing vibration of carbon atoms), indicating the successful doping of carbon. The value of ID/IG is 0.87, displaying the existence of defects from the carbon framework, indicating the excellent incorporation for MoS2 with C and Fe framework.
XPS was performed to investigate the surface composition and chemical states of the composite material. All elements including C, O, Mo, S, and Fe were recorded for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (Fig. 2a). Fig. 2b shows the fitted high-resolution spectra of C 1s, which outlines two peaks. The peak at around 284.5 eV matches well with C–C. The peak at 285.5 eV can be ascribed to C–O. The main peak at 284.5 eV can be attributed to sp2-hybridized carbon, while the weaker peak at 285.5 eV is attributed to sp3-hybridized carbon. The peaks at 724.65 and 711.50 eV are correlated to Fe 2p1/2 and Fe 2p3/2 (Fig. 2c). The peaks at 532.82, 531.35, and 530.57 eV represent the binding energy of C–O–H, C–O–Mo and CO bonds, respectively (Fig. 2d). The peaks at 229.58, 232.80 and 230.90 eV are derived from Mo 3d5/2, Mo 3d3/2 and Mo–O of Mo4+ (Fig. 2e), while the small peaks at 235.91 and 226.42 eV are attributed to Mo6+ and S 2s. The peaks at 163.05 and 161.85 eV match well with the binding energy of S 2p1/2 and S 2p3/2 (Fig. 2f), respectively, showing the existence of S2−.
The morphologies of MoS2-based nanostructures were investigated via TEM images. Fe rods are encapsulated into a hollow structure (Fig. 3a), in which the thickness of RF derived carbon layer is 20 nm. CQDs are spread to the surface of C (Fig. 3b); they homogeneously distribute on the surface of the core shell structure, which enables extended electron transport paths in all directions, shortened ion diffusion distance and release of internal strain during cycling. Dense MoS2 nanosheets over the hollow layer cause a coarse surface compared to the smooth surface of pristine hollow Fe@C@CQD substrate (Fig. 3c). Such thin layers deposit over the core shell structure with a diameter of 500 nm (Fig. 3d). The huge surface area brought about by such hollow nanostructure supplies enriched exposed sites for supporting MoS2 nanosheets and prevents agglomeration. From the HRTEM image of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (Fig. 3e), the lattice spacing of MoS2 is 0.92 nm, corresponding to the (002) plane of hexagonal-phase (2H) MoS2, which is large enough to accommodate large volume expansion/contraction. The selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) result of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 implies its polycrystalline nature (Fig. 3f). The homogenous distributions of Fe, C, S and Mo further confirm the fine incorporation of Fe, C, CQD and MoS2 (Fig. 3g–k), taking advantage of the merits of each material while ameliorating their defects, imparting excellent electrochemical performance to the composite.
The pore texture of such MoS2-based composite was studied by the N2 adsorption/desorption test. As demonstrated in Fig. S2a,† with an obvious hysteresis characteristic of the isotherms, a typical IV behavior was observed at a high relative pressure (0.5–1.0),19 which indicates a typical mesoporous Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 property. Such MoS2-based nanostructure approaches a specific surface area of 72.34 m2 g−1 and a specific pore volume of 18.48 cm3 g−1 according to the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller method. Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 exhibits an average narrow pore size distribution in the range of 2–3 nm (Fig. S2b†). The high specific surface area and pore volume enable enriched sites and large contact area between electrode material and electrolyte.
Electrochemical performance
The MoS2 composite can be expected to show eminent electrochemical performance in the presence of sunlight with finely tuned orientation. The photogenerated electrons can increase the coulombic efficiency, speed chemical kinetics behaviors, and limit sodium dendrite growth, while the magnetic tailoring can bring enhanced optoelectric energy storage efficiency, long cycling performance and reduced heat production. The influence of light on electrochemical storage performance was firstly studied. Fig. S3† displays the diffuse reflectance ultraviolet-visible spectra of MoS2-based samples. As shown in Fig. S3a,† pure MoS2 shows a broad optical absorption in the ultraviolet region (242 nm); the doping of CQD endows the MoS2 composite with a visible-responding region (506 nm). Once exposed to simulated sunlight, electrons and holes are generated and separated immediately. The electrons transferred from CQD quickly via highly conductive carbon and finally accumulated in the ultrathin MoS2 sheets, while the holes were trapped by the electrolyte. It is known that an exceptional SEI film can be formed at a relatively low current density brought about by the photogenerated electrons, which leads to the excellent cycle performance of the Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite. A complementary trial was performed in order to validate the influence of enriched electrons on the formation of high-quality SEI film. After exposure to simulated sunlight for 2 min, the HRTEM image of active Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 was recorded (Fig. S4a and S4c†). A thin SEI film with a thickness of 2.8 nm was continuously deposited over on the surface of MoS2.
The cyclic voltammogram (CV) profiles in the presence of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and Fe@C@MoS2 are shown in Fig. 4. There are two obvious reductive peaks (1.4, 0.7 V) and three oxidation peaks/shoulder (0.6, 1.8 and 2.5 V) in the first cycle for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. The sodiation peak at 1.4 V is ascribed to intercalation of sodium ions into MoS2 interlayer (eqn (1)). The peak at 0.7 V is attributed to the SEI film and the insertion/extraction to carbon coating layer (eqn (2)) with a substantial attenuation potential in second and third cycles. The peaks at 1.4 and 0.7 V of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (Fig. 4b) are obviously smaller than those of Fe@C@MoS2 which cannot take advantage of simulated sunlight (Fig. 4a and Fig. S3b†), verifying the initial elevated coulombic efficiency by pre-alloying of Na+, while the coulombic efficiency was enhanced from the initial 73.5% to 91.2% when exposed to sunlight, which agrees well with previous work.25 The blue shift of the CV profiles for the MoS2 composite using visible light implied decreased detrimental reactions between sodium and the electrolyte.26–28 MoS2 + xNa + xe− → NaxMoS2(1) NaxMoS2 + (4 − x)Na + (4 − x)e− → 2Na2S + Mo(2) (3)
 Fig. 4  Comparison of CV curves of (a) Fe@C@MoS2 and (b) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 when exposed to simulated sunlight. 
It is noted that there is a phase transition (2H to 1T) in the initial charge and discharge process (eqn (3)). Such phase transition is started when conversion 1 is finished in the discharge process. The phase conversion via NaxMoS2 is a consecutive process including the left discharge process with the product Na2S and Mo and partial charge process, in which NaMoS2 (1T) is formed. A full charge process continues until getting 1T MoS2, which is the predominant phase for the left repeated cycles (Scheme 2). Therefore, it is critically important to improve the reaction kinetics behaviors by facilitating the phase transition. XPS profile demonstrates that both Mo 3d5/2 and Mo 3d3/2 peaks gradually split into two independent regions (Fig. S5†), validating the 2H–1T phase transition. Considering the completely intercalated samples are predominant in 1T phase.29 This phase transition is significantly promoted by electron transfer from Na coil to MoS2, which obviously improves the reaction kinetics behaviors.30
 Scheme 2  A schematic of phase transition based on active MoS2 composite electrode material when exposed to simulated sunlight. 
In order to further explore the benefits of visible light-assisted energy storage technology, the charging and discharging voltage differences of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and Fe@C@MoS2 were compared (Fig. 5a and b). The battery shows a stable charging voltage of 2.58 V at a current density of 50 mA g−1, which is 0.60 V lower than that without visible light. Meanwhile, the discharging voltage increased from 2.46 V to 3.06 V with light absorption, for which the battery efficiency changed from 82.3% to 124.2%, leading to an efficient energy saving (41.9%).
 Fig. 5  (a) The discharge curves of the photo-assisted SIBs in the dark (black line) and (b) under simulated sunlight illumination (red line) at a current density of 50 mA g−1. 
In addition to the promoted battery efficiency, reduced dendritic sodium, buffered volume variation as well as enhanced reaction kinetics are simultaneously achieved via such light-assisted energy storage system. As shown in Scheme 3, the photogenerated carriers are separated efficiently with electrons transferring to anode and holes trapped by electrolyte. After Na+ is reduced, protuberant tips generate when deposition occurs. Unavoidably, photogenerated electrons continuously accumulate towards these tips. Na+ ions deposit in the same area due to electrostatic force between electrons and Na+, eventually causing Na dendrite growth in the absence of DMA; however, A+ ions can be primarily adsorbed to the protuberant tips in the presence of DMA. Spontaneously, more and more DMA molecules accumulate around the protuberances due to the elevated surface free energy around the protuberant tips, and in turn enabling the fabrication of a crosslinked protective layer.
 Scheme 3  A schematic of the inhibited process of formation of dendritic sodium via the generated electrostatic force due to sunlight. 
Polarized solvent Na+ cannot deposit over such a layer due to repulsive forces, and eventually Na deposition occurs at adjacent regions, generating smoother Na surface (enlarged profile in Scheme 3). Therefore, the internal positively charged layer generated between A+ can suppress Na dendrite growth via the electrostatic repulsive force and thus ensure stable cycling performance. Therefore, the growth of dendritic Na can be successfully restrained under the synergistic effect of electrostatic interactions between photogenerated electrons, DMA and Na+.
Simultaneously, the vast volume variation is mitigated via the electrostatic force. With more electrons, the potential of active substances will become more and more negative, while the mobility of these electrons can speed up, decreasing the barrier of electron transfer. On the one hand, the photogenerated electrons can be used as the driving force for electron transfer and ion diffusion. On the other hand, charge effect can also improve ion diffusion ability, leading to accelerated kinetics behavior and stronger redox ability. Under light irradiation, photogenerated electrons and holes are effectively separated. A high density of electrons is collected at the interface between MoS2 and carbon layer, while holes are captured by EC and DMC in the electrolyte. With the increase of electrons, the potential becomes more and more negative, and the role of electrons serving as “seed” driving force becomes more and more obvious. In the discharge process, Na+ is fully plated into MoS2 (eqn (1)), and in turn inhibits competitive irreversible reactions such as the interactions between metal and electrolyte. Therefore, excess electrons also play the role of “seed” driving force in the charging process. Na+ is quickly exfoliated from NaxMoS2 (eqn (2)). It is noticeable that electrostatic force can significantly resist volume expansion and compressive force. In the discharge process, the repulsion force between electrons is the counterpart to volume contraction force, while the attraction between Na+ ions and electrons can be balanced with volume expansion force. It is also noted that the higher intensity of photo-induced electrons can generate the electron field force, which can diminish the energy barriers of the sodiation process (∇Esodiation) of the Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite according to the following equations: ∇Esodiation = ∇Esodiation MoS2 composite − (EMoS2 composite + ENa)(4) ∇E′sodiation = ∇Esodiation MoS2 composite − (EMoS2 composite + ENa + qE)(5) F = qE(6)where ∇Esodiation, ∇E′sodiation, ENa and F represent the total energy of Fe@C@MoS2, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2, Na+ and electric field force, respectively.
Obviously, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 exposed to simulated sunlight has lower sodiated energy barriers (eqn. (4)–(6)). In other words, Na+ is energetically more easily intercalated than for the light-free case. The porous carbon framework, especially the intercalated CQDs, leads to an improved intrinsic conductivity, facilitating electron transfer and buffering the internal stain produced during cycling. The lowered energy barrier of sodiation improves sodium ion diffusion ability and promotes the cycling and rate stability.
The migration energy is also one of the important factors for reducing the surface tension and leading to smaller sodiation barrier energy. Fig. 6a and Fig. S6† demonstrate the Na migration pathways and barriers for the MoS2 composite with or without light illumination. Compared with the light-free case, Na migrates on MoS2 surface possessing much smaller barrier energy (0.48 eV versus 2.82 eV), meaning that Na migrates more easily due to the charge effect under light illumination, corresponding well with the above mentioned results.
 Fig. 6  (a) Na migration pathways and barriers on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. (b, c) Charge difference plots of Na atom adsorption on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 according to DFT theory. The yellow and blue areas represent electron accumulation and depletion. The red spheres designate Mo atoms, black ones refer to S atoms. 
The charge density difference is demonstrated in Fig. 6b and c for Na adsorption on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light utilization, where yellow and blue areas are correlated to electron accumulation and depletion, respectively. Considering that the electronegativity of Na is lower than that of Mo, C or S, the Na atom is an electron donor, while MoS2 and carbon additions are electron acceptors. Bader charge investigations show that the Na atom donates 0.85 electrons to the MoS2 layer without light utilization and about 0.93 electrons to the MoS2 layer when exposed to light illumination. The strong electron delocalization validates the reduction occurring leading to more rapid phase transition.31 These calculation results confirm the light-enhanced phase transition with charge redistributions in the sodiated active materials; hence Na intercalation into 2H MoS2 is preferred for the transition of exfoliated 1T MoS2 even at a high current density under visible light driving force.
The electrochemical performance of the MoS2-based composite was further investigated and the influence of composition on its electrochemical performance was studied (Fig. 7a). All MoS2-based electrodes show a cut-off window between 0 V and 3.2 V at a current density of 50 mA g−1 in charge and discharge profiles. Three plateaus covering 1.4 V, 0.7 V and 0.2–0.001 V are observed for MoS2-based electrodes during initial sodiation, which agrees with the CV scans. The first plateau (1.4 V) is ascribed to the intercalation of Na+ to MoS2 interlayer, and the second plateau of 0.7 V is well correlated to the conversion reaction, while the plateau at 0.2–0.001 V is derived from the insertion of Na+ into the interface between Mo and Na2S. For C@MoS2 electrode, a plateau (1.4 V) is ascribed to the intercalation of Na+ to MoS2 interlayer and no conspicuous potential plateau is detected in the subsequent sodiation processes.
 Fig. 7  (a) Charge–discharge curves of MoS2-based composites. (b) The rate performance of MoS2-based composites at different current densities (50 to 500 mA g−1). (c) The rate and cycle performances of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with/without light treatment and Fe@C@MoS2 when exposed to simulated sunlight at different current densities. 
For Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 electrode with simulated light illumination, there is an obvious plateau at 1.7 V, demonstrating the highly reversible oxidation reaction from Mo to MoS2. Apparently, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 electrode exposed to simulated sunlight delivers an exceptionally high sodiation capacity (discharge capacity) of 693.7 mA h g−1 and desodiation capacity of 631.3 mA h g−1 with a high coulombic efficiency of 91.2% in the first cycle. The discharge capacity in the first cycle is slightly higher than the theoretical capacity of MoS2 (670 mA h g−1), which is calculated based on one MoS2 molecule reacting with four sodium ions in the conversion reactions (reactions (1) and (2)). The enhancement of conductivity, the promotion of full (de)sodiation from photogenerated electrons and the reaction of the sodium ions with residual oxygen-containing functional groups lead to high capacity and lower irreversible capacity loss. In the absence of simulated sunlight, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 delivered a discharge capacity of 670.5 and a charge capacity of 568.2 mA h g−1 (coulombic efficiency of 84.7%), which are lower than in the case of simulated sunlight due to the irreversible capacity loss from relatively poor quality SEI film. The accumulated photogenerated electrons are beneficial for the uniform deposition of Na+ at a relatively low current, and hence inhibiting the growth of dendrites. The light field enhances the coulombic efficiency and avoids the loss of some irreversible capacity loss for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. C@CQD@MoS2 without magnetic fabrication just displays 602.6 mA h g−1 and 516.2 mA h g−1 for discharge and charge capacity in initial cycle at 50 mA g−1, respectively; it shows a coulombic efficiency of 87%. The irreversible capacity loss from SEI film and side reactions related to oxygen-rich functional groups are the main reasons causing the low coulombic efficiency in the first cycle.32 As displayed in Fig. S7,† such MoS2 composite displays a negligible capacity attenuation in a continuous 100 cycles at a current of 50 mA g−1. SEM images of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and Fe@C@MoS2 before and after 100 cycles were recorded and compared (Fig. S8†). As shown in Fig. S8,† the sample after 100 cycles is smooth with nearly no wrinkles for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 while the surface is rough and even some sodium dendrites appear for the case of Fe@C@MoS2, implying the important role of photogenerated electrons in suppressing sodium dendrite growth.
Fe@C@MoS2 displayed 573.1 and 459.8 mA h g−1 for discharge and charge capacity, higher than that of C@MoS2 (470.1, 379.8 mA h g−1). The capacity loss compared with Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 is caused by the loss of light field which can convert light energy to electrochemical performance and the cycle stability of SIBs. It is noticeable that the doping of Fe does not contribute much to the enhancement of capacity; however, it serves an important role in improving the cycle ability, which is confirmed in the following rate and cycle performance.
The rate and cycle stability of the MoS2-based composites were also studied at various current densities (Fig. 7b). Compared with other MoS2-based composites, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite exposed to simulated sunlight exhibits a superior cycle stability and rate capacity. Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light treatment displays discharge capacities of 688.9, 661.8, 633.8, 608.3 and 586.9 mA h g−1 at different current densities of 50, 100, 150, 200 and 500 mA g−1, respectively. However, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 displayed attenuated discharge capacities when the simulated sunlight was removed, only 666.2, 639.7, 612.7, 588.2, and 567.3 mA h g−1 from 50 to 500 mA g−1. The reduced rate performance is derived from the decreased coulombic efficiency due to the unstable SEI film, dissolving and depositing continuously during the repeated charge and discharge process. C@CQD@MoS2 just displays 583.6, 547.1, 515.9, 485.1 and 447.9 mA h g−1, respectively, while Fe@C@MoS2 just displays 551.2, 503.5, 442.9, 369.6 and 297.9 mA h g−1 at 50, 100, 150, 200, and 500 mA g−1, respectively, and presents an obvious degeneration at 200 mA g−1. However, it delivers a better cycle and rate performance than that of C@MoS2, which only delivers 446.2, 325.7, 259.9, 223.8, and 160.9 mA h g−1 at 50, 100, 150, 200, and 500 mA g−1, respectively. An obvious capacity attenuation phenomenon is observed as low as 100 mA g−1, and it displays a considerable polarization at 200 mA g−1 due to the absence of light assistance and magnetic field assistance, which is in line with in the above charge and discharge profile. When the current density reverses to the initial 50 mA g−1, except for C@MoS2, all samples can recover to their initial capacity, implying the highlighted optomagnetic assistance effect.
The excellent rate and cycle performances of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 which is responsive to visible light arise partly from its typical structure, the protective double matrix, interpenetrated carbon dots, and rapid permeation of the electrolyte for such a composite. Additionally, such excellent electrochemical performances are also ascribed to the void space to buffer the large deionization radius of Na, shortened Na+ diffusion distance, the promoted electron transfer and ion diffusion ability, and partly come from the photochemical and magnetic tailoring contributions, especially for improved stability due to the inhibited sodium dendrite growth and mitigated volume variation, which is confirmed by calculated SEI thickness variation as time progresses (Fig. S9†). As shown in Fig. S9,† a thinner and more stable SEI film with light treatment is obtained due to the strong pre-insertion of sodium assisted by strong reductive photogenerated electrons during repeated cycles. In addition, the assistance of magnetic fabrication ensures the increased optoelectrical storage efficiency.
Accelerated electron and ion transfer can inhibit the conversion reaction which is detrimental to reversibility, while promoting the insertion and extraction reactions which are the prerequisite conditions for the enhancements of sodium storage performance. The rich electrons due to light illumination promote the charge transfer due to more negative potential, facilitate the insertion of Na (Na δ+) or the extraction of Mo (Mo δ−) and prevent sodium dendrite growth. Therefore, excellent rate and cycle performances are achieved, which agree well with the previously discussed points.
The rate performances under higher current densities for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and Fe@C@MoS2 were also studied (Fig. 7c). The charge and discharge capacity for Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light treatment is 578.8 and 577.8 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The data are 432.4 and 431.9 mA h g−1 at a current density of 20 A g−1, while the data are 521.5 and 520.4 mA h g−1, maintaining 389.4 and 388.2 mA h g−1 at 20 A g−1 for the case without light treatment. The remarkably reduced rate performance was attributed to the robust SEI film with light assistance. Fe@C@MoS2 maintains 335.4 and 333.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 and only 121.1 mA h g−1 capacity is left at 20 A g−1. For the former, the corresponding columbic efficiency is nearly 100% while it shows a large decline in the whole cycle later. The gap at a high current density (20 A g−1) is even larger. As the rate decreased back to 1 A g−1, the capacity reverses to 577.9 mA h g−1. The cycle performance of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 at 2 A g−1 was also recorded. It keeps a stable discharge capacity (291.6 mA h g−1) in 10 consecutive cycles and displays a small polarization tendency.
Additionally, the small polarization brings about low or even nearly no voltage hysteresis. Differing from the case in the absence of light illumination, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light utilization showed outstanding stability with a low voltage hysteresis for 300 h at areal current density of 50 mA g−1 (Fig. 8a). For the case without visible light, the voltage profile was stable for 100 h and an obvious degeneration was observed with a voltage hysteresis because of the continuous decomposition and sodium dendrite growth, well correlated to the extended time period of 0–5, 95–100, and 295–300 h of the cycling (Fig. 8b–d, respectively). Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 electrode with light utilization displays a much smaller over-potential (less than 0.05 V) compared to nonlight responding case (0.43 V) throughout the whole plating/stripping process, confirming the benefits of light in suppressing voltage hysteresis and electric polarization tendency.
 Fig. 8  (a) Comparison of cycling performance in a symmetric cell at a current density of 5 mA cm−2 based on Na-Fe@C@CQD@MoS2|Na-Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (purple line is the case of with light treatment, while red line presents the light-free case). Expansion of time period to (b) 0–5 h, (c) 95–100 h and (d) 295–300 h. 
The discharge capacities and coulombic efficiencies of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 composite with an additional 500 cycles were recorded at a higher rate of 0.5 A g−1 during a long period of cycling (Fig. 9a). The first and 500th discharge capacities of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with and without light utilization at a current density of 0.5 A g−1 were 587.5 and 567.3 mA h g−1, and the corresponding capacity retention was 586.9 (99.8%) and 494.2 (87.1%) mA h g−1. Compared to the HRTEM image of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 exposed to simulated sunlight before cycling (Fig. S4a†), there is little change in the thickness of the SEI film (only 0.1 nm variation) (Fig. S4b†), further confirming the light field contribution to the stability of the SEI film. It is a great challenge to achieve fast and stable Na+ storage properties in SIBs because of the large ionic radius of Na+ intercalation and exfoliation. The relatively outstanding stability of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light assistance is related to charge effects in the mitigation of volume expansion and the beneficial effect for suppressing the growth of sodium dendrites.
 Fig. 9  (a) The long-term cycling performance of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with/without simulated sunlight at 0.5 A g−1. (b) The Nyquist plots of MoS2-based composite (inset is equivalent circuit model). (c) Flexible battery demonstration in flat/bent states. 
The structure variation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 after long-term cycling was also recorded. After 500 cycles, as shown in the TEM image in Fig. S10,† the hollow visible light-responding Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 in the presence of light is well maintained without obvious morphology change being observed (Fig. S10a†). This can be attributed to fabricated hollow voids to support the huge volume variation and the electrostatic force from the generated electrons and electrolyte addition during the repeated intercalation/exfoliation process. However, a pulverization phenomenon was observed for Fe@C@MoS2 without visible light assistance (Fig. S10b†), causing the loss of electrical contact between active materials and the electrode framework causing the capacity to fade during repeated cycles. Notably, the enhanced kinetics via the photo-induced electrons is also another reason for such excellent rate and cycle performances.
In order to further evaluate the electrochemical kinetics behaviors, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) profiles at a frequency between 0.01 Hz and 100 kHz were obtained. The Nyquist plots of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 are displayed in Fig. 9b. Nyquist plots are constituted of a broad depressed semicircle at high frequency and an inclined straight line at low frequency with the EIS data (inset is an equivalent electrical circuit), in which RS represents the ohmic resistance (the resistance of the electrolyte, separator, and electrical contacts), Rct comes from the charge transfer resistance, W is equal to the Warburg impedance of Na+ diffusion into the active materials, and CPE is derived from the constant phase-angle element (named as double layer capacitance). RSEI refers to the formation resistance of SEI. The high-frequency semicircles evaluate the charge transfer resistance while the low-frequency oblique lines are ascribed to Na+ diffusion within the electrode, which are recognized as typical Warburg behavior. Compared to the case without light illumination, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with light assistance demonstrates a much smaller diameter of semicircle implying a higher electronic conductivity. The electron transfer resistance shows a small decrease while the ion diffusion resistance displays a slight elevation before and after 500 cycles. The decreased electron transfer resistance can be ascribed to a “sodiation-induced reactivation” mechanism, indicating the increased interfacial storage of sodium upon cycling. While the slight increase of the ion diffusion resistance can be explained by the huge volume change of the Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 electrode. Fitted with red smooth curves in Nyquist plots, such fitting profiles strongly correspond to the experimental EIS data. Such battery based on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 displays superior mechanical properties, which is beneficial for accommodating the volume variation during cycling (Fig. 9c).
These data verify the great contributions from light field, the doping of carbon dots and Fe in the improvements of electron conductivity as well as the enhanced electron transfer and ionic diffusion capability, the depressed sodium dendrite growth, buffered volume expansion and extraction because of electrostatic force and typical spatial voids. Notably, the low stacking of the MoS2 layers can be enabled via the electrostatic force to resist the stacking power and lower the barrier for Na+ insertion.
To further unveil the high rate performance of MoS2-based composite, CV scans at different scan rates (0.1–2 mV s−1) were performed, as shown in Fig. S11.† Capacitive contribution of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 is closely correlated to the scan rate, and it increases gradually from an initial 66.4% at a scan rate of 0.1 mV s−1 to 99.6% (2 mV s−1) (Fig. S11a to f; see details in ESI†), which is mainly attributed to the synergistic optoelectromagnetic energy storage technology, the typical porous structure, the lower ion diffusion barrier and shortened ion diffusion pathways.
The light-assisted energy storage technology can suppress sodium dendrite growth, mitigate the volume variation and improve the chemical reaction kinetics, while magnetic-assisted energy storage can increase the carrier separation efficiency which is in line with the PL result (Fig. S12†): PL profile was studied for the evaluation of charge separation efficiency. The rate of electron–hole recombination is in reverse proportion to the PL intensity;33–35 in other words, a weaker intensity means suppressed carrier recombination. Compared to the case with no magnetic response, the carrier separation efficiency was increased greatly due to ferroelectric polarization. Compared with the nonmagnetic responding C@CQD@MoS2, Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 exhibits a weaker intensity PL peak with magnetic fabrication modulating its orientation, demonstrating a minimum recombination of electrons and holes in the MoS2-based sample, elevating the optoelectrical conversion efficiency. Therefore, the ferromagnetic Fe reduces the PL emission intensity because of ferroelectric polarization caused by strong internal potential to facilitate charge separation.
In addition to the enhanced light storage energy efficiency, the magnetic field can decrease the accumulated excess heat production. Considering that the great majority of heat production during the (de)sodiation process is derived from the mutual collisions of electrons, reducing the collisions among electrons is greatly desirable. The highly uniform electric field distribution enables a great operability to tailor the motional orbit of electrons. As shown in Fig. 10a, when the electric field force is vertical to the Lorentz force, the heat production due to the collisions of electrons can be avoided (eqn. (7)–(11)); therefore, the heat production is dramatically decreased. As demonstrated in Fig. 10b, the temperature variation during the (dis)charge process is much smaller when the imposed magnetic field is vertical to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 than that the case of the magnetic field being parallel to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (Fig. 10c and d), and the formed temperature difference is 5 K on average (Fig. S13†). f1 = qvBsinθ(7) f2 = qvBcosθ(8) F′ = F + f1(9) Q = f2S2(10) E = F′S1(11)where f1 and f2 are the component forces of Lorentz force, θ is the angle between electric field force and magnetic force, F′ is the join force along electric field, Q is the heat produced due to the component force from Lorentz force, while E is kinetic energy along electric field.
 Fig. 10  (a) The simulated distribution of electromagnetic field and (b) the corresponding transverse section of (a). The calculated temperature variation during the charge and discharge process (c) when imposed magnetic field is parallel to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and (d) when imposed magnetic field is vertical to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. 
In addition to helping in enhancing the thermodynamic stability of the system, the magnetic field can also help to suppress the growth of sodium dendrites via rearranging the Na+ concentration to realize a uniform distribution, hence suppressing the formation of sodium dendrites. Lorentz force affects the charged species in an electrolyte; the electric field tends to be perpendicular to the magnetic field. The Lorentz force guides the spiral motion of the charged species and leads to the convection of electrolyte, boosting the mass transfer and ion distribution. Impressively the redistribution of Na+ can be achieved via the rational tailoring of magnetic field. As shown in Fig. 11a and b, the voltage distribution demonstrates a sharp shift around the sodium dendrites due to the uneven distribution of Na+. Compared to C@CQD@MoS2 (Fig. 11c), Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 realizes a uniform distribution after Fe doping, restraining the growth of sodium dendrites (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) A skeleton diagram of a tiny bump on the anode surface. (b) The voltage distribution near the bump. The scale is the ratio of relative voltage. Simulation results of the different trajectory of Na+ during deposition process (c) without or (d) with magnetic field. The vertical line reflects the motion trajectory of Na+, while the horizontal line represents the equivalent concentration of Na+. The right-hand scale represents the relative concentration of Na+. 
To further explore the influence of Fe doping on the electrochemical performance of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2, DFT calculations were performed to model the adsorption between the discharge products (Na2Mo, Na2S and Na2S2). The adsorption energies of Na+ on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and C@CQD@MoS2 are demonstrated in Fig. 12. It is concluded that Fe doping strengthens the chemical bonding with Na–Mo/Na–S, while the absence of Fe doping weakens the chemical bonding with Na–Mo/Na–S, corroborating that Fe doping promotes Na adsorption, which enhances the sodium storage performance.
 Fig. 12  Theoretical simulations of Na+ adsorption in C@CQD@MoS2 substrate and Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 structures. Main view of Na+ adsorbed in (a) C@CQD@MoS2 and (b) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 structures and the corresponding binding energies (Eb). Electron density differences of Na+ adsorbed in (c, e) C@CQD@MoS2 and (d, f) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. Black, red, green, dark blue and white spheres represent Mo, S, C, Fe and Na atoms, respectively. 
Conclusions
In summary, this work is devoted to introducing stimulus sources (optical field and magnetic field) to solve the bottleneck problems that prevent the developments of SIBs, namely the sluggish chemical kinetics, the sodium dendrite growth, and the large volume variation during repeated plating/stripping process. The visible light- and magnetic-responsive Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 electrode material was successfully fabricated for the evaluation of SIBs, in which simulated sunlight improves the kinetics of electrochemical reaction, prevents the growth of dendritic metals, mitigates volume deformation during cycling, and maintains the coulombic efficiency at nearly 100%. With the calculated temperature dropping 5 K on average, the heat production can be attenuated via well-tailored orientation and hence the thermal stability of the battery is improved. Ferroelectric polarization can promote the carrier separation efficiency, which is beneficial for the increase of light-assisted energy storage efficiency. The redistribution of electrons is achieved via magnetic field for the purpose of attenuating the collisions among electrons, achieving reduced heat production, rearranging the distribution of Na+ to realize uniform deposition and increasing the Na+ adsorption capability. Based on the optoelectromagnetic synergistic energy storage technique, the fine structure fabrication as well as the rational composition and structure design, the MoS2 composite electrode displays an exceptional rate and cycle performance, delivering a capacity of 520.5 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 20 A g−1, and retains 99.8% of its original capacity of 586.9 mA h g−1 (keeping a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100%) after 500 cycles at 0.5 A g−1. This work provides a useful protocol for the development of green sustainable optoelectromagnetic synergistic energy storage techniques.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported financially by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21805152, 51673106), project funded by China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (no. 2018M640616), Talent Fund of Shandong Collaborative Innovation Center of Eco-Chemical Engineering (XTCXQN16) and the Science and Technology Research Project of Shandong Province (no. ZR2018BB033).
Notes and references
Z. Chen, D. Yin and M. Zhang, Small, 2018, 14, 1703818 CrossRef .
R. Wang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, D. Jin, X. Tao and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11165–11175 RSC .
P. Zhang, F. Qin, L. Zou, M. Wang, K. Zhang, Y. Lai and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 12189–12195 RSC .
Y. Liu, J. Liu, M. Hou, L. Fan, Y. Wan and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10902–10908 RSC .
Y. Tang, D. Wu, Y. Mai, H. Pan, J. Cao, C. Yang, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 14679–14685 RSC .
G. Qin, X. Zhang and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12449–12457 RSC .
Z. Lv, N. Mahmood, M. Tahir, L. Pan, X. Zhang and J. Zou, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18250–18269 RSC .
K. Share, A. Cohn, R. Carter, B. Rogers and C. Pint, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9738–9744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cheng and Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 7207–7209 RSC .
Q. Pan, F. Zheng, X. Ou, C. Yang, X. Xiong, X. Tang, L. Zhao and M. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4739–4745 CrossRef CAS .
A. Budumuru, B. Rakesh and C. Sudakar, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8882–8897 RSC .
Y. Li, K. Chang, E. Shangguan, D. Guo, W. Zhou, Y. Hou, H. Tang, B. Li and Z. Chang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1887–1900 RSC .
D. Yoo, K. Kim and J. Choi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702744 CrossRef .
P. Xue, S. Liu, X. Shi, C. Sun, C. Lai, Y. Zhou, S. Dong, Y. Chen and J. Liang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1804165 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shen, H. Liu, X. Cheng, C. Yan and J. Huang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 161–175 CrossRef .
L. Fan, H. Zhuang, W. Zhang, Y. Fu, Z. Liao and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 33, 1703360 CrossRef .
R. Liu, L. Ma, G. Niu, X. Li, E. Li, Y. Bai and G. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701635 CrossRef .
Q. Cheng, L. Wei, Z. Liu, N. Ni, Z. Sang, B. Zhu, W. Xu, M. Chen, Y. Miao, L. Q. Chen, W. Min and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2942 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, M. Yu, G. Wang, T. Zhai, S. Xie, Y. Ling, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, P. Zhou, K. Lei, Q. Zhao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601973 CrossRef .
L. He, Y. Hu, M. Wang and Y. Yin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4196–4202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, P. Zhou, K. Lei, Q. Zhao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601973 CrossRef .
P. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 663–672 CrossRef CAS .
J. Duan, G. Qin, L. Min, Y. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38084–38092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. Zhang, H. Huang, S. Li, X. Han, Z. Liu, J. Yang, W. Xiao, J. Liang, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602880 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, N. Zhang, L. Jiao, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 214–220 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, B. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Ge, Z. Huang and H. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22969–22974 RSC .
G. Eda, H. Yamaguch, D. Voiry, T. Fujita, M. Chen and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5111–5116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. Shin, G. Eda, L. Li, K. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Lee, J. Hong, J. Lopez, Y. Sun, D. Feng, K. Lim, W. Chueh, M. Toney, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 861–868 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, C. Yu, M. Zhang, Q. Sun, S. Li, M. Norouzi Banis, X. Han, Q. Dong, J. Yang, G. Wang, X. Sun and J. Qiu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 66–74 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tu, Y. Zhang, A. H. Reshak, S. Auluck, L. Ye, X. Han, T. Ma and H. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 840–850 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, L. He and Y. Yin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3747 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Usai, S. Obregón, A. Becerro and G. Colón, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 24479–24484 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: N2 adsorption and desorption isotherm, TEM, SEM, XPS data, electrochemical performances. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr06180kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  The preparation process of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) The XRD profiles of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and pure MoS2. (b) The Raman profile of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) XPS spectrum of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2; (b) to (f) those of C, Fe, O, Mo, S, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  TEM images of (a) FeOOH@SiO2@RF, (b) Fe@C@CQD, (c) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and (d) its corresponding magnified TEM image and (e) HRTEM image. (f) SAED image and (g) to (k) element mappings of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2.	 
MoS2 + xNa + xe− → NaxMoS2	(1)
NaxMoS2 + (4 − x)Na + (4 − x)e− → 2Na2S + Mo	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of CV curves of (a) Fe@C@MoS2 and (b) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 when exposed to simulated sunlight.	 

 	Scheme 2  A schematic of phase transition based on active MoS2 composite electrode material when exposed to simulated sunlight.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The discharge curves of the photo-assisted SIBs in the dark (black line) and (b) under simulated sunlight illumination (red line) at a current density of 50 mA g−1.	 

 	Scheme 3  A schematic of the inhibited process of formation of dendritic sodium via the generated electrostatic force due to sunlight.	 
∇Esodiation = ∇Esodiation MoS2 composite − (EMoS2 composite + ENa)	(4)
∇E′sodiation = ∇Esodiation MoS2 composite − (EMoS2 composite + ENa + qE)	(5)
F = qE	(6)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Na migration pathways and barriers on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. (b, c) Charge difference plots of Na atom adsorption on Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 according to DFT theory. The yellow and blue areas represent electron accumulation and depletion. The red spheres designate Mo atoms, black ones refer to S atoms.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Charge–discharge curves of MoS2-based composites. (b) The rate performance of MoS2-based composites at different current densities (50 to 500 mA g−1). (c) The rate and cycle performances of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with/without light treatment and Fe@C@MoS2 when exposed to simulated sunlight at different current densities.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Comparison of cycling performance in a symmetric cell at a current density of 5 mA cm−2 based on Na-Fe@C@CQD@MoS2|Na-Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 (purple line is the case of with light treatment, while red line presents the light-free case). Expansion of time period to (b) 0–5 h, (c) 95–100 h and (d) 295–300 h.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The long-term cycling performance of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 with/without simulated sunlight at 0.5 A g−1. (b) The Nyquist plots of MoS2-based composite (inset is equivalent circuit model). (c) Flexible battery demonstration in flat/bent states.	 
f1 = qvBsinθ	(7)
f2 = qvBcosθ	(8)
F′ = F + f1	(9)
Q = f2S2	(10)
E = F′S1	(11)

 	Fig. 10  (a) The simulated distribution of electromagnetic field and (b) the corresponding transverse section of (a). The calculated temperature variation during the charge and discharge process (c) when imposed magnetic field is parallel to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 and (d) when imposed magnetic field is vertical to the orientation of Fe@C@CQD@MoS2.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) A skeleton diagram of a tiny bump on the anode surface. (b) The voltage distribution near the bump. The scale is the ratio of relative voltage. Simulation results of the different trajectory of Na+ during deposition process (c) without or (d) with magnetic field. The vertical line reflects the motion trajectory of Na+, while the horizontal line represents the equivalent concentration of Na+. The right-hand scale represents the relative concentration of Na+.	 

 	Fig. 12  Theoretical simulations of Na+ adsorption in C@CQD@MoS2 substrate and Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 structures. Main view of Na+ adsorbed in (a) C@CQD@MoS2 and (b) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2 structures and the corresponding binding energies (Eb). Electron density differences of Na+ adsorbed in (c, e) C@CQD@MoS2 and (d, f) Fe@C@CQD@MoS2. Black, red, green, dark blue and white spheres represent Mo, S, C, Fe and Na atoms, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: N2 adsorption and desorption isotherm, TEM, SEM, XPS data, electrochemical performances. See DOI: 10.1039/c9nr06180k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
