Fabrication of nanohybrids assisted by protein-based materials for catalytic applications   - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY02466B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY02466B
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 3515-3531Fabrication of nanohybrids assisted by protein-based materials for catalytic applications†

        
          
            Mingyue 
            Liu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Tao 
            Yu‡
b, 
      
        
          
            Renliang 
            Huang
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Qi
          
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Zhimin 
            He
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Rongxin 
            Su
          
          
        
      *bde
aSchool of Pharmaceutical and Chemical Engineering, Taizhou University, 1139 Shifu Avenue, Taizhou 318000, China
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Tianjin Key Laboratory of Membrane Science and Desalination Technology, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China. E-mail: surx@tju.edu.cn
cSchool of Environmental Science and Engineering, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
dCollaborative Innovation Center of Chemical Science and Engineering (Tianjin), Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
eSchool of Marine Science and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, P. R. China
Received 
      5th December 2019
    , Accepted 29th April 2020First published on 14th May 2020AbstractThe application of protein units and architectures as supports in the synthesis of metal and metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) is a relatively new emerging issue. While avoiding toxic stabilizers and solvents, this new synthesis route mostly fulfils the long-desired prospect of designing and synthesizing size- and morphology-controlled nanocatalysts with long-term stability towards maintaining their catalytic activity during reactions and facilitating their separation and recycling. Biotemplates of protein units and architectures with different dimensions, such as protein cages, bacteriophages, protein fibers, protein membranes, and protein crystals, have been widely adopted for the controllable synthesis and immobilization of metal and metal oxide NPs, owing to their abundant functional surface groups for NP anchoring and well-defined structures for accommodating NPs. Various bioinorganic nanohybrids have been constructed and applied in electrocatalysis for fuel cells, photocatalysis for clean energy and pollutant remediation, hydrogenation and oxidation reactions, catalytic syntheses of organic chemicals, etc. This review is meant to present several pivotal aspects of nanocatalysts, their protein-assisted synthesis and their catalytic applications, providing a description of common protein biotemplates, synthesized NPs and applied catalytic reactions.Mingyue LiuMingyue Liu received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan University in 2012. Later, he performed his Ph.D. studies in Chemical Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Rongxin Su. He currently focuses on the design and synthesis of bio-nanomaterials and their applications in catalytic degradation of environmental pollutants and energy conversion.Tao YuTao Yu received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tianjin University in 2018. Later, he performed his Ph.D. studies in Chemical Engineering in Prof. Rongxin Su's group. He currently focuses on the fabrication of functional metal nanocomposites.Renliang HuangRenliang Huang received his Ph.D. degree from School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2012. He has been an Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2014. His current research mainly focuses on the interaction of environmental pollutants with biomolecules and interface behavior of pollutants.Wei QiWei Qi received her Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2002. She has been a Professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2009. She focuses on the R&D of biochemicals, biofuels and biomaterials via biocatalysis and industrial catalysis.Zhimin HeZhimin He received his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 1990. He has been a Professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 1993. His research mainly focuses on enzyme engineering and technology.Rongxin SuRongxin Su received his Ph.D. degree from School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2007, and was a visiting scholar at University of California, Santa Barbara, from 2013 to 2014. He has been a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2014. His current research mainly focuses on the fabrication of nanomaterials for environmental monitoring and treatment, and bioinspired materials.
1. Introduction
Metal nanoparticles (NPs) and metal oxide NPs have shown great promise for utilization in a variety of applications, including catalysis, biosensing, biomedicine, and nanodevices, due to their intriguing physicochemical properties when compared with those of their bulk materials.1–4 Indeed, the catalytic properties of these NPs are particularly attractive because of their excellent reactivity and selectivity, which are fundamentally determined by the size and morphology of the NPs. NPs with a smaller size usually possess higher catalytic activity, but the synthesis of stable and uniform NPs at the subnanometer scale is an extremely challenging issue.5,6 Moreover, in industrial applications, nanocrystals tend to aggregate due to their high surface energies and van der Waals attractions, leading to reduced catalytic activity and limited recyclability.4,7
Therefore, it is highly desired to design and synthesize size- and morphology-controlled nanocatalysts with long-term stability towards maintaining their catalytic activity during reactions and facilitating their separation and recycling, with the additional goal of avoiding the employment of toxic capping agents and solvents in the synthesis.8,9
In recent decades, many efforts have been devoted to developing nanocatalysts by immobilizing metal and metal oxide NPs on/into a solid matrix,10–12 which appears to be an effective strategy to protect these NPs against agglomeration and to facilitate their recovery. An ideal support should provide perfect affinity towards the NPs to anchor without blocking the catalytic sites, as well as provide a three-dimensional (3D) porous network structure for a large surface area and low diffusion resistance.4,8 Furthermore, the NP immobilization matrix should possess convenient recyclability and long-term stability, which are particularly important for practical applications in the catalytic fields.13,14 Diminishing the biotoxicity and enhancing the biocompatibility of the synthesized nanocatalysts are also important issues when the synthetic materials are to be applied in biomedical situations.15,16
Biomineralization, a rising synthetic technique for metallic NPs using environmentally friendly biotemplates and nontoxic water as the solvent, has been the theme of numerous investigations, and the synthesized high-quality NPs have found applications in electromagnetic devices, photonics, catalysis, and a variety of other fields.5,17 The recent decades have witnessed enrichments in adopted biotemplates and the diverse functions of the constructed bionanomaterials. Protein units and architectures, such as protein cages, bacteriophages, fibroin fibers, protein membranes, and protein crystals, have been widely used for the controlled synthesis and immobilization of metal and metal oxide NPs, owing to their abundant surface functionalities (which can be further modified via chemical and/or genetic modifications) for NP anchoring and well-defined structures (e.g., hollow, fibrous and regular channel networks) for accommodating NPs (Scheme 1).3,18,19 Zero-dimensional protein biotemplates, such as proteins, peptides, bacteriophages and proteins in bacterial/fungal extracts, can be used as a stabilizer and/or reductant for the synthesis of uniform noble metal NPs (MNPs).3 Among these biotemplates, protein cage-like (ferritin and enzymes, such as aldolases) and protein shell-like (bacteriophage) architectures are especially attractive because their nanoreactor structure is convenient for the synthesis of ultrasmall inorganic NPs in confined spaces and bioorganic hybrid materials with no biotoxicity.5,20 One-dimensional (1D) protein biotemplates, such as amyloid fibrils and fibroin fibrils, are valid templating agents for the construction of 1D hybrid materials.21,22 The deposition of 1D hybrid materials on a membrane filter can form two-dimensional (2D) materials for filtration catalysis.23,24 Natural 2D protein-based materials, such as eggshell membrane, are accessible and beneficial for immobilizing noble MNPs and convenient for recycling in catalytic reactions.8,25–27 3D biotemplates, such as lysozyme crystals, consist of abundant 3D interpenetrating solvent channels, which are beneficial for the coordination and deposition of metal ions and NP formation either by in situ reduction or reduction via additional reductants in the confined channel spaces.28 3D aerogels based on amyloid fibrils were achieved by the sol–gel method and applied as a single continuous membrane in filtration catalysis.29 These environmentally friendly and sustainable biomaterials, with various dimensions, are readily available and can be recycled from reaction systems.
 Scheme 1  Protein units and assemblies used to fabricate nanocatalysts for applications in catalytic reactions. 
Various bioinorganic nanohybrids, synthesized with these protein units and architectures, have been used as catalysts in fields as diverse as electrocatalysis for fuel cells and photocatalysis for clean energy, the hydrogenation and oxidation of organic compounds, the catalytic syntheses of organic chemicals, the remediation of environmental pollutants, and various biomedical situations.3,15,16,30–32 Significant efforts have been focused on controlling the size of inorganic NPs to enhance their activity.5,33 There are some reviews focused on the strategy of controlling the catalytic activity and selectivity of nanoparticles by changing their size, shape, and composition.34,35 The slight difference between the potential energy barriers of individual reaction steps determines the selectivity, while the total activation energy of the reaction controls the activity. From the perspective of nanocatalysis, there are many factors that affect the selectivity of the reactions including the surface structure, adsorbate-induced restructuring, adsorbate mobility, reaction intermediates, surface composition, charge transport, and oxidation states. These factors are helpful for us to study the internal mechanism of catalysis based on biological templates, and provide ideas for further research.
The green chemical fabrication of catalysts using these biotemplates that address environmental and energy concerns is both strategically and ecologically important.36 Compared with the conventional approach of heterogeneous catalysis that adopts nanoparticles on porous oxide supports, biotemplate-based catalysis is obviously more in line with environmental protection strategies. First, there are various kinds of proteins with a wide range of structures. Protein molecules and their assemblies have rich functional groups on the surface, and are effective templates for assisting in the synthesis of metal nanomaterials. These functional groups can not only serve as binding sites, but also act as reducing agents. This effectively avoids the use of toxic chemical reagents.8,9 Proteins play an important role in the directional growth and morphology control of metal nanomaterials. In addition, the designable feature of proteins allows us to further design the required protein templates based on existing proteins in order to obtain nanoparticles with specific structures, arrangements and sizes.37 Moreover, the catalysis based on protein templates often uses water as the solvent, which has less environmental impact and better biocompatibility.5,15–17
It should be noted that biotemplate-based catalysis is not perfect. Limited by the protein itself, catalysts of this type cannot withstand high temperatures (the reaction conditions should be relatively mild). Once the environmental conditions change, the configuration of the protein may change (for example, heat-induced accumulation of insulin and amyloid protein fibrillation), which will affect the performance of the catalyst. In view of these phenomena, many researchers have begun to solve this problem in order to improve the chemical and thermal stability of biotemplate-based catalysts. The inherent fragility and solubility of protein crystals are solved by cross-linking technology. These cross-linked protein crystals then became a new class of nanoporous materials.4,7,38 Chemical modification of proteins is also a good way to improve stability.8,13,27 Some higher temperature resistant proteins like ferritin from the hyperthermophile Pyrococcus furiosus and heat shock proteins were applied to solve the problem of thermal stability.33,39 In addition, the TMV coat has good thermal and chemical stability and demonstrates an excellent protein template.3,37,40–42
In this review, we examine certain protein biotemplates with different dimensionalities, namely, protein units and architectures, used to assist in the synthesis of inorganic NPs, whose catalytic capability in diverse reactions are further discussed. The summarized research studies reveal the great potential of directing protein-based template synthesis towards efficient nanocatalysts for chemical synthesis, environmental remediation, sustainable energy applications, and more.
2. Protein units and assemblies
2.1 Peptides
Peptides can be designed and synthesized with desired residues that may benefit the preparation of nanomaterials or catalysts.43,44 The mediation of biomimetic ligands, such as peptides, in the synthesis of nanomaterials promotes the preparation of structured nanomaterials and an enhanced understanding of the structural properties of peptide-functionalized nanomaterials. The specially designed peptides can also act as an ideal model to study the relationship between functional groups and the catalytic performance of peptide-stabilized MNPs (Fig. 1).36,45
 Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of the investigation into sequence-dependent structure/catalytic performance relationships. (B) Configurations of Au NPs generated from simulations. (C) Representative TEM images of a series of peptide-promoted Au NPs. Adapted from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
The amyloid-β (Aβ) peptide is a kind of pathogenic amyloid peptide composed of 42 amino acids. It can self-assemble into different shapes and structures including nanospheres, nanoribbons, or nanofibers under specific conditions, such as incubation time, temperature, pH, and the type of salt, cosolute (or cosolvent), and hydrophobic environment (Fig. 2).46 The self-assembly of peptides, such as the Aβ peptide as an alternative template to controllably synthesize nanomaterials, is very interesting and significant, as is the evaluation of their catalytic activity.46
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation of Aβ25–35-templated Au nanostructures with different Aβ25–35 aggregates as templates. Adapted from ref. 46. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
2.2 Proteins
Proteins, either from bacterial extraction (such as the Fusarium sp. MMT1 strain, Staphylococcus warneri and Candida antarctica B) or from plant extraction (such as gum olibanum), show good bioreduction and stabilization performance in the synthesis of MNPs under various conditions (temperature and pH), making them ideal biotemplates for nanocatalyst preparation.47–50
As the spatially confined environment of cage-like proteins (such as urease and ferritin) can be anticipated to facilitate the crystallization of inorganic materials with nanometer precision and prevent the aggregation of NPs, they can be adopted as a reductant as well as a nanoreactor for the controlled synthesis of NPs.15,33,51 Horse spleen apo-ferritin, composed of 24 subunits, has outer and inner diameters of 12 and 8 nm, respectively, which give an appropriate inner space for the accommodation of MNPs with the desired size.52,53 Through the protein channels (∼0.4 nm) that connect the outside and inner cavity, the metal precursors can freely diffuse into the protein cage and be reduced upon introducing an additive reductant. Highly stable ferritin cages derived from hyperthermophilic Pyrococcus furiosus were also effective for the synthesis of spatially confined nanomaterials and overcame the common limitation of applicable temperature of the bionanomaterials, making them applicable at elevated temperatures.33,54
The bacterial aminopeptidase from Streptococcus pneumoniae (PepA) plays an important role in catabolizing oligopeptides in bacteria, and its active sites located inside the cavity hydrolyze oligopeptides. Its diameter is approximately 12 nm at the exterior and 6 nm in the interior. It has channels of 3 nm and 1 nm in diameter, originally existing for substrate entry and product exit, respectfully, which can serve as gates for accepting inorganic molecules during biomineralization.5 Owing to these features, protein cages, such as PepA and ferritin, are considered as ideal biotemplates for the synthesis of uniform and biocompatible inorganic NPs.
Of further interest is a large self-standing macroporous gel monolith, comprising three-dimensionally connected strands of ferritin with a porosity of ∼55 μm, which can be synthesized from ferritin for the loading of Pd NPs inside the protein. The scaffolds exhibited thermal stability and tolerance to organic solvents and could be applied in a continuous flow hydrogenation reactor (Fig. 3).32
 Fig. 3  (A) Synthesis of porous ferritin scaffolds. (a) Photograph of a ferritin scaffold. (b) SEM image of the cross-linked self-standing scaffold. (c) Confocal micrograph image of the self-standing apo-ferritin scaffold. (d) TEM image of a section of the scaffold. (B) Schematic representation of the continuous flow hydrogenation reaction of different substrates with immobilized Pd@apo-ferritin scaffold. Adapted from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 
2.3 Bacteriophages
The M13 phage has been utilized as a functional template for the fabrication of NWs due to its filamentous structure (approximately 6 × 880 nm), which is composed of an identical pattern of amino acids displayed along the length of its major coat protein.30,55 The genetically engineered M13 bacteriophage can provide strong adsorption sites along the dimensions of the phage for both Au and Au ions; thus, a solid NW can be formed after the penetration of ions through the surfactant layer surrounding the phage and the binding of reduced ions (Au atoms/NPs) to its surface.
Moreover, the P22 bacteriophages, which are procapsid-like particles with T = 7 icosahedral structures and an internal (external) diameter of approximately 46 nm (60 nm), represent an ideal candidate for use as a size-defined nanotemplate and nanoreactor in the synthesis of MNPs.31
2.4 Protein architectures
In biomineralization studies on the synthesis of inorganic materials, protein shells and protein cages have been intensely employed as they are ideal templates for the size-controlled synthesis of inorganic NPs, and the synthesized complexes exhibit biocompatibility.5 Cowpea chlorotic mottle virus (CCMV) capsids, composed of 180 identical 20 kDa coat protein subunits (190 residues), are monodisperse symmetrical architectures, whose outer diameter is ∼28 nm and inner cavity diameter is ∼18 nm.56 The outer surface of a CCMV capsid is not highly charged, while the interior cavity surface is positively charged due to the abundant basic residues (arginine and lysine) of the coat protein subunits. Thus, negatively charged polyoxometalate anions can be expediently aggregated at the interface with CCMV capsids57 and facilitate the mineralization of the precursors, during which the protein shell serves as a spatially selective nucleation catalyst and a size- and shape-constrained reaction vessel.56,58
As the first-discovered and most-studied virus, tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) possesses unique physical and chemical attributes, which are beneficial for the fabrication of nanocatalysts.37 The physical structure of TMV is helically constructed by 2130 identical coat proteins, forming a rigid nanotube 300 nm in length and 18 nm in diameter with a 4 nm inner channel.59–61 TMV's structure is extraordinarily stable under many harsh conditions including high temperatures (up to 90 °C), extreme pH (a range of 2–10) and organic solvents such as ethanol, methanol and dimethyl sulfoxide.37,40,41 By small genetic modification, the precisely spaced thiol groups on the outer surface of each coat protein of TMV (TMV1cys) are harnessed to provide a facile assembly of TMV on chips and an enhanced density of biohybrids. The chip containing surface-assembled viral templates overcomes the disadvantages of homogeneous catalysts, which are usually difficult to separate from the reaction products or recover for repeated use without environmental costs. The strategy of TMV-templated Pd catalysis can be readily extended to other biotemplates, catalysts and reaction systems for investigations into reaction mechanisms and pathways or for improving the utilization of noble metals. The prepared TMV-templated Pd hybrids can be further integrated into poly(ethylene glycol)-based microparticles via a replica molding technique in a simple, robust and highly reproducible manner.3
The self-assembled cage-like architecture of the small heat shock protein (Hsp) from Methanococcus jannaschii, which has 24 subunits and forms a 12 nm cage and a 6.5 nm interior cavity with pores throughout the cage architecture, has been used to encapsulate metal clusters with a defined spatial arrangement.39
2.5 Amyloid fibrils
Amyloids are insoluble aggregates formed from misfolded or self-assembled proteins and are well known for their implication in severe neurodegenerative diseases.62 By mimicking this process in vitro, nanofilaments of notable aspect ratios and mechanical strength can be synthesized, which can serve as a platform for functional materials combining sensory, magnetic, and optical properties with biological compatibility and biodegradability.23,29,63
The fibrillation of different proteins under suitable conditions can also result in the formation of amyloid-like fibrils.64,65 Lysozyme fibrils with diameters ranging from 10 nm to 50 nm and lengths up to several micrometers are valid as templating agents for the construction of 1D hybrid materials, which are potentially applicable as biocatalysts.66 Amyloid fibrils derived from β-lactoglobulin can be produced in water suspensions under the appropriate conditions of temperature and pH.29,63 The resultant amyloid fibrils can serve as a template and reductant in the formation of MNPs and scaffolds for the preparation of lightweight functional materials. The vacuum filtration of fibrils decorated with Au/Pd or alloyed NPs on top of nitrocellulose membranes can further give catalytic membrane reactors (Fig. 4).23,24
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the construction of a metal NP-loaded catalytic membrane reactor. Adapted from ref. 24. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
Insulin amyloid fibrils are also good sacrificial templates for the construction of chains of alloyed MNPs under mild conditions, and the product of which is a good candidate for practical use in exhaust purification, fuel cells, and other electrochemical applications.67
2.6 Natural protein fibers
Fibroin fibers are the degumming product from the raw silk of Bombyx mori. As the main component of fibroin fibers, fibroin possesses a molecular mass of ∼370 kDa and consists of glycine, alanine, serine and tyrosine, as well as residues of sulfur amino acids, which provide abundant sites and reductive groups for the binding and reduction of metal ions.68,69 Further modification of fibroin fibers with cysteine via EDC-NHS coupling makes the growth of MNPs more convenient.70
The cell wall of fungal mycelia (Rhizopus oryzae) contains various functional groups corresponding to the cell surface proteins, providing abundant binding sites for metal ion chelation and promoting the reduction, nucleation, and size- and shape-controlled formation of NPs on the cell surface.71
2.7 Protein membranes
The eggshell membrane (ESM) is a protein-based thin, fibrous membrane located between the calcified eggshell and the albumen of eggs and has long been treated as agricultural waste and disposed of in landfills without pretreatment.8,13 ESM is extensively and irreversibly crosslinked with lysine-derived desmosine and iso-desmosine and forms exquisite and interwoven fibrous network structures.72 ESM potentially possesses a high content of thiols (5–10%). After reduction by dithiothreitol, the disulfide bonds convert into thiols, which make ESM favorable for immobilizing Au NPs by forming strong gold–sulfur bonds. The surface modification (e.g., the grafting of procyanidin) of ESM can promote the reduction of metal ions into MNPs in situ without an additional reductant and can synchronously enhance the binding affinity of ESM towards MNPs.8,13,14
2.8 Protein crystals
Protein crystals, as solid protein assemblies, present highly ordered 3D arrangements of protein molecules with the advantageous properties of high porosity (0.5–0.8), a large surface area (800–2000 m2 g−1) and a wide range of pore sizes (2–10 nm).7
Due to the coordination of metal ions by the amino acid side chains lining the surface of solvent channels, protein crystals can coordinate and deposit metal ions within the solvent channels via absorption of solutions containing the metal ions.73–75 Protein crystals are comparable to typical porous materials with respect to these properties, suggesting that protein crystals can be regarded as excellent biotemplates for unusual classes of nanohybrid materials directed at applications in heterogeneous catalysis. For example, Lu et al. reported that lysozyme can steer the growth of Au NPs within a lysozyme crystal and the hybrid materials were applicable to a catalytic reaction.33,75 Nevertheless, the utilization of native protein crystals for practical applications has been restricted by the nature of native protein crystals, such as being mechanically fragile and prone to dissolution—even under benign conditions.7 Many previous studies have demonstrated that the crosslinking of protein crystals with glutaraldehyde can make them physically robust, stable in organic solvents, and insoluble in water while preserving their activity.73,76,77 Hence, crosslinked protein crystals could provide attractive solid reaction vessels for preparing novel nanomaterials in crystal hybrids with potential applications in catalysis (Fig. 5).4,38
 Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the lysozyme crystallization, crosslinking and preparation of Au@CLLC hybrid materials for the catalytic reduction of 4-NP. Adapted from ref. 7. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd. (B) Optical micrograph images of (b1) S-CLLCs, (b2) Au@S-CLLCs, (b3) L-CLLCs, (b4) Au@L-CLLCs. (C) Representative TEM images of Au NPs within CLLCs with different Au loadings: (c1) Au@S-CLLC3:1, (c2) Au@S-CLLC9:1, (c3) Au@L-CLLC3:1, (c4) Au@L-CLLC9:1. Adapted from ref. 4. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
3. Preparation of nanocatalysts using protein units and assemblies
3.1 Noble MNPs

3.1.1 Au NPs. 
In the ever-expanding research field of nanomaterials, Au NPs have attracted great attention attributed to their stability, oxidation resistance, and biocompatibility as well as their wide applications in electronics and photonics, catalysis, sensing, imaging, and biomedicine.78–80 Their physicochemical properties, especially their catalytic activity, are governed by their size, shape, and crystal structure.81,82 Therefore, the exploration of synthetic protocols for the production of size- and shape-controlled monodisperse NPs are of paramount importance. However, the traditional synthesis method involves reducing gold ions with a reductant (such as borohydride and hydrazine) and using capping ligands to prevent self-aggregation and generate special-shaped NPs and has always posed environmental risks.83 Therefore, biosynthetic routes that generate negligible quantities of hazardous waste, consume far less energy than chemical synthesis routes and are convenient for the synthesis of size- and shape- controlled inorganic NPs represent a promising green strategy for nanofabrication.
The biosynthesis of Au NPs by reducing HAuCl4 with the protein extract of Rhizopus oryzae to produce stable suspensions of size- and shape-controlled Au NPs was obtained simply by varying the ratio of HAuCl4 to protein extract.83 The synthesized Au NP suspensions exhibited excellent stability over a wide range of ionic strengths, pH and temperatures. Similarly, Au NPs can be controllably synthesized by a photochemistry method via the reduction of HAuCl4 with ferritin as the template.84
Au-Based biohybrid nanowires can be synthesized by a seed-mediated method with lysozyme fibrils. The citrate-stabilized Au seeds are negatively charged and electrostatically interact with the electrically charged amine groups of the lysozyme fibrils. The coverage of Au NPs on the surface of the fibrils can be optimized by altering the addition amount of Au seeds for a better catalytic performance.67 The density of Au NPs on the surface of silk fibroin fibers can also be regulated by the reduction of HAuCl4 using modified reductive sulfonated polyaniline and tyrosine residues.70 Furthermore, cysteine-modified silk fibroin can act as a reducing agent, stabilizing agent, and material matrix in the synthesis of uniform Au NPs.71
Upon changing the reaction pH to alkaline, porous crosslinked lysozyme crystals can provide accessible channels that allow AuCl4− to diffuse into the crystals, followed by reduction by tyrosine residues at physiological temperature (37 °C).7 Small uniform Au NPs in the range of 1–3 nm can be expediently prepared within porous CLLCs due to the steric restriction effect, which can confine and prevent the subsequent growth of Au NPs within channels (Fig. 5). An investigation of the Au NPs generated in differently sized CLLCs indicated that the dimensions of the Au NPs increased with Au loading, for both small and large crystals, while Au NPs within smaller CLLCs possess narrower size distributions because the metal precursors exhibit a homogeneous distribution within small protein crystals, rooting from their relatively small diffusion resistance.4
Au nanostructures with special morphologies can also be controllably synthesized with protein architectures. For example, Au nanostars and nanospheres can be generated in situ via the reduction of HAuCl4 with procyanidin-modified ESM.13 Even without procyanidin or an additional reductant, Au cations can be reduced in situ on ESM and form dispersed Au NPs.26 Upon equilibration of an ionic gold solution with amyloid fibrils, Au crystal platelets can be naturally reduced by the amyloid fibrils through a heat- and protein-assisted nucleation process, which is different from the common formation of Au NPs on the surface of the fibrils using sodium borohydride as the reductant.29,63 Combining the formed Au and amyloid fibrils by the sol–gel approach, followed by supercritical CO2 drying, yields Au-based functional aerogels with unprecedented lightness and functionality (Fig. 6).
 Fig. 6  Schematic preparation of aerogels. (A) The self-assembly of β-lactoglobulin into amyloid fibrils by incubation. (B) The equilibration of chloroauric acid on the surface of the fibrils. (C) The preparation of pristine aqueous amyloid fibril dispersions. (D) The nucleation of Au NPs on the surface of the fibrils by the addition of sodium borohydride. (E) The heat-induced protein-assisted reduction of 2D gold macrocrystals. The right figures are photographs and electron microscopy images of the corresponding amyloid and gold amyloid hybrid aerogels. Adapted from ref. 63. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
The presence of Aβ peptide assemblies with different structures could also direct the nucleation of Au to form different Au nanostructures. Using Aβ25–35 monomers, nanoribbons, and nanofibrils as templates could controllably prepare Au nanospheres, nanoribbons, and nanofibers, while the Aβ25–35 monomers prepared by self-assembly in water for 0 h could direct the synthesis of Au nanoflowers (Fig. 2).46


3.1.2 Ag NPs. 
Uniform Ag NPs can be achieved by reducing [Ag(NH3)2]+ with TMV, which acts as a sacrificial biomediator and stabilizer. Ag NPs of 2, 4, and 9 nm can be controllably synthesized by tuning the Tollens' reagent and TMV concentrations.42 Other biotemplates, such as ESM, procyanidin- or tannic-acid-modified ESM, mycelia, and cysteine-modified silk fibroin, can also act as reducing agents and stabilizing agents to convert AgNO3 into Ag NPs with a narrow size distribution.8,14,26,70,71,85 Uniform Ag NPs within crosslinked lysozyme crystals can be achieved by reducing Ag+ adsorbed on CLLCs with NaBH4.38


3.1.3 Pd NPs. 
Palladium (Pd) participates in multiple applications as a metal catalyst for a variety catalytic reactions including hydrogenation, oxidation, dichromate reduction and C–C coupling reactions.32,37,40,41,68 Dispersed peptide-functionalized Pd NPs, synthesized from peptides and a Pd salt and 1.9 ± 0.3 nm in diameter, are soluble and stable in aqueous solutions and exhibit good catalytic activity.36 Uniform and high-activity Pd NPs were prepared from Candida antarctica B lipase and a Pd salt by precipitation and subsequent in situ Pd NP formation.50 Furthermore, the synthesis of uniform supported Pd NPs is similarly easy to achieve with biotemplates.
Pd NPs were prepared by soaking silk fibroin in a MeOH solution of Pd(OAc)2, which was gradually absorbed by fibroin and then rapidly reduced by MeOH at room temperature. The obtained composites were nonpyrophoric and remained stable for more than three years at room temperature in air.68 Cysteine-modified silk fibroin can act as a reducing agent for the synthesis of Pd NPs with a narrow size distribution.70 Pd NPs decorated on amyloid fibrils can be achieved via the reduction of a mixture of metal ions and amyloid fibrils by NaBH4. Catalytic membrane reactors can be further prepared by vacuum filtering Pd NP-decorated fibrils on top of nitrocellulose membranes.23 A narrow size distribution of Pd NPs can also be obtained by the reduction of a ferritin–Pd complex (formed via incubation of apo-ferritin with K2PdCl4) with H2 or NaBH4 (Fig. 7).32,33,86
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic preparation of Pd NPs within ferritin. (B) A TEM image of Pd@ferritin; the scale bar is 50 nm. Adapted from ref. 86. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
Pd NPs can be formed on TMV via the reduction of Na2PdCl4 by dimethylamine borane (DMAB). Meanwhile, TMV retains its shape while holding Pd particles on its surface and preventing their agglomeration.37 Yang et al. reported the spontaneous formation of small (1–2 nm), uniform and highly crystalline Pd NPs along genetically modified tobacco mosaic virus (TMV1cys) biotemplates without external reducing agents.3 The ratio between TMV and the Pd precursor strongly affects the exclusive formation of well-dispersed Pd NPs along the TMV biotemplates.
With the stabilization effect obtained using modified procyanidin on ESM, Pd NPs were controllably grown and uniformly dispersed on the ESM.27 Using eggshell membrane as a template, macroporous Pd and Y2O3@Pd network catalysts can be synthesized and made available to replace Pt catalysts in the methanol oxidation reaction.87
From the shape-regulation and biomineralization effects of the protein on the mycelia cell surface, flower-like branched Pd NPs with an average diameter of 25 nm can be obtained.71


3.1.4 Pt NPs. 
Pt NPs were synthesized within protein cages (PepA, ferritin, and apo-ferritin) by slowly reducing K2PtCl4 using an additional reductant (NaBH4 or (CH3)2NBH3) in an aqueous solution.39,88 The synthesized Pt NPs inside the protein shells presented a uniform size distribution, and the size of Pt NPs can be precisely controlled from 0.9 to 2.1 nm by changing either the reaction time (kinetically controlled synthesis) or the concentration ratio between the Pt precursor and protein (ratio-controlled synthesis).5,15 Selective gas detection materials can be achieved by the functionalization of the interior and exterior walls of electrospun SnO2 nanotubes (or WO3) with Pd@ferritin and subsequent high-temperature calcination.54,89
Pt NPs can uniformly grow on procyanidin-modified ESM and cysteine-modified silk fibroin, which act as a reducing agent and stabilizer to control the metal nuclei growth and inhibit the individual particles from coalescing.27,70
Interestingly, flower-like branched Pt NPs with an average diameter of 3 nm can be formed by adopting mycelia as the reductant and biotemplate.71


3.1.5 Alloy NPs. 
As the changeable composition of metal alloy NPs leads to unique size- and component-dependent electronic, optical, and catalytic characteristics, which are different from those of the corresponding individual MNPs, metal alloy NPs have attracted great attention. For example, Au–Ag alloy NPs performed with an enhanced catalytic activity compared to monometallic Au or Ag NPs in the oxidation of CO at low temperature.90 Nevertheless, the environmentally friendly synthesis of bimetallic NPs with a uniform size distribution without using toxic organic solvents, surfactants, or block copolymers is still under exploration. Protein cages such as ferritin have an inner diameter of 7 nm and thus provide an appropriate inner cavity for the accommodation of alloy NPs. The prepared alloyed Au–Ag NPs showed a narrow size distribution of ∼5.6–6.3 nm, with an increased average size distribution by increasing the Ag content.52
Based on their electronic and/or geometric effects, Au-core/Pt-shell NWs have shown enhanced catalytic activities towards the electrochemical oxidation of small organic molecules (CO and methanol), which is relevant to low-temperature fuel cell applications.30,91 Thus, synthesis of Au/Pt nanocomposites with a controlled surface structure and uniform Pt coverage is a promising approach for the exploration of nanostructures with an enhanced catalytic activity and reduced Pt loading. Taking the M13 phage as surfactant molecules, NWs with well-controlled properties (i.e., diameter and thickness of the shell, morphology, and loading amount of Pt) can be finely tuned.30 In the synthesis process of Au–Pt alloy NPs, Au NPs of 5–7 nm were first nucleated onto a genetically engineered phage, followed by the reduction with ascorbic acid and formation of Au NWs. The diameter of the formed Au NWs can be tuned by changing the concentrations of the phage, CTAB, and ascorbic acid. Pt nanoshells can be further generated by reducing Pt4+ ions with ascorbic acid. Similarly, Pt–Pd alloyed NPs with a uniform particle size of approximately 2.5 nm were nucleated and then grown along the axial direction of insulin amyloid fibrils, thus, forming a long-chain structure with a length of up to several micrometers.67
Alloyed Au–Ag NPs were synthesized and encapsulated by ZnO via adopting urease as a reductant and nanoreactor.51,92 The embedded Au–Pd alloyed NPs within protein cages of apo-ferritin had a narrow size distribution of ∼2.2 nm.93 Cu–Ag and Cu–Ag–Au alloy NPs were synthesized using amyloid fibrils (β-LGFs) as a scaffold and stabilizing agent. In the synthesis process, Cu nanoclusters were formed in the initial stage and were able to promote the synthesis of Ag0, which acted as a reducing agent for the further rapid formation of Au0. Furthermore, a catalytic membrane reactor was constructed by depositing the NPs@β-LGFs on a membrane matrix.24

3.2 Base metal oxide NPs
Highly dispersed NiO/CeO2 nanocatalysts were transformed by calcination from a composite of protein fiber and ESM that adsorbed metal ions.72 Highly dispersed 4.5 nm CeO2 NPs encapsulated in the apo-ferritin cavity were fabricated via a dissociation–reconstruction route.16
Taking advantage of the unique porous 3D grid-like fibrous structures with a relatively high surface area and the abundant macropores of ESM, arrays of carbon nanotubes (CNs) and the growth of NiCo2O4 can be effectively conjugated on ESM as a supercapacitor material and OER (oxygen evolution reaction) catalyst.25
TiO2-Based nanomaterials have found momentous applications in photocatalytic reactions, while their practical photocatalytic activity is intrinsically restricted by their large particle size.94,95 Taking advantage of the size confinement effect of viral capsids, nanosized TiO2 was favorably synthesized within the protein cages of CCMV and bacteriophages (Fig. 8).31,58
 Fig. 8  (A) TEM image of the TiO2@P22 bacteriophage. (B) HRTEM image of an encapsulated crystalline TiO2 NP. Adapted from ref. 31. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
A low-cost and efficient composite photocatalyst material, combining polyethyleneimine-modified eggshell membrane (ESM) and titanium dioxide (TiO2) NPs, was synthesized through a self-assembly method, in which ESM with 3D porous structures provided scaffolds for the growth of TiO2 NPs.96
Manganese dioxide nanostructures were coated onto natural silk (MnO2@silk) by the simple immersion of the silk fibers in a KMnO4 aqueous solution, during which the silk acted as a reductant and support.97 The prepared MnO2 nanostructures are effectively immobilized on the surface of the silk protein and their aggregation was excellently prevented. In addition, the silk support allowed for the convenient separation of MnO2 from the catalytic process.
4. Applications of nanohybrids in catalytic reactions
4.1 Catalytic reduction

4.1.1 Hydrogenation. 
Catalytic hydrogenation is of vital importance for functional group transformations in both the laboratory and industrial plants.98,99 For example, Au@ZnO@urease can efficiently catalyze the hydrogenation reduction of p-nitroaniline to 1,4-diaminobenzene by NaBH4,43 while it is difficult to achieve chemoselective reduction among reducible functional groups in the presence of Pd NPs, due to their high catalytic activity.68 However, in the Pd NPs–fibroin composite catalyst, fibroin drastically and selectively reduced the affinity of Pd to aromatic carbonyls, halides, benzyl esters and N-carbobenzoxy (N-Cbz) groups, leading to excellent chemoselectivity for the hydrogenation of acetylene, olefin and azide groups in the presence of groups with high-affinity to Pd NPs (such as aromatic ketones, aldehydes, halides, etc.).
Pd@apo-ferritin scaffolds immobilized in a steel cartridge can be employed in the continuous flow hydrogenation of alkenes to their corresponding alkanes.32 The Pd NPs do not leach out under demanding reaction conditions and were able to perform 15 cycles of catalytic hydrogenation without any loss of reactivity.32 Moreover, Pd@apo-ferritin scaffolds can be used for size-selective olefin hydrogenation (Fig. 3).86


4.1.2 Catalytic reduction of 4-NP. 
4-NP (4-nitrophenol) is a byproduct of the production processes of pesticides, herbicides, and insecticides and can cause water pollution and result in great public concern. While its hydrogenated derivative 4-aminophenol (4-AP) is in great demand for a plethora of industrial applications, including analgesic and antipyretic drugs, photographic developers, and anticorrosion lubricants. The catalytic reduction of 4-NP by NaBH4 is not only significant to environmental remediation but is also a widely adopted model reaction for the evaluation of the catalytic capability of MNPs.100 As NaBH4 alone is insufficient to reduce 4-NP due to the reaction barrier, metal nanocatalysts are indispensable to remove the kinetic barrier of the reaction and are effective as an electron relay support for the reduction.52 Given that the amount of NaBH4 significantly exceeds that of 4-NP in the reaction system, the reduction rate follows pseudo-first-order kinetics with respect to the concentration of 4-NP, and the reaction rate constant is usually used to evaluate the kinetic reaction rate. The activity of the catalyst is usually evaluated by reaction kinetic studies via in situ monitoring by UV-vis spectroscopy.37 The kinetic rate constant can be calculated by the linear fitting of ln(A400) versus reaction time, where A400 is the UV-vis absorbance of 4-NP at 400 nm (Fig. 9).
 Fig. 9  (A) Typical time-dependent evolution of UV-vis spectra showing the catalytic reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP by Au@CLLCs as the catalyst. (B) The linear fit of ln(Ct/C0) versus reaction time. Adapted from ref. 7. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd. (C) Operation in a flow-through or immersion configuration. Adapted from ref. 63. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. 
The Au NPs biosynthesized with fungus protein extract exhibited interesting size- and shape-dependent catalytic activity, which were found to be sensitive to both the surface-area-to-volume ratio and the thickness of the protein coating on the NPs.83 In addition, Aβ25–35-templated Au nanostructures had lower activation energies and reaction orders, which could also enhance the catalytic reduction of 4-NP.46 TMV-mediated Ag NPs were highly stable and maintained their size relatively well during a hydrogenation reaction under harsh reaction conditions with vigorous stirring and bubbling in the absence of additional capping agents.42
Au@CLLCs provided a catalytic activity superior to that of other substrate-supported Au nanocatalysts owing to the smaller size of Au NPs, which often resulted in a significant increase in the reactivity.7,84 Au@CLLC and Ag@CLLC composites were proven to possess excellent recyclability and reusability in the catalytic reduction of 4-NP owing to the stable mechanical properties of the support (CLLC) and the spatially confined environment of the NPs provided by the support, which could perfectly prevent the aggregation of NPs and maintain their high catalytic activity.38 Moreover, benefiting from the low transfer resistance of a small support size, Au@S-CLLCs (composites of Au NPs within small CLLCs) exhibited a superior catalytic performance to that of Au@L-CLLCs (composites of Au NPs within large CLLCs) with similar Au loading.4
The network structure of chemically modified ESM can provide a large surface area and binding sites for anchoring NPs, and coupled with the enhanced binding ability towards Au and Ag NPs, the bioconjugate exhibited a good catalytic performance and enhanced reusability in addition to its outstanding recyclability, attributed to the easy separation of ESM from the reaction solution.8,13,26,85 MNPs (Pd/Pt/Ag), via a mycelia-assisted synthesis, can also be easily separated and reused multiple times without a significant loss in activity (95% average conversion). Additionally, branched Pd nanoflowers, also from a mycelia-assisted synthesis, exhibited a catalytic activity superior to that of Pd NPs.71 It is noteworthy that silk-fibroin-supported Au NPs performed with steady activity for 16 cycles.69
After vapor-phase glutaraldehyde crosslinking was performed to maintain the integrity of hybrid aerogels and render them stable in water, amyloid fibril aerogels containing Au NPs and alloyed NPs can be used as reusable substrates for wet and continuous flow catalysis (Fig. 4 and 9).24 The filtration catalysis process for the reaction solution of 4-NP and NaBH4 through the membrane can be accelerated by simply increasing the vacuum.23 The result indicated that the filtration catalysis experiment was more efficient than batch catalysis experiments with NPs of a comparable load and size as a result of the improved mass transfer of the model compound across the membrane.29,63,71


4.1.3 Catalytic reduction of Cr(VI). 
Cr(VI) has been listed as the second most common inorganic contaminant in water and the top 16th hazardous substance.101 Cr(VI) can bring about mutagenic and carcinogenic risks to public health via oxidative stress, DNA damage, apoptotic cell death and altered gene expression.102,103
Platinum group metals have important applications in catalysis and environmental cleanup, a practical example of which is the catalytic reduction of toxic Cr(VI) to less toxic and less mobile Cr(III).104 In most cases, this catalytic reaction strictly follows first-order batch reaction kinetics.41 Cr(VI) possesses a characteristic absorption maximum at 350 nm, the absorbance at which was commonly adopted to calculate the concentration of Cr(VI) and further used to calculate the reaction kinetic parameters.
The application of TMV as a template to synthesize Pd NPs on a chip gave a 12-fold improvement in catalytic performance over that of the chip with only Pd NPs.37 The average diameters of the Pd NPs before (11.5 nm) and after the reaction (12.7 nm) were approximately the same, and no significant decomposition of the Pd–TMV complex or leaching of Pd NPs into the reaction solution arose, indicating the superior stability of the Pd–TMV complexes during the catalytic reaction. The constructed Pd–TMV microparticles performed not only with superior catalytic activity towards the reduction of Cr(VI) but also with excellent recyclability and stability,3 in which the conversion rate after 14 day storage at room temperature was identical to the one from freshly prepared samples. Meanwhile, the catalysts can be conveniently reused by thoroughly rinsing the Pd–TMV chips after each batch reaction without any other regeneration treatments and can retain most of the catalytic activity after three reaction cycles (Fig. 10). Moreover, the catalytic activity of Pd–TMV complexes in dichromate reduction can be rationally controlled by simply varying the TMV solution concentration and introducing photolithographic patterning, which resulted in different densities of Pd–TMV on Au chips.40,41
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic diagram of the TMV-templated Pd nanocatalyst synthesis for dichromate reduction. Typically, 1 ml batch reactions are carried out in a quartz cuvette and monitored in situ using a UV/vis spectrophotometer. (B) Control of the Pd catalyst loading by changing the TMV concentration for surface assembly. (C) Control of the Pd catalyst's location via gold-patterned chips with varying gold surface areas. (D) Representative UV/vis absorbance spectra of a dichromate reduction solution over time. Adapted from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Elsevier. 
A procyanidin-modified ESM support for Pd/Pt NPs possessed good catalytic activity and recyclability for the reduction of highly harmful Cr(VI) into Cr(III), with formic acid as the reducing agent.27 Both the size effect of Pt/Pd NPs and the relatively low diffusion resistance of the protein membrane were responsible for the good catalytic performance of the composite catalyst.


4.1.4 Catalytic degradation of dyes. 
Among various contaminants, organic dyes are one of the most widely used and discharged chemicals.105 The discharge of organic dyes into water bodies without treatment has caused public concern owing to their ecosystem and health risks and their undesired diversity of colors in waters, even at low concentrations (less than 1 ppm).106 The catalytic degradation of dyes is an efficient way to treat wastewater containing organic dyes.107
Coomassie brilliant blue G-250, methylene blue (MB), and rhodamine B (RB) can be effectively catalytically degraded by highly reactive Pd NPs synthesized with protein templates.49 The prepared Ag NPs immobilized on tannic-acid-modified ESM also exhibited excellent catalytic activity towards the degradation of azo dyes in the aqueous phase.14 Moreover, due to the stability of ESM and the stabilization of Ag NPs by a polyphenol-modified ESM, the composites can be easily recovered and reused with a high catalytic efficiency.

4.2 Catalytic oxidation
The catalytic and selective oxidation of organics, such as alcohols, is one of the most fundamental and central reactions in organic chemistry on an industrial scale.33,108 Metallic NPs of Au, Pd and Pt have been reported as effective in the catalytic oxidation of alcohols, while improving their selectivity via control of their size and morphology has attracted increasing attention.109 Pd NPs confined in ferritin cages presented superior selectivity towards the oxidation of a range of benzylic primary alcohols and certain allylic alcohols. In all these cases, the oxidation reaction stayed at the aldehyde stage, and no overoxidation products or any other side products were detected.33
A Pd@apo-ferritin biohybrid was adopted as an excellent recyclable heterogeneous catalyst for the selective oxidation of 2,3,6-trimethylphenol to 2,3,6-trimethyl-1,4-benzoquinone (a precursor for vitamin E synthesis) in both aqueous and organic solvents.32
A prepared MnO2@silk catalyst performed with satisfactory catalytic activity in the aerobic oxidation of alkyl arenes, alcohols, and oximes to their corresponding carbonyl compounds and in a one-pot tandem two-component oxidative reaction involving the aromatic hydrocarbons of petroleum naphtha in the absence of any other oxidizing reagent or initiator.97
4.3 Coupling reactions
Coupling reactions, including the Suzuki, Stille, and Heck cross-coupling reactions and others, are one of the most important routes for the synthesis of chemicals via the construction of C–C bonds catalyzed by metal catalysts.40,110 Biomimetic Pd nanocatalysts have shown wonderful reactivities towards the cross-coupling of a variety of chemical compounds, suggesting that this green catalytic system is applicable to the Stille and Suzuki coupling reactions.36
Pd/Pt/Ag NPs from a mycelia-assisted synthesis also exhibited high catalytic activity for Suzuki coupling reactions in aqueous solution, and high-index branched Pd nanoflowers exhibited superior catalytic activity (>99% conversion). Moreover, the nanocatalysts can be easily separated and reused multiple times without a significant loss in activity (95% average conversion).71
A lipase-assisted synthesis yielded a heterogeneous Pd nanocatalyst that was successfully applied in a Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reaction in aqueous media and achieved excellent yields in recycling experiments.50
4.4 Artificial enzyme catalytic reactions
Natural enzymes can be used as biological catalysts for pharmaceutical processes, biosensing, energy transformation, and the food industry due to their superior catalytic performance and high chemical, stereochemical and chiral selectivities under mild reaction conditions.111 However, the applications of such catalysts are limited by the time-consuming preparation and purification processes, as well as the catalytic activity being vulnerable against environmental changes.112 Therefore, attempts at constructing artificial structural complexes with stable physicochemical properties to mimic enzymatic activity are important.113 Among the created strategies, the merging of nanotechnology with biology has inspired numerous studies on the design of functional materials with mimetic enzymatic activity.114
Many nanostructures were reported to have biomimetic peroxidase activity, including Fe3O4, CeO2, and bimetallic alloy nanostructures. The encapsulation of Pt NPs and anchoring Fe(II) within an apo-ferritin scaffold created an artificial enzyme with a mimetic horseradish peroxidase activity.112 The constructed architecture performed with superior peroxidase activity, which could be easily modified for the detection of biomolecules, such as cholesterol, alcohol, and glucose, when coupled with another oxidase. Interestingly, the Pt NPs within ferritin (Pt@ferritin) possess both catalase and peroxidase activity.88,112 With hydrogen peroxide as the substrate, the generation of oxygen gas bubbles was observed as catalyzed by Pt@ferritin, indicating its catalase function over that of peroxidase, while with organic dyes and hydrogen peroxide as substrates, distinctively colored products were formed as catalyzed by Pt@ferritin, indicating its peroxidase-like activity.15 Moreover, these two biomimetic properties show different responses to pH and temperature; that is, the catalase activity increases with the pH and temperature, while the peroxidase-like function has optimal activity at physiological temperature in slightly acidic media.
In the NPs synthesized with apo-ferritin, the protein coating not only improves the biocompatibility of CeO2 NPs but also manipulates the electron localization at the surface of the NPs thereby ameliorating the ROS-scavenging (removal of reactive oxygen species) activity. The prepared CeO2 NPs are considered to be the most active artificial redox enzyme with mimetic superoxide dismutase activity by far.16
The architecture consisting of prepared Pt NPs within a protein cage (Pt@Hsp) exhibits a well-defined thermal stability for generating an artificial hydrogenase with many of the features common to biological catalysts.39 In a light-mediated H2 production reaction, the Pt@Hsp hydrogen production rates are comparable to those of hydrogenase on a per-protein basis and exceed the production rates of other reported Pt-based catalysts.
4.5 Electrocatalytic reactions
Direct methanol fuel cells are valuable electrochemical devices that transform chemical energy directly to electricity by electrochemical reactions with a high power density, high efficiency and low to zero pollutant emission.87
The Au/Pt core/shell NWs synthesized using a template of a genetically modified phage performed with controllable activity towards the ethanol oxidation and CO oxidation reactions and facilitated the optimized design of noble metal NW catalysts for energy conversion devices.30
Y2O3@Pd catalysts, synthesized using eggshell membrane as a template, remain excellent in electrocatalysis with respect to methanol oxidation and CO poisoning tolerance.87 Meanwhile, owing to the macroporous network-structure of the electrode, the synthesized catalysts exhibited extremely high stability after long-term operation. Similarly, PtPd NPs grown on insulin fibril chains also presented an improved catalytic activity for the CO and methanol oxidation reactions at low-temperature and possessed a high CO tolerance compared with the commercial Pt/C catalyst, making this material promising for a variety of possible catalytic applications.67
As the 3D fibrous eggshell membrane frameworks with CNs offer efficient pathways for charge transport, and the macropores between adjacent fibers are fully accessible for electrolyte and bubble evolution, the eggshell-membrane-derived CNs/NiCo2O4 electrode exhibits an OER onset potential of 1.53 V vs. the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and a stable catalytic current density of 20 mA cm−2 at 1.65 V vs. RHE, which is comparable to that of Ni foam/NiCo2O4 (18.5 mA cm−2).25 The current density retention is approximately 92.5% after 10 h of a continuous OER test at 1.65 V vs. RHE, suggesting the excellent electrochemical stability of the constructed electrode.
4.6 Photocatalytic reactions
Solar conversion to electricity, fuels or active radicals for environmental pollutant remediation, based on the electron–hole pair production in semiconductors, is a highly evolved science and promising technology.115–117 Among various metal oxide photocatalysts, the nano-TiO2 photocatalyst is well-known for its high efficiency, low cost, physical and chemical stabilities, widespread availability, and noncorrosive properties.115 It has been widely used to degrade organic and inorganic pollutants.
TiO2 composites, prepared via the viral capsid (CCMV) and bacteriophage P22, were effective in the photocatalytic degradation of MB.31,58 The concentration of MB decreased to 10% of the initial concentration within 2 h, indicating the effectiveness of the TiO2–CCMV composite in the photocatalytic reaction. Despite the photocatalytic activity being restricted by the poor crystallinity of TiO2, and the destruction of the protein support by the hydroxyl radicals generated during the reaction, these investigations provided an exploration beneficial to the biomimetic syntheses of photocatalysts. The photodegradation of RB by TiO2@ESM demonstrated that the composite catalyst possesses a good photocatalytic performance and convenient recyclability for dye degradation.96
4.7 Methane steam reforming reactions
Natural gas (dominant component: methane) reforming is the first step in the conversion of natural gas into valuable liquid fuels and chemicals. The product of the reforming reaction, syngas (a mixture of H2 and CO), can be used to synthesize a variety of liquid fuels and chemicals via the Fischer–Tropsch process.72 NiO/CeO2 nanocatalysts achieved high and stable methane conversions during steam reforming, and no apparent performance decay was found within 300 min, owing to the robust hierarchical microstructure of the nanocatalyst derived from the original network structure of ESM.72 The study indicated that protein architectures, such as ESM, were novel and facile biotemplates for the preparation of nanocatalysts with industrial potential.
5. Conclusions and outlook
Accompanied by the ever-increasing demands of industrial applications for high-reactivity and selective nanosized catalysts and environmentally friendly synthesis routes to meet the requirements of green chemistry, various strategies have been proposed for the controllable and green synthesis of nanomaterials. The biosynthetic approach, which adopts peptides, proteins, protein architectures, and biowaste (such as ESM), as templates and/or reductants, and nontoxic water, as a solvent, for the synthesis of supported and recyclable NPs, has provided an alternative strategy for environmentally benign syntheses of homogeneous and heterogeneous catalysts. Protein-based biotemplates have diverse and distinct properties, such as various dimensional/spatial characteristics, several functional groups, and a multitude of physicochemical properties, yielding special advantages or functions for the synthesis, application, and investigation of biohybrid nanomaterials.
For example, biomaterials with regular channels (such as crosslinked lysozyme crystals) are an ideal academic model system because of their highly ordered 3D porous structure and solvent channels with a uniform size, which are suitable for the investigations into confinement and regulation effects during the growth of NPs and into the relationship between NP size and catalytic performance. Moreover, adopting low-cost daily biowaste as a starting material can not only release environmental pressure but also create more opportunities to design new environmentally friendly electrochemical materials for energy storage and catalytic applications as well as environmentally friendly photocatalysts for pollutant degradation and H2/O2 production. The development of adopting biotemplates for the construction of various types of catalytic membrane reactors for continuous-flow reactions also has industrial significance. Moreover, ferritin-encapsulated metal (such as Pt) NPs exhibited superior biomimetic enzymatic activity (catalase and superoxide dismutase) at quite different optimal pH and temperature values (can be used under a wide range of conditions) to those of native enzymes, indicating that the biomimetic material could not only broaden the application conditions but also serve as a nontoxic biocatalyst in various biomedical situations, such as human diseases involving oxidative stress damage (ROS-mediated diseases). Therefore, such materials hold promise for the application of beneficial combinations of bioscience and nanoscience in medicine. Considering the high biocompatibility of the hybrids and the accessible artificial functionality of protein architectures acquired by genetic or chemical modification, it is expected that the present studies can be expanded to the construction of bionanohybrids with novel applications based on their inherent catalytic properties.
Concerning sustainability and less-toxic routes towards synthesis, these bioinspired nanohybrid materials not only show promise in various green catalytic applications, but also represent unique model systems for catalytic studies to elucidate ecologically friendly reactive species and conditions. However, environmental advantages alone are insufficient for their industrial realization because scaled-up syntheses are plagued by cost and batch-to-batch deviations may be a key challenge. We anticipate the biofabrication approach to controllable syntheses of inorganic NPs with protein units or their architectures being more reproducible and accurate, while the functional properties of the synthesized biohybrids, such as high catalytic activity, selectivity and stability, will be further improved. Further extensions of hybrid nanomaterials to high-end applications, such as biomedical fields and biocompatible nanocatalysts, are also very attractive and promising.118
Moreover, the present biosynthetic routes for the size- and morphology-controlled synthesis of nanocatalysts are tentative and empirical, especially the incompletely achieved morphology-controlled synthesis using biotemplates. Thus, further exploration and understanding of the interactions between proteins and NPs (including the capping effect of biotemplates on the catalytic performance of nanocatalysts), the formation process of NPs from metal precursors in confined spaces, the regulation effect of functional groups of biotemplates on the size and morphology of NPs, the kinetics of microscopic reactions, and the crystal-plane-oriented synthesis with biotemplates deserve special attention.
Multiple approaches, such as investigations into the properties of different combinatorial hybrids, density functional simulations/molecular dynamics simulations, and instrumental analyses by surface plasmon resonance, quartz crystal microbalance or surface force techniques, as well as in situ characterization, may allow for direct knowledge of the formation process of NPs regulated by biotemplates and accurate theoretical directions for the rational design and predicable syntheses of desirable nanocatalysts. Advanced synthesis methods may drive the development and preparation of materials with more high-activity and high-selectivity crystal faces, more accurate structures, more extended functions, or enhanced overall properties, such as the catalytic activity and selectivity of nanohybrids. Meanwhile, an incisive understanding of the reaction mechanisms behind biosynthetic methods and the interaction between inorganic NPs and proteins or protein-based materials will benefit evaluations of the environmental and physiological impacts of inorganic NPs spread to organisms, giving guidance for the harnessed utilization of nanomaterials and for practical applications of biocompatible hybrid nanomaterials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant no. 21621004 and 21776212) and the Tianjin Municipal Science and Technology Bureau, China (grant no. 18YFZCSF00590 and 18YFHBZC00010).
References
K. Saha, S. S. Agasti, C. Kim, X. Li and V. M. Rotello, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 2739–2779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Langille, M. L. Personick, J. Zhang and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 14542–14554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, C.-H. Choi, C.-S. Lee and H. Yi, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5032–5044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Wang, R. Huang, Y. Yu, R. Su, W. Qi and Z. He, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 10895–10904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. San, S. Kim, S. H. Moh, H. Lee, D. Y. Jung and K. K. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12130–12135 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Daimon, T. Onodera, T. Koda and S. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3588–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liang, L. Wang, X. Liu, W. Qi, R. Su, R. Huang, Y. Yu and Z. He, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 245601–245608 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liang, R. Su, R. Huang, W. Qi, Y. Yu, L. Wang and Z. He, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4638–4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, D. Wang and Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5778–5792 RSC .
Y. Lykhach, S. M. Kozlov, T. Skála, A. Tovt, V. Stetsovych, N. Tsud, F. Dvořák, V. Johánek, A. Neitzel, J. Mysliveček, S. Fabris, V. Matolín, K. M. Neyman and J. Libuda, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 284–289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, K. Yuan, Y. Wang, G. Li, J. Guo, L. Gu, W. Hu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Nature, 2016, 539, 76–80 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Matsubu, S. Zhang, L. DeRita, N. S. Marinkovic, J. G. Chen, G. W. Graham, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 120–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Geng, W. Leng, P. J. Vikesland and T. Z. Grove, New J. Chem., 2017, 41, 9406–9413 RSC .
X. Liu, M. Liang, M. Liu, R. Su, M. Wang, W. Qi and Z. He, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 440–448 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Fan, J.-J. Yin, B. Ning, X. Wu, Y. Hu, M. Ferrari, G. J. Anderson, J. Wei, Y. Zhao and G. Nie, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1611–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, W. Wei, Q. Yuan, X. Zhang, N. Li, Y. Du, G. Ma, C. Yan and D. Ma, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 3155–3157 RSC .
L. Shang and G. U. Nienhaus, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7, 769–770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Allen, D. Willits, J. Mosolf, M. Young and T. Douglas, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1562–1565 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Klem, D. Willits, D. J. Solis, A. M. Belcher, M. Young and T. Douglas, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1489–1494 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Cao, K. Luo, Y. Sun, J. Xiong, L. Wang, Z. Liu, J. Li, J. Ma, J. Ge, H. Xiao and R. N. Zare, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 718–725 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Meldrum, V. J. Wade, D. L. Nimmo, B. R. Heywood and S. Mann, Nature, 1991, 349, 684–687 CrossRef CAS .
T. Douglas, D. P. E. Dickson, S. Betteridge, J. Charnock, C. D. Garner and S. Mann, Science, 1995, 269, 54–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bolisetty, M. Arcari, J. Adamcik and R. Mezzenga, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 13867–13873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huang, H. Zhu, R. Su, W. Qi and Z. He, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 11263–11273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Geng, H. Wu, A. M. Al-Enizi, A. A. Elzatahry and G. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14378–14384 RSC .
R. Mallampati and S. Valiyaveettil, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 855–859 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, R. Su, W. Qi, Y. Zhang, R. Huang, Y. Yu, L. Wang and Z. He, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 13635–13643 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abe and T. Ueno, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 21366–21375 RSC .
G. Nyström, M. P. Fernández-Ronco, S. Bolisetty, M. Mazzotti and R. Mezzenga, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 472–478 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, J. Kim, D. S. Yun, Y. S. Nam, Y. Shao-Horn and A. M. Belcher, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8328–8334 RSC .
G. J. Bedwell, Z. Zhou, M. Uchida, T. Douglas, A. Gupta and P. E. Prevelige, Biomacromolecules, 2014, 16, 214–218 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kumari, A. Kulkarni, G. Kumaraswamy and S. Sen Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4813–4819 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kanbak-Aksu, M. N. Hasan, W. R. Hagen, F. Hollmann, D. Sordi, R. A. Sheldon and I. W. C. E. Arends, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5745–5747 RSC .
G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Top. Catal., 2008, 49, 126–135 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9212–9228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Pacardo, M. Sethi, S. E. Jones, R. R. Naik and M. R. Knecht, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1288–1296 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, A. K. Manocchi, B. Lee and H. Yi, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 93, 282–291 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liang, L. Wang, R. Su, W. Qi, M. Wang, Y. Yu and Z. He, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 1910–1914 RSC .
Z. Varpness, J. W. Peters, M. Young and T. Douglas, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2306–2309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, A. K. Manocchi, B. Lee and H. Yi, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 21, 187–194 RSC .
C. Yang and H. Yi, Biochem. Eng. J., 2010, 52, 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, S. Jung and H. Yi, Biochem. Eng. J., 2014, 89, 10–20 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, C. F. Anderson, Z. Wang, W. Wu, H. Cui and C.-J. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 3310–3324 RSC .
R. Bhandari and M. R. Knecht, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 1360–1366 RSC .
N. M. Bedford, Z. E. Hughes, Z. Tang, Y. Li, B. D. Brigg, Y. Ren, M. T. Swihart, V. G. Petkov, R. R. Naik, M. R. Knecht and T. R. Walsh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 138, 540–548 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, M. Meng, J. Mi, H. Yin and L. Liu, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2432–2442 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Guria, M. Majumdar and M. Bhattacharyya, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 222, 549–557 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nag, A. Pramanik, D. Chattopadhyay and M. Bhattacharyya, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2018, 25, 2331–2349 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Kora and L. Rastogi, Ind. Crops Prod., 2016, 81, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cuenca, M. Filice and J. M. Palomo, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2016, 96, 242–247 CrossRef .
B. Sharma, S. Mandani and T. K. Sarma, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2601–2608 CrossRef .
Y. Shin, A. Dohnalkova and Y. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5985–5989 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Watt, O. D. Petrucci and T. Smith, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2013, 3, 3103–3110 RSC .
J.-S. Jang, S.-J. Kim, S.-J. Choi, N.-H. Kim, M. Hakim, A. Rothschild and I.-D. Kim, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16417–16426 RSC .
Y. J. Lee, H. Yi, W.-J. Kim, K. Kang, D. S. Yun, M. S. Strano, G. Ceder and A. M. Belcher, Science, 2009, 324, 1051–1055 CAS .
T. Douglas and M. Young, Nature, 1998, 393, 152–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Speir, S. Munshi, G. Wang, T. S. Baker and J. E. Johnson, Structure, 1995, 3, 63–78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Klem, M. Young and T. Douglas, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3821–3823 RSC .
P. J. G. Butler, J. Gen. Virol., 1984, 65, 253–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Culver, Annu. Rev. Phytopathol., 2002, 40, 287–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Hwang, I. M. Roberts and T. M. Wilson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1994, 91, 9067–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chiti and C. M. Dobson, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2006, 75, 333–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nyström, L. Roder, M. P. Fernández-Ronco and R. Mezzenga, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 28, 1703609–1703619 CrossRef .
I. Cherny and E. Gazit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4062–4069 CrossRef CAS .
T. R. Jahn and S. E. Radford, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 2008, 469, 100–117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Juárez, A. Cambón, S. Goy-López, A. Topete, P. Taboada and V. Mosquera, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2680–2687 CrossRef .
L. Hou, Y. Niu, Y. Wang, Y. Jiang, R. Chen, T. Ma and F. Gao, Nano, 2016, 11, 1650063–1650070 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ikawa, H. Sajiki and K. Hirota, Tetrahedron, 2005, 61, 2217–2231 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, J. Wan and Q. Gu, Gold Bull., 2011, 44, 171–176 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das and B. B. Dhar, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46285–46292 RSC .
S. K. Das, T. Parandhaman, N. Pentela, A. K. M. Maidul Islam, A. B. Mandal and M. Mukherjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24623–24632 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Shao, X. Hu, G. Parkinson, K. Xie, D. Dong and C.-Z. Li, Catal. Today, 2014, 228, 199–205 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guli, E. M. Lambert, M. Li and S. Mann, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 530–533 CrossRef .
J. Wei, Z. Wang, W. Chen and D. H. Cobden, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 4, 420–424 CrossRef .
H. Wei and Y. Lu, Chem. - Asian J., 2012, 7, 680–683 CrossRef CAS .
O. L. Muskens, M. W. England, L. Danos, M. Li and S. Mann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khalaf, C. P. Govardhan, J. J. Lalonde, R. A. Persichetti, Y.-F. Wang and A. L. Margolin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5494–5495 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jang, Y. K. Kim, S. R. Ryoo, M. H. Kim and D. H. Min, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 583–585 RSC .
R. Jin, C. Zeng, M. Zhou and Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10346–10413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T.-Q. Yang, T.-Y. Ning, B. Peng, B.-Q. Shan, Y.-X. Zong, P. Hao, E.-H. Yuan, Q.-M. Chen and K. Zhang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5786–5792 RSC .
E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 583–592 RSC .
A. R. Tao, S. Habas and P. Yang, Small, 2008, 4, 310–325 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Das, C. Dickinson, F. Lafir, D. F. Brougham and E. Marsili, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1322–1334 RSC .
O. D. Petrucci, D. C. Buck, J. K. Farrer and R. K. Watt, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3472–3481 RSC .
M. Liang, R. Su, W. Qi, Y. Yu, L. Wang and Z. He, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 1639–1647 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ueno, M. Suzuki, T. Goto, T. Matsumoto, K. Nagayama and Y. Watanabe, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2527–2530 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H. Cai, Q. Tang, B. He and H. Chen, Mater. Res. Innovations, 2014, 18, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Laug, W. Münchgesang, E. Pippel, U. Gösele, M. Brandsch and M. Knez, Nano Lett., 2009, 10, 219–223 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Choi, S. J. Kim, H. J. Cho, J. S. Jang, Y. M. Lin, H. L. Tuller, G. C. Rutledge and I. D. Kim, Small, 2016, 12, 911–920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Q. Wang, J.-H. Liu, S. D. Lin, T.-S. Lin and C.-Y. Mou, J. Catal., 2005, 233, 186–197 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rodríguez, A. A. Koverga and M. T. M. Koper, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1241–1243 CrossRef PubMed .
R. D. L. Rica and H. Matsui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5415–5417 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Suzuki, M. Abe, T. Ueno, S. Abe, T. Goto, Y. Toda, T. Akita, Y. Yamada and Y. Watanabe, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4871–4873 RSC .
Y. Yang, L. C. Yin, Y. Gong, P. Niu, J. Q. Wang, L. Gu, X. Chen, G. Liu, L. Wang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704479–1704486 CrossRef .
G. Liu, C. Sun, H. G. Yang, S. C. Smith, L. Wang, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 755–757 RSC .
Y. Li, J. Zhou, Y. Fan, Y. Ye and B. Tang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2017, 689, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shaabani, Z. Hezarkhani and E. Badali, Polyhedron, 2016, 107, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
D. Teschner, Z. Révay, J. Borsodi, M. Hävecker, A. K. Gericke, R. Schlögl, D. Milroy, S. D. Jackson, D. Torres and P. Sautet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9274–9278 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Widegren and M. L. Clarke, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6047–6058 RSC .
E.-M. Felix, M. Antoni, I. Pause, S. Schaefer, U. Kunz, N. Weidler, F. Muench and W. Ensinger, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 558–564 RSC .
H. Gao, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, W. Xu, T. Li and W. Xia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 150, 446–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Wang, Y.-S. Song, H. Wang, J. Zhang, S.-F. Yu, Y.-E. Gu, T. Chen, Y. Wang, H.-Q. Shen and G. Jia, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 213, 440–446 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Hu, P. Li, X. Cui, Y. Li, J. Zhang, X. Zhai, S. Yu, S. Tang, Z. Zhao, J. Wang and G. Jia, Environ. Pollut., 2018, 238, 833–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, B. Zhang, Q. Liu, P. Du, W. Liu and Z. He, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 730–739 RSC .
M. Tichonovas, E. Krugly, V. Racys, R. Hippler, V. Kauneliene, I. Stasiulaitiene and D. Martuzevicius, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 229, 9–19 CrossRef CAS .
K. He, G. Chen, G. Zeng, A. Chen, Z. Huang, J. Shi, T. Huang, M. Peng and L. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 228, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, T. Huang, L. Zhang, J. Zhu and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13723–13733 RSC .
C. Li, X. Yang, G. Gao, Y. Li, W. Zhang, X. Chen, H. Su, S. Wang and Z. Wang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 6240–6252 RSC .
T. T. N. Nguyen, M. Huchede, E. Blanco, F. Morfin, J. L. Rousset, L. Massin, M. Aouine, V. Bellière-Baca and J. M. M. Millet, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 549, 170–178 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nikoorazm, F. Ghorbani, A. Ghorbani-Choghamarani and Z. Erfani, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, 4282–4294 CrossRef .
J. Barber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 185–196 RSC .
W. Zhang, X. Liu, D. Walsh, S. Yao, Y. Kou and D. Ma, Small, 2012, 8, 2948–2953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wulff, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 1–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, R. Lévy, D. G. Fernig and M. Brust, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2214–2215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dong, G. Zeng, L. Tang, C. Fan, C. Zhang, X. He and Y. He, Water Res., 2015, 79, 128–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mubeen, J. Lee, N. Singh, S. Krämer, G. D. Stucky and M. Moskovits, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 247–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, W.-Q. Chen, S.-Q. Ke, M. Zhu, W.-H. Qiu, N. Liu, S. Namuangruk, P. Maitarad, S. Impeng and L. Tang, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5953–5961 RSC .
P. Zhao, Z. Jin, Q. Chen, T. Yang, D. Chen, J. Meng, X. Lu, Z. Gu and Q. He, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4241–4252 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cy02466b‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Mingyue Liu	Mingyue Liu received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Henan University in 2012. Later, he performed his Ph.D. studies in Chemical Engineering under the supervision of Prof. Rongxin Su. He currently focuses on the design and synthesis of bio-nanomaterials and their applications in catalytic degradation of environmental pollutants and energy conversion.
Tao Yu	Tao Yu received his bachelor's degree in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tianjin University in 2018. Later, he performed his Ph.D. studies in Chemical Engineering in Prof. Rongxin Su's group. He currently focuses on the fabrication of functional metal nanocomposites.
Renliang Huang	Renliang Huang received his Ph.D. degree from School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2012. He has been an Associate Professor of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2014. His current research mainly focuses on the interaction of environmental pollutants with biomolecules and interface behavior of pollutants.
Wei Qi	Wei Qi received her Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 2002. She has been a Professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2009. She focuses on the R&D of biochemicals, biofuels and biomaterials via biocatalysis and industrial catalysis.
Zhimin He	Zhimin He received his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from Tianjin University in 1990. He has been a Professor of Chemical and Biochemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 1993. His research mainly focuses on enzyme engineering and technology.
Rongxin Su	Rongxin Su received his Ph.D. degree from School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University in 2007, and was a visiting scholar at University of California, Santa Barbara, from 2013 to 2014. He has been a Professor of Chemical Engineering at Tianjin University since 2014. His current research mainly focuses on the fabrication of nanomaterials for environmental monitoring and treatment, and bioinspired materials.

 	Scheme 1  Protein units and assemblies used to fabricate nanocatalysts for applications in catalytic reactions.	 

 	Fig. 1  (A) Schematic illustration of the investigation into sequence-dependent structure/catalytic performance relationships. (B) Configurations of Au NPs generated from simulations. (C) Representative TEM images of a series of peptide-promoted Au NPs. Adapted from ref. 45. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation of Aβ25–35-templated Au nanostructures with different Aβ25–35 aggregates as templates. Adapted from ref. 46. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) Synthesis of porous ferritin scaffolds. (a) Photograph of a ferritin scaffold. (b) SEM image of the cross-linked self-standing scaffold. (c) Confocal micrograph image of the self-standing apo-ferritin scaffold. (d) TEM image of a section of the scaffold. (B) Schematic representation of the continuous flow hydrogenation reaction of different substrates with immobilized Pd@apo-ferritin scaffold. Adapted from ref. 32. Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of the construction of a metal NP-loaded catalytic membrane reactor. Adapted from ref. 24. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Schematic illustration of the lysozyme crystallization, crosslinking and preparation of Au@CLLC hybrid materials for the catalytic reduction of 4-NP. Adapted from ref. 7. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd. (B) Optical micrograph images of (b1) S-CLLCs, (b2) Au@S-CLLCs, (b3) L-CLLCs, (b4) Au@L-CLLCs. (C) Representative TEM images of Au NPs within CLLCs with different Au loadings: (c1) Au@S-CLLC3:1, (c2) Au@S-CLLC9:1, (c3) Au@L-CLLC3:1, (c4) Au@L-CLLC9:1. Adapted from ref. 4. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic preparation of aerogels. (A) The self-assembly of β-lactoglobulin into amyloid fibrils by incubation. (B) The equilibration of chloroauric acid on the surface of the fibrils. (C) The preparation of pristine aqueous amyloid fibril dispersions. (D) The nucleation of Au NPs on the surface of the fibrils by the addition of sodium borohydride. (E) The heat-induced protein-assisted reduction of 2D gold macrocrystals. The right figures are photographs and electron microscopy images of the corresponding amyloid and gold amyloid hybrid aerogels. Adapted from ref. 63. Copyright 2015 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic preparation of Pd NPs within ferritin. (B) A TEM image of Pd@ferritin; the scale bar is 50 nm. Adapted from ref. 86. Copyright 2004 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) TEM image of the TiO2@P22 bacteriophage. (B) HRTEM image of an encapsulated crystalline TiO2 NP. Adapted from ref. 31. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Typical time-dependent evolution of UV-vis spectra showing the catalytic reduction of 4-NP to 4-AP by Au@CLLCs as the catalyst. (B) The linear fit of ln(Ct/C0) versus reaction time. Adapted from ref. 7. Copyright 2013 IOP Publishing Ltd. (C) Operation in a flow-through or immersion configuration. Adapted from ref. 63. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic diagram of the TMV-templated Pd nanocatalyst synthesis for dichromate reduction. Typically, 1 ml batch reactions are carried out in a quartz cuvette and monitored in situ using a UV/vis spectrophotometer. (B) Control of the Pd catalyst loading by changing the TMV concentration for surface assembly. (C) Control of the Pd catalyst's location via gold-patterned chips with varying gold surface areas. (D) Representative UV/vis absorbance spectra of a dichromate reduction solution over time. Adapted from ref. 37. Copyright 2010 Elsevier.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cy02466b
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
