Regulating zinc metal anodes via novel electrolytes in rechargeable zinc-based batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA01672A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA01672A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14692-14708Regulating zinc metal anodes via novel electrolytes in rechargeable zinc-based batteries

        
          
            ChenChen 
            Li†
a, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Wu†
*bc, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Ma
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Hongge 
            Pan
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanxia 
            Liu
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Yingying 
            Lu
          
        
      *abc
aInstitute of Science and Technology for New Energy, Xi'an Technological University, Xi'an 710021, P. R. China. E-mail: yingyinglu@zju.edu.cn; liuyanxia@xatu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Engineering, Institute of Pharmaceutical Engineering, College of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China. E-mail: qianw@zju.edu.cn
cZJU-Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Hangzhou 311215, China
Received 
      2nd March 2022
    , Accepted 1st June 2022First published on 29th June 2022AbstractZinc metal anode-based batteries (ZMBs) are regarded as promising substitutes for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) in large-scale energy storage devices and wearable electronics due to their merits of intrinsic safety, cost-effectiveness and abundant reserves. However, many challenges in the electrolyte module system hinder the practical applications of ZMBs, including the dendrite growth, corrosion, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and passivation in aqueous-based electrolytes (ABEs) and low ionic conductivity in gel or solid-state electrolytes (SSEs). This review focuses on advanced electrolyte engineering to solve the above issues and summarizes the latest strategies to construct an efficient and stable electrode–electrolyte interface by optimizing ABEs and developing neoteric SSEs. The modifications of ABEs are systematically reviewed from four aspects: introducing electrolyte additives, developing highly or local highly concentrated electrolytes, designing the structure of gel electrolytes, and employing solid-state electrolytes. Lastly, this review proposes the further development directions in terms of long-term storage under practical application scenarios.
1. Introduction
Modern industrial technologies and economic societies are witnessing a quite quick increase in the demand for energy storage, which is expected to double by 2050.1 Developing affordable and reliable renewable energy storage systems or devices to reduce the dependence on traditional fossil fuels is the ultimate destination,2,3 among which batteries as a reliable technology can conserve the chemical energy converted from renewable resources such as wind or solar energy and release it controllably through the power grid, making the power supply more predictable and flexible.4–6 Nowadays, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) are widely used in the rapidly growing markets of electric vehicles (EVs) and mobile electronics with an annual production increment of >150 GW h, dominating the field of energy storage due to their high-energy-density.7–9 However, taking the cost, safety, resources and contamination into consideration, it is urgent to seek alternative energy storage technologies for LIBs.10–12 Specifically, the zinc metal batteries (ZMBs) using aqueous-based electrolytes (ABEs) with merits of non-flammability, good compatibility with the atmosphere and low cost are competitive to LIBs and present great application prospect in large-scale energy storage.13,14 The suitable redox potential (−0.76 V vs. the standard hydrogen electrode) makes the zinc metal have a relatively low polarizability in ABEs compared with other metallic materials (e.g. Mg and Al).15 So far, zinc metal has been an ideal anode for high safety aqueous zinc batteries in view of good compatibility with ABEs, easy processability, and low toxicity and cost (ca. 2 USD per kg) as well as abundant resources, high volumetric capacity (5854 mA h cm−3), and high gravimetric capacity (820 mA h g−1).16–20 With regard to industrial fabrication, various scalable techniques such as printing and the mask-assisted filtration strategy have been developed to boost the utilization of aqueous zinc batteries in portable electronics.21,22
Nevertheless, several pivotal scientific issues surrounding aqueous-based ZMBs (AB-ZMBs) impede the commercialization of rechargeable zinc metal anodes (ZMAs). AB-ZMBs get deteriorated rapidly in many practical applications due to the severe side reactions between the ZMA and ABEs, including corrosion, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and passivation. Currently, the challenges of AB-ZMBs mainly include (1) Zn dendrite growth during cycles; (2) self-discharge caused by persistent consumption of electrolytes; (3) generation of irreversible by-products.23–26 Solving the existing issues of AB-ZMBs and further prolonging their cycling and storage lifespan are extremely crucial. Specifically, the composition and concentration of ABEs have significant influence on the electrochemical performance of AB-ZMBs, which not only provide Zn2+ migration pathways but also affect the reversibility of zinc plating/stripping and the ion insertion of the cathode.27,28 In addition, the narrow electrochemically stable potential window (ESPW) is often displayed in ABEs as the electrolysis of water (approximately 1.23 V for pure water).28 Each of the aforementioned challenges in developing AB-ZMBs stem directly or indirectly from the interactions between ABEs and the ZMA.29 Multitudinous efforts have been done to increase coulombic efficiency (CE) for Zn plating/stripping,30–33 which mainly include four aspects: introducing electrolyte additives; developing high concentration electrolytes (HCEs) or localized high concentration electrolytes (LHCEs); designing the structure of gel electrolytes; employing solid-state electrolytes.2,34 Presently, electrolyte additives with a high reduction potential, which include organic molecules or inorganic salts according to the mechanism of action, are commonly employed to adjust the ion flux, generate a protective layer on the ZMA, regulate the Zn2+ solvation cluster, and modify the morphology of the plated Zn and CE of the batteries.35–39 The polymeric network in gel electrolytes endows them with highly flexible properties in wearable ZMBs,40–47 which can increase the CE of zinc plating/stripping and regulate the growth of zinc dendrites. SSEs can mitigate the harsh side reactions; however, extended research studies are needed to enhance ionic conductivity and interfacial compatibility.48–52 Great attention has been paid since ZMBs were discovered; thus it is quite significant and timely to review the recent progress of zinc-based electrolytes and ZMBs.
In this review, based on the analysis of poor electrolyte/zinc metal incompatibility, including dendrite growth, the HER, corrosion and passivation, we demonstrate the importance of advanced electrolyte engineering to systematically discuss various strategies for excellent performances of ZMBs (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of delicate electrolyte engineering design or modification to improve the application potential of ZMBs under practical conditions. 
2. Challenges of ZMAs
In recent years, the research on the anode of rechargeable zinc batteries has been mainly focused on the stabilization and replacement of zinc anodes.53–56 Though a few varieties of anodes exist in the form of galvanized and zinc-free anodes, the most widely used anode material is still pure zinc foil so far.57–59 The reliability and reversibility of Zn flakes are vital to achieve outstanding performance of ZMBs.60–66 However, some issues and challenges including the dendrite growth and shape change, gassing, corrosion, and passivation caused by the harsh HER side reaction with aqueous electrolytes still remain, limiting their actual applications.67–70
2.1 Zinc dendrite growth and shape change
During the electrochemical deposition of Zn2+, the initial nucleation on the substrate is a 2D diffusion process.71 The Zn ions usually diffuse laterally along the surface and inevitably gets localized as a consequence of the inhomogeneous distribution of Zn2+ flux upon the ZMA.72–74 The existing localized zinc crystals under a higher electric field can be identified as the charge centers and attract newly subsequent plated Zn2+ and form some protuberant tips at the most energetically advantageous sites for charge transfer to minimize the surface energy due to the “cusp effect”.75,76 Conceivably, the accumulated deposited zinc crystals are evolved into Zn dendrites as the subsequent growth of Zn nucleation (Fig. 2a).77 Besides, the already formed dendrites can also serve as charge centers to facilitate the growth of dendrites. Comprehensively, the formation of dendrites will cause three types of battery performance decay. First, the contact area between the zinc anode and aqueous electrolytes increases as the growth of dendrites occurs, which will intensify the corresponding detrimental interfacial reactions. Secondly, dead Zn will be generated as a few brittle dendrites peeled off from the ZMA. Both situations result in a decrease in the amount of active zinc that can actually participate in the capacitance-providing electrochemical cycling, lowering the CE and reversible capacity of the batteries.77 Thirdly, once the brittle dendrites punctured the separator, they cause an inner short circuit, and the performance of the battery is greatly impaired.77,78 It's worth noting that migration of zinc in the process of stripping/plating will manifest the shape change of the zinc anode from the side and top to the bottom of the zinc anode as a consequence of gravitational forces, further causing the redistribution of the active material and triggering the formation of dendrites and corresponding negative effects.79 In addition, the effect of current density on the zinc anode is still controversial. There is a study that presented that large current densities (≥4 mA cm−2) play a positive role in achieving favorable morphology of the zinc anode at a low capacity (≤1 mA h cm−2), while contrary viewpoints revealed that the increasing current densities will cause the increase of local charge density and elevate the voltage hysteresis and result in the plating of zinc dendrites.80–82 Consequently, the formation of zinc dendrites and the change of electrode shape are still problems for rechargeable zinc batteries with excellent electrochemical performance that need long-term attention, especially considering high capacity and high voltage.
 Fig. 2  (a) The formation and growth mechanism of zinc dendrites in alkaline electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Chemistry Europe. (b) Zn–H2O Pourbaix diagrams. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram for Zn dendrites, corrosion and passivation.96 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
2.2 Gassing, corrosion, and passivation caused by the HER
In addition to the ZMA itself, the electrode/electrolyte interfacial stability is another concern. The electrochemistry of zinc metal highly depends on the electrolyte's pH value. The incessant interfacial faradaic and non-faradaic reactions of the electrolyte with the zinc anode can be divided into the following three types on the basis of aqueous electrolyte's pH: in alkaline (Zn + 2OH− ↔ ZnO + H2O + 2e−), in neutral (Zn ↔ Zn+ + 2e−) and acid (Zn ↔ Zn+ + 2e−),83 among which, ZMBs exhibit the best electrochemical performance in neutral media.84 Zn metal is thermodynamically unstable in aqueous solutions according to zinc's Pourbaix diagram (Fig. 2b) and can be easily dissolved with the evolution of hydrogen over the whole pH range.85–87 To be specific, although the high over-potential of the Zn anode against H2 evolution can reduce the reaction rate, the continuous H2 evolution at a low rate could occur as a consequence of the numerous microscale primary batteries when a single Zn electrode comes into contact and reacts with aqueous electrolytes.2 The depletion and alteration of the Zn electrode caused by the HER can lead to a decrease in the utilization of zinc and poor CE. Besides, the gas generation of the HER causes swelling and the change of pressure inside batteries, resulting in consumption and leakage of electrolytes. Simultaneously, the corrosion of the ZMA can also be generated by the electrochemical reactions between Zn2+, dissolved oxygen and free water during the discharge process. Specifically, Zn2+ partially forms the zincate solution precipitate with OH− and SO42− anions, in which the byproducts are piled up loosely on the surface of the anode and cannot restrain further corrosion reactions.88 The gradually accumulated corrosion causes a serious self-discharge phenomenon during the storage process, shortening the lifespan of the batteries.89 The formation of these byproducts (Zn hydroxides and zincates) also can be facilitated as the resulting pH changed by the variation of OH−, passivating the surface of the ZMA.78,90–94 The ion pathway will be blocked, and the impedance increases after the passivation, resulting in poor CE.38,95 The above adverse factors and side reactions lead to the consumption of active components (Fig. 2c), which ultimately induces irreversible capacity loss and curtailed cyclability.96
Generally speaking, the electrolyte performs an important role in assisting to achieve a stable and high-performing zinc anode for rechargeable zinc batteries. Optimizing and developing appropriate electrolyte systems are quite significant to boost the electrochemical performance of ZMBs, especially taking the operating parameters such as current density, deposition capacity, temperature, and pressure which are fairly crucial to realize reliable practical operations of ZMBs into account.
3. Modifications of ABEs
ABEs are considered as the most promising candidates in ZMBs with their merits of safety and cost-effectiveness for large-scale production; however, the interfacial instability with zinc metal and unsatisfactory dendrite growth suppression capability result in much low CE and limited cycling life.97–103 In this section, we systematically summarize the modification strategies of ABEs from four aspects: introduce electrolyte additives, design HCEs or LHCEs, develop gel electrolytes, and employ solid-state electrolytes.
3.1 Electrolyte additives
In ABEs, the reduction potential of Zn (−0.76 V) is negative compared to that of the HER, which results in that water can be easily reduced to hydrogen during the Zn deposition process, further leading to a large increase for the pH value.104–109 The alkaline environment induces the generation of porous Zn(OH)2 and ZnO on the surface of the ZMA. The uneven distribution of Zn(OH)2 causes rapid growth of Zn dendrites, decreasing the CE and cycling life of the batteries. Many studies focus on the electrode engineering strategy by building surface protective layers such as CaCO3,110 TiO2,111 polyamide,105 graphene,112 polyacrylonitrile,113 and poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS)/TiO2−x to enhance Zn/electrolyte compatibility.114 However, the mechanical stability and the blocking effect of surface coatings can easily get ruptured during long-term cycling because of repetitive volume change of the ZMA and their poor adhesion with the ZMA.115 In addition, a large amount of hydrogen gas can be generated to dislodge the SEI in low concentration ABEs.98 In comparison, the introduction of electrolyte additives is the most convenient and economical method to improve Zn/electrolyte compatibility.2
The multiple work role of these additives can be divided into four aspects: (1) constructing an artificial solid electrolyte interface (SEI), which allows fast Zn2+ migration and prevents the water penetration.105,107–110 (2) The additives adsorbed on the surface of the ZMA can effectively regulate the ion flux, benefiting to induce homogeneous deposition.116 (3) Modifying the Zn deposition morphology by reducing the diffusion kinetics and the reduction rate of Zn2+.117 (4) Tuning the solvation structure to mitigate the side reactions.118,119
Electrolyte additives can be divided into inorganic, including metal salts, and organic additives such as polyethylene oxide (PEO) and polyacrylamide (PAM) according to their constituents.120,121 For the inorganic additive, Li et al. built a thin and dense SEI by adding the Zn(NO3)2 additive to aqueous Zn(OTF)2 solution, which prevents hydrogen precipitation during the Zn plating/peeling process remarkably (Fig. 3a).32 The Zn5(OH)8(NO3)2–2H2O passivation layer prevents water penetration, and its self-healing properties effectively prevent the formation of cracks during cycling. The gradual reduction of water on the Zn surface results in a local alkaline environment, which triggers thermodynamically and kinetically favorable reactions between Zn and NO3−/OH− and promote the formation of the Zn5(OH)8(NO3)2–2H2O passivation layer, allowing the reduction of the OTF− anion to form the SEI. At the same time, (CF3SO3)− can react with NO3−, which acts as a flexible protective layer to form an organic component in the outer layer, and zinc ion-conducting ZnF2 is formed inside. As a result, the in situ formed SEI enables a high CE of 99.8% for 200 h in Ti//Zn cells and a high energy density (168 W h kg−1) with a 96.5% retention for 700 cycles in Zn//MnO2 cells. Xu et al. discovered that diethyl ether (Et2O) yielded a high capacity retention of 97.7% after 4000 cycles due to the enhanced CE (Fig. 3b).122 The highly-polarized Et2O molecules can be preferably adsorbed on the initial Zn tips driven by the highly local electric field, which hinders further deposition of Zn2+ in the tip areas. As a result, the deposition of Zn2+ would be shifted to the flat region which had minimal Et2O coverage. In this way, the initial morphological fluctuation could be diminished, and the Zn plate would remain as a flat surface during the repeated cycling process. Bayaguud et al. proposed low-cost tetrabutylammonium sulfate (TBA2SO4) as a cationic surfactant-type electrolyte additive and constructed a three-dimensional ZMA, which induces the Zn/Zn batteries to stably cycle for 300 h at 2 mA cm−2.123 During the plating process, TBA+ cations can electrostatically adsorb and aggregate in the vicinity of protuberances to create the protective TBA+ layers, which further restrict the lateral diffusion and self-amplifying tip effect by driving the approaching Zn2+ to deposit in adjacent flat regions, eventually leading to homogeneous Zn deposition (Fig. 3c).
 Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the surface evolution mechanism. Zn dendrite growth in aqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Cycling performance of the aqueous Zn–MnO2 battery with 2 vol% diethyl ether (Et2O) electrolyte additive. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematics of the Zn2+ ion diffusion and reduction processes on electrodes in 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte (upper part) and 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte with 0.05 mM TBA2SO4 (lower part). Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematics of PEO polymer molecules stabilizing Zn anode reactions. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Conceptual diagrams of the Zn2+ solvation structure and HB evolution from aqueous electrolyte to DMSO hybrid electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Illustration of the representative environment of the active Zn species within the deep eutectic electrolyte, and (g) chronocoulometry curves of Zn plating/stripping in the electrolytes on CV. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
As for organic polymer additives, they can modify the Zn deposition morphology by reducing the diffusion kinetics and the reduction rate of Zn2+, and the electrochemically inert organic additives such as PEO and PAM can also be adsorbed on the Zn anode to protect its surface from H2 generation and the corrosion reaction, thereby enhancing the electrochemical stability of the Zn anode. For instance, Liu et al. discovered that PEO molecules can suppress Zn2+ ion transfer kinetics and regulate the Zn2+ ion concentration in the vicinity of Zn anodes through interactions between ether groups of PEO and Zn2+ ions.120 The suppressed ion transfer kinetics and homogeneous ion distribution at the interface promote dendrite-free homogeneous Zn deposition (Fig. 3d). As a result, a stable cycling for over 3000 h and high reversibility (CE > 99.5%) of Zn anodes are demonstrated in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte with 0.5 wt% PEO. Zhang et al. reported a synergistic method to fabricate a three-dimensional dendrite-free zinc anode by combining the Cu–Zn solid solution interface and zinc-oriented PAM electrolyte additive.121 The Cu–Zn solid solution exhibits excellent zinc affinity, and zinc ions have strong selective adsorption on the acyl group of PAM and can be transferred along the polymer chains, leading to the homogeneous distribution of zinc on the surface of the electrode. Recently, Yao et al. introduced a quaternary ammonium (triethylmethyl ammonium, TMA) cation as an electrolyte additive.124 During the plating process, it can not only homogenize zinc deposition via adsorbing onto the zinc metal surface but also inhibit the formation of by-products by participating in the constitution of contact ion pairs (CIPs). Based on the dual-functions of TMA cations, the Zn/Zn symmetric cell can stably cycle for over 2145 h at a current density of 1 mA cm−2 with an overpotential of merely 25 mV, and for over 500 h at a high current density of 5 mA cm−2 with an overpotential of 50 mV.
In terms of tuning the solvation structure, Feng et al. employed dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as multi-functional electrolyte additive to form a 2 M ZnSO4/H2O–DMSO hybrid electrolyte.125 With the higher binding energy to Zn2+, the typical solvation sheath [Zn(H2O)6]2+ can be regulated by DMSO to minimize side reactions and dendrites (Fig. 3e), and DMSO can provide higher adsorption energy to the Zn (002) plane, which will guide Zn deposition to form the Zn (002) texture with no dendrite formation. Due to the hydrogen bond between DMSO and H2O, the amounts of free H2O molecules are remarkably reduced to further alleviate side reactions. Qiu et al. designed an acetamide–Zn(TFSI)2 deep eutectic electrolyte (DEE) (Fig. 3f).126 They revealed that the presence of the anion complexing zinc species with lowered decomposition energies contributes to the in situ formation of the ZnF2-rich interphase. The as-protected anode enables reversible (∼100% CE) and dendrite-free zinc plating/stripping even at high areal capacities (>2.5 mA h cm−2) (Fig. 3g), enabled by the fast ion migration coupled with high mechanical strength of ZnF2. Similarly, Ming et al. discovered that in the presence of propylene carbonate, triflate anions are involved in the Zn2+ solvation sheath structure, even at a low salt concentration (2.14 M).127 The unique solvation structure results in the reduction of anions, thus forming a hydrophobic solid electrolyte interphase. The waterproof interphase along with the decreased water activity in the hybrid electrolyte effectively prevents side reactions, thus ensuring a stable Zn anode with unprecedented coulombic efficiency (99.93% over 500 cycles at 1 mA cm−2). In addition, Lin et al. developed a DEE containing sulfolane (SL) and Zn(ClO4)2·6H2O to prevent water-induced deterioration.128 The strong coordination between SL and Zn2+ triggers the deep eutectic effect, extending the operating temperature window from −40 °C to room temperature. Water molecules are bound in a eutectic network, resulting in delayed oxidation/reduction and a large electrochemical window for DEE. The fabricated Zn|DEE|Zn symmetrical cells cycle for 2000 h at 0.2 mA cm−2, and the Zn|DEE|polyaniline (PANI) cell delivers an excellent cyclic stability of up to 500 cycles with 73 mA h g−1 at 0.3 A g−1 and −30 °C.
To some extent, the multifunctional electrolyte system is an ideal system for many batteries, which can improve the performance of the electrolyte from many aspects and play a prominent role in improving the overall electrochemical performance of ZMBs. For instance, Huang et al. developed a composite electrolyte system consisting of two additives that show the synergistic effect on suppressing the corrosion reaction and dendrite formation/growth of Zn metal.129 The non-ionic low foaming surfactant-fatty methyl ester ethoxylate (FMEE) additive is capable of homogenizing the electrolyte and improving the electrolyte's wetting on the Zn surface, thereby reducing the activation energy of Zn stripping/plating and suppressing dendrite formation. The second additive fumed silica (FS) has strong bonding with water molecules, which can greatly cripple the water-induced detrimental reactions and present a shear-thickening effect to enhance the mechanical strength of the electrolyte to resist the dendrite growth. The synergetic effect of FMEE and FS enables the extraordinary reversibility of the Zn/Zn symmetric cells with a coulombic efficiency of 99.5% and a long cycling stability of 1500 h, and the MnO2/Zn full cell exhibits excellent cycling stability with a low capacity loss of 0.002% per cycle. In addition, Chang et al. reported a hybrid electrolyte which consists of water, ethylene glycol (EG) and zinc sulfate salt (ZnSO4) in low-temperature zinc-based energy storage systems. On the one hand, ethylene glycol (EG) was used as antifreeze in engine coolant owing to its high boiling point and relatively low freezing point. On the other hand, the unique solvation interaction of Zn2+ with EG can enhance the hydrogen bonding between EG and H2O, which weakens the solvation interaction of Zn2+ with H2O, thus providing the hybrid electrolyte with a lower freezing point and reversible Zn/Zn2+ chemistry.130,131 Based on the above studies, more effective multifunctional electrolytes are expected by introducing additional functional components through reasonable design and combination.
It is also worth noting here that the selection of electrolyte additives also depends on the pH value of electrolytes. For the mild system, the role of additives mainly focuses on the suppression of the HER due to the their high overpotential against the HER potential. Lee et al. reported a unique behavior of a zinc oxide anode in the presence of additives such as phosphoric acid, tartaric acid, succinic acid and citric acid.132 These additives are compared with the behavior of the electrolyte 8.5 M KOH in the absence of additives. It was concluded that the hydrogen overpotential is increased enormously, while dendrite formation is reduced to some extent. For the alkaline electrolyte, the ZMA suffers from severe corrosion due to attack of OH− and dendrite growth. The electrolyte additives play an important role of being absorbed on the surface of zinc metal to prevent the attacking effect and reduce by-products. For instance, Hu et al. discovered that the chemical adsorption of benzimidazole on zinc metal can effectively restrain its corrosion in alkaline electrolyte.133 It has been confirmed that the substitution of a mild electrolyte for an alkaline electrolyte can usually exhibit better reversibility for eliminating corrosion and alleviating dendrite growth.
3.2 HCEs or LHCEs
In recent years, designing HCEs or LHCEs to improve the CE and inhibit the reduction of water is another efficient method.134–137 Increasing the salt/water ratio can reduce the activity of water, leading to the huge amount of anions instead of H2O molecules preferentially bonding with Zn2+ and suppressing the formation of (Zn–(H2O)6)2+, thus promoting the reduction of anions. In addition, increasing the electrolyte concentration can decrease the solvation number, which alters the solvation structure and enhances ion transport efficiency.138,139 We list here many reported HCEs and LHCEs as displayed in Table 1.140–148 For instance, in the Zn/V2O5 system, a higher discharge capacity of 128 mA h g−1 and an approximately 100% CE can be observed when increasing the ZnSO4 concentration from 0.5 to 3 M, and ZnSO4 enables enhanced reversibility and faster kinetics of Zn deposition/dissolution compared with Zn(CH3COO)2, Zn(NO3)2 and ZnCl2.149 Zhang et al. developed a HCE with 30 m zinc chloride (ZnCl2) for aqueous ZMBs with a CE of 95.4% (Fig. 4a).140 In asymmetric Zn‖Zn cells with a limited mass of plated Zn as the working electrode, the ZnCl2 improves the average CE of the Zn anode from 73.2% to 95.4%. Wang et al. investigated the mechanism of the enhanced CE in HCEs via the NMR method.141 With increasing salt concentration, the 17O signal shows a downshift, because the lone-pair electrons on water O are directly depleted, which unshields the O nucleus. This effect apparently intensifies as the salt concentration increases to ∼10 m (Fig. 4b). Based on the 17O-NMR spectra, it can be concluded that the water molecules may have been severely confined within the solvation structures at high concentrations, and the presence of water in the vicinity of Zn2+ severely diminished, which weakened Zn–water interactions and eliminated the hydrolysis effect. In addition, Wu et al. proposed an interesting dual-ion battery configuration with the Prussian blue analogue of Zn3[Fe(CN)6]2 as the cathode and the encapsulated ferrocene in microporous carbon as the anion storage anode.150 They found that the 30 m ZnCl2 electrolyte pushes the cation-insertion potential higher and drags the anion-insertion potential lower, which increases the cell voltage by 0.35 V compared with a dilute ZnCl2 electrolyte (5 m). Further, Chen et al. reported a Zn-air battery with utilization of a Zn molten hydrate, which is defined as the inorganic salts in an extremely concentrated state (Fig. 4c).151 With this electrolyte, 99% CE can be obtained, and the resultant Zn-air battery exhibits a capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles. And Chen et al. reported a 1 M zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2)–31 M potassium acetate (KOAc) electrolyte.152 They investigated salt-concentrated electrolytes based on relatively inexpensive acetate salts. An electrochemical window of 3.4 V was achieved in 1 m Zn(OAc)2 + 31 m KOAc electrolyte, and its total ionic conductivity is 2.96 × 10−2 S cm−1. This electrolyte was regarded as a mild alkaline environment with a pH value of 9.76, causing the different storage mechanism for anode with Zn2+ ions. Consequently, the Zn/MnO2 battery can be charged to 2.0 V versus Zn/Zn2+ and delivers a discharge capacity and energy density of 304.6 mA h g−1 in the first cycle under a current density of 100 mA g−1. During cycling, the CE can be maintained around 99% and reached 99.9%. However, the high viscosity of HCEs results in higher cost and low ionic conductivity, which hinders the rate capacities of batteries. Hence, it is critical to balance the salt concentration to obtain the optimum compatibility.
Table 1 The physical and electrochemical properties of reported HCEs and LHCEs




Category
Type
Viscosity
Ionic conductivity (mS cm−1)
PH
Electrochemical stability window (V)
Ref.




HCE
30 m ZnCl2
10−1 Pa S
2.5
5.7
2.3

140



HCE
1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI
10−1 Pa S
—
7
2.6

141



HCE
0.5 m Zn(ClO4)2 + 18 m NaClO4
8 mPa S
98.5
—
High

142



HCE
0.5 m ZnSO4 + 21 m of LiTFSI
—
—
4
1.8

143



HCE
8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2
4.3 mPa S
47
—
2.5

144



HCE
46.5 M NH4Ac–NH3–Zn(Ac)2–Mn(Ac)2
—
16.1
Neutral
2.5

145



HCE
46.5 M NH4Ac–NH3–Zn(Ac)2–Mn(Ac)2
68.3 mPa S
17.14
—
1.52

146



LHCE
2 M ZnSO4/H2O–50% EG
—
∼7
4.5
1.5

147



LHCE
1 m Zn(TFSI)2–19 m LiTFSI–9 m LiBETI/H2O–1,4-DX
24 mPa S
—
3.3
—

148





 Fig. 4  (a) CE measurements of Zn plating/stripping in asymmetric Zn‖Zn cells in 30 m ZnCl2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The change with salt concentration of chemical shifts for 17O nuclei in the solvent (water). Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, Springer Naturer. (c) Molarity of the ZnCl2–H2O binary system as functions of the weight ratio of ZnCl2 to H2O and the molar ratio of H2O to ZnCl2 (n). Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Working mechanisms and (e) the scheme of the solvation structures in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Designing LHCEs can effectively lower the viscosity by adding a diluent to the electrolytes, which is miscible with the main organic solvent molecules but does not dissociate or coordinate with the salt ions in HCEs. As a result, a LHCE not only maintains the favorable electrochemical properties of the HCE structure but also reduces electrolyte viscosity and cost, providing better rate performance and higher CE of the batteries. The “inert” diluent is quite critical to lower the viscosity and is soluble in water.153–155 However, there is an obvious obstacle regarding the selection of the diluents because most organic solvents can complex with the cations, which destruct the solvation structures. Chen et al. demonstrated that the minimal reactivity of water with zinc metal can be observed in ultra-high concentration aqueous solutions containing 1 M (Zn(TFSI)2), 19 M (LiTFSI) and 9 M (LiBETI) (Fig. 4d–e).148 The formation of a stable, locally solvated structure with the non-solvent co-solvent 1,4-dioxane (1,4-dx) at high aqueous concentrations was demonstrated. Compared to the HCE, the unique solvation structure in the LHCE greatly boosts the anion chemistries to induce fluorinated interphases on the Zn anode and the V2O5 cathode. As a result, the LHCE not only achieves higher rate capabilities of V2O5/Zn batteries but also enables the Zn CE to quickly reach an average of 99.7% without the formation of dendrites (compared to <99% for the corresponding HCE). An ideal diluent should be highly soluble in the electrolytes and cannot complex with cations. In addition, Xiao et al. designed an interesting 3D nano-porous Zn electrode with an interface-localized concentrated electrolyte.156 The space charge effect of nano-porous metal provides the platform for regulating the charge density in the electric double layer on the electrode surface to achieve the interface-localized concentrated electrolyte, while the bulk of the electrolyte remains unchanged. The assembled npZn||NaVO3 cell exhibits a long lifespan with considerable capacity retention (76% for 1500 cycles) and high reversibility (coulombic efficiency of 99.8%). It is widely believed that the addition of a diluent to a HCE is effective to lower the viscosity and enhance the ionic conductivity.
HCEs and LHCEs can reduce the amount of active water and reduce corresponding adverse reactions, improving the interface stability and widening the electrochemical stability window. However, the physical and chemical properties of these electrolytes should be comprehensively adjusted, such as density, viscosity, solubility of compounds, conductivity, and electrochemical performance. The aqueous/nonaqueous system with different salts is expected to further evaluate this type of electrolyte. In addition, the exploration towards low-cost and eco-friendliness should be strengthened.
3.3 Gel electrolytes
The third aspect is to develop gel electrolytes. On the one hand, researchers believe that these types of gel electrolytes can reduce the presence of active water and inhibit side reactions at the interface.157–160 On the other hand, these electrolytes can be used in multifunctional scenarios, particularly in flexible devices.161–166 Gel electrolytes are achieved by mixing zinc salt solutions with a polymer matrix. For instance, Ma et al. constructed a 28.6 μm thick gel electrolyte with the poly(vinylidene fluoride-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF) film filled with poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)/ionic-liquid-based Zn salt (Fig. 5a).167 Taking advantage of hydrogen bonds formed by PVDF and PEO and the ionic liquid, the electrolyte delivers high ionic conductivity (16.9 mS cm−1) and flexible properties. Tang et al. developed a hierarchically three-dimensional Zn2+-conductor gel electrolyte (Alg–Zn) based on the ion-crosslinking method (Fig. 5b).168 By utilizing this feature, a “pass-way” is established where Zn2+ migration is guided and restricted by the carboxylate groups, thus exhibiting a high ionic conductivity of 1.82 × 10−2 S cm−1. For gel electrolytes, mechanical properties are highly required. Many research studies focused on the employment of materials with strong mechanical properties as substrates so that they can exhibit excellent electrochemical properties when twisted or folded, including graphene, carbon cloth (CC), polypropylene membranes, stainless steel meshes and carbon fibers. Specifically, polyacrylamide (PAM) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) are used, and additives are added to further increase Young's modulus.169,170 However, their inherent low water absorption and retention capability cause rapid water loss during cycling, leading to significant reduction in ionic conductivity and stability of the batteries.171 In contrast, hydrogel electrolytes deliver high ionic conductivity (10−3 to 10−1 S cm−1) due to their excellent water absorption properties, which provide good conditions to improve the cycling life and stability of ZMBs.50 Hydrogel electrolytes can be classified into physically cross-linked and chemically cross-linked. Physically cross-linked gels present high self-healing properties and ensure that water is attached to the polymer host through hydrogen bonding or electrostatic interactions. As shown in Fig. 5c, once the damaged battery is reconnected again, the hydrogen bonds in the gel electrolyte can re-establish at the interface, realizing the recovery of mechanical strength and ion transport.172 Physically cross-linked gels also support self-contained one-piece electrodes and maintain a robust structure during the flexible conversion process.173,174 In comparison, chemically cross-linked gels exhibit high tensile and flexible properties through the formation of a mesh structure by polymerization of monomers. For instance, a simple and environmentally friendly method was conceived to take advantage of the unique thermal reversibility of the gel.175,176 It is reported that lowering the cooling temperature can increase the mechanical strength of the electrolyte, which effectively inhibits the growth of Zn dendrites. The properties of gelatine electrolytes were also proved to benefit both battery assembly and battery stability. When heated, the gelatine powder dissolves, facilitating the preparation of the electrolytes in situ coated on the electrodes. When cooled, the gelatine can cure into a film, providing mechanical strength to inhibit the formation and growth of zinc dendrites. For instance, Zhu et al. reported a smart separator based on thermal-gated poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) hydrogel electrolytes (Fig. 5d).177 The hydrogel electrolyte not only displays a pore structure evolution from the opened to the closed state but also exhibits surface wettability transition from hydrophilic to hydrophobic behavior when the temperature increases, which can suppress the migration of electrolyte ions across the separators, realizing self-protection of batteries at high temperatures. In addition, the use of rapid cooling technology makes the electrolyte resistant to cutting, distortion and flooding, which allows a more ordered localization of the gelatine molecules.163,178,179 From these results, the use of hydrogel electrolytes and integrated 3D electrodes to construct high-performance self-healing flexible ZMBs holds great promise.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymer network of PHP-ILZE formed due to the intermolecular hydrogen binding effect. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Alg–Zn electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the structure of self-healing integrated all-in-one ZIBs. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Working mechanism of the thermal-gated PNIPAM/AM electrolytes with VPTT. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of the self-healing flexible Zn-ion battery using the all-in-one electrode. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustrations of the CNT network for LVPF and the CNT network PPy coating for LVPF. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
However, achieving high self-healing performance in a whole battery system with compatible electrolytes and electrodes is still a considerable challenge.180 Based on this, a flexible all-in-one self-healing quasi-solid zinc ion battery was proposed, which consists of three main components: a cathode (VS2 nanosheets grown on carbon cloth), anode (electrochemically deposited zinc nanowires) and a self-healing hydrogel electrolyte (PVA–Zn/Mn) (Fig. 5e).181 The PVA–Zn/Mn hydrogel electrolyte has a large number of –OH groups in the PVA chain, which can easily form hydrogen bonds and thus achieve self-healing functions. The in situ growth of nanosheets on CC by the hydrothermal method was used to form a separate cathode, and then the electrochemical deposition of zinc nanowires on CC results in the preparation of zinc ion batteries with flexibility and self-healing properties. This battery heals rapidly even when cut into multiple pieces, without any electrochemical effects except for a slight decrease in overall battery potential. The capability of batteries cycling at high current densities needs further research. In addition, the integrated electronics, including anodes and cathodes, would be suitable for building an emerging energy storage system in the future.47,181 Later, a flexible solid-state hydro–Zn hybrid battery with a hierarchical LiVPO4F (LVPF) cathode and a highly concentrated double-ion hydrogel electrolyte was proposed. Unlike the conventional reduction method (carbon black for carbon thermal reduction), this work constructed a hierarchical structure with a network of carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the “scarf” and polypyrrole (PPy) as the “blanket” for the poorly conductive LVPF for the first time (Fig. 5f), resulting in much better electrochemical performance.158 The design of a highly concentrated double ionic electrolyte (HCE) based on the “salt-in-water” electrolyte concept results in a significant increase in the upper voltage, allowing the LVPF to react with high potential redox, solving the problem of a narrow voltage window effectively. In addition, a flexible solid-state zinc hybrid battery was prepared from a persistent hydrogel electrolyte consisting of a polymer carrier network and HCE. Both the hydrogel electrolyte and electrodes exhibit good flexibility and strength, which allows a flat high-voltage discharge platform suitable for a variety of flexible devices and a stable output voltage of 3.7 V at 0.8 A g−1. Recently, Lin et al. proposed a polyacrylamide–poly(ethylene glycol)diacrylate–carboxymethyl cellulose (PMC) hydrogel electrolyte to guide the preferential orientation of Zn deposition.182 Based on the high binding energy between amide groups and Zn2+, polymer chains in PMC serve as Zn2+ transport channels to guide the uniform deposition behavior on the Zn (002) crystal surface, achieving an ultra-long cycle life of 5000 h at 1 mA cm−2 of the Zn/Zn battery.
There are other concerns such as the capacity of traditional flexible ZMBs being severely attenuated due to electrolyte solidification when at sub-zero temperature. In addition, when the battery is subjected to large deformation, its package is prone to be damaged, resulting in the evaporation of water in the electrolyte and ultimately leading to device failure. To solve this problem, Wang et al. developed an anti-freezing and anti-drying gel electrolyte based on polyacrylamide (PAM) and glycerol (Gly).183 The strong hydrogen-bonding interactions between PAM or Gly and water molecules not only disrupt the crystallization of the gel electrolyte at low temperatures but also constrain the free water and suppress its evaporation. Therefore, such gel electrolytes display high ionic conductivity at −40 °C and restrict their dehydration process in the ambient environment.
Developing gel or hydrogel electrolytes is significant to inhibit the side reactions in flexible zinc batteries. Gel electrolyte-based hybrid zinc battery design strategies open up a new path for future applications of flexible and wearable electronics in high-voltage energy storage systems.184,185 Rational structure design of polymer matrix is applied to balance good mechanical properties and ionic conductivity. It is also significant to maintain the electrochemical performance and lifespan of batteries, especially under harsh conditions. In addition, the selection of materials and the preparation approaches of gel electrolytes need further exploration.
4. Solid-state electrolytes in zinc batteries
Although the electrochemical performance of ZMBs with ABEs has been greatly improved after the unremitting efforts, the high sensitivity of water to temperature results in adverse electrochemical side reactions and unsatisfactory shelf life. Inspired by the research of solid-state lithium metal batteries (LMBs), developing solid-state polymer electrolytes (SPEs) in zinc batteries might be an effective strategy to overcome these obstacles.186–188 In particular, the high mechanical strength, good ductility and machinability of SPEs bring broad application prospects in the fields of intelligence and wear resistance.
Similar to the SPEs in LMBs, zinc SPEs usually consist of PEO, PVDF and polyacrylonitrile (PAN) as the matrix and some zinc salts.186 The Zn2+ and polar groups of the polymer matrix cause complexation–dissociation along with thermal movement of the molecular chain segment in the amorphous region to realize ion transport.189–191 However, most of the polymers present much low room-temperature ionic conductivity due to their high glass transition-temperature (Tg); thus, the current research studies mainly focus on the enhancement of ionic conductivity by crosslinking, bending, copolymerizing and adding inorganic fillers.192–194 Specifically, the in situ polymerization method with the help of specific additives is an effectively strategy to extend the motion region of polymer chain segments so as to improve the ionic conductivity and decrease the interface resistance between the electrolyte and ZMA. For instance, Zhao et al. employed poly(ethylene glycol) methyl ether acrylate (PEGMEA) as the amorphous precursor monomer to construct a crosslinking structure (PPM-SPEs) and reduce the crystallinity of PEO.195 The in situ formed electrolyte delivers an ambient bulk ionic conductivity of 2.87 × 10−5 S cm−1, and the interfacial compatibility is significantly ameliorated. The Zn/Zn symmetric cells can stably cycle for 400 h at 0.05 mA cm−2 and 60 °C. In addition, Ma et al. presented a transparent poly(1,3-dioxolane, DOL)/Zn(BF4)2 SPE by in situ polymerization of 4 M Zn tetrafluoroborate (Zn(BF4)2)/DOL with 2 mM Al(OTf)3, which exhibits a high ionic conductivity of 19.6 mS cm−1 at room temperature.196 Admirably, the in-plane interdigital-structure device using the SPE could be stably operated for more than 30 days when exposed to the atmosphere, and the Zn/SPE/CoHCF full cell holds a specific capacity of 105.8 mA g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of more than 99.75% after 20000 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 (Fig. 6a). In comparison to PEO, the PAN has a higher Tg and delivers mechanical robustness, and its the nitrogen-containing groups are easy to solvate with Zn2+ to realize higher ionic conductivity. Li et al. synthesized a hierarchical polymer electrolyte consisting of a PAN fiber network and gelatin chains grafted by polyacrylamide (PAM) (Fig. 6b).197 The PAN fiber membrane effectively improves the mechanical strength and suppresses zinc dendrite growth. The grafting of PAM onto gelatin chains significantly enhances the ionic conductivity. With the high level of water retention, the electrolyte exhibits high room-temperature ionic conductivity of 1.76 × 10−2 S cm−1. However, the existence of a large amount of water still causes interfacial instability. To further develop zinc SPEs with excellent ion transport capability and electrochemical stability, Chen et al. used poly(methyl acrylate) grafted MXenes to fill poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP) SPE (denoted as PVHF/MXene-g-PMA), which delivers an ionic conductivity of 2.69 × 10−4 S cm−1 (three orders of magnitude larger than that of the control sample) at room temperature.89 The high dielectric constant of PVDF–HFP promotes the ionization of zinc salts, and the good film formation assists it as a promising polymer matrix. Nevertheless, the homopolymer structure presents high intramolecular crystallinity (65–78%), which is harmful to ion conduction. In this work, the addition of MXene-g-PMA reduces the crystallinity effectively. The Zn/Zn symmetric cells deliver stable stripping/plating for 1200 h at 0.2 mA cm−2 and 55 °C (Fig. 6c), and the Zn/SPE/MnHCF cell shows a splendid cycling performance of 10000 cycles at 2C and excellent tolerance over the wide temperature range from −35 °C to 100 °C. In particular, it could maintain a fairly high charge/discharge capacity after being stored at challenging temperatures for up to 90 days. In addition to the polymer electrolytes, an inorganic electrolyte was also employed in ZMBs. Qiu et al. reported a novel way to construct a zinc SPE via crystallizing a Zn(TFSI)2-based deep eutectic solvent, in which TiO2 was used as the nucleation seed (Fig. 6d).198 The high-entropy eutectic-networks and preferential adsorption of TFSI− anions on the Lewis-acid surface of the TiO2 nucleator of this SPE facilitate weakening of the ion-association and formation of interfacial Zn2+-percolated channels on the nucleator surfaces, leading to eminent selectivity for Zn2+ transport  and elevating the ionic conductivity to 3.78 × 10−5 S cm−1 (over 100 times higher than that of conventional polymers) at 30 °C. The Zn/V2O5 cells using this SPE exhibit a high specific capacity of 134.7 mA h g−1 within 80 cycles in comparison with the 28.5 mA h g−1 (only after 10 cycles) of the control sample. If the TiO2 nucleator is replaced by ion-conducting fillers, the ionic conductivity might be further increased. Gao et al. proposed a highly concentrated colloidal electrolyte (HCCE) induced by a palygorskite nano-inorganic material.199 The palygorskite has an intermediate structure between the chain structure and the lamellar structure and shows good adsorption of Zn2+ and reduces the tight solvation sheath with water. The HCCE delivers a high ion transference number of 0.64 and a competitive ionic conductivity of 1.1 × 10−2 S cm−1. The Zn/HCCE/α-MnO2 cells presents 212 mA h g−1 with an 89% capacity retention under 500 mA g−1 after 1000 cycles.
 Fig. 6  (a) Cycle stability of Zn/CoHCF batteries with in situ and ex situ-formed SPEs. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the synthesis route to the hierarchical polymer electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Galvanostatic Zn plating/stripping in the Zn/Zn symmetrical cells based on the as prepared SPEs at 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Zn2+ conducting pathways through the space-charge layers of the neighboring TiO2 grains, and schematic illustration of the ionic hopping-type conduction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In general, the employment of SSEs in ZMBs is beneficial to suppress to dendrite growth and improve the electrolyte/electrode compatibility, while the low ionic conductivity cannot favor the normal operations at a fast charge rate or high capacity. Developing novel zinc SSEs to further boost the electrochemical performance that is competitive to ABEs is quite significant. In addition, the relatively thick SSEs lower the power density and energy density for the full cells, and the high cost and preparation methods limit their applications in large-scale production. Thus the next development attempt of zinc SSEs should attach importance to the rational selection of raw materials and fabrication approaches.
5. Conclusions and prospects
The new large-scale energy storage technology with high safety, low cost and long life has an extremely important impact on energy structure adjustment and smart grid construction.200–204 Compared with the traditional LIBs, AB-ZMBs are expected to be one of the outstanding representatives for the next generation of electrochemical energy storage devices in view of their high volume specific capacity, simple preparation process, safety, environmental friendliness and abundant resources.60,205–208 However, there are still serious challenges in the operations of ZMBs: (1) the growth of zinc dendrites; (2) hydrogen evolution, corrosion and passivation caused by detrimental side reactions between the electrolyte and zinc metal. Although these issues can be alleviated in neutral water electrolytes, the irreversible capacity loss and severe self-discharge caused by the cumulative effect greatly shorten the life of ZMBs, resulting in serious security implications and hindering their applications in practical scenarios. Based on the systematic discussion of the mechanisms of dendrite growth and the hydrogen evolution reaction, this review focuses on the representative advances in the electrolyte field and puts forward some constructive suggestions to solve these problems, providing directions and ideas for the future development of related research.
From the perspective of electrolyte optimization, the representative strategies should be further developed to deal with the constraints: employing functional electrolyte additives, exploiting HCEs and LHCEs, designing hydrogel electrolytes and constructing a SSE system.209–212
First, the introduction of electrolyte additives is the most convenient and economical method to improve the Zn/electrolyte compatibility. Some additives could be absorbed on the surface of the ZMA to isolate the side reactions, while their adhesion and flexibility towards repetitive volume change need further explorations. Tuning the solvation structure using additives is popular and effective for the zinc ion diffusion and SEI formation. It is essential to systematically characterize the solvation structure and interface formation mechanism. In particular, employing a cosolvent electrolyte additive that can achieve both high coulombic efficiency and good ion transport capability is a potential development trend. In-depth understanding of the relationship between the solvation structure, ion transport and interface will benefit the novel electrolyte system, and combination of multifunctional electrolyte additives is worthy for practical applications.
Second, it is widely believed that HCEs and LHCEs can reduce the amount of active water and reduce corresponding adverse reactions, improving the interface stability and widening the electrochemical stability window. However, the physical and chemical properties of these electrolytes should be comprehensively adjusted, such as density, viscosity, solubility of compounds, conductivity, and electrochemical performance. The performance of this type of electrolyte is expected to be further evaluated in different systems such as aqueous/nonaqueous system with different salts. In addition, the exploration towards low-cost and eco-friendliness should be strengthened.
Third, developing gel or hydrogel electrolytes is significant to inhibit the side reactions in flexible zinc batteries. Rational structure design of gel or hydrogel electrolytes is applied to balance good mechanical properties and ionic conductivity. It is also significant to maintain the electrochemical performance and lifespan of batteries, especially under harsh conditions. In addition, the selection of materials and the preparation approaches of gel electrolytes need further exploration.
Fourth, the employment of SSEs in ZMBs is beneficial to suppress dendrite growth and improve the electrolyte/electrode compatibility, while the low ionic conductivity cannot favor the normal operations at a fast charge rate or high capacity. The relatively thick SSEs lower the power density and energy density for the full cells, and the high cost and preparation methods limit their applications in large-scale production. Constructing composite electrolytes with polymer/ceramic or polymer/plasticizer configuration needs more efforts. The in situ polymerization might be the most effective strategy to solve the interface contact issue.
Finally, research studies o electrolyte engineering should be combined with the data screening of artificial intelligence to design a suitable electrolyte system in a more systematic way. The intelligent machine learning prediction can help us save time, human resources and other costs, helping to realize the rapid transformation of laboratory results into industrial applications. Next, the performance of electrolytes with diverse system properties can help the zinc-based metals achieve more stringent application scenarios. This kind of delicate electrolyte engineering design or modification can be further applied in electrolyte systems under elevated and fairly low temperatures or electrolyte systems for long-term storage. Correspondingly, the performance of electrolytes with various system properties to assist zinc-based metals in harsh application scenarios should also be considered and evaluated.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFA0209600), the Natural Science Foundation of China (22022813 and 21878268), and the Leading Innovative and Entrepreneur Team Introduction Program of Zhejiang (2019R01006).
References
C. J. M. Melief, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, J. Hao, C.-C. Kao, C. Wu, H.-K. Liu, S.-X. Dou and S.-Z. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 5669 RSC .
C. Zhong, B. Liu, J. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Zhong, Y. Li, C. Sun, X. Han, Y. Deng, N. Zhao and W. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 440 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Chen, J. Zhou, L. Zheng, K. C. Pradel, X. Fan, H. Guo, Z. Wen, M.-H. Yeh and C. Y. Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 548 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Chen, D. K. Debeli and J. Guo, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 045106 CrossRef .
Z. Li, J. Chen, H. Guo, X. Fan, Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, C. Yu, X. Cao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, X. Li, X. Zeng, D. Li, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3917 RSC .
W. Yang, X. Du, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, J. Li, J. Xie, Y. Zhang, Z. Cui, Q. Kong, Z. Zhao, C. Wang, Q. Zhang and G. Cui, Joule, 2020, 4, 1557 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Pillot, Avicenne Energy,  2019, https://www.avicenne.com Search PubMed.
Y.-P. Deng, R. Liang, G. Jiang, Y. Jiang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1665 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, F. Wan, S. Bi, J. Zhu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cheng, L. Luo, L. Zhong, J. Chen, B. Li, W. Wang, S. X. Mao, C. Wang, V. L. Sprenkle, G. Li and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13673 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, X. Chen, Q. Zhang, J. Zhou, Z. Cai and A. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 36676 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter, B. Barnett and K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 11433 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Yaroshevsky, Geochem. Int., 2006, 44, 48 CrossRef .
A. Naveed, H. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2760 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, Q. Li, Z. Liu, D. Wang, Y. Guo, X. Li, Y. Tang, H. Li, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001854 CrossRef CAS .
P. Oberholzer, E. Tervoort, A. Bouzid, A. Pasquarello and D. Kundu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 11, 674 CrossRef .
X. Zeng, J. Hao, Z. Wang, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 410 CrossRef .
X. Wang, S. Zheng, F. Zhou, J. Qin, X. Shi, S. Wang, C. Sun, X. Bao and Z. Wu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Li, P. Das, S. Zheng, F. Zhou and Z. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 156–163 CrossRef .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, B. Tawiah, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104523 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, Y. Ma, Y. Lu, L. Li, F. Wan, K. Zhang and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Tie, L. Liu, S. Deng, D. Zhao and Z. Niu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4920 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 14 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, X. Chen, M. Yu, Z. Niu, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4203 RSC .
F. Wan, X. Zhou, Y. Lu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3569 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, M. A. Schroeder, O. Borodin, T. P. Pollard, M. S. Ding, C. Wang and K. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 743 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, H. Li, Z. Ruan, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2521 RSC .
D. Li, L. Cao, T. Deng, S. Liu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13035 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Deng, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9377 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288 RSC .
A. R. Mainar, E. Iruin, L. C. Colmenares, A. Kvasha, I. de Meatza, M. Bengoechea, O. Leonet, I. Boyano, Z. Zhang and J. Alberto Blazquez, Journal of Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 304 CrossRef .
V. Verma, S. Kumar, W. Manalastas Jr, R. Satish and M. Srinivasan, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1970004 CrossRef .
B. Wang, J. Li, C. Hou, Q. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 46005 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Q. Meng, Z. Liu, H. Li, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 706 RSC .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, B. Tawiah, Y. Wang, C.-Y. Chan, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104523 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Guan, C. Zhou, Z. Fan, Q. Ke, G. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yu, Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804760 CrossRef .
J. Wang, Z. Zhao, G. Lu, Y. Zhang, Q. Kong, J. Zhao and G. Cui, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 20, 100630 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Dong, J. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11737 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Chen, N. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien, S. Chen, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908121 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, J. Hu, L. Han, Z. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhao, J. Liu and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 92 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, S. Wei, S. Li, Q. Li and Y. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802350 CrossRef .
J. Yi, P. Liang, X. Liu, K. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3075 RSC .
C. Xie, Y. Liu, W. Lu, H. Zhang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1834 RSC .
M. Forsyth, L. Porcarelli, X. Wang, N. Goujon and D. Mecerreyes, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chao, C. R. Zhu, M. Song, P. Liang, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, H. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Wang, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803181 CrossRef .
L. Ma, S. Chen, X. Li, A. Chen, B. Dong and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cao, D. Li, F. A. Soto, V. Ponce, B. Zhang, L. Ma, T. Deng, J. M. Seminario, E. Hu, X. Q. Yang, P. B. Balbuena and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 18845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, X. Shi, S. Liang, X. Ma, M. Han, X. Wu and J. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122248 CrossRef CAS .
C. Deng, X. Xie, J. Han, Y. Tang, J. Gao, C. Liu, X. Shi, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000599 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, X. Zhou, Y. Lu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3569–3590 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ruan, S. Liang, B. Lu, H. Fan and J. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200598 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, E. J. Hansen, G. He and J. Liu, Small, 2022, 18, 2200550. CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, B. Li and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900993 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400930 CrossRef .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto and T. Shoji, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1986, 117, L27 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 124, 957 CrossRef .
L. Ma, S. Chen, H. Li, Z. Ruan, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, Z. Wang, Y. Huang, Z. Pei and J. Zapien, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2521 RSC .
X. Wang, F. Wang, L. Wang, M. Li, Y. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Zhu, L. Fu, L. Zha and L. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhou, H. Zhan, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y.-P. Deng, Z. Xing, D. Luo, S. Sy, Z. P. Cano, G. Liu, Y. Jiang and Z. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Y. Chen, L. Shi, K. Wang, B. Wang, L. Li, Y. Ma, Y. Li, Z. Sun and W. Ali, Small, 2020, 16, 2000730 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604685 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Manalastas Jr, S. Kumar, V. Verma, L. Zhang, D. Yuan and M. Srinivasan, ChemsusChem, 2019, 12, 379 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
L. E. Blanc, D. Kundu and L. Nazar, Joule, 2020, 4, 771 CrossRef CAS .
Q. li, T. Wei, K. Ma, G. Yang and C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20888 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Kang, M. Cui, F. Jiang, Y. Gao, H. Luo, J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801090 CrossRef .
S. Higashi, S. W. Lee, J. S. Lee, K. Takechi and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1 Search PubMed .
Y. Jin, L. Zou, L. Liu, M. H. Engelhard, R. L. Patel, Z. Nie, K. S. Han, Y. Shao, C. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Pan and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900567 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Lu, C. Xie, H. Zhang and X. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hao, X. Li, X. Zeng, D. Li, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3917 RSC .
R. M. Aroa, I. Elena, C. C. Luis, K. Andriy, M. Iratxe de, B. Miguel, L. Olatz, B. Iker, Z. Zhengcheng and J. A. Blazquez, Journal of Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 304 CrossRef .
H. Glatz, E. Tervoort and D. Kundu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 3522–3530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yang, G. Liang, Y. Guo, Z. Liu, B. Yan, D. Wang, Z. Huang, X. Li, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 31, 1903778 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yang, Y. Yin, S. Zhang, N. Li and Y. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Mainar, E. Iruin, L. C. Colmenares, A. Kvasha, I. De Meatza, M. Bengoechea, O. Leonet, I. Boyano, Z. Zhang and J. Blazquez, Journal of Energy Storage, 2018, 15, 304 CrossRef .
C. Xia, J. Guo, P. Li, X. Zhang and H. Alshareef, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3837 CrossRef .
A. J. Drelich, S. Zhao, R. J. Guillory II, J. W. Drelich and J. Goldman, Acta Biomater., 2017, 58, 539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Thomas, I. S. Cole, M. Sridhar and N. Birbilis, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 97, 192 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Hoang, K. E. K. Sun and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41677 RSC .
J. Hao, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, G. Bo, C. Wang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001263 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, X. Li, D. Wang, Q. Yang, L. Ma, Z. Huang, G. Liang, A. Chen, Y. Guo, B. Dong, X. Huang, C. Yang and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3492 RSC .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257 RSC .
A. Khor, P. Leung, M. Mohamed, C. Flox, Q. Xu, L. An, R. Wills, J. Morante and A. Shah, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 80 CrossRef .
V. Soundharrajan, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, M. H. Alfaruqi, D. Y. Putro, J. Jo, S. Kim, V. Mathew, Y.-K. Sun and J. Kim, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938 RSC .
W. Xiong, D. Yang, T. K. Hoang, M. Ahmed, J. Zhi, X. Qiu and P. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 131 CrossRef .
V. Soundharrajan, B. Sambandam, S. Kim, V. Mathew, J. Jo, S. Kim, J. Lee, S. Islam, K. Kim and Y.-K. J. A. E. L. Sun, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1998 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288 RSC .
L. Cao, D. Li, T. Deng, Q. Li and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, M. G. Jiao, L. L. Lu, H. M. Barkholtz, Y. P. Li, Y. Wang, L. H. Jiang, Z. J. Wu, D. J. Liu, L. Zhuang, C. Ma, J. Zeng, B. S. Zhang, D. S. Su, P. Song, W. Xing, W. L. Xu, Y. Wang, Z. Jiang and G. Q. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Qiu, X. F. Du, J. W. Zhao, Y. T. Wang, J. W. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. L. Hu, D. P. Yan, X. H. Zhou and G. L. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Hursan, A. A. Samu, L. Janovak, K. Artyushkova, T. Asset, P. Atanassov and C. Janaky, Joule, 2019, 3, 1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, F. Y. Cheng, J. X. Liu, L. B. Wang, X. H. Long, X. S. Liu, F. J. Li and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 405 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Y. Ma, C. Z. Han, L. W. Luo, A. Daniyar, S. H. Xiang, X. Y. Wu, X. L. Ji and J. X. Jiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 462 RSC .
X. Guo, Z. Zhang, J. Li, N. Luo, G.-L. Chai, T. S. Miller, F. Lai, P. Shearing, D. J. L. Brett, D. Han, Z. Weng, G. He and I. P. Parkin, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Zhao, J. W. Zhao, Z. L. Hu, J. D. Li, J. J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. L. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938 RSC .
Y. B. Yin, S. N. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Song, N. Chang, Y. W. Pan, H. M. Zhang and X. F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yang, Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Deng, X. W. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wang, X. L. Dong, B. L. Wang, Z. W. Guo, Z. Wang, R. H. Wang, X. Qiu and Y. G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 14577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wan, Y. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, D. B. Liu, C. D. Wang, L. Song, Z. Q. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Kang, M. W. Cui, F. Y. Jiang, Y. F. Gao, H. J. Luo, J. J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Y. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801090 CrossRef .
K. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yan, Q. Wei, P. He, Y. Dong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800848 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, M. Xie, F. Wu, Y. Mei, Y. Hao, R. Huang, G. Wei, A. Liu, L. Li and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, X. Yuan, Y. Xia, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, L. Liu, N. Yu, Q. Huang, B. Wang, X. Hu, Y. Wu and T. V. Ree, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, L. Fan, C. Zhao, A. Chen, N. Liu, Y. Zhang and N. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2021, 34, 2105133 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kundu, S. H. Vajargah, L. W. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 881 RSC .
S. J. Banik and R. Akolkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, D519 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, W. Huo, Y. Wang, G. Yao, X. Gu, H. Cheng, L. Mai, C. Hu and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 275 CrossRef CAS .
R. Qin, Y. Wang, M. Zhang, Y. Wang, S. Ding, A. Song, H. Yi, L. Yang, Y. Song, Y. Cui, J. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Li, Q. Zhao and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105478 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, Y. Gao, W. Ming, F. He, J. Li, X. H. Zhu, F. Kang, J. Li and G. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2003965 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jin, K. S. Han, Y. Y. Shao, M. L. Sushko, J. Xiao, H. L. Pan and J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003932 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J. Luan, L. Fu, S. Wu, Y. Tang, X. Ji and H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15841 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, W. Huo, Y. Wang, G. Yao, X. Gu, H. Cheng, L. Mai, C. Hu and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 275 CrossRef CAS .
A. Bayaguud, X. Luo, Y. Fu and C. Zhu, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3012 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yao, L. Qian, Y. Sui, G. Zhao, R. Guo, S. Hu, P. Liu, H. Zhu, F. Wang, C. Zhi and C. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 12, 2102780 CrossRef .
D. Feng, F. Cao, L. Hou, T. Li, Y. Jiao and P. Wu, Small, 2021, 17, e2103195 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Ming, Y. Zhu, G. Huang, A. H. Emwas, H. Liang, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 7160–7170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, G. Zhou, M. J. Robson, J. Yu, S. C. T. Kwok and F. Ciucci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 32, 2109322 CrossRef .
J. Huang, X. Chi, Q. Han, Y. Liu, Y. Du, J. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A1211–A1216 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ramasamy, J. Palma del Val and M. Anderson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 370 CrossRef CAS .
N. Chang, T. Li, R. Li, S. Wang, Y. Yin, H. Zhang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3527 RSC .
C. W. Lee, K. Sathiyanarayanan, S. W. Eom, H. S. Kim and M. S. Yun, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 1474 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Hu, S. T. Zhang, X. H. Huang and Y. Y. Wu, Mater. Prot., 2011, 44, 14 CAS .
B. Q. Li, C. X. Zhao, S. M. Chen, J. N. Liu, X. Chen, L. Song and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31 Search PubMed .
A. Naveed, H. J. Yang, J. Yang, Y. N. Nuli and J. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. L. Fan, C. Y. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. H. Ma, M. Schroeder, A. von Cresce, S. M. Russell, M. Armand, A. Angell, K. Xu and C. S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Li, W. Chen, H. Zhang, Y. J. Gong, F. F. Shi, J. Y. Wang, R. F. Zhang, G. X. Chen, Y. Jin, T. Wu, Z. Y. Tang and Y. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902085 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yamada, K. Furukawa, K. Sodeyama, K. Kikuchi, M. Yaegashi, Y. Tateyama and A. Yamada, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Y. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. D. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodriguez-Perez, J. X. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097 RSC .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Yin, X. Zheng, A.-H. Emwas, Y. Lei, O. F. Mohammed, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4463–4473 RSC .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, X. Peng, S. Dong, J. Ma, G. Cui and L. Chen, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 69, 6–10 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhou, H. Zhan, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22059–22066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Huang, X. Chi, J. Wu, J. Liu and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133058 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Wu, J. Huang, X. Chi, J. Yang and Y. Liu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1148–1155 RSC .
N. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Qiu, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 5556–5564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, Q. Nian, L. Zheng, B.-Q. Xiong, Z. Wang, Y. Shen and X. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 22347 RSC .
J. Zhou, L. Shan, Z. Wu, X. Guo, G. Fang and S. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4457 RSC .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, A. Markir, J. Lu and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6338–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. -Y. Chen, K. Matsumoto, K. Kubota, R. Hagiwara and Q. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900196 CrossRef .
S. Chen, R. Lan, J. Humphreys and S. Tao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 28, 205 CrossRef .
J. F. Ding, R. Xu, N. Yao, X. Chen, Y. Xiao, Y. X. Yao, C. Yan, J. Xie and J. Q. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 11442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jaumaux, X. Yang, B. Zhang, J. Safaei, X. Tang, D. Zhou, C. Wang and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 19965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jia, L. Zou, P. Gao, X. Cao, W. Zhao, Y. He, M. H. Engelhard, S. D. Burton, H. Wang, X. Ren, Q. Li, R. Yi, X. Zhang, C. Wang, Z. Xu, X. Li, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900784 CrossRef .
R. Xiao, Z. Cai, R. Zhan, J. Wang, Y. Ou, Z. Yuan, L. Wang, Z. Lu and Y. Sun, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129642 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, J. Zhu, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Chem, 2019, 25, 14480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, Q. Yang, D. Wang, G. Liang, Y. Zhu, F. Mo, Z. Huang, X. Li, L. Ma, T. Tang, Z. Lu and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902473 CrossRef CAS .
K. Leng, G. Li, J. Guo, X. Zhang, A. Wang, X. Liu and J. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001317 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, J. Ming, Y. Lei, W. Zhang, C. Xia, Y. Cui and H. N. Alshareef, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2776 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miao, B. Chen, S. Li, X. Wu, Q. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Sun and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2020, 450, 227653 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, L. Chen, X. Su, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, M. Yu, J. Yi, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700274 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Han, X. Chi, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Zhou, J. Yang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23046 RSC .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, X. Dong, J. Cao, L. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Ren, Y. Hwang, I. H. Son, X. Huang, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 1701827 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, N. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien, S. Chen, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, C. Liu, H. Zhu, X. Xie, J. Gao, C. Deng, M. Han, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 109 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Pei, Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, J. Fan, Q. Dai, M. Zhang, L. Dai and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802288 CrossRef .
C. Xia, J. Guo, Y. Lei, H. Liang, C. Zhao and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705580 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Han, R. Hu, M. Zhu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, F. Wan, S. Bi, J. Zhu, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400930 CrossRef .
W. Liu, M. S. Song, B. Kong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603436 CrossRef PubMed .
R. W. Mo, D. Rooney, K. N. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Selvakumaran, A. Q. Pan, S. Q. Liang and G. Z. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18209 RSC .
J. Zhu, M. Yao, S. Huang, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 16480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, X. Dong, J. Cao, L. Wang, Y. Xu, J. Ren, Y. Hwang, I. H. Son, X. Huang, Y. Wang and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xue, J. Sun, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, H. Li, Y. Wang, N. Li, H. Zhang and C. Zhi, Small, 2017, 13, 1701827 CrossRef PubMed .
R. W. Mo, D. Rooney, K. N. Sun and H. Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 13949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, J. Long, Z. Shen, X. Jin, T. Han, T. Si and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2004689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lin, J. Cong, J. Li, M. Zhang, P. Lai, J. Zeng, Y. Yang and J. Zhao, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 49, 172–180 CrossRef .
R. Wang, M. Yao, S. Huang, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Sci. China Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1007/s40843-021-1924-2 .
G. Z. Fang, J. Zhou, A. Q. Pan and S. Q. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2480 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, X. L. Dong, J. Y. Cao, L. Wang, Y. F. Xu, J. Ren, Y. N. Hwang, I. H. Son, X. L. Huang, Y. G. Wang and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14382 Search PubMed .
H. Dong, J. Li, J. Guo, F. Lai, F. Zhao, Y. Jiao, D. J. Brett, T. Liu, G. He and I. Parkin, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wu, J. Huang, J. Yi, X. Liu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903977 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, Y. Tang, S. Guo, X. Cao, A. Pan, G. Fang, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4625 RSC .
I. Pucić and A. J. S. S. I. Turković, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1797 CrossRef .
Z. Gadjourova, Y. G. Andreev, D. P. Tunstall and P. Bruce, Nature, 2001, 412, 520 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Long, S. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10038 RSC .
W. Hagan, R. Latham, R. Linford and S. Vickers, J. Power Sources, 1994, 70, 666 Search PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, N. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, J. A. Zapien, S. Chen, J. Fan and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 32, 1908121 CAS .
H. Qian, E. S. Greenhalgh, M. S. Shaffer and A. Bismarck, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 20, 4751 CAS .
Z. Zhao, J. Wang, Z. Lv, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, G. Lu, J. Zhao and G. Cui, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 417, 128096 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Chen, X. Li, A. Chen, B. Dong and C. J. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132, 24044 CrossRef .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941 RSC .
H. Qiu, R. Hu, X. Du, Z. Chen, J. Zhao, G. Lu, M. Jiang, Q. Kong, Y. Yan, J. Du, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 61, e202113086 Search PubMed .
J. Gao, X. Xie, S. Liang, B. Lu and J. Zhou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 69 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Q. Yang, X. Li, Z. Huang and C. Zhi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 180 RSC .
K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 9820 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Xi, X. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Hao, W. K. Pang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000380 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Gu, K. Davey and S. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 7905 CrossRef .
M. Song, H. Tan, D. Chao and H. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802564 CrossRef .
F. Mo, G. Liang, Q. Meng, Z. Liu, H. Li, J. Fan and C. J. E. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 706 RSC .
S. Zhang, N. Yu, S. Zeng, S. Zhou, M. Chen, J. Di and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12237 RSC .
T. Wang, C. Li, X. Xie, B. Lu, Z. He, S. Liang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 16321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, T. Cui, G. Pulletikurthi, A. Lahiri, T. Carstens, M. Olschewski and F. Endres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mansfeld and S. Gilman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 1154 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, Y. Zhou and C. Gao, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 231 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J.-X. Jiang and C. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097 RSC .

Footnote† ChenChen Li and Qian Wu contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of delicate electrolyte engineering design or modification to improve the application potential of ZMBs under practical conditions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) The formation and growth mechanism of zinc dendrites in alkaline electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2018, Chemistry Europe. (b) Zn–H2O Pourbaix diagrams. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram for Zn dendrites, corrosion and passivation.96 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Illustration of the surface evolution mechanism. Zn dendrite growth in aqueous electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Cycling performance of the aqueous Zn–MnO2 battery with 2 vol% diethyl ether (Et2O) electrolyte additive. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) Schematics of the Zn2+ ion diffusion and reduction processes on electrodes in 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte (upper part) and 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte with 0.05 mM TBA2SO4 (lower part). Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematics of PEO polymer molecules stabilizing Zn anode reactions. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Conceptual diagrams of the Zn2+ solvation structure and HB evolution from aqueous electrolyte to DMSO hybrid electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Illustration of the representative environment of the active Zn species within the deep eutectic electrolyte, and (g) chronocoulometry curves of Zn plating/stripping in the electrolytes on CV. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

HCE	30 m ZnCl2	10−1 Pa S	2.5	5.7	2.3	
140

HCE	1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI	10−1 Pa S	—	7	2.6	
141

HCE	0.5 m Zn(ClO4)2 + 18 m NaClO4	8 mPa S	98.5	—	High	
142

HCE	0.5 m ZnSO4 + 21 m of LiTFSI	—	—	4	1.8	
143

HCE	8 M NaClO4 + 0.4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2	4.3 mPa S	47	—	2.5	
144

HCE	46.5 M NH4Ac–NH3–Zn(Ac)2–Mn(Ac)2	—	16.1	Neutral	2.5	
145

HCE	46.5 M NH4Ac–NH3–Zn(Ac)2–Mn(Ac)2	68.3 mPa S	17.14	—	1.52	
146

LHCE	2 M ZnSO4/H2O–50% EG	—	∼7	4.5	1.5	
147

LHCE	1 m Zn(TFSI)2–19 m LiTFSI–9 m LiBETI/H2O–1,4-DX	24 mPa S	—	3.3	—	
148


 	Fig. 4  (a) CE measurements of Zn plating/stripping in asymmetric Zn‖Zn cells in 30 m ZnCl2 electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) The change with salt concentration of chemical shifts for 17O nuclei in the solvent (water). Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2018, Springer Naturer. (c) Molarity of the ZnCl2–H2O binary system as functions of the weight ratio of ZnCl2 to H2O and the molar ratio of H2O to ZnCl2 (n). Reproduced with permission.151 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Working mechanisms and (e) the scheme of the solvation structures in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the polymer network of PHP-ILZE formed due to the intermolecular hydrogen binding effect. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the preparation of Alg–Zn electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Illustration of the structure of self-healing integrated all-in-one ZIBs. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (d) Working mechanism of the thermal-gated PNIPAM/AM electrolytes with VPTT. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (e) Illustration of the self-healing flexible Zn-ion battery using the all-in-one electrode. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustrations of the CNT network for LVPF and the CNT network PPy coating for LVPF. Reproduced with permission.158 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cycle stability of Zn/CoHCF batteries with in situ and ex situ-formed SPEs. Reproduced with permission.196 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of the synthesis route to the hierarchical polymer electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.197 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Galvanostatic Zn plating/stripping in the Zn/Zn symmetrical cells based on the as prepared SPEs at 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.89 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Zn2+ conducting pathways through the space-charge layers of the neighboring TiO2 grains, and schematic illustration of the ionic hopping-type conduction mechanism. Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 
Footnote
† ChenChen Li and Qian Wu contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
