Anode co-valorization for scalable and sustainable electrolysis   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1GC02094C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1GC02094C
(Perspective)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 7917-7936Anode co-valorization for scalable and sustainable electrolysis†

        
          
            Joshua 
            Jack
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wenjin 
            Zhu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            José L. 
            Avalos
          
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Jinlong 
            Gong
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Zhiyong Jason 
            Ren
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Civil and Environmental Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA. E-mail: zjren@princeton.edu;   Tel: +1 (609) 258-7580
bThe Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
cKey Laboratory for Green Chemical Technology of Ministry of Education, School of Chemical Engineering and Technology, Tianjin University, Tianjin 300072, China
dDepartment of Chemical and Biological Engineering, Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey 08544, USA
Received 
      13th June 2021
    , Accepted 27th September 2021First published on 27th September 2021AbstractIncreasingly abundant and low-cost renewable electricity is driving the fast development of electrolysis for energy storage and CO2 valorization. However, current electrolyzers rely on the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), which has been expensive, location limited, high-risk, and generates low value (O2) recovery. In this perspective review, we analyzed the state-of-the-art in electrolysis processes that use alternative anode reactions to improve the economic viability and scalability of water or CO2 electrolysis. We quantitatively compared a wide range of inorganic and organic electron donors in the anode that can lower energy costs and/or produce value-added products, and then assessed the use of different biotic and abiotic catalysts and the feasibility of using low-grade water sources as electrolytes. Through this wide-ranging assessment, we developed an example study for large-scale electrolysis in California, USA, provided long-term perspectives on OER substitutes for anode co-valorization, and delivered insight on future research directions.Joshua JackJoshua Jack is a postdoctoral researcher in the Andlinger Center for Energy and Environment at Princeton University and earned a Ph.D. in environmental engineering from the University of Colorado, Boulder working with Dr Zhiyong Jason Ren. During his graduate research, Joshua obtained extensive research experience in the Biosciences Center at the DOE-National Renewable Energy Laboratory. His current research focuses on energy and resource recovery as part of a sustainable water–energy–climate nexus with a special focus on process design of integrated electrochemical–biological systems towards a circular carbon economy.Wenjin ZhuWenjin Zhu received her B.S. and M.S. degrees from Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Jinlong Gong. She is currently a Ph.D. candidate at University of Cambridge under the supervision of Prof. Henning Sirringhaus. Her research interests include photo/electrocatalysis, organic field-effect transistors and the thermoelectrics.José L. AvalosJosé L. Avalos has been a faculty member at Princeton University since 2015, where he leads a research group focused on the use of biotechnology to address challenges in renewable energy, sustainable manufacturing, the environment, and human health. He received a Ph.D. in biochemistry and biophysics from Johns Hopkins University. He conducted postdoctoral research at The Rockefeller University, MIT, and the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research.Jinlong GongJinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Pei Yang Chair Professorship. His research interests include the catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and syntheses and applications of nanostructured materials.Zhiyong Jason RenZhiyong Jason Ren is a professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and associate director of the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment at Princeton University. His research focuses on water–energy nexus especially in areas of water sector decarbonization and resource recovery during environmental processes such as wastewater treatment and reuse, water desalination, and carbon capture and utilization. He received his Ph.D. in environmental engineering from Penn State University.
1. Introduction
Renewable power has become increasingly cheap and abundant, enabling large-scale electrolysis and carbon valorization.1,2 In countries such as Germany, the United States, Canada, Brazil, and Mexico on-shore wind power has been distributed at levelized costs as low as 3 cents per kW h,3 and due to fluctuating supply and demand, wholesale electricity prices have even temporarily become negative.4,5 Recognizing this as an energy storage challenge and opportunity, such low-priced renewable power can seamlessly be upgraded to renewable fuels and products by electrochemical water or CO2 reduction (CO2-R), supporting zero emission goals and a circular carbon economy.6,7 Such devices simultaneously tackle the United Nations Sustainable Development Goal (SDG) 7 on Clean Energy and SDG 13 on Climate Action,8 yielding tremendous societal benefits.
However, in order for these new technologies to obtain a meaningful market share, costs must be minimized to become competitive with current production methods. Hydrogen (H2) produced from electrochemical water reduction comprises only 4% of the global market9 and it was recently indicated that the costs need to be decrease by an additional $0.80 per kg to become economically practical versus industrial-scale steam reforming.10 Likewise, the cost of electrochemical CO2 reduction products will need to be priced at an aggressive $1 per gasoline gallon equivalent to be on-par with alternative fuels that satisfy the US Department of Energy (DOE) biofuel production goals for 2020.11
Electrolysis typically involves two half reactions, an oxidation reaction on the anode and a reduction reaction on the cathode (i.e. H2 evolution or CO2 reduction). To date, many researchers have focused on improving reduction efficiencies and expanding the portfolio of products that can be generated at the cathode12 while the equally important anode reactions have not received the same attention nor have attained the same rate of improvement. State-of-the-art electrolyzers still rely on anodic O2 evolution reactions (OERs, eqn (1)) to provide electrons and charge balancing ions from water.13 2H2O → 4H+ + 4e− + O2(1)
Though convenient, the OER is unsustainable, requires expensive catalysts, generates a low-value product (i.e. O2), and demands high amounts of energy to overcome the thermodynamic barrier that drags the scalability of the whole system. For instance, Kenis et al. (2019) recently found that the OER typically consumes around 90% of the total electricity input to CO2 electrolyzers.14 In addition, the OER can have a large potable water footprint15 and creates chances for dangerous gas mixtures (e.g. O2/H2) to form if not operated properly.16
In light of these limitations, several OER alternatives have been proposed to decrease energy consumption and/or generate high-value products that can offset operation costs and improve sustainability [Fig. 1]. These reactions can tackle a range of objectives including raw chemical generation (e.g. H2O2), waste oxidation, and molecule upgrade. By coupling worthwhile oxidation reactions at the anode with cathode electrosynthesis, industries can leverage existing infrastructure for purification, distribution, and waste-management, and even produce feedstock chemicals required for parallel processes housed at the same facility. Employing such co-valorization tactics can indeed address current drawbacks of the OER by increasing revenues and the value proposition of the overall process.
 Fig. 1  Different anode co-valorization pathways in electrochemical water or CO2 electrolysis. The combination of electron donor, catalyst, and products are summarized for each co-valorization option, and related industries and benefits are illustrated; summary of standard redox potentials of OER and substitutes reactions vs. Reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Acronyms defined in Table S1† [ref. 22 and 24–37]. 
OER alternatives can be initiated by thermochemical,17 photochemical,18 electrochemical,19 and biological processes,20 with the latter two being the most mature. For instance, the industrial-scale chloroalkali process substitutes the OER for sodium chloride (NaCl) oxidation at the anode while electrochemically generating H2 at the cathode.21 With many possible OER replacements, primary considerations can focus on the anode operating potential and market value of the products. Hereto are described many organic and inorganic reactions that can be operated at much lower potentials than the OER, greatly decreasing energy inputs [Fig. 1]. For instance, the oxidation of a waste product, urea, can take place at a standard potential of just 70 mV,22 potentially reducing energy demands by 94% vs. OER (calc. in S2†). On the other hand, some reactions can generate products valuable enough to justify higher operating potentials than the OER. For example, the standard redox potential of H2O2 production (via H2O oxidation) is around 30% greater than the OER, but the market value of H2O2 is about 23 times greater than O2.23 Still, OER substitutes should preferably be operated with low-energy inputs and generate high-value products. Ancillary considerations should be that the target anode products are non-corrosive to catalysts, easily separated from solutions, resistant to cross-over to the cathode, and do not form hazardous product mixtures. Additionally, feedstock reactants should be inexpensive, plentiful, and complementary to cathode electrosynthesis.
In practice, it may be difficult to find a reasonable OER substitute that meets all these criteria so a secondary method to lower OER expenses could be to reduce the costs of the electrolyte. The OER typically uses a high-purity water electrolyte, similar to standard potable water that is currently priced around $3.38 kGal−1.38 Owing to growing water scarcity, water rates have been steadily increasing (3.6% APC)38 and in areas like El Paso, Texas have surged by over 33% in a single year.39 To bypass these costs, the use of inexpensive and abundant impaired water sources should be considered for the OER and alternative anode reactions. Impaired waters can include any body of water that doesn't meet one or more regulatory water quality standards that comprise it's designated use.40 The US alone generates 34 billion gallons of wastewater per day,20,41 which could be a cheap and readily available source of low-grade water. Recently, pilot-scale microbial electrolysis (MEC) systems have been demonstrated that utilize microbes at the anode to oxidize organics in wastewater (around 1 V below OER), providing electrons for H2 production at the cathode while also reducing the costs of wastewater treatment.42 Similarly, inland surface water and groundwater, as well as seawater (that covers 70% of earth43) are also viable water-electrolyte sources. In fact, many have investigated the use of seawater as an electrolyte for water reduction44 but catalyst degradation and chloride oxidation have been major hurdles.45
In this perspective review, we discuss various co-valorization tactics to improve the economic viability and sustainability of scalable water or CO2 electrolysis. We consider a wide range of inorganic and organic reactions that can lower energy costs and/or produce value-added products. We also compare the use of biotic vs. abiotic catalysts, and examine the feasibility of using low-grade water sources as electrolytes. Through this wide-ranging assessment, we develop a case study for large-scale electrolysis in California, USA and provide long-term perspective on OER substitutes that delivers insight on future research areas.
2. Co-valorization reactions on the anode to replace the OER
2.1. Inorganic oxidations
Inorganic molecule oxidations are an attractive route to replace the OER as they often utilize low-value feedstock and do not produce CO2 as a by-product. Fig. 2 includes the applied potentials of 6 inorganic reactions at peak selectivity and their performance in coupled water reduction and electrochemical CO2-R systems. The feasibility of such designs has been confirmed by industrial-scale electrolysis platforms like the chloro-alkali process that uses NaCl to generate chlorine gas (Cl2) and hypochlorite (NaClO) at the anode while generating H2 at the cathode.46 Such devices offer a useful roadmap to bring substitute OER reactions to the commercial-scale.
 Fig. 2  Performance summary of inorganic and organic OER alternatives for electrolysis. Summary of reported operating potentials (left, bars) at the anode during peak selectivity (right, diamonds) for target reactions [ref. 24, 25, 27 and 47–55] (A) Reported operating cell potentials vs. current densities (log-scale) for two-electrode H2 evolution [ref. 34, 48, 53 and 55–58] (B) and electrochemical CO2/CO reduction [ref. 14, 24, 49, 51–54 and 59–62] (C) via assorted anode oxidations, detailed in the Rxn legend. Reaction acronyms defined in Table S1.† 

Fig. 2a shows that NaCl oxidations have reached some of the highest faradaic efficiencies (FEs) amongst prospective OER substitutes. Recently, some have used catalysts like ruthenium oxide coated titanium (RuO2/Ti) to achieve excellent anodic conversions (FE 99%, 1.5 V) of NaCl to ClO− while reducing CO2 at the cathode [ref. 24 and Fig. 2c]. High-rates of CO2 reduction have also been reported while employing commercial catalysts (e.g. RuO2–IrO2–TiO2 DSA plates) to oxidize NaCl to Cl2 [Fig. 2c]. Such NaCl oxidations have many advantages including mild reaction conditions, cheap raw materials, and a large product demand in fields such as bleaching and industrial waste treatment.63,64 In addition, highly selective catalysts for these oxidations have been validated at an industrial scale for almost a century, which could greatly accelerate future market penetration.65 Still, the characteristically high redox potential of these reactions may restrict their deployment to niche markets and moderate-scale operations. Fig. 2c also shows that Cl2 and ClO− reactions have some of the highest operating potentials of any OER substitute paired with electrochemical CO2-R. Highly active catalysts like atomically dispersed Pt–N4/CNT66 or Nd-doped IrO267 could offer ways to reduce costs and operating voltages but are yet to be applied to CO2 electrolysis. As such, NaCl oxidations may only be reasonable in future electrolysis applications if practical energy efficiencies can be achieved through innovative material and electrolyzer designs.
Like NaCl oxidations, hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) produced from water can also demand large energy inputs yet the high market price of H2O2 (0.56 $ kg−1)23 may justify high-energy costs. Fig. 2a shows that peak H2O2 FEs of 81% can be achieved at applied potentials of around 2.6 V using zinc oxide (ZnO) nanorods on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO).50 This high performance denotes a large improvement compared to less-efficient catalysts like TiO2,68 BiVO4,69 WO3,70 SnO270 (FEs < 70% at 3 V) and is on-par with other highly-active materials like CaSnO3 (FE = 76%).71,72 Still, a major challenge of H2O/H2O2 oxidation is the high operating voltages (i.e. E° = 1.76 V) that promote competition with the 4-electron OER.50 Lately, some have deployed photochemical catalysts like WO3/BiVO473 and TiO274 to lower overpotentials, though success has been limited.75 In addition, these designs commonly require added infrastructure that may not be practical at large-scale. As such, more work is needed to improve the selectivity of dark H2O/H2O2 oxidation at lower potentials and clearly demonstrate its feasibility in electrosynthesis applications. Still, the high value of H2O2 and use of a convenient feedstock (i.e. H2O) make it an appealing OER substitute worth investigating.
Inorganic oxidations not only can be used to produce value-added chemicals like H2O2 but can also treat abundant waste streams that are expensive yet essential to manage. Urea is a major component of human/animal urine and the nutrients (N,P) released during its degradation lead to major environmental problems such as eutrophication and water pollution. Fig. 2c shows that the urea oxidation reaction (UOR) has some of the highest current densities of any reaction coupled with electrochemical CO2-R. Recently, Ni foam electrodes have been used to pair the UOR with CO2-R at cell potentials of just 2.5 V under peak cathode efficiencies (FECO = 90%),51 outperforming comparable NaCl or SO3-based oxidations [Fig. 2c]. Similarly, high current densities toward water reduction have also been achieved using Ni–N3 alloy nanotubes at low cell potentials around 1.42 V (ref. 56) [Fig. 2b]. Other catalysts such as CeO2/NiMoO4,76 MnCo2O4.5/Ni(OH)2,77 and NiClO78 have also demonstrated good performance with low onset potentials around 1.3 V. At present, replacing the OER with the state-of-the-art UOR could decrease energy costs by as much as 18% (calcs. in ESI-S2†) and performances are likely to improve. Though promising, a critical drawback of the UOR is that the products are difficult to separate, which may increase capital costs and limit scalability. Still, the UOR's potential to tackle abundant waste streams and generate valuable chemicals (i.e. carbonates) make it a promising co-valorization option to consider.
Related to urea, ammonia is another abundant pollutant that is routinely discharged into the environment via sources like agricultural wastewater runoff. Notably, the ammonia oxidation reaction (AOR) can be used to manage toxic nitrogenous compounds at very low theoretical potentials (−0.77 V) while supplying cheap electrons for electrolysis at the cathode. In addition, this process can serve as a price-competitive alternative to slow biological ammonia removal processes and can also generate high-value H2 at the anode (), yielding tremendous economic benefits. The AOR is typically sluggish at room temperature, requiring high overpotentials on transition metals like Pd, Rh, Ru, Au, and Cu,79 but recent work has noted that metals such as Pt, Ir, and Ni have optimal binding energies for M–N intermediates that can improve AOR reaction rates.80,81 For instance, a ternary PtIrNi catalyst79 has recently achieved high current densities around 100 mA cm−2 at some of the lowest operating potentials (0.621 V) of any OER alternative [Fig. 2a]. Similar alloys like N-doped NiZnCu layered double hydroxide (LDH) have also been applied towards water electrolysis, achieving high current densities up to 100 mA cm−2 (ref. 82) [Fig. 2b]. In addition, some have also used catalysts like Pt/C51 to couple the AOR to CO2 electrolysis, albeit at low current cell densities around 10 mA cm−2 [Fig. 2c]. Nevertheless, this work is promising and can serve as the foundation for future operations that leverage the AOR to manage abundant toxic waste streams at low energy costs, while also generating high-quality H2 and green electrons for sustainable electrolysis processes at the cathode.
2.2. Organic oxidations
Organic oxidation reactions (OORs) using alcohols, amines, and various biomass-derived compounds have recently received a lot of attention as potential OER alternatives.57,83Fig. 2 includes the applied potentials of 9 OORs at peak selectivity and their performance in coupled electrolysis applications. At large, OORs can be conducted at low potentials, utilize low to zero cost substrates, and generate a wide-range of valuable building-block molecules and products.

Fig. 2a shows that biomass-derived feedstock like ethanol, acetate, glucose, and 1,2-propanediol can be oxidized at anode potentials between 0.7–1.3 V with high selectivity. Notably, the oxidation of ethanol can be conducted at very high FEs around 99% using Ruthenium55 or Co3O484 nanoparticles. Owing to its low standard redox potential (0.06 V), high current densities of 492 mA cm−2 have been achieved at applied potentials of 1.64 V, with high H2 productivity (3000 L m−2) at the cathode55 [Fig. 2b]. Comparable performance has been demonstrated with ethylene glycol (EG) and 1,2-propanediol oxidations [Fig. 2b]. Similar to ethanol, glucose can also be oxidized at low voltages (1.3 V) with high FEs around 87% [Fig. 2a]. Recently, some of the highest current densities towards H2 evolution (200 mA cm−2) have been demonstrated using nickel iron oxide (NiFeOx) catalysts57 for glucose oxidation at the anode [Fig. 2c]. Other catalysts such Fe2P have also demonstrated good activity for glucose oxidation attaining reasonable current densities (10 mA cm−2) for H2 at low cell voltages (1.22 V).85 These results are promising as glucose is a cheap and abundant organic molecule and its product, glucaric acid (GRA), is considered a “top value-added compound” for its uses in biodegradable polymers, biodegradable detergents, and metal complexation agents.57,86 Altogether, the low-operating potentials and high current densities of these biomass-derived OORs make them prime OER substitutes. For instance, replacing the OER with ethanol oxidation could decrease energy inputs by 43–56% (calcs. in S2†). Still, the majority of present studies have been focused on electrochemical H2 evolution applications and more work is needed to verify their performance in coupled electrochemical CO2-R systems. In addition, higher current densities on the order of Amps per cm2 need to be demonstrated at commercially relevant scales and detailed technoeconomic analyses (TEA) are needed to assess whether the use of high-grade chemicals, as used in these lab scale demonstrations, makes economic sense. Similar evaluations should also be done on even cheaper and more abundant industrial wastewaters that often contain such compounds.
In addition to these reactants, other biomass-derived compounds like 5-hydroxymethyl furfural (HMF) can be oxidized at low anode potentials (1.43 V) [Fig. 2a]. It's product, furandicarboxylic acid (FDCA), is considered a key replacement of terephthalic acid in the generation of polyamides, polyesters, and polyurethanes and holds an exceptionally high market value ($32–580 kg−1).83 Several recent electrochemical and photochemical studies have shown excellent conversion efficiencies (ca. 100%) of HMF to FDCA at low-potentials using catalysts like NiBx,87 CoP,32 or photo-assisted BiVO4.88 Notably, HMF oxidation can be coupled to H2 generation with high current densities around 100 mA cm−2 using nickel–sulfur (Ni3S2) catalysts34 or CO2_R to formate using nickel oxide (NiO) nanoparticles,62 albeit at low current densities (about 2 mA cm−2) [Fig. 2b and c]. The low operating potentials, excellent conversion efficiencies, and high-value of FDCA make HMF oxidation one of the most promising OER substitutes to date. Still, foreseeable roadblocks may exist in large-scale sourcing/processing of HMF and the costs of FDCA separation.89
Like inorganic reactions, OORs can also be used to treat waste compounds that are costly to manage. Glycerol is a common waste by-product of biodiesel production that can be used as a near zero-cost substrate to produce glyceric acid (GCA), a building block for polymeric materials,90 along with other valuable products such as formic acid, lactic acid, gluconic acid, and glyceraldehyde.14 Lately, materials like organometallic Co-DPPE91 and AuPt92 have shown promising current densities (44–50 mA cm−2) for glucose oxidation, and others using STEMPO immobilized on ITO47 have demonstrated similar current densities with high FEs (83%) at the anode [Fig. 2a]. When paired with electrochemical CO2 reduction to CO, some of the highest current densities (95 mA cm−2) of any OER substitute have been achieved using Pt/C for glycerol oxidation14 [Fig. 2c]. In addition, replacement of the OER with glycerol co-electrolysis has been reported to reduce energy demands by up to 53% in CO2 electrolyzers.14 This data is encouraging as the combined benefits of treating an industrial waste while generating high-value products at low cost makes glycerol oxidation an attractive OER substitute that can boost profits while reducing the environmental footprint of current biodiesel production.
Aside from these biomolecules, high FEs have also been achieved from alcohol oxidations (e.g. benzylic alcohol) using catalyst like nitrogen-doped carbon (NC) on CuCoXNx93 but the overpotentials of these reactions are still relatively high [Fig. 2a]. Likewise, amine oxidations (e.g. n-butylamine to n-butyronitrile) can also demand high overpotentials even with state-of-the-art catalyst like NiFeOx oxyhydroxides.25 Still, their role in production of valuable imines, nitriles, amides, and amine oxides94–96 is appealing so more work should be done to lower operating voltages and test their performance in electrosynthesis applications.
3. Design considerations
3.1. Abiotic vs. biotic catalysts
The bulk of OER alternative reactions have been examined using abiotic (non-living) catalysts to initiate electrochemical51 or photochemical reactions.50 These include various metal alloys, nanoparticle oxides, and synthetic organometallic compounds that can provide high reaction rates but are often challenged by poor selectivity, low resistance to corrosion, high cost, and inadequate stability.97–100 To circumvent these issues some have turned to biologically-inspired catalysts101 such as enzymes and living cells to initiate various oxidations at the anode.102 Enzymatic catalysts can generally provide numerous benefits including mild operating conditions, high selectivity, and good resistance to co-solvents/corrosion.103,104 Previously, enzymes such as glucose oxidase (GOx) and alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) have been employed in biofuel cell anodes,105 demonstrating moderate efficiencies for the oxidation of glucose (8.3%)106 and ethanol (64%),107 respectively. Still, most enzymes contain their active sites buried deep below their surface,101 which obstructs their electrochemical communication with the electrode and limits overall current densities.101,103 In addition, most enzymatic operations still rely on complex co-factor regeneration cycles107,108 that lower efficiencies, increase costs, and generate problematic waste streams. As such, recent studies have explored the use of whole-cell microbes in place of enzymes or abiotic catalysts at the electrode surface. For example, electroactive bacteria (EAB) can initiate many biological redox reactions that can replace the OER or other abiotically catalyzed reactions. This can potentially lower material costs and improve the sustainability of operations. In the simplest application, EAB are employed in microbial electrochemical systems where they oxidize influent electron donors (often waste organics) and reduce anode electrodes using extra-cellular electron transfer (EET) mechanisms109 as part of their respiration.110 EET can either be direct via surface-bound cytochromes/nanowires111,112 or indirect via excreted mediators/electron shuttles such as flavins.113–115 EAB oxidation offers several benefits compared to the OER and other abiotic alternatives: (1) rather than H2O, microbial redox reactions typically involve the oxidation of organic molecules, which can substantially lower operating potentials. For instance, if using acetate as the electron donor, H2 could be produced at a theoretical cell potential of just 0.16 V, which is about a tenth of the voltage of the OER.116,117 Similarly, replacing OER with (waste) organic oxidization in the anode could reduce the thermodynamic barrier of CO2-R to CO from 1.34 V to 0.24 V;118 (2) microbes can process a wide-variety of abundant waste streams, simultaneously enabling electrosynthesis and large savings on traditional wastewater treatment; (3) microbes are self-replicating, allowing for stable oxidations over long periods without the replacement of expensive or rare catalysts (e.g. enzymes, precious metals); and (4) EAB can thrive at ambient temperatures and pressures, have a wide pH tolerance, do not require oxygen, produce low amounts of biomass, and can operate as open-cultures that avoid sterilization costs.
Indeed such advantages have led to the development of microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) that use electrons and protons generated by EAB oxidation to generate H2 at the cathode.119 In a typical setup, EAB form a biofilm on anode electrodes where they oxidize waste organics and use EET mechanisms to transfer electrons through an external circuit to the cathode for abiotic water electrolysis. MECs have been operated with a wide assortment of feedstock including glucose, glycerol, acetic acid, cellulose, sewage sludge, and wastewater.120,121 Typically a small voltage of ca. 0.2–0.8 V vs. RHE is applied to initiate the flow of electrons,122 or the external voltage need can be bypassed by using a photocathode94 or integrated power management circuit.123,124Fig. 2a shows acetate oxidation can be conducted at very high selectivity (ca. 100%) at low anode potentials (0.78 V). Likewise, high MEC H2 production rates (50 m3 H2 per m3 reactor per day) and yields (close to 100%) have also been reported and are constantly improving.125 In addition to H2 evolution, MEC-type devices have also been used to generate valuable chemicals such as H2O2,126 degrade pollutants like 4-chlorophenol,127 and recover nutrients such as nitrogen128 and phosphorus.129 Moreover, some have coupled EAB oxidation to the synthesis of carbon products such as methane and formic acid from CO2.130 Though promising, microbial electrochemical systems rely on whole cell catalysts that face several scalability challenges such as slow mass transfer rates in low-conductivity electrolytes (e.g. wastewater) that limit overall current densities. Nevertheless, whole-cell catalysts could provide a variety of benefits that complement abiotic or enzymatic catalysis towards low-cost and sustainable electrolysis.
3.2. Realistic electrolyte considerations
Electrolytes that replace pure water for anode oxidations can include a wide-range of aqueous and organic-based solutions. Practical electrolyte considerations include operating pH, temperature, conductivity, and waste management strategies. In addition, electrolytes should be inexpensive, abundant, non-corrosive to catalysts, highly conductive, and exclude ions that are difficult to separate from target valorization products.
In mature electrolysis operations, it may be impractical and/or costly to substitute the existing OER for an alternative co-valorization reaction. The typical OER uses a high purity water electrolyte, which can be expensive and unsustainable due to high water demands.15 Rather than transporting treated water to electrolyzers, high-purity water could be produced via on-site purification/desalination techniques.131 Such processes would, however, inflict significant overhead to production associated with added infrastructure, energy usage, and waste management.132,133 The cost of commercial-scale water treatment processes like desalination are frequently expensive as $2–6 kGal−1.134,135 To avoid these costs, some have considered using seawater as an OER electrolyte due to its low cost, abundance, conductivity, and suitable pH. Fig. 3 summarizes the performance of various studies that have used seawater OER at the anode to support H2 production at the cathode. To date, major challenges have included maintaining a stable pH at the anode, mitigating fouling from non-innocent ions, and increasing selectivity for OER over competing chloride oxidations.45 Lately, reasonable current densities have been attained using catalysts such as FeOx,136 NiCo,137 and NiNS138 for seawater OER [Fig. 3]. Notably, Dresp et al. (2018)139 recently operated a seawater H2 electrolyzer at high current densities of 200 mA cm−2 using a nickel–iron (NiFe) layered double hydroxide anode at 1.6 V [Fig. 3]. Such breakthroughs, present promising options to lower operating costs and improve the sustainability of large-scale OER.
 Fig. 3  Comparison of impaired water electrolytes used in H2 electrolysis. Reported operating cell potentials (x-axis) vs. current densities (log-scale, y-axis) for two-electrode H2 evolution [ref. 42, 136–139 and 149–158] via various impaired water electrolytes. Acronyms: lab-scale seawater OER (SW), MEC using municipal wastewater (MW), MEC using industrial wastewater (IW), and MEC pilot-scale (>1–2 L) using municipal wastewater (pilot MW). 
Though encouraging, the added costs of water transmission ($120–156 MGal−1)140,141 may restrict the use of seawater OER to coastal communities, so equally cheap and abundant in-land water sources (i.e. surface water, groundwater, or wastewater) should also be considered. For example, the US alone produces around 60.4 km3 of municipal wastewater per year142 that could serve as a virtually free electrolyte source. Such wastewaters are often available in high population areas that also emit large amounts of waste CO2 and have a high demand for products such as H2 and energy-dense organics. For instance, New York City consumes about 1.5 billion gasoline gallon equivalents of energy per year143 while also generating 55 Mt CO2− e144 and 475 billion gallons145 of municipal wastewater per year.
As such, an ideal scenario could be to leverage existing wastewaters in an industrial-scale electrolysis operation that simultaneously accomplishes fuel and chemical synthesis, CO2 capture and utilization, and wastewater treatment in a single integrated process. Such platforms could not only be used to tackle municipal wastewaters but could also be applied to highly abundant industrial waste streams that are costly to manage. For example, biorefineries typically produce high strength wastewater (80–160 g L−1 COD)146,147 that is rich in organic compounds, which can serve as cheap electron donors for anode oxidations in place of the traditional OER. Effective oxidation of these waste molecules can simultaneously generate clean water while providing low-cost electrons for carbon-negative (or neutral) electrolysis or electrosynthesis of high-value products at the cathode. Indeed, such practices could substantially increase biorefinery profits by (1) generating valuable chemicals, (2) enabling additional carbon tax credits/incentives, and (3) lowering wastewater treatment costs that can routinely account for 30–40% of total plant operating expenses.148

Fig. 3 summarizes various H2 electrolysis studies that have used industrial or municipal wastewater electrolytes at the anode. Though many wastewater oxidations can potentially be initiated via abiotic or enzymatic catalysts, the majority of present studies have focused on using whole-cell bacteria to oxidize waste organics in MEC-type reactors [Fig. 3]. Importantly, the oxidation of waste organics has allowed these OORs to take place at much lower operating potentials (0.5–1.2 V) than alternate OERs in seawater or potable water (ca. 2.3–2.4 V), highlighting their good potential for energy/cost savings [Fig. 3]. Nevertheless, the current densities (.004–1.6 mA cm−2) of these state-of-the-art reactions have a mean value of 0.36 mA cm−2 (variance, 0.22) and are typically been lower than those achieved in seawater or potable water due to slow rates of EET and mass-transfer limitations at the electrode interface159 [Fig. 3].
Notably, the performance of wastewater oxidations (via MEC) seems to be related to the scale of operation and composition of the wastewater electrolyte. For example, reactors using municipal wastewaters (MW) with sizes below 1 L frequently achieved around 16–18 times greater current densities than those at larger scale (>1–2 L, pilot) using similar MW electrolytes [Fig. 3]. This can generally be attributed to high internal resistances caused by ineffective mixing/mass transfer in the pilot-scale systems.42 Similarly, industrial wastewaters (IW) seem to support higher current densities than MW, as reactors of similar volumes using IW enriched with glucose or glycerol,153 often achieved 3–4 times higher current densities than those using MW at similar operating potentials [Fig. 3]. This is likely because IW can frequently provide higher conductivities and greater organic loadings that support microbial growth and faster rates of electron transfer.153
Though several challenges exist, the combined benefits of lower energy demands, reduced electrolyte costs, generation of valuable products, and treatment of costly waste streams, makes the use wastewater electrolytes one of the most promising co-valorization options available for electrolysis to date. As such, future research is needed to improve the scalability of reactor configurations and develop efficient catalysts that can achieve high current densities in a range of wastewater compositions.
3.3. Expected energy input and costs
Energy costs are a major barrier to large-scale electrolysis and are highly dependent on source, location, availability, and existing governmental policies/incentives.160Fig. 4 summarizes exemplary energy inputs and costs of cathodic CO2-to-ethanol electrosynthesis using various reactions at the anode [calcs. provided in ESI S3†]. These oxidations were chosen due to their low-energy inputs and/or the high market value of their products to assess the economic viability of OER substitutes. A brief comparison of the following results to conventional bioethanol fermentation is provided in the ESI [S4].† Average power intensities range from 13.6 to 24.9 kW h kg−1, depending on the applied potential of the oxidation reactions, with the lowest energy inputs required for OORs like acetate oxidation (13.6 kW h kg−1) and HMF/FDCA oxidation (17.7 kW h kg−1) [Fig. 4a]. Notably, the energy demands of the HMF/FDCA oxidation are amongst the lowest while the market price of FDCA ($32 per kg) is orders of magnitude larger than the products from alternative reactions. Average power intensities for each oxidation scenario were used to approximate costs of electrosynthesis using levelized costs of energy (LCOE) from a recent U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA) report161 [Fig. 3b]. As expected, costs were highly dependent on the energy source used. For instance, if using seawater OER with a fossil fuel like coal, production costs can be as high as $US 1233–1730 per tonne compared to just $US 522–843 per tonne when using renewable energy from solar photovoltaics (PV) [Fig. 4b]. This price gap is prompted by current tax incentives and is likely to be highly variable upon location. However, the retail price of renewable power is projected to steadily decrease due to improved technologies, economies of scale, and strengthened supply chains.162 Importantly, substituting the OER for an OOR like acetate oxidation can still lead to substantial savings of around $140–220 per tonne even when using the same cheap power source like solar PV [Fig. 4b]. These costs estimates are in-line with comparable economic analysis7 and highlight the importance of electricity costs for scalable electrolysis.
 Fig. 4  Power intensities and estimated energy costs of various oxidation scenarios. Current market price of anode products (log scale, x-axis) with corresponding power demands for coupled cathodic CO2-to-ethanol conversion (y-axis) via assorted anode reactions (markers) (A) energy costs per tonne of ethanol produced in a CO2 electrolyzer using various anode reactions (markers legend) and power sources. (B) Costs based on an average of levelized costs of energy (LCOE) with range shown in error bars; select power acronyms: combustion cycle natural gas (CB-NG), combined cycle natural gas (CC-NG). Anode oxidations defined as standard OER (DI), OER using seawater electrolyte (SW), acetate oxidation (ACOX), H2O2 generation via H2O oxidation (H2O2), FDCA production via HMF oxidation (FDCA). 
4. An example comparison of OER alternatives for large-scale electrolysis in Los Angeles, CA
The United States is a major GHG contributor with annual emissions of over 20 tonnes-CO2 equivalents per capita.163 California (CA) is the nation's most populous state and is the second largest total energy consumer behind Texas.164 Almost half of CA's electricity is supplied by renewable sources and is expected to increase to 100% renewable (retail) electricity by 2045.165 In-line with these initiatives, CA's renewable energy infrastructure and lack of freshwater supply present a promising environment for early adoption of large-scale electrolysis using OER alternatives in the anode. Such low-carbon technologies can also benefit from the state's GHG reduction policies/incentives that accompany the CA Global Warming Solutions Act of 2006.166
Los Angeles (LA), as the largest city in CA, consumes around 26 million MWh of electricity per year.167Fig. 5 shows the estimated electrolysis costs and profits if LA were to replace 20% of their yearly energy demand with H2 produced via various coupled anode reactions (calcs. provided in ESI S5†). A total of five oxidation scenarios were considered with an emphasis on varying key operating parameters such as electrolyte source, cell voltage, and market value of the products. Again, these alternate oxidations were chosen due to their low-energy inputs and/or the high market value of their products.
 Fig. 5  Comparison of H2 electrolysis costs and profits using various co-valorization tactics in LA, California. Estimated energy demand of electrochemical H2 production (y-axis, left) and operating voltages (y-axis, right) via assorted anode reactions (x-axis) (A); plant schematic of microbial electrolysis (MEC) for concurrent anodic wastewater treatment and H2 production (C); projected water electrolysis costs and profits from H2 sales alone (left, y-axis) and combined H2 and anode products sales (right, y-axis) in Los Angeles, California in 2021 (B) and 2040 (D); anode oxidations defined as standard OER (DI-OER), OER using seawater electrolyte (seawater), waste organic oxidation (wastewater), H2O2 generation via H2O oxidation (H2O2), FDCA production via HMF oxidation (FDCA). 
The significance of electrolyte costs was initially probed by comparing the traditional freshwater OER (DI-OER) with seawater OER. Based on previous reports, this can be done at operating voltages of around 1.73 V if performance with catalysts like NiFe double hydroxide can be adequately scaled139 [Fig. 5a]. The combined impacts of decreasing both the electrolyte costs and operating voltages were then evaluated via an MEC type operation that replaces freshwater anolyte with inexpensive wastewater and substitutes water oxidation with the oxidation of waste organics (i.e. acetate to CO2). Here it is envisioned that whole-cell biocatalysts on the anode can consume waste organics/nutrients from municipal wastewaters, providing electrons and protons for H2 production at the cathode and partially treated water for subsequent advanced water treatment processes. It is anticipated such systems can be operated at moderate potentials around 0.83 V as commonly reported in MEC pilot-scale studies42,158 [Fig. 5a]. As such oxidations can often produce low-value end products, the impact of greatly increasing the market value of anode products was explored by considering OER alternatives like the inorganic oxidation of H2O to H2O2 and organic oxidation of HMF to FDCA (eqs. listed in S5†). As previously described, these reactions can generate higher value anode products and be operated at modest cell potentials of 2.25 V for H2O2 production50,70 and 1.47 V (ref. 34 and 168) for FDCA synthesis, respectively [Fig. 5a and Table S2†]. For all oxidation scenarios, the respective amounts of anode products were directly calculated using mass-balance equations set to satisfy 20% of LA's annual energy demand with 154 ktonnes H2 generated at the cathode [Table S4, ESI S5†].
Since LA is located on the coast, seawater OER could be a convenient option to replace the traditional OER in large-scale electrolysis. Substituting traditional DI-OER with seawater OER could potentially lower operating costs (from H2O use) by around $2.5 million per year while avoiding about 370 MGal of freshwater use annually [Table S4† and Fig. 5b]. Still, energy demands for seawater OER would be about 2 kW h kg−1 H2 greater than DI-OER due to the increased operating voltages needed to avoid electrode fouling and competing redox reactions [Fig. 5a]. As such, yearly electrolysis profits (ca. $700 million year) would be similar using either freshwater or seawater electrolytes at the anode due to increased energy expenses [Fig. 5b]. In contrast, the use of wastewater electrolytes could lead to substantial savings by reducing operating voltages while also circumventing freshwater needs. For example, the oxidation of waste organics rather than H2O (via DI-OER) could decrease operating voltages from 2.3 V to 0.83 V, leading to around a 93% increase in net profits [Fig. 5a and b]. This is a feasible large-scale approach as an operation of this scale would require about 1 MGal of wastewater per day and LA currently produces around 580169 times that amount, presenting a nearly inexhaustibly source of low-cost electrons and water. Still, present H2 production rates (via MEC) will need to improve to realize such benefits at scale.170
Nevertheless, maximizing total yearly profits requires increasing the market value of products at the anode as both the oxidation of waste organics to CO2 ($.04 per kg) and the OER (creating O2, $.02 per kg) generate relatively low-value commodities. Fig. 5b shows that the combined profits from anode and cathode products can far exceed those from just cathode products (i.e. H2 sales) alone. For example, additional profits of $2.4 bn per year could be achieved if H2O2 (2.6 MT) produced alongside H2 can be sold at a retail price of $0.59 per kg (ref. 23) [Fig. 5b and Table S4†]. Similarly, organic oxidation of HMF to FDCA could also generate sizable profits of around $26 bn per year, owing to low operating potentials and the exceptionally high-market value of FDCA [Fig. 4a]. Notably, the profits of these operations may even increase when considering future market factors.

Fig. 5d shows the adjusted cost and profit estimates for year 2040 based on energy cost predictions from a recent EIA report.161 Future energy prices are predicted to decrease considerably, increasing profits across all oxidation scenarios [Fig. 5d]. Anodic H2O2 or FDCA generation would remain the most economic strategies, however, the relatively high water and energy uses (e.g. 44–67 kW h kg−1 H2) of these methods could potentially lead to substantial drawbacks related to large water footprints and hefty CO2 emissions. As such, the theoretically low energy and potable water uses of wastewater oxidation make it a promising option in terms of both sustainability and future profits. For example, electrolysis operations that replace the traditional anode OER with wastewater oxidation could save about 25 kW h kg−1 H2 and generate an additional $128 million dollars of profits per year [Fig. 5a and d]. Additional benefits can also be obtained by wastewater treatment savings and water-reuse (not quantified). Such integrated wastewater systems are in-line with trends toward decentralized urban water treatment currently under development.171
Though promising, large-scale operations such as these will need to carefully consider environment health and safety aspects of their niche application. In general, these can include detailed accounting of GHG emissions (indirect and direct), waste management techniques, and environmental impact assessments. For instance, seawater electrolysis could potentially influence the surrounding ocean ecology or by-products of H2O2 (or HMF/FDCA) separation may be hazardous wastes that require unique disposal methods. Such concerns should be meticulously addressed in future life-cycle assessments as these technologies are scaled-up. In addition, large-scale electrolysis operations should ensure plant safety by avoiding the formation of dangerous chemical mixtures that can form in situ, as those routinely found in modern H2 electrolyzers that use the traditional OER (i.e. explosive H2/O2 mixes16). For instance, reactive molecules such as H2O2 or Cl2/ClO− could potentially combine with H2 or CO2-R products, generating flammable mixtures. As such, future electrolyzer designs should consider implementing devices like ion-exchange membranes,172 ion-permeable separators (e.g. metal–oxide diaphragms173), or thin product extraction chambers174 that mitigate product cross-over. Such designs have been effectively employed in industrial-scale electrochemical systems like the chloro-alkali processes175 and can be applied to related electrolysis operations towards improved safety and maximized profits.
5. Technical steps towards scalable anode co-valorization
Many alternative anode reactions present promising opportunities to replace the conventional OER while potentially generating substantial add-on economic and societal benefits. Still, future research efforts should aim to improve the scalability of state-of-the-art processes by addressing key limitations in material costs, kinetics, and long-term reactor stability.
Notably, several OER alternatives use expensive catalysts (e.g. precious metals) that can drag the value proposition of electrolysis operations [Tables S5–S7†]. For instance, if operating with 1 kg of catalyst, replacing an precious metal such as Pt ($998 per ozt)176 with a cheaper transition metal like nickel ($.54 per ozt)176 can reduce costs around $32000, leading to significant savings at large-scale. As such, it is crucial that researchers develop sustainable, low cost, and efficient catalysts that can support fast production rates and long-term reactor stability.
In general, the kinetics of abiotic catalysts can be improved by tuning material properties such as particle size,177 surface roughness,178 crystal facet expression,179 and surface binding energy.180 Recent studies showed using free energy diagrams to predict (1010) and (0001) facets on ZnO were an effective method to select active and stable catalysts for H2O2 production.50 Likewise, modulating the oxidation state of Ni active sites was used to tune *COO binding energies and promote more rapid UOR kinetics.78
To complement new materials, future studies can further improve kinetics by accelerating mass-transfer at the electrode surface via rapid-mixing, advanced flow-fields designs,181 and/or increasing the operating temperatures/pressures. A recent thermo-electrochemical hybrid process using a solid acid electrochemical cell (SAEC) achieved exceptionally high current densities for ammonia oxidation and impressive efficiencies for H2 production (ca. 100%) while operating at 250 °C.182
At large, similar tactics that involve improved material and reactor designs can also be applied to biotic catalysts. Recent calculations have suggested that promoting EAB biofilm growth with new 3D electrode materials can boost current densities up to 1 A cm−2 in MEC-type reactors159 and combining these materials with state-of-the-art gas diffusion electrodes,183 bubble-columns,184 or hollow-fiber membranes185 can likely further improve kinetics.
In addition, breakthroughs in genetic engineering186 (e.g. CRISPR) or adaptive lab enrichment187 can be leveraged to further boost microbial metabolisms and cell tolerance of high temperatures (i.e. thermophiles)188 high salinities (i.e. halophiles)189 or extreme pH190 that may also promote fast redox rates. For example, EAB such as Acidiphilium cryptum can tolerate very low operating pH (2.5)190 after several adaptive enrichment cycles, making them more amenable to conditions that promote H2 synthesis.
Nevertheless, intense reactor conditions that accompany high current densities may also be detrimental to the overall reactor stability, especially when using sensitive abiotic catalysts. For instance, pH near the electrode surface has shown to change 5–9 pH units (vs. the bulk) during seawater electrolysis,191 leading to increased overpotentials and catalyst deactivation.192 As such, further development of tools such as protective catalyst films193 and decoupled reactor configurations194 are needed to help mitigate such effects. Some have recently used solid-state redox materials to isolate H2O2 production at the anode,195 demonstrating a step in this direction. Similar devices could also enable abiotic catalysts to more effectively operate in impaired water electrolytes like wastewater where fouling via microbes, obstructive particulate matter, and non-innocent ions may be severe. Though biocatalysts can achieve excellent stability (3–12 months) in a variety of wastewaters,151,196,197 progress towards new electrode materials,198 reactor designs, and protective cell coatings199 may be useful to extend stable operation periods at higher current densities and larger reactor scales.
6. Outlook
The quantitative review and calculations provided in this study show numerous alternatives to the conventional OER in electrolysis that can yield significant economic and societal benefits. Still, many of these pathways are nascent and need to overcome various challenges to improve scalability and performance. In general, each of the scenarios may be suited to niche applications as it may be difficult for a single solution to meet and balance multiple objectives that can include maximized profits, low water-footprint, limited GHG emissions, and long-term stability/feasibility. Alternative OER reactions involving both inorganic and organic molecules present many worthwhile options that can generate substantial add-on profits. Industries can leverage these processes to produce feedstock chemicals required for other processes that are housed at the same facility and take advantage of existing purification, distribution, and waste-management infrastructure. For instance, ethanol biorefineries generate high strength wastewater and high purity waste CO2, which can be an ideal combination for concurrent wastewater treatment and CO2 electrolysis-to-ethanol. In general, OER alternatives can use mature operations like the chloro-alkali process as useful models towards market transformation. In particular, a reaction like HMF/FDCA oxidation is an attractive OER alternative due to its low-operating potentials, high conversion efficiencies, and high market value of target products. Still, OORs like this have almost exclusively been demonstrated at the lab-scale, and data coupling this oxidation with parallel cathodic H2 evolution or electrochemical CO2-R has been scarce. As discussed, the kinetics of this reaction (and other OER alternatives) should also be improved, as relatively high-energy inputs are required for peak selectivities. Universally, future research initiatives need to advance reactor configurations and optimize materials for alternative inorganic or organic reactions to become practical at the commercial scale. Considerations must be made for reactant supply/availability and the market size of end products. In addition, the environmental impact of individual processes should be assessed to determine how their GHG emissions, water demand, and waste generation compare to the conventional OER and other options.
At large, the sustainability of the OER and alternate oxidations can be improved by replacing high-quality water electrolytes with impaired water sources (e.g. seawater or wastewater). Such practices can decrease operational costs and greatly reduce water footprints of electrolysis. This is important as a third of the worldwide population lacks clean water and could face trade-offs between drinking water and energy supply.200 Recently, processes like seawater OER have made significant progress and several studies have achieved modest current densities (43–67 mA cm−2) using real seawater electrolytes.137,155 Still, many technical obstacles including electrode corrosion, pH control,191 fouling, competing redox reactions,192 and low-energy efficiencies, must be overcome for seawater OER to be feasible at large-scale. Lately, designs involving permiselective catalyst coatings193 and optimized OER surface binding sites,201 show good potential to improve overall performance metrics. Such innovations could also be applied to impaired in-land water sources (e.g. wastewater, surface waters, or ground waters) that will likely face similar challenges related to obstructive particulate matter, microbial fouling, and the existence of non-innocent ions. Complementary to seawater sources, wastewater treatment facilities are often located in population centers and near industrial CO2 point sources (such as power plant, refineries, cement plants, etc.)20 that are routinely challenged by energy storage, CO2 emissions, and water use issues.202,203 A single-integrated electrolysis process could solve multiple challenges by cleaning up wastewater at the anode, generating reusable water for on-site processes, and capturing/upgrading CO2 into value-added fuels and chemicals. Researchers are currently working to translate such technologies to the market, and are addressing various performance issues by adapting microbes to hyper saline media to support higher current densities,204 developing new catalysts that effectively operate at neutral pH,205 and constructing novel reactors that physically decouple anode and cathode reactions.206,207
As research continues to advance, an assortment of anode co-valorization techniques will likely become available to future electrolysis operations. Still, many approaches will only be suitable in fit-for-purpose designs and commercial adoption will highly depend on the available water source, electron donors, energy costs, and product demands. As such, careful techno-economic analyses (TEA) and additional CAPEX/OPEX reports would be useful to help identify niche markets where anode and cathode reaction products could be efficiently coupled. In addition, more life-cycle assessment (LCA) studies are needed to evaluate the environmental impacts of the various OER alternatives to ensure they support important global initiatives like the UN SDG 6 on Clean water and sanitation and UN SDG 13 on Climate Action.208 Nevertheless, advancements towards effective anode co-valorization can indeed maximize future profits, accelerate market penetration, and greatly improve the sustainability of commercial electrosynthesis.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by Princeton Catalysis Initiative and the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment Grant for Innovative Research at Princeton University.
References
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, The path towards sustainable energy, Nat. Mater., 2016, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Rau, H. D. Willauer and Z. J. Ren, The global potential for converting renewable electricity to negative-CO2-emissions hydrogen, Nat. Clim. Change, 2018, 621–625 CrossRef .

          International Renewable Energy Agency - IRENA, Renewable power: Climate-safe energy competes on cost alone,  2018 Search PubMed .

          S. Reed, Power Prices Go Negative in Germany, a Positive for Energy Users, The New York Times,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Adminstration, U. S. E. I., Rising solar generation in California coincides with negative wholesale electricity prices,  2017 Search PubMed .
E. Park, 
            et al., Covalent organic framework-supported platinum nanoparticles as efficient electrocatalysts for water reduction, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 2596–2602 RSC .
P. De Luna, 
            et al., What would it take for renewably powered electrosynthesis to displace petrochemical processes?, Science, 2019, 364(6438) CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Sachs, 
            et al., Six Transformations to achieve the Sustainable Development Goals, Nat. Sustainability, 2019, 2, 805–814 CrossRef .
D. Gielen, Hydrogen from Renewable Power Technology Outlook for the Energy Transition Innovation for the Power Sector Transformation View project Global Energy Assessment-Towards a Sustainable Future View project, Int. Renewable Energy Agency, 2018, 1–35 Search PubMed .
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Economics of converting renewable power to hydrogen, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .

          United States Department of Energy, Strategic Plan for a Thriving and Sustainable Bioeconomy,  2016.  DOI:10.1017/CBO9781107415324.004 .
L. Fan, C. Xia, F. Yang, J. Wang, H. Wang and Y. Lu, Strategies in catalysts and electrolyzer design for electrochemical CO2 reduction toward C2+ products, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6(8) DOI:10.1126/sciadv.aay3111 .
S. Sultan, 
            et al., Single Atoms and Clusters Based Nanomaterials for Hydrogen Evolution, Oxygen Evolution Reactions, and Full Water Splitting, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9 DOI:10.1002/aenm.201900624 .
S. Verma, S. Lu and P. J. A. Kenis, Co-electrolysis of CO2 and glycerol as a pathway to carbon chemicals with improved technoeconomics due to low electricity consumption, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(6), 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mehmeti, A. Angelis-Dimakis, G. Arampatzis, S. J. McPhail and S. Ulgiati, Life cycle assessment and water footprint of hydrogen production methods: From conventional to emerging technologies, Environments – MDPI, 2018, 5(2), 1–19 Search PubMed .
Z. P. Ifkovits, J. M. Evans, M. C. Meier, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, Decoupled electrochemical water-splitting systems: a review and perspective, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(9), 4740–4759 RSC .
A. C. Alba-Rubio, A. Plauck, E. E. Stangland, M. Mavrikakis and J. A. Dumesic, Direct Synthesis of Hydrogen Peroxide over Au-Pd Catalysts Prepared by Electroless Deposition, Catal. Lett., 2015, 145(12), 2057–2065 CrossRef CAS .
N. Spiliopoulou and C. G. Kokotos, Photochemical metal-free aerobic oxidation of thiols to disulfides, Green Chem., 2021, 23(1), 546–551 RSC .
S. He, 
            et al., Metal nitride nanosheets enable highly efficient electrochemical oxidation of ammonia, Nano Energy, 2021, 80 DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.105528 .
L. Lu, J. S. Guest, C. A. Peters, X. Zhu, G. H. Rau and Z. J. Ren, Wastewater treatment for carbon capture and utilization, Nat. Sustainability, 2018 DOI:10.1038/s41893-018-0187-9 .
J. Crook and A. Mousavi, The chlor-alkali process: A review of history and pollution, Environ. Forensics, 2016, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yu, C. C. Lang, M. R. Gao, Y. Chen, Q. Q. Fu, Y. Duan and S. H. Yu, Ni-Mo-O nanorod-derived composite catalysts for efficient alkaline water-to-hydrogen conversion: Via urea electrolysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(7), 1890–1897 RSC .

          Database, I.-I. C. P., Hydrogen Peroxide Prices: Historical & Current,  2020.
Available at: https://www.intratec.us/chemical-markets/hydrogen-peroxide-price. (Accessed: 10th July 2020) Search PubMed .
F. Quan, G. Zhan, H. Shang, Y. Huang, F. Jia, L. Zhang and Z. Ai, Highly efficient electrochemical conversion of CO2 and NaCl to CO and NaClO, Green Chem., 2019, 21(12), 3256–3262 RSC .
S. Xue, 
            et al., Reconsidering Water Electrolysis: Producing Hydrogen at Cathodes Together with Selective Oxidation of n-Butylamine at Anodes, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(24), 4812–4816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Duan, A. Vasileff and S. Z. Qiao, Size Fractionation of Two-Dimensional Sub-Nanometer Thin Manganese Dioxide Crystals towards Superior Urea Electrocatalytic Conversion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(11), 3804–3808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Fu, G. S. Sauer, A. Saha, A. Loo and S. Lin, Metal-catalyzed electrochemical diazidation of alkenes, Science, 2017, 357(6351), 575–579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, C. Feng, S. Wang, J. Liu, H. Wu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Ni 3 N/NF as Bifunctional Catalysts for Both Hydrogen Generation and Urea Decomposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(14), 13168–13175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Efficient H2 Evolution Coupled with Oxidative Refining of Alcohols via A Hierarchically Porous Nickel Bifunctional Electrocatalyst, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(7), 4564–4570 CrossRef CAS .
A. Izgorodin, E. Izgorodina and D. R. MacFarlane, Low overpotential water oxidation to hydrogen peroxide on a MnO x catalyst, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(11), 9496–9501 RSC .
C. Tang, 
            et al., Energy-Saving Electrolytic Hydrogen Generation: Ni2P Nanoarray as a High-Performance Non-Noble-Metal Electrocatalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(3), 842–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Jiang, B. You, R. Boonstra, I. M. Terrero Rodriguez and Y. Sun, Integrating Electrocatalytic 5-Hydroxymethylfurfural Oxidation and Hydrogen Production via Co-P-Derived Electrocatalysts, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1(2), 386–390 CrossRef CAS .
J. Weidner, S. Barwe, K. Sliozberg, S. Piontek, J. Masa, U. P. Apfel and W. Schuhmann, Cobalt-metalloid alloys for electrochemical oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural as an alternative anode reaction in lieu of oxygen evolution during water splitting, Beilstein J. Org. Chem., 2018, 14, 1436–1445 CrossRef PubMed .
B. You, X. Liu, N. Jiang and Y. Sun, A General Strategy for Decoupled Hydrogen Production from Water Splitting by Integrating Oxidative Biomass Valorization, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(41), 13639–13646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You, N. Jiang, X. Liu and Y. Sun, Simultaneous H2Generation and Biomass Upgrading in Water by an Efficient Noble-Metal-Free Bifunctional Electrocatalyst, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 128(34), 10067–10071 CrossRef .
J. P. Zou, 
            et al., Electrochemical oxidation and advanced oxidation processes using a 3D hexagonal Co3O4 array anode for 4-nitrophenol decomposition coupled with simultaneous CO2 conversion to liquid fuels via a flower-like CuO cathode, Water Res., 2019, 150, 330–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Posdziech, T. Geißler, K. Schwarze and R. Blumentritt, System Development and Demonstration of Large-Scale High-Temperature Electrolysis, ECS Trans., 2019, 91, 2537–2546 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Layne, Water costs are rising across the U.S.—here's why. CBS News, 2019. Available at: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/water-bills-rising-cost-of-water-creating-big-utility-bills-for-americans/. (Accessed: 1st June 2020).
U.S. water & wastewater bills climb, exposing questions of affordability. Bluefield Research, 2019. Available at: https://www.bluefieldresearch.com/ns/us-water-wastewater-bills-climb/. (Accessed: 1st June 2020).
A. A. Keller and L. Cavallaro, Assessing the US Clean Water Act 303(d) listing process for determining impairment of a waterbody, J. Environ. Manage., 2008, 86(4), 699–711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
The Sources and Solutions: Wastewater | Nutrient Pollution | US EPA. Available at: https://www.epa.gov/nutrientpollution/sources-and-solutions-wastewater. (Accessed: 26th May 2020).
E. S. Heidrich, J. Dolfing, K. Scott, S. R. Edwards, C. Jones and T. P. Curtis, Production of hydrogen from domestic wastewater in a pilot-scale microbial electrolysis cell, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2013, 97(15), 6979–6989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bae, J. S. Park, S. T. Senthilkumar, S. M. Hwang and Y. Kim, Hybrid seawater desalination-carbon capture using modified seawater battery system, J. Power Sources, 2019, 410–411, 99–105 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kuang, M. J. Kenney, Y. Meng, W. H. Hung, Y. Liu, J. E. Huang, R. Prasanna, P. Li, Y. Li, L. Wang and M. C. Lin, Solar-driven, highly sustained splitting of seawater into hydrogen and oxygen fuels, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116(14), 6624–6629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tong, 
            et al., Electrolysis of low-grade and saline surface water, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 367–377 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Karlsson and A. Cornell, Selectivity between Oxygen and Chlorine Evolution in the Chlor-Alkali and Chlorate Processes, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(5), 2982–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Bajada, S. Roy, J. Warnan, K. Abdiaziz, A. Wagner, M. M. Roessler and E. Reisner, A Precious-Metal-Free Hybrid Electrolyzer for Alcohol Oxidation Coupled to CO2-to-Syngas Conversion, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 132(36), 15763–15771 CrossRef .
R. Rousseau, S. F. Ketep, L. Etcheverry, M. L. Délia and A. Bergel, Microbial electrolysis cell (MEC): A step ahead towards hydrogen-evolving cathode operated at high current density, Bioresour. Technol. Rep., 2020, 9, 100399 CrossRef .
J. H. Guo and W. Y. Sun, Integrating Nickel-Nitrogen Doped Carbon Catalyzed CO2 Electroreduction with Chlor-Alkali Process for CO, Cl2 and KHCO3 Production with Enhanced Techno-Economics, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 275, 119154 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kelly, X. Shi, S. Back, L. Vallez, S. Y. Park, S. Siahrostami, X. Zheng and J. K. Nørskov, ZnO As an Active and Selective Catalyst for Electrochemical Water Oxidation to Hydrogen Peroxide, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(5), 4593–4599 CrossRef .
X. V. Medvedeva, J. J. Medvedev, S. W. Tatarchuk, R. M. Choueiri and A. Klinkova, Sustainable at both ends: electrochemical CO2utilization paired with electrochemical treatment of nitrogenous waste, Green Chem., 2020, 22(14), 4456–4462 RSC .
Y. Kong, L. Wang, H. Jiang, F. Li, T. Zhao, M. Zhuo, Q. Chen, M. Mao and Y. Xu, Design of counter oxidation vs. CO2 electroreduction for efficient formate production on a tin cathode, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 847, 113264 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Gonell, U. R. Mathiyazhagan, Y. Liu, D. Wang, A. J. Miller and T. J. Meyer, Simultaneous electrosynthesis of syngas and an aldehyde from CO2 and an alcohol by molecular electrocatalysis, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2(1), 97–101 CrossRef CAS .
E. Pérez-Gallent, S. Turk, R. Latsuzbaia, R. Bhardwaj, A. Anastasopol, F. Sastre-Calabuig, A. C. Garcia E. Giling and E. Goetheer, Electroreduction of CO2 to CO Paired with 1,2-Propanediol Oxidation to Lactic Acid. Toward an Economically Feasible System, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58(16), 6195–6202 CrossRef .
M. V. Pagliaro M. Bellini, M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, M. G. Folliero, A. Marchionni, H. A. Miller, W. Oberhauser, S. Caporali, M. Innocenti and F. Vizza, Carbon supported Rh nanoparticles for the production of hydrogen and chemicals by the electroreforming of biomass-derived alcohols, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(23), 13971–13978 RSC .
J. Y. Zhang, T. He, M. Wang, R. Qi, Y. Yan, Z. Dong, H. Liu, H. Wang and B. Y. Xia, Energy-saving hydrogen production coupling urea oxidation over a bifunctional nickel-molybdenum nanotube array, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 894–902 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Liu, Z. Xu, D. Zhao, X. Q. Pan, H. C. Li, X. Hu, Z. Y. Fan, W. K. Wang, G. H. Zhao, S. Jin and G. W. Huber, Efficient electrochemical production of glucaric acid and H2 via glucose electrolysis, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–1 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Sau, R. Mei, J. Struwe and L. Ackermann, Cobaltaelectro-Catalyzed C–H Activation with Carbon Monoxide or Isocyanides, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12(13), 3023–3027 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, Y. Zhang, B. Zhao, Y. Chang and Z. Li, Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide in an MFC-MEC system with a layer-by-layer self-assembly carbon nanotube/cobalt phthalocyanine modified electrode, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2012, 46.9(2012), 5198–5204 CrossRef PubMed .
T. E. Lister and E. J. Dufek, Chlor-syngas: Coupling of electrochemical technologies for production of commodity chemicals, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27(8), 4244–4249 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bevilacqua, J. Filippi, A. Lavacchi, A. Marchionni, H. A. Miller, W. Oberhauser, E. Vesselli and F. Vizza, Energy Savings in the Conversion of CO2 to Fuels using an Electrolytic Device, Energy Technol., 2014, 2(6), 522–525 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, M. Balamurugan, K. G. Lee, K. H. Cho, S. Park, H. Seo and K. T. Nam, Mechanistic Investigation of Biomass Oxidation Using Nickel Oxide Nanoparticles in a CO2-Saturated Electrolyte for Paired Electrolysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11(8), 2941–2948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Behin, A. Akbari, M. Mahmoudi and M. Khajeh, Sodium hypochlorite as an alternative to hydrogen peroxide in Fenton process for industrial scale, Water Res., 2017, 121, 120–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Liu and Q. Wang, Oxidation Removal of Nitric Oxide from Flue Gas Using UV Photolysis of Aqueous Hypochlorite, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(20), 11950–11959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Baldwin, History of the chlorine industry, J. Chem. Educ., 1927, 4(3), 313 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lim, G. Y. Jung, J. H. Kim, S. O. Park, J. Park, Y. T. Kim, S. J. Kang, H. Y. Jeong, S. K. Kwak and S. H. Joo, Atomically dispersed Pt–N4 sites as efficient and selective electrocatalysts for the chlorine evolution reaction, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–1 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hu, H. Xu, X. Feng, L. Lei, Y. He and X. Zhang, Neodymium-Doped IrO2 Electrocatalysts Supported on Titanium Plates for Enhanced Chlorine Evolution Reaction Performance, ChemElectroChem, 2021, 8(6), 1204–1210 CrossRef CAS .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, Selective Electrochemical Generation of Hydrogen Peroxide from Water Oxidation, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(21), 4224–4228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fuku, Y. Miyase, Y. Miseki, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, Enhanced Oxidative Hydrogen Peroxide Production on Conducting Glass Anodes Modified with Metal Oxides, ChemistrySelect, 2016, 1(18), 5721–5726 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, S. Siahrostami, G. L. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Chakthranont, F. Studt, T. F. Jaramillo, X. Zheng and J. K. Nørskov, Understanding activity trends in electrochemical water oxidation to form hydrogen peroxide, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Park, 
            et al., CaSnO3: an electrocatalyst for two-electron water oxidation reaction to form H2O2, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 4, 352–357 CrossRef .
T. Kang, B. Li, Q. Hao, W. Gao, F. Bin, K. N. Hui, D. Fu and B. Dou, Efficient Hydrogen Peroxide (H2O2) Synthesis by CaSnO3via Two-Electron Water Oxidation Reaction, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8(39), 15005–15012 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fuku, Y. Miyase, Y. Miseki, T. Funaki, T. Gunji and K. Sayama, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Peroxide Production from Water on a WO3/BiVO4 Photoanode and from O2 on an Au Cathode Without External Bias, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12(10), 1111–1119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Goto, Y. Hanada, T. Ohno and M. Matsumura, Quantitative analysis of superoxide ion and hydrogen peroxide produced from molecular oxygen on photoirradiated TiO2 particles, J. Catal., 2004, 225(1), 223–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mavrikis, S. C. Perry, P. K. Leung, L. Wang and C. Ponce De León, Recent Advances in Electrochemical Water Oxidation to Produce Hydrogen Peroxide: A Mechanistic Perspective, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9(1), 76–91 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, C. Wang, F. Ma and D. Wen, Highly active electrocatalysts of CeO2 modified NiMoO4 nanosheet arrays towards water and urea oxidation reactions, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 320, 134608 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sha, K. Ye, J. Yin, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, J. Yan, G. Wang and D. Cao, In situ grown 3D hierarchical MnCo2O4.5@Ni(OH)2 nanosheet arrays on Ni foam for efficient electrocatalytic urea oxidation, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122603 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Wang, H. Lin, Y. Liu, J. Ye, Y. Wen, A. Chen, L. Wang, F. Ni, Z. Zhou and S. Sun, A Lattice-Oxygen-Involved Reaction Pathway to Boost Urea Oxidation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131(47), 16976–16981 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Li, H. S. Pillai, J. Lattimer, N. Mohd Adli, S. Karakalos, M. Chen, L. Guo, H. Xu, J. Yang and D. Su, Ternary PtIrNi Catalysts for Efficient Electrochemical Ammonia Oxidation, ACS Catal., 2020, 10(7), 3945–3957 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Herron, P. Ferrin and M. Mavrikakis, Electrocatalytic Oxidation of Ammonia on Transition-Metal Surfaces: A First-Principles Study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(26), 14692–14701 CrossRef CAS .
L. Song, Z. Liang, Z. Ma, Y. Zhang, J. Chen, R. R. Adzic and J. X. Wang, Temperature-Dependent Kinetics and Reaction Mechanism of Ammonia Oxidation on Pt, Ir, and PtIr Alloy Catalysts, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165(15), 3095 CrossRef .
S. Hu, Y. Tan, C. Feng, H. Wu, J. Zhang and H. Mei, Synthesis of N doped NiZnCu-layered double hydroxides with reduced graphene oxide on nickel foam as versatile electrocatalysts for hydrogen production in hybrid-water electrolysis, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227872 CrossRef CAS .
J. Na, B. Seo, J. Kim, C. W. Lee, H. Lee, Y. J. Hwang, B. K. Min, D. K. Lee, H. S. Oh and U. Lee, General technoeconomic analysis for electrochemical coproduction coupling carbon dioxide reduction with organic oxidation, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Q. Qin, X. Zhao, C. Xu, C. Hu, S. Mo, Y. O. Wang, S. Lin, Z. Tang and N. Zheng, Electrochemical partial reforming of
ethanol into ethyl acetate using ultrathin Co3O4 nanosheets as a highly selective anode catalyst, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2(8), 538–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Du, J. Zhang, Y. Liu and M. Huang, Hydrogen generation from catalytic glucose oxidation by Fe-based electrocatalysts, Electrochem. Commun., 2017, 83, 11–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Ragauskas, C. K. Williams, B. H. Davison, G. Britovsek, J. Cairney, C. A. Eckert, W. J. Frederick, J. P. Hallett, D. J. Leak, C. L. Liotta and J. R. Mielenz, The path forward for biofuels and biomaterials, Science, 2006, 311(5760), 484–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. Sheng, X. Chen, Z. Fang, J. Jiang, M. Wang, F. Li, L. Fan, Y. Ren, B. Zhang and B. J. Timmer, Paired Electrocatalytic Oxygenation and Hydrogenation of Organic Substrates with Water as the Oxygen and Hydrogen Source, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131(27), 9253–9257 CrossRef .

          H. G. C. Kyoung-Shin Choi, Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural to 2,5-furandicarboxylic acid and 2,5-diformylfuran, US Pat., US 9598780 B2,  2017 Search PubMed .
J. Jack, E. Park, P. C. Maness, S. Huang, W. Zhang and Z. J. Ren, Selective ligand modification of cobalt porphyrins for carbon dioxide electrolysis: Generation of a renewable H2/CO feedstock for downstream catalytic hydrogenation, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2020, 507, 119594 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, W. Liu, Z. Zhang, X. Du, L. Dong and Y. Deng, Low energy electro-reduction of carbon dioxide coupling with anodic glycerol oxidation catalyzed by chemical regenerative phosphomolybdic acids, J. Power Sources, 2019, 420, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Lam, A. J. Bloomfield and P. T. Anastas, A switchable route to valuable commodity chemicals from glycerol via electrocatalytic oxidation with an earth abundant metal oxidation catalyst, Green Chem., 2017, 19(8), 1958–1968 RSC .
C. Dai, L. Sun, H. Liao, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, A. C. Fisher and Z. J. Xu, Electrochemical production of lactic acid from glycerol oxidation catalyzed by AuPt nanoparticles, J. Catal., 2017, 356, 14–21 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, X. Chen, X. Zhong, S. Li, T. Liu, G. Zhuang, X. Li, S. Deng, D. Mei and J. G. Wang, Hierarchical Porous NC@CuCo Nitride Nanosheet Networks: Highly Efficient Bifunctional Electrocatalyst for Overall Water Splitting and Selective Electrooxidation of Benzyl Alcohol, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(46), 1704169 CrossRef .
D. G. Brown and J. Boström, Analysis of Past and Present Synthetic Methodologies on Medicinal Chemistry: Where Have All the New Reactions Gone?, J. Med. Chem., 2016, 59, 4443–4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Furukawa, Y. Ohno, T. Shishido, K. Teramura and T. Tanaka, Selective amine oxidation using Nb2O5 photocatalyst and O2, ACS Catal., 2011, 1(10), 1150–1153 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, X. Yang, C. Chen, Z. Shen and M. Li, One-Pot Electrochemical Oxidation of Alcohols to Nitriles Mediated by TEMPO, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164(4), G54 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ayyub, M. Chhetri, U. Gupta, A. Roy and C. N. R. Rao, Photochemical and Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Generation by Splitting Seawater, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24(69), 18455–18462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, Y. Cao, J. He and C. P. Berlinguette, Electrolytic CO2 Reduction in Tandem with Oxidative Organic Chemistry, ACS Cent. Sci., 2017, 3(7), 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Claassens, C. A. Cotton, D. Kopljar and A. Bar-Even, Making quantitative sense of electromicrobial production, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2(5), 437–447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, K. Wang, Y. Chen, T. Tan and J. Nielsen, Third-generation biorefineries as the means to produce fuels and chemicals from CO2, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3(3), 274–288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, M. J. Kummer and S. D. Minteer, Strategies for Bioelectrochemical CO2 Reduction, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 5(63), 14258–14266 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Bonfin, J. H. Franco and A. R. de Andrade, Ethanol bioelectrooxidation in a robust poly(methylene green-pyrrole)- mediated enzymatic biofuel cell, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2019, 844, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, F. Dong and S. D. Minteer, The progress and outlook of bioelectrocatalysis for the production of chemicalsfuels and materials, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3(3), 225–244 CrossRef .
C. Cadoux and R. D. Milton, Recent Enzymatic Electrochemistry for Reductive Reactions, ChemElectroChem, 2020, 7(9), 1974–1986 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Milton, D. P. Hickey, S. Abdellaoui, K. Lim, F. Wu, B. Tan and S. D. Minteer, Rational design of quinones for high power density biofuel cells, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6(8), 4867–4875 RSC .
M. Shao, M. N. Zafar, M. Falk, R. Ludwig, C. Sygmund, C. K. Peterbauer, D. A. Guschin, D. MacAodha, P. Ó. Conghaile, D. Leech and M. D. Toscano, Optimization of a membraneless glucose/oxygen enzymatic fuel cell based on a bioanode with high coulombic efficiency and current density, ChemPhysChem, 2013, 4(10), 2260–2269 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Franco, S. D. Minteer and A. R. de Andrade, Product Analysis of Operating an Ethanol/O 2 Biofuel Cell Shows the Synergy between Enzymes within an Enzymatic Cascade, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 65(9), H575 CrossRef .
S. Schlager, L. M. Dumitru, M. Haberbauer, A. Fuchsbauer, H. Neugebauer, D. Hiemetsberger, A. Wagner, E. Portenkirchner and N. S. Sariciftci, Electrochemical Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Methanol by Direct Injection of Electrons into Immobilized Enzymes on a Modified Electrode, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9(6), 631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Logan, 
            et al., Microbial fuel cells: Methodology and technology, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and Z. J. Ren, A comprehensive review of microbial electrochemical systems as a platform technology, Biotechnol. Adv., 2013, 31, 1796–1807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Gorby, 
            et al., Electrically conductive bacterial nanowires produced by Shewanella oneidensis strain MR-1 and other microorganisms, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 11358–11363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. L. Tremblay, 
            et al., A c-type cytochrome and a transcriptional regulator responsible for enhanced extracellular electron transfer in Geobacter sulfurreducens revealed by adaptive evolution, Environ. Microbiol., 2011, 13, 13–23 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Coursolle, D. B. Baron, D. R. Bond and J. A. Gralnick, The Mtr respiratory pathway is essential for reducing flavins and electrodes in Shewanella oneidensis, J. Bacteriol., 2010, 192, 467–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Baron, E. LaBelle, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Electrochemical measurement of electron transfer kinetics by Shewanella oneidensis MR-1, J. Biol. Chem., 2009, 284, 28865–28873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Marsili, D. B. Baron, I. D. Shikhare, D. Coursolle, J. A. Gralnick and D. R. Bond, Shewanella secretes flavins that mediate extracellular electron transfer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105(10), 3968–3973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Logan and D. Call, Microbial electrolysis cells for high yield hydrogen gas production from organic matter, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42.23, 8630–8640 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Lu, N. B. Williams, J. A. Turner, P. C. Maness, J. Gu and Z. J. Ren, Microbial Photoelectrosynthesis for Self-Sustaining Hydrogen Generation, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51(22), 13494–13501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lu, Z. Li, X. Chen, H. Wang, S. Dai, X. Pan, Z. J. Ren and J. Gu, Spontaneous Solar Syngas Production from CO2 Driven by Energetically Favorable Wastewater Microbial Anodes, Joule, 2020, 4(10), 2149–2161 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rousseau, 
            et al., Microbial electrolysis cell (MEC): Strengths, weaknesses and research needs from electrochemical engineering standpoint, Appl. Energy, 2020, 257, 113938 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kadier, Y. Simayi, M. S. Kalil, P. Abdeshahian and A. A. Hamid, A review of the substrates used in microbial electrolysis cells (MECs) for producing sustainable and clean hydrogen gas, Renewable Energy, 2014, 71, 466–472 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, D. Xing, B. Liu and N. Ren, Enhanced hydrogen production from waste activated sludge by cascade utilization of organic matter in microbial electrolysis cells, Water Res., 2012, 46, 1015–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Ivanov, Y. T. Ahn, T. Poirson, M. A. Hickner and B. E. Logan, Comparison of cathode catalyst binders for the hydrogen evolution reaction in microbial electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 15739–15744 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lu, W. Vakki, J. A. Aguiar, C. Xiao, K. Hurst, M. Fairchild, X. Chen, F. Yang, J. Gu and Z. J. Ren, Unbiased solar H2 production with current density up to 23 mA cm-2 by Swiss-cheese black Si coupled with wastewater bioanode, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(3), 1088–1099 RSC .
X. Chen, F. L. Lobo, Y. Bian, L. Lu, X. Chen, M. P. Tucker, Y. Wang and Z. J. Ren, Electrical decoupling of microbial electrochemical reactions enables spontaneous H2 evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(2), 495–502 RSC .
L. Lu and Z. J. Ren, Microbial electrolysis cells for waste biorefinery: A state of the art review, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 215, 254–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. A. Rozendal, E. Leone, J. Keller and K. Rabaey, Efficient hydrogen peroxide generation from organic matter in a bioelectrochemical system, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 1752–1755 CrossRef CAS .
W. Miran, M. Nawaz, J. Jang and D. S. Lee, Chlorinated phenol treatment and in situ hydrogen peroxide production in a sulfate-reducing bacteria enriched bioelectrochemical system, Water Res., 2017, 117, 198–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cerrillo, M. Viñas and A. Bonmatí, Anaerobic digestion and electromethanogenic microbial electrolysis cell integrated system: Increased stability and recovery of ammonia and methane, Renewable Energy, 2018, 120, 178–189 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yuan and Y. Kim, Increasing phosphorus recovery from dewatering centrate in microbial electrolysis cells, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2017, 10(1), 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Jiang, 
            et al., Carbon dioxide and organic waste valorization by microbial electrosynthesis and electro-fermentation, Water Res., 2019, 149, 42–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Passive solar high-yield seawater desalination by modular and low-cost distillation, Nat. Sustainability, 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
G. Matute, J. M. Yusta and L. C. Correas, Techno-economic modelling of water electrolysers in the range of several MW to provide grid services while generating hydrogen for different applications: A case study in Spain applied to mobility with FCEVs, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 17431–17442 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Voutchkov, Desalination – Past, Present and Future - International Water Association, IWA -International Water Association,  2016. Available at: https://iwa-network.org/desalination-past-present-future/. (Accessed: 1st June 2020) Search PubMed .
S. Bhojwani, K. Topolski, R. Mukherjee, D. Sengupta and M. M. El-Halwagi, Technology
review and data analysis for cost assessment of water treatment systems, Sci. Total Environ., 2019, 651, 2749–2761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Advisian. The Cost of desalination, 2021. Available at: https://www.advisian.com/en/global-perspectives/the-cost-of-desalination.
B. C. Martindale and E. Reisner, Bi-Functional Iron-Only Electrodes for Efficient Water Splitting with Enhanced Stability through in Situ Electrochemical Regeneration, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(6), 1502095 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, Pt-free NiCo electrocatalysts for oxygen evolution by seawater splitting, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 247, 381–391 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, B. Jin, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao and S. Z. Qiao, Interfacial nickel nitride/sulfide as a bifunctional electrode for highly efficient overall water/seawater electrolysis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(14), 8117–8121 RSC .
S. Dresp, F. Dionigi, S. Loos, J. Ferreira de Araujo, C. Spöri, M. Gliech, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Direct Electrolytic Splitting of Seawater: Activity, Selectivity, Degradation, and Recovery Studied from the Molecular Catalyst Structure to the Electrolyzer Cell Level, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(22), 1800338 CrossRef .

          J. Evans, The Cost of Pumping—Power Cost & Efficiency, Pumps and Systems, 2014. Available at: https://www.pumpsandsystems.com/cost-pumping-power-cost-efficiency.

          S. C. Jones and R. B. S. Hansen, QUANTIFYING ENERGY USE IN THE U.S. PUBLIC WATER INDUSTRY-A SUMMARY, Twomey and Webber,  2014 Search PubMed .

          P. Drechsel, M. Qadir and D. Wichelns, Wastewater: Economic asset in an urbanizing world. Wastewater: Economic Asset in an Urbanizing World,  2015.  DOI:10.1007/978-94-017-9545-6 .

          City of New York, U. G. C., New York City's Energy and Water use in 2014 and 2015 Report,  2017 Search PubMed .
NYC Mayor's Office of Sustainability. Inventory on New York City's Green house gas emissions. Available at: https://nyc-ghg-inventory.cusp.nyu.edu/.
NYC Environmental Protection. Wastewater Treatment System. Available at: https://www1.nyc.gov/site/dep/water/wastewater-treatment-system.page.
J. Fito, N. Tefera and S. W. Van Hulle, Sugarcane, biorefineries wastewater: bioremediation technologies for environmental sustainability, Chem. Biol. Technol. Agric., 2019, 6(1), 1–3 CrossRef .
K. C. Surendra, C. Sawatdeenarunat, S. Shrestha, S. Sung and S. K. Khanal, Anaerobic digestion-based biorefinery for bioenergy and biobased products, Ind. Biotechnol., 2015, 11(2), 103–112 CrossRef .

          United States Department of Energy, The Water-Energy Nexus: Challenges and Oppurtunities,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. A. Carmona-Martínez, E. Trably, K. Milferstedt, R. Lacroix, L. Etcheverry and N. Bernet, Long-term continuous production of H2 in a microbial electrolysis cell (MEC) treating saline wastewater, Water Res., 2015, 81, 149–156 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. San-Martín, A. Sotres, R. M. Alonso, J. Díaz-Marcos, A. Morán and A. Escapa, Assessing anodic microbial populations and membrane ageing in a pilot microbial electrolysis cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(32), 17304–17315 CrossRef .
J. A. Baeza, À. Martínez-Miró, J. Guerrero, Y. Ruiz and A. Guisasola, Bioelectrochemical hydrogen production from urban wastewater on a pilot scale, J. Power Sources, 2017, 356, 500–509 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Q. Guo, D. F. Xing, J. S. Chang and N. Q. Ren, Hydrogen production using biocathode single-chamber microbial electrolysis cells fed by molasses wastewater at low temperature, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39(33), 19369–19375 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Selembo, J. M. Perez, W. A. Lloyd and B. E. Logan, High hydrogen production from glycerol or glucose by electrohydrogenesis using microbial electrolysis cells, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34(13), 5373–5381 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Feng, H. Li, X. Wei, R. Wang and A. Zhou, Photoelectrochemical splitting of natural seawater with α-Fe2O3/WO3 nanorod arrays, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41(7), 4096–4105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, J. Pan, E. Lovell, T. H. Tan, Y. H. Ng and R. Amal, A sea-change: Manganese doped nickel/nickel oxide electrocatalysts for hydrogen generation from seawater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11(7), 1898–1910 RSC .
E. S. Heidrich, S. R. Edwards, J. Dolfing, S. E. Cotterill and T. P. Curtis, Performance of a pilot scale microbial electrolysis cell fed on domestic wastewater at ambient temperatures for a 12month period, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 173, 87–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gil-Carrera, A. Escapa, P. Mehta, G. Santoyo, S. R. Guiot, A. Morán and B. Tartakovsky, Microbial electrolysis cell scale-up for combined wastewater treatment and hydrogen production, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 130, 584–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gil-Carrera, A. Escapa, R. Moreno and A. Morán, Reduced energy consumption during low strength domestic wastewater treatment in a semi-pilot tubular microbial electrolysis cell, J. Environ. Manage., 2013, 122, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jourdin and T. Burdyny, Microbial Electrosynthesis: Where Do We Go from Here?, Trends Biotechnol., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.tibtech.2020.10.014 .

          Administration, U. E. I., Annual Energy Outlook 2020,  2020 Search PubMed .

          Adminstration, U. S. E. I., Levelized Cost and Levelized Avoided Cost of New Generation Resources in the Annual Energy Outlook 2020,  2020 Search PubMed .

          International Renewable Energy Agency – IRENA, Renewable Power Generation Costs in 2019,  2019 Search PubMed .

          Programme, U. E., United Nations Emissions Gap Report 2019,  2019 Search PubMed .

          Adminstration, U. S. E. I., California - State Energy Profile Analysis - U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), 2020. Available at: https://www.eia.gov/state/analysis.php?sid=CA. (Accessed: 10th July 2020).

          Energy, N. C. E. T. C., DSIRE,  2018 Search PubMed .

          Resources Board, C. A.
          Califronia's 2017 Climate Change Scoping Plan,  2017 Search PubMed .
LA Department of Water and Power. Power and Water Use: Past & Present, 2020. Available at: https://www.ladwp.com/ladwp/faces/ladwp/aboutus/a-water/a-w-pastandpresent?_adf.ctrl-state=6ousz4h30_4&_afrLoop=316877080154674. (Accessed: 10th July 2020).
W. J. Liu, L. Dang, Z. Xu, H. Q. Yu, S. Jin and G. W. Huber, Electrochemical oxidation of 5-hydroxymethylfurfural with NiFe layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanosheet catalysts, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(6), 5533–5541 CrossRef CAS .
Sanitation, L. Water Reclamation Plant. 2020 Available at: https://www.lacitysan.org/san/faces/home/portal/s-lsh-wwd/s-lsh-wwd-cw/s-lsh-wwd-cw-p?_a. (Accessed: 10th July 2020).
E. Yang, H. O. Mohamed, S. G. Park, M. Obaid, S. Y. Al-Qaradawi, P. Castaño, K. Chon and K. J. Chae, A review on self-sustainable microbial electrolysis cells for electro-biohydrogen production via coupling with carbon-neutral renewable energy technologies, Bioresour. Technol., 2020, 124363 Search PubMed .
National Science Foundation. ReNUWIt: 2021 Project Spotlights, 2021. Available at: http://renuwit.org/highlights/project-spotlights/.
S. Z. Oener, M. J. Foster and S. W. Boettcher, Accelerating water dissociation in bipolar membranes and for electrocatalysis, Science, 2020, 369(6507), 1099–1103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiang, K. M. Papadantonakis and N. S. Lewis, Principles and implementations of electrolysis systems for water splitting, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3(3), 169–173 RSC .
L. Fan, C. Xia, P. Zhu, Y. Lu and H. Wang, Electrochemical CO2 reduction to high-concentration pure formic acid solutions in an all-solid-state reactor, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Moussallem, J. Jörissen, U. Kunz, S. Pinnow and T. Turek, Chlor-alkali electrolysis with oxygen depolarized cathodes: History, present status and future prospects, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2008, 38(9), 1177–1194 CrossRef CAS .
Metalary, 2021. Available at: https://www.metalary.com/.
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, Particle size effects in the catalytic electroreduction of CO2 on Cu nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(19), 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, CO2 reduction at low overpotential on Cu electrodes resulting from the reduction of thick Cu2O films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(17), 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Durand, A. A. Peterson, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, Structure effects on the energetics of the electrochemical reduction of CO2 by copper surfaces, Surf. Sci., 2011, 605(15–16), 1354–1359 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. C. Li, Z. Wang, J. Li, D. H. Nam, Y. Lum, M. Luo, X. Wang, A. Ozden, S. F. Hung and B. Chen, Cooperative CO2-to-ethanol conversion via enriched intermediates at molecule–metal catalyst interfaces, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3(1), 75–82 CrossRef CAS .
S. Toghyani, E. Afshari, E. Baniasadi and S. A. Atyabi, Thermal and electrochemical analysis of different flow field patterns in a PEM electrolyzer, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 234–245 CrossRef .
D. K. Lim, A. B. Plymill, H. Paik, X. Qian, S. Zecevic, C. R. Chisholm and S. M. Haile, Solid Acid Electrochemical Cell for the Production of Hydrogen from Ammonia, Joule, 2020, 4(11), 2338–2347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bajracharya, K. Vanbroekhoven, C. J. N. Buisman, D. Pant and David P. B. T. B. Strik, of gas diffusion biocathode in microbial electrosynthesis from carbon dioxide, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23(22), 22292–22308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Enzmann, F. Mayer, M. Stöckl, K. M. Mangold, R. Hommel and D. Holtmann, Transferring bioelectrochemical processes from H-cells to a scalable bubble column reactor, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 193, 133–143 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Alqahtani, K. P. Katuri, S. Bajracharya, Y. Yu, Z. Lai and P. E. Saikaly, Porous Hollow Fiber Nickel Electrodes for Effective Supply and Reduction of Carbon Dioxide to Methane through Microbial Electrosynthesis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(43), 1804860 CrossRef .
C. M. Humphreys and N. P. Minton, Advances in metabolic engineering in the microbial production of fuels and chemicals from C1 gas, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2018, 50, 174–181 CrossRef CAS .
K. Suzuki, Y. Kato, A. Yui, S. Yamamoto, S. Ando, O. Rubaba, Y. Tashiro and H. Futamata, Bacterial communities adapted to higher external resistance can reduce the onset potential of anode in microbial fuel cells, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2018, 125(5), 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Dessì, P. Chatterjee, S. Mills, M. Kokko, A. M. Lakaniemi, G. Collins and P. N. Lens, Power production and microbial community composition in thermophilic acetate-fed up-flow and flow-through microbial fuel cells, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 294, 122115 CrossRef PubMed .
T. N. Zhilina and G. A. Zavarzin, Extremely halophilic, methylotrophic, anaerobic bacteria, FEMS Microbiol. Lett., 1990, 7(3–4), 315–321 CrossRef .
A. P. Borole, H. O'Neill, C. Tsouris and S. Cesar, A microbial fuel cell operating at low pH using the acidophile Acidiphilium cryptum, Biotechnol. Lett., 2008, 30(8), 1367–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Katsounaros, J. C. Meier, S. O. Klemm, A. A. Topalov, P. U. Biedermann, M. Auinger and K. J. Mayrhofer, The effective surface pH during reactions at the solid-liquid interface, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13(6), 634–637 CrossRef CAS .
F. Dionigi, T. Reier, Z. Pawolek, M. Gliech and P. Strasser, Design Criteria,
Operating Conditions, and, Nickel-Iron Hydroxide Catalyst Materials for Selective Seawater Electrolysis, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 962–972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Obata and K. Takanabe, A Permselective CeOx Coating To Improve the Stability of Oxygen Evolution Electrocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 130(6), 1632–1636 CrossRef .
H. Dotan, A. Landman, S. W. Sheehan, K. D. Malviya, G. E. Shter, D. A. Grave, Z. Arzi, N. Yehudai, M. Halabi, N. Gal and N. Hadari, Decoupled hydrogen and oxygen evolution by a two-step electrochemical–chemical cycle for efficient overall water splitting, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(9), 786–795 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, W. Li, R. Wang, T. Guo, H. Sheng, H. C. Fu, S. S. Stahl and S. Jin, Modular Electrochemical Synthesis Using a Redox Reservoir Paired with Independent Half-Reactions, Joule, 2021, 5(1), 149–165 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Leicester, J. M. Amezaga, A. Moore and E. S. Heidrich, Optimising the hydraulic retention time in a pilot-scale microbial electrolysis cell to achieve high volumetric treatment rates using concentrated domestic wastewater, Molecules, 2020, 25(12), 2945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Z. Ge, J. Grimaud, J. Hurst and Z. He, Long-term performance of liter-scale microbial fuel cells treating primary effluent installed in a municipal wastewater treatment facility, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47(9), 4941–4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang and C. Li, Microbial Fuel Cells: Nanomaterials Based on Anode and Their Application, Energy Technol., 2020, 8(9), 2000206 CrossRef .
K. Liang, J. J. Richardson, J. Cui, F. Caruso, C. J. Doonan and P. Falcaro, Metal–Organic Framework Coatings as Cytoprotective Exoskeletons for Living Cells, Adv. Mater., 2016, 8(36), 7910–7914 CrossRef PubMed .

          World health organization (WHO), 1 in 3 people globally do not have access to safe drinking water – UNICEF, WHO,  2019, p. 1 Search PubMed .
H. A. Hansen, I. C. Man, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, T. Bligaard and J. Rossmeisl, Electrochemical chlorine evolution at rutile oxide (110) surfaces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12(1), 283–290 RSC .

          United States Department of Energy, Solving Challenges in Energy Storage,  2019 Search PubMed .
L. Liu, M. Hejazi, G. Iyer and B. A. Forman, Implications of water constraints on electricity capacity expansion in the United States, Nat. Sustainability, 2019, 2(3), 206–213 CrossRef .
J. Y. Nam and B. E. Logan, Enhanced hydrogen generation using a saline catholyte in a two chamber microbial electrolysis cell, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 15105–15110 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, S. C. Marinescu, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Earth-abundant hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 865–878 RSC .
L. Chen, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Separating hydrogen and oxygen evolution in alkaline water electrolysis using nickel hydroxide, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jack, J. Lo, B. Donohue, P. C. Maness and Z. Jason Ren, High, rate CO2 valorization to organics via CO mediated silica nanoparticle enhanced fermentation, Appl. Energy, 2020, 279, 115725 CrossRef CAS .
United Nations, Sustainable development goals. 2020 Available at: https://unfoundation.org/what-we-do/issues/. (Accessed: 8th July 2020).

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc02094cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Joshua Jack	Joshua Jack is a postdoctoral researcher in the Andlinger Center for Energy and Environment at Princeton University and earned a Ph.D. in environmental engineering from the University of Colorado, Boulder working with Dr Zhiyong Jason Ren. During his graduate research, Joshua obtained extensive research experience in the Biosciences Center at the DOE-National Renewable Energy Laboratory. His current research focuses on energy and resource recovery as part of a sustainable water–energy–climate nexus with a special focus on process design of integrated electrochemical–biological systems towards a circular carbon economy.
Wenjin Zhu	Wenjin Zhu received her B.S. and M.S. degrees from Tianjin University under the supervision of Prof. Jinlong Gong. She is currently a Ph.D. candidate at University of Cambridge under the supervision of Prof. Henning Sirringhaus. Her research interests include photo/electrocatalysis, organic field-effect transistors and the thermoelectrics.
José L. Avalos	José L. Avalos has been a faculty member at Princeton University since 2015, where he leads a research group focused on the use of biotechnology to address challenges in renewable energy, sustainable manufacturing, the environment, and human health. He received a Ph.D. in biochemistry and biophysics from Johns Hopkins University. He conducted postdoctoral research at The Rockefeller University, MIT, and the Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research.
Jinlong Gong	Jinlong Gong studied chemical engineering and received his BS and MS degrees from Tianjin University and his PhD from the University of Texas at Austin under the guidance of C. B. Mullins. After a stint with Professor George M. Whitesides as a postdoctoral fellow at Harvard University, he joined the faculty of chemical engineering at Tianjin University, where he currently holds a Pei Yang Chair Professorship. His research interests include the catalytic conversions of green energy, utilizations of carbon oxides, and syntheses and applications of nanostructured materials.
Zhiyong Jason Ren	Zhiyong Jason Ren is a professor in the Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering and associate director of the Andlinger Center for Energy and the Environment at Princeton University. His research focuses on water–energy nexus especially in areas of water sector decarbonization and resource recovery during environmental processes such as wastewater treatment and reuse, water desalination, and carbon capture and utilization. He received his Ph.D. in environmental engineering from Penn State University.
2H2O → 4H+ + 4e− + O2	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Different anode co-valorization pathways in electrochemical water or CO2 electrolysis. The combination of electron donor, catalyst, and products are summarized for each co-valorization option, and related industries and benefits are illustrated; summary of standard redox potentials of OER and substitutes reactions vs. Reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). Acronyms defined in Table S1† [ref. 22 and 24–37].	 

 	Fig. 2  Performance summary of inorganic and organic OER alternatives for electrolysis. Summary of reported operating potentials (left, bars) at the anode during peak selectivity (right, diamonds) for target reactions [ref. 24, 25, 27 and 47–55] (A) Reported operating cell potentials vs. current densities (log-scale) for two-electrode H2 evolution [ref. 34, 48, 53 and 55–58] (B) and electrochemical CO2/CO reduction [ref. 14, 24, 49, 51–54 and 59–62] (C) via assorted anode oxidations, detailed in the Rxn legend. Reaction acronyms defined in Table S1.†	 

 	Fig. 3  Comparison of impaired water electrolytes used in H2 electrolysis. Reported operating cell potentials (x-axis) vs. current densities (log-scale, y-axis) for two-electrode H2 evolution [ref. 42, 136–139 and 149–158] via various impaired water electrolytes. Acronyms: lab-scale seawater OER (SW), MEC using municipal wastewater (MW), MEC using industrial wastewater (IW), and MEC pilot-scale (>1–2 L) using municipal wastewater (pilot MW).	 

 	Fig. 4  Power intensities and estimated energy costs of various oxidation scenarios. Current market price of anode products (log scale, x-axis) with corresponding power demands for coupled cathodic CO2-to-ethanol conversion (y-axis) via assorted anode reactions (markers) (A) energy costs per tonne of ethanol produced in a CO2 electrolyzer using various anode reactions (markers legend) and power sources. (B) Costs based on an average of levelized costs of energy (LCOE) with range shown in error bars; select power acronyms: combustion cycle natural gas (CB-NG), combined cycle natural gas (CC-NG). Anode oxidations defined as standard OER (DI), OER using seawater electrolyte (SW), acetate oxidation (ACOX), H2O2 generation via H2O oxidation (H2O2), FDCA production via HMF oxidation (FDCA).	 

 	Fig. 5  Comparison of H2 electrolysis costs and profits using various co-valorization tactics in LA, California. Estimated energy demand of electrochemical H2 production (y-axis, left) and operating voltages (y-axis, right) via assorted anode reactions (x-axis) (A); plant schematic of microbial electrolysis (MEC) for concurrent anodic wastewater treatment and H2 production (C); projected water electrolysis costs and profits from H2 sales alone (left, y-axis) and combined H2 and anode products sales (right, y-axis) in Los Angeles, California in 2021 (B) and 2040 (D); anode oxidations defined as standard OER (DI-OER), OER using seawater electrolyte (seawater), waste organic oxidation (wastewater), H2O2 generation via H2O oxidation (H2O2), FDCA production via HMF oxidation (FDCA).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1gc02094c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
