Scalable chemical-vapour-deposition growth of three-dimensional graphene materials towards energy-related applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00852J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00852J
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3018-3036Scalable chemical-vapour-deposition growth of three-dimensional graphene materials towards energy-related applications

        
          
            Ke 
            Chen†
a, 
      
        
          
            Liurong 
            Shi†
a, 
      
        
          
            Yanfeng 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *abc and 

        
          
            Zhongfan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *ac
aCenter for Nanochemistry (CNC), Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, State Key Laboratory for Structural Chemistry of Unstable and Stable Species, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China. E-mail: zfliu@pku.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yanfengzhang@pku.edu.cn
cBeijing Graphene Institute (BGI), Beijing 100095, People's Republic of China
Received 
      11th December 2017
    First published on 27th February 2018AbstractThree-dimensional (3D) graphene materials, which are integrated using graphene structural units, show great promise for energy-related applications because of the high specific surface area, fast electron transport, and low density. Beyond solution-phase assembly of graphene sheets, chemical vapour deposition (CVD) has been recently introduced as a scalable, high-yield, and facile strategy for preparing 3D graphene materials with relatively high crystallinity and controllable layer numbers. Such 3D graphene structures have served as ideal platforms for constructing next-generation energy storage and conversion devices such as supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells. In this tutorial review, we focus on recent progress in the scalable CVD growth of 3D graphene materials (e.g., foams, shells, and hierarchical structures) as well as their applications in energy-related fields. First, we emphasize the role of substrate shape and composition (metal or non-metal) in the CVD growth of diverse 3D graphene materials. The related growth mechanisms of these 3D graphene materials are also analysed and discussed. Second, we demonstrate the applications of the CVD-derived 3D graphene materials in various energy-related devices. Finally, we conclude this review with our insights into the challenges and future opportunities for CVD synthesis as well as the application of such intriguing 3D graphene materials.
Ke Chen
Ke Chen received his PhD degree in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Tongji University in 2012. He worked successively as a postdoctoral fellow and a visiting scholar in the group of Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University from 2013 to 2018. He is currently an Associate Professor at Henan University, China. His research interests focus on the controlled growth of two-dimensional materials, and their applications in optoelectronics, energy storage, etc.
Liurong Shi
Liurong Shi received her BS degree from the School of Physical Science and Technology at Lanzhou University in 2013. She is currently a graduate student in Center for Nanochemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering at Peking University, in Prof. Zhongfan Liu's group. Her research is focused on controlled CVD synthesis of 3D graphene based materials and their applications in LIBs.
Yanfeng Zhang
Yanfeng Zhang received her PhD from the Institute of Physics in the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005. Later on, she worked as a JSPS fellow from 2006 to 2009 in Tohoku University, Japan. In 2010, she joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the College of Engineering of Peking University, and the Center for Nanochemistry of Peking University, and served as a research professor. Her research interests relate to the controlled growth, accurate characterization and novel property exploration of two dimensional layered materials such as graphene, h-BN–graphene heterostructures, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs).
Zhongfan Liu
Zhongfan Liu received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1990. After a postdoctoral fellowship at the Institute for Molecular Science, Japan, he became an associate professor (1993), full professor (1993), and Cheung Kong Chair professor (1999) of Peking University. He was elected as the member of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2011. His research interests focus on low-dimensional carbon materials and novel 2D atomic crystals, targeting nanoelectronic and energy conversion devices together with the exploration of fundamental phenomena in nanoscale systems.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of synthetic methods for three-dimensional (3D) graphene materials, and unique advantages of 3D graphene materials prepared via chemical vapour deposition (CVD).
(2) Summary of recent progress in the CVD syntheses of 3D graphene foams, shells, and hierarchical structures.
(3) Discussion of the growth mechanisms of 3D graphene materials on metal and non-metal substrates.
(4) Brief evaluation of CVD-grown 3D graphene materials in terms of yield and quality.
(5) Demonstration of the energy-related applications in supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, catalysts and thermal management devices.

1. Introduction
Graphene has received widespread attention since it was first isolated from graphite via micromechanical cleavage in 2004.1 The introduction of graphene ushered in a new era of research regarding two-dimensional materials and revolutionary technologies. These applications are mainly mediated by the unique properties of graphene, such as the gapless Dirac conical band structure and related extra high carrier mobility; rather high thermal conductivity, elasticity, and stiffness; and promising optical properties. These outstanding features make graphene and its derivatives attractive for a broad range of applications in electronic, energetic, and environmental-related devices.2,3
To achieve high-power-density energy storage and conversion devices (e.g., supercapacitors, batteries, and fuel cells), an ideal graphene electrode material is highly desired, which should possess the unique traits of high electrical conductivity, large accessible surface area, and excellent electrochemical properties.4 Flat graphene sheets tend to aggregate when assembled because of their strong π–π interlayer interactions, preventing the full realization of high specific surface areas (SSAs) and fast mass/electron transport in electrochemical energy storage and conversion applications.
The integration of graphene structural units into macroscopic three-dimensional (3D) graphene architectures thus appears to be an ideal alternative, as the restacking and agglomeration of the adjacent layers can be largely suppressed. In general, the properties of 3D graphene materials depend on the structure, crystalline quality, and integration pathway of the graphene building blocks. There are mainly two synthetic routes for preparing 3D graphene materials with diverse morphologies, desirable structures, and advanced properties. One route involves the assembly of chemically exfoliated graphene oxide sheets, followed by a chemical reduction process.5 Although this assembly route is compatible with mass production, the products inevitably suffer from poor crystallinity and abundant intrinsic and extrinsic defects as well as prominent performance degradation in energy-related applications. The other route involves the template-directed syntheses of 3D graphene materials via chemical vapour deposition (CVD).6 This route facilitates mass production of high-quality graphene coatings on specific 3D architectures featuring controllable crystallinity and layer numbers, thus greatly boosting the performance of graphene-based energy devices.
In this review, we avoid a repetitive introduction of the traditional 3D assembly route using reduced graphene oxide (RGO) sheets as building blocks, as several comprehensive summaries have already been provided in previous reviews.5 Instead, we focus on the CVD syntheses of 3D graphene architectures and their energy-related applications, an area that has not yet been well summarized. More specifically, we cover recent progress in state-of-the-art CVD synthesis of 3D graphene materials based on the unique template engineering. As shown in Fig. 1, the roles of the template shape (foam, shell, or hierarchical structure) and composition (metal or non-metal) in growing various 3D graphene materials have been well demonstrated. The related mechanisms involved in the CVD growth of 3D graphene materials are also thoroughly analysed. In addition, various energy-related applications of CVD-grown 3D graphene materials are discussed. Finally, an outlook of the challenges and future directions for the CVD synthesis of 3D graphene is provided from the viewpoint of energy-related applications.
 Fig. 1  Scalable CVD synthesis strategies for preparing 3D graphene materials for energy-related applications. 
2. Syntheses of 3D graphene architectures
CVD growth on metal foils is a promising method for the synthesis of high-quality, large-area, and uniform graphene films. Alternatively, the CVD synthesis of 3D architectures enables the production of a large quantity of graphene flakes or monoliths of seamlessly interconnected graphene networks. In this case, the morphology, structure, and composition of the growth substrates play key roles in modulating the geometric features and physical/chemical properties of the resultant graphene products. In this section, we classify the growth template shapes (foams, shells, and hierarchical structures) and compositions (metals, semiconductors, and insulators) used for the synthesis of 3D graphene architectures.
2.1 Graphene foams
Graphene foam, a monolith of a continuous and seamlessly interconnected graphene network, has been one of the main forms of 3D graphene materials since it was first synthesized using a CVD route on a nickel foam substrate.6 Graphene foam can preserve the 3D structure of the original foam substrate as both a template and a catalyst, and thereby possess rather high SSAs and porosities. Depending on the catalytic properties of the substrates (e.g., metals, semiconductors, or insulators), the growth of graphene foams mainly involves either metal-catalysed CVD or catalyst-free CVD processes.

Metal-catalysed growth. 
In 2011, motivated by the catalytic CVD growth of graphene on metal thin films, the synthesis of porous 3D graphene macrostructures was first demonstrated using a template-directed CVD route on nickel foam (Fig. 2a).6 Methane was introduced as a carbon precursor along with the nickel foam in a tube furnace at 1000 °C under ambient pressure. This growth process resulted in coating of graphene on the surfaces of the porous Ni framework. As the derived graphene foam inherited the morphology of the original Ni foam, it consisted of interconnected flexible networks even after the template was removed (Fig. 2b and c). In addition to its rather high conductivity, the free-standing graphene foam also exhibited an extra-low apparent density of 5 mg cm−3, a high SSA of ∼850 m2 g−1, and a porosity of ∼99.7%. Raman spectra of the graphene foams show distinct G and 2D bands along with strongly suppressed defect-related D bands (Fig. 2d). In general, a quasi-empirical quality evaluation of graphene can be provided by Raman analysis. The crystallinity of the graphene foam was higher than that of 3D assemblies of RGO, as indicated by its typical Raman spectrum for graphene. On the laboratory scale, graphene foam with dimensions of 170 × 220 mm2 was grown at 1000 °C in 5 min. The Ni-foam-directed CVD synthetic route is a straightforward and effective approach for the scalable production of 3D graphene macro-networks, with the unique traits of a rather high crystalline quality and ideal structural designability. However, the pore size of the resulting foam was limited to the micro scale, which failed to meet the geometrical requirement of nanoporosity required for certain applications.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a graphene foam (GF) and its integration with PDMS. (b) Photograph of 170 × 220 mm2 free-standing GF. (c) SEM image of GF. (d) Typical Raman spectra of GF. The bottom spectrum and top two spectra correspond to monolayer and few-layer graphene, respectively, based on the intensity, shape, and position of the G band and 2D band. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (e) SEM images of nanoporous graphene on nanoporous Ni grown at 900 °C for 5 min. (f) SEM images (close-up) of nanoporous graphene after the removal of the nanoporous Ni substrate. (g) Typical low-magnification STEM image of nanoporous graphene. SAED pattern (inset) showing multiply orientated graphene sheets in the nanoporous configuration. (h and i) HRTEM image and SAED pattern obtained from the flat region of the nanoporous graphene. The atomic structure is consistent with the 2D model. (j and k) STEM image and SAED patterns obtained from a region with a large curvature gradient. The pentagon–heptagon pair lattices, together with large lattice bending, can be observed. The yellow dashed lines indicate the lattice directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
To overcome this challenge, a nanoporous Ni-based CVD approach was introduced that enables the synthesis of 3D nanoporous graphene networks with tunable pore sizes from 100 nm to 2 μm.7 The nanoporous Ni foam templates were prepared by electrochemically dealloying Ni30Mn70 foils in a (NH4)2SO4 solution. Graphene layers were then grown on the nanoporous Ni surface at 900 °C for 5 min in a CVD system under a mixed atmosphere of H2, Ar, and benzene. The graphene-coated nanoporous Ni foam exhibited an average nanopore size of approximately 210 nm, within a wide statistical distribution range of 100–300 nm (Fig. 2e). After the Ni was removed using a hydrochloride solution, the nanoporous graphene architecture was well interconnected and free of pore collapse (Fig. 2f). The massless Dirac fermion feature typical for a 2D coherent electron system was well preserved in these 3D networks with high electron mobility, which holds great promise for practical applications in 3D electronic devices. Scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM) characterization of the nanoporous graphene structures revealed complex 3D morphologies with concave and convex curvatures and nanopores (Fig. 2g). The perfectly hexagonal atomic lattice of flat graphene was achieved (Fig. 2h and i), and pronounced pentagon–heptagon pair lattices together with large lattice bending were also observed (Fig. 2j and k). These occasionally detected atomic-scale defects should affect the electronic and transport properties of nanoporous 3D graphene foam. Following the introduction of these synthetic strategies, many researchers made consecutive efforts to prepare diverse 3D graphene foams based on porous metal templates. For example, a free-standing 3D mesoporous graphene foam was prepared using Ni powder and sucrose, combining traditional powder metallurgy and CVD growth.8
In short, such metal-catalysed CVD routes for preparing 3D graphene foams are facile, scalable, and possibly compatible with industrial-scale production. However, the intrinsic drawbacks of these approaches include the relatively high amount of metal consumption, limited choice of metal microstructures, and unavoidable metal residues in the products, which present challenges for practical applications.


Catalyst-free direct growth. 
To address the issues associated with metal-catalysed growth and develop a low-cost and facile system, a naturally abundant seashell-based template was designed for the preparation of 3D biomorphic graphene foams (Fig. 3a).9 The seashells composed of biological calcium carbonates were first converted into porous calcium oxides (CaO) without loss of their apparent shapes by a simple high-temperature calcination process (Fig. 3b and c). The diverse specific microscopic structures of the calcium oxides could be converted based on the different types of seashells. In this process, the release of gaseous CO2 from the calcium carbonate sources during calcination is critical for the formation of interconnected porous structures within the scallop bulk. And it is favourable to the effective permeation and adsorption of carbon species in the CVD growth of graphene. Instead of metal foams, the porous CaO solids can be severed as templates for subsequent CVD growth of 3D graphene foams. As expected, graphene layers were deposited on the highly porous CaO frameworks at 1020 °C under a CH4–H2–Ar mixed-gas atmosphere (Fig. 3d). After the normal CVD growth process, the seashell-shaped graphene foams were isolated from the templates by washing away the calcium oxides using dilute acids. As a result, free-standing 3D graphene foams with negligible non-carbon impurities were obtained, and these foams fully inherited the porous microstructures of the CaO templates (Fig. 3e). The foams exhibited high porosity, ultralow density, and superior bendability.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of scallop-derived 3D graphene foam formation. SEM images of (b) pristine scallop microstructure, (c) scallop calcined at 1050 °C for 30 min in air, (d) graphene-coated calcined scallop after CVD growth at 1020 °C for 30 min, and (e) 3D graphene foam after the removal of the CaO framework. The insets of panels b–e are the corresponding photographs. (f) Raman spectra at different locations over a large area. (g) TEM image of a graphene sheet; the inset shows the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (h) Top and bottom views of cuttlebones; the inset is a schematic depiction of a cuttlefish. (i) SEM images of graphene flakes. The inset is an SEM image of 3D graphene flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2016, Springer. 
Randomly selected Raman spectra (Fig. 3f) from different spatial locations of the graphene foam (grown at 1020 °C for 120 min) exhibited identical ID/IG ratios (0.86) and full-width at half-maximum (FWHM) values of the 2D band (80 cm−1), confirming the uniformity of the graphene foam at the macroscopic scale. Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis along with the corresponding selective area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns further revealed a crumpled, electron-transparent, polycrystalline graphene film (Fig. 3g). The macroscopic shapes of these graphene foams could be arbitrarily controlled by either varying the types of seashells or using the lime slaking process of the converted calcium oxides. As another example, cuttlebone was selected as an alternative biological template for 3D graphene growth.10 This template is a brittle chambered shell of cuttlefish and is composed of biological calcium carbonate, with a chemical composition similar to that of a seashell (Fig. 3h). The purified graphene products (after CaO removal) had locally curved, electron-transparent structures, as evidenced by their scanning electron microscopy (SEM) morphology (Fig. 3i). This CaO-templated synthesis route can also be extended to other calcium carbonate masses. In particular, this bio-inspired CVD route is amenable to industrial production because of the abundant and low-cost nature of biotemplates as well as the high scalability of the CVD process. This synthetic approach is expected to open the door to the scalable production of graphene foams with naturally bespoken microstructures.

2.2 Graphene shells
In addition to macroscopic 3D graphene structures, graphene shells have also been synthesized using metal, oxide, and chloride particles as the growth substrates (templates) in the past few years.

Growth on metal particles. 
Alongside the first CVD strategy of preparing graphene foams, various routes for growing graphene shells on metal-particle templates have also been applied. For example, carbon segregation on Ni nanoparticles (Ni NPs) was used to synthesize hollow graphene shells.11 As shown in Fig. 4a, the addition of monodisperse Ni NPs to a triethylene glycol solution induced the effective decomposition of the polyol into carbon atoms at 250 °C, producing carbon-incorporated Ni NPs via a carburization process. Multilayer graphene shells were then formed on Ni NPs at 500 °C via carbon segregation. Notably, the low-temperature (250 °C) carburization process prevented the deformation/aggregation of Ni NPs that generally occurred at higher temperature. Accordingly, the shape and size of the starting Ni NPs were preserved for the resultant graphene/Ni NP hybrids, which were also formed at relatively low temperature (500 °C). This preserved structure was visually verified using the SEM image shown in Fig. 4b, as demonstrated by the similar morphology of the graphene-encapsulated Ni NPs and Ni NPs after the carburization and segregation processes. Finally, hollow graphene shells were obtained with the initial ball-like shape after the core Ni NPs were removed using an acidic solution (Fig. 4c). High-resolution TEM analysis of the resulting graphene shells (Fig. 4d) revealed a typical few-layer graphene feature with a thickness of approximately 2.7 nm. Notably, the synthetic temperature of 500 °C was much lower than the conventional Ni-assisted CVD growth temperature of ∼1000 °C, inevitably inducing abundant defects in the graphene layers, as confirmed by the high ID/IG ratio in the Raman spectrum of the graphene shells (Fig. 4e). Another similar route has also been introduced to synthesize conformal graphene cages.12 And it was realized via the carbonization of Ni-coated Si microparticles in triethylene glycol solution at 185 °C followed by a low-temperature Ni-catalysed CVD process at 450 °C (Fig. 4f). After the Ni catalyst layer was removed using a FeCl3 aqueous solution, voids were formed between the multilayer graphene cage and Si microparticles, as evidenced by TEM analysis (Fig. 4g). The graphene cage exhibited a wavy structure because of the conformal growth behaviour of graphene on the surface of the Ni-coated Si microparticles. A free-standing graphene cage remained after the Si microparticles were completely removed (Fig. 4h).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of hollow graphene balls (GBs). (b) SEM and high-resolution TEM (inset) images of multilayer graphene (MLG)-encapsulated Ni NPs. (c) TEM and (d) high-resolution TEM images of GBs. (e) Raman spectrum at a laser excitation wavelength of 633 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (f) TEM image of an individual particle of Si microparticle@graphene (Si MP@Gr). (g) High-resolution TEM image of the layered structure of a graphene cage. The intensity plot shows that ten layers span a distance of 3.34 nm (average interlayer distance: 0.334 nm), a clear indication of graphene layers. (h) TEM image of a hollow graphene cage after etching Si in NaOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (i) SEM image of core–shell structures of 3D graphene-1000 (3DG1000). (j) SEM image of the core of 3DG1000. (k) TEM images of 3DG1000. The inset is the corresponding high-resolution TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In addition to liquid carbon sources, some solid carbon precursors such as poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS) have also been used for the large-scale production of graphene powder via catalysis of metal particles. For example, graphene powder was obtained via a CVD method using a mixture of Ni powder as catalyst and PMMA as carbon precursor, followed by a Ni etching process. The synthetic route resulted in an estimated yield of approximately 2.5% (weight ratio of graphene/Ni).13 The catalytic growth of graphene balls on metal-functionalized polystyrene beads has also been performed via a precursor-assisted CVD route at relatively high growth temperature.14 In this process, the FeCl3/polymer composite balls served as precursors, which were heated at 1000 °C under a H2/Ar atmosphere to grow multilayer graphene on the reduced iron. After etching away the reduced iron, gram-scale few-layer graphene nanoballs were obtained, with a SSA of ∼508 m2 g−1 and a single-modal mesoporosity with a mean pore diameter of ∼4.27 nm. Recently, the precursors of basic copper carbonate/PMMA composites have also been used to prepare porous copper templates for use in the preparation of 3D graphene-like carbon via the CVD route.15 The purified graphene cages derived from graphene/copper composites exhibited open porous architectures with interconnected micro–meso–macropores, large SSAs (>1500 m2 g−1), and high wettability in either aqueous or ionic liquids (Fig. 4i and j).
The self-propagating combustion process for metals has also been used to synthesize 3D graphene powders. For example, manganese and lithium metals were used as reducing agents, which burned in carbon precursors (such as CO2/CS2 atmospheres) to yield core–shell MgO/Li2S@graphene structures. The by-products MgO and Li2S served as carriers for graphene, in accordance with the traditional CVD route.16,17


Growth on non-metal particles. 
In the aforementioned scenarios, solid/liquid carbon precursors other than gaseous ones (e.g., methane) are typically introduced to grow graphene layers because an elevated temperature is generally needed for the decomposition of methane, which usually leads to sintering of the metal nanoparticle templates. Accordingly, it is difficult to control the growth of monolayer graphene on a metal nanoparticle surface because of the complexity of nucleation from solid- or liquid-phase carbon precursors in the conventional CVD process. Consequently, the high-melting-point, difficult-to-reduce metal oxides became alternative substrates for graphene growth, especially for monolayer graphene growth. As early as 2007, the catalytic graphitization of carbon by metal oxides was achieved under typical carbon-nanotube CVD synthesis conditions.18 For MgO nanopowders, TEM studies (Fig. 5a) demonstrated that MgO crystals were coated with few-layer graphene after the CVD process at 850 °C under a carbon flow of ethanol or methane. In contrast to the formation of continuous graphene layers via the traditional metal-catalysed CVD route, many individual graphene sheets were traced to the surfaces of the oxides (Fig. 5b, label I), which overlapped with each other and formed wrinkles (Fig. 5b, label II). The adjacent graphene domains had to crease and overlap without forming domain boundaries when they met during the growth process because of the absence of a catalyst. Nevertheless, complete graphene shells remained after removing the MgO using dilute hydrochloric acid (Fig. 5c).19 A Raman signal for the derived graphene shells showed a strong D mode, broadened G mode, and weak and broadened 2D mode, indicating the formation of nanosized graphene domains with abundant edge defects (Fig. 5d). Despite these findings, this strategy remains worthy of further investigation and extension to other oxides for mass production of high-purity graphene powders.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of the MgO nanocrystal coated with a few graphene layers. (b) TEM image of the MgO crystal coated with graphene layers. The graphene layers are highlighted. (I) Graphene layer roots on the MgO crystal. (II) Wrinkle formation due to the growth process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of graphene shells after the removal of MgO. (d) Raman spectrum of nanographite derived from a purified sample (prepared at 875 °C over MgO with a cyclohexane feedstock). Reaction time of 30 s. The inset is a schematic illustration of a nanographene flake, showing the presence of a large number of edge defects for the bulk nanographene sheet. The high number of edge defects leads to a high D band in the Raman spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e and f) TEM images of graphene-coated oxide nanoparticles: (e) alumina and (f) titania. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of graphene growth on NaCl crystals. (h) Photograph of NaCl powder after CVD growth (left) and dissolution of NaCl@graphene in water for 0 and 60 s (right). SEM images of (i) NaCl@graphene crystals and (j) purified graphene powder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Subsequently, oxide nanopowders such as alumina and titania were used as growth substrates to prepare nanostructured graphene shells via a similar CVD process.20 TEM investigations (Fig. 5e and f) confirmed the typical few-layer graphene coating on the surfaces of the nanoparticles. Evidently, the use of oxides instead of metals decreased the probability of introducing residual non-carbon impurities for graphene. However, the chemical etching process of templates was not a green synthetic process. Accordingly, microcrystalline sodium chloride (NaCl) powder was explored as a substrate to grow 3D few-layer graphene structures (Fig. 5g).21 In the CVD process, a two-zone (20 cm apart) furnace held at different temperatures was used. NaCl microparticles were placed in the low-temperature zone at 700 °C (lower than the melting point of NaCl) for 2 h to deposit graphene layers, whereas the high-temperature zone was heated to 850 °C to promote the decomposition of the carbon source (ethylene). This unique NaCl substrate is abundant in nature, non-toxic, and water soluble, thus providing a facile and environmentally friendly strategy to isolate the produced graphene layers (Fig. 5h). The graphene-coated NaCl particles were dissolved in the aqueous solution to realize the isolation of graphene layers, as evidenced by the colour change of the solution from transparent to muddy black. Prior to water treatment, cubic NaCl@graphene crystals with sizes of 1–30 μm were produced (Fig. 5i). After the purification process, cuboidal graphene was successfully prepared, as demonstrated in the SEM image in Fig. 5j. Overall, this synthetic route allows the efficient reutilization of the template, thereby paving the way for low-cost production of large-quantity graphene powders.
For more economical production, raw materials that are ubiquitous in nature need to be used as substrates for the CVD growth of graphene. Quartz sand, which is mainly composed of silica crystals with oxygen-bearing surfaces, is one of the most abundant sources on the Earth. The direct scalable growth of 3D graphene flakes was realized on quartz powder at 1050 °C, forming silica@graphene core–shell structures (Fig. 6a).22 The quartz particles were employed as substrates to promote the nucleation and growth of graphene. Even if a high-temperature CVD condition was applied, the quartz particles (∼400 meshes) showed no apparent change in morphology but became dark grey (Fig. 6b). Notably, the graphene flakes were spontaneously separated from the quartz particles without ultrasonication during the wet-etching process (see the insets in Fig. 6b). After being collected, washed, and dried, the separated graphene flakes aggregated again but were not closely stacked with each other (Fig. 6c). Benefiting from the high-temperature crystallization process, a sharp 2D peak was detected in the Raman spectrum of purified graphene flakes (Fig. 6d), suggesting their good crystallinity with long-range π conjugation of the sp2 carbon structure. In addition, the corresponding D peak was also relatively weak and sharp (with broadened D and G Raman peaks (ID/IG = 1.1)). Notably, the 3D surface morphology of the quartz particles was replicated by the graphene flakes; thus, the convex and concave structures of graphene coatings remained after the removal of silica (Fig. 6e). The presence of thin-layered, wrinkled, and corrugated graphene was confirmed by TEM investigations (Fig. 6f). The corresponding SAED pattern (inset of Fig. 6f) revealed the small domains and non-AB-stacked structures of the graphene layers. The controllability of the layer thickness (e.g., from single layer to few layers) was also achieved, as evidenced by high-resolution TEM images of the folded graphene edges (Fig. 6g). The change rules of the Raman D/G and 2D/G intensity ratios as a function of growth temperature and methane concentration revealed the good controllability of graphene layer thickness, as well as the relatively high crystallinity of the 3D graphene flakes (Fig. 6h). Control of graphene defects and layers is beneficial for tailoring the charge transport for electrochemical reactions in energy storage and conversion devices.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of CVD growth of 3D graphene flakes on quartz powder. (b) False-colour SEM image of quartz powder after CVD growth of graphene. The inset presents photographs of quartz powder after CVD growth (left) and wet chemical etching process. (c) False-colour SEM image of graphene powder after removing the quartz powder substrate. The inset is the corresponding photograph of the purified graphene powder. (d) Raman spectra of CVD graphene flakes and RGO flakes. (e) Zoom-in false-colour SEM image of locally curved thin-layer graphene (after purification). (f) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of high-crystallinity graphene flakes. (g) HRTEM images showing the thicknesses of the graphene flakes. (h) I2D/IG and ID/IG as a function of growth temperature and methane concentration, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i and j) SEM (i) and TEM (j) images of honeycomb-structured graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
In addition to the aforementioned difficult-to-reduce metal oxides, another type of metal oxides are able to react with carbon precursors (e.g., CO, CH4), which have been designed as substrates for graphene growth. In 2013, a 3D-honeycomb-like graphene structure was prepared by a simple reaction between Li2O and CO at 550 °C with Li2CO3 as a by-product.23 During the reaction, the graphene layers were sustainably deposited on the simultaneously produced Li2CO3 and served as coating layers. After the removal of the substrate, honeycomb-like graphene networks remained with cell sizes ranging from 50 to 500 nm (Fig. 6i) and with an intrinsic wrinkled or corrugation pattern of 3D graphene structures (Fig. 6j). Very recently, transition metal oxides such as manganese oxides have been proven to catalyse the decomposition of hydrocarbons and promote the growth of graphene.24 Notably, highly crystalline monolayer graphene shells were grown in situ on MnO nanorods using a methane-carburization-mediated CVD strategy. The crystallinity of the produced graphene shells was similar to that of metal-catalysed CVD graphene owing to the catalytic activity of the converted Mn7C3 phase from the reaction between MnO and CH4. Therefore, this approach should also be considered as a promising route for preparing high-quality graphene shells on a large scale.

2.3 Hierarchical graphene microstructures
For application of 3D graphene materials as electrochemical electrodes in energy-related fields, large accessible surface area and fast mass/electron transport are needed. For this purpose, the development of hierarchical graphene architectures is highly desirable. Many researchers have shifted their focus to various complex structured templates to obtain such graphene structures.

Artificial-template directed growth. 
To date, some artificial synthetic materials such as mesoporous MgO nanowires, MgAl-layered double oxide (LDO) nanosheets, and porous silica particles have been used as templates to grow 3D hierarchical graphene microstructures.25Fig. 7a presents a schematic illustration of the synthesis of unstacked double-layer templated graphene (DTG) via a template-directed CVD route. Before the CVD process, hexagonal MgAl-layered double hydroxide plates (approximately 10 nm in thickness, inset in Fig. 7b) were calcined into mesoporous MgAl–LDO nanosheets, which maintained the initial plate-like morphology and layered structure (Fig. 7b). Notably, the graphene layers subsequently deposited onto the LDO templates were conformably cast onto all the mesoporous frameworks. Thus, the DTG preserved a similar hexagonal morphology as that of the templates even after template removal (Fig. 7c). Moreover, the graphene protuberances formed along the mesoporous walls of the templates and served as spacers, preventing the stacking of graphene layers deposited on both sides of the templates. The two-layer structure of the graphene flakes was confirmed by high-resolution TEM on the fold graphene edges at the protuberance positions (black arrow) around the pores (Fig. 7d and e). Because of the presence of these voids, the DTG powder exhibited a relatively high SSA of 1628 m2 g−1 with a large quantity of mesopores with sizes of 2–7 nm (Fig. 7f).
 Fig. 7  (a) Scheme for synthesis of unstacked DTG. A mesoporous metal oxide derived from the calcination of layered double hydroxide nanoflakes was used as a template to cast DTG. The template was removed by etching, whereas the DTG was unstacked because of the protuberances extending from the graphene sheets. (b) SEM images of nanostructures of LDH precursors (inset) and LDO templates for unstacked DTG deposition. (c) TEM image of cast DTG flakes. (d and e) High-resolution TEM images of DTG with protuberances extending from the graphene sheets and the graphene layer for DTG. (f) Pore size distribution of the DTG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (g) FE-SEM image of 3D graphene nanoporous monolith. The inset is the photograph of graphene monoliths. (h) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of an individual microrod. The inset is a high-magnification HRTEM image of 3D graphene. (i) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm distributions of 3D graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (j–l) TEM images (main pictures) and Fourier diffractograms (insets) of the template-free carbon generated using a template of La3+-ion-exchanged (j) FAU, (k) EMT, or (l) beta zeolites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
Another paragon for the synthesis of hierarchical graphene structures was achieved using a similar CVD method based on macro-/mesoporous silica templates.26 As expected, the 3D graphene product inherited the hierarchical micro-/nanoscale structures from the interconnected 3D scaffolds of the templates (Fig. 7g and h) and exhibited significant mesoporosity and high SSAs (as high as 1591 m2 g−1 (Fig. 7i)). In particular, although carbon species from the decomposition of hydrocarbons could freely enter the macroporous/mesoporous structures of the templates, the risk of amorphous carbon formation inside the very small pores still existed at high growth temperature, especially inside the periodic nanopores of zeolite frameworks.
To address this issue, a low-temperature lanthanum-catalysed CVD process based on zeolite templates was explored for the preparation of microporous 3D graphene-like carbons.27 The use of lanthanum ions embedded in zeolite pores was proposed to promote surface adsorption through d–π interaction and the subsequent carbonization of ethylene or acetylene molecules at relatively low temperature (<600 °C). Using this approach, 3D graphene structures were selectively formed inside the lanthanum-containing zeolite (LaY) pores without producing coke at the external surfaces. The subsequent heat treatment was performed at 850 °C to obtain highly ordered porous frameworks of graphene-like carbons. 3D graphene structures systematically evolved along the smoothly curved surfaces of the zeolite supercages, as evidenced by TEM investigations (Fig. 7j–l). Notably, the 3D graphene-like carbons nearly replicated the morphologies of all the LaY zeolite pores, without random deposition of any amorphous carbon. In principle, the graphene growth after the initial nucleation in the present zeolite was proposed to proceed very rapidly via a radical mediated pyro-condensation polymerization route, following a ‘rapid spot growth’ mechanism related to the lanthanum catalysis. This work also demonstrated that the synthesis could be readily scaled to realize a production capacity of 10 g per batch on the laboratory scale. Briefly, this protocol provides an efficient synthetic strategy for achieving 3D periodic microporous graphene architectures on a large scale.


Bio-template directed growth. 
In addition to artificial templates, nature provides rich inspiration regarding the design of 3D templates for graphene synthesis. Biomineral materials, for example, may serve as ideal candidates. As a naturally existing material, diatomite, which is evolved from the deposition of ancient diatom frustules, is abundant on the Earth and widely used in industry. Diatom frustules possess diverse 3D hierarchical porous biosilica structures and hold considerable promise for the construction of delicate geometric topologies of materials. Accordingly, a biotemplate-directed growth behaviour was established for producing 3D hierarchical biomorphic graphene (HBG) powders, as realized by a small-methane-flow CVD process on diatomite substrates (Fig. 8a).28 The graphene coating process on the diatom frustules caused the original white powder to become light grey and then black after the biosilica removal process (Fig. 8b). Raman spectroscopy (Fig. 8c) of the produced graphene powder revealed sharp G and 2D bands, indicative of highly crystalline graphene.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing graphene growth on a diatom frustule and its hierarchical biomorphic structure. (b) Photographs of diatomite before and after graphene growth as well as the derived HBG powder after the removal of biosilica templates. (c) Raman spectra of diatomite-derived graphene powders together with graphite, GO, and RGO powders. (d) False-colour SEM image of a diatom frustule. (e and f) False-colour SEM images of derived HBG flakes after the removal of the diatom frustule. (g) SEM morphology of a HBG flake (i), cross-section of its central pores (ii), and details of its marginal pores (iii). (h) Optical microscopy image of HBG flakes grown at a CH4 concentration of 2.4 vol% after being transferred onto 300 nm SiO2/Si substrates. (i) AFM image of a porous graphene flake inheriting morphology from the diatom frustule template. The height profile taken along the blue line shows a relative height of ∼1.38 nm to the background. (j) Low-voltage, aberration-corrected, high-resolution TEM image of the graphene layer, showing the six-fold lattice symmetry and layer thicknesses of a single layer and two layers. (k) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of HBG, RGO, and diatomite powders. The inset presents photographs of HBG NMP dispersions at 0.03 mg ml−1, showing photoluminescence under ultraviolet light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
From a microscopic viewpoint, an individual diatom frustule looks like a Petri dish composed of two almost equal valves that fit together with a girdle (Fig. 8d). For the HBG flakes, the nearly complete replication of the shape and fine hierarchical porous structures of the diatom frustules was confirmed by SEM observation (Fig. 8e and f). In particular, the holes penetrated through the entire surface of the individual graphene microarchitectures (Fig. 8g), forming aligned hierarchical channels within graphene flakes. For a single HBG flake transferred onto 300 nm SiO2/Si substrates, the distinct colour contrast between the edge and central regions revealed the complicated 3D stacking of graphene layers and hierarchically aligned channels after the template removal process (Fig. 8h). Detailed atomic force microscopy (AFM) and TEM measurements (Fig. 8i and j) also suggested the thin-layer feature and good crystalline quality of the HBG flakes. Because of the hierarchical porous architecture, the assembled HBG powder exhibited high mesoporosity with a SSA of 1137.2 m2 g−1 (Fig. 8k). More notably, because of the weak interlayer interactions, the 3D HBG structures were endowed with relatively good dispersity and stability in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone solution, as demonstrated by the blue photoluminescence of the transparent HBG dispersion (similar to that of colloids). On the laboratory scale, the yield of the resulting HBG powders approached 1% (the weight ratio of graphene and diatomite), which was a comparable production rate to that of RGO powders. Overall, the above synthetic strategy demonstrates the feasibility of growing large-quantity 3D graphene microstructures with special functions.


Template-free growth. 
In addition to template-directed synthetic protocols, a template-free strategy has also been regarded as an alternative route to synthesize 3D graphene architectures to avoid the tedious and time-consuming template removal process. As an example, a plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) process was introduced for the construction of 3D graphene nanowalls on planar metal and dielectric substrates.29,30 Besides, through microwave/radiofrequency-energy-driving decomposition of alcohols, 3D irregular-structured graphene powder was also produced without using supporting substrates.31 Although synthesis using these approaches has been readily realized on a gram scale or larger in the laboratory, precise control over the resulting graphene structures has not yet been achieved.

2.4 Perspectives
Emerging demands for high-performance energy-related applications require 3D graphene materials with high conductivity, low impurity levels, and production scalability. The metal-catalysed CVD route for synthesizing 3D graphene architectures offers high crystalline quality and electrical conductivity; however, it appears to be difficult to avoid metallic residues in the graphene products. Although these residues only slightly affect the electrical conductivity of the graphene networks, the electrochemical properties are largely affected in energy-storage applications. In addition, the cycling stability of graphene electrodes is also degraded by non-carbon impurities, even if such impurities occasionally boost the initial electrochemical performance.
In the typical catalyst-free CVD synthesis route, the difficult-to-reduce oxide growth templates, such as magnesia, silica, and diatomite, can be completely removed using a simple wet chemical etching method. Moreover, these templates can withstand the high-temperature treatments in the CVD growth of graphene. This strategy is relatively economical and practical because of its promising production scalability, but is associated with certain defects resulting from the absence of metal catalysts. In addition, the selection of carbon precursors is relatively unitary; gaseous small molecules, such as methane, ethylene, or acetylene, are generally introduced into the related CVD systems. Another challenge is the necessity of a relatively long period (several hours) for the catalyst-free growth of 3D graphene structures. This time-consuming synthetic route, along with the growth temperatures greater than 1000 °C, is clearly incompatible with industrial-scale production from the viewpoint of energy conservation. The template-free PECVD synthesis route affords the efficient decomposition of carbon precursors, a short growth time, and low growth temperature for achieving graphene powders and nanowalls. Therefore, this route should be one of the most promising approaches for high-yield, low-temperature production of graphene structures. However, great efforts should be made to improve the quality of the resulting graphene products, e.g., the relatively poor controllability and high defect density.
3. Growth mechanisms
As previously mentioned, the growth of 3D graphene architectures has been realized primarily using a similar growth mechanism as that for CVD graphene on planar substrates.30 In the metal-catalysed growth route, the metal substrate accelerates the decomposition of hydrocarbon molecules, the C–C coupling of reactive CHx species, and the perfect lattice arrangement of graphene, as it serves as both a catalyst and a supporting template. In the catalyst-free CVD growth route, however, the initial nucleation and subsequent growth processes of graphene become very slow, basically relying on the thermal decomposition of hydrocarbon molecules. Therefore, understanding the fundamental principles in these CVD growth processes is crucial to the tailoring of the structural features of 3D graphene materials. In particular, it is of tremendous importance that the configurations of 3D graphene structures can be tuned to exploit their unique properties towards specific orientations (such as energy storage and conversion). In addition to the routine parameters (e.g., growth temperature, pressure, gas flow, catalyst, etc.), the substrate morphology, the type of carbon feedstock and the growth kinetics should reasonably be considered because of the particularity and complexity of 3D growth substrates with arbitrarily curved surfaces.
3.1 Substrate morphology
In constructing 3D graphene structures, the geometry of the substrates (templates) can have a significant effect on the CVD growth behaviour and resulting morphology of graphene. Unlike the CVD growth of graphene films on 2D surfaces, 3D graphene growth tends to induce the formation of many intrinsic graphene defects over the concave and convex surfaces of the 3D templates, as many bent graphene lattices form with a sp3 configuration to adapt the large curvature change from the substrate surface.12 Besides, SiOx nanoparticles with suitable sizes (e.g., <5 nm) can be used to grow single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWNTs) with similar sizes because of the so-called catalyst size effect. In contrast, particles with larger sizes appear to be suitable for growing graphene shells but not SWNTs.22 Additionally, turbostratic few-layer graphene caps or islands can be grown on the oxide particle corners, following a rolled-up graphene nucleation process.32
3.2 Growth temperature and carbon feedstock
The growth temperature is regarded as one of the critical factors affecting graphene growth in the conventional CVD system. From the aspect of 3D substrates, special attention should also be paid to the particle aggregation and sintering at high temperature, which result in the structural change of the substrates during the CVD process. In particular, some low-melting-point metals and nanoparticle assemblies have to be used as templates at low temperature (less than 1000 °C) for the syntheses of graphene powders, because of their poor high-temperature tolerance.14,19 As such, the types of carbon feedstocks, such as solid, liquid, and gaseous ones, should also be reasonably considered in this situation. For example, liquid solvents (e.g., alcohol, benzene) and solid polymers (e.g., PS, PMMA) are generally used as isolators for low-melting-point metal particles to prevent particle aggregation at high temperature,11,13,14 whereas gaseous hydrocarbon molecules (e.g., CH4, C2H4, C2H2) are generally used to mitigate coke formation on insulating particles and porous solids because of the absence of metal catalysts.19,20,22
In addition, effective control of the layer thickness of the graphene flakes can be generally achieved by varying the growth temperature and methane concentration. For instance, for the catalyst-free CVD growth of graphene on quartz powder, a moderate increase of the temperature or methane concentration is effective for decreasing the defect density and improving the crystallinity of graphene.26 However, an overly high growth temperature or methane concentration can accelerate the pyrolysis of carbon species, thereby increasing the nucleation density and layer number of graphene, followed by reduced domain sizes, increased sp3 defects, and more layers of graphene.
3.3 Growth kinetics
Despite the tremendous progress that has been made in the CVD syntheses of 3D graphene materials in the past few years, investigations on the initial nucleation and growth mechanism are still needed. With respect to growth, the compositions and surface features of substrates are critical factors affecting the geometric and intrinsic natures of the derived 3D graphene materials.

Metal-assisted CVD synthesis. 
So far, the graphene growth mechanism under the metal-catalysed CVD route has been well established. In general, metal catalysts contribute to the decomposition of carbon feedstocks (hydrocarbons) and the nucleation/growth of graphene domains. In this context, the metal-catalysed CVD growth of 3D graphene materials (i.e., foams, powders) is proposed to follow either the surface-mediated self-limited growth (e.g., Cu) or carbon segregation/precipitation (e.g., Ni) mechanisms, similar to the well-established CVD routes based on planar metal substrates.33 In the two typical routes, the layer numbers of graphene can be well controlled from predominantly monolayer to few layers.


Nonmetal-assisted CVD synthesis. 
In contrast, the catalyst-free growth mechanism of 3D graphene materials on dielectric (e.g., MgO, Al2O3, SiO2, CaO) and semiconducting (e.g., Si, SiC) templates (e.g. particles, foams) remains unclear. An oxygen-aided growth mechanism is proposed where the oxygen-rich surfaces of oxide particles (e.g., SiO2) are capable of enhancing the capture of CHx species by lowering the adsorption energy during the high-temperature decomposition process of hydrocarbons, thus greatly promoting the nucleation and growth of graphene.34 However, it is also reported that the methane decomposition can partially reduce the Al2O3 (or SiO2) surface to an oxygen-deficient oxide (e.g., nonstoichiometric AlOx or SiOx). The formation of Al–O–C and Al–C bonds (or Si–O–C and Si–C bonds) on oxygen-deficient oxide surfaces can create nucleation sites for graphene growth.35 From the viewpoint of charge transfer between the oxide surface and incoming hydrocarbon molecules, the dangling bonds on defective oxides could catalyse the decomposition of hydrocarbons as well as facilitate the nucleation process by accepting or donating electrons to the target molecules. Thus, there is an overlap of the mechanisms for non-metal-assisted graphene growth, which is related with either oxygen-bare or oxygen-deficient oxides.
In addition, the growth of graphene is also related to other reaction kinetic parameters, such as the nucleation density and domain growth rate. All these factors are determined by the competition between the mass transport process through the boundary layer along a solid surface and the surface reaction process.33 For the non-metal substrate in a gaseous atmosphere, both the surface adsorption rate and carbon attachment at the domain edge are greatly limited because of the absence of metal catalysts. The mass transport process thus dominates, leading to increased nucleation density and enhanced layer thickness, in accordance with evolutions of few-layer graphene with small domains always on 3D non-metal substrates.19,22


Plasma-enhanced CVD synthesis. 
The PECVD synthetic process has also been explored to understand the growth behaviour of graphene in the absence of metal catalysts. It has been proposed that the vertical growth mechanism of graphene nanowalls involves the following processes: (a) the formation of an intermediate layer comprised of randomly stacked graphene nanodomains and (b) the subsequent epitaxy of vertically aligned graphene following the Stranski–Krastanov growth model.29
In short, great progress has been made in both theoretical and experimental research on metal-catalysed CVD growth of graphene. However, the debate over the catalyst-free growth mechanism for graphene on non-metal substrates has not been convincingly resolved. As such, understanding and tailoring the complex growth behaviours of graphene on non-metal substrates is highly desired to further improve the quality of catalyst-free CVD-grown 3D graphene materials.

4. Energy-related applications
The aforementioned studies have demonstrated that CVD-grown 3D graphene materials exhibit diverse morphologies, quality, and properties. These features strongly affect the electrochemical, optoelectronic, and thermal performances of energy-related devices that employ 3D graphene materials. State-of-the-art applications based on CVD-grown 3D graphene materials and their composites for supercapacitors, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), catalysts, and thermal management systems will be discussed in this section.
4.1 Supercapacitors
Supercapacitors have very high power densities and extremely long cycle lives (usually >10000 cycles). They can be classified into two groups: pseudocapacitors and electric double-layer capacitors (EDLCs). For pseudocapacitors, 3D graphene materials are generally considered as support electrodes for the electrochemically active components, because of their relatively high loading ability and outstanding conductivity. Since the first successful synthesis of graphene foam using nickel foam in 2011, the derived graphene foams have been widely used as supporting electrodes in pseudocapacitors. In 2012, 3D graphene/Co3O4 composites, prepared using hydrothermal synthesis of Co3O4 nanowires on CVD-grown graphene foam, manifested relative high performance as supercapacitor electrodes (Fig. 9a).36 By virtue of the large pseudocapacity of electrochemically active Co3O4, the composite electrode exhibited a much higher capacity than that of a pristine graphene foam (Fig. 9b). Moreover, the composite electrode presented good stability up to 1000 cycles (Fig. 9c). As demonstrated in this study and later works, 3D graphene foam is an ideal porous conductive support for electrochemically active materials, including PANI, NiO, and MnO2, in pseudocapacitors.5
 Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of 3D graphene foam (left) and 3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composite (right). (b) CV curves of 3D graphene and graphene/Co3O4 composite electrodes measured at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (c) Cycling performance of the graphene/Co3O4 composite electrode at a current density of 10.0 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM image of GNFs after removing MgO by acidic washing. (e) CV curves of GNFs as the electrode in 4 V SCs (two-electrode coin cell) using EMIBF4 as the electrolyte. (f) Retention of relative capacitance of GNF-based SCs for 5000 cycle tests. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) High-resolution TEM image of OMFLC. The nanoporous walls consist of few-layered carbon sheets. The possible locations for N incorporation into a few-layer carbon network are also schematically shown (inset). (h) CV curves at 2 mV s−1 from the first cycle for OMC, OMFLC, and OMFLC-N (S1 to S3) and for mixed OMFLC-N (SM). (i) Ragone plots of energy density versus power density for OMFLC-N SM packaged symmetric devices (counting the entire device volume) using 0.5 M H2SO4 (solid squares) and 2 M Li2SO4 (solid circles) electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2015, Science Publishing Group. 
For electrodes in EDLCs, CVD-grown 3D graphene materials also displayed excellent performance, because of their structural diversities. In general, the capacitance of EDLCs is mainly determined by the SSA, pore volume and especially the mesoporosity of the electrode material. As an example, the graphene nanofibres (GNFs), synthesized via CVD using MgO fibres as templates, afforded an ultra large SSA of ∼2411 m2 g−1 (Fig. 9d).37 Thanks to the low reactivity and the rather high structural stability of GNFs in ionic electrolytes, the GNFs showed a wide potential window up to 4 V and a high capacity of 193 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1, which are highly desirable for application in the high voltage electrolyte EMIBF4. As shown in Fig. 9e, the GNFs also demonstrated nearly trapezoid-shaped CV curves (scan rate is below 200 mV s−1), indicating the quantum capacitance characteristics of graphene flakes. At a current density of 5 A g−1, the fabricated electrode exhibited excellent cycling stability after cycling 5000 times, although the relative capacitance showed a slight decrease and recovery in the initial stages because of the filling and wetting of the electrolyte (Fig. 9f).
Heteroatom doping of graphene also has a great effect on the capacity of 3D graphene-related supercapacitors. Among these supercapacitors, the N-doped 3D graphene materials synthesized on mesoporous silica substrates using a Ni-assisted CVD process have exhibited the highest capacitance to date.38 They were composed of ordered mesoporous few-layer graphene possessing high conductivity (360 S cm−1) and a large SSA (1900 m2 g−1) (Fig. 9g). According to CV analysis (Fig. 9h), N doping enabled the redox reactions, which provided extra capacitance and fast kinetics. In H2SO4 and Li2SO4 electrolytes, the 3D graphene electrodes had specific capacitances of 810 and 720 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, respectively. In addition, their packaged devices exhibited specific energies of 12.0 and 19.5 W h L−1 and specific powers of 13 and 12.5 kW L−1 based on the device volume, respectively (Fig. 9i). Overall, this work provided a new heteroatom doping route for dramatically improving the energy density of 3D graphene-based supercapacitors.
4.2 Lithium ion batteries
CVD-grown 3D graphene materials have shown great potential for application in high-performance LIBs, especially in Si-based anodes with ultrahigh capacity (4200 mA h g−1) and low charge/discharge voltage (0.2 V). To accommodate the large volume change associated with Si anode materials, integration with carbon materials is typically used to improve the stability and cycle life. The direct growth of graphene-encapsulated Si particles has been shown to be effective in improving the performance of Si anodes. By introducing the weak oxidizing agent CO2, SiC-free growth of graphene on Si nanoparticles was realized in a traditional CVD process (Fig. 10a).39 Because of the sliding process of the graphene layers anchored on Si particles, the structure was stabilized during the volume expansion occurring in the charging process (Fig. 10b). Consequently, the cycling stability of the Si nanoparticle anodes was largely improved. For the same areal capacity of 1 mA h cm−2, the capacity fading of the graphene-encapsulated Si nanoparticles was better than that of 2 wt%-AC–Si and pristine Si (Fig. 10c). Besides, CVD-grown graphene on SiOx nanoparticles was also used as a conductive additive in the commercial LiNi0.6Co0.1Mn0.3O2 (NCM) cathodes.40 The introduction of highly conductive graphene balls in the cathodes largely decreased the contents of inactive materials like super P and polymeric binder, thus greatly improving the volumetric energy density (as high as 800 W h L−1) of the fabricated full cell, which was remarkable in the development of LIBs.
 Fig. 10  (a) High-magnification TEM image of Gr–Si NP. The insets are line profiles from the two red boxes demonstrating that the interlayer spacing between the graphene layers is ∼3.4 Å, in good agreement with that of typical graphene layers based on van der Waals interaction. (b) Schematic illustration showing the sliding process of the graphene coating layers that can buffer the volume expansion of Si. (c) Lithiation (filled circles) and delithiation (open circles) capacity retentions of the same four samples. The potential was swept within a voltage window between 0.01 and 1.5 V at 0.5C (C = 2000 mA h g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Design and structure of graphene cage encapsulation. (e) Full-cell delithiation capacity of SiMP@Gr (∼2.0 mg) with no conductive additives paired with a traditional LCO cathode. The coulombic efficiency of the SiMP@Gr is plotted on the secondary y-axis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f) TEM image of connected particles of d-SiO@vG. (g) High-resolution TEM images of the vertical graphene sheet with a triangular shape. (h) Schematic view of the ionic and electronic vertical graphene coating layer. (i) Specific capacity and cycling efficiency of d-SiO and d-SiO@vG electrodes. The current density is 320 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides nanoscale Si particles, microscale Si particles encapsulated by graphene can also be utilized to improve the cycling stability of electrodes.12 By removing the sacrificial nickel buffer layer, a void space was created between the Si microparticle and the graphene capsule, which was beneficial for stress relief during Si volume expansion. In addition, the mechanically flexible graphene cage guaranteed perfect electrical connectivity even after the expansion and fracture of the Si microparticles during the charge and discharge processes (Fig. 10d). Moreover, the addition of conductive additives was unnecessary for the electrodes, further improving the energy density of the full cell. These features enabled stable cycling of Si microparticles even in full-cell configurations. At a high mass loading of 2 mg cm−2, the fabricated full cell exhibited good stability when paired with a traditional lithium cobalt oxide cathode (Fig. 10e).
However, because of the excellent impermeability of its 2D structure, graphene can impede lithium ion penetration when mixed improperly or used in excessive amounts. A CVD method was developed for vertical graphene (v-G) encapsulation on SiO particles (Fig. 10f and g).41 The unique morphology of the v-G encapsulation fulfilled the functions of graphene, ensuring electrical contact with the surrounding conducting material, fluent passage of lithium ions to active materials, and buffering the volume change of Si-based materials (Fig. 10h). Consequently, the resultant Si-based anode exhibited impressive stability (100 cycles, 93% retention) even at a high areal mass loading of 1.5 mg cm−2 (Fig. 10i).
4.3 Catalysts
The design of effective catalysts has become a key issue in fuel-cell-related fields. In catalytic reactions such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), 3D graphene materials are inert. However, for heteroatom doping or catalyst loading, 3D graphene materials have been proven to be eco-friendly replacements for noble metals in electrocatalytic applications. 3D N-doped graphene materials were found to be bifunctional catalysts towards ORR and oxygen evolution reaction (OER).7,42–45 With high concentration N-doping, the catalytic activity of nanoporous graphene in ORR was dramatically enhanced.7 In this regard, the nanoporous structure and high conductivity derived from the N-doping contributed an additional effect on the ORR activity. Moreover, to date, the active site in N-doped graphene remains controversial. Some researchers claimed that the pyridinic N appeared to play a more important role than graphitic N, while some other researchers demonstrated that graphitic N was critical to ORR. What's more, 3D N-doped graphene materials have been proven to be active in OER, wherein pyridinic N with p-type doping may act as the active site.42,43 Notably, the electrochemical oxidation of carbonous OER catalysts at high voltage should be addressed before their real application.
Although N-doped graphene materials have shown excellent ORR catalytic activity, their catalytic applications in HER were relatively poor. By introducing N and S co-doping, a high catalytic activity in HER was achieved for the nanoporous graphene material.46 According to the DFT analysis, the coupling of S and N dopants with geometric defects in the graphene lattice produces a synergistic effect in tuning the Gibbs free energy of H* absorption and hence is responsible for the outstanding HER performance. Additionally, 3D graphene materials can work as conducting supports to load more electrochemical catalysts such as MoSx for highly improved HER.47 In short, 3D graphene materials with high surface areas and electrical conductivity have been proven to be effective in electrocatalytic applications.
4.4 Thermal management devices
Recently, CVD-grown 3D graphene materials have been developed as perfect candidates in the fields of thermal management including thermal storage, thermal transfer as well as thermal conversion. The CVD-grown graphene shells on Al2O3 particles have been selected as heat transfer fillers in stearic acid for enhanced thermal energy storage. This structural design largely increased the wettability at the interface of both materials, thus greatly improving the thermal storage capacity.48 In addition, the 3D graphene architectures also show excellent broadband absorption and photothermal properties, which can be exploited for solar-thermal energy conversion devices. The 3D hierarchical graphene (h-G) foams (derived from the nickel foam templates via a PECVD method) were detected to show greatly improved light absorption (Fig. 11a–c).49 Accordingly, the solar-thermal conversion efficiency was dramatically enhanced (∼93.4%), which was much superior to other carbon-based solar-thermal materials. Thus, the h-G foam was also used as a light absorber and an efficient heater in a solar-driven seawater desalination system (Fig. 11d and e). Very recently, vertical graphene structure has also been fabricated on a 6-inch soda-lime glass substrate by using a PECVD system (Fig. 11f).50 The surface temperature of the graphene glass with 75% transmittance was detected to be 15 °C higher than that of the pristine glass (Fig. 11g), which was suitable for high performance photo-thermal applications of glass.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of solar-thermal conversion difference between ordinary graphene foam and h-G foam. (b) SEM image of h-G foam at low magnification. (c) SEM image of the frame edge, inset: top view of the frame. (d) Temperature distribution of the steam generation unit under solar illumination of 5 kW m−2. The height of the h-G foam surface was defined as a depth of 0 cm. The inset is an IR image of the corresponding unit. Colour bar: 22–75 °C. (e) Photo of water steam generated under solar illumination of 5 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) Photograph of a white float glass substrate after PECVD graphene growth at 580 °C with a growth period of 7 min. (g) Infrared thermal imaging camera photograph of the 6-inch vertical graphene nanosheet on glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, Springer. 
4.5 Perspectives
CVD-grown 3D graphene materials have exhibited superior performances in energy storage and conversion systems, which made them perfect candidates for next-generation high-energy-density and long-life devices. For supercapacitor applications, the future direction should be focused on the precise syntheses of 3D mesoporous structures with large SSA. Besides, cost competition against widely used active carbon electrodes should also be considered. From the aspect of LIB electrode applications, e.g., using Si/SiO@graphene composites as the electrode, an in situ growth pathway is highly desired for the introduced strong binding between graphene and active materials, followed with good stability upon cycling for high-capacity electrodes. Notably, the impermeability of lithium ions into graphene electrodes should be remedied by tailoring the morphology or defect structures of graphene. In addition, heteroatom doping of 3D graphene materials should be further investigated to promote the catalytic applications of graphene, as the active catalytic sites in N-doped graphene catalysts have not yet been identified. Finally, structure and quality engineering of 3D graphene materials should be pursued to enhance heat absorption, transfer, and emission for applications in thermal management systems.
5. Conclusion and outlook
In summary, 3D graphene architectures have attracted considerable attention in both academia and industry areas, considering their superior merits, e.g., designable structures, compatibility with mass production, and economic effectiveness. The template-directed CVD growth strategies based on various 3D metal and non-metal substrates were summarized in this review to highlight the recent advances in the 3D graphene materials production. The related growth mechanisms were summarized and analysed. More significantly, the energy-related applications of these intriguing graphene materials were discussed.
Although many graphene-based energy-related devices have exhibited rather high performance in the laboratory scale, real breakthroughs rely on the mass production of 3D graphene materials with desirable structures and versatile properties. It is well known that the chemical exfoliation route is scalable and low cost, but the poor crystallinity of thus-produced graphene sheets greatly limits the ultrafast electron transport in high-energy-density and high-power-density energy systems, such as supercapacitors and batteries. On the other hand, the CVD synthesis route has emerged as a scalable, controllable, and feasible strategy for producing high-crystallinity graphene films for basic research and practical applications. More intriguingly, the synthetic route greatly reinforces the features and properties of the obtained graphene products. In Fig. 12, the common synthetic routes for preparing graphene materials are compared in terms of yield and quality. Due to the limited yield, the conventional CVD route based on 2D planar substrates seems unsuitable for producing bulk quantities of graphene materials. In this regard, the CVD growth of 3D graphene foams and powders is considered as a good choice to bridge the gap between chemical exfoliation and 2D surface growth, considering the trade-off between quality and yield. Despite the moderate quality, the currently obtained graphene products still maintain the long-range π-conjugation of sp2 carbon structure, benefiting from the high-temperature crystallization process. Hereby, the graphene products should outperform the chemically exfoliated graphene sheets which are usually associated with abundant intrinsic/extrinsic defects, even if the defects can serve as active sites to improve catalytic activities in certain situations (e.g., metal–air batteries and fuel cells). Moreover, the extraordinary electrical and thermal properties can also be preserved in the CVD-grown 3D graphene materials, resulting in enhanced energy storage and conversion performances in related applications.
 Fig. 12  Comparison of the CVD growth method for 3D graphene architectures with several preparation methods for other graphene materials in terms of yield and quality. Each method was also evaluated in terms of graphene crystallinity (G), purity (P), layer number controllability (L), cost aspect (C, a low value related to high cost of production), and scalability (S) of the entire production process. Each ring referred to low, medium and high level is marked as 1, 2, and 3, respectively. 
Despite significant advances being made, several challenges still remain in the CVD syntheses and energy-related applications of 3D graphene materials. For example, in tubular CVD chambers, the gradient distributions of temperature and precursor concentration along the axial and radial directions significantly affect the uniformity and crystalline quality of graphene layers grown on a powder bed, thus hindering the scalability of the designed CVD system for graphene synthesis. Besides, the low mass or volume ratio of graphene to its underlying substrate significantly limits the yield of 3D graphene products, since the conformal growth proceeds only along the 3D surface of the substrate. Accordingly, fabricating highly exposed surfaces for the template should be a promising route to improve the production capacity on an industrial level, along with a continuous and scalable fluid-bed CVD strategy. Moreover, a green transfer process for removing and reusing the substrates should be considered to reduce the production costs of 3D graphene.
On the one hand, with respect to practical applications in energy-related fields, especially in LIBs, defect-free 3D graphene materials are not the best choice, since a perfect graphene lattice usually prevents the passing through of lithium ions. Accordingly, the defect engineering of graphene should be intensively explored. On the other hand, the hollow structural property of 3D graphene materials generally leads to low volumetric energy densities in the associated energy storage devices. In this regard, designing 3D-graphene-based hybrid materials should be reliable for resolving such an issue, with graphene acting as a stable and conductive matrix. Herein, the graphene networks can work complementarily with electroactive materials to buffer electrode volume changes and prevent pulverization, aggregation, and electrolyte corrosion of the electrode materials. Accordingly, the CVD synthesis of 3D-graphene-decorated electrode materials should be one of the most promising directions in this field. The derived graphene products possess relatively high crystalline quality, designable structures, variable components, and desirable properties, making them perfect candidates for the development of various energy-related applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research & Development Plan of China (no. 2016YFA0200103), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 51520105003 and 51432002), and the Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commission (no. Z161100002116020).
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Chang, C.-H. Liu, C.-H. Liu, S. Zhang, S. R. Marder, E. E. Narimanov, Z. Zhong and T. B. Norris, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10568–10574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lozada-Hidalgo, S. Zhang, S. Hu, A. Esfandiar, I. V. Grigorieva and A. K. Geim, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15215–15219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Raccichini, A. Varzi, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Nat. Mater., 2014, 14, 271–279 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Chowdhury and R. Balasubramanian, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2017, 90, 224–275 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H. M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424–428 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ito, Y. Tanabe, H. J. Qiu, K. Sugawara, S. Heguri, N. H. Tu, K. K. Huynh, T. Fujita, T. Takahashi, K. Tanigaki and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2014, 53, 4822–4826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Sha, C. T. Gao, S. K. Lee, Y. L. Li, N. Q. Zhao and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1411–1416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, K. Chen, R. Du, A. Bachmatiuk, M. H. Rummeli, K. Xie, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 6360–6363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, C. Li, Z. Chen, L. Shi, S. Reddy, H. Meng, Q. Ji, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 249–259 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Yoon, W. M. Choi, H. Baik, H.-J. Shin, I. Song, M.-S. Kwon, J. J. Bae, H. Kim, Y. H. Lee and J.-Y. Choi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6803–6811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, K. Yan, H.-W. Lee, Z. Lu, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15029–15036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shan, H. Tang, T. Wong, L. He and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2491–2495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Lee, S.-I. Kim, J.-C. Yoon and J.-H. Jang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6047–6055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Jiang, H. Fan, M. Liu, O. Zhuo, X. Wang, Q. Wu, L. Yang, Y. Ma and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604569 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tan, R. Xu, Z. Xing, Y. Yuan, J. Lu, J. Wen, C. Liu, L. Ma, C. Zhan, Q. Liu, T. Wu, Z. Jian, R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Y. Ren, D. J. Miller, L. A. Curtiss, X. Ji and K. Amine, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17090–17099 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xing, B. Wang, W. Gao, C. Pan, J. K. Halsted, E. S. Chong, J. Lu, X. Wang, W. Luo, C.-H. Chang, Y. Wen, S. Ma, K. Amine and X. Ji, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 600–610 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Rümmeli, C. Kramberger, A. Grüneis, P. Ayala, T. Gemming, B. Büchner and T. Pichler, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4105–4107 CrossRef .
M. H. Rümmeli, A. Bachmatiuk, A. Scott, F. Börrnert, J. H. Warner, V. Hoffman, J.-H. Lin, G. Cuniberti and B. Büchner, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4206–4210 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bachmatiuk, R. G. Mendes, C. Hirsch, C. Jähne, M. R. Lohe, J. Grothe, S. Kaskel, L. Fu, R. Klingeler, J. Eckert, P. Wick and M. H. Rümmeli, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10552–10562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, K. Chen, R. Du, A. Bachmatiuk, M. H. Rummeli, M. K. Priydarshi, Y. Zhang, A. Manivannan and Z. Liu, Small, 2015, 11, 6302–6308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, Z. Chai, C. Li, L. Shi, M. Liu, Q. Xie, Y. Zhang, D. Xu, A. Manivannan and Z. Liu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3665–3673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, K. Sun, F. Tao, D. J. Stacchiola and Y. H. Hu, Angew. Chem., 2013, 52, 9210–9214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, F. Zhang, J. Sun, Z. Li, L. Zhang, A. Bachmatiuk, Z. Zou, Z. Chen, L. Zhang, M. H. Rümmeli and Z. Liu, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 110–118 CrossRef .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, G. L. Tian, J. Q. Nie, H. J. Peng and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3410 Search PubMed .
H. Bi, T. Lin, F. Xu, Y. Tang, Z. Liu and F. Huang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 349–354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, T. Lee, Y. Kwon, Y. Seo, J. Song, J. K. Park, H. Lee, J. Y. Park, H. Ihee, S. J. Cho and R. Ryoo, Nature, 2016, 535, 131–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chen, C. Li, L. Shi, T. Gao, X. Song, A. Bachmatiuk, Z. Zou, B. Deng, Q. Ji, D. Ma, H. Peng, Z. Du, M. H. Rummeli, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13440–13448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Jiang, T. Z. Yang, F. Liu, J. Dong, Z. H. Yao, C. M. Shen, S. Z. Deng, N. S. Xu, Y. Q. Liu and H. J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 250–255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4956–4975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dato, V. Radmilovic, Z. Lee, J. Phillips and M. Frenklach, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2012–2016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo, S. A. Steiner, B. C. Bayer, P. R. Kidambi, S. Hofmann, M. S. Strano and B. L. Wardle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 17808–17817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, L. Fu, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 2263–2274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Wen, Y. Guo, B. Wu, L. Huang, Y. Xue, D. Geng, D. Wang, G. Yu and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17548–17551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hwang, M. Kim, D. Campbell, H. A. Alsalman, J. Y. Kwak, S. Shivaraman, A. R. Woll, A. K. Singh, R. G. Hennig, S. Gorantla, M. H. Rümmeli and M. G. Spencer, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 385–395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-C. Dong, H. Xu, X.-W. Wang, Y.-X. Huang, M. B. Chan-Park, H. Zhang, L.-H. Wang, W. Huang and P. Chen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3206–3213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cui, W. Qian, Y. Yu, C. Kong, B. Yu, L. Xiang and F. Wei, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2256–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lin, I. W. Chen, F. Liu, C. Yang, H. Bi, F. Xu and F. Huang, Science, 2015, 350, 1508–1513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Son, J. Hwan Park, S. Kwon, S. Park, M. H. Rummeli, A. Bachmatiuk, H. J. Song, J. Ku, J. W. Choi, J. M. Choi, S. G. Doo and H. Chang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7393–7400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. H. Son, J. H. Park, S. Park, K. Park, S. Han, J. Shin, S.-G. Doo, Y. Hwang, H. Chang and J. W. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1561–1571 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, C. Pang, S. Chen, M. Wang, K. Wang, Z. Tan, P. Gao, J. Ren, Y. Huang, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3681–3687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S.-F. Hung, J. Chen, H. B. Tao, X. Wang, L. Zhang, R. Chen, J. Gao, H. M. Chen, L. Dai and B. Liu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e150112 Search PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
L. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. Tang, H. Gong, Z. Shen, J. Lin and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
X. Cui, S. Yang, X. Yan, J. Leng, S. Shuang, P. M. Ajayan and Z. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5708–5717 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ito, W. Cong, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. Chen, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Chang, C.-T. Lin, T.-Y. Chen, C.-L. Hsu, Y.-H. Lee, W. Zhang, K.-H. Wei and L.-J. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 756–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, T. Lin, F. Huang, Y. Zhong, Z. Wang, Y. Tang, H. Bi, D. Wan and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2263–2269 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Ci, H. Ren, Y. Qi, X. Chen, Z. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Z. Liu, Nano Res., 2018 DOI:10.1007/s12274-017-1839-1 .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

Ke Chen
	Ke Chen received his PhD degree in Materials Physics and Chemistry from Tongji University in 2012. He worked successively as a postdoctoral fellow and a visiting scholar in the group of Prof. Zhongfan Liu at Peking University from 2013 to 2018. He is currently an Associate Professor at Henan University, China. His research interests focus on the controlled growth of two-dimensional materials, and their applications in optoelectronics, energy storage, etc.

Liurong Shi
	Liurong Shi received her BS degree from the School of Physical Science and Technology at Lanzhou University in 2013. She is currently a graduate student in Center for Nanochemistry, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering at Peking University, in Prof. Zhongfan Liu's group. Her research is focused on controlled CVD synthesis of 3D graphene based materials and their applications in LIBs.

Yanfeng Zhang
	Yanfeng Zhang received her PhD from the Institute of Physics in the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2005. Later on, she worked as a JSPS fellow from 2006 to 2009 in Tohoku University, Japan. In 2010, she joined the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in the College of Engineering of Peking University, and the Center for Nanochemistry of Peking University, and served as a research professor. Her research interests relate to the controlled growth, accurate characterization and novel property exploration of two dimensional layered materials such as graphene, h-BN–graphene heterostructures, and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs).

Zhongfan Liu
	Zhongfan Liu received his PhD from the University of Tokyo in 1990. After a postdoctoral fellowship at the Institute for Molecular Science, Japan, he became an associate professor (1993), full professor (1993), and Cheung Kong Chair professor (1999) of Peking University. He was elected as the member of Chinese Academy of Sciences (CAS) in 2011. His research interests focus on low-dimensional carbon materials and novel 2D atomic crystals, targeting nanoelectronic and energy conversion devices together with the exploration of fundamental phenomena in nanoscale systems.

Key learning points
(1) Overview of synthetic methods for three-dimensional (3D) graphene materials, and unique advantages of 3D graphene materials prepared via chemical vapour deposition (CVD).
(2) Summary of recent progress in the CVD syntheses of 3D graphene foams, shells, and hierarchical structures.
(3) Discussion of the growth mechanisms of 3D graphene materials on metal and non-metal substrates.
(4) Brief evaluation of CVD-grown 3D graphene materials in terms of yield and quality.
(5) Demonstration of the energy-related applications in supercapacitors, lithium ion batteries, catalysts and thermal management devices.


 	Fig. 1  Scalable CVD synthesis strategies for preparing 3D graphene materials for energy-related applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of a graphene foam (GF) and its integration with PDMS. (b) Photograph of 170 × 220 mm2 free-standing GF. (c) SEM image of GF. (d) Typical Raman spectra of GF. The bottom spectrum and top two spectra correspond to monolayer and few-layer graphene, respectively, based on the intensity, shape, and position of the G band and 2D band. Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. (e) SEM images of nanoporous graphene on nanoporous Ni grown at 900 °C for 5 min. (f) SEM images (close-up) of nanoporous graphene after the removal of the nanoporous Ni substrate. (g) Typical low-magnification STEM image of nanoporous graphene. SAED pattern (inset) showing multiply orientated graphene sheets in the nanoporous configuration. (h and i) HRTEM image and SAED pattern obtained from the flat region of the nanoporous graphene. The atomic structure is consistent with the 2D model. (j and k) STEM image and SAED patterns obtained from a region with a large curvature gradient. The pentagon–heptagon pair lattices, together with large lattice bending, can be observed. The yellow dashed lines indicate the lattice directions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2014, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of scallop-derived 3D graphene foam formation. SEM images of (b) pristine scallop microstructure, (c) scallop calcined at 1050 °C for 30 min in air, (d) graphene-coated calcined scallop after CVD growth at 1020 °C for 30 min, and (e) 3D graphene foam after the removal of the CaO framework. The insets of panels b–e are the corresponding photographs. (f) Raman spectra at different locations over a large area. (g) TEM image of a graphene sheet; the inset shows the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (h) Top and bottom views of cuttlebones; the inset is a schematic depiction of a cuttlefish. (i) SEM images of graphene flakes. The inset is an SEM image of 3D graphene flakes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2016, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of hollow graphene balls (GBs). (b) SEM and high-resolution TEM (inset) images of multilayer graphene (MLG)-encapsulated Ni NPs. (c) TEM and (d) high-resolution TEM images of GBs. (e) Raman spectrum at a laser excitation wavelength of 633 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (f) TEM image of an individual particle of Si microparticle@graphene (Si MP@Gr). (g) High-resolution TEM image of the layered structure of a graphene cage. The intensity plot shows that ten layers span a distance of 3.34 nm (average interlayer distance: 0.334 nm), a clear indication of graphene layers. (h) TEM image of a hollow graphene cage after etching Si in NaOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (i) SEM image of core–shell structures of 3D graphene-1000 (3DG1000). (j) SEM image of the core of 3DG1000. (k) TEM images of 3DG1000. The inset is the corresponding high-resolution TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 15. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of the MgO nanocrystal coated with a few graphene layers. (b) TEM image of the MgO crystal coated with graphene layers. The graphene layers are highlighted. (I) Graphene layer roots on the MgO crystal. (II) Wrinkle formation due to the growth process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of graphene shells after the removal of MgO. (d) Raman spectrum of nanographite derived from a purified sample (prepared at 875 °C over MgO with a cyclohexane feedstock). Reaction time of 30 s. The inset is a schematic illustration of a nanographene flake, showing the presence of a large number of edge defects for the bulk nanographene sheet. The high number of edge defects leads to a high D band in the Raman spectrum. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society. (e and f) TEM images of graphene-coated oxide nanoparticles: (e) alumina and (f) titania. Reproduced with permission from ref. 20. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic illustration of graphene growth on NaCl crystals. (h) Photograph of NaCl powder after CVD growth (left) and dissolution of NaCl@graphene in water for 0 and 60 s (right). SEM images of (i) NaCl@graphene crystals and (j) purified graphene powder. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2015, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of CVD growth of 3D graphene flakes on quartz powder. (b) False-colour SEM image of quartz powder after CVD growth of graphene. The inset presents photographs of quartz powder after CVD growth (left) and wet chemical etching process. (c) False-colour SEM image of graphene powder after removing the quartz powder substrate. The inset is the corresponding photograph of the purified graphene powder. (d) Raman spectra of CVD graphene flakes and RGO flakes. (e) Zoom-in false-colour SEM image of locally curved thin-layer graphene (after purification). (f) TEM image and corresponding SAED pattern (inset) of high-crystallinity graphene flakes. (g) HRTEM images showing the thicknesses of the graphene flakes. (h) I2D/IG and ID/IG as a function of growth temperature and methane concentration, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i and j) SEM (i) and TEM (j) images of honeycomb-structured graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2013, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scheme for synthesis of unstacked DTG. A mesoporous metal oxide derived from the calcination of layered double hydroxide nanoflakes was used as a template to cast DTG. The template was removed by etching, whereas the DTG was unstacked because of the protuberances extending from the graphene sheets. (b) SEM images of nanostructures of LDH precursors (inset) and LDO templates for unstacked DTG deposition. (c) TEM image of cast DTG flakes. (d and e) High-resolution TEM images of DTG with protuberances extending from the graphene sheets and the graphene layer for DTG. (f) Pore size distribution of the DTG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group. (g) FE-SEM image of 3D graphene nanoporous monolith. The inset is the photograph of graphene monoliths. (h) Cross-sectional FE-SEM image of an individual microrod. The inset is a high-magnification HRTEM image of 3D graphene. (i) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm distributions of 3D graphene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (j–l) TEM images (main pictures) and Fourier diffractograms (insets) of the template-free carbon generated using a template of La3+-ion-exchanged (j) FAU, (k) EMT, or (l) beta zeolites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram showing graphene growth on a diatom frustule and its hierarchical biomorphic structure. (b) Photographs of diatomite before and after graphene growth as well as the derived HBG powder after the removal of biosilica templates. (c) Raman spectra of diatomite-derived graphene powders together with graphite, GO, and RGO powders. (d) False-colour SEM image of a diatom frustule. (e and f) False-colour SEM images of derived HBG flakes after the removal of the diatom frustule. (g) SEM morphology of a HBG flake (i), cross-section of its central pores (ii), and details of its marginal pores (iii). (h) Optical microscopy image of HBG flakes grown at a CH4 concentration of 2.4 vol% after being transferred onto 300 nm SiO2/Si substrates. (i) AFM image of a porous graphene flake inheriting morphology from the diatom frustule template. The height profile taken along the blue line shows a relative height of ∼1.38 nm to the background. (j) Low-voltage, aberration-corrected, high-resolution TEM image of the graphene layer, showing the six-fold lattice symmetry and layer thicknesses of a single layer and two layers. (k) Nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of HBG, RGO, and diatomite powders. The inset presents photographs of HBG NMP dispersions at 0.03 mg ml−1, showing photoluminescence under ultraviolet light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SEM images of 3D graphene foam (left) and 3D graphene/Co3O4 nanowire composite (right). (b) CV curves of 3D graphene and graphene/Co3O4 composite electrodes measured at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (c) Cycling performance of the graphene/Co3O4 composite electrode at a current density of 10.0 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (d) SEM image of GNFs after removing MgO by acidic washing. (e) CV curves of GNFs as the electrode in 4 V SCs (two-electrode coin cell) using EMIBF4 as the electrolyte. (f) Retention of relative capacitance of GNF-based SCs for 5000 cycle tests. Reproduced with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) High-resolution TEM image of OMFLC. The nanoporous walls consist of few-layered carbon sheets. The possible locations for N incorporation into a few-layer carbon network are also schematically shown (inset). (h) CV curves at 2 mV s−1 from the first cycle for OMC, OMFLC, and OMFLC-N (S1 to S3) and for mixed OMFLC-N (SM). (i) Ragone plots of energy density versus power density for OMFLC-N SM packaged symmetric devices (counting the entire device volume) using 0.5 M H2SO4 (solid squares) and 2 M Li2SO4 (solid circles) electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2015, Science Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) High-magnification TEM image of Gr–Si NP. The insets are line profiles from the two red boxes demonstrating that the interlayer spacing between the graphene layers is ∼3.4 Å, in good agreement with that of typical graphene layers based on van der Waals interaction. (b) Schematic illustration showing the sliding process of the graphene coating layers that can buffer the volume expansion of Si. (c) Lithiation (filled circles) and delithiation (open circles) capacity retentions of the same four samples. The potential was swept within a voltage window between 0.01 and 1.5 V at 0.5C (C = 2000 mA h g−1). Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Design and structure of graphene cage encapsulation. (e) Full-cell delithiation capacity of SiMP@Gr (∼2.0 mg) with no conductive additives paired with a traditional LCO cathode. The coulombic efficiency of the SiMP@Gr is plotted on the secondary y-axis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (f) TEM image of connected particles of d-SiO@vG. (g) High-resolution TEM images of the vertical graphene sheet with a triangular shape. (h) Schematic view of the ionic and electronic vertical graphene coating layer. (i) Specific capacity and cycling efficiency of d-SiO and d-SiO@vG electrodes. The current density is 320 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of solar-thermal conversion difference between ordinary graphene foam and h-G foam. (b) SEM image of h-G foam at low magnification. (c) SEM image of the frame edge, inset: top view of the frame. (d) Temperature distribution of the steam generation unit under solar illumination of 5 kW m−2. The height of the h-G foam surface was defined as a depth of 0 cm. The inset is an IR image of the corresponding unit. Colour bar: 22–75 °C. (e) Photo of water steam generated under solar illumination of 5 kW m−2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (f) Photograph of a white float glass substrate after PECVD graphene growth at 580 °C with a growth period of 7 min. (g) Infrared thermal imaging camera photograph of the 6-inch vertical graphene nanosheet on glass. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2018, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 12  Comparison of the CVD growth method for 3D graphene architectures with several preparation methods for other graphene materials in terms of yield and quality. Each method was also evaluated in terms of graphene crystallinity (G), purity (P), layer number controllability (L), cost aspect (C, a low value related to high cost of production), and scalability (S) of the entire production process. Each ring referred to low, medium and high level is marked as 1, 2, and 3, respectively.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
