High performance of electrochemical lithium storage batteries: ZnO-based nanomaterials for lithium-ion and lithium–sulfur batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR07207K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR07207K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 18578-18595High performance of electrochemical lithium storage batteries: ZnO-based nanomaterials for lithium-ion and lithium–sulfur batteries

        
          
            Jian 
            Zhang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Xu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Huaiguo 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Huan 
            Pang
          
          
        
      *a
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, 225002, Jiangsu, China. E-mail: chhgxue@yzu.edu.cn; huanpangchem@hotmail.com; panghuan@yzu.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Anyang Normal University, Anyang, 455002, P. R. China
Received 
      12th September 2016
    , Accepted 14th October 2016First published on 17th October 2016AbstractAs one of the most promising electrode materials, zinc oxide-based nanomaterials have attracted great attention in recent decades for remarkable features such as relatively low cost, relatively high reversible capacity and good physical and chemical stability. In this article, we aim to present a general review of synthetic methods of zinc oxide-based nanomaterials and related morphologies. In addition, recent advances in lithium storage batteries are summarized and discussed (lithium-ion and lithium–sulfur batteries). Tentative conclusions and assessments aim to promote the next generation of electrochemical lithium storage devices.Jian ZhangJian Zhang is currently a student under the supervision of Professor Huan Pang, at Yangzhou University of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu province, China. His research is mainly focused on the field of inorganic semiconductors nanostructures and their applications as super-capacitors.Peng GuPeng Gu did his doctoral training at the Photophysics Group, University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. After working with Murphy's group, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, he joined Professor Huan Pang's group at Yangzhou University as an assistant researcher. His research interests include organic semiconductors, solar energy, metal–air battery, surface plasmon energy transfer and wavelength-tunable SPASER.Jing XuJing Xu is now a graduate student under Professor Huan Pang's supervision, Yangzhou University of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, China. She graduated from Yancheng Institute of Technology. Her research mainly focuses on the field of inorganic semiconductor nanostructures and their applications as super-capacitors.Huaiguo XueHuaiguo Xue received his Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2002. He is currently a professor of physical chemistry and the dean of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Yangzhou University. His research interests focus on electrochemistry, functional polymers and biosensors.Huan PangHuan Pang received his Ph.D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He then founded his research group in Anyang Normal University where he was appointed as a distinguished professor in 2013. He has now joined Yangzhou University as a university distinguished professor. He has published more than 100 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Chemical Society Reviews and Advanced Materials, with 3700 citations (H-index = 32). His research interests include the development of inorganic semiconductor nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronics with a focus on energy devices.
1. Introduction
Enormous growth in fossil fuel consumption in past decades has led to many serious environmental problems.1 To relieve environmental stress, secondary batteries are regarded as important electrochemical energy storage devices (EESDs) due to high efficiency and environmental friendliness.2–5 Significant progress has been achieved in rechargeable battery applications, such as lithium-ion battery (LIB) powered mobile devices and commercial vehicles (Tesla). In addition, owing to greater specific capacity, the lithium–sulfur battery (Li–S) is currently considered the most promising energy storage device for electrical vehicles. Furthermore, other devices, such as metal–air batteries and super-capacitors, have also been extensively investigated for various reasons.6,7
Because conventional electrode materials, briefly discussed in the following, do not meet diverse requirements for EESDs,8 researchers are focused on transition metal oxides (MOs) (e.g., zinc oxide, titanium oxide, tin oxide) and corresponding composites.9–17 Among various MOs, zinc oxide and its composites have proved valuable in addressing problems of intrinsic resistance and rapid disintegration.18,19 In addition, due to the advantages of high special capacity, relative stability, environmental friendliness and low cost, great attention has been focused on various zinc oxide-based nanomaterials in recent years.20 Thus far, study results show that Li-ion battery, Li–S and Zn–air batteries have desirable features of high theoretical special capacity, low cost and portability. For example, Xiao et al. synthesized in situ ZnO via hybridization with conductive cobalt (Co) and N-doped carbon (C–N), demonstrating its promise to displace commercial graphite in LIBs.21 Hierarchical porous carbon was prepared by Strubel et al. via a versatile approach based on ZnO nanoparticles.22 Such high-performance nanomaterials are expected to perform far better than certain existing Li–S materials.23 Gan et al. directly synthesized polypyrrole on the surface of zinc oxide particles by in situ polymerization, circumventing direct contact with an electrolyte and reducing volume variation.24
In this review, we mainly introduce the recent progress of ZnO-based nanomaterials vis-à-vis Li-ion and Li–S batteries. First, we provide a brief assessment of synthetic strategies for zinc oxide-based nanomaterials, and their functional applications in lithium storage batteries. In particular, several substantial improvements are presented in sequence. Meanwhile, advantages and disadvantages of these nanomaterials are discussed. In addition, other applications, such as the zinc–air battery, are introduced as well. Finally, insights into ongoing research are outlined in the last section.
2. Lithium-ion battery
The LIB rechargeable battery has been a practical and easily accessible solution for a long time, especially in electronic products such as mobile phones, laptops and smart watches. In LIBs, lithium ions migrate in and out of two electrode interiors.25 While discharging, the reaction mechanism at the anode is described in the following equation: xLi+ + 6C + xe− = LixC6.26 Although the principal mechanism is clear, inevitable and troublesome side effects occur in the electrode and electrolyte. Such side effects cause problems in the following areas: chemical and physical stability, oxidation–reduction quality, capacity fade, coulombic efficiency, volume expansion–shrinkage and costs. The classic rocking chair battery, in which lithium ions move continuously, is presented vividly in Fig. 1(a) and (b).27
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic design of secondary Li-metal battery (picture of dendrite growth at Li surface was obtained directly from in situ scanning electron microscopy measurements). (b) Rechargeable Li-ion battery.27 Mechanical degradation of high-capacity material at particle level (c) and electrode level (d) during discharge/charge cycling. Adapted from ref. 47, with permission, © 2016 Nature. 
Various surface morphologies and nanostructures contribute to distinctive features that have been investigated. Regarding cathodes, lithium storage materials (e.g., LiMn2O4, LiCoO2 and LiFePO4) mixed with zinc oxide have not been explored systemically in this field.28–31 In contrast, for anodes it is acknowledged that the common lithium anode has gradually developed based on commercial carbonaceous materials, owing to a dendrite-free recharge process.32,33 Nonetheless, zinc oxide-based composites are considered promising as anode materials. Based on previous references, the electrochemical mechanism for ZnO anode electrodes is described in the following equations, which is essentially different from graphite: Conversion reaction: ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e− ⇌ Zn + Li2O(1) Alloying–dealloying reaction: Zn + Li+ + e− ⇌ LiZn.(2)
Note that in reaction (1), the zinc oxide material occupies more lithium ions, which are quite valuable during alloying–dealloying process. Due to the essential nature of zinc oxide, low columbic efficiency, severe capacity fading and poor electrochemical kinetics have restricted its widespread application. Therefore, it is necessary to explore diverse methods of surmounting these problems. For instance, coating the zinc oxide material could alleviate volume change efficiency, and combining it with other elements or carbon materials may increase initial capacity and reduce degradation during cycling. Moreover, the short transport path of lithium ions, relative high electrochemical conductivity and longevity are advantages of ZnO-based nanomaterials. In general, zinc oxide material (theoretical capacity 987 mA h g−1) and tin oxide material (more than 600 mA h g−1) have similar mechanisms, but the former has higher theoretical capacity.34 Cobalt oxide and copper oxide anode material also possess lower theoretical capacity at 890 mA h g−1 and 674 mA h g−1, respectively.35 Therefore, as an environment-friendly and low-cost anode material, ZnO-based composite will prove to be quite promising for next-generation batteries.
ZnO-based composite possesses better electrochemical properties of theoretical specific capacities up to 600 mA h g−1.36 Nanostructures of these materials include zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D) and three-dimensional (3D) structures (e.g., microspheres and nanoflowers).37–43 Herein, we compare various characteristics in the three dimensions to identify the key role ZnO-based nanomaterials play. A series of improvements are presented in subsequent sections.
2.1 Zero-dimensional nanostructure
Bresser et al. investigated properties of diverse elements and found that transition-metal-doped, zinc oxide nanoparticles materials have intriguing performance characteristics.44 They replaced Zn with transition metals (Co and Fe) in the wurtzite lattice to enhance electrochemical properties of zinc oxide. The n-type transition-metal (TM)-doped zinc oxide nanoparticles, which had a general formula of Zn0.9TM0.1O (TM = Fe or Co), were prepared via an environment-friendly and sucrose-assisted wet chemical synthesis method. However, this anode material tends to aggregate due to nanoparticles’ relative high surface energy. Therefore, this research group further modified the previous structure to carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O nanoparticles.45–48 The carbon coating protected the electrode from seriously reacting with the electrolyte. In addition, the inside material could also change volume under limits rather than seriously disintegrate. Their reversible capacity was slightly reduced to ∼840 mA h g−1 at the current density of 48 mA g−1 after a single cycle. Specific capacities of ∼720, 670, 580, 475, and 360 mA h g−1 were measured at current densities of 0.095, 0.19, 0.48, 0.95 and 1.9 A g−1, respectively (Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  (a) Performance of carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O electrodes subjected to continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles at increasing specific currents. (b) Zn0.9Fe0.1O electrodes subjected to continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles at increasing specific currents. (c) HRTEM image of carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O. (d) Model: iron in the zinc oxide lattice. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission, © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
Upon cycling, unfortunately, traditional 0D zinc oxide material at the nanoscale inherently undergoes negligible volume variety due to high surface energy. The lithiation and delithiation process, severe cracking, fracture and pulverization will take place gradually in anode (demonstrated in Fig. 1(c)). In addition, across the electrode the repeated expansion and shrinkage of particles cause dramatic capacity decay and delaminated active material, shown in Fig. 1(d).49 Thus, the protective coating method has attracted great attention.
In this way, zinc oxide material was used as a coating to suppress gassing behavior by Han et al. As a relatively safe and stable anode material, the poor rate capacity of Li4Ti5O12 (LTO), which is caused by moderate Li+ diffusion coefficient and low intrinsic electronic conductivity, limits the further application of this material.50 In addition, common anode materials based on LTO show severe gassing behavior while charging and discharging. Han et al. took the two factors into consideration.51 They assumed that reactions on the surface of LTO could be the major reason for such behavior and then took measurements on modified LTO spinel particles with a ZnO coating (Fig. 3). Experimental data demonstrated that the ZnO coating could stabilize the interface of electrode and electrolyte and prevent side reactions between LTO and electrolyte by forming an interface (SEI) film (shown in Fig. 3(a)). It is believed that this coating not only decreased reaction kinetics of side reactions but also improved both lithium ion diffusion and electronic conductivity in the meantime. In the LTO battery, the aforementioned method may be an effective way of overcoming the barriers of gassing behavior.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration for effect of ZnO coating layer on the LTO surface. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM image of 2 wt% ZnO modified LTO. Adapted from ref. 51, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
2.2 1D nanostructure
Generally speaking, 0D nanomaterials suffer severe capacity fading and poor kinetics upon cycling due to the aggregation from intrinsic high surface energy.52,53 After long-term cycling, the electrode may partly disintegrate. Nonetheless, in contrast to ZnO nanoparticles, 1D nanomaterials such as nanorods surpass the 0D in some aspects.54 ZnO combined with carbon materials have shown much better performance, since carbon materials, such as specific carbon nanofibers, are capable to enhance electronic conductivity, mechanical stability/flexibility and specific capacity.55–57
In order to investigate the special feature of ZnO based 1D nanomaterials, Shen and co-workers attached Zn(CH3COO)2 and Cu(CH3COO)2 composite onto polyacrylonitrile (PAN) fibers via electrospinning.58 After heat treatment, ZnO and Cu particles were decorated on the carbonized nanofibers (CNFs). Study results demonstrated that reversible capacities of 618 and 493 mA h g−1 at large current densities of 500 and 1000 mA g−1 even after 50 cycles. As shown in Fig. 4, the capacity still remained at 321 mA h g−1 under 5000 mA g−1 current density. In the ZnO/Cu/CNFs composites, the synergistic effect not only enhanced electrical conductivity and structural stability, but also shortened the Li-ion diffusion length. Later, Shilpa et al. successfully encapsulated ZnO in the hollow composite (C–rGO) nanofibers by electrospinning.59 This ZnO–C–rGO composite exhibited a high capacity of 618.98 mA h g−1 and maintained at 445.81 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at the current density of 50 mA g−1. In addition, this composite also showed an excellent rate performance which retained at 472 mA h g−1 under a large current rate of 500 mA g−1 and 815 mA h g−1 under a small current rate of 50 mA g−1, respectively.
 Fig. 4  (a) Low- and (b) high-magnification TEM images and (c) HRTEM image of ZnO/C hierarchical porous nanorods. (d) Rate performance and cycling performance at 1C of PEDOT-PSS-coated ZnO/C hierarchical porous nanorods in FC electrolyte. Adapted from ref. 64, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
Ever since, many researchers have focused on synthesizing new electrode materials. The addition of multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) is proved to be an effective way in delaying the anodes’ capacity fading after long-term cycle.60 With the use of a sol–gel spin coating technique, free-standing ZnO and MWCNT composites were synthesized in a 3D bucky papers network by Köse et al.61 They found that the sol–gel-coated ZnO/MWCNT anode by chelating with glycerin, showed high discharge capacity of 460 mA h g−1 at the current rate of 0.2C after 100 cycles. It is well known that there is a charge accumulation in the carbon nanotube that limits lithium ion movement (known as high irreversible capacity). Although this composite cannot entirely avoid this shortcoming, study results indicated that it can increase energy storage capability and provide high capacity retention.
Meanwhile, novel materials are emerging all the time. Feng's group reported CoO–ZnO nanotubes and ZnCo2O4 hierarchical nanorods.62 Based on special features of zinc oxide, they attached these oxides on copper substrate and found that different concentrations of Co(NO3)2 solution could form diverse morphologies. Consequently, they achieved hexagonal hierarchical rod structures through increasing concentration of Co(NO3)2 to 0.3 M. Some advantages of CoO–ZnO nanorod and nanotube arrays can be summarized. (1) ZnO nanorods serve as reaction precursors to promote activity. (2) High electronic conductivity is caused by the copper substrate. (3) While charging and discharging, volume change could be reduced effectively. (4) This material was cost-effective with less pollution.
In addition, Zhu and colleagues applied a one-step strategy to make SnO2/ZnO11 (molar ratio of Sn:Zn = 1:1) heterogeneous nanofibers (HNFs) by electrospinning.63 After an intensive search for the molar ratios between Sn:Zn, they found that the optimum ratio is 1:1. The SnO2/ZnO11 HNFs exhibited good reversible capacities of 625.4, 567.4, 556.7, 525.7, 529.1 and 521.1 mA h g−1 after 20, 40, 60, 80, 100 and 120 cycles. Furthermore, due to their special heterogeneous and mesoporous structures, the materials showed a reversible capacity of 237.2 mA h g−1 at a high current density of 4000 mA g−1. As for comparison, they found that pure SnO2 NFs and pure ZnO NFs had serious degradation resulting from drastic volumetric change during the insertion and extraction of Li+. Regarding SnO2/ZnO HNFs, the evenly distributed SnO2 nanorods with large spaces can bear more pressure during cycling. In addition, SnO2 nanorods are less likely to peel off from ZnO nanofibers because of their heterogeneous structure. In addition, such morphology has a relative large length to diameter ratio, contributing to faster electron transfer and larger specific surface area. In conclusion, the SnO2/ZnO HNFs with optimum molar ratio showed a high specific surface area and outstanding electrochemical performance.
In 2015, Xu et al. synthesized ZnO/C hierarchical porous nanorods through one-pot, wet-chemical reaction followed by thermal calcination.64 Then, an extra PEDOT-PSS (poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrenesulfonate)) layer was coated to the surface of ZnO/C nanorods. This coating structure resulted in long cycle stability and high rate capacity (e.g., 623.94 mA h g−1 reversible capacity after 1500 cycles at 1C). Some specific details are exhibited in the Fig. 4. The coating layer could alleviate volume change and prevented pulverization effectively. Next, long cycle stability and high rate capacity are attributed to high electronic conductivity of PEDOT-PSS coating layer and the material's hierarchical structures.
2.3 2D nanostructure
2D nanomaterials have drawn our attention in recently years due to their relative high electrochemical conductivity and excellent 2D tunnels for lithium ions.65 Although not comparable, 2D ZnO-based nanomaterials shows superior properties than conventional ZnO powders to some extent, because 2D nanostructures own stratified structures in favor of work system. Indeed, 2D nanostructure is not ideal as the classic stratified structure of graphite, it also provides relatively abundant 2D tunnels for lithium ions, and keeps relatively stable while cycling because lithium ions insertion and extraction are easier. Meanwhile, during charging–discharging, scattered ZnO-based nanoparticles tend to aggregate seriously due to their high surface energy, resulting in the irretrievable capacity fading.
Huang et al. reported the fabrication of porous ZnO nanosheets on Cu foil substrate through a chemical bath deposition method and compared the morphology and the corresponding electrochemical performance with those from commercial ZnO powders, as shown in Fig. 5.66 It is obvious that porous ZnO nanosheets shows the first discharge–charge capacity of 1120 mA h g−1 and 750 mA h g−1, respectively, which is much higher than that of ZnO powder electrode. As a result, the advantages of 2D advanced materials can be concluded into three points. First of all, porous nanosheets create short diffusion paths and large contact interfaces. Second, particles could interact with each other easily due to their net-like structures and eventually lead to a better electrical conductivity. Finally, the porous nanosheets optimized the cyclability and helped to alleviate disintegration.
 Fig. 5  (a) Illustration for fabrication process of porous ZnO nanosheets grown on copper foil substrates. SEM image of (b) commercial ZnO powders and TEM of (d) porous ZnO nanosheets grown on copper substrates. Discharge–charge curves of (c) commercial ZnO powders and (e) porous ZnO nanosheets at current density of 0.05 A g−1. Adapted from ref. 66, with permission, © 2011 Elsevier. 
However, 2D ZnO-based materials also have some drawbacks including volume expansion, aggregation and disintegration to some extent, which are mentioned before.67 Thus, further investigation is needed to optimize the property of ZnO nanosheet materials. Due to the stable structure of ZnO, various 2D morphologies of zinc oxide composites are emerging. Li et al. took vertically aligned graphene sheets (VAGN) anchored on Cu foil into account.68 ZnO nanoparticles (ZnO-NPs) were gradually grown on both sides of the VAGN during the hydrothermal synthesis process to form ZnO–VAGN composite, which exhibited excellent electrochemical performance. Interestingly, the sheet structures offered short pathways of Li-ion transport and largely enhanced ion conductivity. The electrode, made of ZnO–VAGN composite, surprisingly retained at high reversible capacity of 810 m Ah g−1 at current density of 80 mA g−1 as well as low capacity loss (about 6.0%) after 105 cycles. Wu et al. adopted a similar approach to address several inherent problems.69 They fabricated ZnO/reduced graphene oxide (rGO) composites and deposited the composites on Ni foil current collector through the electrostatic spray deposition technique (ESD). Fig. 6(a) demonstrates the synthesis process sketchily and Fig. 6(b) and (c) show their morphology and corresponding electrochemical properties, respectively.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of ZnO/rGO composite nanostructure prepared by ESD. (b) SEM images of nanostructure ZnO/rGO composite films. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of nanosheet ZnO/rGO composite films. Adapted from ref. 69, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
During the alloying–dealloying process, many side reactions may occur that lead to device fade.70 One noteworthy consequence is removal of the active substance from the substrate (current collector); thus the electrode cannot load lithium ions as mentioned in the previous section. Wu et al. found that the addition of rGO prevented ZnO-based nanomaterials from aggregating into large particles to some extent.71 Moreover, this composite also showed a specific capacity of 1724 m Ah g−1 during the first discharge and possessed strong defensive stability at high current density. Huang et al. further utilized pyrrole as the carbon source to prepare sheet-like ZnO as shown in Fig. 9.72 The experimental data showed that carbon coating improved electronic conductivity of active materials and stabilized their structure during the cycling process.73 In addition, carbon coating also prevented active materials from dissolving to electrolyte. After 200 cycles, 400 mA h g−1 capacity could be reflected at charge–discharge rate of 1C. Furthermore, it still retained high capacity of 380 mA h g−1 even at a high current rate of 3C after 100 cycles, which showed a much more stable cycle performance than bare ZnO materials (Fig. 7).
 Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of formation of cribriform sheet-like carbon-coated ZnO. (b) SEM images of carbon-coated ZnO. Adapted from ref. 72, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (d) HRTEM micrographs of yolk–shell ZnO–C microspheres. (b) SEM and (e) HRTEM micrographs of ZnO–C hollow microspheres. (c) Discharge–charge curves of yolk–shell ZnO–C microspheres at 100 mA g−1. (f) Rate performance of ZnO–C yolk–shell microspheres, hollow microspheres and solid microspheres. Adapted from ref. 91, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 9  (a, b) SEM, (c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM micrographs of hierarchical ZnO–Ag–C composite porous microspheres. (e) Cycling properties of ZnO–Ag–C composite porous microspheres at high current rate of 500 mA g−1 in 0.01–3 V. Adapted from ref. 92, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society. 
2.4 3D micro/nanostructure
3D ZnO-based nanomaterials are considered as a complicated system. Their morphologies are diverse and cannot be described by a general expression. Thus, we classify them as microsphere, nanoflower and other complex structures.74–78 And other complex structures involves metal oxide and carbon composite materials.79–82 Since the existence of various models of 3D architectures and constituents, these anode materials exhibit different properties (e.g., specific surface area, electrochemical conductivity, and reversible capacity).83 According to practical data, excellent 3D structures and moderate proportion of components exhibit higher specific surface area, relative great conductivity and outstanding capacity.84 Moreover, a large number of interspaces can alleviate volume change to some extent and provide efficient and even rapid pathways for lithium ions. Nevertheless, large numbers of voids are possible that cause cracking and pulverization of materials, which means irretrievable capacity damage.85–87 Hence, such integrated materials continue to be investigated to identify better architectures and more suitable proportions (Table 1).
Table 1 Influence of 0D and 1D structures and different compositions on discharge capacity of ZnO-based nanomaterials




Dimension
Electrode material
Method
Discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle
Ref.




0D
Carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O
Sucrose-assisted wet chemical synthesis method
840 (48 mA g−1)
1st

44



ZnO-coated Li4Ti5O12
Not mentioned
123.6 (20C)
20th

50



1D
ZnO/Cu/CNFs
Electrospinning approach
812 (100 mA g−1)
50th

58



ZnO/C/rGO
One-step, co-axial electrospinning
618.98 (50 mA g−1)
100th

59



ZnO/MWCNT/GLY
Sol gel technique
1152/852/460 (0.2C)
1st/2nd/100th

61



ZnCo2O4 nanorods
ZnO nanorod array-assisted method
2100 (100 mA g−1)
1st

62



CoO/ZnO nanotubes
ZnO nanorod array-assisted method
1350/1000 (50 mA g−1)
1st/50th

62



ZnO/SnO2 heterogeneous nanofibers
Electrospinning and calcination
625.4/521.1 (80 mA g−1)
20th/120th

63



PEDOT-PSS coated ZnO/C
One-pot wet-chemical reaction and thermal calcination
623.94 (1C)
1500th

64






2.4.1 ZnO-based microsphere. 
Based on many experiments and resulting data, some high reversible capacity can be easily realized (e.g., one microsphere material achieved 257 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at current density of 50 mA g−1 and another one obtained 850 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at current density of 100 mA g−1).88,89 Xie et al. successfully synthesized ZnO–ZnCo2O4 hybrid, hollow microspheres via the annealing process shows outstanding properties as the anode material for LIBs.90 Its reversible capacity could reach 1199 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at current density of 200 mA g−1, where the hollow structures played a pivotal role in improving charge–discharge capacity and stabilizing work system (Fig. 8).
Xie et al. was the first to made yolk–shell ZnO–C microspheres.91 The data showed that the structure was beyond hollow microsphere and solid microsphere. Differences can be indicated not only in geometry, but also in electrochemical properties such as discharge capacities, coulombic efficiencies and rate performance. The yolk–shell structure was unique and the material's electrochemical performance was far better than the other two microspheres. For instance, after 150 cycles, the material still retained 99.3% of coulombic efficiency and reached relative capacity up to 520 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 mA g−1. The wrapper carbon isolated every zinc oxide nanoparticle to prevent aggregation and support the whole system. They suggested that the pulverization, which resulted in capacity fade, may be assuaged effectively. Xie et al. proposed an idea for metallic element doping and prepared a hierarchical ZnO–Ag–C composite microspheres (radius of 1.5 μm) with porosity by a similar method, as shown in Fig. 11.92 Study results revealed that capacity remained at 729 mA h g−1 even after 200 cycles at 100 mA g−1. This superior electrochemical performance resulted from the modification of silver and carbon layers as well as unusual hierarchical porous architectures (Table 2).
Table 2 Influence of 2D and 3D structures and different compositions on discharge capacity of ZnO-based nanomaterials




Dimension
Electrode materials
Method
Discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle
Ref.




2D
Porous ZnO nanosheets
Chemical bath deposition technique and heat treatment
1120/400 (50 mA g−1)
1st/100th

66



ZnO-VAGHs
Facile two-step method
1560 (80 mA g−1)
1st

68



ZnO/rGO
Electrostatic spray deposition technique
360 (200 mA g−1)
200th

69



Carbon-coated ZnO
Polymerization and carbonization
400 (1C)/380 (3C)
200th/100th

72



3D (microspheres)
ZnO/ZnCo2O4
Annealing process
1199 (200 mA g−1)
200th

88



ZnO/C
Facile chemical solution reaction and calcination
520 (100 mA g−1)
150th

91



ZnO/Ag/C
Calcination method
729 (100 mA g−1)
200th

92



ZnO/CoO@PCM
Aerosol spray pyrolysis method
1250 (100 mA g−1)
150th

93



ZnO/NiO
Simple aging process
1176 (100 mA g−1)
200th

94



3D (nanoflowers)
Au/ZnO
Solution phase approach and electrodeposition
1280 (120 mA g−1)
50th

95



ZnO/ZnCo2O4
Not mentioned
1086 (100 mA g−1)
80th

96





Another work on encapsulated ZnO–CoO nanoparticles in 3D porous carbon microspheres (PCMs), fabricated via a simple one-pot hydrothermal procedure, was reported by Liu et al.93 In addition to cost effectiveness, this porous structure of ZnO–CoO@PCM microspheres offers a lot of reaction sites and facilitates electrolyte diffusion. The electrode based on this new composite showed high reversible capacity of 1250 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1. Meanwhile, Xie's team made remarkable contributions to the field of ZnO-based microspheres such as zinc–nickel citrate microspheres achieved through an aging process.94 In addition, three different ZnO–NiO hybrid microstructures containing solid, hollow, yolk–shell microspheres were prepared via annealing treatment and the hybrid yolk–shell microspheres had far better properties. At the 200th cycle, the ZnO–NiO hybrid yolk–shell microspheres still maintained a high reversible capacity of 1176 mA h g−1 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  (a) Galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles ZnO–NiO hybrid yolk–shell microspheres. (b) Rate capabilities of ZnO–NiO yolk–shell hybrid microspheres at different current densities. Adapted from ref. 94, with permission, © 2015 Nature. 


2.4.2 ZnO-based nanoflower. 
Nanoflower is another classic 3D morphology. Mashkoor et al. synthesized hierarchical ZnO nanoflower modified by Au nanoparticles (AuNPs).95 The hybrid nanomaterial possessed abundant void spaces, which were beneficial to the diffusion of lithium ion, and exhibited some benign properties comparing to previously reported common zinc oxide anodes. The Au–ZnO phase contributed to the tremendous increase of capacity and longevity in the Li-ion battery. Morphology and electrochemical performance are shown in Fig. 11. It can be seen that every flower-like structure's diameter is about 6–10 μm and every branch length varies by 2–3 μm. In addition, the material had a 1280 mA h g−1 initial discharge capacity and even achieved over 392 mA h g−1 reversible capacity after 50 cycles. In contrast, at a current density of 120 mA h g−1, the Au–ZnO cell degraded much slower than conventional ones. For instance, after 10 cycles, the Au–ZnO cell decreased to 402 mA h g−1 capacity while the capacity of the ZnO film electrode was reduced to 252 mA h g−1. Afterward, bi-component ZnO/ZnCo2O4 composite materials were prepared by Xu et al. in a scalable and facile way, by controlling the ratio of Zn to Co in the process.96 The porous nanoflower-like material possessed abundant open space and electroactive reaction sites, which showed great cycling stability of capacity of 847 mA h g−1 at density of 500 mA g−1 after 200 cycles. Meanwhile, incredible rate capability (∼538 mA h g−1 at 3200 mA g−1) was exhibited. This kind of material surpasses other ZnO-based or ZnCo2O4-based material. As a promising electrode material, it showed high reversible capacity, stability and rate capacity (Fig. 12).
 Fig. 11  (a), (d) FESEM, and (b), (e) TEM images of magnification hierarchical flower-like ZnO structure. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of Au–ZnO electrode at scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (f) Plot of capacity and Coulombic efficiency of cell vs. cycle number for Au–ZnO and ZnO film electrode, which is shown as a comparison to display improvement when using Au–ZnO film. Adapted from ref. 95, with permission, © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of synthesis route for ZnO/ZnCo2O4 nanocomposites. Adapted from ref. 92, with permission, © 2016 Elsevier. 


2.4.3 Other complex composites. 
As previously mentioned, this section addresses metal oxides and carbon composite materials. Metal oxides are typical materials for LIBs depending on battery performance and cost issues. LIB based on lithium cobalt oxide (LiCoO2) has high energy capacity, but it cannot stay stable upon many cycles. In addition, this kind of battery is likely to cause safety risks if broken during transportation. Hence, with effort, Dai et al. proposed that ZnO coating has the ability to improve rate capability and cycling performance from 3.0 to 4.5 V, by modifying LiCoO2 electrodes with ZnO.97 The thin film of zinc oxide theoretically played an important part among electrode materials such as diffusing through the whole material. They applied radio frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering technology to coat zinc oxide on as-prepared LiCoO2 composite and discovered the composite, whose coating thickness was 17 nm (named LiCoO2/ZnO17), exhibited discharge capacity of 191 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and maintained 81% capacity after 200 cycles. Furthermore, at 10C, reversible capacity of 106 mA h g−1 was delivered. According to study results, better lithium ion diffusion and stable nanostructure resulted from this special morphology.
Gao et al. reported the fabrication of sandwich-like TiO2@ZnO arrays that could be used directly as electrodes without conductivity additive and polymer binder for flexible LIB.98 Among the open porous 3D interconnected arrays, the intrinsic flaws of ZnO nanoparticles (aggregation and volume change) can be alleviated to some extent due to the strong support of TiO2 nanosheets. The general nanostructure and electrochemical performance are demonstrated in Fig. 13(a)–(c). After 100 cycles, the flexible electrode made from TiO2@ZnO arrays achieved a reversible capacity of 340.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of special nanostructure for TiO2@ZnO nanocomposite. (b) SEM images of TiO2@ZnO arrays. (c) Rate performance of TiO2@ZnO and TiO2 electrodes at discharge process. Adapted from ref. 98, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
Another important material is carbon composite. As carbon sources, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are drawing great attention due to functional advantages and convenient synthesis. Zhou et al. developed an in situ calcination strategy and successfully applied this method to fabricate porous ZnO/N-doped carbon (ZnO/NC) polyhedrons.99 They used a metal–organic framework ZIF-8 as the precursor and achieved excellent results. On the one hand, the porous N-doped MOFs alleviate volume variations and offer abundant hosting sides for lithium ions during charging and discharging. On the other hand, the precursor improves electronic conductivity. In addition, at the initial low rate of 0.5C (1C = 978 mA g−1), ZnO/NC polyhedrons showed high reversible discharge capacity of 834.3 mA h g−1. Moreover, at 5C or 10C, superior rate performance of 399.2 mA h g−1 and 253.5 mA h g−1 were demonstrated, respectively. After 100 cycles, they exhibited excellent cycling stability (399.2 mA h g−1 at 5C). Fig. 17(a) and (b) provide information on morphology and performance. This material clearly has the potential to open up opportunities for the next generation of LIBs.100
Meanwhile, some other works also proceeded to overcome limitations such as poor electronic conductivity.101,102 Yue et al. doped cobalt into carbon-coated ZnO (ZnO@C) and obtained cobalt (Co)-doped MOF-5s (Co-MOF-5s) by a secondary growth method followed by a heat treatment.103 The morphology can be seen in Fig. 14(c) and (d). The doping of Co played an important role on increasing the degree of graphitization. The high-graphitized carbon framework is beneficial from the high electronic conductivity. This as-synthesized CZO@C composite maintained a reversible capacity of 725 mA h g−1 at the current density of 100 mA g−1, after 50 cycles which was much higher than ZnO@C composite (335 mA h g−1) because of the contribution from high-graphitized carbon framework. The mechanism (alloying/dealloying process) was summarized as follows:
Discharge process:CZO + 2Li+ + 2e− → Zn + Co + Li2OZn + Li+ + e− → LiZnCo + Li + e− → LiCo
Charge process:LiZn → Zn + Li+ + e−LiCo → Co + Li+ + e−Zn + Li2O → ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e−Co + Li2O → CoO + 2Li+ + 2e−
 Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of ZnO/NC polyhedrons. (b) Comparison of rate performance for ZnO/NC electrode, pristine ZnO electrode and ZnO/C electrode. Adapted from ref. 95, © 2015 Elsevier. (c, d) SEM images of CZO@C. Adapted from ref. 103, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Similar to MOFs, porous carbon or graphene materials are also good alternatives to serve as carbon sources. Shen et al. prepared ZnO-loaded/porous carbon (PC) composites via a facile solvothermal method.104 During the process, ZnO crystals were gradually well-distributed in PC host medium. They controlled the amounts of loaded ZnO contents and achieved the near-perfect weight percentage (54 wt%). They found that this flexible structure buffered stress, preventing aggregation and pulverization effectively. Besides, 653.7 mA h g−1 reversible capacity was observed after 100 cycles. Cycled at the current density of 1000 mA g−1, it showed high a high reversible capacity of 496.8 mA h g−1. In addition, Hsieh et al. made full use of graphene and combined it with zinc oxide.105 They attached zinc oxide (ZnO) nanocrystals to graphene nanosheets (GNs) via a series of methods from microwave heating, modified Hummers’ method to homogenizing dispersion. Both sides of GNs were dispersed over by ZnO nanocrystals uniformly and ZnO@GN composite formed. At 0.1C, the as-prepared ZnO@GN material obtained the capacity of 850 mA h g−1 and retained 82.1% coulombic efficiency at 1st cycle. It maintained a capacity of ∼60% at 5C and decayed ∼8% capacity after 50 cycles. All these were far better than fresh GN anode according to statistics. The 3D integration system enhanced the performance by providing abundant redox sites and short ionic pathway.
So far, plenty of advanced electrode materials, which possess various morphologies and metallic metal, have been well investigated.106–111 In our opinions, common ZnO electrode materials’ property cannot meet people's need because they have tendency to aggregate and serious volume change during charging and discharging process. These problems may lead to the irretrievable capacity fading and the risk of safety, which means the device failure. Therefore, zinc oxide needs to be modified and protected by an extra layer. This effective coating carbon has the ability to get lithium ions through and endure stress from the volume change. Besides, zinc oxide composites are evenly distributed into stable supporting system such as MOFs and conductive polymers. Such a feasible measure assists in supressing pulverization and improving conductivity of the system to some extent. Meanwhile, appropriate metallic elements, added moderately, play functional parts such as improving electrochemical conductivity and specific capacity in the system of ZnO-based nanomaterials. Nonetheless, what we mainly focus on is the part that zinc oxide material plays. According to the above literatures, although this material has severe volume change while discharging–charging, the excellent property of higher specific capacity, relative prominent ionic and electrochemical conductivity, prolonged cycling stability and so on have attracted great attention in applied research. Besides, the synergistic effect in the zinc oxide-based composite endow LIBs many unexpected properties.

3. Lithium–sulfur battery
Among rechargeable batteries, the lithium–sulfur (Li–S) battery is well known for high energy density (theoretical capacity of 1672 mA h g−1) and relative light weight.112 Compared with conventional lithium-ion batteries, lithium–sulfur batteries are lower cost due to the use of sulfur.113–115 The Li–S battery has recently attracted attention due to its high theoretical specific energy of 2600 Wh kg−1, which is about five times higher than that of common LIB.116,117 The reaction process between electrode and electrolyte contains the dissolution of Li+ moving between the cathode surface and anode during discharging and charging as shown in Fig. 18. As is well known, the single host ion only combines 0.5–0.7 lithium ions in LIB, while each sulfur atom unites with two lithium ions. Nevertheless, compared to LIB, Li–S has volume expansion–shrinkage as well, which could cause mechanical tension on the electrode and lead to reduced electrochemical connection and hindered flow of Li+. Moreover, charge carriers can only diffuse on material surfaces because of poor electrical insulating of sulfur (5 × 10−30 S cm−1 at 25 °C).118 In addition, the dissolved polysulfides deposits on the anode, reduces to Li2S and Li2S2, which always lead to low coulombic efficiency, poor cycling stability and irretrievable capacity fading.119 At present researchers are trying to address these challenges (e.g., electrochemical conductivity and the dissolution of Li2Sx (2 ≤ x ≤ 8)) through various solutions.120 As a metal oxide, zinc oxide and its composite make a significant contribution to Li–S batteries.121–123 Therefore, recent typical applications of zinc oxide-based nanomaterials in the Li–S battery are reviewed in the following paragraphs (Fig. 15).124,125
 Fig. 15  Schematic presentation of lithium–sulfur battery with anode (metallic lithium) and cathode (sulfur-containing material), separated by non-aqueous liquid electrolyte. (A) Discharging process and (B) charging process. Adapted from ref. 118, with permission, © 2014 Elsevier. 
Finding a solution to improve the poor electronic conductivity is a big challenge for Li–S battery. In order to address this issue, sulfur is usually dispersed in a conductive matrix such as conductive polymers and carbon nanomaterials. Liang et al.126 used a classic two-step method consisting of hydrothermal procedure and heating treatment to make ZnO porous nanostructures. The synthesized S/ZnO composite material was heat treated at the temperature of 155 °C. They found that the size of composite material was lighter than pure ZnO material because the former only absorbed sulfur on the surface. Moreover, compared to pure S, the S/ZnO composite showed good cycling stability and high discharge capacity of 1414 mA h g−1. After 100 cycles, 662 mA h g−1 capacity was maintained at current density of 335 mA g−1, which is much better than pure S (470 mA h g−1 for the initial cycle and 169 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles). Surprisingly, the obtained columbic efficiency was up to 97%. The combination with zinc oxide increases conductivity as the insulating property of sulfur and its reduced products (Li2S/Li2S2). in addition, the dissolution of polysulfides (Li2Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8) can be reduced effectively (Table 3).
Table 3 Comparison of lithium-ion cell and lithium/sulfur cell characteristics




Characteristic
Lithium-ion cells
Lithium–sulfur cells




Adapted from ref. 117, with permission, © 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.




Cell voltage
3.4–4.0 V
2.15 V


Cathode specific capacity
140–200 mA h g−1
1675 mA h g−1


Theoretical specific energy
500–600 Wh kg−1
∼2600 Wh kg−1


Practical (obtainable) specific energy
150–200 Wh kg−1
200–700 Wh kg−1 (estimated)


Theoretical energy density
∼1800 Wh L−1
∼2800 Wh L−1


Cycle life (current status)
300–1000 deep cycles
<200 cycles




Regarding carbon sources, zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) made a tremendous contribution (high thermal stability) to the Li–S battery.127–129 Importantly, zinc oxide still plays a key role in these nanomaterials. Yue et al. proposed the multi-walled carbon nanotube/ZIF-8 composite, called MWNT@ZIF via a “brick-and-mortar” method without a template.130,131 Due to high specific surface area, WMNT improved the diffusion rate of lithium ions and the material's electrochemical conductivity. After 25 cycles experimental data showed that the composite had Li capacity of 380 mA h g−1 at C/10 and a reversible capacity of 1013 mA h g−1. The entire system showed outstanding properties and was poised for future applications and comparison with other porous carbon–sulfur composites. In brief, zinc oxide is regarded as a precursor that supports the loading material and improves electronic conductivity (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  DFT simulations showing the most stable configurations and calculated binding energies of Li–S with (a) ZnO and (b) MgO. The corresponding binding energies are listed at the bottom. (c) STEM image of ZnO/G-S composite. (d) Cycling performances of the composite electrodes at a constant rate of 0.2C. The typical coulombic efficiency of the ZnO/G-S electrode is shown. Adapted from ref. 132, with permission, © 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Meanwhile, other improvements had been made. Yu et al. proposed dual protection in electrodes by successfully utilizing tight self-assembled rGO skin to prepare reduced graphene oxide (rGO)-sulfur aerogel material and modifying them via atomic layer deposition (ALD).132 Polysulfides were protected incredibly around cathode due to the co-existence of ALD-oxide coating and rGO skin. Both of the two protective layers have the synergistic effect on improving the performance of Li–S better. They tried two metal oxides with various weight percentages of sulfur and found that the zinc oxide composite material demonstrated better properties than magnesium oxide composite in general. After that, they discovered 55 wt% sulfur loading G-S electrode, which was modified by ZnO, achieved discharge capacity of 998 mA h g−1 at current density of 0.2C. After 100 cycles, capacity of 846 mA h g−1 was still retained with the coulombic efficiency up to 92%. Based on the experiment, rGO along with ALD of zinc oxide acted as the valid barrier to constrain the polysulfides around cathode, showing to superior rate capacity, high coulombic efficiency and prominent cycling stability. The ZnO coating layer made the undeniable contributions for the large number of hydroxyl groups which trap polysulfide anions effectively. Gu et al.133 further developed a facile ball-milling method to synthesize sulfur/carbon nanotubes, which were wrapped by zinc oxide or nickel hydroxide (ZnO@S/CNT and Ni(OH)2@S/CNT). Their method was simple and controllable. By adding zinc oxide additives, performance was far better than the control sample because of strong interactions between ZnO and Sx2−, leading to higher adsorption energy for Li2S8. Furthermore, the ZnO@S/CNT composite displayed high reversible capacity and electrochemical conductivity over bare S/CNT composite due to the presence of zinc oxide. Meanwhile, after 70 charging–discharging cycles, the ZnO@S/CNT composite still maintained capacity of about 942 mA h g−1.
In brief, to face these challenges researchers did not give up and attempt to seek novel solutions of various nanomaterials including ZnO-based material. Our own viewpoints and suggestions follow. (1) Increase the void fraction of zinc oxide nanomaterial to further improve sulfur loading such as the porous zinc oxide material mentioned above. (2) Combining with suitable carbon material (e.g., rGO, CNT, etc.) to form composites could increase the use of sulfur based on the intimate connection between sulfur and carbon. (3) Add other appropriate materials such as metal compounds to improve electrochemical conductivity, reversible capacity and effective morphology. According to recent experiments, the synergistic effect in zinc oxide composite is so obvious that it surpasses commercial zinc oxide material.
4. Others
With the evolution of battery technology, a myriad of prototypes of metal–air battery have been introduced recently. Except for the two advanced lithium storage batteries mentioned above, the ZnO-based nanomaterials are also widely applied in many other fields. For example, the metal–air battery, which can be described as a breathing battery, has attracted great interest. In contrast to other advanced metal–air batteries, the zinc–air battery (Zn–air) is one of the strongest candidates to compete with LIBs and Li–S in the lithium storage battery. Besides, not only continuous even inexhaustible oxygen supply but also abundance and relative low-cost are the outstanding characteristics of Zn–air.134
When the cathode is fully exposed to oxygen in air, upon discharging, they will yield hydroxyl ions and then form zincate (Zn(OH)42−), releasing electrons. Circulation will be achieved by dehydration of Zn(OH)42− forming ZnO.135,136 The reaction mechanism can be indicated precisely in the following equations and Fig. 18(a). Anode: 2Zn + 4OH− → 2Zn(OH)42− + 4e−(3) Cathode: O2 + H2O + 2e− → 2OH−(4) Fluid: Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−(5) Overall reaction: 2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO(6) Side reaction: Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2(7)
 Fig. 17  (a) Ball-milling process for preparing ZnO@S/CNT and Ni(OH)2@S/CNT. TEM images of (b) ZnO@S/CNT and (c) Ni(OH)2@S/CNT. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of ZnO@S/CNT, Ni(OH)2@S/CNT and S/CNT-45% cathodes at 160 mA g−1. (e) Cycle life of ZnO@S/CNT, Ni(OH)2@S/CNT and S/CNT-45% composite cathodes at 160 mA g−1. Adapted from ref. 133, with permission, © 2016 Elsevier. 
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic view of zinc–air battery based on bi-electrodes. (b) Schematic cross-sectional view of air electrode. Adapted from ref. 136, with permission, © 2014 Elsevier. (c) Dendrite growth evolution of electrodeposited zinc by means of the phase-field simulation. Adapted from ref. 137, with permission, © 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Due to limitation of the electrode material, the development of Zn–air is far from satisfactory at present. In spite of the fact that Zn–air has high available energy density (1086 Wh kg−1 including oxygen), low equivalent weight and other excellent features, the corrosion rate of the zinc anode electrode remains an unsolved issue. For example, reaction (7) shows a severe parasitic process, resulting in a gradual self-corrosion of metal zinc that degrades electrode performance and produces unnecessary hydrogen gas, especially for the nano-zinc anode. After recharging, zincate gradually comes back to the electrode where electrode geometry changes and grows branches, causing poor circulation.137,138 This may result from concentration gradients or irregular current distribution.139–141 Moreover, CO2 from air possibly enter electrolyte and react with OH− to a great extent. A great deal of pores can be blocked by precipitation of carbonates. These challenges mentioned above have been perplexing researchers in recent years but this review mainly focuses on the key role that zinc oxide material plays actually, and the modifications of zinc oxide material.
Commercial zinc electrode underperforms due to poor electrochemical conductivity between nanoparticles during discharging. In essence, zincate ions dehydrate to bulky zinc oxide on the surface of particles, leading to ZnO deposition within the void space, loose interconnectivity between nanoparticles, and even active materials peeling off from the electrode.142 It is well-known that zinc oxide material could act as a significant additive on passive film. Recently, zinc oxide–based composite was used in zinc–air batteries as well. Comparable to the conventional zinc anode, after charging the zinc oxide material is reduced to zinc material, which serves as anode in the zinc–air battery. This novel approach exhibits outstanding advantages, especially in carbon-coated zinc oxide material. The charging process drives the yolk–shell-like architecture because the zinc core has smaller volume than zinc oxide in the shell, which confines the formation and extension of the dendrites. Meanwhile, such special architecture also provides sufficient cushion buffer between core and shell in order to decrease the stress that coating layer suffers from initially during cycling.
As mentioned previously, morphology change and dendrite formation continue intractable and unsolved, which seriously restricts development of the zinc–air battery.143 Miyazaki et al. and Zhu et al. found that polymer coating was beneficial to electrode capacity and longevity.144,145 Inspired by this idea, Gan et al. adopted alkaline polymer film to cover ZnO particles, based on a polyvinyl alcohol (PVA (as traditional binder)) and poly (diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) mixture in a rechargeable zinc–air battery.146 The general procedure is shown in Fig. 19(a). At 50 mA cm−2, cycle stability and electrochemical conductivity of ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite were superior to the pure ZnO electrode (utilizing PVA as binder), which are exhibited in Fig. 19(b)–(d), owing to confinement of dendrite growth and retention of zinc active nanomaterial. This PVA/PDDA polymer film offered abundant void space for volume change and ionic transfer during cycling. Moreover, in accordance to Fig. 19(b), the cyclic voltammogram of ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode showed an anodic peak at 0.183 V, lower than that of the bare ZnO electrode, because PVA/PDDA film limited diffusion of the discharge product to some extent. Meanwhile, compared with bare ZnO material, the composite had a lower potential interval, which determined the faster electrochemical kinetics of the redox process. After charging, this system formed the yolk–shell-like structure to relieve the stress that the coating layer suffered from, thereby avoiding dendritic growth, severe volume variety and pulverization of electrode to some extent.
 Fig. 19  (a) Structures of PVA, PDDA and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite. (b) Cyclic voltammetry of bare ZnO electrode (curve A) and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode (curve B). Variation of specific discharge capacity with cycle numbers of bare ZnO electrode and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode at different charge–discharge current density. (c) 25 mA cm−2 and (d) 50 mA cm−2 SEM images of (e) bare ZnO electrode and (f) ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode after 60 cycles. Adapted from ref. 146, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier. 
Meanwhile, there is another marked improvement of zinc oxide material, in alkaline medium, such as subjecting metal surface to an initial or mechanical treatment. Lee et al. conducted three contrasting investigations on pure zinc powder, zinc oxide powder (ZnO) and the modified zinc oxide material (ZnOPO) containing organic corrosion inhibitor (polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)) and lead oxide, in order to achieve the best scheme to optimize this ZnO-based composite.147 They synthesized different electrodes to compare in detail via the pelletizing method and took the mechanism into consideration; results indicated that pure zinc electrode tended to generate severe hydrogen evolution.148,149 In contrast, the additive of lead oxide as a surfactant effectively postponed corrosion, and shifted the hydrogen evolution reaction to more negative side. Lead may be susceptible to oxidation, where the anodic part is enhanced and the cathodic part is suppressed. At the same time, PTFE prevented the corrosion rate and effectively protected the zinc oxide core, which is similar to the PVA/PDDA film.
In brief, the two abovementioned methods to modify zinc oxide and the ZnO-based nanomaterials have been gradually breaking through the numerous limitations in zinc–air battery development such as morphology change, volume variety and dendrite formation of anode.150 The ZnO-based nanomaterial has not been extensively investigated thus far.
5. Conclusions
In the field of LIB, zero- to three-dimensional electrode nanomaterials, which are also widely applied as electrochemical supercapacitors (ECs), have been discussed along with corresponding characteristics.151–155 As shown in this review, electrochemical performance has been promoted step by step with the optimization of novel morphologies and tuneable composition of ZnO-based composites.156–159 In our perspective, the proper degree of modification is the key point in LIBs. In addition, specific surface area, lithium ion transportation, volume change and subsequent pulverization are all significant challenges for commercial applications.160
By introducing the sulfur element, the cost of high-power batteries is cut in half. This approach has been extended to various applications.161 However, many serious problems remain unsolved. The insulating nature and volume change of sulfur and its polysulfides cause problems. Polysulfide dissolution results in irretrievable capacity fading and even safety risks. Several ideas for improvement follow. (1) Various morphologies and proportions should be taken into account to improve specific capacity and cycling performance (e.g., use of pre-prepared porous S/ZnO composite materials obtained leads to superior properties).162–164 (2) Research results indicate that coating structure and conductive matrix have the special ability to mitigate volume change and prohibit sulfur dissolution to some extent.165 (3) Use of smaller sulfur allotropes S2–4 or ultrafine sulfur effectively diminishes polysulfide dissolution because cyclo-S8 molecules determine this intrinsic problem to a great extent.166–168
Fabrication technology for nanomaterials is equally significant. (1) The hydrothermal procedure is a moderate and prevailing method in the preparation of ZnO-based nanomaterial. Various reactions take place at different temperatures, determining the morphology and its corresponding property. (2) The next most promising is the simple template-free method. Researchers have fully used adsorption between protonated MIM ligand (HMIM) and zinc oxide and the strong interactions between HMIM and carbon surface. This method does not require a template but achieves the effect of one. (3) The ball-milling synthetic method, a mechanochemical route, is utilized to grind various materials. It is simple and practical to make large amounts of metal oxide (e.g., zinc oxide) coating homogenous composite cathode material. Due to its economy and reproducibility, ball milling technology has been widely adopted for achieving high packing density material.
The recently developed Zn–air battery is expected to be a prominent EESD. Compared with the other two batteries, Zn–air batteries possess the characteristics of light weight, low toxicity, and environmental friendliness because the heavy cathode material is substituted by an O2-breathing electrode that is light weight and environment friendly.169 Nonetheless, several disadvantages constrain its rapid development in the future. First, parasitic reactions, non-uniform current densities and volume variety are serious issues that must be addressed. In addition, electrode corrosion, blockage and dendrite growth on the anode would occur constantly during cycles, causing capacity fade and even safety issues. Thus, more effective measurements should be taken such as using corrosion inhibitors and chemical additives. At the same time, despite ZnO-based nanomaterial in zinc–air batteries, this type of experiment has not been more extensive than in other commercial batteries. Its outstanding features have captured our attention recently because this special material easily turns itself into something like yolk–shell structure through charging, which plays a crucial part in later cycling. Moreover, the addition of other appropriate elements can decrease the corrosion reaction and hydrogen evolution to some extent. Therefore, we recommend further investigation of the coating layer and suitable additions of elements in ZnO-based nanomaterial. In future, researchers will seek to prevent the corrosion rate, dendritic growth and shape change by modifying structure and adding electrode additives.
The focus should be on comprehensive benefits, such as cost, safety, availability, and environmental impact rather than only high efficiency.170 This means that as abundant and environment-friendly materials, ZnO-based nanomaterials have a promising future for applications in EESDs such as LIB, Li–S, and Zn–air.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Program for New Century Excellent Talents, University in China (grant NCET-13-0645); the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC-21201010, 21671170, 21173183, 21505118 and 51202106); Innovation Scientists and Technicians Troop Construction Projects of Henan Province (164200510018); Plan for Scientific Innovation Talent of Henan Province, Program for Innovative Research Team (in Science and Technology), University of Henan Province (14IRTSTHN004, 16IRTSTHN003); the Science & Technology Foundation of Henan Province (122102210253 and 13A150019); the Science & Technology Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20150438); the Six Talent Plan (2015-XCL-030); Student's Platform for innovation and Entrepreneurship Training Program of Yangzhou University (x20160307) and the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2012M521115). We also acknowledge the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions and the technical support we received at the Testing Center of Yangzhou University.
Notes and references
B. Li, M. B. Zheng, H. G. Xue and P. Huan, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2015, 3, 175–202 RSC .
C. Liu, F. Li, L. P. Ma and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E28–E62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, D. Zhou, D. Zhao, M. Hou, C. Wang and Y. Xia, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A98–A104 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Chen, Z. Y. Huang, H. W. Liang, Q. F. Guan and S. H. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4746–4752 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          B. E. Conway, Electrochemical supercapacitors, Kluwer Academic/Plunum, New York,  1999 Search PubMed .
Z. Q. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. H. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Jain, R. Balasubramanian and M. P. Srinivasan, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 283, 789–805 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Yu, Y. B. Lin and Z. G. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 515–522 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, L. L. Yang, G. Xu, X. Q. Huang, X. Yang, X. Wei, Z. H. Ren, G. Shen and G. R. Han, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 577, 663–668 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Park, F. Xia, S. W. Kim, S. B. Kim, T. Song, U. Paik and W. I. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 1037–1043 CAS .
M. Ahmad, Y. Y. Shi, A. Nisar, H. Y. Sun, W. Shen, M. Wei and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
Q. S. Xie, Y. T. Ma, X. P. Wang, D. Q. Zeng, L. S. Wang, L. Q. Mai and D.-L. Peng, ACS Nano, 2016, 10(1), 1283–1291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Hu, L. Kienle, Y. G. Guo and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Wang, D. W. Choi, J. Li, Z. G. Yang, Z. M. Nie, R. Kou, D. H. Hu, C. M. Wang, L. V. Saraf, J. G. Zhang, I. A. Aksay and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 907–914 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Chen and X. W. Lou, Mater. Today, 2012, 15, 246–254 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Ding and X. W. Lou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3586–3588 RSC .
J. X. Li, Y. Zhao, N. Wang and L. H. Guan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5238–5240 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Kang, X. Q. Yan and Q. L. Liao, Sci.: China Mater., 2015, 58, 60–76 CrossRef .
X. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang, Z. Yang, B. Yang, R. Wang and J. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 257, 174–180 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiao, D. D. Mei, M. L. Cao, D. Y. Qu and B. Deng, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 627, 455–462 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strubel, S. Thieme, T. Biemelt, A. Helmer, M. Oschatz, J. Brückner, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 287–297 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Ma, X. B. Huang, Q. Q. Jiang, J. Huo and S. Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 884–890 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Gan, D. B. Zhou, J. Zhao and L. Zhou, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 913–919 CrossRef CAS .
Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Lithium-ion_battery.
Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. B. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Jiang, X. Y. WANG and H. Zhang, J. Electron Mater., 2016, 45, 4350–4356 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Song, S. Park, F. M. Alamgir, J. Cho and M. L. Liu, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2011, 72, 203–252 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Bi, X. D. Zhang, W. He, D. D. Min and W. S. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19744–19751 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q. Y. Huo, P. P. Dua, L. Z. Wang, A. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Song, Y. Lv and G. Y. Li, Synth. Met., 2012, 162, 1315–1326 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, J. Huang, B. Y. n. Liaw, V. Metzler and J. B. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 254, 168–182 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Zhang, X. Z. Sun, X. Zhang, H. Lin, K. Wang and Y. W. Ma, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 622, 783–788 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao and M. H. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2016, 305, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liang, M. X. Gao, H. G. Pan, Y. F. Liu and M. Yan, J. Alloys Compd., 2013, 575, 246–256 CrossRef CAS .
L. R. Hou, L. Lian, L. H. Zhang, G. Pang, C. Z. Yuan and X. G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jahromi, A. Pandikumar, B. Goh, Y. Lim, W. Basirun, H. Lim and N. Huang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 14010–14019 RSC .
L. Qiao, X. H. Wang, L. Qiao, X. L. Sun, X. W. Li, Y. X. Zheng and D. Y. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3037–3042 RSC .
L. Gao, S. H. Li, D. K. Huang, Y. Shen and M. K. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 529–536 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ahmad, S. Yingying, A. Nisar, H. Y. Sun, W. Shen, M. Weie and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
Q. S. Xie, Y. Ma, X. Q. Zhang, L. Wang, G. H. Yue and D. L. Peng, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 619, 235–239 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kim, S. A. Hong and J. Yoo, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 266, 179–188 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702–730 CAS .
D. Bresser, F. Mueller, M. Fiedler, S. Krueger, R. Kloepsch, D. Baither, M. Winter, E. Paillard and S. Passerini, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4977–4985 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zou, X. L. Hu, Z. Li, L. Qie, C. C. Hu, R. Zeng, Y. Jiang and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6622–6628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Z. Yuan, H. Cao, S. Q. Zhu, H. Hua and L. R. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20389–20398 CAS .
Y. M. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016 DOI:10.1038 .
X. L. Ge, Z. Q. Li, C. X. Wang and L. W. Yin, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26633–26642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Li, M. Zhong, Y. M. Hu, P. F. Hua, M. Y. Zhu, W. X. Li and Y. B. Li, Mater. Lett., 2016, 171, 244–247 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Ouyang, Z. Y. Zhong and M. S. Lei, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 1107–1112 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Han, Y. B. He, H. F. Li, B. H. Li, H. D. Du, X. Y. Qin and F. Y. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 157, 266–273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, Y. F. Yuan, L. K. Wang, H. L. Ni, H. L. Zhu, J. L. Yang, J. S. Gui, Y. B. Chen and S. Y. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 112, 364–370 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, Y. J. Xiong and Y. Xie, Inorg. Chem., 2003, 42, 8105–8109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kundu, S. Sain, M. Yoshio, T. Kar, N. Gunawardhana and S. K. Pradhana, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 329, 206–211 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, R. Agrawal and Y. Hao, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, 3074–3077 CrossRef .
S. Y. Kim and B. H. Kim, Synth. Met., 2015, 210, 386–391 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Shuakat and T. Lin, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2014, 14, 1389–1408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Shen, D. B. Mu, S. Chen, R. Huang and F. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 4309–4315 CAS .
Shilpa, B. M. Basavaraja, S. B. Majumder and A. Sharma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5344–5351 CAS .
B. Oschmann, M. N. Tahir, F. Mueller, D. Bresser, I. Lieberwirth, W. Tremel, S. Passerini and R. Zentel Macromol, Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 1075–1082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Köse, S. Karaal, A. O. Aydın and H. Akbulut, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 235–245 CrossRef .
Y. J. Feng, R. Q. Zou, D. G. Xia, L. L. Liu and X. D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9654–9658 CAS .
J. Zhu, G. H. Zhang, S. Z. Gu and B. G. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 150, 308–313 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Xu, Y. Li, T. Y. Ma, Y. Ren, H. H. Wang, L. F. Wang, J. G. Wen, D. Miller, K. Amine and Z. H. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 253–264 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, Z. Y. Zeng and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1934–1946 RSC .
X. H. Huang, X. H. Xia, Y. F. Yuan and F. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 4960–4965 CrossRef CAS .
X. H. Huang, R. Q. Guo, J. B. Wu and P. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 122, 82–85 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, S. X. Jin, Q. Y. Liao and C. X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20590–20596 CAS .
J. Wu, C. H. Chen, Y. Hao and C. L. Wang, Colloids Surf., A, 2015, 468, 17–21 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5364–5457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. S. Wu, G. Zhou, L. C. Yin, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 107–131 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Huang, Z. H. Yang, X. Xie, Z. B. Feng and Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 289, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H. B. Wu, Z. Guo and X. W. Lou, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 20, 7–10 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu, A. Q. Pan, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5669–5674 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Chen, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, C. Li, J. J. Chen and K. Wang, Mater. Lett., 2015, 152, 181–184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhu, N. Liu, M. M. Dowell, Y. Jin, Y. Cui and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, K. Q. Wang, J. K. Feng and S. L. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22848–22857 CAS .
S. Aziz, J. Q. Zhao, C. Cain and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2014, 30, 427–433 CAS .
L. F. Zhang, J. Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, P. Zheng, X. Y. Yuan and S. W. Guo, Mater. Lett., 2016, 165, 165–168 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Liu, J. Y. Liu, Z. T. Li, G. L. Wu and M. B. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 271, 173–179 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, W. B. Yue, Y. M. An, Y. Ren and X. Yan, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 161–167 CrossRef CAS .
Z. M. Ren, Z. Y. Wang, C. Chen, J. Wang, X. X. Fu, C. Y. Fan and G. D. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 146, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .
X. d. Wang, Z. D. Li, J. Shi and Y. H. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9346–9384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Z. Yang, H. W. Song, H. Cui, Y. C. Liu and C. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Arrebola, A. Caballero, L. Hernán and J. Morales, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4278–4284 CrossRef CAS .
V. Cauda, D. Pugliese, N. Garino, A. Sacco, S. Bianco, F. Bella, A. Lamberti and C. Gerbaldi, Energy, 2014, 65, 639–646 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gabriele, T. Angela, M. Franziska, B. Dominic, D. Francesco, F. Acapito and P. Stefano, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 9393–9400 CrossRef PubMed .
H. B. Li, W. J. Kang, Y. Yu, J. F. Liu and Y. T. Qian, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4787–4793 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Xiao, S. C. Zhang, S. B. Wang, Y. L. Xing, R. X. Lin, X. Wei and W. X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 189, 245–251 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Xie, D. Q. Zeng, Y. T. Ma, L. Lin, L. S. Wang and D. L. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 169, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Xie, X. Q. Zhang, X. B. Wu, H. Y. Wu, X. Liu, G. H. Yue, Y. Yang and D. L. Peng, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 659–665 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Xie, Y. T. Ma, D. Q. Zeng, L. S. Wang, G. S. Yue and D. L. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19895–19904 CAS .
L. J. Liu, C. Y. Zhao, H. L. Zhao, Q. Y. Zhang and Y. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 135, 224–231 CrossRef CAS .
Q. S. Xie, Y. T. Ma, D. Q. Zeng, L. S. Wang, G. S. Yue and D. L. Peng, Sci. Rep., 2014, 6, 8351–8359 Search PubMed .
A. Mashkoor, Y. Y. Shi, N. Amjad, H. Y. Sun, W. C. Shen, M. Miao and J. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7723–7729 RSC .
J. M. Xu, L. He, Y. J. Wang, C. J. Zhang and Y. H. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 191, 417–425 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Dai, L. P. Wang, J. Xu, Y. Wang, A. J. Zhou and J. Z. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 15853–15859 CAS .
L. Gao, S. H. Li, D. K. Huang, Y. Shen and M. K. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 529–536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Zhou, K. Zhang, J. H. Liu, H. G. Peng and G. C. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 406–412 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Chen, Materials, 2013, 6, 156–183 CrossRef .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. S. Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 53645–55457 Search PubMed .
H. Li, Z. X. Wang, L. Q. Chen and X. L. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4593–4607 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Yue, Z. P. Shi, Q. X. Wang, Z. X. Cao, H. Y. Dong, Y. Qiao, Y. H. Yin and S. T. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17067–17074 CAS .
X. Y. Shen, D. B. Mu, S. Chen, B. R. Wu and F. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3118–3125 CAS .
C. T. Hsieh, C. Y. Lin, Y. F. Chen and J. S. Lin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 111, 359–365 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, S. S. Chen and X. Qin, Mater. Lett., 2014, 128, 50–53 CrossRef CAS .
M. Laurenti, N. Garino, S. Porro, M. Fontana and C. Gerbaldi, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 640, 321–326 CrossRef CAS .
N. Garino, A. Lamberti, R. Gazia, A. Chiodoni and C. Gerbaldi, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 615, S454–S458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Zhou, W. J. Li and Z. W. Fu, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 59, 435–440 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, W. Zeng, Q. M. Su, G. H. Du and H. G. Duan, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 186, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Wang, X. J. Jiang, L. S. Yang, N. Jia and Y. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1525–1532 CAS .
Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LithiumE280%93sulfur_battery.
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Wang, G. Zhu, F. Li, K. H. Wu, G. Q. Lu, H. M. Cheng and I. R. Gentle, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8703–8710 RSC .
W. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148–7153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen and L. L. Shaw, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 770–783 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Song, E. J. Cairnsbc and Y. G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2186–2204 RSC .
S. E. Cheon, K. S. Ko, J. H. Cho, S. W. Kim, E. Y. Chin and H. T. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 10, A800–A805 CrossRef .
V. Yuriy, Z. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1969–A1976 CrossRef .
S. T. Zhang, M. B. Zheng, Z. X. Lin, N. W. Li, Y. J. Liu, B. Zhao, H. Pang, J. M. Cao, P. He and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 15889–15896 CAS .
W. Gong, W. S. Chen, J. P. He, Y. Tong, C. Liu and L. Su, Carbon, 2015, 83, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mbuyisa, S. P. Bhardwaj, F. Rigoni, E. Carlino, S. Pagliara, L. Sangaletti, A. Goldoni, M. Ndwandwe and C. Cepek, Carbon, 2012, 50, 5472–5480 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mecklenburg, A. Schuchardt, Y. K. Mishra, S. Kaps, R. Adelung, A. Lotnyk, L. Kienle and K. Schulte, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3486–3490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu and Y. S. SU, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Liu, Z. B. Feng, J. Wang, J. Y. Diao and D. S. Su, New Carbon Mater., 2016, 31, 87–91 CrossRef .
X. H. Liang, Q. Q. Song, Y. S. Liu and H. Liu, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2015, 10, 9333–9341 CAS .
S. Eslava, L. Zhang, S. Esconjauregui, J. Yang, K. Vanstreels, M. R. Baklanov and E. Saiz, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zheng, C. Mao, T. Wu, S. Lee, P. Feng and X. Bu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11936–11939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D.-J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yue, B. Guo, Z. A. Qiao, P. F. Fulvio, J. H. Chen, A. J. Binder, C. C. Tian and S. Dai, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 198, 139–143 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yue, Z.-A. Qiao, X. Li, A. J. Binder, E. Formo, Z. Pan, C. Tian, Z. Bi and S. Dai, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 1002–1005 CAS .
M. P. Yu, A. J. Wang, F. Y. Tian, H. Q. Song, Y. S. Wang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5292–5298 RSC .
X. X. Gu, C. J. Tong, B. Wen, L. M. Liu, C. Lai and S. Q. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 196, 369–376 CrossRef CAS .
Y. G. Li and H. J. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .
Wikipedia, https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/ZincE280%93air_battery.
P. C. Pei, K. L. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Wang, P. C. Pei, Z. Ma, H. C. Chen, H. C. Xu, D. F. Chen and X. Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22648–22655 CAS .
H. Kim, G. Jeong, Y.-U. Kim, J.-H. Kim, C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9011–9034 RSC .
K. W. Choi, D. Hamby, D. N. Bennion and J. Newman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1976, 123, 1628–1637 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Adler, F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 289–294 CrossRef CAS .
B. Aurian-Blajeni and M. Tomkiewicz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1985, 132, 869–870 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Park and S. Mho, Anal. Sci., 1997, 13, 311–316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Cho and G. T.-K. Fey, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 610–616 CrossRef CAS .
K. Miyazaki, Y. Lee, T. Fukutsuka and T. Abe, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 725–727 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Zhu and Y. H. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 1998, 73, 266–270 CrossRef CAS .
W. G. Gan, D. B. Zhou, L. Zhou, Z. J. Zhang and J. Zhao, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 182, 430–436 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, S. W. Eoma, K. Sathiyanarayanan and M. S. Yun, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1588–1591 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Nichols, F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, Chem. Eng. Commun., 1985, 37, 355–379 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, E. S. Nelson, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1117–1124 CAS .
Z. Liu, S. Z. El Abedin and F. Endres, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 58, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pang, F. Gao, Q. Chen, R. Liua and Q. Y. Lu, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 5862–5868 RSC .
H. Pang, Y. F. Shi, J. M. Du, Y. H. Ma, G. C. Li, J. Chen, J. S. Zhang, H. H. Zheng and B. Q. Yuan, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 85, 256–262 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pang, Q. Y. Lu, Y. Z. Zhang, Y. C. Lia and F. Gao, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 920–922 RSC .
H. Pang, Q. Y. Lu, Y. C. Lia and F. Gao, Chem. Commun., 2009, 48, 7542–7544 RSC .
H. Pang, C. Z. Wei, Y. H. Ma, S. S. Zhao, G. C. Li, J. S. Zhang, J. Chen and S. J. Li, ChemPlusChem, 2013, 78, 546–553 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, W. Li, X. Shen and G. W. Diao, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 4514–4523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Zheng, D. F. Qiu, B. Zhao, L. Y. Ma, X. R. Wang, Z. X. Lin, L. J. Pan, Y. D. Zheng and Y. Shi, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 699–703 RSC .
S. P. Zhu, M. Chen, W. J. Ren, J. R. Yang, S. S. Qu, Z. C. Li and G. W. Diao, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 7923–7931 RSC .
M. Chen, X. Shen, K. Y. Chen, Q. H. Wu, P. F. Zhang, X. Zhang and G. W. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 195, 94–105 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013–16028 CrossRef .
W. Liu, P. G. Oh, X. Liu, M.-J. Lee, W. Cho, S. J. Chae, Y. Kim and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4440–4457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, G. Y. Zheng and Yi Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3018–3032 RSC .
K. Mi, Y. Jiang, J. K. Feng, Y. T. Qian and S. L. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1571–1579 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xin, L. Gu, N.-H. Zhao, Y.-X. Yin, L.-J. Zhou, Y.-G. Guo and L.-J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18510–18513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Jiang, L. X. Yuan, Z. Q. Yi, C. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Strasser and Y. H. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 9295–9303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Liu, Y. J. Li, X. B. Hong, J. Xu, C. M. Zheng and K. Xie, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 188, 516–522 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. W. Ji, P.-A. Glans, Y. G. Zhang, J. F. Zhu and J. H. Guo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13670–13675 RSC .
J. Hassoun, J. Kim, D.-J. Lee, H.-G. Jung, S.-M. Lee, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, J. Power Sources, 2012, 202, 308–313 CrossRef CAS .
H. I. Kim, E. J. Kim, S. J. Kim and H. C. Shin, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307 CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this paper.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Jian Zhang	Jian Zhang is currently a student under the supervision of Professor Huan Pang, at Yangzhou University of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Jiangsu province, China. His research is mainly focused on the field of inorganic semiconductors nanostructures and their applications as super-capacitors.
Peng Gu	Peng Gu did his doctoral training at the Photophysics Group, University of Strathclyde in Glasgow. After working with Murphy's group, University of Illinois at Urbana Champaign, he joined Professor Huan Pang's group at Yangzhou University as an assistant researcher. His research interests include organic semiconductors, solar energy, metal–air battery, surface plasmon energy transfer and wavelength-tunable SPASER.
Jing Xu	Jing Xu is now a graduate student under Professor Huan Pang's supervision, Yangzhou University of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, China. She graduated from Yancheng Institute of Technology. Her research mainly focuses on the field of inorganic semiconductor nanostructures and their applications as super-capacitors.
Huaiguo Xue	Huaiguo Xue received his Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry from Zhejiang University in 2002. He is currently a professor of physical chemistry and the dean of the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Yangzhou University. His research interests focus on electrochemistry, functional polymers and biosensors.
Huan Pang	Huan Pang received his Ph.D. degree from Nanjing University in 2011. He then founded his research group in Anyang Normal University where he was appointed as a distinguished professor in 2013. He has now joined Yangzhou University as a university distinguished professor. He has published more than 100 papers in peer-reviewed journals including Chemical Society Reviews and Advanced Materials, with 3700 citations (H-index = 32). His research interests include the development of inorganic semiconductor nanostructures and their applications in flexible electronics with a focus on energy devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic design of secondary Li-metal battery (picture of dendrite growth at Li surface was obtained directly from in situ scanning electron microscopy measurements). (b) Rechargeable Li-ion battery.27 Mechanical degradation of high-capacity material at particle level (c) and electrode level (d) during discharge/charge cycling. Adapted from ref. 47, with permission, © 2016 Nature.	 
Conversion reaction: ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e− ⇌ Zn + Li2O	(1)
Alloying–dealloying reaction: Zn + Li+ + e− ⇌ LiZn.	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Performance of carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O electrodes subjected to continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles at increasing specific currents. (b) Zn0.9Fe0.1O electrodes subjected to continuous galvanostatic charge–discharge cycles at increasing specific currents. (c) HRTEM image of carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O. (d) Model: iron in the zinc oxide lattice. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission, © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration for effect of ZnO coating layer on the LTO surface. (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM image of 2 wt% ZnO modified LTO. Adapted from ref. 51, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Low- and (b) high-magnification TEM images and (c) HRTEM image of ZnO/C hierarchical porous nanorods. (d) Rate performance and cycling performance at 1C of PEDOT-PSS-coated ZnO/C hierarchical porous nanorods in FC electrolyte. Adapted from ref. 64, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Illustration for fabrication process of porous ZnO nanosheets grown on copper foil substrates. SEM image of (b) commercial ZnO powders and TEM of (d) porous ZnO nanosheets grown on copper substrates. Discharge–charge curves of (c) commercial ZnO powders and (e) porous ZnO nanosheets at current density of 0.05 A g−1. Adapted from ref. 66, with permission, © 2011 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of ZnO/rGO composite nanostructure prepared by ESD. (b) SEM images of nanostructure ZnO/rGO composite films. (c) Galvanostatic discharge–charge curves of nanosheet ZnO/rGO composite films. Adapted from ref. 69, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Illustration of formation of cribriform sheet-like carbon-coated ZnO. (b) SEM images of carbon-coated ZnO. Adapted from ref. 72, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) SEM and (d) HRTEM micrographs of yolk–shell ZnO–C microspheres. (b) SEM and (e) HRTEM micrographs of ZnO–C hollow microspheres. (c) Discharge–charge curves of yolk–shell ZnO–C microspheres at 100 mA g−1. (f) Rate performance of ZnO–C yolk–shell microspheres, hollow microspheres and solid microspheres. Adapted from ref. 91, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a, b) SEM, (c) TEM, and (d) HRTEM micrographs of hierarchical ZnO–Ag–C composite porous microspheres. (e) Cycling properties of ZnO–Ag–C composite porous microspheres at high current rate of 500 mA g−1 in 0.01–3 V. Adapted from ref. 92, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

0D	Carbon-coated Zn0.9Fe0.1O	Sucrose-assisted wet chemical synthesis method	840 (48 mA g−1)	1st	
44

ZnO-coated Li4Ti5O12	Not mentioned	123.6 (20C)	20th	
50

1D	ZnO/Cu/CNFs	Electrospinning approach	812 (100 mA g−1)	50th	
58

ZnO/C/rGO	One-step, co-axial electrospinning	618.98 (50 mA g−1)	100th	
59

ZnO/MWCNT/GLY	Sol gel technique	1152/852/460 (0.2C)	1st/2nd/100th	
61

ZnCo2O4 nanorods	ZnO nanorod array-assisted method	2100 (100 mA g−1)	1st	
62

CoO/ZnO nanotubes	ZnO nanorod array-assisted method	1350/1000 (50 mA g−1)	1st/50th	
62

ZnO/SnO2 heterogeneous nanofibers	Electrospinning and calcination	625.4/521.1 (80 mA g−1)	20th/120th	
63

PEDOT-PSS coated ZnO/C	One-pot wet-chemical reaction and thermal calcination	623.94 (1C)	1500th	
64


2D	Porous ZnO nanosheets	Chemical bath deposition technique and heat treatment	1120/400 (50 mA g−1)	1st/100th	
66

ZnO-VAGHs	Facile two-step method	1560 (80 mA g−1)	1st	
68

ZnO/rGO	Electrostatic spray deposition technique	360 (200 mA g−1)	200th	
69

Carbon-coated ZnO	Polymerization and carbonization	400 (1C)/380 (3C)	200th/100th	
72

3D (microspheres)	ZnO/ZnCo2O4	Annealing process	1199 (200 mA g−1)	200th	
88

ZnO/C	Facile chemical solution reaction and calcination	520 (100 mA g−1)	150th	
91

ZnO/Ag/C	Calcination method	729 (100 mA g−1)	200th	
92

ZnO/CoO@PCM	Aerosol spray pyrolysis method	1250 (100 mA g−1)	150th	
93

ZnO/NiO	Simple aging process	1176 (100 mA g−1)	200th	
94

3D (nanoflowers)	Au/ZnO	Solution phase approach and electrodeposition	1280 (120 mA g−1)	50th	
95

ZnO/ZnCo2O4	Not mentioned	1086 (100 mA g−1)	80th	
96


 	Fig. 10  (a) Galvanostatic discharge–charge profiles ZnO–NiO hybrid yolk–shell microspheres. (b) Rate capabilities of ZnO–NiO yolk–shell hybrid microspheres at different current densities. Adapted from ref. 94, with permission, © 2015 Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a), (d) FESEM, and (b), (e) TEM images of magnification hierarchical flower-like ZnO structure. (c) Cyclic voltammogram of Au–ZnO electrode at scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1. (f) Plot of capacity and Coulombic efficiency of cell vs. cycle number for Au–ZnO and ZnO film electrode, which is shown as a comparison to display improvement when using Au–ZnO film. Adapted from ref. 95, with permission, © 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of synthesis route for ZnO/ZnCo2O4 nanocomposites. Adapted from ref. 92, with permission, © 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of special nanostructure for TiO2@ZnO nanocomposite. (b) SEM images of TiO2@ZnO arrays. (c) Rate performance of TiO2@ZnO and TiO2 electrodes at discharge process. Adapted from ref. 98, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 
CZO + 2Li+ + 2e− → Zn + Co + Li2O
Zn + Li+ + e− → LiZn
Co + Li + e− → LiCo
LiZn → Zn + Li+ + e−
LiCo → Co + Li+ + e−
Zn + Li2O → ZnO + 2Li+ + 2e−
Co + Li2O → CoO + 2Li+ + 2e−

 	Fig. 14  (a) SEM images of ZnO/NC polyhedrons. (b) Comparison of rate performance for ZnO/NC electrode, pristine ZnO electrode and ZnO/C electrode. Adapted from ref. 95, © 2015 Elsevier. (c, d) SEM images of CZO@C. Adapted from ref. 103, with permission, © 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic presentation of lithium–sulfur battery with anode (metallic lithium) and cathode (sulfur-containing material), separated by non-aqueous liquid electrolyte. (A) Discharging process and (B) charging process. Adapted from ref. 118, with permission, © 2014 Elsevier.	 


Cell voltage	3.4–4.0 V	2.15 V
Cathode specific capacity	140–200 mA h g−1	1675 mA h g−1
Theoretical specific energy	500–600 Wh kg−1	∼2600 Wh kg−1
Practical (obtainable) specific energy	150–200 Wh kg−1	200–700 Wh kg−1 (estimated)
Theoretical energy density	∼1800 Wh L−1	∼2800 Wh L−1
Cycle life (current status)	300–1000 deep cycles	<200 cycles

 	Fig. 16  DFT simulations showing the most stable configurations and calculated binding energies of Li–S with (a) ZnO and (b) MgO. The corresponding binding energies are listed at the bottom. (c) STEM image of ZnO/G-S composite. (d) Cycling performances of the composite electrodes at a constant rate of 0.2C. The typical coulombic efficiency of the ZnO/G-S electrode is shown. Adapted from ref. 132, with permission, © 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Anode: 2Zn + 4OH− → 2Zn(OH)42− + 4e−	(3)
Cathode: O2 + H2O + 2e− → 2OH−	(4)
Fluid: Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−	(5)
Overall reaction: 2Zn + O2 → 2ZnO	(6)
Side reaction: Zn + 2H2O → Zn(OH)2 + H2	(7)

 	Fig. 17  (a) Ball-milling process for preparing ZnO@S/CNT and Ni(OH)2@S/CNT. TEM images of (b) ZnO@S/CNT and (c) Ni(OH)2@S/CNT. (d) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of ZnO@S/CNT, Ni(OH)2@S/CNT and S/CNT-45% cathodes at 160 mA g−1. (e) Cycle life of ZnO@S/CNT, Ni(OH)2@S/CNT and S/CNT-45% composite cathodes at 160 mA g−1. Adapted from ref. 133, with permission, © 2016 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic view of zinc–air battery based on bi-electrodes. (b) Schematic cross-sectional view of air electrode. Adapted from ref. 136, with permission, © 2014 Elsevier. (c) Dendrite growth evolution of electrodeposited zinc by means of the phase-field simulation. Adapted from ref. 137, with permission, © 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Structures of PVA, PDDA and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite. (b) Cyclic voltammetry of bare ZnO electrode (curve A) and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode (curve B). Variation of specific discharge capacity with cycle numbers of bare ZnO electrode and ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode at different charge–discharge current density. (c) 25 mA cm−2 and (d) 50 mA cm−2 SEM images of (e) bare ZnO electrode and (f) ZnO/PVA/PDDA composite electrode after 60 cycles. Adapted from ref. 146, with permission, © 2015 Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this paper.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
