Water electrolysis and photoelectrolysis on electrodes engineered using biological and bio-inspired molecular systems  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B926749B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B926749B
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 727-747Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsWater electrolysis and photoelectrolysis on electrodes engineered using biological and bio-inspired molecular systems

        
          
            Phong D. 
            Tran
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Vincent 
            Artero
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Marc 
            Fontecave
          
        
      *ab
aLaboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Université Joseph Fourier, CNRS UMR 5249, CEA, DSV/iRTSV, 17 rue des Martyrs, F-38054, Grenoble Cedex 9, France. E-mail: vincent.artero@cea.fr;  Fax: +33 4 3878 9124;   Tel: +33 438789102
bCollège de France, 11 place Marcelin-Berthelot, 75231, Paris Cedex 05, France
Received 
      18th December 2009
    , Accepted 12th March 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      13th May 2010
    AbstractPhotoelectrocatalytic cells for water splitting should combine one or two photosensitive units with a water oxidation catalyst at the anode and a hydrogen evolution catalyst at the cathode. In this perspective article, we first show how a chemist can take the naturally occurring multi-electron catalysts for these two electro- and photochemical reactions, photosystem II and hydrogenases, as a source of inspiration for the design of original, efficient and robust molecular catalysts. The focus of this article is given to the immobilisation of these natural or bio-inspired catalysts onto conducting surfaces and the design of electrode and photoelectrode materials for hydrogen evolution/uptake and water oxidation.

Broader context
Catalysis is key to the urgent development of new energy applications. Hydrogen production through the reduction of water appears to be the best solution for the long-run storage of renewable energies. Ideally, the energetic input for such a process should come from a renewable source such as solar energy. Moreover, economically viable hydrogen production requests platinum-free catalysts since this expensive and scarce metal is not a sustainable resource. The design of molecular bio-inspired catalysts for hydrogen evolution, based on abundant metals with the aim to provide alternatives to the use of platinum, has been the core project developed by Dr Vincent Artero and Prof. Marc Fontecave in the Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals in Grenoble. This group recently demonstrated that such molecular catalysts can be used to modify electrode nanomaterials and they reported, in collaboration with two other institutes from the CEA (Iramis in CEA Saclay and Liten in CEA Grenoble) on the first noble-metal-free electrocatalytic material for both hydrogen evolution and uptake working under very acidic conditions compatible with the proton-exchange membrane technology. Such catalysts are also very valuable in the context of artificifial photosynthesis and this team pioneered the design of supramolecular H2-evolving photocatalytic devices based on first-row transition metal H2-evolving catalysts, by coupling cobaloxime catalysts with molecular photosensitizers.

Introduction
One of the most promising solutions to the anticipated crisis in future energy production resides in the combination of two renewable resources: water and sunlight. Conversion of solar energy to chemical energy through the light-driven reduction of water into hydrogen not only provides an attractive approach to store the abundant flow of sunlight falling on earth but also to generate a fuel with the highest energy output relative to molecular weight that can be used to generate electricity in fuel cells with very high energy conversion efficiencies. Furthermore hydrogen is a carbon-free fuel since it generates only water as a by-product during reaction with oxygen. The technological challenges thus reside in particular in the development of electrochemical devices for water reduction into hydrogen (electrolysers) (eqn (1)) and for hydrogen oxidation to water (fuel cells) (eqn (2)). In an electrolyser, electrons are extracted from water (eqn (3)) and the whole process is written as in eqn (5) whereas in a fuel cell electrons are captured by oxygen (eqn (4)) and the whole process is written as in eqn (6). 2H+ + 2e− → H2(1) H2 → 2H+ + 2e−(2) 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−(3) O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O(4) 2H2O → 2H2 + O2(5) 2H2 + O2 → 2H2O(6)
A catalytic issue
The main issue related to water splitting resides in the multielectronic nature of both reactions 1 and 3, which limits their kinetics. Accordingly, one of the major problems associated with the development of efficient electrolyzers (and fuel cells) resides in the requirement for electrocatalysts proceeding at diffusion controlled rates without demanding large driving forces called overvoltages and corresponding to the extra energy required for the redox reaction as compared to that defined by its standard potential. The overvoltage is defined as the difference between the potential needed to be applied to the system to make it function at a significant rate and the standard potential of the redox couple. The determination of overvoltage is quite straightforward when the reaction is catalyzed at the electrode surface in aqueous solution but the situation is less clear when the catalyst is in the bulk and assayed in non-aqueous solvents.1 Practically, overvoltages should remain below 0.1 V for a process to be economically viable. So far, and from the emergence of fuel cell technology by Grove,2 the most efficient electrocatalysts are based on noble metals, in particular platinum, in a pure form or as alloys. However, the wide and continued application of Pt-based systems is highly doubtful because of the limited amount of this metal on our planet and its high cost.3 Intense research and development activity in this field has led to the design of new electrocatalytic materials requiring minimal amounts of such noble metals.4 Recent advances have been reported in the case of the oxygen reduction reaction taking place at the cathode of hydrogen fuel cells, with noble-metal-free materials either based on nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes,5 pyrolyzed mixtures of graphite, phenanthroline and iron salts,6 or cobalt–polypyrrole nanocomposite catalysts.7 Similar efforts are pursued towards the design of new, cheap, robust and efficient electrode materials, namely for water oxidation (eqn (3)) and hydrogen evolution and uptake (eqn (1) and (2)), discussed here.
In order to make water electrolysis practically, environmentally and economically viable, the added energy must be provided by renewable sources of electricity such as for example the most abundant solar energy but also hydraulic, wind and wave energy.8 Provided that prices compete with the current industrial hydrogen production process from fossil fuels (hydrocarbon reforming), this would allow for storing these renewable energetic sources that are in essence intermittent and unequally distributed over the world.
Photocatalytic water splitting using semi-conductor materials
As far as solar energy is concerned and except for thermal processes, the current way to use it (although still expensive and under technological development) is through photovoltaics, which converts photon energy into electricity. This power can be used directly, stored in batteries or used for the generation of chemical fuels such as hydrogen through electrolysis as discussed above. However, direct utilization of sunlight to split water into oxygen and hydrogen would be a major breakthrough for future applications in hydrogen production. Even though visible and UV-light photons carry enough energy to thermodynamically split water (eqn (4)), a direct photocatalytic process (with homolytic cleavage of O–H bonds) is inefficient, mainly because water does not absorb sunlight. It is thus necessary to turn towards a photoelectrochemical process that will combine light-harvesting with a photosensitizer and catalysis of the multielectron reaction. Technological applications of these principles should result in the development of solar cells which are electrochemical devices combining a photoanode on which the oxidation of water occurs as a consequence of sunlight absorption and a cathode where the electrons extracted from water react with protons to generate hydrogen, thus converting photon power directly into a chemical fuel (Fig. 1). The seminal work on that topic was reported by Honda and Fujishima in 1972 with a water splitting cell made from a TiO2 photoanode and a Pt cathode.9 Utilization of simple semiconductors as photosensitizers such as TiO2, with wide band gaps and displaying both valence band edge potential competent for oxygen evolution and conduction band edge potential competent for proton reduction, is challenging, however, since these materials hardly absorb visible light but absorb UV radiation instead. Two solutions have been developed to circumvent this limitation. The first one exploits the properties of other semi-conductor materials with smaller band gaps, such as WO3, Fe2O3 or GaInP2, which overlap with the solar spectrum but in that case the band-gap is not properly positioned for water splitting. In the case of WO3 and Fe2O3 for instance, the potential for the photoexcited electron in the semiconductor is more positive than the potential needed to reduce water to H2 (Fig. 2). By contrast, the photogenerated holes in GaInP2, Si or GaAs are not oxidizing enough to promote oxygen evolution from water at pH 1. As a result, the photoelectrochemical cell should be voltage biased with another photovoltaic device in a tandem cell configuration. The second solution consists in sentitizing TiO2 with molecular photosensitizers—typically ruthenium diimine complexes but first-row transition metal complexes and organic dyes have proved competent for that use—that are covalently grafted at the surface of the oxide.10 Three examples of operating cells are known in the literature. The monolithic photovoltaic-photoelectrochemical device reported by Turner and Khaselev combines a GaInP2/GaAs p/n, p/n photovoltaic cell and two Pt-based active layers (Fig. 3a).11 Rocheleau and colleagues initially designed a similar hybrid-junction photoelectrode configuration, incorporating cheap, environmentally benign and highly-stable O2-evolution photocatalysts, such as Fe2O3 or WO3, deposited on top of a solid-state junction to generate the bias for water reduction on a platinum electrode (Fig. 3b).12 These first examples display quite good efficiencies for energetic conversion (12.4% for the cell reported by Turner and Khaselev11) but are very expensive due to the fabrication of the photovoltaic assembly and the presence of Pt as a catalyst. Platinum-free devices are also developed integrating a multi-junction photovoltaic device based on amorphous silicon, and CoMo (hydrogen evolution)/Fe:NiOx (oxygen evolution) electrocatalytic layers working under basic conditions, though with associated corrosion issues.13 The last example is the so-called tandem-cell developed by Grätzel at EPFL (Switzerland) developing 3.5 mA cm−2 with an overall yield of ∼5% that consists of a WO3/Pt or a Fe2O3/Pt photoelectrochemical cell biased with a Dye Sensitized Solar Cell (Fig. 3c).10 It is important to note that, in the three examples shown in Fig. 3, hydrogen evolution is catalyzed at the surface of a platinum electrode. Platinum is also used to catalyze oxygen evolution, but in the cases of WO3 and Fe2O3 this reaction is not really catalyzed and occurs thanks to the high driving force provided by the very positive potential of the valence band of the oxide material; however, photogenerated valence band holes are kinetically inefficient for abstracting electrons from water because of low conductivity properties that limit their diffusion to the surface.14,15 Recent studies have demonstrated that coating of these materials with a catalytic layer,16 such as the cobalt oxide deposit described by Nocera and coworkers,17 results in a significant reduction of the overvoltage for water photo-oxidation. Spinel-type Co3O4 nanocrystals have also proved very efficient as water oxidation catalysts.18
 Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a photoelectrochemical cell for water splitting. PS stands for a photosensitizer, Cat and Cat′ are catalysts for water oxidation and reduction, respectively, existing in the reduced (R) and oxidized (O) states. 
 Fig. 2  Band positions of several semi-conductor materials in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 1 (green lines represent the upper edge of the valence band whereas the red ones represent the lower edge of the conduction band). The visible spectrum corresponds to energies from 1.56 eV (800 nm) to 3.12 eV (400 nm). 
 Fig. 3  Selected devices for photocatalytic water splitting: (a) Turner and Khaselev's monolithic photoelectrochemical-photovoltaic design,11 (b) Hawaï hybrid planar multijunction photoelectrode,12 and (c) principle of Grätzel's tandem cell.10 
Current research is moving toward the use of materials absorbing in the visible spectrum and being usable for both hydrogen and oxygen evolution.19 CdS or CdSe materials are rather unstable under continuous irradiation.20 Promising materials include nitride21 or oxynitride22 compounds and composite oxides such as In1−xNixTiO4.23 Further combinations of dye-sensitized nanostructured TiO2 layers with nanoparticulate catalysts are developed, namely by the group of Mallouk.24 However in both approaches, noble metal compounds are typically used as catalysts or cocatalyts for hydrogen evolution (Pt) and water oxidation (Pt, RuO2 or IrO2).
Artificial photosynthesis
An alternative solution can be found in natural systems. Water splitting is very efficiently achieved in photosynthetic organisms such as microalgae and cyanobacteria which contain a fascinating protein machinery for light harvesting and water splitting catalysis. This complex system combines molecular photosensitizers for photon capture and charge separation, electron-transfer mediators for long-range electron transfers preventing charge recombination and unique metal-based multielectron catalysts (enzymes) for water oxidation to oxygen and for water reduction to hydrogen. As a consequence, an alternative and emerging approach to address the above issues is molecular electrocatalysis in connection with molecular photochemistry. Molecular catalysts can consist of either purified enzymes (bioelectrocatalysis) or synthetic metal complexes, inspired by these natural systems (bioinspired electrocatalysis).
Bioelectrocatalysis has been applied extensively to the hydrogenase enzymes for the interconversion of water and hydrogen, and to photosystem I, for the observation of light-induced electron flows (photocurrents). So far, the observation of photocurrent or the measurement of redox potential of cofactors using cyclic voltametry25 has been successfully performed on purified and immobilized photosystem II, but no electrocatalytic current related to water oxidation could be observed so far.
The bioinspired electrocatalysis approach has recently emerged as a major topic in bioinorganic chemistry. The design of such mimics has been greatly facilitated by the detailed characterization, at the atomic level, of the active sites of the natural systems, photosystem II26 and hydrogenases.27 Obviously, these active centers are attractive sources of inspiration because of their relative structural simplicity and of their utilization of first-row non-noble transition metals, manganese and calcium for water oxidation, nickel and iron for water reduction, to achieve catalysis. During the very last years it has provided a wealth of very interesting active compounds on which technological developments can be built up. However, in most cases the bio-inspired molecular catalysts have been assayed under conditions which do not give a clear indication of their practical utility in the context of a real electrochemical device. For example, in the case of water oxidation catalysis, the catalytic potential of bioinspired complexes has typically been investigated mostly in homogeneous solution using chemical oxidants and only very rarely electrochemically. In the case of proton reduction catalysis, complexes have been also very often studied in organic solvents because of solubility limitations.
A final obvious aspect regarding water photolysis is light collection. We mentioned above that there is still a need for an electrode material which has the ability to collect the visible portion of the sunlight. Again molecular science may provide original solutions through the development of both inorganic photosensitizers, such as diimine complexes of ruthenium, iridium, rhenium or copper, and organic dyes. Efficient combinations of electrocatalysts with photosensitizers will then yield new photocatalysts.28–30 This field also benefits from all the knowledge in photonics accumulated in the context of dye-sensitized solar cells implying the grafting of molecular photosensitizers on metal-oxide surfaces and related light-driven electron transfers.10 Again bio-inspiration can lead to the design of smart linkers that may favour proton-coupled electron transfers within the system.31
Nevertheless, it appears clearly that the molecular electrocatalysis approach will demonstrate its practical potential, as far as solar and fuel cells are concerned, only through the development of methods for the immobilization of the best molecular electro- and photo-catalysts on cheap electrode materials, either carbon or transparent metal-oxides, and the evaluation of these new original electrode surfaces. In this perspective article we describe some of the very first attempts to design such electrode materials based on molecular photosensitizers and/or catalysts that can be used for water electrolysis and photoelectrolysis. We limit the scope of this article to this process (eqn (4)) and thus exclude catalysis carried out in fuel cells although some aspects regarding hydrogen oxidation will be presented because of the intrinsic reversible activity of hydrogenases. Molecular catalysis for oxygen reduction (eqn (3)) has been thoroughly covered in a number of excellent review articles.32 The examples discussed herein indeed show that the immobilization approach very often results into increased catalytic activities and robustness of the catalytic centers and allows the exploitation of water-insoluble complexes.
Hydrogenases and model complexes
Structure and function of hydrogenases
The metallo-enzymes responsible for hydrogen metabolism in microorganisms are called hydrogenases.33 These enzymes can catalyze both hydrogen uptake (eqn (2)), furnishing the cell with low-potential electrons, and hydrogen evolution (eqn (1)), which re-oxidizes the pool of electron carriers participating in fermentation or photosynthesis. There are two kinds of hydrogen-metabolizing enzymes dealing with electrons and protons: the [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases.27 A third kind, the [Fe]-hydrogenase, is only found in methanogens where it transfers a hydride to methenyl-tetrahydromethanopterin.34 The latter uses a single Fe atom for catalysis, whereas the former two have catalytic dinuclear metal centers in which either one nickel and one iron or two iron atoms are connected through two thiolate bridges. The structures of the metal sites of [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases, derived from detailed crystallographic studies, are shown in Fig. 4. The bridging thiolates have different origins in the two enzymes: they are provided by two cysteine residues in [NiFe]-hydrogenases,35 so that Ni is coordinated by four cysteinates in a unique and non-regular coordination configuration, and by a small organic propanedithiolate ligand in [FeFe]-hydrogenases.36 In the case of the [FeFe]-hydrogenase active site the bridging ligand has been previously proposed to contain a bridgehead nitrogen atom37 and this was recently confirmed by spectroscopic studies.38 In addition, X-ray crystallography and FTIR spectroscopy have shown that the three kinds of hydrogenases are characterized by active sites that have in common a Fe(CO)x unit. In the case of [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases, Fe atoms also bind CN− ligands. What the three-dimensional structures also reveal is the presence of an array of iron–sulfur clusters, distant from each other by less than 15 Å, allowing an electrical communication between the active site and the protein surface where redox partners are expected to bind for accepting (H2 oxidation) or providing (H2 formation) electrons. At this surface a so-called distal cluster is exposed to the solvent and plays a crucial role in connecting the hydrogenase to the redox partners.
 Fig. 4  Structure of the active sites of [FeFe]-hydrogenases in the reduced active state (X is a hydride ligand, a water molecule or a H2 ligand) and of [NiFe]-hydrogenases in the Ni–C state. 
Biomimics and bio-inspired models
The biomimetic work regarding both kind of hydrogenases achieved during the last ten years has been reviewed recently and readers are invited to refer to these articles to see how closely synthetic complexes can reproduce the structural features of an enzyme active site.39–41 To summarize the current situation, more than 50 different dinuclear Ni–Fe biomimetic complexes have been synthesized but the first functional mimics have been Ni–Ru compounds from Ogo's laboratory42,43 and our group (Fig. 5).44 In our laboratory, we recently described the synthesis of another dinuclear mimic of [NiFe] hydrogenases, although containing an organometallic manganese moiety instead of an iron center (Fig. 5),45 that proved functional for H2 evolution from trifluoroacetic acid in DMF.46 Only very recently were catalytically competent dinuclear Ni–Fe compounds reported: Rauchfuss and colleagues reported on the protonation of a Ni(I)–Fe(I) compound, with a P2S2 set around the nickel, (Fig. 5) yielding a stable bridging hydride product and showed that the latter was competent for catalyzing hydrogen evolution from trifluoroacetic acid in CH2Cl2.47 Another nickel–iron model compound was synthesized in our group, with a S4 set of ligands around nickel and a cyclopentadienyl ligand on the iron center. The former mimics the four cysteine residues found at the enzyme active site whereas the latter provides the catalyst with both lower overvoltage for hydrogen evolution and improved stability upon cycling.48
 Fig. 5  Structures of selected functional Ni–Ru,42,44 Ni–Mn45 and Ni–Fe47,48 bio-inspired models of [NiFe]-hydrogenases. 
In contrast, a very large number of diiron complexes have been synthesized and shown to display electrocatalytic activity, also exclusively for proton reduction to hydrogen,41,49 although stoichiometric hydrogen activation was recently reported for a [FeFe]-hydrogenase mimic containing an azadithiolate bridging ligand.50 Unfortunately, so far, these dinuclear biomimetic compounds electrocatalyze hydrogen evolution from non-aqueous protons in organic solvents (DMF, CH2Cl2, CH3CN) with overvoltages in the 0.5–1 V range and further work is needed to address this limitation.
A variety of square-planar nickel and cobalt complexes, often containing macrocyclic ligands, have also been shown to catalyze proton electroreduction. As far as cobalt complexes are concerned, representative examples are from the porphyrin,51 phthalocyanine52 and poly-oxime series.53,54 Nickel-based H2-evolving mononuclear catalysts have been recently reviewed.40 The exquisite work by DuBois and DuBois, recently reviewed,55 has shown that active complexes could be produced by combining features of both [NiFe]- and [FeFe]-hydrogenases. Mononuclear nickel bisdiphosphine complexes (Fig. 6) with pendant proximal bases (amines), as found in the bridging azapropanedithiolate ligand of [FeFe]-active center, have been shown to catalyze either the reduction of protons (in the form of triflic acid or protonated DMF) to hydrogen or the electrooxidation of hydrogen in the presence of triethylamine with small overvoltages, in the range of 0.1–0.2 V. When correctly positioned close to the nickel atom the basic sites facilitate intra- and inter-molecular proton transfers and the coupling of proton and electron transfer processes, resulting in a dramatic decrease of the overvoltages. This is the only molecular catalytic platform reported to electrocatalyze the H+/H2 interconversion in solution in one or the other direction depending on the nature of the substituents on the phosphorus and nitrogen atoms of the diphosphine ligands. The importance of a basic site in the second coordination sphere has also been raised from studies of mononuclear cobalt complexes (Fig. 6) with the same diphosphine ligands56 or with a diimine–dioxime ligand providing an open oxime bridge susceptible to proton exchange and displaying electrocatalytic activity during proton reduction.54
 Fig. 6  Structure of homogeneous nickel55 and cobalt-based54,56 H2-evolving catalysts with positioned proton relays. 
Hydrogenase-based electrodes for electrolysis
There have been some interesting reports dealing with the application of hydrogenases to replace Pt, since the demonstration by Armstrong and colleagues that hydrogenases adsorbed on carbon electrodes57 are comparable in activity to Pt nanoparticles.58 We would like to draw the attention of the readers here to the fact that special care should be taken when comparing the performances of such hydrogenase-modified electrodes, in particular to those of Pt-based electrodes. Indeed current densities often do not directly correlate with the catalytic efficiency or the surface density of the grafted/adsorbed catalyst (enzymes or Pt nanoparticles). First, the amount of active enzyme in the sample is very difficult to estimate due to the high instability of these materials (see above) and it is likely that a substantial amount of enzyme is inactivated during the grafting procedure. Second, the current density values reported are not measured under similar conditions. In most cases, the kinetic of the reaction is limited by the mass transport of the substrate (H2 or protons) so that the observation of similar catalytic currents for platinum or hydrogenase-coated electrode does not imply that both catalysts have similar nominal activity. The right way to compare the two systems requires the determination of the maximum current density obtained in the absence of any mass-transfer limitation. Such a value can be obtained from a Koutecky–Levich plot analysis. In the first report by Armstrong and colleagues, such an analysis yields a maximum current density of about 4 mA cm−2 for hydrogen uptake.57 In the following text, however, we will quote the current density values reported in the literature even if they mainly correspond to mass-transport-limited conditions. Such values indeed give an indication of the performances that can be expected for such an electrode working in a technological device in which mass transport is often limiting.
The advantages of hydrogenase enzymes in bioelectrocatalysis reside in the very low overpotential, the great substrate specificity and their very high activity. For example, the highest H2 production activities are associated with [FeFe]-hydrogenases, with values in excess of 1500 turnovers per second. The main disadvantages of hydrogenases as electrocatalysts reside in: (i) their size, which results in very low density of catalytic centers on surfaces, thus low current densities; (ii) the low accessibility of the active sites, which are buried inside the protein, making difficult to achieve a good electronic coupling to the electrode in some cases; (iii) the cost for their production that in addition can hardly be scaled up; (iv) their great sensitivity with regard to traces of oxygen, which makes them difficult to use in practical situations. This last issue is currently addressed by searching for the most resistant ones from the biodiversity and by producing hydrogenase mutants with increased stability through site-directed mutagenesis.59 For technological applications, so far, [NiFe]-hydrogenases are generally favoured over [FeFe]-hydrogenases because their reaction with O2 is mostly reversible. The ease and rapidity for recovery depend on the conditions under which they get inactivated since two different oxidized states can be formed, either ready (Ni–A) or unready (Ni–B) with different resistance to reductive activation. O2-resistant enzymes are those getting exclusively in the ready form that is smoothly reactivated in a few minutes under hydrogen. The molecular basis for O2 tolerance in these hydrogenases is not yet understood but current investigations addressing this issue might open new possibilities regarding the use of hydrogenases in technological applications: such O2-tolerant [NiFe]-hydrogenases, as those isolated from Ralstonia species, can be used as the anode (H2 oxidation) electrocatalyst in a fuel cell functioning in the presence of air (less than 4% H2) or as an electrocatalyst for H2 production in the presence of air provided H2, an inhibitor of the reaction, is continuously removed.60 Promising results have also been obtained with the [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from Desulfomicrobium baculatum61 and with the native [NiFe]-hydrogenase Hyd-1 from Escherichia coli.62 Finally, as shown below, in some cases enzyme stability and lifetime seem to increase upon attachment to a surface. For example, De Lacey and collaborators have reported a stable catalytic response over 30 days using an electrode covered with carbon nanotubes to which a hydrogenase has been covalently attached.63
In the following we summarize some of the most representative and rare results regarding the use of hydrogenases as electrocatalysts for H2 evolution and oxidation. In any case, this strategy implies that convenient methods for covalent or non-covalent attachment of the enzyme to the electrode material are set up, so that the highest surface coverage, electron coupling, enzyme stability and current densities are obtained.
Direct adsorption of the enzyme onto the electrode
The simplest method, extensively developed by Armstrong's group, involves direct adsorption of hydrogenases onto freshly polished pyrolytic graphite electrodes: a film of enzyme is adsorbed on the electrode surface with electroactive coverage of 10−12 mol cm−2 such that the enzymes cycle while directly exchanging electrons with the electrode. Depending on the surface electrostatic potential of the enzyme a favourable orientation is spontaneously obtained, allowing direct interfacial electron transfer to occur efficiently without the need for a mediator.64 This is because the active sites are electrically connected to the surface of the protein through the array of iron-sulfur clusters, the distal one lying close to that surface. This is however not always the case: for instance the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from D. desulfovibrio does not adsorb in a favourable orientation on negatively charged carboxy-functionalized carbon nanotubes.65 Some previous reports suggest that addition of a polyamine coadsorbate such as polymyxin B sulfate or poly-L-lysine may stabilize the enzyme film and lead to increased catalytic responses, as shown in the case of [NiFe]-hydrogenases from A. vinosum and D. gigas and [FeFe]-hydrogenase from D. vulgaris (Hildenborough).66,67
These electrodes have been essentially used to study fundamental aspects of the enzyme electrochemical and redox activity.67,68 However this method is not appropriate for technological applications, in particular because of long-term instability: leaching of the enzyme is observed and the electrodes are stable at best for some hours when dropped in pure electrolyte solutions.63 However it is worth mentioning the recent work from Armstrong's group which took advantage of the O2-resistance of the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from Ralstonia species, R. metallidurans and R. eutropha, to study H2 production using protein film electrochemistry.69 Proton reduction to H2 is observed at pH 5.5 and 40 °C under a N2 atmosphere containing 21% O2, with a turnover frequency of 70 s−1, a value thus only slightly smaller than that of fully functional enzymes, and without any significant overvoltage. These data provide the very first experimental evidence that a hydrogenase-based electrode can be used as an electrocatalytic material for water reduction to H2 in the presence of oxygen. Other O2-tolerant enzymes, such as the heat resistant hydrogenase from Aquifex aeolicus, a H2-oxidizing, microaerophilic, obligate chemolithoautotrophic microorganism growing at 85 °C,70 the [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from D. baculatum61 or [NiFe]-hydrogenases from E. coli62 should be considered.
Recently a very active hydrogenase-based electrode, prepared by adsorption of the [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum onto pyrolytic graphite edge and carbon felt electrode surfaces, was used as the cathode in a photoelectrochemical biofuel cell (Fig. 7).71 In cyclic voltammograms this cathode showed current densities accounting for 40% of those obtained at a platinum electrode. At the anode, made of porphyrin-sensitized TiO2 nanoparticles supported on a transparent conductive F-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate, illumination leads to a photoexcited porphyrin singlet state which relaxes via electron transfer to the TiO2 conduction band. Whereas the ground state porphyrin is regenerated during reduction by NADH, the electrons provide reducing equivalents to the cathode where hydrogenase catalyzes proton reduction to H2. Similar photocurrents and hydrogen production rates were observed in this cell using either hydrogenase or platinum cathodes.
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of Moore's photoelectrochemical cells71 for H2 evolution using surface-immobilized hydrogenases as catalyst. 
Direct adsorption onto graphite particles has also been shown as a means to couple hydrogenases with another enzymatic system such as nitrate or fumarate reductases72 or carbon-monoxide deshydrogenase (CODH)73 so as to achieve hydrogen production from organic substrates or CO (water gas shift reaction). Finally it is worth mentioning that hydrogenases spontaneously assemble with carbon nanotubes (CNTs) forming biohybrids, from which catalytically active Langmuir–Blodgett films can be prepared for example on indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes.74 The preparation of such biohybrids has been reported for [NiFe]-hydrogenases from T. roseopersicina,74D. fructosovorans65 and A. aeolicus75 and for [FeFe]-hydrogenases.76 In the case of the A. aeolicus enzyme catalyzed H2 oxidation, only direct electron transfer (without the need for any mediator) was obtained with a ten-fold higher catalytic current density in the case of stationary CNT-coated electrodes as compared to bare electrodes, reaching a value of 1 mA cm−2 at 60 °C. Here again, such a current density value is clearly limited by the mass transport. Unfortunately the active film proved quite unstable with a marked decrease of the catalytic current with time (up to 50–70% after 1 h at 60 °C), due to a combination of enzyme release and denaturation rather than to an instability of the CNT coating. Preincubation of CNTs and hydrogenase before adsorption to the electrode may slightly result in enhanced stability.75
Entrapment of hydrogenases in polymers
A number of reports describe methods to adsorb hydrogenases onto carbon electrodes modified with polymers. For example Morozov et al. describe entrapment of [NiFe]-hydrogenases from Thiocapsa roseopersicina,77–79D. fructosovorans,77D. baculatum79 or Lamprobacter modestogalofillum79 within viologen-containing polypyrrole films. These modified electrodes are active for both hydrogen evolution and uptake. However, the activity is strongly biased by the nature of the gaseous atmosphere: only weak H2 production currents are measured under hydrogen. By contrast, high H2 oxidation currents (1.2–1.7 mA cm−2) are recorded at an overpotential of 200 mV.79 Such electrodes are almost completely covered with hydrogenases (45 pmol cm−2) and all the enzyme molecules are properly oriented to achieve electrocatalysis: the turnover frequencies determined for the immobilized enzymes are in the 150–220 s−1 range which is comparable to the values obtained for the same enzymes functioning under homogeneous conditions. Activities have been shown to be comparable to those of Pt-based electrodes, which indicate that nearly limiting performance characteristics for bioelectrocatalysis under mass-transport control are reached. This strategy may result in very stable electrode materials which can be functional over a period of several months.80 All these studies thus demonstrate that entrapment of hydrogenases into a conductive matrix provide enzyme electrodes with great potential for technological fuel cell applications. Hydrogenases, such as the [FeFe]-hydrogenase from D. vulgaris can also be incorporated with methyl viologen into clay films at the surface of carbon electrodes.81 Alternatively, the electron mediator can be incorporated within a electropolymerized film deposited together with the clay.82
Covalent attachment of the enzyme to the electrode
Although the electrode materials discussed above lead to high catalytic currents, they suffer from the drawbacks of enzyme instability on the electrode and the lack of control of the immobilization process. In order to improve enzyme film stability and to correctly orientate the electron-transfer sites with regard to the electrode surface for optimal electron coupling and electron transfer efficiency, methods for site-specific covalent attachment of hydrogenases to surfaces have been proposed. One of the most elegant approach and remarkable success in this direction has been obtained by De Lacey and coworkers. Their strategy takes advantage of the existence of a dipole moment in the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from D. gigas arising from the presence of several glutamic residues at the protein surface where the distal [FeS] cluster is bound (Fig. 8).83 Since this distal cluster is located in the negative region of the dipole it is thus possible to control the orientation of the enzyme molecules by electrostatic interactions, as described in the following.
 Fig. 8  Covalent grafting of the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from D. gigas onto pyrolytic graphite electrode via an amide linkage.63 
First, a pyrolytic graphite electrode (PGE) is modified by a layer of 4-aminophenyl groups, in order to link the enzyme to the surface covalently through formation of amide linkages (carbodiimide or N-hydroxysuccinimide promoted coupling) between the glutamates and the amine groups. Functionalization of the electrode has been achieved using the efficient method developed by Savéant and co-workers.85 This implies the one-electron reduction of aryldiazonium salts generating aryl radicals which react with the carbon surface to form covalent C–C bonds (Fig. 9).86 This reaction can be carried out either electrochemically87 as described above, eventually with in situ formation of the diazonium salt from the reaction of the aniline precursor with nitrite derivatives, or in the bulk with spontaneous thermal grafting on nanotubes in the presence of an electron donor (in some cases, the CNTs can provide the electrons required for the grafting reaction).88 When a nitro-phenyldiazonium salt is used, transformation of the NO2 groups of the grafted aryl species into NH2 groups can be achieved by electrochemical reduction on the electrode (Fig. 9).84 In agreement with a pKa value of 6.9 for these NH2 groups, correct orientation of the hydrogenase and amide formation is obtained at pH 6, when the surface is protonated and thus positively charged and can selectively interact with the negative side of the enzyme dipole where the electron-shuttling distal cluster is found, and not at pH 7.6 when the surface is neutral (Fig. 8). The resulting enzyme carbon electrode was shown to be catalytically active during H2 activation by cyclic voltammetry and to be highly stable: 90% of the initial catalytic current was maintained after 1 week’s continuous measurement under 1 atm H2 at room temperature.83
 Fig. 9  Functionalization of conductive surfaces by an amino-polyphenylene layer via diazonium salt reduction.84 
More recently a search for highly developed surface area electrodes led to the emergence of CNTs as suitable components of molecular electrode materials.89 Indeed CNTs display high electrical conductivity, unique chemical and mechanical properties and nanometric dimensions. Integration of hydrogenases can be carried out either by direct non specific adsorption onto CNTs (see above) or by covalent attachment. De Lacey and coworkers have exploited the methodology described above to build original and efficient CNT-based enzyme electrodes for H2 oxidation.63 They reported the fabrication of a gold electrode on which a carpet of vertically aligned multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) were grown by chemical vapour deposition of acetylene (1.5 mg cm−2 of carbon) and then functionalized through the reduction of a diazonium salt, under conditions controlled for creating a layer of aminophenyl groups. The electroactive surface area of CNT-coated electrodes was found to be increased by a factor of 50 as compared to a polished pyrolytic graphite electrode. Again covalent functionalization with [NiFe]-hydrogenase from D. gigas was achieved by formation of amide bonds, under pH conditions allowing an optimal orientation of the enzyme to favour electronic coupling between the surface and the enzyme. These electrodes display high current densities (the maximum value in the absence of mass-transfer limitation is estimated to ∼4 mA cm−2 at −0.1 V vs. NHE under H2 atmosphere). For comparison only 0.1 mA cm−2 current density values were obtained with hydrogenases immobilized by the same method on a polished PGE electrode. This last figure is at variance with the values (∼4 mA cm−2) obtained by Armstrong and colleagues using chemically adsorbed hydrogenases, indicating that the grafting procedure may be damaging to the enzyme. Cathodic H2 evolution currents could also be detected at potentials below −500 mV vs. NHE and were found to increase under N2 atmosphere. In general H2 is severely inhibiting enzymatic proton reduction in the case of [NiFe]-hydrogenases. It is interesting to note that inhibition of the hydrogenase-modified MWCNT gold electrode by H2 is much less effective, possibly as a consequence of depletion of H2 concentration within the forest of MWCNTs. Finally these electrodes also display a remarkable stability, greatly increased with respect to carbon electrodes on which the hydrogenase was directly adsorbed: a stable current is reported to persist for over 1 month for the former as compared to complete loss of activity after 6 days for the latter. They thus provide an interesting material for the development of miniaturized biosensors and of small scale hydrogen fuel cells.
Alternatively, hydrogenases can be covalently attached to CNTs decorated with carboxy functions through the establishment of amide bonds with proteic residues bearing amine functions.65 Whether efficient and direct electron transfer between the CNTs and hydrogenase can occur here again depend on the correct orientation of the enzyme with the proximal iron–sulfur cluster close to the surface.
Electrodes modified with H2-evolving synthetic molecular catalysts
With the same objective of designing cheap and robust carbon-based electrodes for H2 production or oxidation, a number of groups have extended their studies of H2-evolving metal catalysts, summarized above, to their immobilization on surfaces and characterization of these novel materials. In general these complexes display much lower catalytic activities than hydrogenases themselves but they provide a solution to several limitations of the enzyme. They are much less difficult to prepare and thus are less expensive materials; they show, under certain conditions, larger stabilities and in particular they can be handled in air which is critical to their exploitation in practical technological devices; their smallest size allow more catalytic material to be bound to the electrode surface and better electron coupling between the electrode and the active metal site.
As discussed above in the case of the hydrogenases, those projects require that efficient methods are developed to achieve an efficient and stable grafting of the molecular catalyst to the electrode surface. The different strategies reported in the literature are listed below and concern both standard carbon surfaces, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and semi-conductor materials.
Entrapment of the catalyst within a polymeric material
Originally, Spiro and Kellett reported that stable catalytic materials can be simply obtained by incorporating positively charged cobalt porphyrin complexes into a Nafion film laid onto a glassy carbon electrode, however with a low electroactivity because of the poor electron-transfer characteristics of Nafion films.90 When coated on a bare pyrolytic graphite electrode, neutral [Co(TPP)] (Fig. 10) incorporated in a Nafion film can reduce protons but only with a large overpotential (−0.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl; pH = 1) and a quite low 70 h−1 turnover frequency value.91 Better catalytic activity (2.105 h−1 TOF) was observed with an applied potential of −0.90 vs. Ag/AgCl and at pH = 1 for a cobalt phthalocyanine (Fig. 10) incorporated in a poly(4-vinylpyridine-co-styrene) film deposited on a graphite electrode.52 Here again the catalytic proton reduction was limited by the electron transfer within the matrix.
 Fig. 10  Selected cobalt,52,90,91 iron92 and rhodium-based93 H2-evolving catalysts that have been immobilized onto electrode surfaces by incorporation into a polymeric support layer. 
Electrodes can also be coated with conducting polymers obtained via an electropolymerization process. Electropolymerization of [Cp*Rh(L)Cl](BF4) (L = bis-4,4′-bispyrrol-1-ylmethyl)methoxycarbonyl]-2,2′-bipyridyl) leads to a stable film capable of proton electroreduction at −0.31 V vs. NHE at pH below 4 (Fig. 10). Quantitative current efficiency corresponding to 353 turnovers was observed during a 14 h electrolysis experiment at pH 1 using a carbon-felt electrode coated with the electropolymerized rhodium complex.93 More recently, an electropolymeric material incorporating a hydrogenase model compound was provided by Pickett and coworkers.94 To achieve that goal a dinuclear thiolate-bridged Fe complex containing CO ligands, thus combining many structural features of the active site of [FeFe]-hydrogenases, was synthesized using a dithiolate bridging ligand carrying a nucleophilic group. This complex was reacted with a glassy carbon electrode coated with a functionalized polypyrrole film, containing electrophilic groups (Fig. 11). This material has been shown to electrocatalyze proton reduction at potentials slightly more positive than those for the complex-free polymer, however still with a too large overvoltage for practical applications. A similar strategy has been developed by DuBois and coll. with a mononuclear Ni complex with diphosphine ligands carrying electropolymerizable thiophene groups (Fig. 11).95 While the molecular complex displays interesting electrocatalytic properties (limited overvoltage of 280 mV and turnover frequency of 56 s−1) when assayed in solution, the electropolymerized film obtained by electrooxidation of the complex is not electrocatalytically competent, for still unknown reasons.
 Fig. 11  Bio-inspired complexes immobilized onto electrode surfaces by covalent incorporation into an electro-deposited polypyrole (top)94 or polythiophene (bottom) film.95 
The immobilization of synthetic analogues of [FeFe]-hydrogenase active site on polyethyleneglycol-rich polystyrene beads, via reaction of the amine termini of PEG chains with carboxylates incorporated into the bridging dithiolate ligand, has been described by Darensbourg and colleagues However, the PEG environment facilitated photochemical CO loss and acid conditions resulted in release of degraded complexes from the material.96
Covalent attachment to electrode materials
As discussed above in the case of hydrogenases, covalent grafting is the method of choice for the design of stable electrocatalytic materials. Spiro and Kellett initially reported covalent grafting of a series of cobalt porphyrins on glassy carbon electrodes via an amide link with surface carboxylic acid groups. These electrodes displayed high activity for H2 production associated with low overvoltage in neutral aqueous solution but were found quite fragile: film instability or disrupting processes at either film–electrode or film–electrolyte interfaces were postulated.90
Similar methodologies have been used by Gloagen and colleagues97 to graft models of [FeFe]-hydrogenase active sites on highly ordered pyrolytic graphite electrode surfaces. The electrode was first polished in the presence of ammonia, resulting in the functionalization with amino groups.98 Then a diiron complex with a dithiolate bridge derivatized with an activated ester group was anchored but again no electrocatalytic activity was observed using the grafted electrode.
The electroreduction of diazonium salts (Fig. 9) proved to be an efficient alternative method to form covalent linkages between a model compound and a carbon electrode. This was applied by Darensbourg's group (Fig. 12a),99 Gloaguen and colleagues97 (Fig. 12b) and ourselves100 (Fig. 12c) to dinuclear Fe complexes modelling [FeFe]-hydrogenase active sites: dithiolate-bridged diiron complexes with activated succinimide ester groups have been grafted on glassy carbon electrodes modified with either aminophenyl or p-(2-aminoethyl)phenyl groups. Unfortunately, these materials displayed very weak electrocatalytic responses because of a great instability, due to the loss of CO ligands in the reduced state of the catalyst as shown by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and ATR-IR studies.100
 Fig. 12  Covalent immobilisation of diiron mimics via an amide linkage from three different groups: (a) ref. 99, (b) ref. 97 and (c) ref. 100. 
A major breakthrough was recently reported in our laboratory and Palacin's laboratory in Saclay (France) in 2009 regarding novel Ni-based CNT-coated electrodes with remarkable electrocatalytic activities both for H2 evolution and uptake.101 The major findings will be discussed in detail in the following section. Here one would like to mention that the molecular Ni complex used in this study was efficiently covalently attached to MWCNTs also using the diazonium strategy for functionalization of the CNTs. Clearly diazonium salt reduction appears as an increasingly popular method to functionalize carbon-based materials, and in particular CNTs, since it allows to decorate the surface with a variety of chemical functions such as carboxylate derivatives, amine, azide or alkyne.84,102 It is, however, important to note that other popular synthetic routes to functionalized MWCNTs are based on the reactivity of surface carboxyl groups.103,104 CNTs are first oxidized with nitric acid to create carboxylic groups on their surfaces (Fig. 13a). Coupling and anchoring of the desired molecule is then performed by amidation, esterification, Friedel–Crafts reactions or click chemistry.105 These routes, however, suffer from many drawbacks: (i) during oxidation MWCNTs are shortened and this can make recovery of the catalyst more difficult; (ii) the oxidation generates other reactive groups which can lead to undesirable side-reactions (weak selectivity, catalyst poisoning) and (iii) the oxidation modifies the electron π-system and then may modify the electrical conductivity of CNTs. This explains why alternative methods are avidly searched for. Alternatively azide groups can be attached to a carbon surface through its reaction with azide iodine (Fig. 13b).106 Further functionalization is carried out using surface azide–alkyne cycloaddition reaction catalyzed by Cu2+ to form a 1,2,3-triazole linkage with excellent stability. As an example, ferrocene was successfully grafted onto CNTs surface by this method.107 We would also like to mention two other methods which deserve consideration. The oldest one is based on the exploitation of the Prato reaction which involves 1,3-dipolar cycloaddition of azomethine ylides, thermally generated in situ by condensation of aminoacids and aldehydes, forming pyrrolidine rings, as a powerful way for functionalizing and solubilizing CNTs (Fig. 13c).103 This has for example been used for grafting phthalocyanines, which are aromatic macrocycles with remarkable high extinction coefficients in the red/near infrared region, an important part of the solar spectrum, and exceptional photostability, onto SWCTs.108 Very recently a novel approach was proposed for the synthesis of MWCNT-grafted amino groups (Fig. 13d), involving modification of existing structural defects of the MWCNTs. Indeed the large number of chemically reactive vacancies and sp3 carbons can be used for the covalent attachment of desired molecules onto sidewalls by C–C coupling reactions. This method involves first a reaction of MWCNTs with an excess of butyl lithium, a strong base and a good nucleophile, which results in deprotonation (formation of C–Li bonds) and carbometalation (addition of BuLi). The second step involves an electrophilic attack of a bromoalkylamine. This one-pot reaction is fast and results in high coverage of functional groups.109
 Fig. 13  Useful chemical pathways for the functionalization of CNTs: (a) ref. 103 and 104, (b) ref. 106, (c) ref. 103 and (d) ref. 109. 
Immobilization of molecular complexes by π-stacking
Among the available noncovalent CNTs functionalization approaches, the π–π stacking of ligands on the nanotube surface is found to be a viable approach. Pyrene derivatives are well known for their ability to adsorb onto graphite via a π–π stacking interaction. This has been extensively used to graft molecules including proteins and metal complexes on CNTs and modify their properties.110 This methodology, with pyrene groups on the ligand serving for the interaction with the surface of the CNTs, has also been exploited for preparing supramolecular CNT–fullerene hybrids which displayed charge separation upon irradiation, as the result of electron transfer from the nanotube to the fullerene, and thus demonstrating the potential of these materials in light harvesting applications.111 We also successfully used this strategy for the immobilization of DuBois nickel bisdiphosphine H2-evolving catalysts on CNTs (see below). The obtained catalyst-CNTs hybrid materials are however less robust due to desorption of the complexes from CNTs surface when assayed in organic solvents in which they are soluble.
A Ni-based electrode material with exceptional activity for H2 oxidation/production
As stated above, we recently exploited the outstanding catalytic properties and synthetic versatility of DuBois complexes to evaluate the potential of hydrogenase bioinspired catalysts as heterogeneized electrode materials for applications in electrolyzers or fuel cells. This led us to synthesize an analogue of DuBois complexes, namely 1(BF4)2 (Fig. 14), in which activated ester functionalities were introduced. An amidation reaction then afforded covalent attachment of the catalyst (Fig. 15) with carbon nanotubes previously decorated with amine groups at their surface through electrochemical reduction of the 4-(2-aminoethyl)phenyldiazonium salt (Fig. 14).112
 Fig. 14  Electrografting of amine groups on MWCNTs and post-functionalization with complex 1(BF4)2 through amide links.101 This is a simplified representation of the structure of the material for sake of clarity: the number of phenylene residues is indeed arbitrary and attachment of the nickel complex to two or more surface amine groups is not excluded. 
 Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the structure and reactivity of the bio-inspired H2-evolving nickel catalyst grafted on a carbon nanotube.101 Electrons are exchanged between the carbon nanotube and the Ni centres where H+ is reduced to H2 or H2 oxidized to H+. 
Deposition of these electroactive Ni-functionalized carbon nanotubes onto a gas diffusion layer, developed for proton exchange membrane (PEM) applications and made of carbon fibers, and coating with Nafion generated a cheap, stable, air-resistant electrocatalytic material with unique performances especially under the strongly acidic conditions required in the expanding PEM technology. Hydrogen indeed evolves from aqueous sulfuric acid solution with very low overvoltage (<20 mV) and exceptional stability (>100 000 turnovers). Interestingly, this Pt-free catalyst is also very efficient for hydrogen oxidation under the same conditions with current densities similar to those observed for hydrogenase-based materials (1–2 mA cm−2) under mass-transport limitation. The maximum current density that can be measured in the absence of such limitation (i.e. using a rotating disk electrode on which the catalytic material has been deposited) reach 40 mA cm−2. The latter property was completely unexpected from solution studies and shows how modification of the distant environment of a metal complex, say its third coordination sphere, may also allow one to tune its catalytic properties. The molecular catalyst in this material is located at the crossroads of the three interpenetrated networks allowing percolation of protons (the Nafion membrane), hydrogen (the pores in the gas diffusion layer) and electrons (the carbon fibers of the gas diffusion layer relayed by the conducting carbon nanotubes). In a way, even if it is not as well defined as in the protein, the catalyst environment in this membrane–electrode assembly reproduces that found in the active sites of hydrogenases buried into the polypeptidic framework but connected to the surface of the protein via a gas diffusion channel, a network of hydrogen-bonded amino-acids for proton transport and the array of electron-transferring iron–sulfur clusters. We should, however, recognise that this design emerged from the PEM technology and was not bio-inspired, even though it would be tempting to pretend so.
As a result of this finding and to the best of our knowledge, this has been the first report of a molecular-engineered and noble-metal-free electrode material that is capable of achieving hydrogen evolution/oxidation with little or no overvoltage (Fig. 15).
Very recently, we have also prepared pyrene derivatives of such nickel bisdiphosphine complexes (Fig. 16) displaying similar electrocatalytic activities. Immobilisation of these complexes onto CNTs, deposited on gas diffusion layers, is practically a much easier method than the covalent grafting as described above. Interestingly, surface catalyst loading can be easily tailored by varying the amount of CNTs deposited on the electrode. For example, a catalyst surface concentration as high as 8 × 10−9 mol cm−2 was obtained with a CNTs deposit of 0.2 mg cm−2. For comparison the covalent method relying on diazonium electroreduction followed by an amidation post-functionalisation step affords a limited surface coverage of 1.5 × 10−9 mol cm−2.113 Furthermore, when stacked onto CNTs the nickel bisdiphosphine complexes show catalytic performances comparable with those displayed by the complexes covalently attached to CNTs. We thus believe that this methodology will be useful to elaborate more efficient electrocatalytic materials.
 Fig. 16  Schematic structure of nickel(II) bisdiphosphine complex containing four pyrene π-stacking anchor sites. 
Photocatalytic H2-evolving systems and photocathode design
Artificial photosynthesis relies on the coupling of photosensitizers, harvesting light and promoting charge separation, with catalysts using the photogenerated charges to drive chemical reactions. Often these systems are assayed under homogeneous conditions, with the reducing or oxidizing equivalents provided by sacrificial reagents. While early achievements in this field have been made with multi-component systems where photosensitizers and catalysts are free in solution, a series of supramolecular photocatalytic H2-evolving systems have been recently reported based on the assembly of either photosystem I and hydrogenase or inorganic photosensitizers and bio-inspired catalysts.
Photocatalytic bio-constructs
Goldbeck and collaborators have used a dithiol ligand to connect a [4Fe–4S] cluster of Photosystem I directly to the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster of the [FeFe]-hydrogenase from C. acetobutylicum. The complex is able to use ascorbate as the sacrificial electron source and produce hydrogen under illumination.114 A similar system (Fig. 17) was constructed by Heberle and colleagues using the membrane-bound hydrogenase from R. eutropha H16 fused with an extrinsic subunit (PsaE) of an histidine-tagged form of PS I. This system has been immobilized at the surface of a nickel-functionalized gold electrode through a nickel His–Tag interaction. When this electrode is poised at −0.09 V vs. NHE, so as to reduce the soluble electron carrier N-methylphenazonium methyl sulfate (PMS), and under visible illumination (λmax = 700 nm), photocurrents are observed (85 nA cm−2), 30% of which could be assigned to hydrogen evolution.115
 Fig. 17  Structure of the biochemical H2-evolving photoelectrode designed by Heberle and coworkers.115 
In a slightly different approach Armstrong and colleagues adsorbed the [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase from D. baculatum, a very efficient H2 producer and rather O2-resistant enzyme, onto a thin film of nanocrystalline TiO2, sensitized by a dye (a light-absorbing Ru-tris-diimine complex in which a bipyridine ligand contains phosphonic acid groups providing a stable chemical linkage to Ti atoms) and deposited on a conducting ITO-coated glass support (Fig. 18).116 Irradiation with visible-light in the presence of a sacrificial electron donor provided an efficient generation of H2, with initial turnover frequency of 50 s−1 and turnover numbers of 10 000 and 100 based on hydrogenase and photosensitizer, respectively after 8 h irradiation. However some photoinstability of the system is observed with time. Similarly, the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from Thiocapsa roseopersicina, adsorbed on CdS particles which function as the photosensitizer, catalyzes formate decomposition into H2, CO and CO2.117
 Fig. 18  Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using surface-immobilized hydrogenases as catalyst.116 
Synthetic H2-evolving photocatalytic systems
The last 5 years have seen the growing development of synthetic supramolecular photocatalytic assemblies for hydrogen evolution118 combining a photosensitizing unit (a metal–diimine complex) and a H2-evolving catalyst. However, the first system using non noble transition metal catalysts, in that case cobaloximes, has only been reported by our group in 2008 (Fig. 19).29,30,119 Such assemblies display activities far superior to those of the previously known photocatalytic systems, based quite exclusively on noble metals such as platinum as H2-evolving catalysts. However, none has yet been immobilized on surfaces. Until very recently, the only systems for hydrogen photoproduction based on heterogeneized functional molecular H2-evolving catalysts use semi-conductors for light harvesting and charge separation: coating of a p-type silicon material with conducting polypyrrole covalently functionalized with [1.1]ferrocenophane (Fig. 10) allowed the design of a H2-evolving photocathode: under illumination, the voltage photogenerated within the silicon layer allows proton reduction to occur with an underpotential of 300 mV, i.e. the proton reduction occurs at a potential 300 mV more positive than the standard apparent potential of the H+/H2 couple.92 Kölle and Grätzel have reported on a {Cp*Rh(bipy)} catalyst grafted on TiO2 particles via carboxylate anchors, catalyzing H2 evolution under UV-light in the presence of sacrificial electron donors.120
 Fig. 19  Structure of Ru-based supramolecular photocatalysts for light-driven hydrogen production.30,119 
A similar approach has been recently reported by Nann, Pickett and coworkers to build a H2-evolving photoelectrode (Fig. 20). Nanocrystals of InP, a semiconductive material absorbing a significant part of the visible spectrum, have been deposited, and connected through interactions with 1,4-benzenedithiolate, on a gold electrode using a layer-by-layer procedure. [Fe2(μ-S)2(CO)6] has then been adsorbed as a H2-evolving catalyst on this material and photocurrents (∼250 nA cm−2), associated with H2 evolution from neutral aqueous solution, could be measured under illumination with 395 nm LED, while the electrode was poised at −500 mV vs. Ag/AgCl, thus 250 mV more positive than the standard potential of the H+/H2 couple.121
 Fig. 20  Structure of the H2-evolving photocathode based on InP nanocrystals designed by Nann, Pickett and coworkers.121 
Photosystem II and model complexes
In Nature the photo-driven oxidation of water is catalyzed by Photosystem II present in photosynthetic organisms. This multi-subunit membrane-associated system is much too complex and unstable to be exploited to build photoanodes for water electrolysis in technological devices. However, a brief summary of its structural and functional features might be worthwhile in the context of this perspective article. During the first steps of the process, absorption of a photon of visible light (λ = 680 nm) by photopigments (chlorophylls) and immediate charge separation result in one side in the reduction of quinones and in the other side in the formation of a very strong oxidant (P680+ with E0 = 1.2 V vs. NHE). The latter serves to abstract (through a long-range proton-coupled electron transfer) electrons from a unique metal cluster, which has the potential to accumulate, one by one, 4 oxidizing equivalents. This cluster is responsible for the binding of two molecules of water and their oxidation to molecular oxygen and is thus called the oxygen-evolving center (OEC). A huge effort has been devoted to characterize this cluster spectroscopically, structurally and functionally.26 Excellent review articles, describing how our understanding of this catalyst has progressed, most often with controversies, are available.122 In summary, even though the structure of the cluster is incompletely established, the most recent evidence strongly suggests that it is constituted of a mixture of manganese and calcium ions in a Mn4Ca stoichiometry, likely in the arrangement of a Mn3Ca cubane where ions are bridged by oxo groups, with a fourth manganese ion linked to this cluster. The linking mode is still a matter of debate and investigation and several models are available in the literature: one in which the fourth manganese is connected to an μ3-oxo ligand of the Mn3Ca cubane and one in which it is connected to a Mn ion of this cubane through carboxylato and oxo bridges.122
In Fig. 21 di- and tetra- Mn-based synthetic compounds are displayed which have been extensively studied as models of the OEC.123 It should be made clear that functional analogy to the OEC has been only rarely achieved with such Mn-based systems and in all cases small turnover numbers have been obtained. In general they are not free of controversy since in most cases the oxidants used are peroxides or peroxide derivatives which are potential direct sources of molecular oxygen. These Mn complexes do not function, or only produce sub-stoichiometric amounts of molecular oxygen, when assayed in solution with one-electron oxidants such as CeIV. However, two independent reports have demonstrated catalytic oxygen-evolving activity with CeIV as the oxidant when dinuclear manganese compounds are adsorbed on clays.124 As inexpensive water oxidation catalysts are needed to develop photocatalytic solar cells and produce fuel from water and sunlight, manganese appears as a very relevant target and further work is needed to find efficient Mn-based systems and utilize them in technological applications.
 Fig. 21  Selected Mn-based125–127 synthetic complexes mimicking PSII OEC active site. 
Very preliminary work has been done in this direction for example by Brudvig's group through the development of methods to attach Mn-terpyridine (trpy) complexes to TiO2 nanoparticles.125 In this work they showed that trpy ligands substituted with acetylacetonate128,129 or hydroxamate130 groups (Fig. 22) allow a very stable linkage of the corresponding mononuclear MnII complex to TiO2 surfaces. An efficient charge separation process is observed upon photoexcitation through interfacial electron injection into the conduction band of TiO2 and oxidation of Mn ions. Half-time for regeneration of MnII from e−/h+ recombination is about 20 and 44 s respectively. More recently they succeeded in adsorbing dinuclear and tetranuclear di-μ-oxo Mn-terpy complexes on TiO2 nanoparticles. These stable hybrid assemblies likely involve oxo bridges between Mn and Ti. Interestingly, using CeIV as an oxidant oxygen evolution from these surfaces was observed in some cases but with turnover number just above 1 and very slow rates.131
 Fig. 22  Functional ligands designed for post-immobilization of Mn and Ru complexes onto electrode surfaces (from left to right, see ref. 128, 130 and 132–134). 
An interesting model system, reported by Dismukes and colleagues, is a synthetic Mn4O4L6 cubane-like complex, bearing diarylphosphinate L ligands (Fig. 21), which experiences conversion of its bridging oxides into O2 upon photooxidation in the gas phase.127 Binding of the oxidized form of this complex, [Mn4O4L6]+ to a thin proton-conducting Nafion membrane deposited on a conducting (glassy carbon) electrode yields a robust catalyst that sustains the photoelectrooxidation of water to O2.135 When this electrode is polarized above the [Mn4]2+/[Mn4]+ potential at 1.00 V (vs Ag/AgCl) (electrical bias) and illuminated with filtered Xe light (λ > 275 nm) a large photocurrent is observed corresponding to the formation of O2, which was found by labelling experiments to derive exclusively from water. Catalytic turnover frequencies of 20–270 per Mn4 unit and per hour and turnover numbers >1000 were reported. It was proposed that light activates the catalyst through photodissociation of a phosphinate ligand, which allows O2 formation, followed by reassembly of the cubane structure. This is the only active water oxidation photoelectrode material made from molecular mimics of the OEC so far. Recently, as a variant of the tandem cell developed at EPFL,10 this photocatalyst was entrapped in Nafion polymer and deposited onto a nanostructured TiO2 electrode sensitized with a Ru-diimine dye. This photoanode, that uses two photons to sustain water oxidation, was coupled to a platinum electrode for the construction of a photo-electrocatalytic cell achieving overall water splitting (Fig. 23).136,137 The other example of an O2-evolving photoelectrode takes advantage of the catalytic properties of cobalt ions regarding water oxidation,138 Abe et al. indeed demonstrated that a bilayer composed of a perylene derivative, acting as a photosensitizer, and cobalt phthalocyanine, the O2-evolving catalyst, can act as a water oxidation photoanode in basic aqueous solutions under visible-light irradiation when poised at 0.3 V vs. Ag/AgCl (Fig. 23).139 Several thousands of turnovers are reported.
 Fig. 23  Top: schematic representation of the photoelectrochemical device for overall water splitting reported by Spiccia and colleagues.137 Bottom: structure of the perylene derivative/cobalt phthalocyanine bilayer photoanode for water photocatalytic oxidation described by Abe et al.139 
Catalysis of water oxidation using coordination compounds has been successful mostly with ruthenium complexes. This field has been recently discussed in few review articles.140 Here, after a brief summary of the most active catalysts (Fig. 24), we discuss those which have been integrated within solid materials and characterized as such in greater detail.
 Fig. 24  Selected Ru141–146 and Ir-based147 active catalysts for water oxidation. 
The first generation of active compounds has been initiated by Meyer and colleagues. It is a family of dinuclear oxo-bridged Ru complexes containing di-imine and water ligands, the prototype being the so-called “blue dimer” containing bipyridine ligands. In the presence of an excess of CeIV this complex is able to catalyze water oxidation to O2 with a total turnover number of 13.148,149 The activity has been recently shown to be significantly increased in the presence of redox mediators.141 It is assumed that the reaction proceeds through the formation of high-valent Ru-oxo species but the mechanism of O–O bond formation is still under investigation. This class of compounds suffers from a relatively low activity and great instability. The activity was even lowered when the catalyst was heterogeneized using a Nafion polymer as the solid support.150 A terpyridine analogue, [(trpy)(H2O)2Ru(O)Ru(H2O)2(trpy)]4+ has been anchored onto solid oxide conductive surfaces, using a substituted trpy ligand containing a phosphonate group (Fig. 22) which allows tight binding to the surface.132 Using CeIV as an oxidant this material is only weakly active (3 turnovers).151 The related ammino ruthenium oxo trimer [(NH3)5RuIII(μ-O)RuIV(NH3)4(μ-O)RuIII(NH3)5] (Ru–Red) was more active during water oxidation in the presence of CeIV with 75 turnovers in 3h but underwent decomposition through oxidation of the ammine ligands. Incorporation within Nafion membranes enhances the catalytic activity by suppressing the decomposition reactions.150 Finally one should mention the very interesting reports of di- and tetranuclear ruthenium derivatives of polyoxometallate as possible catalysts for water oxidation.152–154 For example the complex [RuIV4(O)4(μ-OH)(H2O)4(γ-Si–W10O36)2]10− catalyzes the oxidation of water by CeIV with a turnover number of 385 and a yield of 90% during a 2 h reaction.154 This is a remarkably stable activity probably related to the fact that there are no fragile organic ligands whose oxidation usually leads to catalyst deactivation. This catalyst has recently been coupled to a photosensitizer in a light-driven water oxidation system.155
A major breakthrough was achieved with dinuclear Ru complexes containing an organic bridging ligand as an alternative to the oxo bridges often considered as a source of instability. Furthermore an alternative bridging group should not only be more robust but also provide a certain degree of rigidity, constraining the water-derived oxo groups within active dinuclear high-valent intermediates to interact with each other to favour O–O bond formation. Two distinct designs should be mentioned here.
Tanaka and coworkers reported a dinuclear Ru complex in which two trpy moieties are attached to an anthracene unit and the coordination is completed by a bidentate chelating ligand such as a bipyridine or an orthoquinone (Fig. 24). It is proposed on the basis of modeling studies that the two water molecules, one on each Ru center, are facing each other in a configuration that facilitates O–O coupling.142,156 Whereas it is not reported if this complex is active with chemical oxidants such as CeIV, it has been shown to catalyze water oxidation to O2 under application of a potential of 1.7 V vs. Ag/AgCl with a turnover number of 21 (91% current efficiency). The most remarkable observation is a spectacular turnover number of 33500 when the catalyst is deposited onto an ITO electrode surface with an applied potential of 1.7 V, thus with a high overpotential.142,156
Alternatively, in 2004 Llobet and colleagues synthesized a Hbpp (3,5-bis(2-pyridyl)pyrazole) bridging ligand (Fig. 24).143 In combination with a trpy ligand this led to one of the most active catalysts for oxidation of water to O2 by CeIV with a turnover number close to 200.157 This system was further improved by Thummel and coworkers who integrated the different ligands into a polydentate dinucleating neutral ligand that contains two naphtyridyl groups coupled to a central bispyridylpyridazine unit (Fig. 24). Catalytic oxidation of water to O2 by CeIV was obtained with a remarkable turnover number of 538 (24% with regard to Ce).144
This work has been extended through the heterogenization of such interesting water-oxidizing catalyst in order to demonstrate its viability onto a solid conducting support, with the objective of its exploitation in practical technological energy-conversion devices. Initially a catalyst analogue was synthesized using a trpy ligand containing a pyrrole substituent (Fig. 22) and application of an anodic potential resulted in polymerization of a polypyrrole material that was tightly attached to the surface of the electrode (vitreous carbon or FTO).133 Under optimized conditions, turnover numbers of 250, using the chemical CeIV oxidant, and of 120, during electrochemical oxidation (E = 1.17 V vs. SSCE), have been reported. Even though the performance of this new material is interesting, a significantly fast deactivation was observed. An alternative strategy took advantage of new bis-(2-pyridyl)pyrazole dinucleating bridging ligands functionalized with a para-methylenebenzoic acid (Fig. 22). The carboxylic acid moiety has been used to anchor the corresponding dinuclear Ru aquo complex at the surface of rutile TiO2.134 Reaction of this material with CeIV provides very little turnover and formation of CO2, due to either oxidation or decarboxylation of the ligand. An analogous TiO2-catalyst material anchored onto a transparent and conducting FTO surface has also been prepared but not characterized functionally.
The recent developments in this field are linked to the discovery that there is no absolute requirement for polynuclear complexes for catalytic activity: a number of mononuclear Ru145,158,159 and Ir147,152 complexes have been found to behave as excellent catalysts for oxidation of water to O2 using chemical oxidants such as CeIV, or electrochemical assays. Turnover numbers ranging from 50 to 2500 have been reported. Some examples are shown in Fig. 24 and it should be noted that light-driven O2 evolving systems have been obtained based on such mononuclear Ru catalysts.159 Very recently, Meyer and coworkers reported two remarkable examples of heterogeneized mononuclear Ru catalysts (Fig. 25): [Ru(Mebimpy)(4,4′-((HO)2OPCH2)2bipy)(OH2)] (Mebimpy = 2,6-bis(1-methylbenzimidazol-2-yl)-pyridine) was first immobilized on ITO substrate via a phosphonate linkage and the resulting electrode catalyzed water oxidation at 1.85 V vs. NHE at pH 5 for more than 8 h with a current density of 14.8 μA cm−2 corresponding to ∼11 000 turnovers at a turnover rate of 0.36 s−1.160 In a second version, a ruthenium trisdiimine moiety was introduced as an electron mediator between the ITO surface and the catalytic center, resulting in lowering the overvoltage, although also associated with current decrease: oxygen evolution occurs at potentials just higher than 1.43 V in 0.1 M HNO3. This design, with the ruthenium trisdiimine complex likely to function as a photosensitizer, opens new perspectives regarding the preparation of molecular-engineered photoelectrode materials for H2O oxidation.161
 Fig. 25  Covalent immobilization of ruthenium-based water oxidation catalysts onto metal oxide surface assembled (right)160 or not (left)161 with a ruthenium-based redox relay. 
Conclusion
In the last two decades, significant advances have been achieved both in the design of new and efficient molecular catalysts for hydrogen evolution or water oxidation and in their heterogeneization onto conducting surfaces resulting in electrocatalytic materials. In parallel, the coupling of such multi-electron catalysts with photosensitizers has been demonstrated in solution with sacrificial electron donors or acceptors. The implementation of such photocatalytic systems into molecular-engineered photoelectrode materials remains to be achieved but the above analysis shows that the field is now mature, so that it is very likely that a fully molecular photoelectrocatalytic system for overall water splitting will appear in the very next future, the challenge now residing in determining the experimental conditions suitable for the concomitant operation of water-oxidizing and water-reducing (photo)catalytic systems.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the CEA (Nanosciences program, grant Grafthydro), the CNRS (“Materials” program, Grant 961 “projets exploratoires: Interface Science des Matériaux/Vivant”) and the French National Research Agency (ANR PAN-H 2008 EnzHyd and Carnot pH2oton).
References
M. T. M. Koper and E. Bouwman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3723–3725 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Grove, Philos. Mag. S. 3, 1839, 14, 127–130 Search PubMed .
R. B. Gordon, M. Bertram and T. E. Graedel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 1209–1214 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Neyerlin, W. B. Gu, J. Jorne and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2007, 154, B631–B635 .
K. P. Gong, F. Du, Z. H. Xia, M. Durstock and L. M. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS .
M. Lefevre, E. Proietti, F. Jaouen and J. P. Dodelet, Science, 2009, 324, 71–74 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bashyam and P. Zelenay, Nature, 2006, 443, 63–66 CrossRef CAS .
In developed countries nuclear electricity is abundant and can be also used to convert water to hydrogen but this is a non-renewable source which might become unavailable during the next century.
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CAS .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef CAS .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Miller, B. Marsen, D. Paluselli and R. Rocheleau, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2005, 8, A247–A249 CrossRef CAS ; E. L. Miller, D. Paluselli, B. Marsen and R. E. Rocheleau, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 131–144 CrossRef CAS ; E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and S. Khan, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2004, 29, 907–914 CrossRef CAS ; E. L. Miller, R. E. Rocheleau and X. M. Deng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 615–623 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Rocheleau, E. L. Miller and A. Misra, Energy Fuels, 1998, 12, 3–10 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Yamada, N. Matsuki, T. Ohmori, H. Mametsuka, M. Kondo, A. Matsuda and E. Suzuki, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2003, 28, 1167–1169 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cesar, A. Kay, J. A. G. Martinez and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4582–4583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay, I. Cesar and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15714–15721 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Zhong, J. W. Sun, H. Inumaru and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6086–6087 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS ; D. A. Lutterman, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841–1844 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Hernandez-Alonso, F. Fresno, S. Suarez and J. M. Coronado, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1231–1257 RSC .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 7806–7809 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sato, N. Saito, Y. Yamada, K. Maeda, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, H. Kobayashi, K. Domen and Y. Inoue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4150–4151 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. L. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295–295 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Zou, J. H. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Youngblood, S.-H. A. Lee, K. Maeda and T. E. Mallouk, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009 Search PubMed .
K. Alcantara, B. Munge, Z. Pendon, H. A. Frank and J. F. Rusling, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 14930–14937 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yano, J. Kern, K. Sauer, M. J. Latimer, Y. Pushkar, J. Biesiadka, B. Loll, W. Saenger, J. Messinger, A. Zouni and V. K. Yachandra, Science, 2006, 314, 821–825 CrossRef CAS ; B. Loll, J. Kern, W. Saenger, A. Zouni and J. Biesiadka, Nature, 2005, 438, 1040–1044 CrossRef CAS ; K. N. Ferreira, T. M. Iverson, K. Maghlaoui, J. Barber and S. Iwata, Science, 2004, 303, 1831–1838 CrossRef CAS ; A. W. Rutherford and A. Boussac, Science, 2004, 303, 1782–1784 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4273–4303 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Esswein and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4022–4047 CrossRef .
M. Wang, Y. Na, M. Gorlov and L. C. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6458–6467 RSC .
A. Fihri, V. Artero, A. Pereira and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 5567–5569 RSC ; A. Fihri, V. Artero, M. Razavet, C. Baffert, W. Leibl and M. Fontecave, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 564–567 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lachaud, A. Quaranta, Y. Pellegrin, P. Dorlet, M. F. Charlot, S. Un, W. Leibl and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1536–1540 CrossRef ; G. F. Moore, M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, O. G. Poluektov, T. Rajh, D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 10466–10467 CrossRef CAS ; J. X. Pan, Y. H. Xu, G. Benko, Y. Feyziyev, S. Styring, L. C. Sun, B. Akermark, T. Polivka and V. Sundstrom, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12904–12910 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collman, R. Boulatov, C. J. Sunderland and L. Fu, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 561–588 CrossRef CAS ; J. Rosenthal and D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 543–553 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Vignais, B. Billoud and J. Meyer, FEMS Microbiol. Rev., 2001, 25, 455–501 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shima and R. K. Thauer, Chem. Rec., 2007, 7, 37–46 CrossRef CAS ; S. Shima, O. Pilak, S. Vogt, M. Schick, M. S. Stagni, W. Meyer-Klaucke, E. Warkentin, R. K. Thauer and U. Ermler, Science, 2008, 321, 572–575 CrossRef CAS ; T. Hiromoto, K. Ataka, O. Pilak, S. Vogt, M. S. Stagni, W. Meyer-Klaucke, E. Warkentin, R. K. Thauer, S. Shima and U. Ermler, FEBS Lett., 2009, 583, 585–590 CrossRef CAS .
A. Volbeda, M. H. Charon, C. Piras, E. C. Hatchikian, M. Frey and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, Nature, 1995, 373, 580–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nicolet, C. Piras, P. Legrand, C. E. Hatchikian and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, Structure, 1999, 7, 13–23 CrossRef CAS ; J. W. Peters, W. N. Lanzilotta, B. J. Lemon and L. C. Seefeldt, Science, 1998, 282, 1853–1858 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nicolet, A. L. de Lacey, X. Vernede, V. M. Fernandez, E. C. Hatchikian and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 1596–1601 CrossRef CAS .
A. Silakov, B. Wenk, E. Reijerse and W. Lubitz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2009, 11, 6592–6599 RSC .
V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2005, 249, 1518–1535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canaguier, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Dalton Trans., 2008, 315–325 RSC .
C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2245–2274 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ogo, R. Kabe, K. Uehara, B. Kure, T. Nishimura, S. C. Menon, R. Harada, S. Fukuzumi, Y. Higuchi, T. Ohhara, T. Tamada and R. Kuroki, Science, 2007, 316, 585–587 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kure, T. Matsumoto, K. Ichikawa, S. Fukuzumi, Y. Higuchi, T. Yagi and S. Ogo, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4747–4755 RSC ; T. Matsumoto, B. Kure and S. Ogo, Chem. Lett., 2008, 37, 970–971 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canaguier, L. Vaccaro, V. Artero, R. Ostermann, J. Pécaut, M. Field and M. Fontecave, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 9350–9365 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Oudart, V. Artero, L. Norel, C. Train, J. Pécaut and M. Fontecave, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2866–2869 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Oudart, V. Artero, J. Pécaut and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 4334–4336 CrossRef CAS ; Y. Oudart, V. Artero, J. Pécaut, C. Lebrun and M. Fontecave, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2007, 2613–2626 CrossRef CAS ; L. Vaccaro, V. Artero, S. Canaguier, M. Fontecave and J. M. Field, Dalton Trans., 2010, 39, 3043–3049 RSC .
M. Razavet, V. Artero, C. Cavazza, Y. Oudart, C. Lebrun, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and M. Fontecave, Chem. Commun., 2007, 2805–2807 RSC .

          Canaguier
          et al., unpublished data.
B. E. Barton, C. M. Whaley, T. B. Rauchfuss and D. L. Gray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6942–6943 CrossRef CAS .
S. Canaguier, M. Field, Y. Oudart, J. Pécaut, M. Fontecave and V. Artero, Chem. Commun. Search PubMed  , in press.
J. F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, F. Y. Petillon, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2009, 253, 1476–1494 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Olsen, B. E. Barton and T. B. Rauchfuss, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7507–7509 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Kellett and T. G. Spiro, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 2373–2377 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, J. Zhang, T. Abe, D. Wohrle and M. Kaneko, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 1999, 145, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baffert, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 1817–1824 CrossRef ; X. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and J. C. Peters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8988–8998 CrossRef CAS ; X. L. Hu, B. M. Cossairt, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis and J. C. Peters, Chem. Commun., 2005, 4723–4725 RSC ; O. Pantani, S. Naskar, R. Guillot, P. Millet, E. Anxolabehere-Mallart and A. Aukauloo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 9948–9950 CrossRef CAS ; M. Razavet, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS .
P.-A. Jacques, V. Artero, J. Pécaut and M. Fontecave, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 20627–20632 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 62–72 RSC ; M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1974–1982 CrossRef .
G. M. Jacobsen, J. Y. Yang, B. Twamley, A. D. Wilson, R. M. Bullock, M. R. DuBois and D. L. DuBois, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 167–174 RSC .
H. R. Pershad, J. L. C. Duff, H. A. Heering, E. C. Duin, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Biochemistry, 1999, 38, 8992–8999 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Jones, E. Sillery, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2002, 866–867 RSC .
P.-P. Liebgott, F. Leroux, B. Burlat, S. b. Dementin, C. Baffert, T. Lautier, V. Fourmond, P. Ceccaldi, C. Cavazza, I. Meynial-Salles, P. Soucaille, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, B. Guigliarelli, P. Bertrand, M. Rousset and C. Léger, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2010, 6, 63–70 CrossRef CAS ; S. Dementin, F. Leroux, L. Cournac, A. L. de Lacey, A. Volbeda, C. Leger, B. Burlat, N. Martinez, S. Champ, L. Martin, O. Sanganas, M. Haumann, V. M. Fernandez, B. Guigliarelli, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and M. Rousset, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10156–10164 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cracknell, K. A. Vincent, M. Ludwig, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 424–425 CrossRef CAS ; K. A. Vincent, J. A. Cracknell, J. R. Clark, M. Ludwig, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2006, 5033–5035 RSC ; K. A. Vincent, J. A. Cracknell, O. Lenz, I. Zebger, B. Friedrich and F. A. Armstrong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 16951–16954 CrossRef CAS .
A. Parkin, G. Goldet, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13410–13416 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lukey, A. Parkin, M. M. Roessler, B. J. Murphy, J. Harmer, T. Palmer, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 3928–3938 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alonso-Lomillo, O. Rudiger, A. Maroto-Valiente, M. Velez, I. Rodriguez-Ramos, F. J. Munoz, V. M. Fernandez and A. L. De Lacey, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1603–1608 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Lamle, K. A. Vincent, L. M. Halliwell, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Dalton Trans., 2003, 4152–4157 RSC .
E. Lojou, X. Luo, M. Brugna, N. Candoni, S. Dementin and M. T. Giudici-Orticoni, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 13, 1157–1167 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bianco and J. Haladjian, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 2428–2432 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Vincent, A. Parkin and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4366–4413 CrossRef CAS .
C. Baffert, M. Demuez, L. Cournac, B. Burlat, B. Guigliarelli, P. Bertrand, L. Girbal and C. Leger, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2052–2054 CrossRef CAS ; C. Leger and P. Bertrand, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2379–2438 CrossRef CAS ; J. A. Cracknell, K. A. Vincent and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2439–2461 CrossRef CAS ; F. A. Armstrong, N. A. Belsey, J. A. Cracknell, G. Goldet, A. Parkin, E. Reisner, K. A. Vincent and A. F. Wait, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 36–51 RSC .
G. Goldet, A. F. Wait, J. A. Cracknell, K. A. Vincent, M. Ludwig, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 11106–11113 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guiral, P. Tron, V. Belle, C. Aubert, C. Leger, B. Guigliarelli and M. T. Giudici-Orticoni, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 1424–1431 CrossRef CAS ; E. Lojou, M. T. Giudici-Orticoni and P. Bianco, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 577, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, D. Svedruzic, P. W. King, D. Gust, M. Ghirardi, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Vincent, X. Li, C. F. Blanford, N. A. Belsey, J. H. Weiner and F. A. Armstrong, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2007, 3, 761–762 CrossRef CAS .
O. Lazarus, T. W. Woolerton, A. Parkin, M. J. Lukey, E. Reisner, J. Seravalli, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14154–14155 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Liu, T. Wakayama, C. Nakamura, J. Miyake, N. A. Zorin and D. J. Qian, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 3222–3228 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, M. Brugna, P. Tron-Infossi, M. T. Giudici-Orticoni and E. Lojou, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 14, 1275–1288 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. McDonald, D. Svedruzic, Y. H. Kim, J. L. Blackburn, S. B. Zhang, P. W. King and M. J. Heben, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3528–3534 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, P. M. Vignais, V. L. Cournac, N. A. Zorin, E. E. Karyakina, A. A. Karyakin and S. Cosnier, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 1501–1505 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, O. G. Voronin, E. E. Karyakina, N. A. Zorin, S. Cosnier and A. A. Karyakin, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 851–854 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Karyakin, S. V. Morozov, O. G. Voronin, N. A. Zorin, E. E. Karyakina, V. N. Fateyev and S. Cosnier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7244–7246 CrossRef CAS .
S. V. Morozov, E. E. Karyakina, N. A. Zorin, S. D. Varfolomeyev, S. Cosnier and A. A. Karyakin, Bioelectrochemistry, 2002, 55, 169–171 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lojou, M. T. Gludici-Orticoni and P. Bianco, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 579, 199–213 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Qian, C. Nakamura, S. Wenk, T. Wakayama, N. Zorin and J. Miyake, Mater. Lett., 2003, 57, 1130–1134 CrossRef CAS .
O. Rudiger, J. M. Abad, E. C. Hatchikian, V. M. Fernandez and A. L. De Lacey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16008–16009 CrossRef .
J. Pinson and F. Podvorica, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2005, 34, 429–439 RSC .
M. Delamar, R. Hitmi, J. Pinson and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 5883–5884 CrossRef CAS ; P. Allongue, M. Delamar, B. Desbat, O. Fagebaume, R. Hitmi, J. Pinson and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1997, 119, 201–207 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schmidt, S. Gallon, S. Esnouf, J. P. Bourgoin and P. Chenevier, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 2101–2110 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bahr, J. P. Yang, D. V. Kosynkin, M. J. Bronikowski, R. E. Smalley and J. M. Tour, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 6536–6542 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Kooi, U. Schlecht, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1353–1355 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Baughman, A. A. Zakhidov and W. A. de Heer, Science, 2002, 297, 787–792 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Kellett and T. G. Spiro, Inorg. Chem., 1985, 24, 2378–2382 CrossRef .
T. Abe, F. Taguchi, H. Imaya, F. Zhao, J. Zhang and M. Kaneko, Polym. Adv. Technol., 1998, 9, 559–562 CrossRef CAS .
U. T. Muellerwesterhoff and A. Nazzal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 5381–5382 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cosnier, A. Deronzier and N. Vlachopoulos, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1989, 1259–1261 RSC .
S. K. Ibrahim, X. M. Liu, C. Tard and C. J. Pickett, Chem. Commun., 2007, 1535–1537 RSC .
D. H. Pool and D. L. DuBois, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2858–2865 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Green, J. L. Hess, C. M. Thomas and M. Y. Darensbourg, Dalton Trans., 2009, 4344–4350 RSC .
V. Vijaikanth, J. F. Capon, F. Gloaguen, P. Schollhammer and J. Talarmin, Electrochem. Commun., 2005, 7, 427–430 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anne, B. Blanc, J. Moiroux and J. M. Saveant, Langmuir, 1998, 14, 2368–2371 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Thomas, O. Rudiger, T. Liu, C. E. Carson, M. B. Hall and M. Y. Darensbourg, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 3976–3984 CrossRef .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, R. Metayé, F. Moggia, B. Jousselme, M. Razavet, P. D. Tran, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010 DOI:10.1016/j.ijhydene.2010.02.112 .
A. Le Goff, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, P. D. Tran, N. Guillet, R. Metaye, A. Fihri, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, Science, 2009, 326, 1384–1387 CrossRef CAS .
D. Evrard, F. Lambert, C. Policar, V. Balland and B. Limoges, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 9286–9291 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tasis, N. Tagmatarchis, A. Bianco and M. Prato, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 1105–1136 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Bahr and J. M. Tour, J. Mater. Chem., 2002, 12, 1952–1958 RSC ; A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1853–1859 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. He, C. Gao and J. Y. Wu, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 5814–5824 CrossRef CAS .
A. Devadoss and C. E. D. Chidsey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5370–5371 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Landis and R. J. Hamers, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 724–730 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballesteros, G. de la Torre, C. Ehli, G. M. A. Rahman, F. Agullo-Rueda, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 5061–5068 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Tessonnier, A. Villa, O. Majoulet, D. S. Su and R. Schlogl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 6543–6546 CrossRef .
T. J. Simmons, J. Bult, D. P. Hashim, R. J. Linhardt and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 865–870 CrossRef CAS ; Q. Yang, L. Shuai, J. Zhou, F. C. Lu and X. J. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2008, 112, 12934–12939 CrossRef CAS ; E. W. McQueen and J. I. Goldsmith, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17554–17556 CrossRef CAS ; R. J. Chen, Y. G. Zhang, D. W. Wang and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 3838–3839 CrossRef CAS .
F. D'Souza, R. Chitta, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, N. K. Subbaiyan, L. D'Souza, Y. Araki and O. Ito, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15865–15871 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Artero, M. Fontecave, S. Palacin, A. Le Goff and B. Jousselme, European patent application EP-08 290 988.8, 21 octobre  2008 .

          P. D. Tran, V. Artero, B. Jousselme, A. Le Goff, N. Guillet, S. Palacin and M. Fontecave, unpublished data.
C. E. Lubner, R. Grimme, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 404–414 CrossRef CAS .
H. Krassen, A. Schwarze, B. Friedrich, K. Ataka, O. Lenz and J. Heberle, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 4055–4061 CrossRef CAS .
E. Reisner, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 550–552 RSC ; E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Nedoluzhko, I. A. Shumilin and V. V. Nikandrov, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 17544–17550 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rau, D. Walther and J. G. Vos, Dalton Trans., 2007, 915–919 RSC .
C. Li, M. Wang, J. X. Pan, P. Zhang, R. Zhang and L. C. Sun, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2814–2819 CrossRef CAS .
U. Kölle and M. Grätzel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1987, 26, 567–570 CrossRef .
T. Nann, S. K. Ibrahim, P.-M. Woi, S. Xu, J. Ziegler and C. J. Pickett, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010 DOI:10.1002/anie.200906262 .
S. Petrie, R. Stranger, P. Gatt and R. J. Pace, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 5082–5089 CrossRef CAS ; T. J. Meyer, M. H. V. Huynh and H. H. Thorp, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5284–5304 CrossRef CAS ; H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1861–1870 CrossRef CAS ; R. Pace, J. Messinger, A. Boussac, R. D. Britt and C. Dismukes, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 1177–1177 .
C. W. Cady, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 444–455 CrossRef CAS ; M. Yagi, A. Syouji, S. Yamada, M. Komi, H. Yamazaki and S. Tajima, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2009, 8, 139–147 RSC .
P. Kurz, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6103–6108 RSC ; M. Yagi and K. Narita, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8084–8085 CrossRef CAS .
J. Limburg, J. S. Vrettos, L. M. Liable-Sands, A. L. Rheingold, R. H. Crabtree and G. W. Brudvig, Science, 1999, 283, 1524–1527 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Poulsen, A. Rompel and C. J. McKenzie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6916–6920 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ruttinger and G. C. Dismukes, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. McNamara, R. C. Snoeberger, G. Li, J. M. Schleicher, C. W. Cady, M. Poyatos, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 14329–14338 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Heimer, S. T. DArcangelis, F. Farzad, J. M. Stipkala and G. J. Meyer, Inorg. Chem., 1996, 35, 5319–5324 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. McNamara, R. C. Snoeberger, G. H. Li, C. Richter, L. J. Allen, R. L. Milot, C. A. Schmuttenmaer, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 1173–1175 RSC .
G. H. Li, E. M. Sproviero, R. C. Snoeberger, N. Iguchi, J. D. Blakemore, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and V. S. Batista, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 230–238 RSC .
P. H. Mutin, G. Guerrero and A. Vioux, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3761–3768 RSC .
J. Mola, E. Mas-Marza, X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, C. Vinas, T. Parella and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5830–5832 CrossRef CAS .
L. Francas, X. Sala, J. Benet-Buchholz, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2, 321–329 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, G. F. Swiegers, G. C. Dismukes and L. Spiccia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 7335–7338 CrossRef CAS ; R. Brimblecombe, D. R. J. Kolling, A. M. Bond, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7269–7279 CrossRef CAS ; 
          R. Brimblecombe, L. Spiccia, G. C. Dismukes and G. F. Swiegers, PCT International Application AU2008/000407; G. C. Dismukes, R. Brimblecombe, G. A. N. Felton, R. S. Pryadun, J. E. Sheats, L. Spiccia and G. F. Swiegers, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1935–1943 Search PubMed .
R. F. Service, Science, 2009, 325, 1201 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brimblecombe, A. Koo, G. C. Dismukes, G. F. Swiegers and L. Spiccia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2892–2894 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Brunschwig, M. H. Chou, C. Creutz, P. Ghosh and N. Sutin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1983, 105, 4832–4833 CrossRef CAS ; V. Y. Shafirovich, N. K. Khannanov and V. V. Strelets, New J. Chem., 1980, 4, 81–84 Search PubMed ; V. Y. Shafirovich and V. V. Strelets, New J. Chem., 1978, 2, 199–201 Search PubMed .
T. Abe, K. Nagai, S. Kabutomori, M. Kaneko, A. Tajiri and T. Noritnatsit, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2778–2781 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sala, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2842–2852 CrossRef CAS ; S. Romain, L. Vigara and A. Llobet, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1944–1953 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. v. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 17632–17635 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1479–1482 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sens, I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, A. Llobet, T. Parella and J. Benet-Buchholz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 7798–7799 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zong and R. P. Thummel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 12802–12803 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Tseng, R. Zong, J. T. Muckerman and R. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 11763–11773 CrossRef CAS .
L. Duan, Y. Xu, P. Zhang, M. Wang and L. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 209–215 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. McDaniel, F. J. Coughlin, L. L. Tinker and S. Bernhard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 210–217 CrossRef CAS ; J. F. Hull, D. Balcells, J. D. Blakemore, C. D. Incarvito, O. Eisenstein, G. W. Brudvig and R. H. Crabtree, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8730 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Gersten, G. J. Samuels and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 4029–4030 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Collin and J. P. Sauvage, Inorg. Chem., 1986, 25, 135–141 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yagi and M. Kaneko, Chem. Rev., 2001, 101, 21–35 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu, T. Cardolaccia, B. J. Hornstein, J. R. Schoonover and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2446–2447 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cao, H. Y. Ma, Y. V. Geletii, K. I. Hardcastle and C. L. Hill, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 5596–5598 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, B. Botar, P. Koegerler, D. A. Hillesheim, D. G. Musaev and C. L. Hill, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3896–3899 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sartorel, M. Carraro, G. Scorrano, R. De Zorzi, S. Geremia, N. D. McDaniel, S. Bernhard and M. Bonchio, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5006–5007 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Geletii, Z. Q. Huang, Y. Hou, D. G. Musaev, T. Q. Lian and C. L. Hill, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7522–7523 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wada, K. Tsuge and K. Tanaka, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 329–337 CrossRef CAS ; J. T. Muckerman, D. E. Polyansky, T. Wada, K. Tanaka and E. Fujita, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1787–1802 CrossRef CAS .
I. Romero, M. Rodriguez, C. Sens, J. Mola, M. R. Kollipara, L. Francas, E. Mas-Marza, L. Escriche and A. Llobet, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1824–1834 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, R. Zong, H. W. Tseng and R. P. Thummel, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 990–998 CrossRef CAS ; J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16462–16463 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xu, T. Akermark, V. Gyollai, D. P. Zou, L. Eriksson, L. L. Duan, R. Zhang, B. Akermark and L. C. Sun, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 2717–2719 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15580–15581 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, P. G. Hoertz and T. J. Meyer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9473–9476 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Broader context
Catalysis is key to the urgent development of new energy applications. Hydrogen production through the reduction of water appears to be the best solution for the long-run storage of renewable energies. Ideally, the energetic input for such a process should come from a renewable source such as solar energy. Moreover, economically viable hydrogen production requests platinum-free catalysts since this expensive and scarce metal is not a sustainable resource. The design of molecular bio-inspired catalysts for hydrogen evolution, based on abundant metals with the aim to provide alternatives to the use of platinum, has been the core project developed by Dr Vincent Artero and Prof. Marc Fontecave in the Laboratory of Chemistry and Biology of Metals in Grenoble. This group recently demonstrated that such molecular catalysts can be used to modify electrode nanomaterials and they reported, in collaboration with two other institutes from the CEA (Iramis in CEA Saclay and Liten in CEA Grenoble) on the first noble-metal-free electrocatalytic material for both hydrogen evolution and uptake working under very acidic conditions compatible with the proton-exchange membrane technology. Such catalysts are also very valuable in the context of artificifial photosynthesis and this team pioneered the design of supramolecular H2-evolving photocatalytic devices based on first-row transition metal H2-evolving catalysts, by coupling cobaloxime catalysts with molecular photosensitizers.

2H+ + 2e− → H2	(1)
H2 → 2H+ + 2e−	(2)
2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−	(3)
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O	(4)
2H2O → 2H2 + O2	(5)
2H2 + O2 → 2H2O	(6)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic representation of a photoelectrochemical cell for water splitting. PS stands for a photosensitizer, Cat and Cat′ are catalysts for water oxidation and reduction, respectively, existing in the reduced (R) and oxidized (O) states.	 

 	Fig. 2  Band positions of several semi-conductor materials in contact with aqueous electrolyte at pH 1 (green lines represent the upper edge of the valence band whereas the red ones represent the lower edge of the conduction band). The visible spectrum corresponds to energies from 1.56 eV (800 nm) to 3.12 eV (400 nm).	 

 	Fig. 3  Selected devices for photocatalytic water splitting: (a) Turner and Khaselev's monolithic photoelectrochemical-photovoltaic design,11 (b) Hawaï hybrid planar multijunction photoelectrode,12 and (c) principle of Grätzel's tandem cell.10	 

 	Fig. 4  Structure of the active sites of [FeFe]-hydrogenases in the reduced active state (X is a hydride ligand, a water molecule or a H2 ligand) and of [NiFe]-hydrogenases in the Ni–C state.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structures of selected functional Ni–Ru,42,44 Ni–Mn45 and Ni–Fe47,48 bio-inspired models of [NiFe]-hydrogenases.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure of homogeneous nickel55 and cobalt-based54,56 H2-evolving catalysts with positioned proton relays.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of Moore's photoelectrochemical cells71 for H2 evolution using surface-immobilized hydrogenases as catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 8  Covalent grafting of the [NiFe]-hydrogenase from D. gigas onto pyrolytic graphite electrode via an amide linkage.63	 

 	Fig. 9  Functionalization of conductive surfaces by an amino-polyphenylene layer via diazonium salt reduction.84	 

 	Fig. 10  Selected cobalt,52,90,91 iron92 and rhodium-based93 H2-evolving catalysts that have been immobilized onto electrode surfaces by incorporation into a polymeric support layer.	 

 	Fig. 11  Bio-inspired complexes immobilized onto electrode surfaces by covalent incorporation into an electro-deposited polypyrole (top)94 or polythiophene (bottom) film.95	 

 	Fig. 12  Covalent immobilisation of diiron mimics via an amide linkage from three different groups: (a) ref. 99, (b) ref. 97 and (c) ref. 100.	 

 	Fig. 13  Useful chemical pathways for the functionalization of CNTs: (a) ref. 103 and 104, (b) ref. 106, (c) ref. 103 and (d) ref. 109.	 

 	Fig. 14  Electrografting of amine groups on MWCNTs and post-functionalization with complex 1(BF4)2 through amide links.101 This is a simplified representation of the structure of the material for sake of clarity: the number of phenylene residues is indeed arbitrary and attachment of the nickel complex to two or more surface amine groups is not excluded.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic representation of the structure and reactivity of the bio-inspired H2-evolving nickel catalyst grafted on a carbon nanotube.101 Electrons are exchanged between the carbon nanotube and the Ni centres where H+ is reduced to H2 or H2 oxidized to H+.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic structure of nickel(II) bisdiphosphine complex containing four pyrene π-stacking anchor sites.	 

 	Fig. 17  Structure of the biochemical H2-evolving photoelectrode designed by Heberle and coworkers.115	 

 	Fig. 18  Structure of the TiO2-based material for H2 photoproduction using surface-immobilized hydrogenases as catalyst.116	 

 	Fig. 19  Structure of Ru-based supramolecular photocatalysts for light-driven hydrogen production.30,119	 

 	Fig. 20  Structure of the H2-evolving photocathode based on InP nanocrystals designed by Nann, Pickett and coworkers.121	 

 	Fig. 21  Selected Mn-based125–127 synthetic complexes mimicking PSII OEC active site.	 

 	Fig. 22  Functional ligands designed for post-immobilization of Mn and Ru complexes onto electrode surfaces (from left to right, see ref. 128, 130 and 132–134).	 

 	Fig. 23  Top: schematic representation of the photoelectrochemical device for overall water splitting reported by Spiccia and colleagues.137 Bottom: structure of the perylene derivative/cobalt phthalocyanine bilayer photoanode for water photocatalytic oxidation described by Abe et al.139	 

 	Fig. 24  Selected Ru141–146 and Ir-based147 active catalysts for water oxidation.	 

 	Fig. 25  Covalent immobilization of ruthenium-based water oxidation catalysts onto metal oxide surface assembled (right)160 or not (left)161 with a ruthenium-based redox relay.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
