Spiers Memorial Lecture Artificial photosynthesis: An introduction  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9FD90025J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9FD90025J
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2019, 215, 9-14Spiers Memorial LectureArtificial photosynthesis: An introduction

        
          
            Jan-Niclas 
            Beller
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Matthias 
            Beller
          
        
      *
      Leibniz-Institut für Katalyse an der Universität Rostock, Albert-Einstein-Straße 29a, 18059 Rostock, Germany. E-mail: Matthias.Beller@catalysis.de
Received 
      29th May 2019
    , Accepted 29th May 2019First published on 26th June 2019AbstractA brief introduction into artificial photosynthesis technologies is presented. Following the basic concepts of biological photosynthesis, light energy is directly or sequentially used for the synthesis of valuable chemicals with the help of man-made catalysts. Differences between artificial, hybrid and natural photosynthesis are shown and the possible advantages and disadvantages are highlighted.
Introduction
From the beginning of the 1970s until today, human energy consumption has almost doubled. If this development continues, there will be a further doubling in the next 30 years.1 Where should all this additional energy come from? Fossil resources such as coal, oil and natural gas are not an option anymore because they generate the main greenhouse gas carbon dioxide (CO2), which already makes a major contribution to climate change. Thus, it is clear that a shift towards alternative technologies using renewable energy is needed. In the search for possible solutions, natural photosynthesis can be used as a role model. More specifically, photosynthesis is the cornerstone of all life on this planet. Every year, more than 170 billion tons of biomass are produced, mostly by photosynthesis.2 In this complex biological process, the energy of solar radiation is converted into a multitude of organic substances. Solar energy is available to us almost indefinitely – at least for more than 1 billion years longer. Even if only 0.1% of the energy which reaches the surface of the earth could be converted at an efficiency of only 10% it would be four times the world’s total generating capacity. In other words, the total annual solar radiation falling on the earth is more than 7500 times the world’s total annual primary energy demand.3 Despite its beauty and importance, a disadvantage of natural photosynthesis is the low efficiency with which light energy is used to produce organic compounds. For most conventional plants, this is less than 1%.4 Therefore, it makes sense to simplify this multifaceted process and improve its efficiency by artificial photosynthesis technologies.
In this article, we will briefly introduce the reader to the differences between artificial, hybrid and natural photosynthesis and present their possible advantages and disadvantages. Besides, we will describe the state of the art and possible technology options in the future.
A short glimpse at biological photosynthesis
The overall process of photosynthesis takes place in several steps, which are spatially and temporally separated from each other. In the so-called light reaction, sunlight is used to split water, while at the same time electrons are provided for the dark reaction. This latter process uses the resulting reducing agents in the form of reduced nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH) to convert carbon dioxide into biochemical platform molecules and subsequently to all kinds of organic matter. A key role in the dark reaction is played by the enzyme rubisco (ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate-carboxylase/-oxygenase), which controls carbon dioxide fixation. Although the theoretical maximum efficiency of the light reaction is about 10%, in reality it is <1% on an annual average for crops.5 In other words, in the vast majority of plants more than 99% of light energy is lost through scattering, reflection and heat. In addition, plants do not absorb high-energy ultraviolet and infrared light. This means that large amounts of energy are lost that otherwise could be used. It is somewhat surprising that, despite their relatively low efficiency, numerous plant species are cultivated today for energy usage. These “energy-rich” crops are used directly for the production of heat and/or electrical energy, as well as indirectly for the processing of biofuels. Specific examples include both arable crops, for which varieties are cultivated that are partly optimized for energy use (e.g. rapeseed and maize), and cultivated crops that have not yet been used, or are hardly used at all, such as Chinese reed. Potential energy crops for the future are soya, oil palm, purgonium nut and sugar cane.
Modified biological photosynthesis
By using modified biological photosynthesis,6 fuels and valuable substances can be produced using genetically improved single-cell organisms (bacteria, fungi, algae, etc.). This concept must not be confused with the well-known production of biofuels by converting biomass into biogas, biodiesel or bioethanol, where natural microorganisms are used. For precise modification of photosynthetic organisms, modern tools of genetic engineering and/or synthetic biology are used. Ideally, in this way the known biological processes should not only be optimized but breakthrough solutions be sought, for example the implementation of a completely new metabolism for the conversion of carbon dioxide. In such a way, this approach also aims to increase the energy efficiency of the light reaction.
In addition, the coupling of non-biological with biological components to hybrid systems is being actively pursued at the moment.7 In most of these combinations, a process driven by light is combined with a biological dark reaction. For example, electricity generated by photovoltaics is typically converted into hydrogen (H2) and carbon monoxide (CO) by the electrolysis of water and carbon dioxide. Subsequently, microorganisms can produce organic substances from these raw materials. Following this principle, researchers from Siemens and Evonik elegantly combined electrolysis and biotechnology. By 2021, an initial pilot plant is to go into operation in Marl, North Rhine-Westphalia, producing chemicals such as butanol or hexanol – both starting materials for speciality plastics or dietary supplements, for example. The companies announced that the next step could be to build a plant with a production capacity of up to 20000 tons per year. The production of other speciality chemicals or fuels is also conceivable.8
Artificial photosynthesis
In a recent white paper from the German Academies of Sciences, artificial photosynthesis was defined as a technological toolbox which serves to produce chemical energy carriers and valuable products using sunlight as the sole energy source in integrated systems.9 Related to this idea are so-called “Power to X” technologies,10 whereby renewable energies should be transformed into fuels and recyclables. Here, an energy surplus arising from wind power or photovoltaics should be converted into better storable energy vectors such as methane, methanol or e-fuels. Basically, “Power to X” pursues similar goals as artificial photosynthesis; however, at present the former focus is on sequential processes, while artificial photosynthesis is pursuing a system approach similar to that of photosynthesis. The particular strength of this general approach lies in the provision of renewable energy to materials, which can be easily stored and transported. This is achieved by mimicking a central principle of the biological model: combining light-induced charge separation with catalytic processes for the production of energy-rich compounds. To be clear, the general goal of artificial photosynthesis is not to imitate biological processes in detail, but instead to fundamentally improve them in order to create a higher degree of efficiency. Nowadays a variety of approaches are summarized under the general term of artificial photosynthesis.11 Most of them have it in common that reduction and/or proton donation processes take place through the use of external (light) energy. After the initial light absorption in artificial photosynthesis the following processes do not generate structurally complex organic substances as in normal photosynthesis. Instead, simple but valuable energy carriers as well as platform chemicals such as methane or methanol are made by reducing CO2. Even the production of ammonia as an energy vector by reducing atmospheric nitrogen is being discussed.12 In this case the only raw materials required are nitrogen, protons and electrons.
Electron transfer in artificial photosynthesis processes always consists of two half reactions: (a) the oxidation of water molecules to give electrons and protons and (b) the reduction of carbon dioxide (or nitrogen) as proton and electron acceptor. For light absorption, both naturally-occurring light-absorbing pigments and “high-chem” materials, typically applied in photovoltaic systems, can be used. Advantages of the latter materials are their stability and luminous efficacy. To develop more efficient integrated devices, the binding of the light-absorbing unit (so-called antenna systems) to the catalytically active reduction unit has been actively pursued in recent years. Due to their availability and price, 3d metal-based (molecular) catalysts are of current interest especially.13 After suitable immobilization on stable solid-state supports, e.g. carbon, quantum dots, metal oxide surfaces or semiconductors, the resulting materials are used for electro-, photo-, and photoelectrocatalytic synthesis of fuels and bulk chemicals.14 With respect to stability, artificial inorganic photovoltaic units (e.g. based on silicon or semiconductors) are advantageous and require little maintenance. However, the maximum efficiency of the current state of the art is only 33%, which is not realistically achievable.
In the quest to create a more efficient integrated device, several research groups are trying to develop so-called “artificial leaves”. Pioneering work from the group of Nocera used cobalt and nickel as catalysts for water splitting analogous to PS II.15 However, this system and following versions are not commercially competitive, yet. In 2015, Lewis and co-workers described another system consisting of a photoanode (for water oxidation) and a photocathode (hydrogen generation from protons) with a membrane in between.16 Despite significant advancements and comparably good incident photoefficiencies, for the key step of the process, the splitting of water, the catalyst – often based on expensive precious metals such as platinum – efficiency, stability and thus costs still do not meet the requirements for large-scale industrial applications.
Challenges in the future
As described vide supra, the efficiency for converting the energy of visible sunlight into chemical energy in natural photosynthesis is comparatively low. For the vast majority of plants it is less than 1%. In contrast, technologies related to artificial photosynthesis make it possible to achieve significantly higher efficiencies already today. By using commercially available solar panels and well-established water electrolysis, “green electrons” can be used to split water into oxygen (as in PS II) and hydrogen with overall efficiencies of 7–10% (almost 10 times more than in the natural system). Nevertheless, the price of the so-produced hydrogen is still higher by a factor of 2–5 compared to that of hydrogen production via reforming of fossil resources. In addition, one must also take into account that hydrogen has a number of disadvantages compared to liquid fuels. Thus, the upscaling and operation costs of these sequential processes remain challenging at the moment. Obviously, a globally operating carbon dioxide tax on fossil fuels will make the present technologies economically more interesting. However, at the moment the main uses will be smaller and decentralized energy applications. In the mid- to long-term future (>2030), integrated devices, which directly convert carbon dioxide with the aid of sunlight (renewable energy) to organic products, might be advantageous. To apply integrated artificial photosynthesis technologies on a global scale, we will also have to find out how carbon dioxide can be most efficiently converted into organic products. In this respect, the amount of energy required for the direct use of CO2 from the atmosphere (only 0.04 percent, i.e. 400 ppm) is also a critical factor for the success of the new technologies. Estimates assume a considerable energy input here (at least 20 kJ mol−1).
Conclusions
The artificial photosynthesis technologies described here rely on basic concepts of biological photosynthesis. In contrast to natural processes, light energy is directly or sequentially used for the synthesis of valuable chemical substances with the help of man-made catalysts (e.g. photocatalysts). In the next decades, artificial photosynthesis could contribute to replacing large quantities of fossil fuels or raw materials. It thus has the potential to make a significant contribution to more environmentally friendly energy generation and climate protection. In recent years, considerable progress has been made by researchers all over the world. Nevertheless, a number of challenges need to be mastered before large-scale technical and economic implementation is possible. These include, in particular, the efficient use of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and the production of cost-effective and long-term stable photocatalysts. Finally, it is worth mentioning that progress in this field will likely trigger the advancement of different research fields like photoredox synthesis, photoreforming, etc.17
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Notes and references

          IRENA (2019), Global energy transformation: A roadmap to 2050, International Renewable Energy Agency, Abu Dhabi,  2019 Search PubMed .
D. Peters, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2006, 78, 229–238 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.worldenergy.org/wp-content/uploads/2013/10/WER_2013_8_Solar_revised.pdf
        .
R. Blankenship, D. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Here, the energy efficiency of photosynthesis is considered to be the overall efficiency of the energy conversion of the visible spectrum of light into organic products.
O. Kruse, J. Rupprecht, J. H. Mussgnug, G. C. Dismukesc and B. Hankamer, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 957–970 RSC .
See for example: 
  (a) D. Leister, Plant Physiol., 2019, 179, 778–793 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, A. R. Oliveira, J. Warnan, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. RuffInês, A. C. Pereira and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 16418–16422 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Haas, R. Krause, R. Weber, M. Demler and G. Schmid, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 32–39 CrossRef CAS .

Artificial Photosynthesis, ed. M.-D. Weitze, acatech – National Academy of Science and Engineering, German National Academy of Sciences Leopoldina, Union of the German Academies of Sciences and Humanities, Munich,  2018, p. 74, see also: https://www.acatech.de/wp-content/uploads/2018/05/en_KPH_web_neu.pdf Search PubMed .
V. Eveloy and T. Gebreegziabher, Energies, 2018, 11, 1824 CrossRef .
For recent reviews see: 
  (a) Z. N. Zahran, Y. Tsubonouchi, E. A. Mohamed and M. Yagi, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 1775–1793 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) B. Zhanga and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 48, 2216–2264 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Remiro-Buenamañana and H. García, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 342–356 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J.-W. Wang, D.-C. Zhong and T.-B. Lu, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2018, 377, 225–236 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Fukuzumi, Y.-M. Lee and W. Nam, Biochem. Soc. Trans., 2018, 46, 1279–1288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hirakawa, M. Hashimoto, Y. Shiraishi and T. Hirai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10929–10936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
For an excellent recent review see: 
  (a) K. E. Dalle, J. Warnan, J. J. Leung, B. Reuillard, I. S. Karmel and E. Reisner, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 2752–2875 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. Steinlechner, A. F. Roesel, E. Oberem, A. Päpcke, N. Rockstroh, F. Gloaguen, S. Lochbrunner, R. Ludwig, A. Spannenberg, H. Junge, R. Francke and M. Beller, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2091–2100 CrossRef CAS .
See for example: 
  (a) K. P. Sokol, W. E. Robinson, J. Warnan, N. Kornienko, M. M. Nowaczyk, A. Ruff, J. Z. Zhang and E. Reisner, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 944–951 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Kreft, R. Schoch, J. Schneidewind, J. Rabeah, E. V. Kondratenko, V. A. Kondratenko, H. Junge, M. Bauer, S. Wohlrab and M. Beller, Chem, 2019, 3 DOI:10.1016/j.chempr.2019.04.006 .
D. G. Nocera, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 767–776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3656–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
