Electrospun lithium metal oxide cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries  - RSC Advances (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3RA45414B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3RA45414B
(Review Article)
RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25576-25601Electrospun lithium metal oxide cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries

        
          
            Sujith 
            Kalluri
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kuok Hau 
            Seng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zaiping 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Hua Kun 
            Liu
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shi Xue 
            Dou
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: zguo@uow.edu.au; shi@uow.edu.au;  Fax: +61-2-4221 5731;   Tel: +61-2-4221 5225
bSchool of Mechanical, Materials and Mechatronics Engineering, University of Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia
Received 
      27th September 2013
    , Accepted 2nd October 2013First published on 8th October 2013AbstractThe superior performance of lithium metal oxide cathode materials is a key aspect for the advanced development of lithium-ion battery (LIB) technology in portable electronics and high-end applications such as renewable energy units, electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs) etc. However, this battery technology suffers from some critical problems related to electrochemical performance, storage efficiency, safety and cost. Tremendous research is performed globally to solve these problems associated with battery performance. One of the potential ways to improve battery electrochemical performance and safety is by developing hybrid lithium metal oxide based one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures by simple and advanced electrospinning processes. These electrospun nanostructures of continuous fibrous morphology are attractive as new cathode materials due to their shorter Li ion diffusion pathways, high surface area and porous network. Since lithium-ion battery technology growth is tremendous and grabbing the attention of the world-wide scientific community, an update on recent progress in such fields is required. In this review, we discuss an in-depth summary about the significant role of electrospun lithium metal oxide based cathode materials in improving ionic conductivity, electrochemical stability, rate capability and safety; as well as possible future research challenges and prospects. In addition, we briefly describe the very recent progress of electrospun materials in anode and separator/electrolyte applications of LIBs.Sujith KalluriSujith Kalluri received his Bachelors in Engineering from Acharya Nagarjuna University and Masters in Nanotechnology from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, India. There he worked for Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, India project on novel electrospun materials as conductive electrodes in batteries and solar cells. Currently, he is a doctoral researcher at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia. His present research focus is on lithium metal oxide based electrospun cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries funded by the AutoCRC. He is also Affiliate Member of The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) and The Electrochemical Society (ECS).Kuok Hau SengKuok Hau (Ivan) Seng graduated from University of Wollongong with Bachelors of Nanotechnology (Honors) in 2008. In 2013, he completed his PhD at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia with thesis titled “High Capacity Nanostructured Electrode Materials for Lithium-ion Batteries”. He is currently an Associate Research Fellow at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials working on cathode materials for batteries, funded by AutoCRC. His research interests include nanomaterial synthesis and their application for energy storage devices. His current research focuses are developing high energy-density and large volume production of electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.Zaiping GuoProf. Zaiping Guo obtained her B.S. (1993) from the Department of Chemistry, Xinjiang University and her Ph.D (2003) from University of Wollongong. After her postdoctoral research with Prof. Hua Kun Liu at the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, she joined the Faculty of Engineering in 2008. Her research interests include synthesis and applications of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion. She has published more than 200 papers in prominent international journals.Hua Kun LiuProf. Hua Kun Liu is a leader of energy materials research group at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia. The energy materials research group has grown from one PhD student in 1994 to 30 postgraduate students and 8 full time staff now. She has won the most competitive ARC Australian Professorial Fellowships in the last 17 years (1994–1998, 1999–2003, 2003–2005 and 2006–2010). She has supervised numerous PhD and Masters to completion and a number of postdoctoral, visiting fellows. She has published 500 journal papers, cited 13000 times, H-index = 52. Her research focuses on clean energy materials.Shi Xue DouProf. Shi Xue Dou is Director at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, UOW. He received PhD in chemistry from Dalhousie University, Canada (1984). He was elected as Fellow of Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering (1994). He was awarded DSc by the University of New South Wales (1998) and three ARC Australian Professorial Fellowships in 1993, 2002 and 2007. He received Australian Government’s Centenary Medal (2003), Engineering Excellence Award (2006), Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award (2008), Vice-Chancellor Outstanding Partnership Award (2012). His publications attracted over 14000 citations with H-index > 52. He is specialised in electronic materials for applications.
1. Introduction
Materials at the nanoscale have grabbed the attention of the scientific research community for many years. Nanoscale materials and composites are at the forefront of energy materials because of their ease in charge conduction mechanisms and excellent textural properties; they also provide a better interfaces and chemical reaction rates.1–3 However, further development of novel nanomaterials for enhanced efficiency of energy storage devices involves implementing various synthesis procedures of nanomaterials and needs a better understanding of their structural, chemical and electrical properties.4
The processing of novel 1D nanostructures, such as nanofibers, nanotubes, nanorods and nanowires, is extensively used in energy storage applications because of improved electrical and physico-chemical properties.5–10 But most of the processing methods of 1D nanomaterials involve several steps: for example, the synthesis of template assisted nanotubes or nanowires involves the preparation of the template prior to the growth of the nanotube/nanowire, template removal after the growth, and further purification of the obtained material. So the processing parameters in the each step may influence the quality of the final product. In order to avoid such complications, template-free and single-step experimental procedures are desirable. Continuous nanofibers are produced with such template-free and single-step methods. Of the various fibre fabrication techniques, electrospinning is a simple, flexible and economical method of processing continuous, ultrathin nanofibers.11–14
1.1. Electrospinning: basics and an overview
Electrospinning is a widely used fabrication technique for fabricating continuous, electro-active nanofibers from a wide range of materials with diameters in the range of several nanometres to the micrometre regime. Out of various classifications of materials, nanofibers by electrospinning can be successfully obtained from polymers, semiconductors, ceramics and their composites.15–18 Because of the decrease in the fibre diameter to nanoscale, these materials show enhanced properties of high surface area to volume ratio, porosity, flexibility, electrochemical and mechanical properties,19 which make them excellent candidates for a broad range of applications such as in energy conversion and storage devices,20 electronic devices21 and tissue engineering22etc., as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Applications of electrospun nanofibers. 
The basic principle behind the processing of nanofibers by electrospinning is based on the unidirectional elongation of a spinnable visco-elastic solution by considering various parameters involved in the process of electrospinning.23 Continuous nanofibers are formed due to the electrostatic Coulombic repulsive forces applied during elongation of the visco-elastic solution as it strengthens to form a fiber as shown in the inset of Fig. 2. For a schematic representation of the electrospinning set-up shown in Fig. 2, a visco-elastic solution is first loaded into a syringe and fed through a flow meter pump. When a high electric potential is applied to the spinnable solution, at a threshold voltage usually around 6 kV, the repulsive force developed in the electro-active solution is greater than its surface tension and a droplet, namely a Taylor cone, is formed at tip of syringe.24,25 This droplet is further elongated because of electrostatic forces, which results in evaporation of the solvent and formation of solidified nanofibers, which are usually collected randomly on the grounded static/rotating mandrel collector substrates. Although the electrospinning process is simple, because of various instabilities such as the Rayleigh instability, an axisymmetric instability, and whipping/bending instability,26,27 it is very complex to control the diameter and morphology of nanofibers for their use in potential applications. Previous researchers have well explained about the optimization of various electrospinning technique parameters that affect the fibre diameter and morphology.11,28 These parameters include the applied electric potential, viscosity and concentration of the solution, the pump flow rate, syringe tip-to-target/collector distance and relative humidity.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the electrospinning process. 

1.1.1. Influence of various parameters on fibre formation. 
The formation of nanofibers by the electrospinning process depends on the optimization of various parameters, which are categorized as solution parameters, processing parameters, and ambient parameters. Nanofibers with various morphologies and assemblies can be formed by varying these parameters.
Processing parameters. 
Even though electrospinning is a relatively simple process, there are various external parameters that can largely influence fiber formation and morphology. These parameters include the applied electric potential, solution flow rate, the temperature of the solution, diameter of the syringe needle, the syringe tip-to-collector distance and movement of the collector screen.
Solution parameters. 
Along with the processing parameters and ambient parameters, many solution parameters have a significant influence on fiber formation and morphology. These parameters include the solution concentration, surface tension, solvent volatility, solvent dielectric effect and solvent conductivity/surface charge density. The surface tension is an important parameter to be considered for control of the bead formation along the fiber length. The viscosity of the solution and its electrical conductivity will influence the extent of stretching of the electrospinning solution, which will directly influence the formation of the resulting fiber. Further system parameters include the molecular weight, molecular weight distribution and architecture (branched or linear etc.) of the polymer used in the preparation of the electrospinning solution.
The formula that determines the diameter of the fibre (ht) formed based on the above parameters is given as follows:11 (1)Typical electrospinning parameter values: electric potential, E: 5–30 kV; flow rate, Q: 0.2–15 ml h−1; tip-to-collector screen distance: 5–20 cm; electric current, I; dimensionless parameter of instability, φ; and surface tension, γ.
Ambient parameters. 
The interaction between the surrounding conditions and the electrospinning solution may have an influence on the fiber diameter and morphology. These surrounding conditions include temperature, humidity, type of atmosphere, pressure and air velocity in the chamber. For instance, pores are formed on the surface of the electrospun fibers because of huge variations in humidity level.29,30 Further, humidity in the surroundings of the electrospinning determines the rate of evaporation of the solvents in the electrospinning solution.31,32 In addition, fibre formation process is influenced by the proportion of air in the electrospinning atmosphere and the pressure of the closed electrospinning set-up.33
Apart from the variation of the above-mentioned parameters, the type of electrospinning process can largely affect the nanofiber assemblies.34 These include choices in nozzle configuration (single, single with emulsion, side-by-side or coaxial nozzles) or solution vs. melt spinning. Table 1 briefly describes the influence of various parameters on the fiber diameter and morphology. Another noted point of the electrospinning process is the type of fiber target collector used. Usually, aluminium foil is used as a collector substrate. However, because of the difficulty in collecting fibers from aluminium substrates, alternatively, based on requirements of many applications, various collector substrates such as conductive paper, conductive cloth, wire mesh,35 pin,36 parallel- or grid-pattern,37 rotating rod, rotating wheel38 and blade-cage system39etc., have been used.28 Also, multiple spinnerets have been designed for high-throughput production and thickness of nanofibrous mats.40
Table 1 Influence of various parameters on fiber diameter and morphology




Parameters
Influence on fiber diameter and morphology





Processing parameters



Electric potential
Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in electric potential and the possibility of beads at low voltage.11


Flow rate
Decrease in flow rate results in smaller fiber diameter and beads are formed at very high flow rate.28


Temperature
The higher the temperature of solution, the more uniform the fiber diameter.29


Diameter of syringe needle
The smaller the needle diameter gives reduction in fiber diameter, clogging and amount of beads.33


Tip to collector distance
Formation of beads at two extreme distances and minimum distance needs to be optimized for bead-free fibers.41


Type of collector
Fiber alignment is possible with a rotating collector.42


 



Solution parameters



Surface tension
Varies with type of material used.43


Concentration
Increase in fiber diameter with increase in concentration.44


Viscosity
No continuous fiber formation with low viscosity and problem in ejection of jets for highly viscous solution. Optimization of solution viscosity is required.29


Conductivity
Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in conductivity.28


 



Ambient parameters



Temperature
Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in temperature.28


Humidity
Increase in depth of pore and formation of pores on the surface of fibers increases with high humidity.28


Pressure
When the pressure in the closed set-up is below atmospheric pressure, electrospinning is not possible.41




Therefore, the fabrication of nanofibers by electrospinning depends on the various parameters involved, such as the electric potential, flow rate, solution concentration, viscosity, surface tension, and conductivity.41–44 The resulting electrospun nanofibers of stable morphology can be obtained by carefully optimizing these parameters.

1.2. Electrospun materials for LIBs

1.2.1. Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs). 
A battery is an enclosed electrochemical device which converts chemical energy to electrical energy and vice versa by redox coupled reactions. It consists of a cathode (positive electrode), an anode (negative electrode), a porous separator film which separates these electrodes from short circuiting, and a conductive electrolyte. Improving the power density and cycle life time are main challenges in battery technology to solve the energy crisis and powering of portable electronics and hibrid electric vehicles.45
LIBs are light-weight rechargeable batteries, which operate at a voltage of around 4 V and with an energy density and power density within the respective ranges of 120–200 Wh kg−1 and 250–1000 W kg−1.46,47 A LIB in its general form consists of a graphite anode and lithium metal oxide based cathode separated by an electrolyte of a solution of a lithium salt in mixed organic solvents. A porous separator film is present in the electrolyte which prevents the electrode from short circuit.48–50Fig. 3 illustrates the schematic representation of the LIB system. The main chemical reactions involved are reversible Li-ion intercalation and de-intercalation cycles between the two electrodes. When the battery is in charge mode with an external power supply, this introduces electrons to the anode and the lithium ions in the cathode intercalate through the electrolyte and are stored in the anode. During this conduction mechanism, electrical energy is stored in the form of chemical energy in the battery. When the battery is in discharge mode, the lithium ions de-intercalate through the electrolyte to the cathode, allowing the flow of electrons to the external load. Many commercial and research reports on LIBs are based on the use of a powder material as the electrode material, such as graphite as the anode and lithium metal oxide as the cathode.51–55 During lithium-ion intercalation and de-intercalation cycles, these powder materials have long diffusion pathways for the lithium ions which slows down the reaction mechanism with the electrodes, thereby resulting in diminution of the electrochemical performance for LIBs.7,56 Therefore, electrodes with advanced nanostructured materials need to be prepared which can overcome the problems of the ionic conduction mechanism for their use as electrodes and electrolytes in LIBs.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of basic mechanism in LIBs. 


1.2.2. Electrospun electrodes. 
To obtain a high power density, energy density and operating voltage for LIBs, electrospun nanofibers are an interesting host material for the electrodes because of their ease of synthesis by the low-cost electrospinning process, the shorter diffusion pathways of the Li-ions when compared to powder materials, a faster intercalation–de-intercalation mechanism and better electrochemical reaction kinetics at the electrode–electrolyte interface due to their high porosity, reduced dissolution during the cycling process because of high stability and specific surface area, and exclusion of the use of binders and electro-active additives.57–61Table 2 summarizes the advantages and disadvantages in use of nanofiber technology in LIB electrodes and other related fields. Furthermore, due to the small pore size, high porosity and shorter desirable diffusion pathways for Li-ion transport, electrospun nanofibrous mats can be used as the porous separator between the two electrodes which enables high electrochemical performance.62,63 However, low throughput and fiber packing density limit their application in various fields. Commercialised needleless electrospinning technology can resolve the problem and increase the throughput and fiber packing density. In this section, recent developments in the area of electrospun materials for LIB electrodes, separator membranes and electrolytes are briefly explained and outlined in Table 3.
Table 2 Advantages and disadvantages of electrospun fibers in energy applications




Application
Advantages
Disadvantages




Lithium-ion batteries
Inexpensive
Low fiber packing density


High charging rate
Low throughput


High power density




Short Li-ion diffusion pathways




High porosity




Solar cells
Do not need direct sunlight




High efficiency




Flexible electronics
Low-cost




Transparent




Light-weight




Flexible






Table 3 Outline of electrospun materials for lithium-ion batteries




Battery component
Electrospun material
Ref.




Cathode
LiCoO2 nanofibers

67 and 215



LiCoO2/MgO coaxial fibers

69



LiFePO4 nanofibers

71



Carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanowires

74



LiFePO4/graphene/C nanofibers

82



Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 nanofibers

71



Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4/C nanofibers

72



LiF/Fe/C nanofibers

73



Hollow LiNiO2 fibers

197



LiMn2O4 nanofibers

215 and 217



Porous LiMn2O4 hollow nanofibers

218



Mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers

228



β-Ag0.33V2O5 nanorods

233



V2O5 nanofibers

66, 229 and 237



V2O5 nanofibers with carbon coating

235



 


Anode
Carbon nanofibers

93



Carbon/Ni composite fibers

96



Carbon nanofibers decorated with Ni nanoparticles

97



CNTs/graphitic carbon nanospheres coaxial fibers

99



Si/carbon composite nanofibers

104



Si nanoparticles/porous carbon hybrid nanofibers

102



TiO2 nanofibers

109, 118 and 119



TiO2–MWCNTs nanofibers, rice-grained structure

111



TiO2–graphene composite nanofibers

112



TiO2@carbon composite nanofibers

114



TiO2Nx nanofibers

115 and 116



Porous hollow SnO2 nanofibers

127



Porous hollow SnO2 nanotubes

128



SnO2@carbon composite nanofibers

129



SnO2 nanocrystal-decorated carbon nanofibers

130



Ni–SnO2–C nanofibers

131



CaSnO3 nanotubes

132



Egg-roll-like CaSnO3 nanotubes

133



NiO nanofibers

135



CuO nanofibers

136



α-Fe2O3 nanorods and hollow nanorods

137 and 138



Porous NiO–ZnO hybrid nanofibers

139



ZnMn2O4 nanofibers, nanorods, nanowebs

141



ZnFe2O4 nanofibers

142



Porous ZnCo2O4 nanotubes

143



Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers

120 and 121



Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers with TiN/TiOxNy layer

117



Ag–Li4Ti5O12 and Nb–Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers

122 and 123



TiNb2O7 nano-strings

124



Li4Ti5O12–C composite nanofibers

125



 


Separator/electrolyte
PVdF–HFP nanocomposite membrane

148



PVdF-co-CTFE nanofibers coated on substrate

149



PVdF–LiTFSI membrane

150



PI@PVdF–HFP core@sheath nanofibers

148



TPU/PVdF porous fibrous electrolyte

154



PAMPSLi fibrous electrolyte

155





Cathode materials. 
Recent advances in electrospun materials for LIB cathode application have focused on electrospinning lithium-based transition metal oxides with various processing parameters, pre- and post-treatments of electrospinning, and a wide range of morphologies and composites.64–66 Lithium transition metal oxides include LiCoO2, LiNiO2, LiMnO2, LiMn2O4, LiFePO4, and LiV3O8etc., and show a better electrochemical behaviour as cathodes for LIBs.
No review on cathode materials can be complete without a brief description of the most commercial battery cathode material LiCoO2, which shows an improved performance in specific energy density (theoretical value 140 mAh g−1) and a better charge–discharge life.67–69 Since this review focuses on the lithium metal oxide based composites, advanced developments in electrospun materials of LiCoO2 and other lithium metal oxides will be explained in the coming sections. This section includes a brief discussion about non-lithium metal oxide based materials such as lithium iron phosphate, and non-metal oxides etc.
LiFePO4 is a potential cathode material for LIBs due to its thermally stable and large specific capacity (170 mA h g−1), longer lifetime, improved electrochemical performance, being economical and environmentally friendly. However, because of the complexity of its structure, electrons and ions cannot easily penetrate through the material and thus results in low ionic and electronic conductivity, and high impedance in LIBs. Some of the approaches to avoid these problems are development of novel 1D nanostructures, decreasing the particle size, surface engineering with carbonaceous materials and cationic doping,70 which can introduce numerous ionic and electronic pathways within the complex structure and protect surface from the formation of undesirable by-products. In addition, LiFePO4 suffers from a low operating voltage when compared to other cathode materials since the redox potential of Fe2+/Fe3+ is 3.5 V. One of the alternatives for increasing the operating voltage is by substituting manganese at the 4c site in LiFePO4. Further electrochemical properties of these materials can be enhanced by fabrication of nanofibers by the electrospinning process. A recent report by Kang et al.71 discussed the study of the morphology change of Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 nanofibers (x = 0, 0.1, 0.3) and observed that the surface roughness of such electrospun nanofibers increases with manganese content. This study suggests that the enhanced electrochemical properties can be obtained by increased manganese content in morphologically stable and high surface area Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 nanofibers and find a potential application as a cathode material in LIBs. Since the increase in manganese content in Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 results in improvement of the cell operating voltage from 3.5 V (x = 0) to 4.1 V (x = 1) and thereby the specific energy density,72 further tuning of the material can improve the battery performance. The in situ incorporation of carbon into the electrospun Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 nanofibrous mat (Fig. 4a) (x = 0, 0.25, 0.50, 0.75, 1) was proposed by von Hagen et al.72 to improve the specific capacity and cyclability. This in situ incorporation of carbon creates a conductive porous matrix around the fiber which serves to protect the fibre morphology and to enhance the overall conductivity of the composite fibrous matrix. Fig. 4b reveals a homogeneous dispersion of LiMnPO4 (x = 1) crystallites in the porous carbon matrix. Interestingly, these nanofibers showed improved charge–discharge capacity values of 238 and 229 mC cm−2 respectively and cyclability even after 50 cycles as shown in Fig. 4c.
 Fig. 4  (a) Digital photograph of nanofibrous mat before and after calcination. (b) TEM image of LiMnPO4/C nanofiber at higher magnification and (c) specific capacity of LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4 for different discharge rates. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 72.) 
However, these lithium transition metal phosphates make use of only one oxidation state of the transition metals for one lithium intercalation/de-intercalation mechanism per formula unit. To improve the capacity of the cathodes, all the oxidation states of the material should be involved in the lithium intercalation/de-intercalation process. A carbon fibre matrix involves many active sites and improves the lithium intercalation/de-intercalation reaction by fast Li-ion diffusion and charge transfer. Zhang et al.73 introduced LiF/Fe/C electrospun nanofibers from the 21 wt% of precursor solution with uniform incorporation of active cationic LiF and Fe particles. This cathode material exhibited an enhanced reversible discharge capacity of over 472 mAh g−1 and stable cyclability even after 30 cycles. However, there is a problem associated with oxidation of the Fe ions during the cycling process. An electrospun triaxial LiFePO4 nanowire with a vapour-grown carbon fiber (VGCF) core column and an outer shell of amorphous carbon are fabricated which can prevent the oxidation of Fe2+ because of well ordered carbon coating.74 Such electrodes resulted in improved performance but very poor structural stability during the preparation of electrodes. To improve the structural stability, Lee et al.75 developed an electrospun material of the LiFePO4/carbon composite from the precursor solutions of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) in dimethylformamide (DMF) and commercially available LiFePO4. These electrodes showed an improved electrical conductivity (2.23 × 10−2 S cm−1) at 800 °C and a discharge capacity of 153.18 and 61.06 mAh g−1 at a current density of 0.1 C and 10 C respectively. There is even good thermal stability; the rate performance needs to be further improved. A similar performance is shown by electrospun carbon nanofibers coated with LiFePO4.76 Toprakci et al.77 prepared LiFePO4/carbon composite nanofibers by electrospinning process from PAN and LiFePO4 precursor under optimized conditions of the precursor material and with a further calcination/carbonization process. As a result, these optimized fibers (8% LiFePO4–4% PAN) calcined/carbonized at 700 °C for 18 h achieved a high capacity of 166 mAh g−1 at a current rate of 0.05 C and an improved rate capability with increased capacity with cycles due to the good penetration of the electrolyte into the active material.78 However, further research is required in terms of improving the overall conductivity of the system. Electrospun LiFePO4/C submicrofibers with a crystal size of 30 nm are synthesized from a precursor solution of LiNO3, Fe(NO3)3·9H2O, NH4H2PO4, citric acid and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP).79 These fibrous electrodes delivered an initial charge and discharge capacity of 169 and 166 mAh g−1 respectively at a rate of 0.1 C with 98.2% Coulombic efficiency. After 150 cycles from 0.1 to 5 C, these electrodes remarkably delivered a discharge capacity of 165 mAh g−1 (reset to 0.1 C), signifying the improved structural stability of the composite fibers, which is due to conductive fibers with mesopores and a high surface area (167.729 m2 g−1). This carbon fiber matrix, however, limits the conductivity and thus the electrochemical performance, which can be improved by incorporating some other electro-active materials such as graphene and carbon nanotubes etc.80,81 Toprakci et al.82 processed electrospun LiFePO4/graphene/C composite nanofibers by incorporation of LiFePO4 nanoparticles in a graphene-coated carbon nanofiber matrix. These fibers reported an initial reversible capacity of 165 mAh g−1 at a rate of 0.05 C and, remarkably, the same value of the capacity (166 mAh g−1) was achieved after 50 cycles. Graphene flakes, smaller sized particles of LiFePO4 nanoparticles and carbon coating functions as a protective layer on the active material and improves the electrochemical stability and rate capability at high discharge rates.83,84 The same researchers developed carbon nanotubes (CNTs)-loaded LiFePO4/C composite fibers, resulting in 169 mAh g−1 at 0.05 C over the entire 50 cycles. This excellent cyclability, rate capacity and structural stability are attributed to the loaded CNTs which form conductive bridges between the LiFePO4 nanoparticles and therefore enhance the conductivity.85 Zhu et al.86 proposed electrospun carbon-coated single crystalline LiFePO4 nanowires with a diameter of around 100 nm (see Fig. 5a). Interestingly, these nanowire-based electrodes reported an almost theoretical capacity value with 98% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 60 °C as shown in Fig. 5c. This excellent result is attributed to the single-crystalline nature of the nanowires and the protective carbon coating (Fig. 5b). Owing to the importance of LiFePO4, A123 Systems Inc. and Sony came up with LiFePO4 batteries for power tools and electric vehicle applications respectively. However, their energy densities (∼578 Wh kg−1) are low due to the limited operating voltage at ∼3.4 V vs. Li, which is not sufficient for high-end applications. Hence, it is necessary to have a new class of cathode materials such as LiMnPO4, which could deliver an energy density of ∼700 Wh kg−1 with an operating voltage of ∼4.1 V vs. Li.87
 Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of electrospun nanowires. (b) HRTEM image with SAED region and (c) cycling stability of carbon-coated LiFePO4 at 1 C rate at room temperature and at 60 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 86.) 
In a similar class of cathode materials, monoclinic structured amphoteric lithium vanadium phosphate (Li3V2(PO4)3) is also a potential cathode material for LIBs because of its three-dimensional stable framework, high theoretical capacity (197 mAh g−1), good reversible extraction of three Li+ ions and excellent cycling performance.88,89 Such amphoteric materials are quite suitable for symmetrical battery design. However, the electrochemical performance is limited because of its poor electronic conductivity (2.0 × 10−8 S cm−1). This problem can be addressed by developing novel nanostructured Li3V2(PO4)3, which could improve both the electronic and ionic conductivities. Chen et al.90 proposed the Li3V2(PO4)3/C nanofiber composite fabricated through the electrospinning process. Such electrodes exhibited a high discharge capacity of 190 and 132 mAh g−1 at 0.1 C and 20 C respectively. This excellent performance is attributed to the combined mesoporosity, electronic conductivity and large surface area of the Li3V2(PO4)3 nanofibers and carbon fibers. Further sections in this review will explain about various lithium metal oxides (LiCoO2, LiNiO2 and LiMn2O4) and their electrospun composite materials, substituted lithium metal oxides and non-lithium metal oxides such as vanadium pentoxide etc.
Anode materials. 
The choice of anode material for LIBs greatly influences the charge–discharge rate capability, cyclability and amount of lithium storage capacity. To face challenges in the present generation of batteries, extensive research is required in the area of anode materials. Some features of the ideal anode are as follows: it must accommodate a large amount of Li ions per formula unit, have a potential as high as Li metal, be insoluble in solvents of the electrolyte, be stable and generate high capacity, and be economical and eco-friendly.91 Along with the choice of material, the morphology and structure also play a key role in the performance of the battery. As discussed earlier, electrospun nanofibers show a significant role in the improvement of the lithium ion diffusion rate and hence the electrochemical performance.
Firstly, we briefly discuss the importance of graphitic carbon as an anode material. Carbonaceous materials, such as carbon allotropes, and graphite are potential candidates for use as an anode material in batteries due to their high cell efficiency, economical and eco-friendly nature. Amongst these, graphite shows an excellent performance because of its abundance, its promising reversibility with high Coulombic efficiency and a theoretical specific capacity of 372 mAh g−1.92 However, if LIBs are to be suitable for electric vehicles (EVs) and hybrid electric vehicles (HEVs), the efficiency of the graphitic carbon anode materials needs to be improved in terms of cell life time, cell operating voltage and specific capacity. One of the best approaches for improving the performance of a battery is by designing the nanostructure of the anode material. For instance, Liu et al.93 reported that carbon nanofibers can accommodate more lithium than the usual intercalation mechanism in graphite because of their turbo-static storage. Another report on carbon nanofibers (CNFs) prepared by low-cost electrospinning of polyacrylonitrile (PAN) showed superior electrochemical performance.94 The fibres exhibited an initial discharge capacity of 826 mAh g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1, and at the end of the 200th cycle the Li/CNF cell showed a discharge capacity of 826 mAh g−1. Further, the Coulombic efficiency is almost 100% except for the first few cycles, which indicates that easy reversible storage of lithium can be achieved in CNFs rather than the intercalation mechanism in graphitic anodes. However, CNFs suffer from poor cyclic stability due to the formation of a solid electrolyte interface (SEI) film and slow electrochemical kinetics. Improvement of the reversible capacity with cycling stability is the key challenge for CNFs. Incorporation of an electro-active metal in the carbon material can facilitate the formation of many conducting pathways, improve the charge–discharge mechanism, which enhances the cyclic stability and stabilizes the SEI film formation during the charge–discharge cycles.95 In the recent study, electrospun carbon nanofibers with a homogeneous dispersion of Ni were processed from polyacrylonitrile (PAN)/dimethylformamide (DMF) with nickel nitrate solution.96 These composite fibres showed a high initial specific discharge and reversible capacity of 1698 and 643 mAh g−1 respectively at a current density of 135 mA g−1. Interestingly, after 50 cycles a high reversible capacity (457 mAh g−1) was recorded. This good cyclic stability and improved performance can be attributed to the combined advantages of fibre morphology and the conducting Ni network. In a similar context, electrospun carbon nanofibers decorated with electrochemically-inert nickel nanoparticles were prepared by Ji et al.97 Under the optimized amount of nickel nanoparticles (12 wt%), these electrodes revealed the highest reversible capacity of 728 and 541 mAh g−1 at the first and 50th cycles respectively at the current density of 50 mA g−1 and with a capacity retention of 75%. To note, these nanofibers showed very little capacity degradation even with a high current density of 500 mA g−1, which signifies the cycling stability and improved electrochemical performance. In the significant research on carbonaceous anode materials, hybrid carbon nanomaterials and graphene composites have proven to be potential alternatives for anode applications because of their structural integrity for creating numerous free sites for lithium storage and hence improving the battery performance.98,99 Chen et al. processed an electrospun composite material of amorphous carbon nanotubes decorated with hollow graphitic carbon nanospheres.99 This composite material showed an excellent electrochemical performance with a high reversible specific capacity of 969 mAh g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 as shown in Fig. 6b. Moreover, a reversible capacity of 965 mAh g−1 was maintained after 100 cycles. This improved stability and electrochemical performance could be attributed to the additional free sites for Li-ion storage in the unique structure of the composite material with defects in hollow walls, the hollow structure with nanopores and nanospheres uniformly dispersed on the fibre structure as shown in Fig. 6a.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM image and (b) charge–discharge profile of the composite nanotubes at a current density of 50 mA g−1 between 3 and 0 V vs. Li+/Li. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 99.) 
Tremendous research in silicon (Si) reveals it as a potential candidate as an anode material for LIBs because of its low-cost, ease of availability, low electrochemical potential and excellent theoretical capacity, of 4200 mAh g−1, over that of carbon materials.100,101 However, bulk Si cannot withstand the stresses associated with charge–discharge cycles, which results in the poor performance of the battery.102,103 Alternatively, Si nanostructures have the capability to overcome these volumetric stresses with charge–discharge cycling. For example, Huang et al.,104 synthesized electrospun composite nanofibers of silicon and carbon from a PAN/DMF solution with Si powder. The first charge and discharge of these electrodes showed a capacity of 1531 and 1004 mAh g−1 respectively at a current density 150 mA g−1 and a capacity retention of 66%. This loss is due to the side reactions in the electrolyte and SEI formation. Interestingly, a 94% Coulombic efficiency was achieved in the second cycle with a discharge capacity of 1069 mAh g−1. But after 100 cycles, this reversible capacity had declined to 390 mAh g−1, which represents a poor cycling performance. As an improvement, silicon nanoparticles/porous carbon hybrid nanofibers were prepared from a stable solution of Si nanoparticles in PAN/DMF solution by electrospinning and with a further calcinations process.105 In the first cycle with a current density of 0.5 A g−1, these hybrid fibres reported a charge and discharge capacity of 1598 and 2643 mAh g−1 respectively with a Coulombic efficiency of 60.5%. This capacity degradation can be due to the SEI film formation. After 100 cycles, these fibres maintained a reversible charge capacity of 1104 mAh g−1 with a capacity retention of 69.1%. These results signify the superior performance of these hybrid fibres in terms of cycling stability.
It is anticipated that metal oxides have a high lithium ion storage capacity when compared to carbon or silicon materials, owing to their well-ordered and crystalline structures.106 One-dimensional (ID) nanostructures of such metal oxides are of special interest as anode materials in LIBs because of their high specific surface area, structure-directed electron conduction mechanism and lithium-ion storage capability.107,108 The titanium dioxide (TiO2) anatase phase is abundant, economical and eco-friendly, and has the features of high theoretical capacity (335 mAh g−1) and cyclability with a potential anode application in lithium-ion batteries. Electrospun TiO2 nanofibers are prepared from the precursor solution of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), ethanol and titanium(IV) isopropoxide in the presence of acetic acid.109 At first cycle, with a current density of 150 mA g−1, the specific charge and discharge capacity of ∼120 and ∼175 mAh g−1 respectively are obtained. But due to the more crystalline nature of the TiO2 nanofibers, the discharge capacity is lower than that of TiO2 nanoparticles (∼270 mAh g−1). The crystalline nature of the TiO2 nanofibers results in more surface defects and thus hinders the electron conduction and Li+ diffusion mechanisms. However, 23% capacity fading is observed for nanofibers over 2–50 cycles, which is very lower than that of the nanoparticles (63%). This suggests the better stability of the TiO2 nanofibers for electrochemical performance. Lu et al.110 fabricated a three-dimensional (3D) architecture of anatase TiO2 nanofibers as a potential anode for LIBs. These electrodes delivered a range of capacities 140–192 mAh g−1 for five cycles at a current rate of 0.5 C with a capacity loss of 1.0% per cycle. At the current rate of 1.5 C, the discharge capacities ranged from 87 to 170 mAh g−1 in the first 30 cycles with a capacity loss of 1.6% per cycle. Such a type of 3D architecture can enhance the Li-ion diffusion and thus the rate capability. Tailoring of these fibres by coating or incorporation of carbon materials can greatly influence the capacity values and hence the battery performance. In such an attempt, Zhu et al.111 processed an electrospun TiO2–multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) nanostructure from titanium isopropoxide and commercially available MWCNTs. Under the optimized conditions, these TiO2–MWCNTs (4%) nanofibers showed an initial charge and discharge capacity of ∼139 and ∼179 mAh g−1 respectively at a current density of 150 mA g−1. Addressing the improved cyclic stability, after 800 cycles, these nanofibers delivered a discharge capacity of ∼136 mAh g−1 with a capacity fading of 8% from 10 to 800 cycles. This enhanced performance can be attributed to the highly porous conducting 3D network of the electrospun fibres due to evaporation of the binder polymer during the sintering process. Similarly, highly stable TiO2–graphene composite nanofibers are prepared by the electrospinning process from polystyrene, titanium isopropoxide/DMF solution with separately prepared graphene nanosheets.112 The cell with these composite nanofibers delivered an initial discharge and charge capacity of 260 and 185 mAh g−1 respectively at a constant current rate of 33 mA g−1. The cell exhibited an excellent cycling stability except over a few initial cycles, after which the Coulombic efficiency was reported to be 99% with a discharge capacity of 153 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles. The capacity fading in the initial cycles can be due to variation of the unit cell volume in the phase transition.113 However, a report by Yang et al.114 on electrospun TiO2–carbon composite nanofibers showed an excellent cycling stability and high reversible capacity of 206 mAh g−1 up to 100 cycles with a current density of 30 mA g−1. The first discharge and charge cycles reported a specific capacity of 220.8 and 217.1 mAh g−1 respectively with a Coulombic efficiency of nearly 100%. The improved rate capability is due to the shorter Li+ diffusion pathways and diffusion of the electrolyte through the interconnected nanopores on the fibres during the charge–discharge cycles. Recent findings by Kim et al.115 demonstrated nitrogen-doped TiO2 nanofibers by the electrospinning process. In an attempt at improving the electrical conductivity, a small amount of nitrogen is doped with the TiO2 nanofibers, which results in a specific charge capacity of 224 and 185 mAh g−1 with improved performance than seen elsewhere in similar systems reported.116,117 Owing to the significance of the TiO2 fiber system in LIBs, Ramakrishna and co-workers conducted extensive research and uncovered the performances of full-cell assembly configurations of LiFePO4/TiO2 and LiMn2O4/TiO2 with commercially available olivine LiFePO4 and spinel LiMn2O4 cathodes, which delivered the reversible capacities of ∼103 and ∼104 mAh g−1 at a current density of 100 and 150 mA g−1 with an operating voltage of ∼1.4 V and ∼2.1 V, respectively.118,119 Lastly, Kim et al.122 reported Ag-doped spinel Li4Ti5O12 electrospun nanofibers with a superior rate capability of 20% more than that of bare Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers as reported elsewhere,120,121 which could be due to the increase in charge transfer rate with incorporation of the Ag nanoparticles. This is the same as the case observed in Nb-doped Li4Ti5O12–C composite fibers and TiNb2O7 electrospun strings.123–125
As another part, tin dioxide (SnO2) is also an attractive anode material for LIBs due to its high theoretical capacity (781 mAh g−1).126 However, implementation of SnO2 nanostructures in batteries is quite challenging because of the large initial irreversible capacity induced by Li2O formation and the capacity degradation due to the volume difference. One of the effective approaches for overcoming these problems is to process the 1D nanostructures of SnO2, which can improve the cycling properties because of their high specific surface area with shorter diffusion pathways. Electrospun SnO2 nanofibers with a uniform distribution of nanoparticles were obtained from a tin(II) 2-ethylhexanoate–polyacrylonitrile (PAN) solution and further thermal pyrolysis.127 These nanofibers reported an initial discharge and charge capacity of 1650 and 824 mAh g−1 respectively with a current rate of 100 mA g−1. Further, after 50 cycles, the SnO2 nanofibers showed a reversible capacity of 446 mAh g−1 and an excellent rate capability of 477.7 mAh g−1 at 10.0 C. Similarly, electrospun porous SnO2 nanotubes reported a high specific capacity of 807 mAh g−1 at a current density 180 mA g−1 and voltage range of 0–2 V.128 However, capacity fading is very high and can be due to some decomposition reactions in the electrolyte. To solve this problem, SnO2–carbon composite nanofibers were prepared by simple the electrospinning technique as shown in Fig. 7a. The composite nanofibers consist of SnO2 nanoparticles/nanocrystals of crystal size 5–10 nm that are uniformly distributed in the carbon matrix fibers.129 The electrochemical performance showed quite promising results of an improved reversible capacity of 420 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles at a constant current of 100 mA g−1, which is more than that of the SnO2 nanofibers (see Fig. 7c). This improved performance can be attributed to the direct contact of some SnO2 nanoparticles/crystals with the electrolyte during the cycling process and the well-guided transport of electrons in the fibers as shown in the schematic Fig. 7b. In addition, the carbon matrix acts as a ‘buffer zone’ to regulate the agglomeration of SnO2 nanoparticles and withstand high volume variations. Similarly, carbon nanofibers decorated with SnO2 nanocrystals are prepared by electrospinning with a subsequent calcinations process.130 The composite fibres delivered an initial reversible capacity of 913 and 539.4 mAh g−1 after 30 cycles with a cycling rate of 100 mA g−1. Interestingly, Ni-doped SnO2–C nanofibers delivered 447.6 mAh g−1 at a current density of 200 mA g−1 after 100 cycles.131 This improved performance could be attributed to the improved structural stability and conductivity of the fibers upon Ni cation doping, as mentioned earlier. Unfortunately, these SnO2 systems report a poor capacity retention due to the large volume distortions during a large number of cycles. Thus, various Sn-based composite oxides are researched to address the problem of poor capacity retention. For example, electrospun porous CaSnO3 nanotubes and egg-roll-like CaSnO3 nanotubes showed excellent capacity retention, which could be attributed to the uniform distribution of electrochemically active and inactive phases in the compound that can accommodate volume changes.132,133
 Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of SnO2–carbon nanofibers. (b) Schematic representation of electronic conductivity in the nanofibers during the charge–discharge process and (c) cycling performance of SnO2–carbon and SnO2 nanofibers at the same current density of 100 mA g−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 129.) 
A report by Poizot et al.134 demonstrated that nanostructured transition metal oxides undergo lithium charge–discharge reactions and show a 2–3× increase in reversible capacity when compared to graphitic anode materials as per the reversible chemical reaction: MxOy + 2yLi+ + 2ye− ↔ xM0 + yLi2O (M = Ni, Cu, Fe, Co etc.). Among the various metal oxides, NiO is quite promising as an anode candidate due to its ease of preparation, low-cost, non-toxic property and high theoretical capacity (718 mAh g−1). Nevertheless, bulk NiO is poor in its cycling stability because of its semiconducting/insulating character (band gap Eg: 4.3 eV) and volume changes during redox reactions. It is well known that tuning the nanostructured morphology to 1D can overcome these issues. Recently, Aravindan et al.135 synthesized high rate performance electrospun NiO nanofibers from a precursor solution of nickel acetate, N,N-dimethylformamide, poly(vinyl acetate) in acetic acid and followed by heat treatment. This NiO fibrous cell delivered an initial discharge and charge capacity of 1280 and 784 mAh g−1 respectively with a current density of 100 mA g−1 and an operating voltage of 1.27 V vs. Li. After 100 cycles, the discharge capacity of the same is 583 mAh g−1, which is 75% of its initial charge capacity. It is notable that these increment values can be attributed to the 1D morphology of NiO and its pseudo-capacitive behaviour. Similarly, the CuO counterpart showed a stable discharge capacity of 452 mAh g−1 over 100 cycles at a current density of 100 mA g−1.136 Electrospun α-Fe2O3 nanorods and hollow fibers reported discharge capacities in the range of 1000–1290 mAh g−1 over 40 cycles at various current rates, once again, however, revealing the importance of electrospun materials in LIBs.137,138 On the other hand, hybrid materials show some novel features which are quite challenging in a single system, such as high stability during charge–discharge cycles and volume variations of the material. For example, electrospun porous NiO–ZnO hybrid nanofibers are prepared by electrospinning which consists of interconnected primary nanocrystals and many nanopores as conducting bridges between NiO and ZnO.139 These fibers reported a huge discharge capacity of 949 mAh g−1 after 120 cycles with a current density of 0.2 A g−1 and 707 mAh g−1 at a current density of 3.2 A g−1, with evaluation of the increased performance being due to the novel morphology of the nanoparticle heterostructures between NiO and ZnO. The same researchers studied the Ta doping aspects in Nb2O5 electrospun nanostructures and revealed an improvement in capacity retention when compared with the particle and non-doped counterparts.140 Finally, Teh et al.141,142 processed ZnMn2O4 and ZnFe2O4 nanofibers, which delivered a reversible capacity of 705 and 733 mAh g−1 after 30 cycles at a current density of 60 mA g−1, whereas electrospun porous ZnCo2O4 nanotubes showed a high reversible capacity of 794 mAh g−1 at a high current density of 2000 mA g−1.143
Separators/electrolytes. 
A separator in a LIB is a porous film between the anode and cathode, which prevents direct contact of the electrodes and enables ionic flow in the electrolyte. Chemically and mechanically stable micro-porous polymer membranes are used in conventional batteries. However, they suffer from low thermal stability, wettability and porosity, which affects the overall battery performance. Hence, electrospinning is quite a suitable technique for the development of highly porous and thick separators which can enhance the electrolyte intake and ionic conductivity.4,7,144–146 Electrospun nanofibrous mats of polyvinylidenedifluoride (PVDF), polyethylene oxide (PEO), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and their derivatives are commonly used in batteries as separators, which provide a thin, porous structure with better ionic conductivity.146,147 Liu et al.148 prepared electrospun core@sheath fibrous material of polyimide–polyvinylidene fluoride–hexafluoropropylene (PI@PVdF–HFP) from a coaxial electrospinning process, which demonstrated a remarkable tensile strength of 53 MPa and high thermal stability up to 300 °C (see Fig. 8a and 8b). These properties can be attributed to a reduced pore size and uniform pore size distribution which lead to a better rate capability and good capacity retention. Electrospun materials of polyvinylidene fluoride-co-chlorotrifluoroethylene (PVdF-co-CTFE) and PVdF-co-CTFE/polyvinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene (PVDF-co-HFP) were prepared and their electrolyte intake capacity was tested by coating these nanofibers on commercially available microporous battery separator membranes. The nanofibers showed good adhesion to the membranes and resulted in higher electrolyte uptakes than uncoated membranes, which can be due to the smaller diameters and higher polarity of the electrospun PVdF-co-CTFE.149 The electrospun material of polyvinylidene fluoride–lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonamide (PVdF–LiTFSI) was prepared by Truong et al.150 and they investigated the decrease in fiber diameter that occurs when LiTFSI is doped with PVdF compared to bare PVdF fibers, which significantly improved the wettability and mechanical strength. UV or thermal cross-linking of these membranes resulted in further improvement in the wettability of electrolyte intake and mechanical strength. Moreover, the LiTFSI-doped membrane and the thermally cross-linked membrane showed excellent electrochemical performance compared with commercially available separators. Similarly, PAN-based electrospun materials showed an improved performance in terms of improved cyclic stability and high rate capability with lower diffusion resistance, due to the high porosities and structural stability of these membranes.151 Realizing the importance of nanofibers, DuPont prepared commercially available Energain™ battery separators which can improve the performance and longevity of LIBs in electric vehicle applications.152 Polymer electrolytes play a significant role in LIBs because of their robustness, safety and portable nature, with a mechanism of electrolyte solution immersed in a polymer matrix, known as a polymer gel. However, these gels sometimes suffer from poor thermal and mechanical stability. This problem is resolved by developing novel porous matrices which provide better interconnection pathways when compared to polymer gels. Such highly porous membranes are developed by feasible electrospinning processes, which have the advantage of high electrolyte intake with homogeneous distribution of the electrolyte. For instance, electrospun PVDF-graft-poly-tert-butyl acrylate (g-tBA) nanofibrous mat reported an enhanced ionic conductivity and battery cycling performance due to its highly crystalline morphology and lower interfacial resistance.153 Moreover, a recent report on a highly porous novel electrospun material of polyurethane (TPU)/PVdF showed an improved electrolyte uptake, an ionic conductivity of 1.6 mS cm−1 and an electrochemical stability of 5 V vs. Li/Li+, which makes this material a potential candidate as a polymer electrolyte in LIBs.154 Similarly, poly(lithium-2-acrylamido-2-methylpropanesulfonic acid) (PAMPSLi) fibrous polymer electrolytes resulted in an ionic conductivity of 2.12 × 10−5 S cm−1, excellent structural stability and electrochemical stability of 4.4 V vs. Li/Li+.155
 Fig. 8  Digital photographs of the polypropylene (PP) separator and PI@PVDF–HFP non-woven (a) before and (b) after thermal treatment at 150 °C for 1 h. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 148.) 

2. Lithium metal oxide composite based electrospun cathode materials
2.1. Lithium cobalt oxide
Goodenough and co-workers proposed that LiCoO2 has a layered stoichiometric α-NaFeO2 structure which enables Li-ions to dissociate during electrochemical reactions. This peculiar feature of LiCoO2 makes it a potential candidate as a cathode material in LIBs.156 The first commercial and safe LIB was developed by Sony with a LiCoO2 cathode and carbon anodes and reported a theoretical capacity of 130 mAh g−1 at room temperature.157 This relatively low capacity is attributed to the structural properties of LiCoO2, the poor stability of the electrodes and low reaction rates. Later, several reports focused on improvement of the capacity by surface modification of the LiCoO2 particles by metal oxide or phosphates and further heat treatments,158,159 and demonstrated that the improvement in capacity (170 mAh g−1 over 70 cycles) is due to the prevention of phase transitions during the cycling process. Although a larger reversible capacity can be achieved, thermal stability, low availability and high price are the main challenges for LiCoO2 in terms of its safety and further applications such as in EVs and HEVs. To overcome these problems, electrospinning is a low-cost and simple procedure for fabrication of 1D nanostructures, which offer attractive properties such as high specific surface area, short ionic and electronic diffusion pathways and mechanical stability,160 which can enhance the specific capacity and thus the battery performance and safety.
LiCoO2 nanofibers are fabricated by a sol–gel-based electrospinning process from lithium acetate, cobalt acetate and citric acid as precursor materials and under optimized conditions of electrospinning parameters such as an applied voltage of 25 kV, and a distance between the nozzle tip and collector screen of 30 cm.67 The obtained xerogel fibers are transformed to structurally stable LiCoO2 nanofibers upon further heat treatments. The galvanostatic charging and discharging profiles of these fibrous electrodes reveal the initial charging and discharging capacity of 216 and 182 mAh g−1 respectively at a potential plateau around 3.9–4.0 V. In the second cycle, there is sudden drop in the charge and discharge capacity, to 193 and 173 mAh g−1 respectively. However, after 20 cycles the discharge capacity is maintained at 123 mAh g−1 which is 64% of the initial value. Further crystallographic and structural analyses reveal that the 1D morphology of the LiCoO2 nanofibers can greatly suppress the resistance of Li+ diffusion during the delithiation process which results in short diffusion pathways.161 The high surface area (18.04 m2 g−1) of these nanofibers when compared to that of powdered material (3.14 m2 g−1) is also responsible for the improved capacity, which helps in alteration of the battery voltage before it is completely discharged.162 Interestingly, after 5 cycles and 20 cycles, crystallographic analysis shows that the formation of crystalline CoF2 and Li2CO3 by-products respectively, whose proportion increased with the cycling process and results impurities. During the cycling process, LiCoO2-derived Co3+ ions could react with carbon species in the electrolyte and form Co2+ ions, which further reacted with HF from the decomposition of LiPF6 in the electrolyte, resulting in crystalline CoF2. Excess Li+ ions from the high concentration gradient in the lattice structure react with Co3+ oxidized electrolyte species and result in Li2CO3. Not only these decomposition reactions but also phase transition, structural, and morphological degradation are mainly responsible for the capacity loss during the charge–discharge process.163 In one way this problem can be solved by optimizing the proportion of metal contents in the precursor materials prior to electrospinning and preparation of the compatible electrolyte during the cycling process. Although there are various reports on LiCoO2 nanofibers and hollow fibers by electrospinning with a change in precursor materials and their metal proportions, extensive electrochemical studies are not performed.164–167 To solve the problems related to the structural stability of nanofibers, Lu et al.168 proposed a study on coating a lithium phosphorus oxynitride (LiPON) layer on the 3D structure of LiCoO2 nanofibers. This LiPON is a solid-state electrolyte which acts as a protective barrier for the 3D fibrous structure and results in an enhanced Li+ diffusion mechanism and improves the electrode–electrolyte interface and fiber mechanical stability by suppressing local strains and cathode dissolution during the cycling process.169 With a current density of 0.05 mA cm−2 and a potential plateau of around 3.9–4.0 V, these electrodes delivered a discharge capacity of 128.9 and 127.8 mAh g−1 in first and second cycles respectively. Interestingly, a discharge capacity of 120.4 mAh g−1 was reported at the same current density after 100 cycles, which is quite a positive sign for the improvement of the nanofibrous structural stability. Further electrochemical analysis with a range of discharge rates in the first 100 cycles shows that the discharge capacity ranges from 118.1 to 111.5 mAh g−1 with a capacity loss of 0.11% at a discharge rate of 0.1 mA cm−2 when compared to that of LiCoO2 nanofibers without the LiPON coating (111.5–97.6 mAh g−1; discharge rate 0.15 mA cm−2). These results signify that the Li intercalation–de-intercalation process is highly reversible and stable even at high discharge rates. From CV analysis for rate capability, the diffusion constant of Li+ in the 3D structure LiCoO2 nanofibers (1.3 ± 0.1 × 10−12 cm2 s−1) is higher than that of 2D LiCoO2 electrodes.170 All these above factors are responsible for the overall improvement of battery performance. Unfortunately, the initial capacity values of LiPON-coated LiCoO2 are lower when compared to bare LiCoO2 reported elsewhere,68 which could be attributed to variation in the precursor materials in the processing of fibers and analysis parameters. Extensive research is required in the surface engineering of electrospun cathode materials which can enhance the structural and electrochemical stability.
Metal oxides as a coating material for LiCoO2 nanostructures could accelerate the structural stability of LiCoO2 during the cycling process by suppressing active electrode materials from reacting directly with the electrolyte.171,172 Co-electrospun LiCoO2–MgO coaxial fibers are prepared from two sol–gel solutions of magnesium acetate–citric acid and lithium acetate, and cobalt acetate–citric acid.69 Under the optimized conditions of the electrospinning parameters and rheological properties, morphologically stable core–shell LiCoO2–MgO fibers are developed as shown in Fig. 9a. Galvanostatic charge–discharge analysis reported that for the first 5 cycles of the charge–discharge process, the initial discharge capacity of the core–shell nanofibers is 181 mAh g−1 with the voltage range of 2.6–4.3 V, which is less than that of bare LiCoO2 nanofibers. This decrease could be attributed to the suppression of direct contact between the electrode and Li+ ions by the MgO coating. However, the partial alignment of the nanocrystals in the LiCoO2 fiber core could enhance the Li+ diffusion by reducing diffusion during the delithiation process. Alternatively, the high surface area (20.16 m2 g−1) of the core–shell fibers can also be an influence for improved capacity. The initial charge capacity (192 mAh g−1) of the core–shell fibers is lower than that of bare LiCoO2 fibers (214 mAh g−1), which indicates that the MgO coating can alter the Li-diffusion kinetics by changing the interactions between the cathode material and the electrolyte.173 In addition, it is observed in the charge–discharge profile that increases in the electrochemically-passive MgO coating amount results in interruption of the Li+ diffusion process and thereby causes a decline in the charge–discharge capacities of the core–shell fibers.174 Interestingly, 163 mAh g−1 of discharge capacity is retained for core–shell fibers after 40 charge–discharge cycles with a capacity retention of 90%, which is in good agreement for cyclic stability (see Fig. 9b). Structural analysis was performed after 40 cycles, which showed that the fibers retained clear morphology and flexibility as shown in Fig. 9c. Thus, coating the surface of LiCoO2 with an optimized amount of electrochemically-inactive substance can enhance its electrochemical performance. On the other hand, regardless of the smaller particle size, the bare LiCoO2 nanofiber assemblies suffer from poor cyclability. To resolve these issues, Ou et al.175 developed a synthesis method for electrospun LiCoO2 nanofibers with ultrafine particle sizes. After a grinding process at low temperature, ultrafine powders were produced from these electrospun fibers, resulting in a high discharge capacity of 148–153 mAh g−1 at a current density of 54.8 mA g−1, and 84% of the initial capacity is retained after 30 cycles, which is higher than that for the bare LiCoO2 fibers reported elsewhere.168,69 In addition, surface modification with La2O3 coating results in an improved capacity retention of 91% and 83% at the 30th and 50th cycles respectively at constant initial capacity, which can be attributed to the high resistance behaviour of the La2O3 coating that protects the structure of the LiCoO2 powder from HF in the electrolyte.176,177
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of the calcined core–shell LiCoO2–MgO fiber. (b) Cycling performance and (c) TEM image of core–shell fibers after the 40th cycle. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 69.) 
It is well known that the nanostructure morphology of the cathode material plays a key role in battery performance. Mizuno et al.178 proposed wire-structured LiCoO2 electrodes which could reduce the crystal growth even at high temperature conditions and result in high rate capability. Further, Fig. 10a shows that heat-treated, plate-like, crystal-clear LiCoO2 with vapour-grown carbon fibers (VGCFs) wired-nanostructures are prepared by electrospinning by dispersion of VGCFs in the precursor solution. The addition of VGCFs can reduce the fiber diameter of the electrospun fibers179,180 and is expected to improve the electronic conduction through ballistic transport phenomena. The capacity at the first cycle is ∼140 mAh g−1 (see Fig. 10b), which is approximately the theoretical capacity of LiCoO2 (137 mAh g−1, 0.5 < x < 1 in LixCoO2). However, over 30 cycles, the discharge capacity for the LiCoO2–VGCF fibers decreased from 137 to 89 mAh g−1 with 35% capacity loss, whereas LiCoO2 without VGCF reported a decrease in discharge capacity from 135 to 108 mAh g−1, which is not in good agreement with the expected ballistic transport phenomena. As nano-sized LiCoO2 has been reported with poor cyclic stability,181 this can be the reason for the poor cyclic stability for LiCoO2 with VGCF nanostructures.
 Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of wire-structured LiCoO2–VGCF composite and (b) their charge–discharge profile in the first and second cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178.) 
2.2. Lithium nickel oxide
Layered structure lithium nickel oxide (LiNiO2) with a high theoretical capacity (200 mAh g−1) is inexpensive and eco-friendly when compared to LiCoO2 and similar assemblies in terms of its crystal structure.182 Hence LiNiO2 is a potential candidate to be used as a substitute for LiCoO2 in commercial applications. However, clear understanding and research in LiNiO2 chemistry and structural features are required for its usage as a cathode material in LIBs and which are discussed further. The structural transformations of LiNiO2 during the cycling process are categorized as follows:183,184
(i) In the first cycle, de-intercalation of Li ions (y < 0.25), Li1−yNiO2 keeps its rhombohedral phase. (ii) At 0.25 ≤ y ≤ 0.55, it converts to the monoclinic phase. (iii) Further de-intercalation from Li1−yNiO2 results in the rhombohedral phase in the range 0.55 < y ≤ 0.75. (iv) Li1−yNiO2 attains a two-phase rhombohedral phase in the remaining region of y, which alters the lattice parameters and results in destruction of the NiO2 layer in the LiNiO2 crystal lattice and thus capacity fading.185 Since successive cycles are different from the first cycle, reversible reaction after a few cycles is given as:186 Li0.85NiO2 ↔ Li0.35NiO2 + 0.5Li+ + 0.5e−(2)At high temperatures, LiNiO2 undergoes structural transformation into the cubic phase, which is electrochemically passive and accelerates the capacity fading since LiNiO2 is non-stoichiometric. Following are a few difficulties in attaining the stoichiometric structure of LiNiO2 during synthesis method: (i) Structural transformation from rhombohedral. (ii) Controlled synthesis atmospheric conditions. (iii) Presence of structural abnormality and random cation-mixing. (iv) Formation of inactive cubic phase in the cycling process. Thus it is understood that the electrochemical performance of LiNiO2-based cells depends on the synthesis method and their optimized conditions in processing the LiNiO2-based material for cathode application. In addition, LiNiO2 is affected by geometric distortion during the cycling process (known as the Jahn–Teller effect), partial phase transitions and safety issues relating to the exothermic release of oxygen in the electrolyte in the high de-intercalation region. This release of oxygen increases with a decrease in the x value and thus safety issues can be controlled by ensuring that x does not become too low in LixNiO2. Thus, structural stability of LiNiO2 is lower when compared to LiCoO2, since Ni3+ is more frequently reduced. Therefore, considering all these drawbacks, LiNiO2 is not such a promising cathode material for LIBs at the moment.
Dahn et al.187 for the first time designed a rechargeable LiNiO2/carbon cell with LiNiO2 and petroleum coke as the cathode and anode respectively. Such a cell suffers from capacity fading due to Li-deficient LiNiO2 and possible intercalation of Li ions into the solid–electrolyte interface layer at the anode during the cycling process.188 In addition, the rate of capacity loss increases with higher voltage which could be attributed to oxidation in the electrolyte with increased voltage. However, intensive research based on developing high-specific-surface-area nanostructured materials of LiNiO2 could resolve some these problems and compete as a potential candidate for commercial application in terms of cost and safety. With a special focus on the synthesis conditions, Yamada et al.189 prepared LiNiO2 compounds from Li(OH)2·H2O and Ni(OH)2 in the temperature range of 500–900 °C. Under the optimized temperature of 700 °C and voltage range of 3.0–4.3 V, these samples resulted in a high discharge capacity of 200 mAh g−1 at a current rate of 1 mA cm−2. However, the cycling performance is poor with only 90 mAh g−1 after 200 cycles at the same current rate, which can be attributed to instability in the non-stoichiometric structure and results in rapid capacity loss. Since low-ductile metal oxides form lattice strain-induced microcracks, this results in poor reversibility of Li intercalation.190,191 In order to improve the structural stability of LiNiO2, partial replacement of the Ni cations with other transition or alkali metals has been studied. This resulted in improved structural stability but a decrease in the original capacity.192,193 One of the possible approaches to eliminate this problem is by the coating of an electrochemically-inactive material on the LiNiO2 cathodes to protect from structural degradation during the cycling process. Cho et al.194 proposed a sol–gel ZrO2-coated LiNiO2 cathode material for LIBs. Structural analysis reveals that the lattice structure deterioration is controlled with such a ZrO2 coating when compared to the bare sample. The initial capacities of the coated and bare samples are 190 and 200 mAh g−1 respectively. But ZrO2 coating improved the Li intercalation stability, resulting in only a 2% capacity loss after 70 cycles when compared to the bare sample (87% capacity loss). Similarly, under optimized conditions 2 wt% La2O3-coated layered LiNiO2 cathode materials were prepared by Mohan and Kalaignan.195 These electrodes reported an initial charge and discharge capacity of 221 and 198 mAh g−1 respectively at a current rate of 0.5 C and voltage range of 3.0–4.5 V. Correspondingly, this gave a reversible capacity of 187 mAh g−1 with 94% capacity retention. The same researchers reported an optimized condition of 2 wt% SiO2-coated layered LiNiO2 cathode materials synthesized by a sol–gel process from metallic precursors at 600 °C for 10 h. Structural analysis reported no effect of the coating on the crystal structure and hence improved structural stability. Galvanostatic charge–discharge studies delivered an improved initial charge and discharge capacity of 212 and 188 mAh g−1 respectively at a current rate of 0.5 C and a potential range of 3–4.5 V.196 After 60 cycles, this resulted in a reversible capacity of 173 mAh g−1 and 92.02% capacity retention. Thus ZrO2-, La2O3- and SiO2-coated LiNiO2 cathodes showed an enhanced capacity, high rate capability and excellent reversibility. The surface engineering of LiNiO2 with such coatings could prevent the possible chemical reactions between the electrode and electrolyte during a prolonged cycling process and further no influence on capacity since there is no loss of any active material in the parent oxide. However, developing novel 1D nanostructures can greatly enhance the structural and electrochemical properties because of their unique features such as high surface-to-volume ratio.
Gu et al.197 developed hollow structured LiNiO2 fibers by an inexpensive and versatile electrospinning method from a precursor solution of lithium acetate, nickel acetate, citric acid and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) and with a further calcination process of the xerogel fibers. These electrospun xerogel and hollow fibers are morphologically stable and uniform as shown in Fig. 11a and 11b. During processing of the fibers, PVP molecules decrease the surface energy of the LiNiO2 sol resulting in the formation of rigid tubular fiber structures which can withstand structural variations due to mechanical strains during electrochemical processes. Likewise, Zhan et al.198 reported coaxial electrospun LiNiO2 nanofibers with an outer diameter range of 500 nm to 4 μm which were made up of 20–30 nm nanocrystals. Because of this rigid hollow fibrous morphology, one can find a potential application as a cathode in LIBs. But neither of the reports explained in detail about the electrochemical properties of such hollow fibers. However, incorporation of carbon materials and the substitution of nickel with electro-active cations (without affecting the original capacity) can further enhance the cyclic performance, structural stability and thus the thermal stability. For example, substitution of nickel with other cations such as cobalt and aluminium can result in an improved performance. Cobalt assists in the structural ordering of nickel in the NiO2 layer and electrochemically-inactive aluminium helps in stabilizing the structure by preventing complete de-intercalation of lithium and eliminating any unnecessary phase transformations.199 Some substituted compounds will be discussed in detail in subsequent sections.
 Fig. 11  SEM image of (a) LiNiO2 xerogel fibers and (b) LiNiO2 hollow fibers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 197.) 
2.3. Lithium manganese oxide
Manganese oxides have been proven to be inexpensive, eco-friendly and abundant when compared to cobalt or nickel oxides. Lithium manganese oxides with layered (LiMnO2) and spinel (LiMn2O4) structures have a significant role in the research community due to the mentioned features and have a theoretical capacity of 285 mAh g−1 and 148 mAh g−1 for LiMnO2 and LiMn2O4 respectively.185,200 However, in variance to the layered structure of LiMnO2 the present spinel structure LiMn2O4 has a 3D stable tunnel structure as cubic close-packed which can enhance the Li+ intercalation–de-intercalation in multiple ways.201 Moreover, the Li de-intercalation process in spinel LiMn2O4 retains the spinel structure Li1−xMn2O4 as per the charge reaction below and thus the structure does not break down during the cycling process and shows improved thermal stability and a high energy density.202 LiMn2O4 → Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe− (0.8 ≤ x ≤ 0.95)(3)Bulk LiMn2O4 suffers from capacity degradation during the cycling process due to the Jahn–Teller effect caused by Mn3+ at the octahedral sites and low electronic and ionic conductivities. Hence, developing nanostructured LiMn2O4, conductive additives to LiMn2O4 and doping techniques can result in high capacity retention and electrochemical performance due to short Li+ diffusion pathways and increasing interaction between electrode and electrolyte.203,204 Therefore, tremendous research must be performed to resolve the problems of low capacity retention and overall conductivity.
Curtis et al.205 prepared spinel LiMn2O4 nanoparticles which showed a uniform particle size, being more crystalline and cubic with increase in temperature. The nanoparticles annealed at an optimized temperature of 450 °C resulted in an initial discharge capacity of 106 mAh g−1 and 45% capacity retention after 50 cycles. The capacity retention of these nanoparticles could be further improved by adding carbon additives to LiMn2O4, which can enhance the electrical conductivity, chemical stability and mechanical strength. Thus, carbon-coated LiMn2O4 nanoparticles (particle size: 20 nm) were synthesized by mixing prepared LiMn2O4 nanoparticles with sucrose followed by a further quenching process.206 At 0.1 C, the initial discharge capacity is 120 mAh g−1 with a Coulombic efficiency of 96% and with reported 99.9% of the same in successive cycles. Further analysis for charge rate capability resulted in discharge capacities of 121 mAh g−1, 108 mAh g−1 and 80 mAh g−1 at current densities of 1 C, 50 C and 100 C respectively (1 C = 120 mA g−1), giving 66% capacity retention at 100 C. Remarkable capacity retention values of 90% and 63% were achieved after 400 and 2000 cycles respectively with an initial capacity of 110 mAh g−1 at a charge rate of 20 C, which is attributed to the high activation energy of the carbon coating which acts not only to mitigate Mn decomposition in the electrolyte during cycling process but also as a conducting bridge between the grain boundaries of nanoparticles to enhance the electrical conductivity. However, at high temperatures, adding carbon could cause detrimental effects and these nanoparticles could agglomerate and result in depreciation of the electrochemical performance due to increased particle and grain size. Thus one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures such as nanorods, nanowires, nanotubes and nanofibers are of special interest because of the unique feature of high surface-to-volume ratio that enhances the electrode material and electrolyte interactions, uniaxial electron transport mechanism and structural relaxations during the charge–discharge process.207 In addition, fabrication of a non-woven 3D fabric morphology from these 1D nanostructures can prevent the agglomeration and grain size increase at high temperatures.208
Kim et al.207 reported a facile method for the preparation of spinel LiMn2O4 nanorods from chemical conversion of hydrothermally synthesized β-MnO2 nanorods into LiMn2O4. These nanorods-based electrodes delivered a specific charge capacity of 100 mAh g−1 at a high current density of 148 mA g−1. Moreover, these electrodes showed a capacity retention of 95 and 85% after 50 and 100 cycles respectively at a same current rate with an average Coulombic efficiency of 99.7%. In addition, structural analysis reveals that the de-intercalation takes place in a single cubic phase by reducing the cell parameter and with the existence of two similar cubic phases. Hence these results signify the enhancement of the rate capability and stability by fast Li intercalation–de-intercalation kinetics with the high specific surface area of single-crystalline LiMn2O4 nanorods. Another report on hydrothermally prepared LiMn2O4 nanorods exhibited a remarkable cyclic performance of 94% capacity retention after 1200 cycles at a current rate of 500 mA g−1.209 These nanorods reported an initial reversible capacity of 110, 108, 105 and 97 mAh g−1 at current rates of 500, 1000, 5000 and 10000 mA g−1 respectively. This improved performance can be due to the ability of the nanorod structure to bear structural variations during the cycling process. A similar electrochemical performance is observed in nanochain LiMn2O4 reported by the same researchers.210 Lee et al.211 developed cubic spinel-structured ultrafine LiMn2O4 nanowires from a similar procedure using α-MnO2 nanowires and a subsequent lithiation process. These nanostructured electrodes reported a discharge capacity range of 116–62 mAh g−1 at a wide range of current density 1 C (148 mA g−1) to 30 C with much higher capacity retention even after 100 cycles than that of the LiMn2O4 nanorods reported.207 The average discharge capacities of 105, 100 and 78 mAh g−1 were obtained at a current density of 10 C, 60 C and 150 C respectively. These improved performances in cyclability could be due to ballistic transport phenomena (fast electron transport with less resistivity) in the high surface-to-volume ratio nanowires with diameters <10 nm. Another report on spinel LiMn2O4 nanowires revealed the excellent structural stability with a clear lattice pattern at the 100th cycle at a current density of 5 A g−1 (see Fig. 12a and 12b).208
 Fig. 12  (a) Cycling performance of single-crystalline LiMn2O4 nanowires at a high rate of 5 A g−1 and (b) TEM image of nanowire after 100 cycles at 5 A g−1 with electron diffraction pattern. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 208.) 
Tang et al.212 reported an excellent retention capacity of LiMn2O4 nanotubes with growth along the (4 0 0) planes processed by using multiwall carbon nanotubes as a template, as shown in the schematic representation in Fig. 13a. These electrodes were used as a cathode material in battery assembly with a 0.5 M Li2SO4 aqueous electrolyte, and showed a reversible capacity 110 mAh g−1 at a current density of 500 mA g−1 and 99 mAh g−1 with an increased rate of 10000 mA g−1, which is a very significant result. Further good capacity values are obtained within several seconds at high rates and increased charging potential. This can be attributed to the highly porous and thin walls (10 nm) of the nanotube and its crystal orientation in the (4 0 0) plane by which Li+ are more exposed to aqueous electrolyte and improving the cycling performance. It is interesting to note that the ionic conductivity increased 2-fold when using aqueous electrolytes instead of an organic electrolyte. Remarkably, LiMn2O4 nanotubes maintained excellent capacity retention with no loss of capacity, even after 1200 cycles as shown in Fig. 13b, due to an efficient intercalation–de-intercalation process across the stable and highly porous nanotube structure. Exploring the importance of the nanotube structure, spinel LiMn2O4–carbon nanotubes (CNTs) nanocomposites were prepared by facile hydrothermal synthesis from MnO2/CNTs and LiOH as the precursor materials.213 Charge–discharge analysis of these nanocomposite electrodes delivered an initial discharge capacity of 116 mAh g−1 at a discharge rate of 1 C and a retained capacity of 115 mAh g−1 after 100 cycles, which follows a discharge rate of 2 C. This unique performance and stability can be due to the combined effect of CNTs and LiMn2O4 in terms of their good electrical conductivity and crystalline nature respectively. Similarly, LiMn2O4–graphene composites were prepared by sol–gel method with an optimized 5 wt% of graphene in the composite, and showed a reversible capacity and high energy density of 107 mAh g−1 and 393 Wh kg−1 respectively at a rate of 50 C.214
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of material synthesis and (b) cycling behaviour of LiMn2O4 nanotubes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 212.) 
Even though there are many reports on 1D nanostructures of LiMn2O4 there are very limited reports available on LiMn2O4 nanofibers by the versatile and low-cost electrospinning technique. Fu et al. and Yu et al. fabricated spinel LiMn2O4 nanofibers of diameter <100 nm and 100–200 nm respectively by an electrospinning process from various precursor solutions.215,216 No electrochemical studies were evident from these reports. Later, Liu et al.217 prepared LiMn2O4 nanofibers from a precursor solution of lithium carbonate, manganese acetate and polyvinylpyrrolidone. The charge–discharge analysis was performed at a potential range of 3.3–4.3 V at a rate of 0.1 C, and resulted in an initial discharge capacity of 80 mAh g−1 and 67.7 mAh g−1 after 5 cycles with a poor capacity retention of 85%. In addition, the thermal stability of the cathode material is an important aspect for their application in EVs and HEVs. Most recently, Jayaraman et al.218 synthesized thermally stable electrospun porous LiMn2O4 hollow nanofibers (see Fig. 14a inset) with an excellent lithium storage capacity even at elevated temperatures (55 °C) and reported an initial reversible capacity ∼122 mAh g−1 in the voltage range 3.5–4.3 V at a high current rate of 150 mA g−1 and 80.2% capacity retention after 100 cycles as shown in Fig. 14b. This excellent performance could be attributed to the highly stable porous hollow structure which improved Li ion diffusion at high current rates. Interestingly, these nanofibers retained a fiber morphology and 87% of the initial reversible capacity (∼103 mAh g−1) after 1250 cycles at a current rate of 150 mA g−1 as shown in Fig. 14c and 14d. It is understood that fast Li ion diffusion along the porous network on the surface of the hollow nanofibers during the cycling process leads to an outstanding electrochemical performance. In spite of the highly stable and porous network of these nanofibrous mats, future research can be focused on developing 3D-structured nanofibrous mats of LiMn2O4-based composites to find a potential role as a high power density and stable cathode material in LIBs.
 Fig. 14  (a) FE-SEM image of heat-treated LiMn2O4 hollow fibers, (b) elevated temperature cyclic performance of LiMn2O4 hollow fibers, (c) long-term cyclic performance at a current density 150 mA g−1 in the range of 3.5–4.3 V, and (d) TEM image of LiMn2O4 hollow fibers after 1250 cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 218.) 
2.4. Substituted lithium metal oxides and other non-lithium metal oxides
The use of layered lithium metal oxides such as LiCoO2, LiNiO2 and spinel LiMn2O4 in electric vehicle batteries is limited due to their respective features such as the high cost of cobalt, structural instability, and low gravimetric and volumetric energy density. However, the electrochemical behaviour and overall conductivity of such systems can be enhanced by substituting various metal ions with the above lithium metal oxides.219 For instance, hollow LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2–MgO coaxial fibers were processed by the sol–gel-assisted coaxial electrospinning process with a shell thickness of 30–60 nm and a wall thickness of 300–500 nm.220 Such fibers showed an initial discharge capacity of 195 mAh g−1 at a current density of 20 mA g−1 and voltages of 3.0–4.3 V. After 50 cycles, the same electrodes retained hollow structured fibers with a discharge capacity of 174 mAh g−1 and 89.2% capacity retention. This improved performance could be attributed to their hollow tubular structure which provides more active sites for the Li ion intercalating–de-intercalating process and prevents the capacity fading associated with the concentration polarization to a higher current density. Similarly, core–shell Li(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2–Li(Ni1/2Mn1/2)O2 fibers as shown in Fig. 15a have been synthesized by a sol–gel-assisted co-electrospinning process.221 Here, the core and shell have the unique features of high specific capacity (200 mAh g−1) and good stability respectively. These fibers reported an initial charge–discharge capacity of 211.2 and 195.7 mAh g−1 respectively and a capacity loss of 5.9% and 5.1% after 5 cycles. As seen in Fig. 15b, after 40 cycles, the specific capacity decreased from 195.7 to 147.7 mAh g−1, and this better stability is due to the core–shell structure of the fibers. The thermal stability of active materials is also an essential feature for LIBs in potential high-end applications such as HEVs, EVs, etc. Kuo et al.222 fabricated electrospun nanofibers of LiNi0.5+αMn0.5−αO2 with multilayered nanoparticles of grain size ≤50 nm. These nanofibers reported an excellent thermal stability at 800 °C; however, their electrochemical performance needs to be further investigated. Adding conductive carbon materials to such substituted lithium metal oxide nanofibers can further enhance the electron and ion diffusions. Zhang et al.223 reported Li2MnSiO4–carbon composite nanofibers prepared from the electrospinning process and further heat treatment. These nanofibers delivered a charge–discharge capacity of 218 and 185 mAh g−1 respectively at the second cycle and the capacity retention of 54% after 20 cycles. Later, the same researchers reported Cr-doped Li2MnSiO4–carbon composite nanofibers through the electrospinning technique.224 These fibers showed a discharge capacity of 295 and 318 mAh g−1 at the first and fifth cycles respectively, and 273 mAh g−1 even after 20 cycles. These fibers showed a capacity retention of 65% after 50 cycles. This improved electrochemical performance can be attributed to the high surface area and conductive nanofibers, and to the presence of Cr3+ ions which prevent the lattice structure from collapsing during the cycling process. A recent finding by Hosono et al. revealed that highly crystalline electrospun 0.5Li2MnO3–0.5LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 hollow nanowires exhibited an improved cycling performance when compared to bulk LiMn2O4.225 These hollow wired electrodes delivered an initial charge and discharge capacity of 328 and 273 mAh g−1 respectively at a current density of 0.01 A g−1 and 83% Coulombic efficiency. After 20 cycles at the same rate, these electrodes showed a capacity of 200 mAh g−1. This improved cycle performance could be attributed to their special nanostructured morphology to withstand mechanical stress during the cycling process.
 Fig. 15  (a) TEM image of core–shell Li(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2–Li(Ni1/2Mn1/2)O2 fiber, and (b) cycling performance of core–shell fibers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 221.) 

2.4.1. Vanadium pentoxide. 
Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) (theoretical capacity: 510 mAh g−1) is an n-type semiconductor (band gap Eg: ∼2.4 eV) transition metal oxide with active species which could increase the overall conductivity by reducing V5+ ions to V4+ during electrochemical interaction of the lithium intercalation–de-intercalation process.226,227 However, a low electronic conductivity and lithium diffusion rate are reported for V2O5 powdered materials as the cathode.228 One of the approaches to overcome these problems is to fabricate high-surface-area 1D V2O5 nanostructures by the electrospinning process. For instance, Ban et al.66 prepared V2O5 electrospun nanostructures which showed an electrochemical cell capacity of about 360 mAh g−1 in the first cycle and declined to 240 mAh g−1 at the end of 25 cycles, which can be due to dissociation of the active material with the electrolyte. Thus 100% cell efficiency is achieved by adding a small amount of lithium bis(oxalato)borate (LiBOB) to the electrolyte (5% LiBOB) due to formation of a protective layer at the electrode–electrolyte interface. Later, Cheah et al.229 reported V2O5 electrospun nanofibers but the electrochemical performance was not promising when compared to the nanostructures of Ban et al.,66 which could be due to the different electrolyte and morphology. Similarly, mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers showed a slight increase in cell capacity to 370 mAh g−1 with a stable charge–discharge rate of 800 mA g−1 and reversibility.230 Mai et al.64 prepared electrospun ultralong hierarchical vanadium oxide nanowires of diameter 100–200 nm and length of up to several millimetres that were fabricated from attached vanadium oxide nanorods. These electrodes reported an initial discharge capacity of 275 and 390 mAh g−1 in the voltage range 2.0–4.0 V and 1.75–4.0 V respectively. After 50 cycles, the discharge capacities were reported as 187 and 201 mAh g−1 in the corresponding voltage ranges. It is proposed that the cyclic performance of the battery at 2.0–4.0 V is higher and more stable than that at 1.75–4.0 V, which is due to an irreversible phase transition at 1.9 V. This improved electrochemical performance of the battery can be attributed to the reduced self-aggregation of the nanomaterials. Later, Wang et al.231 proposed different electrospun 1D nanostructures of V2O5 synthesized at various annealing temperatures of 400, 500 and 600 °C, resulting in porous V2O5 nanotubes, hierarchical V2O5 nanofibers and single-crystalline V2O5 nanorods, respectively, as shown in Fig. 16. Charge–discharge analysis of these nanostructures resulted in initial discharge capacity values of 131.2, 91.4 and 162.8 mAh g−1 for the nanotubes, nanofibers and nanorods respectively at a current density of 2 A g−1 as shown in Fig. 17a–c. Among them, a superior cyclic performance (137.8 mAh g−1 after 250 cycles) was achieved for the nanorods, which can be attributed to oriented crystal growth along the (0 0 1) direction and the ability to withstand mechanical stress during the cycling process (see Fig. 17d). Further, mechanical stability of such nanostructures can be improved by forming octahedral units during incorporation of transition metal ions such as Al3+ and Ag+ into the V2O5 lattice.232 Under an optimized amount of Al incorporated into the V2O5 nanofibrous electrodes, an initial discharge capacity of 350 mAh g−1 was reported with a capacity retention of 85% after 20 cycles.233 This improved performance can be due to the increased space between the VO5 lattice layers which results in an improved intercalation process and conductivity. Likewise, silver vanadium oxide is one of the alternative potential candidates for cathode materials with its high theoretical capacity of 315 mAh g−1 and excellent electrical conductivity. However, its application is limited because of capacity fading due to the irreversible reaction of Ag+. This cycling stability can be overcome by fabrication of novel 1D nanostructures of this material. Wu et al.234 proposed β-Ag0.33V2O5 electrospun nanorods, which represent a cell capacity of 250 mAh g−1 and a high capacity reversibility of 180 mAh g−1 after 30 cycles. The capacity reversibility value became further stabilized after the 20th cycle, with a loss of only 1 mAh g−1 per cycle before the 30th cycle, which is quite a notable point in terms of its cycling stability. As mentioned earlier that carbon coating on nanofibers can improve the cyclic performance, electrospun V2O5 nanofibers coated with carbon by plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition resulted in excellent capacity retention at elevated temperature.235 Gu et al.236 fabricated 1D arrays of Li1+αV3O8 nanosheets by a sol–gel-assisted electrospinning process. These electrodes delivered an initial discharge capacity of 352 mAh g−1 and retained 72.4% of that initial capacity after 40 cycles, which is due to controlling of the aggregation of the electrode material and withstanding of the stress during phase transformation in cycling process. Considering the promising electrochemical results of V2O5 electrospun nanostructures, Cheah et al.237 performed full-cell assembly studies with a V2O5 nanofiber cathode and commercial spinel Li4Ti5O12 anode, and delivered a discharge capacity of ∼119 mAh g−1 at a current density of 20 mA g−1 with an operating voltage of ∼1.8 V.
 Fig. 16  Synthesis procedure of porous V2O5 nanotubes, hierarchical V2O5 nanofibers, and single-crystalline V2O5 nanorods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 231.) 
 Fig. 17  Charge–discharge profile at different current densities in the range of 2.5–4.0 V for (a) porous V2O5 nanotubes, (b) hierarchical V2O5 nanofibers, (c) charge–discharge profile of single crystalline V2O5 nanorods at a current density 2 A g−1 in the range of 2.0–4.0 V, and (d) cycling performance of single crystalline V2O5 nanorods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 231.) 

3. Full-cell LIB configuration with electrospun nanofibrous components
To date, research is limited to the individual performance of electrospun nanofibrous components i.e., cathodes, anodes and separators/electrolytes in LIBs. Due to the accountable contribution of electrospun nanofibers to LIB technology, as a first example, Ramakrishna and co-workers investigated the possibility of full-cell LIB configuration with electrospun nanofibers as the cathode, anode and separators/electrolytes, as shown in Fig. 18a.238 LiMn2O4 nanofibers, anatase TiO2 nanofibers and PVdF–HFP nanofibrous mats were used as the cathode, anode and separator/electrolyte respectively. After half-cell analysis of the cathode (LiMn2O4) and anode (TiO2) vs. Li at the same current density of 150 mA g−1, full-cell analysis was performed under similar conditions and resulted in a superior cycle life with an operating voltage of ∼2.2 V as shown in Fig. 18b. Future research could be on investigating the full-cell performance with various electrospun cathodes, anodes and separators.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of LiMn2O4–PVdF:HFP–TiO2 full-cell configuration, and (b) its cycling performance at the 2 C rate. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 238.) 
4. Challenges and future perspectives of electrospun materials
For many years, extensive research has being going on in the field of layered, spinel- and olivine-structured lithium metal oxides and phosphates as potential electrode material in LIBs. However, their application is quite challenging in terms of improving the electrochemical performance, safety concerns and longevity of battery systems for various applications. Bulk layered, spinel- and olivine-structured lithium metal oxides and phosphates suffer from different limitations. For example, limited application of layered LiCoO2 is due to its low specific capacity, structural instability and expense of cobalt; olivine LiFePO4 and spinel LiMn2O4 suffer from poor conductivity and poor cycling stability, respectively. Substituted lithium metal oxides can resolve some of the limitations such as thermal instability and capacity fading by preventing cation mixing and complete structural variations during the cycling process. For instance, LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3−x–AlxO2 exhibited an improved cycling performance due to its enhanced structural stability by expansion of the lattice volume with an optimized Al content.239 Nevertheless, low rate capability and electrical conductivity are still major problems in substituted lithium metal oxide and phosphate bulk materials. It is anticipated that nano forms of such materials can enhance the physico-chemical and electrical properties and result in a better rate capability and improved lithium intercalation–de-intercalation mechanism. Even though nanostructured materials show various advantages, they still suffer from considerable capacity fading and structural degradation over a cycle life. Resolving such physical and electrochemical issues is a major challenge to develop such nanostructured lithium metal oxides and phosphate materials to commercial scales with superior life time and safety issues. Developing one-dimensional (1D) nanostructures of such materials with proper surface coating and engineering can significantly meet some of the challenges due to their high surface area and short diffusion pathways. However, suppression of the volumetric density of nanofibers is a drawback for their use as electrode materials for lithium ion batteries. This is also a general problem for nanomaterials. It is proposed that microspheres which could be densely packed and composed of nanostructures can retain the advantages of both micro-sized materials (high tap density) and nanomaterials (high surface area and short lithium diffusion path).240,241 Improvement of the volumetric density in nanomaterials is quite challenging and could be a special area of future research.
For the industry-level development of LIBs based on these materials, it is admirable to have eco-friendly, versatile and low-cost synthesis technique of such ID nanostructures. Amongst such synthesis methods, after intensive research, electrospinning is now a commercialized advanced technology for the production of high-throughput 1D continuous nanofibers with controlled morphology by variation of the electrospinning parameters. However, nanofibrous mats suffer from low nanofiber packing density (fiber per area/weight), which can be addressed by fabrication of continuous aligned fibers by using a large-area rotating drum and parallel electrode collector system in the electrospinning set-up.242–244 However, such collector systems are showing poor performance in terms of the nanofiber packing density. Hence, the blade-cage collector system was proposed that could facilitate the industrial production of nanofibers.39 In addition, employing needleless nanospider free-surface electrospinning technology can result in mass production and high packing density.40,245,246 Designing 3D structures of aligned nanofibers must be developed with improved nanofiber packing density to thereby result in improved penetration of the electrolyte and lithium ion diffusion during the cycling process.247 Such nanofibrous mats are potential candidates as electrodes in LIBs because of their high surface area and porosity, low pore size and short, well-guided diffusion pathways for Li ions. However, few reports are available on some such lithium metal oxides and phosphates. Future research can be focused on developing composite nanofibers based on conductive materials and lithium metal oxides to pave the way for a new category of nano-electrodes for high-performance LIBs. Various architectures of composite nanofibers include the incorporation of conductive materials, mixing two lithium metal oxides in the form of core–shell fibers, hollow fibers and surface engineering of nanofibers with electro-active materials. However, extensive study is required to understand the correlation between such composite fiber morphology and electrochemical performance. But processing of these composite nanofibers involves optimization of the chemistry between the carbon material and the lithium metal oxide and parameters that are compatible with the electrospinning technique, thereby choosing suitable precursors for such composite nanofibers is absolutely important and a requirement for the electrospinning technique. Fabrication of eco-friendly nanofibers based on aqueous solvents and water-soluble salts can further improve the safety features of batteries in high-energy applications. With thorough research by considering the above challenges and features, electrospun fiber-based LIB systems can pave the way for advanced development in the field of portable, flexible electronics and high vehicle applications.
5. Conclusions
Technological development in the field of lithium transition metal oxide based new cathode materials for LIBs has been tremendous in the last few years. However, these lithium transition metal oxides have their own merits and demerits in terms of their structural stability, cycling performance and safety. It is evident from many scientific reports that one-dimensional nanostructures by a low-cost, versatile and scale-up electrospinning technique can address some of the challenges associated with the critical physico-chemical and electrochemical parameters of LIBs. Electrospun lithium metal oxide based nanofibers of such a kind are especially advantageous as cathode materials due to their shorter diffusion pathways, faster Li intercalation kinetics, good mechanical strength, high surface area and porosity. In addition, electrospun nanofibers help to mitigate the charge transfer resistance across the electrode–electrolyte interface and increase the number of Li insertion sites, enhance ionic conductivity and thereby the rate capability and battery performance. Since conduction is one of the barriers for advancement in LIBs, this can be resolved by cation doping, surface coating and incorporation of carbon materials into these electrospun fibers to enhance the electrical conductivity and cyclic stability. Future research can be focused on developing novel hybrid electrospun lithium metal oxide nanostructures by doping, surface engineering and incorporation of carbon materials, paving the way for new cathode materials to the commercial scale. However, further research is also required to understand the structure–property relationships of such cathode materials. We believe that the suggested future research directions could lead to realization of the commercial scale of electrospun material-based LIB technology.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge the financial support from the Commonwealth of Australia and Automotive CRC 2020.
References
M. Pumera, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 668 CAS .
M. Park, X. Zhang, M. Chung, G. B. Less and A. M. Sastry, J. Power Sources, 2010, 95, 7904 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Srinivasu, A. Islam, S. P. Singh, L. Han, M. L. Kantam and S. K. Bhargava, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20866 RSC .
S. Cavaliere, S. Subianto, I. Savych, D. J. Jonesa and J. Rozièrea, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4761 CAS .
L. Ji, A. J. Medford and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5593 RSC .
J. Y. Howe, D. J. Burton, Y. Qi, H. M. Meyer, M. Nazri, G. A. Nazri, A. C. Palmer and P. D. Lake, J. Power Sources, 2013, 221, 455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, Q. Wen, W. Qian, D. S. Su, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ranjusha, A. S. Nair, S. Ramakrishna, P. Anjali, K. Sujith, K. R. V. Subramanian, N. Sivakumar, T. N. Kim, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20465 RSC .
P. Anjali, R. Ranjusha, A. M. Asha, R. Vani, K. Sujith, K. R. V. Subramanian, N. Sivakumar, T. N. Kim, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 220, 360 CrossRef PubMed .
D. K. Kim, P. Muralidharan, H. W. Lee, R. Ruffo, Y. Yang, C. K. Chan, H. Peng, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Ramakrishna, K. Fujihara, W. E. Teo, T. C. Lim and Z. Ma, An Introduction to Electrospinning and Nanofibers, World Scientific, Singapore, SG,  2005, p. 1 Search PubMed .
S. Kalluri, A. M. Asha, B. P. Arun, R. Vani, P. Anjali, A. S. Nair, N. Sivakumar, K. R. V. Subramanian, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, Sci. Adv. Mater., 2012, 4, 1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Thavasi, G. Singh and S. Ramakrishna, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 205 CAS .
S. Jana and M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2575 RSC .
S. Agarwal, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Jose, P. S. Archana, A. Le Viet and M. V. Reddy, IEEE First Conference on Clean Energy and Technology (CET), Kuala Lumpur,  2011 Search PubMed .
Y. Dai, W. Liu, E. Formo, Y. Sun and Y. Xia, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 326 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, P. Li, Y. Yu, X. Jia, S. Zhang, X. Yang and S. Ryu, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Bonino, L. Ji, Z. Lin, O. Toprakci, X. Zhang and S. A. Khan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 2534 CAS .
A. A. Madhavan, S. Kalluri, D. K. Chacko, T. A. Arun, S. Nagarajan, K. R. V. Subramanian, A. S. Nair, S. V. Nair and A. Balakrishnan, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 13032 RSC .
R. Zhu, C. Y. Jiang, X. Z. Liu, B. Liu, A. Kumar and S. Ramakrishna, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 013102 CrossRef .
K. T. Shalumon, P. R. Sreerekha, D. Sathish, H. Tamura, S. V. Nair, K. P. Chennazhi and R. Jayakumar, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2011, 7, 609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lukáš, A. Sarkar, L. Martinová, K. Vodsed'álková, D. Lubasová, J. Chaloupek, P. Pokorný, P. Mikeš, J. Chvojka and M. Komárek, Text. Prog., 2009, 41, 59 CrossRef .
N. Ashammakhi, A. Ndreu, A. M. Piras, L. Nikkola, T. Sindelar, H. Ylikauppila, A. Harlin, M. E. Gomes, N. M. Neves, E. Chiellini, F. Chiellini, V. Hasirci, H. Redl and R. L. Reis, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2006, 6, 2693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Reneker and A. L. Yarin, Polymer, 2008, 49, 2387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lu and B. Ding, Recent Pat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 2, 169 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dersch, M. Steinhart, U. Boudriot, A. Greiner and J. H. Wendorff, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2005, 16, 276 CrossRef CAS .
N. Bhardwaj and S. C. Kundu, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Nezarati, M. B. Eifert and E. C. Hernandez, Tissue Eng., Part C, 2013, 19, 810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Casper, J. S. Stephens, N. G. Tassi, D. B. Chase and J. F. Rabolt, Macromolecules, 2004, 37, 573 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Raghavan and D. W. Coffin, J. Eng. Fibers Fabr., 2011, 6, 1 CAS .
H. H. Htike, L. Chen and S. Sachiko, J. Textil. Eng., 2012, 58, 9 CrossRef .
C. J. Luo, S. D. Stoyanov, E. Stride, E. Pelan and M. Edirisinghe, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4708 RSC .
J. A. Genovese, C. Spadaccio, A. Rainer and E. Covino, Stud. Mechanobiol. Tissue Eng. Biomater., 2011, 6, 215 CrossRef .
L. Y. Outinen, C. Mariani, H. Skottman, R. Suuronen, A. Harlin and S. Narkilahti, Open Tissue Eng. Regener. Med. J., 2010, 3, 1 CrossRef .
S. Jana, A. Cooper, F. Ohuchi and M. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4817 CAS .
Y. K. Fuh, S. Z. Chen and Z. Y. He, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 97 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Li, J. Xiong and H. Xue, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2011, 51, 2178 CAS .
A. Jafari, J. H. Jeon and I. K. Oh, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Persano, A. Camposeo, C. Tekmen and D. Pisignano, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 504 CrossRef CAS .
C. Henriques, R. Vidinha, D. Botequim, J. P. Borges and J. A. M. C. Silva, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zargham, S. Bazgir, A. Tavakoli, A. S. Rashidi and R. Damerchely, J. Eng. Fibers Fabr., 2012, 7, 42 CAS .
H. S. Chien and C. Wang, Fibres Text. East. Eur., 2013, 21, 72 CAS .
V. Pillay, C. Dott, Y. E. Choonara, C. Tyagi, L. Tomar, P. Kumar, L. C. du Toit and V. M. K. Ndesendo, J. Nanomater., 2013, 2013, 789289 CrossRef PubMed  , 22 pages.
M. M. Thackeray, C. Wolverton and E. D. Isaacs, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7854 CAS .
B. Scrosati and J. Garche, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Laudenslager, R. H. Scheffler and W. M. Sigmund, Pure Appl. Chem., 2010, 82, 2137 CrossRef CAS .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitraa and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243 CAS .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Terakawa, T. Yamada and Y. Usami, Polyolefin resin porous film and battery separator, US pat., US 20130017430 A1, Mitsubishi Plastics, Inc.,  2013 .
K. H. Seng, M. H. Park, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 5657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wen, J. M. Wu and M. H. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3881 CAS .
O. Toprakci, H. A. K. Toprakci, L. Ji and X. Zhang, Kona Powder Part. J., 2010, 28, 50 CAS .
C. S. Chou, C. H. Tsou and C. I. Wang, Adv. Powder Technol., 2008, 19, 383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hazra and I. N. Basumallick, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2001, 4, 275 CAS .
K. H. Seng, M. H. Park, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, G. Du, C. Feng, S. Li, Z. Chen, P. Zhang, Z. Guo, X. Yu, G. Chen, S. Huang and H. K. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Park, T. Song, H. Han, A. Devadoss, J. Yuh, C. Choi and U. Paik, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 22, 81 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kong, W. A. Yee, Y. Wei, L. Yang, J. M. Ang, S. L. Phua, S. Y. Wong, R. Zhou, Y. Dong, X. Li and X. Lu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2967 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu, J. Sun, Y. Liu, L. Gao and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6960 RSC .
Z. Dong, S. J. Kennedy and Y. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. Arora, S. Frisk and L. Zhang, Batteries including improved fine fiber separators, US pat., US 7112389 B1, E. I. Du Pont De Nemours and Company,  2006 .
P. W. Gibson, H. L. S. Gibson and D. Rivin, AIChE
J., 1999, 45, 190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mai, L. Xu, C. Han, X. Xu, Y. Luo, S. Zhao and Y. Zhao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Le Viet, M. V. Reddy, R. Jose, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ban, N. A. Chernova and M. S. Whittingham, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. L. Ellis, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 691 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu, D. Chen and X. Jiao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, D. Chen, X. Jiao and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 1769 RSC .
N. S. Choi, Z. Chen, S. A. Freunberger, X. Ji, Y. K. Sun, K. Amine, G. Yushin, L. F. Nazar, J. Cho and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Kang, C. Kim, J. Kim, J. H. Lim and J. T. Son, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. von Hagen, H. Lorrmann, K. C. Möller and S. Mathur, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 553 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Lu, G. Xu, Y. Li and X. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 395301 CrossRef .
E. Hosono, Y. Wang, N. Kida, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, M. Okubo, H. Matsuda, Y. Saito, T. Kudo, I. Honma and H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 212 CAS .
S. H. Lee, M. J. Jung, J. S. Im, K. Y. Sheem and Y. S. Lee, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2010, 36, 591 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dimesso, C. Spanheimer, W. Jaegermann, Y. Zhang and A. L. Yarin, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 064307 CrossRef .
O. Toprakci, L. Ji, Z. Lin, H. A. K. Toprakci and X. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Dominko, M. Bele, M. Gaberscek, M. Remskar, D. Hanzel, J. M. Goupil, S. Pejovnik and J. Jamnik, J. Power Sources, 2006, 153, 274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, X. Qiao, C. Peng, T. Zhang, Y. Wang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 78, 40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Bhuvaneswari, N. N. Bramnik, D. Ensling, H. Ehrenberg and W. Jaegermann, J. Power Sources, 2008, 180, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Hu, R. O'Hayre and Z. Shao, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 7151 RSC .
O. Toprakci, H. A. K. Toprakci, L. Ji, Z. Lin, R. Gu and X. Zhang, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2012, 4, 013121 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, F. Wang, Y. Zhu and Z. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3353 RSC .
P. He, J. L. Liu, W. J. Cui, J. Y. Luo and Y. Y. Xia, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Toprakci, H. A. K. Toprakci, L. Ji, G. Xu, Z. Lin and X. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1273 CAS .
C. Zhu, Y. Yu, L. Gu, K. Weichert and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, J. Gnanaraj, Y. S. Lee and S. Madhavi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3518 CAS .
N. Bockenfeld and A. Balducci, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 265 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Yin, H. Grondey, P. Strobel, M. Anne and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 10402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, T. Zhang, X. Qiao, D. Li and J. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, G. V. Subba Rao and B. V. R. Chowdari, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113(7), 5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Lian, X. Zhu, S. Liang, Z. Li, W. Yang and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, J. S. Xue, T. Zheng and J. R. Dahn, Carbon, 1996, 34, 193 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Kumar, R. Sahay, V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, W. C. Ling, V. Thavasi, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Madhavi and S. Ramakrishna, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2012, 45, 265302 CrossRef .
W. J. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. Cheng, Y. Wu, D. Wang and D. He, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 1368 CAS .
L. Ji, Z. Lin, M. Alcoutlabi, O. Toprakci, Y. Yao, G. Xu, S. Li and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 192 RSC .
S. Han, D. Wu, S. Li, F. Zhang and X. Feng, Small, 2013, 9, 1173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Lu, L. Zhou, Y. W. Mai and H. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7898 CAS .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, B. Han, J. Choo and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 10151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, Y. X. Yin, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2198 RSC .
X. H. Liu, L. Zhong, S. Huang, S. X. Mao, T. Zhu and J. Y. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Huang, Z. C. Chen and J. Yu, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 532–533, 92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Small, 2013, 9, 2684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Meng and M. E. A. de Dompablo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 589 CAS .
S. H. Nam, H. S. Shim, Y. S. Kim, M. A. Dar, J. G. Kim and W. B. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 2046 CAS .
J. Liu and D. Xue, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 1525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Reddy, R. Jose, T. H. Teng, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Lu, W. Zeng, Y. S. Li and Z. W. Fu, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, Y. Wu, M. V. Reddy, A. S. Nair, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 531 RSC .
X. Zhang, P. S. Kumar, V. Aravindan, H. H. Liu, J. Sundaramurthy, S. G. Mhaisalkar, H. M. Duong, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14780 CAS .
L. Shen, X. Zhang, H. Li, C. Yuan and G. Cao, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3096 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Du, Q. Meng, Z. Guo, X. Yu, Z. Chen, T. Guo and R. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5848 RSC .
J. G. Kim, D. Shi, K. J. Kong, Y. U. Heo, J. H. Kim, M. R. Jo, Y. C. Lee, Y. M. Kang and S. X. Dou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 691 CAS .
H. Han, T. Song, J. Y. Bae, L. F. Nazar, H. Kim and U. Paik, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4532 CAS .
H. Park, T. Song, H. Han and U. Paik, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, V. Aravindan, P. S. Kumar, H. Liu, J. Sundaramurthy, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5973 RSC .
P. S. Kumar, V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, V. Thavasi, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7983 RSC .
M. R. Jo, Y. S. Jung and Y. M. Kang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6870 RSC .
C. P. Sandhya, B. John and C. Gouri, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 5827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Kim, D. Shi, M. S. Park, G. Jeong, Y. U. Heo, M. Seo, Y. J. Kim, J. H. Kim and S. X. Dou, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 365 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Shen, X. Zhang, P. Nie, L. Chen and K. Xu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159(4), A426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tang, X. Mu, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 49 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guo, Y. Li, Y. Yao, Z. Lin, L. Ji, G. Xu, Y. Liang, Q. Shi and X. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 2011, 204–205, 61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Idota, T. Kubota, A. Matsufuji, Y. Maekawa and T. Miyasaka, Science, 1997, 276, 1395 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Du, C. Feng, S. Li, Z. Chen, P. Zhang, Z. Guo, X. Yu, G. Chen, S. Huang and H. K. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, X. Yin, S. Liu, Y. Wang, L. Chen and T. Wang, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, G. Du, Z. Guo, X. Yu, Z. Chen, P. Zhang, G. Chen and H. K. Liu, J. Mater. Res., 2010, 25, 1516 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Du, Z. Guo, X. Yu, S. Li, Z. Chen, P. Zhang and H. K. Liu, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1011 RSC .
D. Kim, D. Lee, J. Kim and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5408 CAS .
L. Li, S. Peng, J. Wang, Y. L. Cheah, P. Teh, Y. Ko, C. Wong and M. Srinivasan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 6005 CAS .
L. Li, S. Peng, Y. L. Cheah, J. Wang, P. Teh, Y. Ko, C. Wong and M. Srinivasan, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 134 RSC .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, P. S. Kumar, J. Sundaramurthy, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sahay, P. S. Kumar, V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, W. C. Ling, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18087 CAS .
C. T. Cherian, J. Sundaramurthy, M. Kalaivani, P. Ragupathy, P. S. Kumar, V. Thavasi, M. V. Reddy, C. H. Sow, S. G. Mhaisalkar, S. Ramakrishna and B. V. R. Chowdari, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12198 RSC .
S. Chaudhari and M. Srinivasan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23049 RSC .
L. Qiao, X. Wang, L. Qiao, X. Sun, X. Li, Y. Zheng and D. He, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3037 RSC .
A. Le Viet, M. V. Reddy, R. Jose, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Teh, Y. Sharma, Y. W. Ko, S. S. Pramana and M. Srinivasan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 2812 RSC .
P. F. Teh, Y. Sharma, S. S. Pramana and M. Srinivasan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14999 RSC .
W. Luo, X. Hu, Y. Sun and Y. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8916 RSC .
J. Miao, M. Miyauchi, T. J. Simmons, J. S. Dordick and R. J. Linhardt, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2010, 10, 5507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Aravindan, P. Vickraman, A. Sivashanmugam, R. Thirunakaran and S. Gopukumar, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2013, 13, 293 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Raghavan, D. H. Lim, J. H. Ahn, C. Nah, D. C. Sherrington, H. S. Ryu and H. J. Ahn, React. Funct. Polym., 2012, 72, 915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Ji, O. Toprakci, Y. Liang and M. Alcoutlabi, Polym. Rev., 2011, 51, 239 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, W. Jiang, Q. Kong, C. Zhang, P. Han, X. Wang, J. Yao and G. Cui, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2013, 298, 806 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, M. Alcoutlabi, J. V. Watson and X. Zhang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 1939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. B. Truong, P. Kao, I. L. Kyratzis, C. Huynh, F. H. M. Graichen, A. I. Bhatt and A. S. Best, Aust. J. Chem., 2013, 66, 252 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Cho, T. Sakai, S. Tanase, K. Kimura, Y. Kondo, T. Tarao and M. Tanaka, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2007, 10, A159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          DuPont, DuPont Energain Separators for High Performance Lithium Ion Batteries, http://www.dupont.com/products-and-services/membranes-films/products/energain.html, accessed September, 2013 Search PubMed.
M. A. Kader, S. K. Kwak, S. L. Kang, J. H. Ahn and C. Nah, Polym. Int., 2008, 57, 1199 CrossRef .
N. Wu, B. Jing, Q. Cao, X. Wang, H. Kuang and Q. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, 2556 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Cui and D. Y. Tang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 126, 510 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783 CrossRef CAS .
N. Imanishi, M. Fujiyoshi, Y. Takeda, O. Yamamoto and M. Tabuchi, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 118, 121 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Y. J. Kim and B. Park, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3788 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Y. J. Kim, T. J. Kim and B. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 3367 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sigmund, J. Yuh, H. Park, V. Maneeratana, G. Pyrgiotakis, A. Daga, J. Taylor and J. C. Nino, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2006, 89, 395 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Bueno and E. R. Leite, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 8868 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yan, S. Sokolov, J. C. Lytle, A. Stein, F. Zhang and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Liu, Z. Wang, H. Li, L. Chen and X. Huang, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 152–153, 341 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shao, N. Yu, Y. Liu and R. Mu, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 1423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Chen, J. D. Liao, Y. J. Chuang, K. C. Hsu, Y. F. Chiang and Y. S. Fu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 121, 154 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Liu and M. Taya, Proc. SPIE 7288, Active and Passive Smart Structures and Integrated Systems,  2009, p. 728806 Search PubMed .
S. Zhan, Y. Li and H. Yu, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2008, 29, 702 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Lu, L. Yu, W. Zeng, Y. S. Li and Z. W. Fu, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2008, 11, A140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. B. Bates, G. E. Jellison, Jr and F. X. Hart, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Nakamura, H. Ohno, K. Okamura, Y. Michihiro and I. Nakabayashi, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 143 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang and A. V. Virkar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A1565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Wu, L. Liu, F. Wu, L. Chen and X. Huang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Kim, H. Kim, B. Kim, D. Ahn, J. G. Lee, T. J. Kim, D. Son, J. Cho, Y. W. Kim and B. Park, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1505 CrossRef CAS .
G. T. K. Fey, P. Muralidharan, C. Z. Lu and Y. D. Cho, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 2759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ou, J. Wen, H. Xu, S. Xie and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2013, 74, 322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. T. K. Fey, P. Muralidharan, C. Z. Lu and Y. D. Cho, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Myung, K. Izumi, S. Komaba, H. Yashiro, H. J. Bang, Y. K. Sun and N. Kumagai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4061 CAS .
Y. Mizuno, E. Hosono, T. Saito, M. Okubo, D. N. Hamane, K. Oh-ishi, T. Kudo and H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10774 CAS .
Y. W. Ju, G. R. Choi, H. R. Jung and W. J. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 5796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. H. Wong, M. Z. Allmang, J. L. Hutter, S. Hrapovic, J. H. T. Luong and W. Wan, Carbon, 2009, 47, 2571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Okubo, E. Hosono, J. Kim, M. Enomoto, N. Kojima, T. Kudo, H. Zhou and I. Honma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Davidson, J. E. Greedan, U. von Sacken, C. A. Michal and J. R. Dahn, Solid State Ionics, 1991, 46, 243 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ohzuku, A. Ueda and M. Nagayama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, Solid State Ionics, 1990, 44, 87 CrossRef CAS .
P. He, H. Yu, D. Li and H. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3680 RSC .
P. Kalyani and N. Kalaiselvi, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2005, 6, 689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Dahn, U. von Sacken, M. W. Juzkow and H. Al-Janaby, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 2207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fong, U. von Sacken and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1990, 137, 2009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yamada, M. Fujiwara and M. Kanda, J. Power Sources, 1995, 54, 209 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. I. Jang, B. Huang, D. R. Sadoway and Y. M. Chiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Dokko, M. Nishizawa, S. Horikoshi, T. Itoh, M. Mohamedi and I. Uchida, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delmas, I. Saadoune and A. Rougier, J. Power Sources, 1993, 44, 595 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3089 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cho, T. J. Kim, Y. J. Kim and B. Park, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2001, 4, A159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mohan and G. P. Kalaignan, Ionics, 2013, 19, 895 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mohan and G. P. Kalaignan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 2765 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, D. Chen and X. Jiao, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2007, 43, 245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhan, Y. Li and H. Yu, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2008, 29, 823 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Rao, Journal of Optoelectronics and Biomedical Materials, 2013, 5, 9 Search PubMed .
Z. M. Yu and L. C. Zhao, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2007, 17, 659 CrossRef .
G. W. Ling, X. Zhu, Y. B. He, Q. S. Song, B. Li, Y. J. Li, Q. H. Yang and Z. Y. Tang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 2455 CAS .
Y. Lee, M. G. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Reufer, M. J. Walter, P. G. Lagoudakis, A. B. Hummel, J. S. Kolb, H. G. Roskos, U. Scherf and J. M. Lupton, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Curtis, J. Wang and D. L. Schulz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, A590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, Y. Cho, H. K. Song, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Kim, P. Muralidharan, H. W. Lee, R. Ruffo, Y. Yang, C. K. Chan, H. Peng, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Hosono, T. Kudo, I. Honma, H. Matsuda and H. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1045 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, L. L. Liu, S. Tian, L. Li, L. L. Li, Y. B. Yue, Y. Bai, Y. P. Wu, K. Zhu and R. Holze, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 1159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, S. Tian, L. L. Liu, L. Li, H. P. Zhang, Y. B. Yue, Y. Bai, Y. P. Wu and K. Zhu, Electrochem. Commun., 2011, 13, 205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. W. Lee, P. Muralidharan, R. Ruffo, C. M. Mari, Y. Cui and D. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tang, Y. Hou, F. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Wu and K. Zhu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ding, J. Li, Y. Zhao and L. Guan, Mater. Lett., 2012, 68, 197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, B. Cheng, Y. Wang, L. Zheng, X. Duan, L. Wang, J. Yang and Y. Qian, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2012, 7, 10627 CAS .
Z. W. Fu, J. Ma and Q. Z. Qin, Solid State Ionics, 2005, 176, 1635 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yu, C. Shao, Y. Liu, H. Guan and X. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2005, 285, 163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, Y. Z. Long, H. D. Zhang, B. Sun, C. C. Tang, H. L. Li, G. W. Kan and C. Wang, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 562–564, 799 CAS .
S. Jayaraman, V. Aravindan, P. S. Kumar, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6677 RSC .
C. C. Pan, C. E. Banks, W. X. Song, C. W. Wang, Q. Y. Chen and X. B. Ji, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2013, 23, 108 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gu and F. Jian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 20176 CAS .
Z. Yang, C. Cao, F. Liu, D. Chen and X. Jia, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Kuo, S. C. Lee, K. C. Hsu, S. J. Liu, B. Y. Chou and Y. S. Fu, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 4594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Y. Li, G. Xu, S. Li, Y. Lu, O. Topracki and X. Zhang, Soft Nanosci. Lett., 2012, 2, 54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Z. Lin, L. Ji, Y. Li, G. Xu, L. Xue, S. Li, Y. Lu, O. Toprakcia and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 14661 RSC .
E. Hosono, T. Saito, J. Hoshino, Y. Mizuno, M. Okubo, D. Asakura, K. Kagesawa, D. N. Hamane, T. Kudo and H. Zhou, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2592 RSC .
X. Lu, L. Zhao, X. He, R. Xiao, L. Gu, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, Z. Wang, X. Duan, L. Chen, J. Maier and Y. Ikuhara, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Modafferi, S. Trocino, A. Donato, G. Panzera and G. Neri, Thin Solid Films, 2013 DOI:10.1016/j.tsf.2013.03.137 .
Y. Tang, X. Rui, Y. Zhang, T. M. Lim, Z. Dong, H. H. Hng, X. Chen, Q. Yan and Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 82 CAS .
Y. L. Cheah, N. Gupta, S. S. Pramana, V. Aravindan, G. Wee and M. Srinivasan, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 6465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, C. Chen, S. Xie, Y. Liu, K. Park, X. Zhou, Q. Zhang, J. Li and G. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 858 CAS .
H. Wang, D. Ma, Y. Huang and X. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 8987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Giorgetti, M. Berrettoni and W. H. Smyrl, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5991 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Cheah, V. Aravindan and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3270 CAS .
Y. Wu, P. Zhu, X. Zhao, M. V. Reddy, S. Peng, B. V. R. Chowdari and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 852 CAS .
Y. L. Cheah, R. Hagen, V. Aravindan, R. Fiz, S. Mathur and S. Madhavi, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gu, D. Chen, X. Jiao and F. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4361 RSC .
Y. L. Cheah, V. Aravindan and S. Madhavi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 3475 CAS .
V. Aravindan, J. Sundaramurthy, P. S. Kumar, N. Shubha, W. C. Ling, S. Ramakrishna and S. Madhavi, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 10636 RSC .
Y. Ding, P. Zhang, Z. Long, Y. Jiang and F. Xu, J. Alloys Compd., 2009, 487, 507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, W. He, Y. Yue, R. Wang, J. Shen, S. Liu, J. Ma, M. Li and F. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 19948 RSC .
C. Zhang, Z. Chen, Z. Guo and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 974 CAS .
W. E. Teo and S. Ramakrishna, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, R89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tran and V. Kalra, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. E. Teo, R. Inai and S. Ramakrishna, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2011, 12, 013002 CrossRef .
J. Fang, H. Niu, H. Wang, X. Wang and T. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2196 CAS .

          X. Wang and T. Lin, Needleless electrospinning of nanofibers: Technology and applications, Pan Stanford Publishing, Singapore, SG,  2013 Search PubMed .

          R. Jayakumar and S. Nair, Advances in polymer science: Biomedical applications of polymer nanofibers, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2012, vol. 246, pp. 21–62 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Sujith Kalluri	Sujith Kalluri received his Bachelors in Engineering from Acharya Nagarjuna University and Masters in Nanotechnology from Amrita Vishwa Vidyapeetham University, India. There he worked for Ministry of New and Renewable Energy, India project on novel electrospun materials as conductive electrodes in batteries and solar cells. Currently, he is a doctoral researcher at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia. His present research focus is on lithium metal oxide based electrospun cathode materials for lithium-ion batteries funded by the AutoCRC. He is also Affiliate Member of The Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC) and The Electrochemical Society (ECS).
Kuok Hau Seng	Kuok Hau (Ivan) Seng graduated from University of Wollongong with Bachelors of Nanotechnology (Honors) in 2008. In 2013, he completed his PhD at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia with thesis titled “High Capacity Nanostructured Electrode Materials for Lithium-ion Batteries”. He is currently an Associate Research Fellow at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials working on cathode materials for batteries, funded by AutoCRC. His research interests include nanomaterial synthesis and their application for energy storage devices. His current research focuses are developing high energy-density and large volume production of electrode materials for lithium-ion batteries.
Zaiping Guo	Prof. Zaiping Guo obtained her B.S. (1993) from the Department of Chemistry, Xinjiang University and her Ph.D (2003) from University of Wollongong. After her postdoctoral research with Prof. Hua Kun Liu at the Institute for Superconducting & Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, she joined the Faculty of Engineering in 2008. Her research interests include synthesis and applications of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion. She has published more than 200 papers in prominent international journals.
Hua Kun Liu	Prof. Hua Kun Liu is a leader of energy materials research group at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, University of Wollongong, Australia. The energy materials research group has grown from one PhD student in 1994 to 30 postgraduate students and 8 full time staff now. She has won the most competitive ARC Australian Professorial Fellowships in the last 17 years (1994–1998, 1999–2003, 2003–2005 and 2006–2010). She has supervised numerous PhD and Masters to completion and a number of postdoctoral, visiting fellows. She has published 500 journal papers, cited 13000 times, H-index = 52. Her research focuses on clean energy materials.
Shi Xue Dou	Prof. Shi Xue Dou is Director at Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, UOW. He received PhD in chemistry from Dalhousie University, Canada (1984). He was elected as Fellow of Australian Academy of Technological Science and Engineering (1994). He was awarded DSc by the University of New South Wales (1998) and three ARC Australian Professorial Fellowships in 1993, 2002 and 2007. He received Australian Government’s Centenary Medal (2003), Engineering Excellence Award (2006), Vice-Chancellors Senior Excellence Award (2008), Vice-Chancellor Outstanding Partnership Award (2012). His publications attracted over 14000 citations with H-index > 52. He is specialised in electronic materials for applications.

 	Fig. 1  Applications of electrospun nanofibers.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the electrospinning process.	 
	(1)


Processing parameters

Electric potential	Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in electric potential and the possibility of beads at low voltage.11
Flow rate	Decrease in flow rate results in smaller fiber diameter and beads are formed at very high flow rate.28
Temperature	The higher the temperature of solution, the more uniform the fiber diameter.29
Diameter of syringe needle	The smaller the needle diameter gives reduction in fiber diameter, clogging and amount of beads.33
Tip to collector distance	Formation of beads at two extreme distances and minimum distance needs to be optimized for bead-free fibers.41
Type of collector	Fiber alignment is possible with a rotating collector.42
 

Solution parameters

Surface tension	Varies with type of material used.43
Concentration	Increase in fiber diameter with increase in concentration.44
Viscosity	No continuous fiber formation with low viscosity and problem in ejection of jets for highly viscous solution. Optimization of solution viscosity is required.29
Conductivity	Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in conductivity.28
 

Ambient parameters

Temperature	Decrease in fiber diameter with increase in temperature.28
Humidity	Increase in depth of pore and formation of pores on the surface of fibers increases with high humidity.28
Pressure	When the pressure in the closed set-up is below atmospheric pressure, electrospinning is not possible.41

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of basic mechanism in LIBs.	 

Lithium-ion batteries	Inexpensive	Low fiber packing density
High charging rate	Low throughput
High power density	

Short Li-ion diffusion pathways	

High porosity	

Solar cells	Do not need direct sunlight	

High efficiency	

Flexible electronics	Low-cost	

Transparent	

Light-weight	

Flexible	


Cathode	LiCoO2 nanofibers	
67 and 215

LiCoO2/MgO coaxial fibers	
69

LiFePO4 nanofibers	
71

Carbon-coated LiFePO4 nanowires	
74

LiFePO4/graphene/C nanofibers	
82

Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4 nanofibers	
71

Li[Fe1−xMnx]PO4/C nanofibers	
72

LiF/Fe/C nanofibers	
73

Hollow LiNiO2 fibers	
197

LiMn2O4 nanofibers	
215 and 217

Porous LiMn2O4 hollow nanofibers	
218

Mesoporous V2O5 nanofibers	
228

β-Ag0.33V2O5 nanorods	
233

V2O5 nanofibers	
66, 229 and 237

V2O5 nanofibers with carbon coating	
235

 
Anode	Carbon nanofibers	
93

Carbon/Ni composite fibers	
96

Carbon nanofibers decorated with Ni nanoparticles	
97

CNTs/graphitic carbon nanospheres coaxial fibers	
99

Si/carbon composite nanofibers	
104

Si nanoparticles/porous carbon hybrid nanofibers	
102

TiO2 nanofibers	
109, 118 and 119

TiO2–MWCNTs nanofibers, rice-grained structure	
111

TiO2–graphene composite nanofibers	
112

TiO2@carbon composite nanofibers	
114

TiO2Nx nanofibers	
115 and 116

Porous hollow SnO2 nanofibers	
127

Porous hollow SnO2 nanotubes	
128

SnO2@carbon composite nanofibers	
129

SnO2 nanocrystal-decorated carbon nanofibers	
130

Ni–SnO2–C nanofibers	
131

CaSnO3 nanotubes	
132

Egg-roll-like CaSnO3 nanotubes	
133

NiO nanofibers	
135

CuO nanofibers	
136

α-Fe2O3 nanorods and hollow nanorods	
137 and 138

Porous NiO–ZnO hybrid nanofibers	
139

ZnMn2O4 nanofibers, nanorods, nanowebs	
141

ZnFe2O4 nanofibers	
142

Porous ZnCo2O4 nanotubes	
143

Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers	
120 and 121

Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers with TiN/TiOxNy layer	
117

Ag–Li4Ti5O12 and Nb–Li4Ti5O12 nanofibers	
122 and 123

TiNb2O7 nano-strings	
124

Li4Ti5O12–C composite nanofibers	
125

 
Separator/electrolyte	PVdF–HFP nanocomposite membrane	
148

PVdF-co-CTFE nanofibers coated on substrate	
149

PVdF–LiTFSI membrane	
150

PI@PVdF–HFP core@sheath nanofibers	
148

TPU/PVdF porous fibrous electrolyte	
154

PAMPSLi fibrous electrolyte	
155


 	Fig. 4  (a) Digital photograph of nanofibrous mat before and after calcination. (b) TEM image of LiMnPO4/C nanofiber at higher magnification and (c) specific capacity of LiFe0.5Mn0.5PO4 for different discharge rates. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 72.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) SEM image of electrospun nanowires. (b) HRTEM image with SAED region and (c) cycling stability of carbon-coated LiFePO4 at 1 C rate at room temperature and at 60 °C. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 86.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM image and (b) charge–discharge profile of the composite nanotubes at a current density of 50 mA g−1 between 3 and 0 V vs. Li+/Li. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 99.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) TEM image of SnO2–carbon nanofibers. (b) Schematic representation of electronic conductivity in the nanofibers during the charge–discharge process and (c) cycling performance of SnO2–carbon and SnO2 nanofibers at the same current density of 100 mA g−1. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 129.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Digital photographs of the polypropylene (PP) separator and PI@PVDF–HFP non-woven (a) before and (b) after thermal treatment at 150 °C for 1 h. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 148.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of the calcined core–shell LiCoO2–MgO fiber. (b) Cycling performance and (c) TEM image of core–shell fibers after the 40th cycle. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 69.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) SEM image of wire-structured LiCoO2–VGCF composite and (b) their charge–discharge profile in the first and second cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 178.)	 
Li0.85NiO2 ↔ Li0.35NiO2 + 0.5Li+ + 0.5e−	(2)

 	Fig. 11  SEM image of (a) LiNiO2 xerogel fibers and (b) LiNiO2 hollow fibers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 197.)	 
LiMn2O4 → Li1−xMn2O4 + xLi+ + xe− (0.8 ≤ x ≤ 0.95)	(3)

 	Fig. 12  (a) Cycling performance of single-crystalline LiMn2O4 nanowires at a high rate of 5 A g−1 and (b) TEM image of nanowire after 100 cycles at 5 A g−1 with electron diffraction pattern. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 208.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic representation of material synthesis and (b) cycling behaviour of LiMn2O4 nanotubes. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 212.)	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) FE-SEM image of heat-treated LiMn2O4 hollow fibers, (b) elevated temperature cyclic performance of LiMn2O4 hollow fibers, (c) long-term cyclic performance at a current density 150 mA g−1 in the range of 3.5–4.3 V, and (d) TEM image of LiMn2O4 hollow fibers after 1250 cycles. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 218.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) TEM image of core–shell Li(Ni1/3Co1/3Mn1/3)O2–Li(Ni1/2Mn1/2)O2 fiber, and (b) cycling performance of core–shell fibers. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 221.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Synthesis procedure of porous V2O5 nanotubes, hierarchical V2O5 nanofibers, and single-crystalline V2O5 nanorods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 231.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Charge–discharge profile at different current densities in the range of 2.5–4.0 V for (a) porous V2O5 nanotubes, (b) hierarchical V2O5 nanofibers, (c) charge–discharge profile of single crystalline V2O5 nanorods at a current density 2 A g−1 in the range of 2.0–4.0 V, and (d) cycling performance of single crystalline V2O5 nanorods. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 231.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of LiMn2O4–PVdF:HFP–TiO2 full-cell configuration, and (b) its cycling performance at the 2 C rate. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 238.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
