Enhanced light harvesting through Förster resonance energy transfer in polymer–small molecule ternary system   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TC04667C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TC04667C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 1136-1148Enhanced light harvesting through Förster resonance energy transfer in polymer–small molecule ternary system†

        
          
            Amreen A. 
            Hussain
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Arup R. 
            Pal
          
        
      *
      Plasma Nanotech Lab, Physical Sciences Division, Institute of Advanced Study in Science and Technology, Guwahati-781035, Assam, India. E-mail: arpal@iasst.gov.in
Received 
      28th October 2016
    , Accepted 5th January 2017First published on 5th January 2017AbstractWe report a conceptually new approach for preparing a ternary blend of polymer/small molecule/metal oxide using plasma nanotechnology and realized it in the fabrication of a high-performance self-powered broadband photodetector. Here, we demonstrate the Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) effect in a polymer–small molecule system with the incorporation of rubrene, a small molecule. The high absorption of rubrene in the visible region expands the spectral absorption and assists in developing nano-morphology for enhanced charge transport. The polymer absorbs in the UV region and non-radiatively transfers the absorbed energy to rubrene by FRET effect. The time-resolved photoluminescence study reveals efficient excitation energy transfer from the polymer to the small molecule occurring on a nanosecond timescale, thereby confirming the occurrence of FRET. We also demonstrate the synergistic effect of FRET and energy cascade dominated mechanisms when used in the ternary structure (polymer/small molecule/metal oxide) to realize high-performance broadband self-powered photodetector with a very low dark current of 32 pA cm−2 and a high photoconductive gain of 24.34 at zero bias. Conclusively, this configuration has the potential to be directly utilized in traditional multiple donor/acceptor systems with separate spectral responses to work synergistically, thereby allowing an enhancement in both light absorption and photocurrent generation.
Introduction
Ternary structures comprising one additional donor or acceptor material are emerging as a prospective design that is known to simultaneously improve the light harvesting and power conversion efficiency of optoelectronic devices.1–3 Generally, a classic ternary blend consists of one additional donor or acceptor material as associated with its traditional binary equivalent, where the third constituent is frequently chosen to have complementary absorption with respect to the reference device. The resultant ternary system has the benefit of extended light absorption for wide to low band-gap polymers, which provides a strategy to significantly enhance the efficiency of binary host systems. Numerous varieties of third components have been revealed in the literature that are suited to ternary systems, including donor polymers,3 small molecules,4 fullerene derivative acceptors,5 dye molecules,6 and quantum dots.7
Apart from the potential advantages of the ternary blend, the underlying photophysical mechanisms involved in the ternary devices are indeed complex and are still in debate, but they offer unique opportunities to understand the carrier dynamics of organic photovoltaics (OPVs). However, significant progress has been made by researchers who intend to present a comprehensive view on explaining the working mechanism of ternary devices, including charge transfer, energy transfer, parallel-like and alloy-like models.1,8–11 Currently, non-radiative Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) is verified as an effective way to increase the performance of the device, which results from the dipole–dipole interactions and is thus strongly dependent on the donor–acceptor separation distance.8 Traditionally, ternary designs are usually chosen in the context of OPVs, mainly the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) solar cells, which delivers a substantial outcome in terms of power conversion efficiency (PCE).6 However, less attention is given to developing prototype FRET-enhanced self-powered broadband photodetectors employing ternary structures.
Self-powered photodetection has become one of the most popular domains of research in the past decade.12,13 Several excellent self-powered photodetectors have been demonstrated that target the feasibility to operate independently, sustainably and wirelessly of external power sources.14,15 These photodetectors can work at zero-volt position or short-circuit conditions based on the photovoltaic properties, which are either driven by a Schottky junction or a p–n junction without the need to consume external power.13 This will greatly assist the enhancement of the adaptability of the device and also greatly reduces the size and weight of the system. Nevertheless, the range of detectable light wavelengths of these self-powered photodetectors is normally very narrow, and the boundaries of the detectable light intensities are continually high (∼3.5–500 mW cm−2).13,16–19 It is therefore quite a challenge to find subtle approaches to fabricate simple nanostructured devices toward self-powered broadband detectors under low light conditions that will be very promising for applications in upcoming nano-optoelectronic integrated circuits.
As already mentioned, the efficient transport of charges through organic interfaces is an essential requirement for any OPVs. For this purpose, conducting polymers such as polyaniline, polythiophene, and poly(3-hexylthiophene), are considered as the ideal organic medium and have been traditionally used in fabricating OPVs for decades.3,6 Apart from these, recently various other polymers (organic semiconductors) with low-bandgaps have been synthesized, for instance, PBDTTT-C (Eg = 1.6 eV), PBDTT-DPP (Eg = 1.46 eV), and PTB7 (Eg = 1.62 eV), and have been used in OPVs for increasing the power conversion efficiency.20 Moreover, among the family of organic semiconductors, rubrene (dye), a small molecule that belongs to the group of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons with IUPAC name 5,6,11,12-tetraphenyltetracene, C42H48, is recognized to show record values for most of the properties required to build an efficient prototype device, such as, high photogeneration efficiency, high photoluminescence and high charge carrier mobility.21–23 In particular, owing to the highly delocalized π-electrons coming from the sp2 hybridization of carbon atoms, rubrene has predominantly good electrical transport properties. However, looking at a broader picture, this material (rubrene) poses several experimental challenges regarding its synthesis and stability, along with the limitations in understanding its stable molecular conformation theoretically.22,24–26 Therefore, to date this material has not been optimized since a better understanding of its chemical structure, possible interactions and synthesis is still required. So far, single crystals of rubrene with interesting properties have been developed and described by many researchers. A high charge carrier mobility for the single crystal of rubrene22–27 are highlighted with values of 13–40 cm2 V−1 s−1. In parallel, amorphous rubrene28 has also been synthesized where the mobility value reaches 7–9 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Examining all the information gained from the literature, we report herein the fabrication of a polymer/small molecule/metal oxide viz. plasma polymerized aniline/rubrene/titanium dioxide (PPA/rubrene/TiO2) ternary blend for direct application in self-powered broadband photodetectors. In the ternary device, rubrene is introduced as the third component in the binary PPA/TiO2 blend to broaden the spectral response. In this study, focus is placed on three important aspects. First is the designing of a robust polymer/small molecule/acceptor blend with PPA/rubrene/TiO2, based on their individual structure–property relationships. Second is the preparation of the PPA/rubrene/TiO2 ternary blend by plasma nanotechnology and its direct utilization in the fabrication of a self-powered broadband photodetector. Third is studying the underlying photophysical mechanism of the ternary blend in a real device where Förster resonance energy transfer and energy cascade transfer processes are involved.
Experimental section
Method
Most commonly, the synthesis or growth of crystalline or amorphous rubrene is only performed by means of vapour-phase processes, for instance, physical vapour transport and thermal evaporation.24–27 These methods are often accompanied by rigorous growth under high temperature and high vacuum, which hinders the mass production of rubrene at the industrial level. On further reviewing the literature reports, a few reports address the direct synthesis of crystalline rubrene from solutions where it is illustrated that the solubility of rubrene is very effective in aromatic solvents.29,30 Therefore, keeping that in mind, we have tried an alternate synthetic approach to prepare the rubrene-containing samples by means of plasma nanotechnology. Since we are concerned with plasma-based processes, the transport of rubrene vapours into the plasma reactor is quite a huge task as the vapour pressure of rubrene is almost negligible and its melting point is reasonably high, i.e. 315 °C. Consequently, the synthesis of rubrene alone is difficult by plasma based methods without using any carrier material to transport the molecules of rubrene. Considering all these issues and taking hints from the literature, here we have chosen two strategies for the transport and synthesis of rubrene inside the plasma reactor. First, the preparation of a solution of rubrene in an aromatic solvent (aniline). Second, plasma polymerization of the prepared precursor containing rubrene and the solvent. Rubrene in aniline solution is separately prepared with aniline as the aromatic solvent and rubrene as the solute at a concentration of 5 mg mL−1 and then mixed appropriately in ambient conditions followed by ultra-sonication to form the blend solution. The blend of aniline and rubrene (aniline/rubrene precursor) serves as the organic component that is directly transported to the plasma rector in the vapour form without any external heating.
The experimental setup used in this work is equipped with a water-cooled planar magnetron fitted with a titanium target along with an RF electrode mounted just below the magnetron thus maintaining a gap of 10 cm.31,32 The detailed deposition procedure is explained in the ESI.† The various plasma-controlling variables for the deposition of the PPA/rubrene/TiO2 ternary blend are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). The additional experimental details regarding the materials and characterizations are also provided in the ESI.†
Device fabrication
For the binary and ternary hybrid device fabrication, two protocols are utilized: (i) plasma deposition of PPA/TiO2 (binary) and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 (ternary) on top of an ITO coated glass by the combined process of plasma polymerization and reactive magnetron sputtering using a proper masking arrangement. Commercially available ITO coated glasses of 100 nm thickness with a surface resistivity 70–100 Ω sq−1 are used as the transparent conducting oxide. (ii) The ITO/PPA/TiO2 and ITO/PPA/rubrene/TiO2 configuration is placed in a thermal evaporation chamber where high purity aluminium (Al) wires under a high vacuum of 2 × 10−5 Torr are evaporated on both the binary and ternary structures. The thickness of the Al layer is maintained at 100 nm. In this work, three types of device are fabricated: (a) using the binary blend of PPA/TiO2 without an additional hole transport layer (HTL), named as PD-1; (b) using the ternary blend of PPA/rubrene/TiO2 without additional HTL, named as PD-2; and (c) using the same ternary blend of PPA/rubrene/TiO2 with HTL, named as PD-3. The devices have the configuration of ITO/PPA/TiO2/Al as PD-1, ITO/PPA/rubrene/TiO2/Al as PD-2 and ITO/MoOx/PPA/rubrene/TiO2/Al as PD-3. As an HTL, a very thin layer of molybdenum oxide (MoOx, 10 nm) is used. MoOx is sputter deposited on top of ITO coated glass at a pressure of ∼4 × 10−2 Torr with Ar:O2 (4:1) gases using a pulsed DC power of 100 W. The thicknesses and lateral areas of the photoactive layer for the two devices are 200 nm and 8.8 × 10−5 cm2, respectively. All the electrical measurements of the hybrid devices are carried out after exposure of the device to the atmosphere.
Results and discussion
The chemical structure and optical properties of the materials are investigated using FTIR, UV-Vis and PL measurements. The FTIR spectra of the PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 are presented in Fig. S1a and b in the ESI.† From the FTIR study, well distinguished IR vibrational bands of PPA, rubrene and TiO2 are observed with a little shifting of wavenumbers, which suggests the interaction of PPA, rubrene and TiO2 (Tables S2 and S3, ESI†). The corresponding wavenumber assignments are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). Fig. 1a presents the UV-Vis spectrum of pristine rubrene. The characteristic absorption bands of rubrene are observed at 468, 498, and 532 nm. The absorption band at 498 nm (2.49 eV) and 532 nm (2.33 eV) are characterized by the vibronic progression, attributed to the E0–0 transition of the LN-polarized band and E0–0 transition (or HOMO–LUMO transition) of the M-polarized band with a spacing of 0.16 eV.33–35 This spacing signifies the C–C stretching vibration mode. Fig. 1b shows the normalized absorption spectra of the PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 samples. Distinct features of PPA are observed between 260 and 305 nm corresponding to the π → π* transition of the benzene ring.32 The organic binary blend of PPA/rubrene displays the features of PPA along with rubrene. However, the thickness of the samples being very small (200 nm) affects the absorption spectra mainly in the visible region, because of which the characteristic absorptions of rubrene are not prominent in the spectrum. However, the features of rubrene in PPA/rubrene are more clearly shown in the enlarged view (Fig. 1c), where the absorption bands are observed at 480, 537 and 577 nm. It is noticed that the absorption spectrum of the hybrid binary blend (PPA/TiO2) shows a considerable blue shift as compared to the PPA spectrum, which is consistent with our previous reports.31,32 This noticeable blue shift is ascribed to the bonding and interaction between the TiO2 and the quinoid unit of PPA owing to hydrogen bonding in the form of NH⋯O–Ti in PPA/TiO2. On the contrary, the absorption spectra of PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 show a prominent red shift of the absorption bands covering the entire UV and visible region. The enhanced absorption towards the visible region can be attributed to chemical bonding between the organic semiconductors (PPA and rubrene) and specific sites of TiO2 resulting in charge delocalization and hence narrowing of the overall material's bandgap. Furthermore, the interaction of PPA and rubrene in the form of a CH–π/π–π interaction might cause the increase of conjugation length and causes the red shifting. Thus, the presence of rubrene affects the optical properties of the ternary blend and is responsible for the red shift in the absorption spectrum, which not only enhances light absorption in the visible region, but also facilities efficient mobility of the charge carriers between the two semiconductors. In this study the main motive for preparing the ternary blend is to extend the light absorption towards visible light. Therefore, it is worth mentioning that the inclusion of rubrene in PPA/TiO2 has significantly extended the absorption spectrum up to 800 nm.
 Fig. 1  Normalized absorption spectra of (a) pristine rubrene and (b) PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2. (c) Enlarged view of the absorption spectra of PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 showing the rubrene features. 
The emission characteristics of pristine rubrene, PPA, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2, and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 are investigated using PL spectroscopy. Fig. 2a presents the PL spectrum of the pristine rubrene excited at 350 and 530 nm. The spectrum shows a prominent emission in the visible region with a maximum emission peak at 570 nm corresponding to the M-axis polarized band of the short tetracene backbone in the rubrene molecules.34 This is the first replica of its vibronic progression corresponding to the HOMO and LUMO transition. Fig. 2b shows the emission spectra of PPA, pristine rubrene, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2 and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 samples. PPA exhibited a broad PL emission centred at 405 nm with a shoulder peak at 439 nm upon optical excitation at 350 nm corresponding to the π → π* transition of the benzenoid unit.36 Again, the PL spectrum of PPA/rubrene excited at 350 nm shows the emission at 418, 485 and 560 nm. A clear shifting of the emission spectrum is observed in PPA/rubrene, which suggests the interaction of PPA and rubrene, consistent with the FTIR and UV-Vis spectroscopic results. Considering the PL emission of pristine rubrene at 570 nm, a blue shift is observed in PPA/rubrene (560 nm) which is often related to the formation of nanoparticles of rubrene which will be investigated later using FESEM.34 Moreover, the full width half maximums (FWHM) are obtained for the PL spectra of pristine rubrene and PPA/rubrene. The FWHM value of the pristine rubrene (Fig. 2a) for emission at 570 nm is 65 nm, which broadens dramatically to 156 nm (emission at 560 nm), suggesting that the structural confinement of the pristine rubrene has been lost, thus forming an amorphous structure, which will be confirmed later by SAED analysis. Moreover, the PPA/TiO2 and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 shows the efficient quenching of PL due to addition of TiO2 which serve as the acceptor material whereas PPA and rubrene serve as the two donor materials (D-1, PPA; D-2 rubrene). The efficient PL quenching is because of the increased donor/acceptor (PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene/TiO2) interfacial area and possible phase interpenetration.31,32 This proficient PL quenching in the binary and ternary system evidenced the photo-induced charge transfer in the system and is also a very useful indication of exciton dissociation.
 Fig. 2  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of (a) pristine rubrene, excitation wavelength 350, 530 nm and (b) PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2, excitation wavelength 350 nm. 
After receiving an indication of the formation of rubrene nanoparticles from the PL spectra, it is worthwhile to investigate the surface morphologies of PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2. The FESEM and TEM morphologies of the PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 samples are presented in Fig. S2 (ESI†). Additionally, Fig. S3a–d (ESI†) represents the FESEM morphology of PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 at two different magnifications. Direct observation of the formation of sub-micron particles of rubrene is consistent with the PL results (Fig. S2 and S3a–d, ESI†). Uniform particles of rubrene with an average particle size of 110 ± 0.5 nm (Fig. S4a, ESI†) are formed throughout the substrate with a nanostructured base matrix, which arises owing to the presence of PPA. The high magnification images presented in Fig. S3b and d (ESI†) show that rubrene particles are well embedded in the PPA matrix, which supports the incorporation of rubrene particles in PPA. In addition, the FESEM morphologies of PPA, PPA/TiO2 are shown in Fig. S2 and S4b, c (ESI†) for reference. The EDX spectra and mapping images of PPA, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2, and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 are presented in Fig. S5 (ESI†), which shows the elemental compositions of the samples. Further, Fig. S2 and S3e–g (ESI†) present the TEM morphologies of the PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2. From the TEM image shown in Fig. S3e (ESI†), an interesting structure is observed with almost uniform sized particles of rubrene with an average diameter of 1.7 ± 0.03 nm (Fig. S6a, ESI†), well embedded in the bigger sized nanoparticles of rubrene. It is observed that the separation between two nanoparticles is 1.9 nm, as estimated from Fig. S3f (ESI†). In addition, it is well understood that the gap between the nanoparticles is filled with PPA, hence the average separation between the D-1, PPA and D-2, rubrene is estimated to be 1.8 nm. The small sized nanoparticles are slightly diffused in nature, as observed from Fig. S3f (ESI†). The diffused structure of the particles might be owing to the amorphous nature of rubrene. In order to confirm the amorphous nature of rubrene, SAED study is conducted, as shown in the inset of Fig. S3f (ESI†). In the SAED pattern no significant diffraction spots or rings were observed, which suggests the amorphous nature of rubrene. This result is consistent with the PL studies. Moreover, the TEM imaging of the ternary blend (PPA/rubrene/TiO2) is performed and is presented in Fig. S3g (ESI†). The TEM image displayed the presence of TiO2 nanoparticles of size 7.5–10 nm along with the formation of rubrene and PPA. In addition, the formation of TiO2 nanoparticles is confirmed from the SAED pattern (Fig. S3h, ESI†), where the bright diffraction spots forming circular ring correspond to the (101) crystallographic plane of anatase TiO2. The interplanar spacing is also determined from the lattice fringes, which have a value of 0.35 nm for TiO2. Furthermore, the TEM images of PPA and PPA/TiO2 are presented in Fig. S2 and S6b, c (ESI†) for reference. Commonly, rubrene micro- or nano-particles are prepared by hydrothermal and physical vapour transport processes at a temperature of 110–180 °C.24,33,34 In this work, we are able to synthesize rubrene nanoparticles without application of any heating, which promises the direct synthesis or growth of rubrene nanoparticles or films on various substrates for nano optoelectronic device applications.
Examining the material properties of both PPA and PPA/rubrene, it is found that PPA only shows light absorption in the ultraviolet region. However, PPA/rubrene presents absorption in the ultraviolet and visible region of the electromagnetic spectrum. Moreover, the fusion of the two organic constituents PPA/rubrene demonstrates the vibronic progression, as confirmed from the UV-Vis and PL spectroscopy. Fig. 3a and b presents a plot of the emission and absorption spectra of PPA and pristine rubrene showing the vibronic structure. From the presented spectra, a clear overlap (shown by the shaded region) of the emission and absorption spectrum is observed. This implies that there is the possibility of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between PPA and rubrene. Generally, the FRET process is non-radiative energy transfer from a photo-excited donor molecule to an acceptor molecule.8 Therefore, in the present case, PPA serves as the donor material and rubrene serves as the acceptor material. The Förster radius calculated in the present system has a value of 2 nm, which is consistent with the reported values for FRET as it falls within the window 1–10 nm2,3,37,38 (the detailed formulae/calculation of the Förster radius is provided in the ESI†). Therefore, FRET will certainly occur between PPA and rubrene. It is worth mentioning that the first signature of the occurrence of FRET between PPA and rubrene is obtained from the PL study (Fig. 2b), where in the case of PPA/rubrene there is an enhancement of acceptor emission at donor excitation.
 Fig. 3  (a) Normalized emission and absorption spectra of PPA and pristine rubrene. (b) Normalized emission and molar extinction coefficient plot of PPA and pristine rubrene showing the spectral overlap (overlap integral, J = 2.9421 × 10−16 M−1 cm3). Time-resolved fluorescence decay profile (excitation wavelength is 375 nm) and the corresponding fitting curve of (c) pristine rubrene and (d) PPA, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2 and PPA/rubrene/TiO2. 
Further, to verify the occurrence of FRET between PPA and rubrene, time-resolved photoluminescence (TRPL) measurement is conducted. Fig. 3c presents the fluorescence decay profiles of pristine rubrene and Fig. 3d shows the decay profiles of the PPA, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2 and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 samples. The corresponding fitted decay times are summarized in Table S4 (ESI†). The pristine rubrene exhibits a mono-exponential decay with a lifetime of 12.778 ns when excited at 375 nm and probed at 570 nm. This corresponds to the lifetime of the excited singlet state, which is in good agreement with the reported values.39,40 The decay profile of PPA shows a bi-exponential decay with an average lifetime of τavg = 1.285 ns. Interestingly, for the blend of acceptor rubrene with donor PPA (PPA/rubrene), a strong quenching is observed with a short average lifetime of τavg = 0.456 ns as compared to pristine rubrene and PPA. This decrease in the excited state lifetime demonstrates that the energy transfer (FRET) is occurring between PPA and rubrene.2
Furthermore, the efficiency of FRET is obtained using the formula:2,3 (1)where τDA and τD are the fluorescence lifetimes of the donor in the presence and absence of the acceptor, respectively. From the average fluorescence lifetimes, the FRET efficiency is obtained, which has a value of 64.5%. Alternately, the energy transfer efficiency is also calculated as:38 (2)where R is the distance between the donor and acceptor in nm and R0 is the distance at which the energy transfer is 50% efficient, known as the Förster radius. From the TEM images (Fig. S3e and f, ESI†) the separation between the donor (PPA) and acceptor (rubrene) is estimated to be 1.8 nm and the Förster radius calculated from the spectral overlap is 2 nm. Therefore, putting these values into eqn (2), the transfer efficiency is found to be 65.29%. It is noted that the separation between the interpenetrating network of donor PPA and acceptor rubrene is approximately equal to the Förster radius, which leads to comparable energy transfer efficiency as estimated from eqn (1) and (2). Convincingly, it is expected that the occurrence of the FRET effect in the polymer–small molecule (PPA/rubrene) system will provide an alternate effective route for current generation when the PPA/rubrene blend is integrated into the optoelectronic device geometry.
Moreover, it is known that the quenching effect of PPA/TiO2 is owing to the formation of a charge transfer state (CT state) which is different from the rubrene quenching effect. As illustrated, the rubrene quenching effect is mainly via energy transfer. Therefore, while forming the ternary blend with PPA/rubrene/TiO2, it is expected that both the charge transfer and energy transfer mechanisms work in synergy, the first signature of which is directly obtained from TRPL measurement, which shows a faster decay time (Table S4, ESI†). Further, to systematically illustrate the working mechanism of the ternary blend, the individual energy level diagrams of the components constituting the ternary blend are studied and are presented in Fig. 4a–c. The HOMO/LUMO levels are determined from the electrochemical analysis and the detailed experiment is summarized in the ESI.† The HOMO/LUMO levels of rubrene lie between the HOMO/LUMO levels of PPA and TiO2, which indicates that rubrene serves as the facilitator of an energy cascade between PPA and TiO2 (Fig. 4c). This is essentially beneficial for the charge transfer process to occur in the ternary system. Moreover, with proper energy alignment and fast fluorescence decay time between PPA and rubrene, as shown in Fig. 4a, the FRET effect provides an additional effective pathway for increased carrier population, which implies enhanced current generation. Therefore, the two mechanisms viz. charge transfer and FRET should work in a synergistic manner in this ternary system.
 Fig. 4  Energy level diagrams of the decay profiles of (a) PPA/rubrene, (b) PPA/TiO2 and (c) PPA/rubrene/TiO2 highlighting the routes for energy cascade and FRET induced charge transport with a fast decay time of 0.3865 ns. 
Self-powered photodetectors with broadband photodetection receive much attention owing to their functioning independently of external power sources.12 In the present study, the displayed photo-physical properties of the ternary blend direct its application towards optoelectronic devices. Thus, integrating the combined effect of the constituents of the ternary blend, self-powered hybrid photodetectors are fabricated. Three geometries of photodetectors are fabricated, one without a HTL bilayer device (PD-1, Fig. 5a), the second without a HTL ternary device (PD-2, Fig. 5d) and the third with a HTL ternary device (PD-3, Fig. 5g). Fig. 5b presents the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the hybrid photodetector with PPA/TiO2 as the photoactive layer (PD-1). The device response under dark and white light (λ = 300–800 nm, λpeak ∼ 570 nm) featured a weak photovoltaic property with an open circuit voltage of VOC = 0.24 V and a short circuit current of ISC = 0.25 nA cm−2. At zero bias condition, the photosensitivity (S) ((Ilight − Idark)/Idark) value of the device under white light is considerably low, which is S = 4.55. Moreover, since the binary blend PPA/TiO2 shows a strong UV absorption, therefore the photoresponse of the device is also conducted under UV illumination, as presented in Fig. S7 (ESI†). The device shows an improved photovoltaic effect with VOC = 0.67 V and ISC = 0.41 nA cm−2 for UV-254 nm illumination. Similarly, under UV-365 nm illumination, the VOC and ISC values increase to 0.89 V and 3.93 nA cm−2, respectively. In addition, the photosensitivity (S) of the device under UV light is 13.14 (UV-254 nm) and 76.33 (UV-365 nm). These results suggest that this binary device (PPA/TiO2) has a strong wavelength selectivity towards UV light which is well consistent with the material properties of the PPA/TiO2 samples where a strong UV absorption is observed for the binary nanocomposite (PPA/TiO2). Fig. 5e and f presents the current–voltage (I–V) characteristics and the energy level sketch of the hybrid photodetector PD-2. Under dark and white light with an incident power density of 80 μW cm−2 the hybrid photodetector featured excellent photovoltaic properties with VOC = 0.73 V and ISC = 11.36 nA cm−2. This result evidenced the enhanced light harvesting towards the visible region after fusing rubrene in the binary host system. Furthermore, Fig. 5h shows the I–V characteristics of PD-3, where high values of VOC = 0.94 V and ISC = 80.3 nA cm−2 were recorded. It is noted that at zero bias, the photodetectors exhibit a very low dark current of 27 pA cm−2 and 32 pA cm−2 for PD-2 and PD-3. Therefore, the device can well function under self-powered mode with a high photosensitivity (S) of 4.19 × 102 and 2.51 × 103 for PD-2 and PD-3, respectively. The increase in the device performance in PD-3 is owing to the inclusion of the HTL, which significantly increases the charge extraction efficiency and reduces the bimolecular recombination at the electrodes. The HTL, MoOx, was chosen so that its work function matches well with the energy levels of the active layer (PPA/rubrene/TiO2) and the work function of the anode (ITO) in order to ensure effective charge transport. The schematic of the standard device geometry with the HTL and its corresponding sketch of energy levels are presented in Fig. 5i.
 Fig. 5  (a, d and g) Schematic architecture of the standard devices (PD-1, PD-2 and PD-3). (b, e and h) I–V characteristics of the photodetectors PD-1, PD-2 and PD-3 under dark and white light conditions at an intensity of 80 μW cm−2. (c, f and i) The corresponding sketch of the energy levels of the main components of the device. 
The performance of a photodetector mainly relies on a few critical parameters, which include photoconductive gain (G), spectral responsivity (Rλ), detectivity (D*) and response speed.13,16,31,32 To evaluate the photodetection performance of the photodetectors PD-2 and PD-3, the responsivity (Rλ), detectivity (D*) and photoconductive gain (G) are determined. Additionally, the values of Rλ, G and D* for PD-1 are summarized in Table S5 (ESI†). For PD-2, under white illumination with 1.5 V bias at a fixed intensity of 80 μW cm−2, the calculated values are Rλ = 4.78 A W−1, G = 10.37, and D* = 3.9 × 1012 Jones. However, at zero bias the values of Rλ, G and D* are 1.59 A W−1, 3.44, 1.3 × 1012 Jones, respectively. Similarly, for PD-3, the values of Rλ, G and D* increase significantly at both the biases (1.5 V and 0 V) under white light. At 1.5 V bias, the values are Rλ = 30.54 A W−1, G = 66.31, and D* = 2.5 × 1013 Jones. Again at zero bias the values are Rλ = 11.21 A W−1, G = 24.34, and D* = 9.2 × 1012 Jones. It is noted that the device has low responsivity and detectivity, which is common for self-powered photodetectors because there is no external electric field to drive the exciton dissociation. The dissociation of excitons in self-powered devices solely depends on the built-in electric field, which will finally assure the detection of light irradiance. Moreover, a high gain is required for achieving sensitive detection of an optical signal, which is desirable for low-light measurements. A photoconductive gain greater than unity is observed for the hybrid photodetector that can be attributed to the presence of trap states in the PPA/rubrene/TiO2 device. Upon illumination, the trapped charge carriers at the metal–semiconductor interface lead to the reduction of the Schottky barrier height, and also trapping of charge carriers results in a prolongation of lifetime before e–h recombination, which contributes to the generation of photoconductive gain greater than unity.41
Since the performance of PD-3 is better than those of PD-1 and PD-2, the detailed response characteristics of the device under illumination are investigated only with PD-3. The photoresponse of the photodetector (PD-3) is tested under various irradiance intensities and is plotted in Fig. 6a, which shows the gradually increasing photocurrent with increasing intensity. This observation is consistent with the fact that the amount of photo-generated charge carriers is proportional to the absorbed photon flux.31 The dependence of the photocurrent on the irradiance intensity can be fitted by a power law: Ip = APθ where Ip is the photocurrent, A is constant at a specific wavelength, P is the power density of the incident light, and θ is a parameter related to the trapping and recombination processes of the carriers in photodetectors.16,31 The best fitting shows θ = 0.2 (Fig. 6b). Reports on a non-unity exponent with 0.5 < θ < 1 suggest a complex process of electron–hole generation, recombination and trapping within the photoactive material.16 The intensity dependence with θ < 0.5 may arise owing to defect mechanisms, including both recombination centres and traps. The trap states in the photoactive material (PPA/rubrene/TiO2) might be originated from the defect states in PPA.31,32 The contribution of traps can be directly identified by the intensity-dependent behaviour of the photoconductive gain (G), as shown in Fig. 6c. The decrease of the photoconductive gain is a strong manifestation of hole-trap saturation during the diffusion process of photoexcited carriers for relatively high light intensity.42 Additionally, at high power densities, bimolecular recombination dominates the carrier relaxation process, and thereby significantly reduces the photocarrier lifetime.43–45
 Fig. 6  (a) Intensity profile and (b) the corresponding power law fit of the ternary hybrid photodetector, PD-3. (c) Intensity dependent photoconductive gain of PD-3 at a bias of 1.5 V. (d) Repetitive on/off switching and (e) single cycle on/off switching showing the rise and decay time constants of the photodetector PD-3 under white light at zero bias condition. 
The on–off switching of the photodetector at zero bias is shown in Fig. 6d, which displays stable and repetitive on–off cycles. The transition between the on and off states reveals the response and recovery speed of the hybrid photodetector. The result is shown in Fig. 6e under white light illumination, from which the rise time (τr; from 10% to 90% of the maximum photocurrent) and the fall time (τd; from 90% to 10% of the maximum photocurrent) of the photodetector can be estimated. The rise time and fall time are found to be 88 ms and 95 ms, respectively. A stable switching response is also observed for hundreds of consecutive on–off cycles under ambient conditions and is presented in Fig. S8 (ESI†). The typical response parameters of the PPA/rubrene/TiO2 hybrid photodetector are compared with the best-reported values for other self-powered photodetectors and are summarized in Table S6 (ESI†). In terms of device trade-off between open circuit voltage (VOC), photoconductive gain (G), speed (τr/τd), responsivity (Rλ) and detectivity (D*), the present photodetector demonstrates the best performance by balancing these critical parameters on which a photodetector's performance relies.13,16,18,46–51
The general working mechanism of self-powered broadband photodetection can be depicted from the energy level diagram shown in Fig. S9 (ESI†). Al has a work function of 4.3 eV. Therefore, the Al/TiO2 interface serves as an ohmic contact for electron injection from the LUMO of TiO2 to Al. Concurrently, the PPA/ITO interface serves as a Schottky contact, as a result of which a built-in electric field is established that contributes significantly to generate the VOC in the device. Once the photoactive layer, PPA/rubrene/TiO2 is exposed to the light, electron–hole (e–h) pairs are generated in PPA (D-1) and rubrene (D-2). The e–h pairs thus excited in PPA and rubrene are efficiently separated owing to the presence of the electron accepting material TiO2. Finally, the electrons get transported to Al from TiO2 and the holes move through PPA/rubrene into ITO, leading to the generation of a photovoltaic current in the external circuit. Generally, the underlying working mechanisms of the ternary systems are more complicated owing to the involvement of complex photophysical processes. A more realistic physical picture explaining the mechanism of photodetection in the ternary system can be depicted from the energy level diagram. To date four possible working mechanisms have been adopted to describe the photophysical processes involved in the ternary system, as shown in Fig. 7. The first mechanism, M-1, presented in Fig. 7a, is based on the charge transfer cascade process. The domination of this mechanism in a ternary system requires that the energy levels of the third component (donor or acceptor) must be located at the interface to form an energy cascade with the energy levels of the binary components to ensure efficient charge transport between the components.1,52 The second mechanism, M-2, shown in Fig. 7b, is based on Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), also termed an energy transfer process.1–3,8 The critical requirement for the occurrence of FRET in a ternary system is that the emission of one of the donors must overlap with the absorption of the second donor or acceptor (and vice versa) so as to allow for energy transfer. The co-existence of both the mechanisms, M-1 and M-2, can lead to enhanced device performance through extended light absorption and efficient charge generation and transport.1,8,52 The third mechanism, M-3 (Fig. 7c), in a ternary system is based on a parallel-like model.9,10 This mechanism is marked by the independent transport of charges from the two HOMOs of donors in a manner similar to a parallel-linked tandem cell. Finally, the fourth mechanism, M-4 (Fig. 7d), is based on an alloyed model where the essential condition is the intimate mixing of the two donors to form alloys such that they become electronically coupled to form a new state.1,11 It is worth mentioning that the mechanisms M-1 and M-2 are mostly adopted for explaining the photo-physics of photovoltaic devices based on a ternary structure. Moreover, progressive understanding have been made from both experimental and theoretical works for the establishment of these two mechanisms.1–3,8,52 However, the third and fourth mechanisms (M-3 and M-4) in the ternary system are still under debate as a thorough understanding of the photophysical processes in both the models is far from accomplished. This is owing to limited examples of parallel-like and alloyed systems.1,10,11,53 Although the reports available on these two mechanisms have shown conceptually the domination of the two mechanisms through improved device performance, they have failed to explain the occurrence of various VOC behaviour in photovoltaic systems.1
 Fig. 7  Operating mechanisms of ternary system: (a) M-1, the charge transfer mechanism, (b) M-2, the energy transfer (FRET) mechanism, (c) M-3, the parallel-like model, and (d) M-4, the alloyed model. D1, D2 and A correspond to donor 1, donor 2 and acceptor materials, respectively, in ternary systems. 
To understand the mechanisms of operation of the device, it is interesting to verify the possible mechanisms in the present ternary system under study. Considering the first two mechanisms, M-1 and M-2, it is certain that in the present study both the mechanisms will work in synergy to improve the device performance, the first signature of which is confirmed by the TRPL measurements and the energy level alignments (Fig. 4, Fig. S9 and Table S4, ESI†). However, the possibilities of the mechanisms M-3 and M-4 are also checked from the material properties and from the performance of the ternary device. Examining the TEM image (Fig. S3g, ESI†), it is likely that the concept of parallel-like model will contribute to the ternary operation. But examining the material properties of the two donor materials (PPA and rubrene), the possibility of alloy formation is most unlikely as the individual properties of both the materials (PPA and rubrene) are not changed in the composite structure with PPA/rubrene. However, in PPA/rubrene a little deviation of the peak positions (FTIR, UV-Vis, PL) is observed, which is solely due to the interaction between PPA and rubrene. It is verified that the characteristic features of PPA and rubrene stand alone without forming a new state after blending the two materials, thus, the possibility of the alloyed model is ruled out from the present study.
In order to get more insight into the possible working mechanism in the ternary device, the spectral response of the ternary device (PD-3) is plotted and compared with the emission and absorption spectra of PPA and rubrene, as presented in Fig. 8a and b. A broadband wavelength response from the UV to the visible region is observed from the spectral photoresponse of the device at zero bias (Fig. 8a). The broad absorption is owing to the incorporation of rubrene in the PPA/TiO2 host system. As discussed earlier, the PPA/TiO2 binary structure has a strong UV absorption, while in the present study the inclusion of rubrene has significantly extended the light absorption towards the visible region. Considering the working mechanism M-1 (Fig. 7a), the energy levels of PPA, rubrene and TiO2 follow a cascade structure (Fig. 4c), which allows efficient charge transport in the ternary device after photoexcitation (UV and visible light), which confirms the domination of this mechanism (M-1). In addition, a strong increase in the photoconductive gain in the region 430–510 nm is observed for the ternary device. This increment in the photoconductive gain is explained by the FRET mechanism. After photoexcitation, energy transfer from PPA to rubrene occurs, followed by charge separation at the rubrene/TiO2 interface, which provides an alternate effective way for current generation in the device. The increase in the photoconductive gain values in the region 430–510 nm falls within the FRET spectral overlap (Fig. 8b), which shows the contribution of the FRET mechanism (M-2) in the ternary device. Further, in order to verify the occurrence of the third mechanism, M-3, it is necessary to consider the device performance both under UV and visible light as the absorption ranges of the two donor materials, PPA (D-1) and rubrene (D-2), are different. It is worth mentioning that in the UV range of 254–400 nm, as shown in Fig. 8a, the gain value shows a gradual increase that could be contributed up to some extent by the photocurrent generation in PPA under UV light followed by the independent charge collection according to mechanism M-3. Similarly, in the visible range (400–700 nm), the gain value reaches a maximum at 455 nm and then reduces. The significantly high gain value at 455 nm is owing to the FRET effect and the appreciable values of gain at higher wavelengths (>455 nm) support the independent charge transport under visible light. Therefore, the existence of appreciable gain values at lower and higher wavelengths reveals the possibility of a weak contribution of a parallel-like model in the present study. However, considering the photoconductive gain values in the whole spectral range from UV to visible, it may be inferred that the dominance of the energy transfer process (M-2) is more significant as compared to other processes (M-1 and M-3). Hence, it is concluded that mechanism M-2 of Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) is the dominant mechanism in the present ternary system, whereas the synergistic effect of energy cascade (M-1), parallel-like model (M-3) and FRET (M-2) between PPA and rubrene enables the overall superior performance of the ternary device in the UV-Visible range.
 Fig. 8  (a) Spectral response of the ternary hybrid photodetector (PD-3) at zero bias. (b) Emission/absorption spectra of PPA and rubrene showing the spectral overlap. 
Conclusion
We highlight three important aspects of the present study. First, we designed a robust polymer/small molecule/metal oxide ternary system based on their individual structure–property relationships. Secondly, we prepared the polymer/small molecule/metal oxide (PPA/rubrene/TiO2) ternary blend using plasma nanotechnology and demonstrated the direct utilization of the prepared ternary blend for fabrication of a self-powered broadband photodetector. The purpose of incorporating the third component, rubrene, in the binary host (PPA/TiO2) is to broaden the spectral response region covering the entire UV to visible range. A high device performance was obtained for the ternary photodetector. The photodetector enabled self-powered photodetection with a very low dark current (32 pA cm−2), enhanced photosensitivity (2.51 × 103), high photoconductive gain (24.34), high responsivity (11.21 A W−1) and detectivity (9.2 × 1012 Jones) simultaneously for low intensity irradiance of 80 μW cm−2. Third was studying the underlying photophysical mechanism of the ternary blend in a real device. The improved device performance is correlated with the synergistic effect of energy cascade and Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) between PPA and rubrene. A very strong FRET effect is distinctly visible in the spectral response of the device, where the spectral response peaks at the FRET overlap region and not at the peak position of absorption of rubrene. This signifies the dominance of FRET over energy cascade processes. It is concluded that the impact of the combined effect of the energy cascade and the polymer–small molecule FRET has great potential to further improve light absorption and device performance in single junction devices by using multiple polymers/small molecules.
Conflict of interest
Authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank SAIF-NEHU, Shillong, India for providing the HRTEM characterization facility. The authors also thank CIF, IIT-Guwahati for providing the TRPL measurement facility.
References
L. Lu, M. A. Kelly, W. You and L. Yu, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 491–500 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gupta, V. Bharti, M. Kumar, S. Chand and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4398–4404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. Xu, B. Wu, F. Zheng, X.-Y. Yang, H.-D. Jin, F. Zhu and X.-T. Hao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21913–21920 CAS .
H. Li, Q. Xu, N. Li, R. Sun, J. Ge, J. Lu, H. Gu and F. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5542–5543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cheng, Y. Li and X. Zhan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2005–2011 CAS .
T. Ameri, P. Khoram, J. Min and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4245–4266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Allen and M. G. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9240–9241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Huang, T. Goh, X. Li, M. Y. Sfeir, E. A. Bielinski, S. Tomasulo, M. L. Lee, N. Hazari and A. D. Taylor, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 479–485 CrossRef CAS .
J. You, L. Dou, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2013, 38, 1909–1928 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, H. Zhou, S. C. Price and W. You, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5432–5435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart and B. C. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9074–9077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, L. Hu and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2591–2610 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Hong, Y. Cao, J. Xu, H. Lu, J. He and J.-L. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 20887–20894 CAS .
Z. Wang, R. Yu, C. Pan, Z. Li, J. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and J. H. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Hussain, B. Sharma, T. Barman and A. R. Pal, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4258–4265 CAS .
J. H. He, C. L. Hsin, J. Liu, L. J. Chen and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 781–784 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, Q. Liao, Y. Yu, X. Wang and Y. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2014, 9, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Shaikh, V. P. Thakare, D. J. Late and S. Ogale, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3550–3556 RSC .
Y. (Michael) Yang, W. Chen, L. Dou, W.-H. Chang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 190–198 CrossRef .
P. J. Fagan, M. D. Ward, J. V. Caspar, J. C. Calabrese and P. J. Krusic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 2981–2983 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. McGarry, W. Xie, C. Sutton, C. Risko, Y. Wu, V. G. Young Jr., J.-L. Brédas, C. D. Frisbie and C. J. Douglas, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 2254–2263 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Pandey and J.-M. Nunzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 263508 CrossRef .
H. Alves, R. M. Pinto and E. S. Maçôas, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1842 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zeng, D. Zhang, L. Duan, L. Wang, G. Dong and Y. Qiu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2007, 253, 6047–6051 CrossRef CAS .
J. Takeya, K. Tsukagoshi, Y. Aoyagi, T. Takenobu and Y. Iwasa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44, L1393–L1396 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hasegawa and J. Takeya, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2009, 10, 024314 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Fong, S. K. So, W. Y. Sham, C. F. Lo, Y. S. Wu and C. H. Chen, Chem. Phys., 2004, 298, 119–123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsukawa, Y. Takahashi, T. Tokiyama, K. Sasai, Y. Murai, N. Hirota, Y. Tominari, N. Mino, M. Yoshimura, M. Abe, J. Takeya, Y. Kitaoka, Y. Mori, S. Morita and T. Sasaki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 8950–8954 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Park, S. G. Jo, Y. K. Hong, C. Cui, H. Lee, D. J. Ahn, J. Kim and J. Joo, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8002–8007 RSC .
A. A. Hussain, A. R. Pal and D. S. Patil, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2107–2115 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Hussain, A. R. Pal and D. S. Patil, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 193301 CrossRef .

          J. Weinberg-Wolf, Optical characterization of organic semiconducting single crystals, PhD thesis, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. S. Kim, E. H. Cho, D. H. Park, H. Jung, J. Bang and J. Joo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2011, 6, 405 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Irkhin, A. Ryasnyanskiy, M. Koehler and I. Biaggio, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 085143 CrossRef .
T. Barman, A. R. Pal and J. Chutia, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 313, 286–292 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz, J. M. Mauro, B. R. Fisher, M. G. Bawendi and H. Mattoussi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 301–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Didenko, Biotechniques, 2001, 31, 1106–1121 CAS .
L. Huang, Q. Liao, Q. Shi, H. Fu, J. Ma and J. Yao, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 159–166 RSC .
L. Ma, K. Zhang, C. Kloc, H. Sun, M. E. Michel-Beyerle and G. G. Gurzadyan, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 8307–8312 RSC .
D.-S. Tsai, K.-K. Liu, D.-H. Lien, M.-L. Tsai, C.-F. Kang, C.-A. Lin, L.-J. Li and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3905–3911 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kind, H. Yan, B. Messer, M. Law and P. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 158–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, P. S. Lee, C. Yan, T. Zhai, X. Fang, M. Liao, Y. Koide, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5145–5249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Soci, D. Moses, Q.-H. Xu and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 245204 CrossRef .
M. Stolterfoht, A. Armin, B. Philippa, R. D. White, P. L. Burn, P. Meredith, G. Juška and A. Pivrikas, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9949 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mandal, N. S. Chaudhari and S. Ogale, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9141–9147 CAS .
X. Zhong, W. Zhou, Y. Peng, Y. Zhou, F. Zhou, Y. Yin and D. Tang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 45239–45248 RSC .
X. Li, J. Wu, N. Mao, J. Zhang, Z. Lei, Z. Liu and H. Xu, Carbon, 2015, 92, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, J. Jie, Z. Shao, Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. Sun and S.-T. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2910–2919 CrossRef CAS .
O. Game, U. Singh, T. Kumari, A. Banpurkar and S. Ogale, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 503–513 RSC .
D. Li, G. Dong, W. Li and L. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7902–7909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ameri, J. Min, N. Li, F. Machui, D. Baran, M. Forster, K. J. Schottler, D. Dolfen, U. Scherf and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1198–1202 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Street, D. Davies, P. P. Khlyabich, B. Burkhart and B. C. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 986–989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional details of materials, sample characterizations, sample analysis and device characterizations are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04667cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Normalized absorption spectra of (a) pristine rubrene and (b) PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2. (c) Enlarged view of the absorption spectra of PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2 showing the rubrene features.	 

 	Fig. 2  Photoluminescence (PL) spectra of (a) pristine rubrene, excitation wavelength 350, 530 nm and (b) PPA, PPA/TiO2, PPA/rubrene and PPA/rubrene/TiO2, excitation wavelength 350 nm.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Normalized emission and absorption spectra of PPA and pristine rubrene. (b) Normalized emission and molar extinction coefficient plot of PPA and pristine rubrene showing the spectral overlap (overlap integral, J = 2.9421 × 10−16 M−1 cm3). Time-resolved fluorescence decay profile (excitation wavelength is 375 nm) and the corresponding fitting curve of (c) pristine rubrene and (d) PPA, PPA/rubrene, PPA/TiO2 and PPA/rubrene/TiO2.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  Energy level diagrams of the decay profiles of (a) PPA/rubrene, (b) PPA/TiO2 and (c) PPA/rubrene/TiO2 highlighting the routes for energy cascade and FRET induced charge transport with a fast decay time of 0.3865 ns.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a, d and g) Schematic architecture of the standard devices (PD-1, PD-2 and PD-3). (b, e and h) I–V characteristics of the photodetectors PD-1, PD-2 and PD-3 under dark and white light conditions at an intensity of 80 μW cm−2. (c, f and i) The corresponding sketch of the energy levels of the main components of the device.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Intensity profile and (b) the corresponding power law fit of the ternary hybrid photodetector, PD-3. (c) Intensity dependent photoconductive gain of PD-3 at a bias of 1.5 V. (d) Repetitive on/off switching and (e) single cycle on/off switching showing the rise and decay time constants of the photodetector PD-3 under white light at zero bias condition.	 

 	Fig. 7  Operating mechanisms of ternary system: (a) M-1, the charge transfer mechanism, (b) M-2, the energy transfer (FRET) mechanism, (c) M-3, the parallel-like model, and (d) M-4, the alloyed model. D1, D2 and A correspond to donor 1, donor 2 and acceptor materials, respectively, in ternary systems.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Spectral response of the ternary hybrid photodetector (PD-3) at zero bias. (b) Emission/absorption spectra of PPA and rubrene showing the spectral overlap.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Additional details of materials, sample characterizations, sample analysis and device characterizations are provided. See DOI: 10.1039/c6tc04667c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
