Challenges and advances in wide-temperature rechargeable lithium batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE03292E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE03292E
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 1711-1759Challenges and advances in wide-temperature rechargeable lithium batteries

        
          
            Yang 
            Feng
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Limin 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Ma
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Zhonghan 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qing 
            Zhao
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Haixia 
            Li
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *ac and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ac
aFrontiers Science Center for New Organic Matter, Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), Engineering Research Center of High-efficiency Energy Storage (Ministry of Education), Renewable Energy Conversion and Storage Center (RECAST), College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, People's Republic of China
bTianjin EV Energies Co., Ltd., Tianjin 300380, People's Republic of China
cHaihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations, Tianjin, 300192, People's Republic of China
Received 
      20th October 2021
    , Accepted 14th February 2022First published on 15th February 2022AbstractRechargeable lithium batteries (RLBs), including lithium-ion and lithium-metal systems, have recently received considerable attention for electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices due to their low cost, sustainability, environmental friendliness, and temporal and spatial transferability. Most RLBs are harnessed only in favourable environments rather than extreme climates/conditions such as ocean exploration, tropical areas, high altitude drones, and polar expeditions. When chronically or periodically exposed to harsh environments, conventional RLBs will fail to work, especially in low- and high-temperature zones (i.e., below 0 °C and above 60 °C). Constructing alternative electrode materials and electrolyte systems with strong temperature tolerance lays the foundation for developing full-climate RLBs. Herein, the key stumbling blocks to realizing wide-temperature RLBs are first comprehensively discussed. Then the latest research progress to address the challenges at extreme temperatures is gradually introduced. And the fundamental operating mechanism and design strategies of electrolyte and electrode materials for RLBs working within a wide-temperature range are reviewed in detail. Finally, insights into and perspectives on energy materials and battery systems are provided to develop wide-temperature-operating range energy storage devices.
Yang Feng
Yang Feng received his MS degree in 2021 from the School of Textile Science and Engineering at Tiangong University, Tianjin, China. Currently, he is a PhD student in Prof. Kai Zhang's group with the College of Chemistry at Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His current research focuses on synthesis and characterization of advanced materials for wide temperature rechargeable lithium-based batteries.
Limin Zhou
Limin Zhou received her PhD in 2019 from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Wuhan University of Technology and her MS degree from the College of Chemistry from Nankai University in 2015. Then, she jointed Professor Yong-Mook Kang's group as a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Korea University. Her current research focuses on synthesis and characterization of advanced materials for rechargeable batteries.
Kai Zhang
Kai Zhang was born in Tianjin, China, in 1987 and earned his BS in science in 2010 from the College of Chemistry at Nankai University (China). In 2015, he received his PhD in engineering from Nankai University under the supervision of Professor Jun Chen. Then, he joined the group of Professor Yong-Mook Kang as a post-doc in the Department of Energy and Materials Engineering in Dongguk University-Seoul (Korea). Currently, he is a professor at Nankai University. He has been selected as a member of the Young Elite Scientist Sponsorship Program funded by CAST. His research focuses on advanced battery materials and wide-temperature electrochemical energy-storage devices.
Jun Chen
Jun Chen received his BS and MS degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD degree from the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 1999. He held a NEDO fellowship in the National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. Then he joined Nankai University as a Full Professor in 2002. He is currently an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, a fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), the Director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), and the Vice President of Nankai University. His research focuses mainly on nanomaterials chemistry and high-energy batteries. He is the founding Editor-in-Chief of eScience.

Broader context
With ever-increasing energy demands and environmental concerns, there is an urgent need for renewable energy power generation. Because of the intermittency and randomness of renewable energy, electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices play a vital role in shifting electricity load from peak periods to off-peak ones. Among various EES devices, rechargeable lithium batteries (RLBs), including lithium-ion and lithium-metal systems, are well-known and widely used owing to their high energy density and environmental friendliness. However, most of the RLBs are harnessed only in mild environments. Operating at low temperature (LT, below 0 °C) or high temperature (HT, above 60 °C) will sharply reduce battery performance. Building RLBs for wide-temperature applications is highly demanding for various specific applications which include, but are not limited to, electric vehicles, renewable energy storage, national defence, and polar/high-altitude/deep-sea explorations. In this review, we focus on the working mechanism and design methods of wide-temperature RLBs, especially in material construction, fundamental structure–effectiveness relationships, system compatibility, and performance improvement strategies. It also provides prospects for high-energy-dense RLBs operating in wide-temperature-differential environments.

1. Introduction
Based on the prediction of the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the global energy consumption will reach 910.7 quadrillion British thermal units (Btu) by 2050.1 Developing renewable and clean energy has become an international consensus. Unlike the intermittency and randomness of renewable energy, electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices have balanced high energy/power densities and flexible deployment.2,3
Among them, rechargeable lithium batteries (RLBs) undoubtedly play a dominant role in modern society by powering electric vehicles (EVs), smart grids, and portable electronics.4,5 In the 1990s, Sony Corp. developed commercial Li-ion batteries (LIBs), which promoted the development of EES technology during the past 30 years.6 Meanwhile, diversifying RLBs was attempted to meet the requirements of different application scenarios (Fig. 1a).7 For example, aqueous Li-ion batteries (ALIBs) are characterised by high safety, low cost, and sustainability.8 Other Li-based “beyond Li-ion” technologies, such as Li–air batteries (LABs) and Li–sulfur batteries (LSBs), can take advantage of Li metal anodes to increase the cell-level energy density.9 Even though energy density has been dramatically improved by in-depth scientific research into developing novel battery chemistries, their working range is typically around room temperature (RT, close to 25 °C). Moreover, working at low temperatures (LT, below 0 °C) or high temperatures (HT, over 60 °C) usually worsens the electrochemical performance and even causes thermal runaway, which severely limits the all-weather application of RLBs.10,11
 Fig. 1  (a) Stages in the development of RLBs for achieving high volumetric and gravimetric energy densities. (b) Global temperature distribution on January 14, 2022. Image from Climate Reanalyzer, Climate Change Institute, University of Maine, USA. (c) The number of publications on “high/low-temperature lithium batteries”, up to December 2021. Database: Web of Science. (d) A schematic diagram of RLBs with extreme temperature tolerance and reliable safety. 
Considering the diversity and variability of climate (Fig. 1b), how RLBs adapt to extreme conditions is one challenge that attracts tremendous research attention (Fig. 1c).12,13 Moreover, task-specific applications, such as subsurface exploration, military, and rescue devices, require reliable rechargeable batteries at extreme temperatures.14 This concern is common in both aqueous and nonaqueous RLB systems. Under LT conditions, the batteries suffer hindered interfacial ion transfer. The overall impedance and interface polarization cause sharp drops in battery capacity. What is worse, the electrolyte freeze or Li salt precipitation blocks the ion transport, causing an internal open circuit and then battery failure.15,16 When running at HT, although the electrochemical reaction kinetics of electrode materials is enhanced, it can also aggravate the side reactions and even cause gas bulging and safety hazards.17 If working in a temperature range from −40 °C to 70 °C, it is hard to explore a kind of electrolyte that is compatible with both LT and HT. In addition, the structure–effectiveness relationships in different temperature ranges have received relatively little attention despite its obvious importance. Consequently, the enthusiasm for developing all climate RLBs should be aroused.
Previous reviews have focused on either the improvements in a particular temperature region (LT or HT), or a single battery system for a wide temperature range.15,18–21 Until now, there have been no comprehensive mechanistic analysis and modulating strategies that deal with RLBs for LT, HT and all-climate operation. This review comprehensively summarizes the novel progress in RLBs working at different temperatures, especially the puzzles and progress in promoting electrode and electrolyte materials for LT, HT, and wide-temperature RLBs (Fig. 1d). We first focus on an in-depth analysis of the failure mechanism of RLBs operated at LT and HT. Then, we systematically present subzero-temperature RLBs’ breakthroughs in terms of their critical materials and components. Moreover, we thoroughly summarize the implementation of HT RLBs. For both situations, the fundamental structure–effectiveness relationships between materials and their electrochemical performance are insightfully discussed. Lastly, we provide an outlook on all-climate rechargeable RLBs. This review would shed light on developing advanced RLBs used in different temperature ranges.
2. Temperature effect on RLBs
Temperature determines whether a chemical reaction can take place and its reaction rate, and the relationship between reaction active energy and temperature can be expressed by the Arrhenius equation (Fig. 2a): k = Ae−Ea/RT(1)where k is the rate constant, A is the preexponential factor, Ea represents the activation energy, R is the universal gas constant, and T is the absolute temperature. In RLBs, two main reactions are involved: the redox reactions inside the electrode material and the complex reactions at the electrode–electrolyte interface. Another remarkable effect is that the output potential (V) relies on the voltage difference between the cathode and anode sides. The redox potential of each active material is a function of temperature, as represented by the Nernst equation (illustrated in Fig. 2b): (2)In this equation, E and  are the actual and standard potentials, respectively, R stands for the gas constant, n means the electron migration number, F denotes the Faraday constant, and Q is related to the concentration of substances. Accordingly, when a cell operates at different temperatures, its output voltage and capacity become extremely unstable during cycling, resulting in critical battery management and usage problems.
 Fig. 2  (a) The relationship between the reaction constant and temperature based on the Arrhenius equation. (b) The relationship between cell electromotive force and temperature. (c) Schematic description of Li+ migration from the anode to cathode during the discharge process. 
Taking a graphite//lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) full cell as an example (as shown in Fig. 2c), the Li+ transfer pathway can be decomposed into the following discharge steps: (1) Li+ diffusion in the graphite interlayer; (2) Li+ extraction from the LixC6 anode; (3) Li+ transport across the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI); (4) Li+ solvation on the surface of the SEI layer; (5) Li+ migration in the electrolyte towards the LCO cathode surface; (6) Li+ desolvation on the surface of the cathode electrolyte interphase (CEI) layer; (7) Li+ diffusion through the CEI layer; and (8) Li+ diffusion in the LCO interlayer. For LT LIBs, the Li+ desolvation process (steps 6 and 7), which is the stripping of the solvent sheath of Li+, is a rate-determining step.
When exposed to elevated temperatures, internal exothermic reactions will occur, including the structure collapse and gas generation of the cathode materials (affecting steps 6, 7 and 8) and the decomposition and regeneration of the SEI (affecting steps 3 and 4).22,23 The failure mechanism and main challenges of RLBs at LT and HT will be introduced in turn.
2.1. Low-temperature zone

Failure mechanism. 
Low temperature (LT) conditions (below 0 °C) limit thermal kinetic energy, resulting in severe energetic hurdles within an electrochemical reaction pathway. The kinetics coefficient shows a strong temperature dependence in a specific temperature range. LT inevitably retards the diffusion of ions compared to ambient temperature, leading to severe voltage polarization of the electrochemical reaction. Consequently, the set cut-off voltage will be reached quickly, which brings about insufficient output capacity.24,25 For LIBs, the intrinsic ion conductivities of most electrode materials depend on their crystal structure and grain boundary. These inherent properties make the improvement of the preexponential factor very limited. For LSBs, the insulation of the sulfur cathode and the multi-step transformation process aggravates their sluggish reaction kinetics.26
In terms of Li metal batteries (LMBs), an analytical model of Li+ deposition was proposed by Akolkar (Fig. 3a). This model demonstrated the critical temperature of dendrite formation on the anode side with a specific rate.27,28 Later, in situ optical microscopy was used to explore the effects of RT and LT on the formation of Li dendrites (including the nucleation number, initiation time, and growth rate). The voltage–time curves at different temperatures are shown in Fig. 3b. Moreover, the multi-variable relationship among temperature, dendrite morphology, and short-circuit time is given in eqn (3). (3)where tsc is the time that Li dendrites grow from the anode to the cathode, ti is the time of the dendrite formation, T is the temperature, vd is the growth rate, i is the applied current, and l is the distance between electrodes. Eqn (3) illustrates that the temperature directly affects the dendrite morphology and the rate of dendrite formation and thus tunes the short-circuit time.29
 Fig. 3  (a) The effects of temperature and current density on dendrite growth. Data extracted from ref. 27. (b) Voltage vs. time at different temperatures. Data extracted from ref. 29. (c) Energy barriers of three types of electrolytes at different temperatures. Data extracted from ref. 30. (d) Schematic of the main challenges of RLBs at LT. 
In addition to electrode materials, temperature also significantly affects the electrolyte whether it is an organic or aqueous system. Fig. 3c shows that LT can increase the viscosity and desolvation energy of the organic electrolyte, which is described by the Stokes–Einstein equation (eqn (4)) and the dielectric effect (eqn 5).30 (4) (5)where D is the diffusion constant, η is the viscosity of the medium, r is the solvation radius, q is the critical distance for the ion pair formation, z is the valence order of ions, ε0 is the dielectric constant of vacuum, k is Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature. According to eqn (4) and (5), the increased viscosity decreases the ionic mobility, and the formed close ion pairs with their counterions by the solvating solvent hinder ionic migration.31,32 Moreover, the obstacles turn more severe when an aqueous electrolyte is employed, attributed to the phase transition of water and the salt precipitation. Significantly, when the temperature is lower than a particular value (usually 4 °C), the frequency of hydrogen bond formation between water molecules in the solution gradually increases (much higher than the breaking frequency), thereby forming a solid ice–water mixture. The freezing point of the solution can be expressed as follows:33 Tsolution = Twater − ΔTf = Kf·m(6)where Tsolution is the solution's freezing point, Twater is 0 °C, ΔTf is the freezing point depression, Kf is the freezing point depression constant (Kf = 1.86 °C kg mol for water), and m is the molality of the solution. For example, the freezing point for 1 M NaCl solution is calculated to be −3.7 °C, which is not enough to support its regular operation under extremely cold conditions.16


Main challenges. 
In an LT environment, there are some fatal issues that need to be tackled (Fig. 3d).34,35 (1) For organic electrolytes, the increasing viscosity and decreasing solubility should be alleviated. (2) For aqueous electrolytes, water freezes at LT, and the solubility of Li salts is positively correlated with temperature. That is to say, the lower the temperature, the lower the solubility. And the Li salt precipitation brings about battery failure. (3) LT inevitably increases the charge transfer resistance of the electrode materials. (4) Uneven Li deposition for LMBs at LT increases the risk of short circuits. (5) For LSBs, the sluggish kinetics and high overpotential under LT conditions also need to be tackled. Even worse, all obstacles mentioned above will turn more severe when the temperature is decreased to an extremely low level (less than −20 °C).36

2.2. High-temperature zone

Failure mechanism. 
High temperature (HT) (over 60 °C), as another extreme condition, is a double-edged sword. The advantage is that the increased temperature lowers the energy barrier and increases the ionic diffusion rate. However, HT accelerates side reactions (such as transition metal ion dissolution, gas escapes, and SEI decomposition and regeneration) at the electrolyte–electrode interface and easily causes thermal risk, which is related to the thermodynamics and kinetics of the SEI or CEI.37 In terms of thermodynamics, according to the Nernst and Gibbs–Helmholtz equations, as the temperature increases, the chemical potential of cathode materials (μc) shifts negatively. When the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) of electrolyte is lower than μc, electrons transfer from the electrolyte to the cathode side, which causes electrolyte oxidation and decomposition to reach a new equilibrium (i.e., CEI formation). In terms of the anode, the chemical potential (μa) change trend of the active material is just the opposite. If μa turns to be higher than the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) of electrolyte, electrons will preferably transfer from the anode to electrolyte, which means electrolyte decomposition and SEI formation (Fig. 4a and b).10,38 From a kinetics viewpoint, according to the assumption of the porous SEI film model, the intrinsic electronic conductivity (κ0) of the SEI is the decisive factor for the rate of SEI generation. With the elevated temperature, its electronic conductivity becomes high, which means that the SEI film turns thick (Fig. 4c).39 Moreover, some electrode materials exhibit severe capacity degradation at HT owing to their unique intrinsic properties. For example, Li-rich materials display intensified lattice oxygen loss and transition-metal dissolution at HT, causing rapid capacity decay.40 For LSBs, the dissolution of lithium polysulfides (LiPSs) in the cathode exacerbates at HT, resulting in active material loss and capacity decay. In terms of batteries with the Li metal or silicon anode, the vulnerable passivation layers and undesirable reactions with electrolyte at elevated temperatures compromise their cycle lives, energy density, and safety.41
 Fig. 4  (a) The electrochemical potentials of the cathode (μa) and anode (μc) are related to temperature. (b) Schematic illustration of the CEI (SEI) energy level shift to reach a new steady state as the chemical potential of the cathode (anode) shifts with temperature. Data deduced from ref. 10. (c) Comparison of the theoretical and experimental values of SEI thickness growth rates at different temperatures (t = 60 °C, κ0 = 4.5 ps m−1; t = 15 °C, κ0 = 0.3 ps m−1). Data deduced from ref. 39. (d) Schematic of the main challenges of RLBs at HT. 


Main challenges. 
Although there is no problem with the favourable redox reaction kinetics of electrode materials under HT conditions, serious safety hazards and challenges exist at HT (Fig. 4d):42 (1) cell bulge and Li salt precipitation caused by the volatilization of the electrolyte solvent should be solved; (2) the irreversible dissolution of the transition metal or LiPSs should be addressed; (3) some interface side reactions and safety hazards should be overcome; and (4) the compatibility of the current collector with the Li salt or binder is worthy of attention. Overall, the thermal properties of battery components and the system's compatibility are indispensable for maintaining stable electrochemical performance.38,43,44

3. Subzero-temperature breakthrough
3.1. Lithium-ion batteries
LIBs usually display severe polarization under LT conditions, drastically decreased capacity, and inferior rate capability. Moreover, LT causes slow charge transfer at the anode interface. Thus, the metal Li tends to separate on the anode surface because of the reduced lithiation kinetics of the anode materials. Meanwhile, Li deposition inevitably causes the formation of Li dendrites, which brings potential safety hazards.45 Tremendous efforts focused on suitable co-solvents to reduce the freezing point of the electrolyte and replace the high freezing-point ethylene carbonate (EC) or water and develop a stable interphase/interface on the electrodes that promotes ion transport dynamics.46,47 Besides, structural and material engineering attempts on both the electrolyte and electrodes are also effective strategies to optimize LT performance.34 A detailed review of LT engineering for electrolytes and electrodes and their interfaces is presented in this part successively.

3.1.1. Electrolyte. 
LT would increase the viscosity of electrolyte and even bring about Li salt precipitation, adversely affecting the ionic transfer and electrolyte wettability on the electrode. The reduced conductivity of electrolyte causes Li+ exhaustion near the electrode, conclusively hindering battery performance. Numerous studies have been performed to address these issues to ensure LIBs work under LT conditions.
3.1.1.1. Organic electrolyte. 
For improving LT electrochemical stability, considerable attention has been focused on developing functional electrolytes aiming to enhance ionic conductivity in electrolytes and the interphase strength at the electrolyte–electrode interface. Thus, research studies were conducted to optimize solvents, Li salts, and additives.
Since commercial LIBs based on high-melting-point (HMP) EC electrolytes were introduced in the 1990s, they have received the primary blame for their poor performances at LT. Mixing with other low-melting-point (LMP) solvents has been adopted to enhance the LT performance.46 Twenty years ago, the U.S. Army Research Laboratory (ARL) and Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) systematically researched a series of LMP electrolytes, such as 1.0 M lithium hexafluorophosphate (LiPF6) in ethylene carbonate/diethyl carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (EC/DEC/DMC, v:v:v, 1:1:1) and 1.0 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate/ethyl methyl carbonate/dimethyl carbonate (EC/EMC/DMC, v:v:v, 1:1:1), which provided LMP and low charge transfer resistance on graphite and improved the electrochemistry performance at −20 °C.48 Moreover, LMP ethyl acetate (EA, −84 °C) and low-viscosity dichloromethane (DCM, with an MP of −95 °C and a viscosity of 0.44 MPa s) are generally used to guarantee the workability of the battery. Dong et al. prepared a high concentration electrolyte, 5.0 M lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI) with EA electrolyte and DCM diluent (v:v, 1:4). Due to the electrochemically “inert” diluent, the local solvation structure of the obtained LiTFSI/EA would remain undisturbed (Fig. 5a). Even at −70 °C, the prepared electrolyte displayed a high ionic conductivity of 0.6 mS cm−1, a low viscosity of 0.35 Pa s, and a high potential window of 4.85 V. As a result, the Li//polyimide (PI) battery could deliver a high specific energy of 259 W h kg−1 and a power density of 5668 W kg−1 at 25 °C, which was comparable to commercialized LIBs. When decreasing the temperature to −70 °C, the battery delivered a specific energy of 178 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 64 W kg−1. Even at a high-power density of 2877 W kg−1, it still provided a specific energy of 17 W h kg−1.49 Very recently, a high-entropy electrolyte with a low freezing point of −130 °C was developed to extend the service temperature range of LIBs by using a decimal solvent mixture. Unlike conventional electrolytes, the molecularly disordered solvent mixture significantly suppressed the freezing crystallization of the electrolyte, providing good protection for LIBs from possible mechanical damage at extremely LT (Fig. 5b). As a result, the prepared electrolyte exhibited a high ionic conductivity (0.62 mS cm−1) even at −60 °C.50
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of the solvation structure. Data deduced from ref. 49. (b) Schematic illustrations of the changes in commercial binary and high-entropy electrolytes at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Chinese Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustrations of the solvation structures of the PC and PC-DEC electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to adding LMP co-solvent, the solvation/desolvation behaviour of Li+ has an essential effect on the LIB performance at LT. This indicates that the Li+ desolvation process is the significant kinetic barrier during the Li+ transport between the cathode and anode at LT. Moreover, stripping the solvent sheath of Li+ was the most energy-consuming step for Li+ to enter the interior of the electrode, and this energy barrier became even more prominent as the temperature decreased below −20 °C.51 Yang et al. proposed a low freezing point fluorinated electrolyte by dissolving LiTFSI into ethyl trifluoroacetate (ETFA, −78 °C) solvent. Molecular dynamics (MD) calculations indicated that the binding energy of Li+-ETFA (10.05 kJ mol−1) was lower than those of Li+-EC, EA, and DMC (21.56, 28.18, and 19.07 kJ mol−1, respectively). This result implied that the de-solvation of Li+-ETFA molecules would be easier than those of typical carbonate-based electrolytes at LT. The ETFA electrolyte provided a wide electrochemical window (0–4.73 V, vs. Li+/Li) and maintained its liquid state at −120 °C.52 Recently, the Cao group reported a propylene carbonate (PC)-based electrolyte, whose solvation structure is presented in Fig. 5c; they introduced a weakly coordinating DEC co-solvent for inducing PF6− anions into the solvation shell of Li+ to form an anion-induced ion-solvent-coordinated (AI-ISC) structure. The AI-ISC structure increased the LUMO energy level of the electrolyte, improving the reduction tolerance of the PC solvent. Given that the film-forming additive fluoroethylene carbonate (FEC) could enable reversible Li+ intercalation on the graphite electrode, the graphite//LiNi0.5Mn0.3Co0.2O2 (NCM523) pouch cell based on the dilute PC-DEC (a Li+/solvent molecular ratio of 1:10) electrolyte with 5 vol% FEC additive showed a discharge capacity of 430 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and −40 °C. Moreover, the graphite//NCM523 pouch cell exhibited excellent cycling performance under 1C and RT conditions with a capacity retention of 91.5% over 750 cycles and an average CE of 99.84%. Even after 750 cycles, there was no appreciable bloat, suggesting that the PC-DEC electrolyte suppressed the gas production.53
Further to exploring different combinations of solvents, some Li salts have also been investigated. For example, Liao et al. reported a novel approach for improving the LT performance of LIBs by reducing electrode interface impedance. They employed lithium difluorobis(oxalato)phosphate (LiDFBOP), which served as a film-forming additive, which simultaneously formed films on both electrodes via reduction and oxidation. Moreover, when LiDFBOP was used as a film-forming additive, Li+ ions were incorporated into the interface films, which endowed the interface films with good ionic conductivity. Thus, the SEI design suppressed the electrolyte decomposition and provided high ionic conductivity. Based on these advantages, the graphite//NCM523 pouch cell (RT conditions) demonstrated a high capacity retention of 75% at 1C with a high coulombic efficiency (CE) of ∼100% when charged to 4.6 V and applying 1% LiDFBOP additive, suggesting that the interface films derived from LiDFBOP could endure high-voltage application.54
3.1.1.2. Aqueous electrolyte. 
Aqueous lithium-ion batteries (ALIBs) are safer alternatives to current LIBs. Moreover, aqueous electrolyte provides inherent advantages such as low cost, environmental benignity, high ionic conductivity, and high safety. Thermodynamically, it is known that pure water freezes at 0 °C. The addition of solutes and other additives decreases the freezing point of water.55–58 According to the freezing depression equation (eqn (6)) for the solution based on salt in water, it is found that saturated LiCl (16 mol kg−1, RT) does not freeze at temperatures down to −50 °C. Thus, a water-in-salt (WIS) strategy containing LiCl for ALIBs was developed. As shown in Fig. 6a, the prepared aqueous solution demonstrated superior LT performance to EC/DEC electrolyte. Moreover, a minor resistance could be obtained with an LCO cathode, which is even better than the battery system with organic electrolyte (Fig. 6b).33 In addition, electrolyte additives, such as antifreeze additives, are attractive for aqueous electrolytes to solve the solvent crystallization issue of ALIBs. As a well-known antifreeze additive, ethylene glycol (EtG) has been widely applied in electronics and automobiles due to its high boiling point and relatively low freezing point. With the increase of EtG (0–40 wt%) in 1 M Li2SO4 electrolyte, the crystallization temperature decreased from −4.6 to −24.6 °C. Furthermore, the stable ion conductivity of the active carbon//LiFePO4 (AC//LFP) battery was obtained in 1 M Li2SO4 with 40 wt% of EG at −20 °C (Fig. 6c).59
 Fig. 6  (a) Cycling performance of LCO with various electrolytes at different temperatures. (b) Comparison of resistances from electrolytes as a function of temperature. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) The ionic conductivity as a function of time of a 1 M Li2SO4 aqueous electrolyte solution with ETG additive. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration describing the fabrication electrolytic conductivity and pressure with the temperature of the liquefied gas electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustration of the solvation mechanism and photos of 0.1 M LiTFSI in FM (left) and 0.3 M LiTFSI and 0.3 M THF in FM (right). (f) The CE of Li plating and stripping at various temperatures in the liquefied gas electrolyte. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
3.1.1.3. Beyond liquid phases. 
Considering the phase limitations of liquid electrolyte, researchers proposed beyond the liquid phase system to expand the operating temperature range. Liquefied gas is a unique solvent. Generally, liquefied gas remains in the gaseous state at RT, while it can liquefy with high electrolytic conductivities under LT conditions (Fig. 6d).60 The Meng group prepared fluoromethane (FM) based liquefied gas electrolytes with tetrahydrofuran (THF) additive. MD simulations indicated that the fraction of free Li+ uncoordinated by TFSI− anions increased with decreasing temperature. The introduction of THF fully coordinated with the Li+ and greatly enhanced Li salt solubility and transport (Fig. 6e). As the concentrations of Li salt and additive synchronously increased, the conductivity was substantially enhanced. Notably, the obtained 0.5 M LiTFSI and 0.5 M THF in FM provided a high conductivity of 2.8 mS cm−1 at −60 °C. Moreover, the authors added 5 wt% CO2 in the FM/THF-based electrolyte to stabilise the Li–metal anode. The obtained liquefied gas electrolyte (0.3 M LiTFSI, 0.3 M THF in FM/CO2) demonstrated a stable CE of 98.4% at −60 °C (Fig. 6f), which is attributed to the fast kinetics of the liquefied gas electrolyte and the stable interface chemistry.61 Recently, flexible metal organic framework (MOF) modified polymer membranes were designed for restricting gas. And these membranes enabled operation at low vapour pressure and provided high capacity than commercial Celgard membranes (∼500 mA h g−1) at −40 °C, which opened a potential pathway for the safe operation of gas electrolytes.62
Moreover, Li et al. reported ion conduction behaviour in three types of lithiated covalent organic nanosheets obtained by self-assembly and tabletting methods. The prepared solid covalent organic framework (COF)-based electrolyte with the functionalized groups can quickly coordinate and dissociate with Li+, which may allow single-Li-ion conduction. Besides, the porous nanosheet structure enhanced ion conductivity by providing enriched ion diffusion pathways. Conductivities of up to 10−5 S cm−1 were reported at −40 °C with a Li+ transference number of 0.92. Unfortunately, the authors only used the small organic molecular electrode with low loading, which did not match common inorganic cathode materials.63
In short, the rational design of electrolyte composition and electrolyte–electrode interfaces has attracted much attention, and Fig. 7 presents the main electrolyte modification strategies. Initial efforts have been made to use co-solvents to reduce the electrolyte's overall freezing point and viscosity. Experiments and theoretical calculations demonstrated that the desolvation process at the interface mainly limits the LT kinetics of LIBs. By designing high-concentration electrolyte and high-entropy electrolyte to modulate the Li+ coordination environment, the energy barrier for Li+ desolvation can be reduced, which improves the LT performance. Adding interfacial film-forming agents (e.g., FEC and LiDFBOP) and harnessing liquefied gas electrolytes can optimize the Li+ coordination structure and thus reduce electrode–electrolyte interface impedance.
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of main electrolyte modification strategies at LT. 


3.1.2. Electrode materials. 
As the central place of electrochemical reactions, electrode materials also influence LT performance. The electrochemical properties of electrodes are associated with the reaction activation energy, the diffusion barrier, and the ability to decrease charge transfer resistance, which depends significantly on the structural characteristics of electrodes. A temperature decrease results in an increase of ohmic polarization on account of decreased electronic conductivity and ion diffusion capability, thus leading to the limited LT performances of electrodes.19 Efforts put into introduction of heteroatoms, surface modification, and the fabrication of nanoporous structures for stabilizing electrodes, reducing the diffusion barrier, and accelerating the ion/electron kinetic rate are discussed in the coming sections.
3.1.2.1. Cathodes. 
As transfer centres for ions and electrons, cathodes suffer from unfavourable structure and phase transition. Fig. 8a–d show the reported cycling stability of several typical cathode materials, and their crystal structures are also schematically demonstrated in Fig. 8e–l. Moreover, Fig. 8a–d show that sluggish redox kinetics impedes the electrochemical activity.34 The evolution of cathodes under extreme conditions is undergoing several tricky issues, and much effort has been devoted to breaking through temperature limitations. According to the classification of material structures, the progress of several representative cathode materials is discussed, such as layered, spinel, and polyanionic cathodes.
 Fig. 8  The temperature behaviour of several typical cathode materials. (a–d) Low and ambient temperature performance. (e–l) Schematic structures of the corresponding cathode materials. (a, e and i) Layered LiCoO2 (LCO). (b, f and j) Layered LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NCM). (c, g and k) Spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO). (d, h and l) Olivine-type LiFePO4 (LFP). The data of (a–d) were deduced from ref. 65, 67, 72 and 75. 
Layered oxides. 
As a representative of the layered oxide material family (LiMO2, M = Co, Ni, Mn), lithium cobalt oxide (LCO) was first recognized as a cathode material in 1980 and successfully used in commercial LIBs in 1991.64,65 Then, ternary and Li-rich cathode materials emerged. Although satisfactory performance at RT has been achieved for LCO, inherent kinetic problems limit its LT electrochemical performance. In particular, the energy density of 18650-type LIBs with an LCO cathode at −40 °C was only 5% of that at 20 °C.66
For enhancing the capacity at −40 °C, Tan et al. coated a glassy lithium borate (Li2O–2B2O3) with a thickness of about 8 nm on LiNi1/3Co1/3Mn1/3O2 (NCM111). When cycling at 0.2C, the electrode without a Li2O–2B2O3 coating delivered a capacity of 38 mA h g−1 at −40 °C, whereas the corresponding capacity value was 103 mA h g−1 for the coated electrode.67 A similar effect was observed for the LT behaviour of layered Li-rich materials. The prepared lithium borate (Li3BO3) was deposited onto Li1.2Ni0.2Mn0.6O2 particles. As shown in Fig. 9a, the coating layer acted as a protective layer to prevent the attack of hydrofluoric acid (HF) while guaranteeing fast Li+ transport. With a 5–8 nm coating layer (Fig. 9b), the obtained cathode provided stable performance at −30 °C.68 Besides, some conductive polymers have also been successfully coated onto the surfaces of Ni-rich cathodes. As shown in Fig. 9c, Sun and co-workers spontaneously grafted benzenediazonium tetrafluoroborate (C6H5N2+BF4−) onto LiNi0.6Co0.2Mn0.2O2 (NCM622). The modified particles provided a thin film with a thickness of about 10 nm. The corresponding selected area electron diffraction (SAED) patterns indicated that the coating layer consisted of disordered polymer materials. Moreover, the modified particles demonstrated a higher electronic conductivity (1.939 S cm−1) than the pristine sample (3.624 × 10−3 S cm−1). The high conductivity of the surface-functionalized NCM622 particles indicated fast electron transport through the thin surface layer. Benefitting from the high conductivity of the conductive polymer, the polyphenylene/LNCM-3 electrode maintained impressive rate capabilities over a wide-temperature range of −20 to 25 °C. When cycled at 1C, it retained a reversible capacity of 105 mA h g−1 at −20 °C, and provided a reversible capacity of 180 mA h g−1 at 25 °C. Moreover, a high reversible capacity of 113 mA h g−1 was achieved at −20 °C after 1150 cycles with CEs of nearly 100.0% (Fig. 9d).69
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of main processes occurring with ion/electron transfer during working and the synergistic effects of coating Li3BO3. (b) TEM image of the 3 wt% LBO-coated particles. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism of the preparation of a polyphenylene/NCM622 composite. (d) Electrochemical performance of the polyphenylene/NCM622 cathode at 0.5C and 20 °C. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Spinel-structured oxides. 
Unlike layered materials, spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO) has a strong edge-shared MnO6 octahedral lattice and three-dimensional Li+ conduction pathways and thus exhibits good physical stability and rate capability. But its performance at LT (−20 °C) is far less than that at RT. A few studies have been reported to tackle these problems through doping and/or surface modification.64,70 Coating Li2O–Al2O3–TiO2–P2O5 (LATP) onto LiNi0.5Mn1.5O4 (LNMO) enabled the structure surface to form a continuous layer and further improve the LT performance of LNMO, and Fig. 10a presents the TEM image of LATP@LNMO. The electrochemical test revealed that the battery with the LATP layer was beneficial to decreasing polarization at −20 °C. And the enhancement could be attributed to the LATP coating, which promoted Li+ diffusion at the electrode–electrolyte interface. The LATP–Li4Ti5O12 (LTO)//LNMO full cell thus achieved an energy density of 270 W h kg−1 at −20 °C, which was much better than that of the pristine sample.71 Besides, Ni doping onto the surface of LMO was proved to decrease the charge transfer energy barrier (Fig. 10b) and facilitate the interfacial process, thus inhibiting the capacity loss under LT conditions. The electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) mapping of Mn and Ni for LMO and LMO-Ni in Fig. 10c revealed that Ni was doped into the surface. Moreover, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) and theoretical calculations indicated that Ni surface doping could strengthen the Li binding to surface sites and give rise to a ∼20% reduction of the activation energy for the charge transfer process (Fig. 10d). To evaluate the impact of Ni surface doping on the electrochemical performance of LMO, charging/discharging measurements were performed under RT and LT conditions. Under RT conditions, the modified sample showed a high capacity of ∼85 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 82.3%, while the pristine sample capacity was only 48 mA h g−1. Impressively, the modified electrode exhibited high-capacity retention at 0.2C and −20 °C, far surpassing that of the hardly discharged unmodified counterpart (Fig. 10e).72
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of the 10 nm LATP-coated particles. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of lowering the surface energy barrier by modulating surface chemistry. (c) EELS mapping of Mn and Ni for LMO and LMO-Ni. (d) Simulation of the reaction rates of LMO and LMO-Ni at different temperatures. (e) Electrochemical performance of LMO and LMO-Ni cathodes at 0.2C and 20 °C. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the prepared LFP@C/CNT nanocomposite and corresponding HRTEM images. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of carbon-coated LVP with ion/electron transport channels. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM images of V2O5 nanofibres. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH. 
Polyanionic-type compounds. 
In addition to the oxides mentioned above, polyanion compounds are also widely investigated.73–75 As a representative of the commercial cathode material, olivine-type lithium iron phosphate, LiFePO4 (LFP) has high discharge specific capacity, a stable framework, and high safety. While Li atoms form a migration channel along the [010] axis in a one-dimensional direction and the electrons can only jump in the b-axis direction, which seriously affects the diffusion ability of electrons/ions in the material, at LT the diffusion of Li+ is further hindered, resulting in increased impedance, severe polarization, and poor LT performance.76 A double nano-carbon (amorphous carbon and graphitized carbon nanotubes (CNTs)) modified LFP@C/CNT composite was designed via a polyol route followed by a coating procedure (Fig. 10f). The prepared LFP@C/CNT composite demonstrated excellent performance with 71.4% capacity retention when discharged at −25 °C. The improved properties resulted from the synergistic effect of the amorphous uniform carbon coating and the graphitized conductive CNTs. The amorphous carbon promoted Li+ diffusion and stabilized the cathode interface, while the CNTs functioned as a 3D conducting network to facilitate the electron transfer.77 The LT capacity of LFP can also be increased by trace doping with elements. Zhang et al. doped La and Mg ions into the olivine structure without destroying the crystal structure of LFP, in which the La ions occupied the Li-site, and the Mg ions occupied the Fe-site. As a result, Li0.99La0.01Fe0.9Mg0.1PO4/C displayed a high capacity at −20 °C.78 Besides, the low redox performance at LT can be countered by altering the electrode materials with low activation energy. It was proved that NASICON-type Li3V2(PO4)3 (LVP) had an activation energy of 6.57 kJ mol−1, seven times lower than that of LFP. The apparent improvement of the diffusion coefficient of Li+ resulted in an almost 300% higher capacity of 108.1 mA h g−1 at −20 °C. Thus, the extraction/intercalation of Li+ from/into LVP was much easier than that from/into LFP, making it an attractive cathode material for LT LIBs. Subsequently, the Mai group prepared a hierarchical carbon decorated LVP, which showed improved cycling stability and rate performance at −20 °C (88% capacity retention after 450 cycles and 106 mA h g−1 at 5C). Moreover, the long-life RT-performance of the LVP/C cathode was presented. The initial specific discharge capacity was 122 mA h g−1 at 20C. After 4000 cycles, the capacity still remained at 94 mA h g−1, corresponding to a capacity fading of 0.0065% per cycle. The combination of the nano-scale carbon coating and the micro-scale carbon network provided a hierarchical structure for electrolyte infiltration, thus achieving rapid electron transfer (Fig. 10g). In addition, the fast kinetics of materials benefitted the enhancement of LT performance, which was a key point in practical applications.79–84
For improving the LT performance of LFP, the critical factor is to increase the ion/electron transfer rate. The thin carbon coating on LFP enables fast electron transport and accelerates the desolvation process of Li+, which is conducive to the improvement of its LT performance. Moreover, elemental doping increases the lattice defects of LFP, which helps in improving the internal conductivity of the particles, fundamentally reconciling the problem of poor conductivity, and improving its LT performance.
Other-type cathodes. 
Vanadium oxides such as V2O5 are typical intercalation compounds with a layered structure to host guest molecules and display high potential for Li insertion. In particular, the 1D V2O5 nanostructure was used as a Li-storage cathode material to enhance LT properties. Sides and Martin employed a template-directed process to prepare V2O5 with micron-scale to nano-sized diameters (70 nm) (Fig. 10h). The enhanced performance of nanorod arrays with a diameter of 70 nm at −20 °C was attributed to their decreased size, which shortened the distance for Li+ diffusion.85 Similarly, a nanosized Ni-based Prussian blue (NPB) cathode was also reported. The 3D NPB structure enabled the wide spacing of Li+ diffusion channels due to weak interaction with moving ions that promote fast transfer. The galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT) determined that the diffusion coefficient of the NPB cathode could achieve 10−10 cm2 s−1 at −70 °C. Based on these merits, the pseudocapacitive behaviour drove the desolvation process at the interface and accelerated the diffusion of Li+, which enabled the cathode to deliver a high-capacity retention of 89% at −50 °C.86
In addition, in terms of materials’ intrinsic properties, spinel and layered oxide cathodes exhibit better LT activity than those of polyanion compounds. For layered materials, selecting dopants with large ionic radii increases the layer spacing of the materials, which accelerates the Li+ diffusion, thus improving the LT performance of LIBs. Moreover, elemental doping increases the lattice defects of LFP, which helps in improving the internal conductivity of the particles and LT performance.
3.1.2.2. Anodes. 
As a battery component, the anode also plays a vital role in sustaining LT battery operation.87 From an electrochemical view, LT increases the charge transfer resistance of the electrode, leading to a problematic electrode reaction and the kinetic limitation of Li+ transfer. In addition, the formation of an SEI on the anode side also has a significant effect on battery performance.35 The improvement of the LT battery performance on the anode side can be achieved by optimizing the electrode structure and reaction interface to reduce resistance and maintain the SEI stability.88 Most of the research studies focus on anode materials, including graphite, hard carbon, spinel LTO, Si, and other compounds.
Carbon materials. 
As the first commercially available anode material for LIBs, graphite has attracted a lot of interest during the past 30 years.89 According to the data of U.S. ARL, when the temperature decreased from 30 °C to −40 °C, the electrolyte resistance, SEI resistance, and charge transfer resistance in the cell with a graphite electrode increased by 10, 100, and 2000 times, respectively. And the diffusion coefficient of Li+ in graphite decreased 12 times in the fully-lithiated state and 25 times in the fully-delithiated state (Fig. 11a and b).87 To fight the LT crisis, significant efforts have been devoted to artificial metallic interphases and their effects on optimizing LT performance. For example, Marassi et al. showed that a mixture of partially oxidized graphite and metal nanoparticles maintained 30% of its theoretical capacity at −30 °C. Also, the Sn–graphite composite anode delivered a specific capacity of 152 mA h g−1 at −30 °C.90,91 Moreover, the sluggish intercalation/de-intercalation kinetics of the graphite anode at LT affects its electrochemical performance (Fig. 11c). Fortunately, composite electrodes and pre-lithiation treatment are also practical approaches for improving the LT capacity of graphite. Liu et al. built a pre-lithiated hard carbon anode for improving the LT performance. They used an LVP cathode coupled with a pristine hard carbon anode to form a primary cell. The initial charge of the cell was employed to achieve the pre-lithiation, which included two separated Li extraction steps at about 3.6 V (vs. Li+/Li) and 4.2 V (vs. Li+/Li). The pre-lithiated hard carbon anode coupled with the self-formed LVP cathode demonstrated a high capacity retention of over 67% at −40 °C, which was much better than those of traditional LIBs.92 Lee et al. prepared a free-standing 3D crumpled graphene (CG) electrode via one-step aerosol drying and vacuum-filtration processes. The obtained structure-controlled CG anode consisted of CG particles, and few-walled CNTs enabled Li+ charge storage kinetics and anode structural stability. An electrochemical test combined with DFT analysis demonstrated that the dominant surface-controlled charge storage mechanism greatly improved LT performance through oxygen functional groups and defect sites. As a result, a superior capacity of 154 mA h g−1 was achieved at 0.01 A g−1 and −40 °C after 100 cycles (Fig. 11d).93
 Fig. 11  The significant challenges of graphite anodes at LT. (a) The effects of a thick SEI film on the interface resistance and the Li plating process. (b) The energy diagram of the corresponding charging process of graphite. (c) The influence of temperature on the apparent Li+ chemical diffusion coefficient (d) on graphite. Data deduced from ref. 92. (d) The cycle performance of the CG-1000 anode at −40 °C. Data deduced from ref. 93. (e) Scheme of the uneven dendritic growth on graphite. (f) Scheme of the correlation of dendrites on the anode surface with temperature. 
The deterioration of Li+ diffusion kinetics of carbon anode materials is the main reason that limits the LT performance of LIBs. Moreover, the electrochemical polarization is significantly increased during the charging process, which can easily lead to uncontrolled Li plating on the surface of the anode and notorious dendrite growth (Fig. 11e). And small and sharp dendrites are easily formed at LT, resulting in “dead Li”, increased polarization, and decreased CE (Fig. 11f). Recently, the Zhang group systematically investigated the boundary of the graphite electrode with uniform Li plating. They claimed that metal Li could keep uniform distribution with a high average CE of 99.5%, while Li plating was controlled below 25% of the total capacity of lithiated graphite. And the graphite//NCM523 cell with controlled Li plating could present a capacity retention of 80.2% after 500 cycles.94
Lithium titanate. 
Li4Ti5O12 (LTO) has been successfully commercialized because it allows the combination of temperature tolerance, high rates, and “zero strain” with a slight (0.2%) change in volume. Compared with graphite, LTO with a stable structure provides better Li+ deintercalation behaviour during the lithiation/delithiation process. Through the reduced particle size and structural design, its interface resistance was well reduced, and thus its LT electrochemical performance was improved. Kallio and co-workers studied the LT performance of different sized LTO particles (Fig. 12a), including secondary particles aggregated with a small primary particle size (LTO-SP, 150 nm, surface area: 22 m2 g−1) and secondary particles with a large primary particle size (LTO-LP, 225 nm, surface area: 7 m2 g−1). This confirmed that small size particles with the large surface area could enhance the capacity (110 and 84 mA h g−1 at −20 °C, as shown in Fig. 12b).95 Based on the morphology optimization strategy, Wang et al. prepared a peapod-like LTO architecture by facile hydrothermal reaction combined with a subsequent solid-state process. As shown in Fig. 12c and d, the prepared peapod-like LTO composite anode provided a core–shell structure. The inner LTO nanoparticles were protected by the shell and prevented from pulverizing, thus integrating the structure during the redox processes. Based on the above merits, the as-prepared samples exhibited a CE of about 99% even after 500 cycles at −25 °C and 10C.96 Moreover, Cao and co-workers synthesized hierarchically porous LTO–TiO2 (HP LTO–TO) microspheres through a topochemical conversion method and applied them in LT LIBs. As shown in Fig. 12e, the prepared HP LTO–TO microspheres were composed of ultrathin nanosheets with a large specific surface area (SSA), providing a much-reduced ionic diffusion path. Moreover, a High-Resolution Transmission Electron Microscope (HRTEM) demonstrated the co-existence of LTO and TO phases (Fig. 12e), which brought lots of cation vacancies and enhanced ion transport. The as-prepared HP LTO–TO microspheres demonstrated a discharge capacity of 94 mA h g−1 at −40 °C. Moreover, a capacity of 77 mA h g−1 could be maintained at −20 °C and 5C (Fig. 12f).97
 Fig. 12  (a) The secondary particle aggregates with different particle sizes. (b) The charge and discharge curves of the LTO-based half cells at 1C and −20 °C. Data deduced from ref. 95. (c) Schematic presentation of the peapod-like composite and its electron/ion-transfer pathways. (d) TEM image of the peapod-like composite anode. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic representation of the hierarchically porous LTO–TiO2 (HP LTO–TO) microspheres and the HRTEM images of HP LTO–TO. (f) Rate performance of the HP LTO–TO microspheres at −20 °C. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Silicon-based anodes. 
Silicon (Si) is considered to be an excellent substitute for graphite due to its unique advantages, including its high theoretical capacity, suitable discharge voltage, and natural abundance. However, practical applications of Si anodes are impeded by issues such as volume expansion (∼400%), poor electrical conductivity, and unstable SEIs.98 Due to the constraints of the graphite anode under LT conditions, Markevich et al. explored the performance of Si anodes with 1 M LiPF6 in FEC/DMC (1:4, v:v) at −30 °C. They observed that the Si anode provided a higher capacity compared with that of graphite.99 Nestoridi et al. designed an A h-level pouch LIB with a sputtered Si anode. They employed 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC/DEC (1:3:1, v:v:v) electrolyte and a LiNi0.8Co0.15Al0.05O2 (NCA) cathode. The obtained cell could deliver more than 75% of its capacity at RT when cycled at −40 °C, demonstrating an energy density of 140 W h kg−1.100
Other materials. 
Besides the materials mentioned above, some Group IVA element (Ge, Sn)-based alloying/dealloying anodes and their oxides are also explored at LT.101 For example, Tan et al. recently presented that a SnO2 anode could deliver a high capacity at subzero temperature (71% of its 30 °C capacity at −20 °C) in LiPF6–EC/PC electrolyte. The subzero temperatures effectively promoted the cycling stability of pure SnO2 anodes toward Li storage, which could be explained by the following reasons. Firstly, in situ X-ray diffraction (XRD) monitoring revealed that LT suppressed Sn coarsening in lithiated SnO2 anodes to maintain high reversibility for alloying (Sn + xLi+ + xe− ↔ LixSn, 783 mA h g−1) and conversion (SnO2 + 4Li+ + 4e− ↔ Sn + 2Li2O, 711 mA h g−1) reactions, which ensured stable capacities in 0–1.0 V and 1.0–2.4 V potential ranges. Furthermore, the allotropy transformation from the β-Sn phase to α-Sn phase occurred at 13 °C, and the diffusion of Li+ in the α-Sn phase (diffusion barrier 0.21 eV) was easier than that in the β-Sn phase (0.39 eV). Thus, LT might even promote the capacity retention and cycling stability of SnO2 anodes owing to the fast Li+ diffusion in α-Sn.102 Moreover, organic electrodes have attracted attention.11,103–105 Xia et al. fabricated an organic electrode-based rechargeable battery with EA-based electrolyte. Polytriphenylamine (PTPAn)- and 1,4,5,8-naphthalenetetracarboxylic dianhydride (NTCDA)-derived polyimide (PNTCDA) were used as cathode and anode materials, respectively. Even at a super-high rate of 100C (10 A gPTPAn−1), the rechargeable battery still delivered a charge/discharge capacity of 70 mA h gPTPAn−1, indicating excellent rate capability. When operating at −70 °C and 0.5C, the capacity of the organic electrode-based rechargeable battery still remained at about 70% of that obtained at RT.106
At present, carbonaceous materials, in particular (artificial and natural) graphite and hard/soft carbon, can be considered as primary commercial anode materials. For EV applications, artificial graphite provides high purity levels and fewer defects; however, the uncontrolled Li plating and dendrite growth at LT have been criticized. Often, nanoporous structure construction, interlayer spacing engineering, and chemical modification of carbon materials are regarded as promising strategies for improving the LT performance of carbonaceous anodes. Compared with graphite, LTO provides a better Li+ deintercalation behaviour under LT conditions. However, LTO-based cells are more suitable for scalable energy-storage application due to their insufficient energy density and high safety.
The mainstream ways to improve the LT performance of cathode materials are surface coating, elemental doping, and reducing particle size (Fig. 13). Coating conductive materials on cathode particles avoids the side reactions between the cathode and electrolyte, which reduces the interface impedance and stabilizes the material structure. For layered compounds, doping with alkali metals (such as K) or transition metals (such as Zn) increases their layer spacing, promotes the diffusion rate of Li+, and thus enhances the LT performance of the battery. Moreover, reducing the particle size of cathode materials shortens the Li+ diffusion path. For carbon-based anodes, surface fluorination treatment facilitates robust SEI generation. Employing a carbon material with a large layer spacing such as turbostratic carbon to modify the graphite anode can improve the compatibility of the electrolyte with the anode, which facilitates Li+ diffusion and therefore avoids uneven Li plating.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of main electrode optimization strategies at LT. 

3.2. Lithium metal batteries
Li metal is honoured as the “ultimate anode” or the “Holy Grail” because of its high theoretical capacity.107,108 Recently, researchers have developed a variety of Li-based batteries with high theoretical capacities, such as LSBs and LABs. Although the host-free feature of the highly conductive Li metal anode avoids the obstacle of long-distance charge transfer, its electrolyte compatibility, the formation and decomposition of the SEI, and the nucleation and growth of dendrites are its inevitable challenges, which result in poor cycle lives and safety hazards.109,110

3.2.1. Li metal anode. 
To improve the Li anode's stability and the battery's cycling performance at LT, Thenuwara et al. developed a novel electrolyte system. The addition of 10 wt% FEC or EC into ether electrolytes 1,3-dioxolane and 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DOL/DME) leads to stabilized Li deposition/stripping and substantially increased CEs at −60 °C, as well as high capacities in LMBs at −40 °C. As revealed by cryogenic transmission electron microscopy (cryo-TEM) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), this improvement was due to the rich inorganic species and a thin SEI layer.111 Holoubek et al. employed 1 M LiPF6 in methyl 3,3,3-trifluoropropionate (MTFP)/FEC (9:1, v:v) electrolyte for LMBs at −60 °C. MTFP, a fluorinated analogue of methyl propionate (MP), acted as an LT co-solvent combined with other esters. The fluorinated ester maintained a high ionic conductivity of 0.75 mS cm−1 at −60 °C, which was much higher than that of 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC (0.005 mS cm−1), which changed into a solid state. And a uniform Li deposit with a large particle size was formed, which reduced side reactions and resulted in a high CE (over 99%) of Li metal plating.112 Moreover, fluorinated derivatives modified based on commercial EC solvent molecules provided different solvation forces with Li+. Through experiments and simulation calculations, it was found that as the fluorination degree increases, the coordination ratio and the ion–dipole interaction strength gradually weaken. Among the fluorinated derivatives, difluoro ethylene carbonate (DFEC) exhibited a lower desolvation energy barrier, while the stable fluorinated interface ensured an excellent Li deposition efficiency at −20 °C. The extraordinary oxidation tolerance of EC-based fluorinated derivatives makes them promising for commercial LiNi0.8Co0.1Mn0.1O2 (NCM811) with a charge cut off voltage of 4.5 V. A DFEC-based electrolyte enabled an original capacity retention of 91% after 300 cycles with an average CE of 99.6% under RT conditions. Moreover, the obtained DFEC-based electrolyte made the Li//NCM811 cell provide high LT cycling stability.113
Since the interfacial reaction of the Li anode largely determines the battery performance, it is necessary to deeply understand the formation of an SEI and its composition change at LT.114 McDowell and co-workers explored the deposition behaviour of Li and the evolution of the SEI composition (Fig. 14a). They first assembled Li//Cu cells in DOL/DME electrolyte at different temperatures. SEM images revealed that smaller Li particles formed at LT (the average area of the Li particles is 1.87 ± 0.41 μm2 at 20 °C and 0.24 ± 0.07 μm2 at −60 °C) (Fig. 14b) compared with those at RT. Moreover, Li//Li symmetric cells presented the same pattern – the Li particle size decreased as the temperature decreased. The authors inferred that the reduced electrolyte conductivity exacerbated the local diffusion, which caused the formation of dendritic Li plating with tiny size. The XPS spectra revealed that the SEI formed at −40 °C had less carbon content and more minor polymeric species compared with that at RT, which showed a mosaic structure with rich LiF (Fig. 14c).115 To realize the stable operation of the LT Li metal anode, interface engineering is a practical direction. Recently, an electrochemically active monolayer (EAM) on a Cu current collector was designed to achieve a stable LT Li–metal anode (Fig. 14d). For the EAM-Cu collector, a multi-layered SEI displayed a sandwich structure including a LiF-rich inner layer and an organic outer layer at −15 °C, which avoided the generation of dendrites (Fig. 14e). Moreover, the Li//LCO cell showed stable reversible capacities when the temperature switched between −15 °C and 25 °C (Fig. 14f), indicating its promising application potential for widening the temperature range of LMBs.116
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagrams of Li deposition/stripping morphologies and SEI compositions at different temperatures. (b) SEM images of electrodeposited Li metal on Cu substrates with 0.2 mA cm−2 in the DOL/DME electrolyte at 20 and −60 °C. (c) High-resolution F 1s XPS spectra of the SEI. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of Li deposition on a Cu or EAM Cu substrate at LT, associated with deposition morphology and SEI composition. (e) SEM images of Li deposition on a Cu or EAM Cu substrate at −15 °C. (f) Cycling performance of a Li//LCO cell with an EAM Cu host at the temperatures switched between −15 and 25 °C. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 
For the Li metal anode, the LT performance is highly correlated with a stable SEI, sufficient LT conductivity, and Li+ coordination behaviour in solvents. Designing an artificial SEI layer and electrolyte modification are the main strategies. As shown in Fig. 15, the degree of coordination and the interaction strength between Li+ ions and their solvation shell strongly correlate with the LT performance of the Li metal anode. Thus, whether weak solvation behaviours are constructed through ultra-high concentration electrolytes or non-polar fluorinated solvents, a deep understanding of the solvation shell is the key to controlling the plating/stripping of Li+ at LT.
 Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of Li deposition/stripping morphology at LT. (a) Strong solvent–ion interaction resulting in desolvation and dendritic Li deposition morphologies. (b) Weak solvent–ion interaction resulting in a uniform deposition. 


3.2.2. Lithium–sulfur batteries. 
The lithium–sulfur battery (LSB) has received significant attention as a promising energy storage system.117,118 However, state-of-the-art LSBs still face tricky issues (Fig. 16a): for example, the irreversible loss of active substances caused by the shuttle effect of LiPSs and the slow kinetics of multiphase transformation during the whole redox process, which is even worse at LT (Fig. 16b and c).119
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of a typical LSB and the main challenges. (b) The compendium of LIPS evolution in the LSB. (c) Schematic diagram of reaction energy barriers at different temperatures. (d–k) Strategies to improve the LT performance of LSBs, (d–f) catalytic strategy, and (g–k) optimizing the Li+ coordination structure. (d) Schematic of the regulation process of MoSe2 for LIPS conversion. (e) The performance of LSBs with RGO@MoSe2 NSS at 0 and −25 °C for 0.1C. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) HAADF-STEM images of Ni@C/graphene (left) and atomic nickel characterization, some of which are circled (right). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g) The significance of 1 M LiFSI DOL/DME and 1 M LiFSI DEE structures for ultra-low Li plating. (h) Li deposition profiles with different electrolytes at 0.5 mA cm−2. (i) Photographs of Cu current collectors with the Li deposition in different electrolytes and the corresponding SEM images at −60 °C. (j) The charge/discharge profiles of a Li//span full-cell at 0.1C and −60 °C. (k) The cycling performance of 1 M LiFSI DEE at −60 °C. (g–k) Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. 
Early research mainly used physical confinement or chemical adsorption to anchor active substances. In addition to porous host materials, a sulfur-rich polymer was also designed, which enabled the intermediates to exist in an amorphous state without long-range order, enhancing the conversion of intermediates and improving the LT performance.120 Moreover, separator engineering is also an essential means to solve the LiPS shuttle effect. Besides, introducing materials with electrocatalytic activity into cathodes was regarded as an effective method for boosting surface electrochemical conversion kinetics and improving their LT performance.121 Fan et al. prepared few-layered MoSe2 nanosheets (NSs) vertically grown on 3D reduced graphene oxide (rGO) NSs as a coating layer for the separator to improve the LT performance of LSBs. Due to the effective d-band structure derived from the synergism between d-orbitals of metal ions and unsaturated heteroatoms in the edge sites of 2D MoSe2 NSs, the composite had an electrocatalytic effect for sulfur conversion (Fig. 16d). As a result, a high capacity of 865.7 mA h g−1 was achieved over 100 cycles at −25 °C (Fig. 16e).122 Then, graphene-supported Ni nanoparticles with carbon coating (Ni@C/graphene) were synthesized by carbonizing a MOF/graphene oxide composite, which was used to modify a commercial glass fibre membrane (Fig. 16f). Experimental tests and theoretical analysis demonstrated that Ni@C/graphene served as a versatile electrocatalyst and sulfiphilic site for accelerating the redox process. The 2D graphene with high conductivity was regarded as a physical tamer to inhibit the shuttling of LiPSs. Surprisingly, cells with the modified separator could stably operate over 1000 cycles at −50 °C.26
In terms of LT electrolytes, fluorobenzene (FB) was regarded as a bifunctional cosolvent for LSB electrolyte (lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI)/DME/FB, molar ratio 1:1.2:3). The prepared electrolyte exhibited a low viscosity, a high ionic conductivity, and good wettability. Moreover, FB could improve the interaction between DME and FSI− around Li+ in the electrolyte. Due to the presence of FB, a stable LiF-enriched component was formed at the Li anode surface. The assembled battery with the prepared electrolyte exhibited excellent performance at −20 °C.123 Moreover, 1 M LiFSI in MP/FEC electrolyte was reported for LT LSBs, which supported Li//sulfurized polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) cells operated at −40 °C.124 Along this road, recently, they demonstrated that the solvation structure of Li+ in the electrolyte had a great effect on the reversibility and plating behaviour of Li metal at LT, which was crucial for avoiding dendritic growth. For comparison, electrolytes 1 M LiFSI diethyl ether (DEE) and 1 M LiFSI DOL/DME were chosen to reveal the impact (Fig. 16g). After experimental and theoretical investigations, the DEE-based Li//SPAN cell prepared with a high-loading SPAN cathode (3.5 mA h cm−2) and a onefold excess Li metal anode presented 76% of its RT capacity when operated at −60 °C after 50 cycles. Moreover, the deposition test of Li//Cu cells (0.5 mA cm−2, 5 mA h cm−2) at LT confirmed the flaw of the DOL/DME system (Fig. 16h). The morphology of the plated Li (Fig. 16i) clearly revealed that it was difficult to obtain uniform Li deposition in 1 M LiFSI DOL/DME, but a uniform morphology was realized in the DEE system. Moreover, the voltage profiles and the cycle performance of the Li//SPAN full-cells demonstrated that the 1 M LiFSI DOL/DME electrolyte produced decreased output capacities, while the 1 M LiFSI DEE was able to provide reliable cycling performance at −60 °C (Fig. 16j and k). This work proved that optimizing the solvation structure was a decision-making step in improving LT LSB/LMBs.125 More recently, an all-liquid-phase reaction mechanism was proposed to significantly enhance the reaction kinetics of the S cathode under LT conditions, in which allyl methyl disulfide (AMDS) was used as an electrolyte additive. The S cathode would first react with AMDS to form a trisulfide and then be reduced to the final product (i.e., Li2S) directly. Thus, all the discharging intermediates were dissolved in the functional thioether-based electrolyte containing AMDS. This mechanism successfully bypassed the slow “solid to solid” transformation route and favoured a fast liquid-phase pathway, leading to a dramatic decrease of the reaction activation energy.126
The development of high-performance catalyst materials provides a new direction for LT LSBs. Developing uniform single-atom and atom-defect catalytic materials (SACMs and ADCMs) provides more active sites and faster Li+ diffusion compared with the S cathode without catalysts, which achieves a good balance between energy density and catalyst loading. For the typical DOL/DME electrolyte, its ionic conductivity is not poor at LT. The unsatisfactory performance is more likely to be related to the behaviour of the Li anode. In other words, adjusting the electrolyte components to optimize the Li+ solvation structure can facilitate uniform Li deposition at LT.127


3.2.3. Lithium–gas batteries. 
The lithium–air (O2) battery (LAB), which has the highest theoretical specific energy of 3.5 kW h kg−1 among all battery systems, is a promising future energy storage technology.128 However, LABs usually suffer from shortcomings of high charging overpotentials, poor rate capability, endless by-products, and short cycle lives (Fig. 17a–c).129 It has been found that the performance of LABs largely depends on the proper choice of catalyst and electrolyte. Also, many efforts have been made to design cathode structures and electrolyte compositions to tackle the critical problems.130 Nonetheless, most of these improvements ignore the operating temperature, which is crucial in the chemical/electrochemical reactions occurring between the electrodes and electrolyte.
 Fig. 17  (a) Challenges facing non-aqueous LABs. (b) High voltage hysteresis. (c) The slow kinetics of Li2O2 oxidation. (d–f) Light-assisted strategy. (d) Schematic illustration of the solar photothermal ASS-LAB. (e) IR image of the cathode coated on the LAGP with sunlight irradiation (Xe-lamp). (f) Cycle performance of ASS-LABs with Xe-lamp light irradiation at −73 °C (2.0–4.2 V and capacity limitation of 1000 mA h g−1). (d–f) Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–i) Catalyst/electrolyte collaborative design strategy. Schematic diagrams of discharge (g) and charge (h) products based on the reaction 4Li + 3Co2 + 4e− ↔ 2Li2Co3 + C. (i) XRD patterns of the fresh Li and that cycled ten times at 0, −30, and −60 °C. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
It is generally believed that LT decreased the capacity and severely enhanced the voltage polarization related to the charge transport resistance in the Li2O2 layer and the diffusion limitation of electroactive species in the electrolyte. Thus, an all-solid-state (ASS) photo-assisted rechargeable LAB was proposed recently by using close-packed single-layer plasmonic Ru nanostructures to harvest solar energy and convert it into heat. Fig. 17d demonstrates the solar photothermal ASS-LAB schematic diagram, including a plasmonic air cathode, solid-state electrolyte (SSE) Li1.5Al0.5Ge1.5P3O12 (LAGP), and a Li anode. The air electrode consisting of CNT and Ru nanostructures as typical photothermal materials enabled efficient broadband absorption of sunlight and light-induced heat (Fig. 17e). With solar light irradiation, the cell showed a reduction in grain and interface impedance from 105 Ω cm2 to 103 Ω cm2 even at −73 °C. Meanwhile, as shown in Fig. 17f, the battery could also stably operate for 15 cycles at −73 °C at 400 mA h g−1 with a capacity limitation of 1000 mA h g−1 under Xe-lamp irradiation.131
The ambient temperature significantly controls the discharge capacity of LABs and the form of Li2O2. When the temperature slowly decreased from 40 °C to −20 °C, the capacity first decreased and then increased sharply. This enhancement of LT performance may be related to the inhibition of electrolyte decomposition and prolongation of the life of superoxide, which needs follow-up research to further verify the mechanism behind it.132
Besides Li–O2 batteries, Li–CO2 batteries are efficient energy supply systems and help achieve CO2 fixation and a carbon-neutral cycle. Recently, the Peng group designed and assembled a Li–CO2 battery with an Ir-based catalyst and LiTFSI/DOL electrolyte that could operate at −60 °C with a high discharge capacity of 8976 mA h g−1 over 150 cycles at 100 mA g−1. They demonstrated that the Ir-based catalyst provided a high catalytic activity for CO2 reduction and evolution reactions, which promoted the formation of a small-sized discharge product (Fig. 17g and h). In addition, side reactions during the cycle were inhibited thanks to the compatibility of the DOL-based electrolyte with Li metal (Fig. 17i).133

4. Implementation of high-temperature batteries
4.1. Lithium-ion batteries
Generally, batteries operate below 50 °C. For some specific devices, batteries need to work under HT conditions.134 Unlike kinetic limitations at LT, elevated temperature favours ion diffusion kinetics and rate capability. However, with the increase of working temperature, the electrolyte evaporates quickly, which causes Li salt precipitation. The SEI- or CEI-related thermodynamics and kinetics problems get severe, resulting in fast interface side reactions and inferior cycling stability of batteries.135,136 Moreover, a high operating temperature (from 25 °C to 60 °C) could significantly accelerate the capacity fading of LIBs.137 Furthermore, because the heat in batteries cannot be adequately dissipated, the overheating phenomenon gives rise to thermal runaway. Here, strategies for HT LIBs are discussed.

4.1.1. Electrolyte. 
Electrolyte serves as a bridge to connect the cathode and anode. However, the LIB electrolyte at HT has poor thermal stability, which accelerates the disproportionation of Li salt in the presence of traces of protic impurities and side reactions with the charged electrodes. In particular, commercial LiPF6 reacts with little water in organic electrolytes and tends to form HF, while HT promotes this process. Moreover, HF continues to attack the cathode, accelerates the collapse of the crystal structure, and causes irreversible battery performance degradation.138 Besides, HT accelerates the evaporation of the solvent and increases the Li salt concentration, which slows the Li+ migration, ultimately leading to battery failure.139,140
To tackle the above issues of LIBs at HT, tremendous efforts for developing alternative electrolytes with improved thermal, chemical and electrochemical stability have been made from the perspective of aqueous electrolytes and ionic liquids (ILs). Adding additives and co-solvents with higher thermal stability is a promising strategy for extending LIB operability at HT.
4.1.1.1 Organic electrolytes. 
Generally, engineering the interface between the anode/cathode and electrolyte is a common and effective approach to improve HT performance. So far, several functional electrolyte solvents/additives, such as vinylene carbonate (VC),141 1,2-bis(difluoromethylsilyl)ethane (FSE),142 and FEC,143 have been used to construct a stable SEI and CEI for the battery working at 60 °C. For example, fluorinated carbonate solvents have higher thermal and voltage stability compared with conventional carbonate solvents. For graphite//LNMO cells cycled at 55 °C, a combination of fluorinated solvent, FEC/methyl 2,2,2-trifluoroethyl carbonate/1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl 2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (FEC/F-EMC/F-EPE, v:v:v, 3:5:2) based on 1 M LiPF6, showed higher capacities and CEs than those with EC/EMC solvents. Moreover, FEC prompted the formation of a thermally stable SEI film, which favoured cycling stability at HT.144
Li salts such as lithium tetrafluoroborate (LiBF4),145 lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate (LiDFOB),146 and lithium tetrafluoro oxalate phosphate (LiTFOP) have also been incorporated as additives to enhance the HT performance.47 Although LiTFSI has high thermal stability, it corrupts the Al-based current collector and affects the device. It was found that adding lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB) into LiTFSI-based electrolytes enabled the formation of a borate-containing passivation layer and effectively prevented severe corrosion to the Al current collector (Fig. 18a). The mixed salts upgraded the electrolyte's thermal decomposition temperature, optimized the SEI to stabilize the electrode–electrolyte interface, and created a passivation layer to suppress the corrosion of the current collector, thus contributing to extending the cycle and storage lives under HT conditions.147 Another remarkable Li salt is LiDFOB, which had improved solubility compared to LiBOB and better conductivity compared to LiPF6.148 Besides, high concentration electrolyte (2.0 M LiDFOB in EC/DMC, v:v, 1:1) was proved to boost the HT (90 °C) cycling stability of a graphite//LCO cell (Fig. 18b). XPS and TEM showed that the high-salt concentration electrolyte generated a LiF layer on the surface of the LCO, which could effectively prevent the dissolution of transition metals and further result in superior cycling performance.149
 Fig. 18  Optical images of (a) fresh Al foil and Al foils after testing at 60 °C in 1 M LiTFSI based, 1 M LiTFSI–LiBOB-based, and 1 M LiPF6-based electrolytes (from left to right). Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cycling performance of graphite//LCO full cells (1C, 2.75–4.2 V) with different electrolytes at 90 °C. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the mechanism of molecular sieves (3 Å zeolite) sieving out excess solvent molecules in the solvation sheath. (d) Operando micro-Raman technology for characterizing the configuration of electrolyte inside zeolite channels. (e) 3D Raman spectra of electrolyte inside zeolite channels. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic diagram of a hybrid electrolyte-based battery structure. Cycling performance of an assembled full-cell (g) and (h) pouch cell. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition, optimizing the Li+ solvation sheath is also crucial for batteries operated at HT and high voltages. A principle-similar electrolyte sieving strategy was proposed with the help of porous molecular sieves (3 Å zeolite), in which weakly-coordinated solvent molecules within the Li+ solvation sheath could be extruded when solvated Li+ entered the narrow channels of the selected sieve (Fig. 18c). As shown in Fig. 18d, the operando micro-Raman technology was employed to investigate the formation mechanism of the prepared zeolite sieved electrolyte. As displayed in Fig. 18e, the closer the Raman laser located to the surface of the NCM811 cathode, the quicker the process of the electrolyte inside zeolite channels reaching the strongly-coordinated EC state-dominated configuration. Moreover, as time went by, the proportion of the strong-coordinated EC state gradually approached 100%, while the weakly-coordinated EC state experienced the opposite trend. Inspiringly, the designed electrolyte exhibited largely enhanced anti-oxidation stability under high-voltage (4.6 V) and elevated temperature (55 °C).150
To operate at elevated temperatures, the electrolyte must be thermally stable to avoid decomposition and high vapour pressure, either of which can cause the battery to catch fire. RT ILs are promising electrolyte candidates for highly-safe devices because of their high thermal stability extending to above 300 °C.151 For example, phosphonium-based ILs which had a decomposition temperature of 355 °C were shown to operate at 100 °C for 30 days when combined with LiTFSI salt.152 To optimize the battery performance and thermal stability, a mixed electrolyte was proposed (Fig. 18f). Benefitting from its high graphite affinity, the LiTFSI/G3 complex was used as an anolyte, and an ionic liquid (LiTFSI/Pyr13TFSI) with superior oxidative stability was employed as a catholyte, which was segregated using a MOF-based separator. Besides, the hybrid-electrolyte strategy delivered excellent thermal stability and nonflammability. With the hybrid electrolyte, a 5 V-class graphite//LNMO full-cell held a capacity retention of 83.8% over 1000 cycles at 55 °C (Fig. 18g).153 As shown in Fig. 18h, the hybrid-electrolyte pouch cell provided stable cyclability at elevated temperatures. Also, ILs have outstanding thermal stability and safety. However, the high cost, low ionic conductivity, and high viscosity of IL electrolytes remain a barrier for their RT practical applications.
4.1.1.2 Aqueous electrolytes. 
Compared with organic batteries, aqueous battery systems undoubtedly have the outstanding advantage of thermal safety. HT can increase the electrolyte's ionic conductivity, enhancing the rate performance. However, as the temperature increases, fast volatilization of solvent water is inevitable, causing crystal precipitation and harmful side reactions. To address these problems, adding some additives and salts with favourable water retention and high thermal stability and developing thermally stable hydrogel-based electrolytes are promising strategies.
The stability at the interface between the electrolyte and electrode is crucial for HT batteries. The WIS electrolyte with high concentration (21 M LiTFSI + 7 M lithium trifluoromethanesulfonate (LiOTf)) could effectively form a fluorine-rich SEI layer, which prevented water penetration and side reaction to allow stable cycling at high voltages. Besides, hydrophilic polymer polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) or polyethene oxide (PEO) also formed a high-salt hydrogel gel electrolyte, which prevented the cross-over of the traces of water and simultaneously minimized the heat generated from the delithiation reaction. This strategy opens a potential pathway to replace flammable organic electrolytes with a safe aqueous alternative.154
HT stability can also be optimized by changing the type and composition of the salts in the electrolyte. The electrochemical potential window and thermal stability of the aqueous electrolytes with two different salts (i.e., lithium sulfonylbis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiSFSI) and lithium carbonylbis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiCFSI)) were compared. LiSFSI exhibited an electrochemical stability window of 3.78 V, which could be further expanded due to the formation of a stable CEI layer. A graphite//LCO cell with LiSFSI-based electrolyte delivered a specific discharge capacity of 113.5 mA h g−1, two times more than that based on LiFSI. Furthermore, both LiSFSI and LiCFSI revealed much higher thermal stability than LiFSI.155
In short, the rational design of electrolyte compositions and electrolyte–electrode interfaces of HT LIBs has attracted much attention. Fluorine-containing solvents can improve the thermal stability of organic electrolyte and facilitate the formation of a fluorinated SEI interface. The use of boron-containing salts can avoid the corrosion of the Al current collector and stabilize the electrode interface. Moreover, organic phosphate-based flame-retardant additives can improve the thermal stability of the electrolyte, thus avoiding the thermal runaway of LIBs. Aqueous electrolytes are one exciting research direction. The development of hydrogels and functional Li salts can tackle evaporation and salt precipitation problems, broadening their electrochemical stability window at HT.


4.1.2. Electrode materials. 
Different electrode materials determine the electrochemical matching between each other and the energy density of the battery. The stability of the electrode material's surface, interface, and bulk is the key to the HT performance of the battery.156 In the second place, when the temperature goes up, both the lithiated anode and delithiated cathode become more electrochemically and chemically active, leading to the deterioration of the active substance structure and the disintegration of the SEI and/or CEI interface layers. As a result, significant capacity fading can be observed.42 Surface deteriorations are instigated by freshly exposed surfaces resulting from cracks, which come from chemical and/or electrochemical side reactions (Fig. 19a). For example, commonly used LiPF6 in electrolyte was thermodynamically unstable, which would decompose into LiF and PF5 (Fig. 19a). Trace water in electrolyte or on the surface of the cathode reacts with PF5 to generate acidic HF species, which attack the surface of the cathode and lead to issues like transition metal (TM) ion dissolutions. The dissolution process can be explained by the Jahn–Teller effect: the Jahn–Teller distortion of TM ions elongates two axial TM–O bonds of the TMO6 octahedral unit, leading to a higher negative charge on the axial oxygen atoms. As the stronger Lewis bases, the axial oxygens are easily reacted with acidic species such as HF at the CEI and further generate H2O molecules accompanied by the formation of lower-valence solvated TM ions. At the same time, the phase transition on the surface (from layered to spinel-like and finally NiO-like rock salt) hinders ion transport and increases the interface impedance.138,157 What is worse, the structure collapse is usually accompanied by lattice oxygen escaping from the surface, leading to gas evolutions. At high voltages, electrolyte solvents like EC suffer from ring opening reaction, and are oxidized to radical cation EC˙+ and further decompose into alkyl lithium compounds and CO2 (Fig. 19a).40,158 Furthermore, when dissolved TM ions such as Mn2+ migrate to the surface of the anode, they will act as catalysts to consume electrolyte and produce C2H4 (Fig. 19b). Meanwhile, some the organic components in the SEI layer will be transformed into inorganic components (eqn (7)): (7)The decomposition of organic components in the SEI layer leads to the generation of fractures and further electrolyte diffusion. Thus, the SEI film decomposes and regenerates. In addition, the SEI with low mechanical strength cannot cope with rupture, which renders fresh Li to be exposed again, further consuming electrolyte and regenerating the SEI. As a result, these factors trigger the domino effect, especially under HT conditions. Furthermore, the degradation of battery performances, and fire or explosion even occur (Fig. 19b).45,159–161 Efforts devoted to introduction of heteroatoms, surface modification, and structure fabrication for stabilizing the electrode structure and SEI/CEI are reviewed in the following sections.
 Fig. 19  Challenges of the electrodes at HT. Cathode particle (a) and carbon anode surface (b). Images adapted from ref. 159. 
4.1.2.1. Cathodes. 
To broaden the scope of application in LIBs, many cathode materials have spurred extensive searches to break the temperature limitations. However, the cycling stability of cathode materials at HT is still impeded by their unsatisfactory electrochemical performance, related to their irreversible structural transformation. Moreover, their HT defect brings profound structural changes, metal dissolution, gas release, and other side reactions, which cause performance degradation or even safety concerns.162 Therefore, there is a growing demand to enhance the cathode structural stability at HT. In this context, advances in temperature-tolerant cathode materials and their modifications are counted.
Layered oxides. 
Even though LiMO2 (M = Co, Ni, Mn) show satisfactory performance at RT, the unstable structure and fragile M–O bond further constrain their HT performance. For example, the intermediate state of cobalt (+3.5) in charged LCO triggers the crystal change from the hexagonal phase to a monoclinic structure, which belongs to unstable phase transitions.163 To overcome these tricky issues, binary and ternary cathodes have been developed by partial elemental substitutions. NCM111 demonstrated stable performance with high capacity (Ni2+), orderly cations (Co3+), and good thermal stability (Mn4+) at 60 °C. These advantages further stimulate the development of ternary temperature-tolerant cathodes.164
Another approach to improve HT stability is to minimize the side reactions at the interface through surface engineering, aiming to enhance the structural stability and inhibit the capacity loss originating from the HF effect. Fig. 20a illustrates a schematic of the coating graphene procedure. Coating graphene on Ni-rich oxides (NCA and NCM811) endowed the highly packed cathodes with a high content of active materials (∼99 wt%), and the adhesive amphiphilic surfactant allowed almost conformal attachment of the graphene scraps on the surfaces of the Ni-rich oxides (Fig. 20b). The graphene-coated electrode displayed good cycling stability at 60 °C, which was attributed to the fact that the graphene helps electrolyte penetrate into the secondary particle interior well during repeated cycling.165 An attractive strategy based on core–shell or full gradient composition materials has been reported in the past few years. As shown in Fig. 20c, NCM811 at the core provides high capacity, and LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 at the surface ensures high thermal stability, where the nickel concentration of each particle decreases linearly, and the manganese concentration increases linearly from the centre to the outer layer. As a result, the prepared cathode provided long-term cycling performance at RT and HT (Fig. 20d).166 Moreover, a spinel Li4Mn5O12 coating on Li1.2Mn0.54Co0.13Ni0.13O2 was constructed to prevent oxygen release at HT. Due to the uniform protection of the heterostructure layer (Fig. 20e), the phase transformation and side reactions at the cathode surface were hindered during Li+ extraction/insertion. As expected, the prepared cathode exhibited favourable kinetics and good stability with a capacity retention of 77.8% at 55 °C.167
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of graphene coating on Ni-rich oxide particles. (b) The bonding configuration between graphene and Ni-rich oxide. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of the oxide particle with decreasing and increasing Ni and Mn concentration. (d) The discharge capacity of NCM-based full cells at RT and HT (3.0–4.2 V and 1C). (c and d) Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (e) The energy dispersive spectral (EDS) maps of the coating oxide particles. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the stabilization effect of the Li–Mg–PO4 surface modification. (g) Cycling performance of the bare and surface coated cathodes at 60 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (h) Cycling performance for different cathode materials in coin-type cells at 60 °C. (i) Cycling performance for pouch-type cells containing BLMO (right) and APLMO (left) after 200 cycles at 60 °C. (h and i) Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (j) Cycling performance for the Al3+, F−, and PO43− co-doped LMO and the pristine LMO electrodes in coin-type cells at 1C and 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The combination of coating and doping is also believed to stabilize the structure and avoid surface side reactions, thereby improving voltage hysteresis and capacity degradation at HT. For instance, Liu and co-workers constructed a hybrid surface protection layer on Li1.17Ni0.17Co0.17Mn0.5O2, including Mg2+ pillars and a Li–Mg–PO4 layer. The surface treatment introduced mixed layers composed of Mg2+ doped Li-rich core material and hybrid protective surface layers, which protected the cathode from HF attack and reduced metal ion dissolution (Fig. 20f). As a result, the battery exhibited enhanced cycling stability at 60 °C, maintaining a capacity of 180 mA h g−1 with 72.6% capacity retention over 250 cycles (Fig. 20g).168
Spinel-structured oxides. 
Spinel also faces the problems of bulk phase transition and surface side reactions, and suffers from severe degradation, especially during HT cycling. Tremendous efforts have been made towards improving cycling and rate performance, such as introduction of doping ions, coating, and morphology control.
Doping appropriate amounts of ions into the spinel bulk or surface can restrain the dissolution caused by Mn3+ disproportion reaction and Jahn–Teller distortion. The Cui group designed and prepared Al-doped LMO nanorods as a temperature-tolerant cathode. The SEM and single-nanorod transport measurements clarified that Al dopants could reduce the dissolution of Mn3+ and stabilize the LiAl0.1Mn1.9O4 nanorods against HF etching. Integrated with the effects, 80% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 1C and 60 °C was achieved for the LiAl0.1Mn1.9O4 nanorods.169
Surface coating is another approach to improve the cycling performance of spinel cathodes by inhibiting the Mn dissolution. The Cho group synthesized a 0.3 wt% AlPO4-coated Li1.09Mn1.83Al0.08O4 (APLMO) cathode with a portion of phosphorus ions diffused into the spinel structure. Although the coating effect was not too obvious in the initial state, it could maintain good stability under long-term cycles at 0.5C and 60 °C (Fig. 20h). The APLMO pouch cell exhibited a capacity retention of 78% over 200 cycles at 0.5C and 60 °C without undesirable swelling, which was ascribed to the formation of a solid solution as a protection layer without insulating impurities or defective phases (Fig. 20i).170 Moreover, a facile and scalable co-doping strategy for LMO spinel was proposed through the incorporation of Al3+, F−, and PO43−. After modification, the thermal stability of the LMO samples was enhanced by suppressing the formation of a parasitic Li-rich phase upon long-term cycling. As shown in Fig. 20j, the co-doped and the pristine samples were tested at 55 °C. The co-doped cathode retained 98% of its initial capacity over 100 cycles at 1C. But the capacity retention of the pristine one was only 65%. The modified LMO exhibited a low polarization voltage and significant mitigation of the self-discharge process, which made the LMO cathode commercially feasible for HT applications.171
Polyanionic-type compounds. 
Since the discovery of polyanions (XO4, X = P, S, Si, etc.), a large diversity of polyanion-based compounds has been developed for LIBs. Among them, LFP shows promise for application at elevated temperatures due to the structural stability from the covalent bond of PO4 units and the chemical stability of Fe2+/3+ (Fig. 21a).76 Moreover, the Differential Scanning Calorimeter (DSC) profiles showed that LMO provided better thermal stability than LCO. As shown in Fig. 21b, when charged to 4.2, 4.4, and 4.6 V, the DSC curves of LMO were very similar, while the LCO curve showed more fluctuations because of its more heat release. Based on the data in Fig. 21c, cathode materials could be ranked from the least to most safe in the following order: LiNiO2, LiNi0.8Co0.2O2, LCO, LiNi3/8Co1/4Mn3/8O2 and LFP. This result demonstrated that LFP was less reactive at HT than those of layered cathode materials.172,173 Although it has low cost and high safety, its low electronic conductivity cannot be ignored, which might be tackled by carbon-coating and particle downsizing.
 Fig. 21  (a) DSC spectra of overcharged layered, spinel and olivine cathodes. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) DSC data of LMO and LCO (solid lines: LMO, dashed lines: LCO) charged to different indicated voltages. Duplicate scans are from a nominally identical sample. (c) Analysis of DSC data (LFP: LiFePO4; LNCMO: LiNi0.375Co0.25Mn0.375O2; LMO: LiMn2O4; LNCO: LiNi0.8Co0.2O2; LNO: LiNiO2; LNO: LiCoO2; T1: onset temperature; T2: peak temperature; h: total evolved heat). (b and c) Data deduced from ref. 172. 
In terms of the cathode material's intrinsic properties, polyanion-type cathodes have better electrochemical and thermal stabilities at HT than those of layered and spinel materials. Multi-element micro-surface doping or bulk gradient doping can improve the structure and thermal stabilities of layered cathode materials (especially NCM-based materials). In addition, the surface coating can well solve the challenges of HF attack at HT, which avoids transition-metal dissolution and bulk structure phase transitions.
4.1.2.2. Anodes. 
The anode also suffers from severe challenges at HT due to its rich and complex interface chemistry. For instance, the graphite anode has good thermal stability but has vulnerable passivation layers and undesirable reactions with electrolytes at elevated temperatures, which compromise its cycle life, energy density, and safety. To broaden the temperature scope of application, many modification strategies like surface coating and structure optimization have been reported, which aim at introducing a stable SEI and avoiding undesirable side reactions at elevated temperature.
Carbon materials. 
Although graphite has good thermal tolerance, its HT electrochemical performance is not satisfactory. From the perspective of the graphite anode, the degradation of HT battery performance is mainly attributed to the unstable SEI layer (Fig. 22a). The morphology, composition, and thickness of the anode SEI significantly affect the guest ions’ behaviour. In particular, the elevated temperature increases inorganic species in the SEI, making it more brittle and thus forming a porous SEI structure. Simultaneously, due to repeated decomposition and regeneration, the SEI thickness will increase, which undoubtedly consumes electrolyte, and increases the interface impedance (Fig. 22b–e).174
 Fig. 22  (a) Challenges facing the graphite SEI under HT conditions. (b) The charge–discharge profiles of the graphite//NCM523 battery in the first cycle at 25 °C and 60 °C. An EIS test of a graphite//NCM523 battery (c) resting at 25 °C, and (d) 1st and (e) 5th cycles at 25 and 60 °C. (b–e) Data deduced from ref. 174. 
The surface coating of the graphite is effective in suppressing the irreversible reactions of the solvated species. LG Chem Ltd. investigated the electrochemical performance of carbon coating graphite at elevated temperatures. Carbon-coated graphite was prepared by mixing synthetic graphite particles with polyvinylchloride, followed by a carbonization process (1000 °C, argon gas). Li//graphite half-cells with 1 M LiPF6 in (PC/EC/DEC, v:v:v, 3:2:5) and 1 M LiBF4 in (EC/DMC, v:v, 2:1) electrolytes were fabricated to investigate the coating effect under HT conditions. The carbon-coated graphite exhibited relatively stable cycling performance at 80 and 60 °C, while the pristine graphite resulted in premature cell failure.175 Nevertheless, the excessive Li in the Li//graphite half-cells covered the Li consumption in a full battery, leading to misleading assessments of the interface chemistry.
Lithium titanate. 
Titanium-based materials as anode materials have also attracted loads of attention. It has been claimed that titanium-based anodes can provide outstanding safety over the graphite anode at elevated temperatures. Generally, the crystal structure of LTO is stable up to 1000 °C, implying that its HT performance depends on its reactivity with electrolyte.176 DFT calculations were performed to understand the safety of LTO, which found that the low formation enthalpy was the reason for the high thermodynamic stability of LTO. The good thermal stability of LTO was associated with the strong covalent bonding between Ti and O. In addition, HT conditions and current density almost do not damage the LTO structure, but trace PF5 significantly affects the thickness and components of the SEI, consequently affecting the cell performance.177
To optimize the HT performance of LTO, a novel kind of Li4Ti5O12–rutile TiO2 (LTO–RTO) hybrid anode was prepared. The obtained LTO-RTO//LCO full cell provided an 83.6% capacity retention over 500 cycles at 2.5C and 60 °C. The generation of gas at HT was closely related to the exposed (111) crystal plane of LTO. In the optimized hybrid anode, the LTO(400) plane was more than the (111) plane, stabilising the electrochemical performance at 60 °C due to the reduced gas production.178
Silicon-based anodes. 
A Si anode has a high theoretical capacity of 4200 mA h g−1 when fully lithiated to the Li4.4Si phase (∼10 times higher than that of graphite) and is considered to be an excellent substitute for graphite. Nevertheless, the inevitable volume expansion and the available onset for the phase transition temperature of Li–Si alloys exacerbate the structure collapse and regeneration of the SEI and capacity loss at elevated temperatures. In addition, a brittle inorganic layer is easily formed on the Si surface at HT, causing continuous consumption of electrolyte.
From the perspective of Si anode optimization, massive efforts have been devoted to structural design to buffer the Si expansion and interface modulation to form a stable SEI. For example, nanodiamond seeds were fabricated to create a pillar-type SEI. From the atomic force microscopy (AFM) images, it was observed that the Si anode with a pillar-type SEI demonstrated a significantly decreased roughness of 33.4 nm after 1000 cycles, which was less than that of the conventional SEI (53.6 nm). Moreover, Ti–SiOx@C achieved a high-capacity retention of 76.4% over 1000 cycles at 5 A g−1 and 50 °C. And the Ti–SiOx@C//NCM811 full cell showed a high capacity retention of 61.8% over 500 cycles at 5C and 50 °C.179 In addition, coating carbon, ceramic particles, and metal fluorides onto the Si particle surfaces was found to prevent direct contact of silicon with the electrolyte, eliminating side reactions and enhancing their mechanical properties during the lithiation/delithiation process. Recently, a pinecone-like carbon microsphere filled with Si particles, covered with Al2O3 nano-petals, was prepared by a template method. The out-layer carbon coating and Al2O3 alleviated the volume expansion and suppressed the side reactions at the anode–electrolyte interface. The as-prepared hybrid anode rendered a capacity of 1405 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 and 80 °C over 1000 cycles.180 It is worth mentioning that the content of organic and inorganic substances in the SEI layer can also be optimized by adjusting the electrolyte, which has been introduced in detail in the HT electrolyte section.
Other materials. 
Organic polymers have been proven to be efficient materials for HT LIBs, because they hardly dissolve in organic electrolytes. For example, Zhang et al. prepared polyazaacene analogue poly(1,6-dihydropyrazino[2,3g]quinoxaline-2,3,8-triyl-7-(2H)-ylidene-7,8-dimethylidene) (PQL), which had a large π-conjugated structure, a high amount of nitrogen heteroatoms, and a multiring aromatic system. Since PQL showed thermal stability up to 400 °C, the electrochemical activities of PQL nanoparticles at 50 °C were explored. Surprisingly, it successfully cycled 1000 times at 50 °C and 2.5C (4555 mA g−1).181
Overall, structural design or artificial SEIs can help graphite improve the HT performance, and hard carbon with good stability and solvent inertness is a substitute. Although the energy density of LTO is not satisfactory, its structural properties give it unique advantages at HT. Surface modification and electrolyte regulation can be used to optimize the electrochemical stability at HT. Although the Si anode faces problems such as colossal volume expansion, it seems that this problem can be alleviated by alloying and pre-lithiation. Moreover, the pre-formation of a stable SEI and the pre-expansion strategy can lessen the HT challenges during cycling. Moreover, organic polymer- or MOF-derived anodes show potential for HT energy storage systems.181,182
4.1.2.3. Separators. 
The separator plays a role in blocking electrons and transporting ions in batteries, which significantly affects the capacity and safety of the batteries, especially under HT conditions. It should exhibit basic physical and chemical properties such as good wettability, mechanical strength, thermal stability, isotropy, and uniform pore structure. However, the morphology and pore structure of the separator may melt, deform, and block at HT, leading to local micro-short circuits and safety hazards. Research efforts have been devoted towards the development of various multi-functional separators with high thermal stability, good Li dendritic resistance, and high mechanical strength.183
Functionalized polyolefin separators with high heat-resistance inorganic particles (such as Al2O3, ZrO2, SiO2 and zeolite) improved the ionic conductivities.184 However, ceramic-coating separators still exhibited poor thermal stability due to the low melting point of common polymer binders. Thus, substituting high melting-point polymers for traditional binders, such as PI and polydopamine (PDA), is an effective strategy to improve the thermal stability of separators.185
Moreover, separators with a high heat resistant skeleton have also been designed based on high melting-point polymers.186 For example, a flexible SiC fibre network skeleton-supported aluminium oxide separator with improved flexibility and thermal stability was reported. Its conductivity at 120 °C reached 5.12 mS cm−1, which was 3 times higher than that at RT, so that the LFP provided excellent rate performance (a capacity of 140 mA h g−1 for 200 cycles at 20C and 120 °C).187 Besides, incorporating flame retardants such as core@sheath triphenyl phosphate (TPP)@poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP), polyphenylene sulfide (PPS), PBI@PI and SiO2@PI as the protective polymer shells of microfibres could enhance the HT performance of LIBs.188
Now stimuli responsiveness and active protection against thermal runaway have been reported to avoid overheating. For example, ethylene–vinyl acetate copolymer (EVA), or paraffin wax microsphere based multi-layer membranes with shutdown function, high thermal sensitivity, and low melting-point materials were also employed as separators.189 Some thermal conductivity separator materials can achieve uniform heat diffusion, which efficiently suppresses Li dendrite growth and ensures HT safety.
In short, HT promotes ion transport, but the thermal decomposition of electrode and electrolyte materials is also worth noting. Succinctly, the optimization strategies of electrodes, separators, electrolytes and interfaces for LIBs under HT conditions are shown in Fig. 23. By coating, doping, and other means, the HT stability of electrode materials can be enhanced. Adjusting electrolyte components, adding thermal stability additives, developing new salts, and employing gels or all-solid electrolytes can make up for the deficiencies of conventional electrolytes. For separator materials, the safety of the battery system must be ensured while being functional.
 Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of main electrode, electrolyte and separator optimization strategies under HT conditions. 

4.2. Lithium metal batteries

4.2.1. Li metal anode. 
The high reactivity of Li metal causes a series of problems due to the formation of an unstable SEI (dendrites, gas, dead Li, heat), especially at elevated temperatures.190 Therefore, understanding the effect of temperature on the SEI formation and metal deposition behaviour has been of guiding significance for regulating HT LMBs. In EC and linear carbonate-based systems, the components of SEIs such as Li ethylenedicarbonate (LEDC), Li methylcarbonate (LMC), Li ethylcarbonate (LEC) and Li propylenedicarbonate (LPDC) are not stable with HF and other Lewis acids such as PF5. Moreover, HT promotes the production of HF, and the thermal decomposition of LMC and LEC also produces Li2CO3, Li alkoxides, and Li2O at 60 °C.191 This continually generates heat, and consumes electrolyte and Li, which causes electrochemical performance degradation and safety issues. Interestingly, the change in the SEI was investigated by cryo-SEM when using a 1 M LiTFSI-DOL/DME system with 1 wt% LiNO3 as the electrolyte. This revealed that the SEI formed at 20 °C with amorphous and polymeric interphases more easily fractured during cycling, which led to continuous SEI reformation and poor interfacial stability. In comparison, the SEI formed at 60 °C had an inner layer of amorphous polymer matrix and an outer layer of large crystalline Li2O grains, which effectively passivated the anode and led to good interfacial stability.192 Therefore, solvents, additives, and salts could significantly affect the generation of an SEI, which was related to the HT performance of the battery.
Solvation sheath structure manipulation is also an effective way to tune the SEI layer's composition, structure, and morphology as well as consequent Li deposition behaviour at HT. By changing the types of inorganic components in the solvation sheath and promoting their conversion into stable compounds to form an SEI, the sustained decomposition of the electrolyte can be well avoided, and the HT stability of the Li anode can be improved. Therefore, FEC solvent and LiNO3 additive were incorporated into the solvation structure, which enhanced the stability of the SEI layer. The high modulus LiF induced by the FEC and the inorganic substance (Li3N) with high ionic conductivity induced by the NO3− were formed. In addition, the use of HT stable adiponitrile (ADN) as the solvent could preferentially coordinate in the solvation sheath and provided electrochemical inertness during the cycles (Fig. 24a). Therefore, Li//LFP cells with DME, FEC, LiFSI (1.0 M), LiNO3 (0.1 M), and ADN (ADFN) provided stable capacities over 200 cycles at 80 °C and 100 cycles at 90 °C.143 Also, the co-solvent ADN/EC (AE, 1:1, v:v) with the dual-salt 0.8 M LiTFSI and 0.2 M LiDFOB favoured the solvation with Li+ compared with the EC solvent at HT. The AE electrolyte had a great capability to enable the LTO-LMBs to cycle at high rates and temperatures (Fig. 24b). The reversible capacities of the Li//LTO cells reached 92.4, 139.8 and 152.6 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 30 °C, 100 °C, and 120 °C at 5C, respectively. The Li//LTO cells yielded average CEs of 87.94% at 120 °C, 99.93% at 100 °C, and 90.38% at 30 °C.193
 Fig. 24  (a) The schematic of the SEI formation mechanisms at 90 °C. Data deduced from ref. 143. (b) Cycling performance of Li//LTO cells with the AE electrolyte at 5C and different temperatures (1–3 V). Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of the protection layer, thermally responsive behaviour, and the corresponding polymerization mechanisms. (d) Thermal stability test of fully charged Li//LFP pouch cells with EC/DMC electrolyte and PPE at 130 °C. (e) Voltage–time curves of the Li//PPE//LFP pouch cells with EC/DMC electrolyte at 130 °C and PPE at 150 °C. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic diagram of the function of the dual-salt system. (g) Cycling performance of Li//NCM cells with different electrolytes at 60 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. 
Besides, some temperature-responsive electrolytes have also been explored. Recently, poly(ethylene glycol)methyl ether methacrylate (PEGA) and 2,2,3,3,3-pentafluoropropyl acrylate (PFE) as smart temperature-responsive electrolytes (PPEs) for LMBs were presented, which exhibited two distinct polymerization behaviours. As shown in Fig. 24c, a favourable polymer protection layer on Li anodes was formed by an anionic polymerization, which guaranteed reversible Li plating/stripping behaviour with a dendrite-free morphology. Interestingly, this electrolyte could be rapidly transformed from the liquid to a solid state through a thermal free radical polymerization. The thermal abuse test revealed that the commercial EC/DMC-based pouch battery was short-circuited at 130 °C, but the PPE-based battery provided a stable discharge plateau after 2 h storage at 130 °C (Fig. 24d). Besides, it was noted that the Li//PPE//LFP cell exhibited a smooth charge/discharge curve even at 150 °C (Fig. 24e), and no thermal runway happened at an extremely HT of 280 °C.194
RT-ILs also have good HT performance. For example, a piperidinium-based IL electrolyte can reach an ionic conductivity of 3 mS cm−1 at RT. The IL electrolyte allowed the Li//LTO cell to operate over 120 °C, which delivered 140 mA h g−1 at 3C over 600 cycles.195 Recently, Li[bis(fluorosulfonyl)amide]-[1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium] as the IL-based electrolyte presented Li dendrite growth suppression and long-term cycling performance from 25 to 90 °C. The Li2FeP2O7 electrode with this IL electrolyte displayed a high CE of 99.97%. Thus, the use of IL-based electrolytes offered great benefits in terms of dendrite suppression.196
In addition to solvent, the selection of Li salts has great effects on the stability of the SEI at HT. The Li//LFP battery using 1 M LiBOB in EC electrolyte was able to cycle over 50 cycles over wide ranges of rates (0.5–200C) and temperatures (60–115 °C).197 Later, the addition of 0.05 M LiPF6 in LiTFSI–LiBOB dual salt electrolyte was reported to prevent Al corrosion and enhance Li metal's stability (Fig. 24f). The introduction of LiBOB enabled the formation of a borate-containing passivation film to prevent the corrosion of Al foil. The LiPF6 additive helped in forming a Li-conductive polycarbonate-rich SEI, which protected Li metal against the side reaction with the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 24g, Li//LiNi0.4Mn0.4Co0.2O2 batteries based on LiPF6-containing dual salt electrolyte could sustain over 400 cycles at 1.75 mA cm−2 and delivered a capacity of 147 mA h g−1 at 60 °C. Instead, batteries using 1 M LiPF6 presented fast capacity loss due to the degradation of the Li metal surface.198 In addition, the electrolyte based on 0.01 M LiPF6 and the LiTFSI–LiDFOB dual-salt in EC/PC solvents endowed the Li//LCO cell to deliver enhanced cycling stability with a capacity of 2.4 mA h cm−2 even at 80 °C.146 The improved electrochemical performance at elevated temperature was attributed to the excellent thermal strength of electrolytes and the high stability of the SEI film, which inhibited the growth of Li dendrites during cycling.
Gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) have the advantages of good contact with electrodes and high thermal stability. A multifunctional polymer electrolyte (named PMMCPE) consisting of a bacterial cellulose substrate, poly(methyl vinyl ether-alt-maleic anhydride), and PC/LiDFOB (Fig. 25a) was used for a high-voltage Li//LCO cell (up to 4.45 V), which had a high ionic conductivity and a wide electrochemical window (up to 5.2 V) and exhibited outstanding cycling stability at 60 °C (85% capacity retention after 700 cycles). The PMMCPE with high mechanical strength and strain could suppress the growth of Li dendrites. As shown in Fig. 25b, PMMCPE also served as an effective protection layer between LCO and Li metal, which ensured the stable operation at HT and high voltages.199
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the PMMCPE fabrication process. (b) Schematic diagram of the function of PMMCPE in the Li//LCO cell. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Rate performance of MIC-based Li//LFP cells at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of the thermal runaway process of SSE-based LMBs. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Evolution of the Li content of dendrites in the bulk region of SSEs. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Thermal stability test of the Li5B4/Li and pure Li at different temperatures. (g) Voltage profiles of the Li5B4/Li//Li5B4/Li symmetric cell operating at 200 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Recently, a molecular ionic composite (MIC) electrolyte membrane, which was composed of poly(2,2′-disulfonyl-4,4′-benzidine terephthalamide) (PBDT), LiTFSI, and Pyr14TFSI, was prepared and applied in Li//LFP cells. The ionic conductivity of the MIC membrane at 25 °C was 0.56 mS cm−1 without any volatile components. PBDT was a rigid-rod highly sulfonated aromatic polyamide with high strain. And the MIC membrane was stable at HT and had a high ionic conductivity. Benefitting from the high modulus and collective ionic (electrostatic) interactions of MICs, the Li//LFP solid-state batteries demonstrated excellent rate performance from 23 to 100 °C (Fig. 25c).200
It is expected that the HT operation of SSEs would benefit the rate performance due to their increased conductivity. However, some SSEs still had the risk of thermal runaway. As shown in Fig. 25d, the reaction between LAGP and Li metal was exothermic, and oxygen release might occur at HT, which led to thermal runaway and explosion, respectively.201 In addition, the weak electrical conductivity of the ceramic electrolyte also induced the growth of Li dendrites in their internal gaps, which caused internal micro short circuits, especially at HT (Fig. 25e).202 Of course, the main challenge of SSE-batteries is whether they can achieve high ion conductivity at LT and RT.
Considering the melting point of Li (180.5 °C), which imposes an intrinsic upper-temperature limit, Li alloy anodes might be a solution for Li-metal batteries to work at elevated temperature (e.g., >200 °C). For example, Sun et al. prepared a Li5B4/Li composite, which featured a 3D Li5B4 fibrillar framework filled with metallic Li. The capillary force caused by the porous structure of the Li5B4 fibrillar framework, and the lithiophilic surface restricted the leakage of HT liquid metallic Li, which ensured the full utilization of the Li anode. As shown in Fig. 25f, the prepared Li5B4/Li anode provided excellent thermal stability, and the obtained Li5B4/Li//Li5B4/Li symmetric cell could cycle at 200 °C without apparent polarization (Fig. 25g). The typical sandwich-type cell configuration with a garnet-type ceramic electrolyte exhibited stable Li stripping/plating behaviours with a low overpotential of 6 mV at 200 °C.203 Moreover, constructing a 3D lithiophilic skeleton hybrid anode is believed to be effective. A novel LiTiO2–Li3N–C hybrid anode was prepared by heat-treating a MXene under a mixed gas (NH3/Ar). The 3D skeleton served as a host for Li infusion and was beneficial for alleviating volume variation. And the Li3N could guide Li deposition along the scaffolding to avoid dendrite growth, which was confirmed by experimental tests and DFT calculations. The symmetrical cell assembled with the hybrid anode exhibited a long-term operation of 500 h at 10 mA cm−2 at HT.204


4.2.2. Lithium–sulfur batteries. 
LSBs have unparalleled advantages in energy density, but their reaction mechanism of multi-electron multi-phase transition also brings enormous challenges.205 From the cathode side, long-chain LiPSs as the discharged product can diffuse to the anode side due to their highly soluble properties and chemically react with Li metal. The dissolution and shuttle behaviours of LiPSs will be accelerated at HT, resulting in irreversible loss of sulfur and passivation of Li metal. Moreover, when the temperature reaches the flashpoint or melting point of the electrolytes, the cell may bloat or vent, thereby leading to ignition and even explosion.206
For improving the safety properties and the electrochemical performance of HT LSBs, functional additives for electrolytes have been exploited to solve safety issues, such as electrolyte flammability. The Wang group prepared an intrinsic flame-retardant (IFR) electrolyte for HT LSBs, which consisted of 1.1 M LiFSI in a mixed solvent of triethyl phosphate (TEP) and high flash point 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl (TEP/TTE, 1:3, v:v). This IFR electrolyte showed HT stability and highly reversible Li deposition. Even at 60 °C, the prepared electrolyte endowed the batteries with a capacity retention of 92.4% over 100 cycles (Fig. 26b). The stable HT cycle performance could be attributed to the formed Li3PO4 and LiF-rich interphase on the cathode side, which suppressed the side-reaction between the electrolyte and sulfur species. Moreover, the TEP was highly coordinated with LiFSI, and no free solvent molecules could be attacked by LiPS (Fig. 26a).207 In addition, concentrated electrolyte (6.5 M LiTFSI/FEC) was applied to stabilize the safety of HT LSBs at 90 °C.208
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic diagram of the LSB with STD (standard carbonate) electrolyte and IFR electrolyte. (b) Cycling performance of LSBs with the different electrolytes at 60 °C. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the gel-based soft LSB package. (d) SEM image of the prepared gel cathode. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of LSB based on the CuNWs–GN/PI/LLZO separator. (f) Thermal stability test of different separators. (g) Digital photo of a LIPS adsorption test. (h) Chemical adsorption of LIPSs and catalytic conversion process. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Some GPEs and SSEs have also been reported to eliminate the LiPS shuttle and improve the cycling performance at HT. As shown in Fig. 26c, a stretchable LSB with a gel cathode and electrolyte was designed via a phase inversion with a swelling treatment process. The prepared gel cathode presented a 3D porous cross-linked morphology (Fig. 26d). The gel electrolyte with an amorphous copolymer matrix and tethered anions exhibited high ionic conductivity, good thermal stability, and flexibility, suppressing Li dendrite growth. The soft-packed LSB could be stretched up to 420% of its original length and exhibit long-term cycling capability even at 80 °C.209
In addition to the electrolyte optimization, separator design can also avoid short circuits and improve cycle performance. To achieve long-term stable and safe LSBs, separators are harnessed to inhibit the shuttle effect of LiPSs and restrain Li dendrite growth.210 At HT, inorganic material modified separators and polymer-based separators were well designed and reported, such as fluorinated polyimide (F-PI),211 PI@LLZO.212 For example, a thermotolerant and non-flammable hierarchical functional separator was designed based on the poly(m-phenylene isophthalamide) (PMIA) membrane and the in situ formed Co-containing zeolitic imidazolate framework (ZIF-L(Co)). Benefiting from the feature of “Aramid” fibres and the special ZIF-L(Co) nanostructures, the Z-PMIA separator guaranteed high mechanical strength (suffering from a tensile strength of 15 MPa and a puncture force of 0.95 N) and remarkable thermal stability (no dimensional shrinkage even at 200 °C). When running at 80 °C, the Z-PMIA separator exhibited a high initial capacity of 1092.9 mA h g−1 and retained 86% capacity after 80 cycles.213 Moreover, some organic polymers and inorganic fibres or particle-based functional interlayers were also prepared to hinder Li dendrite growth, such as a TiO2@NiCo-LDH interlayer,214 a carbon nanofibres@MnS interlayer,215 a MOF-derived Mo2C particle interlayer,216 and a Co-doped FeOOH@CNT interlayer.217 To solve the problems on both sides of the cathode and Li anode for HT LSBs, a multifunctional Janus separator (CuNWs–GN/PI/LLZO) was presented (Fig. 26e), which integrated PI fibres with a copper nanowire–graphene nanosheet layer and an LLZTO@PEO layer. As shown in Fig. 26f, thanks to the inorganic components and PI, the composite separator exhibited excellent thermal stability without shrinkage. The copper nanowires combined with the graphene nanosheet layer presented strong polar adsorption and catalytic effects, which inhibited the loss of LiPSs and accelerated their conversion (Fig. 26g and h). As a result, the Janus separator exhibited excellent structure and thermal stability, and performed well at 80 °C.44
According to the Arrhenius equation, HT accelerates ion transfer and LiPS conversion, but the side reactions of sulfur species with electrolyte solvent and the Li metal side also proliferate. This problem can be solved from two aspects. First, for the liquid system, the solvation structure of the electrolyte is essential. The solvent molecule should be thermally stable, chemically “inert” with Li metal, and preferentially coordinated with Li+. Some fluorinated solvents and flame-retardant additives can also improve the battery safety. In the DOL/DME system, LiNO3 is often used as an additive to stabilize the SEI, but due to its substantial oxidizing properties, it is easily decomposed to N2 and N2O at HT, which makes the battery swell. Reasonable design of separators can improve the battery performance and ensure the battery safety. Secondly, for a gel or all-solid system, we should pay attention to ionic conductivity and interface compatibility, and the shuttle effect still exists in the polymer-based electrolyte, especially at HT.21


4.2.3. Lithium–gas batteries. 
Rechargeable Li–O2 batteries (LABs) are another alternative to conventional LIBs because of their high theoretical specific energy density and unlimited oxygen source.218 Similar to other Li-based battery systems, although HT promotes the redox process, the side reactions and the electrolyte decomposition are also accelerated. Due to the open operating system of LABs, liquid electrolytes with low boiling points are easily volatilized in HT environments. It should be noted that the intrinsically flammable organic liquid electrolyte may result in a fire hazard or even explosion when it operates at HT.219,220
To improve the cycling stability and safety of LABs, an intermediate temperature (∼150 °C) molten salt electrolyte based on the LiNO3–KNO3 eutectic was designed. The battery with the molten electrolyte showed high energy efficiency (∼95%) and improved rate capability because the discharged product Li2O2 was stable and moderately soluble in the molten salt electrolyte.221 Moreover, incorporating LAGP into the molten electrolyte could well prevent the oxygen shuttle from reacting with the Li metal anode (Fig. 27a). As shown in Fig. 27b, the LiNO3–KNO3 eutectic molten electrolyte promoted the conversion of O2 to Li2O, thermodynamically realizing the four-electron electrochemical reaction at 150 °C.222 Unfortunately, this system was not suitable at RT.
 Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram of the LAB with LAGP and molten electrolyte. (b) Gibbs free energy of reactions in Li–air batteries as a function of temperature, indicating the possibility of a four-electron process. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Flexible solid-state LAB based on an HSE while powering a LED lamp. Reproduced with permission.220 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of the fibre-shaped LAB. (e) Cycling performance of fibre-shaped LAB with different temperatures. (f) Charge–discharge curves of a fibre-shaped LAB for the 1st, 200th, and 380th cycles with 140 °C. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to molten salt electrolyte, a hybrid solid-state electrolyte was developed for LABs by mixing LAGP with poly(methyl methacrylate-styrene)-based electrolyte. The hybrid electrolyte solved the performance deterioration caused by the evaporation of the liquid electrolyte at HT. As presented in Fig. 27c, the assembled flexible LAB could discharge–charge for 90 cycles at 50 °C without any capacity decay at 200 mA g−1.220 Combining the improved interface contact of polymer electrolyte and the thermal stability of ILs, the Peng group synthesized an IL-based GPE by mixing the ILs/LiTFSI and PVDF-HFP. A coaxial fibre-shaped LAB was then fabricated with the help of an aligned CNT sheet and Li wire, which showed a wide electrochemical window of 1–5 V (vs. Li+/Li) and impressive HT stability (Fig. 27d). As shown in Fig. 27e and f, the prepared fibre-shaped LAB could stably work from 25 °C to 140 °C.223
In fact, the problems faced by HT LABs are more complicated. First of all, the open battery system has the problem of solvent evaporation. To solve this problem, choosing a higher boiling point electrolyte solvent or developing a gel system with good liquid absorption and strong heat resistance is recommended. At the same time, it is necessary to optimize the solvation structure to ensure the matching between the electrolyte and the Li metal anode. Secondly, air molecules continue to attack the Li metal anode at HT. Developing all-solid electrolytes is a good choice, but it seems challengeable to achieve stable operation at both RT and HT. Of course, for open systems and mixed gas environments, it is a promising strategy to design membrane materials with precise gas molecule selection and screening functions, making the open system “selectively open”.

5. Exploration of wide-temperature RLBs
Nowadays, temperature tolerance is attaching mounting importance to the evaluation of RLBs. As discussed above, the environmental temperature inevitably impacts the kinetics and stabilities of the electrolytes, electrodes, separators, and interphases in RLBs. It is difficult to solve the problems at HT and LT at the same time. Some materials have stable HT performance but unsatisfactory LT performance. On the other hand, some materials are on the contrary. With the development of materials science and management technology, much effort has been devoted to developing RLBs with wide-temperature applicability.
5.1. Electrode materials
For all-climate electrode materials, designing nanostructured electrode materials with interfacial and thermal stabilities is effective in maintaining their electrochemical activity over a wide range of temperatures, facilitating the ionic diffusion by shortening the diffusion path, and relieving the thermal decomposition of the critical components. To maintain satisfactory electrochemical performance and avoid severe degradation and safety risks, the critical materials in RLBs must meet the requirements of acceptable LT conductivity, a thin but stable interphase, and outstanding thermal stability to withstand extreme conditions. Specifically, two principles should be met for the electrode: first, sufficient LT ion conductivity; second, the stable phase structure and electrode–electrolyte interface during lithiation and delithiation processes at HT.
Under HT conditions, LFP has intrinsic thermal safety and good electrochemical performance, but the slow Li+ diffusion and poor electronic conductivity buried its LT performance. To tackle this problem, use of coral-shaped hierarchically porous LFP/graphene hybrids might be a promising way. The porous structure and fast ion/electron transport kinetics of the high conductive framework guaranteed excellent wide-temperature performance. At −40 °C, the cathode delivered an initial capacity of 120 mA h g−1 and maintained a discharge capacity of 80 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles with a CE of ∼99% at 80 mA g−1. At 20 °C, the obtained cell provided an initial capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at 1C and maintained a capacity of 108 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles with a CE of ∼100% (5.0 A g−1, 30C). Moreover, the battery delivered a large capacity at 60 °C (160 mA h g−1 at 80 mA g−1) (Fig. 28a).224 However, the above test lacks data for high current densities at LT, which is not enough to meet the needs of practical EV applications.
 Fig. 28  (a) Cycling performance of coral-shaped LFP/graphene hybrids from −40 to 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the tri-functional effect towards the LIPSs for a Zn-based host. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the pre-lithiation process. (d) Rate performance of the L5VP battery from −40 to 55 °C. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) TEM image of the LTO particles with carbon bridges. (f) The charge–discharge profiles of the LTO//LNMO battery at different temperatures. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group. 
For the sulfur cathode, a graphene supported BN nanosheet composite was designed as a host material to improve cell performance over a wide-temperature range. The composite greatly enhanced the adsorption ability for LiPSs and promoted its redox process. With the synergistic effects of BN and graphene, the cell obtained a capacity attenuation of <0.04% per cycle over 300 cycles at 70 °C and delivered a capacity of above 650 mA h g−1 at −40 °C.206 Moreover, a zinc atomic cluster within a double-layered N-doped carbon matrix was designed for wide-temperature LSBs. The combination of electron holography and geometry phase analysis proved that the sulfur host enhanced the capability towards the immobilization and conversion of LiPSs, and promoted a long cycle life in a wide-temperature zone (Fig. 28b).225
Among anode materials, the wide-temperature performance of graphite has always been criticized, especially below −20 °C. One alternative candidate is hard carbon, but its irreversible capacity loss in the initial stage has not been solved. With the development of pre-lithiation technology, proper Li supplementation can improve its initial performance when operated over a wide-temperature range, which requires consideration of the electrochemical window matching between the cathode and the anode and the temperature resistance of the material itself. A Li5V2(PO4)3 (L5VP) cathode can be obtained by the lithiation of Li3V2(PO4)3 (Fig. 28c). Then the irreversible capacity loss of hard carbon was entirely compensated for by de-lithiation of L5VP below 3.0 V (vs. Li+/Li). Moreover, the L5VP provided a stable phase transition behaviour and the minimum heat release (10–40 J g−1) during Li insertion/extraction processes. Notably, the hard carbon//L5VP pouch full cell could work at −40 °C with 80% capacity delivery. As shown in Fig. 28d, a stable rate performance could also be achieved at different temperatures. Due to the limitation of the theoretical capacity of L5VP (133 mA h g−1), this system is not suitable for long-cruising-range EV applications. However, this system has potential application value in moderate/low speed EVs and scalable energy storage systems.226
To enhance interfacial stability, the working potentials of electrodes and the electrochemical window of electrolyte should be compatible. In this regard, Ti-based compounds such as LTO are promising for all-climate electrodes, which almost have no volume changes and voltage excursion during cycling. As presented in Fig. 28e, the nanoscale carbon bridges acted as electron pathways to electrically interconnect the LTO particles, thus providing the electrode with very high conductivity. The reduction of the Li diffusion length within the particles endowed the LTO electrode with high CE and high-speed kinetics. When a carbon-coated LTO anode was combined with a Li[Ni0.45Co0.1Mn1.45]O4 cathode, the operating temperature range of the battery was extended from −20 to 55 °C without substantial capacity loss (Fig. 28f).227 This system yielded stable capacities at 1C under RT and HT conditions, and presented acceptable LT performance at 0.5C (but lack data at high current densities), which is expected to be applied in portable devices.
For cathodes, key strategies are based on structural reconstruction and morphology control. Reducing the particle size of LFP can boost its rate performance. Combining elemental doping and surface coating may be a reasonable and wise choice for solving the dilemma under extreme temperature conditions. By carefully choosing materials with fast ionic diffusion combined with well-constructed carbon networks, their LT performance can be improved. The design and selection of catalyst materials with good adsorption and catalytic performance, combined with good physical confinement function, help in solving the performance issues of LSBs over a wide-temperature range.
In the case of anodes, SEI-related processes are most influential towards wide-temperature performance, which are critical to improving safety and cycling stability. The composition, thickness and strength of the SEI film are related to the energy barrier of Li+ desolvation. For the Li metal anode, surface modifications at the atomic level are also essential for Li plating, and the problematic Li dendrite growth can be suppressed by selecting appropriate Li alloys or a host material with high lithiophilicity, especially at LT. Besides, traditional graphite electrodes have a high degree of uncertainty at extremely HT or LT, and it seems that LTO and hard carbon are promising alternatives.
5.2. Electrolytes and interfaces
In terms of electrolytes and interfaces, to widen the working temperature range, several significant factors must be better compromised. In general, HT causes severe side reactions, while LT results in sluggish ionic transport.174 Ideally, electrolyte should provide acceptable ionic conductivity and a low barrier for Li+ desolvation. Moreover, the stable thermodynamic and electrochemical windows of SEIs and CEIs are equally necessary, which avoids the decomposition/regeneration process. For the LSB system, it is also essential to limit the LiPS shuttle to the anode side while ensuring a sufficient oxidation–reduction rate. Thus, appropriate electrolytes and multi-functional separators need to be designed to enable wide-temperature RLBs.
Robust artificial interphases can be constructed by coating a protective layer on electrode materials or employing appropriate electrolyte additives/salts. Moreover, adjusting the relative composition of the electrolyte and species of the solvent, salt, and additive has been regarded as a facile approach to extend the working temperature of the battery. In recent years, researchers employed CsPF6 as an additive to optimize the wide-temperature stability of a ternary electrolyte (0.05 M CsPF6 and 1 M LiPF6, in EC/PC/EMC, v:v:v, 1:1:1). Moreover, localized high-concentration electrolytes and dual-salt electrolytes, including FEC, tris(trimethylsily)phosphite (TTMSPi), 1,3-propanesultone (PS) and 1,1,2,2-tetrafluoroethyl-2,2,3,3-tetrafluoropropyl ether (TTE), were developed to support the cycling stability from −30 °C to 60 °C. In addition, FEC as an additive was also investigated to improve the wide-temperature cycling stability of LSBs.228–231
The challenges of all-climate LSBs are greater than those of LIBs due to their complex reaction mechanism. Compared to the design of sulfur carriers, it also seems an effective way to optimize electrolytes and separators.232 For example, LiNO3 was explored as an additive for eliminating Li dendrite growth and decreasing the electrolyte decomposition of LSBs. However, it would generate gaseous decomposition products such as N2 and N2O due to its strong oxidizing properties.233 Thus, it is urgent to develop novel electrolytes with good LT conductivity, good interfacial stability, and safety for all-climate LSBs. Recently, the Huang group reported a novel in situ-formed flame-retardant polymerized 1,3-dioxolane electrolyte (PDE) with a multifunctional tris(pentafluorophenyl)borane (TB) additive. TB served as not only an initiator but also as a multifunctional additive. The in situ-formed PDE presented improved interface compatibility, good ionic conductivity (Fig. 29a), and flame-retardant properties (Fig. 29b). As shown in Fig. 29c, PDE-based LSBs demonstrated excellent cycling stability and a wide operating temperature range (−20 °C to 50 °C).234
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of ex situ LDE with some problems and the advantages of in situ PDE electrolytes. (b) Flame retardancy test. (c) Cycling performance of LSBs with different electrolytes from −20 to 50 °C. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The electrolyte design strategy of the non-polar solvent. (e) Cycling performance of Li//NCA cells with different electrolytes from −85 to 70 °C. (f) Long-term cycling performance of Li//NCA cells with different electrolytes at −20 °C. (g) The calculated Li+ solvation/desolvation energies with different structures of the LiPF6–EC/DMC and super electrolytes. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
As one of the breakthroughs for all-climate batteries, the Wang group developed a class of electrolytes. They mixed fluorinated electrolytes (FEC and methyl(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl)carbonate (FEMC)) with highly fluorinated nonpolar solvents, such as methoxyperfluorobutane (M3) and tetrafluoro-1-(2,2,2-trifluoroethoxy)ethane (D2). When using a mixture of the all-fluorinated electrolyte and the non-polar fluorinated diluent, the affinity between the solvated Li+ and its well-defined solvated shell could be accurately controlled (Fig. 29d), indicating that desolvation was one of the decisive factors for LT conditions. By optimizing blends of fluorinated solvents and diluents, the desolvation energy could be minimized, which reduced the charge-transfer resistance and enabled fast Li+ desolvation. Such electrolytes maintained superior properties, including the stable LiF-rich SEI on the Li surface and the wide electrochemical window. In addition, the fluorinated solvents in the electrolytes provided a high conductivity and low molecular interaction, which ensured a wide liquid-phase temperature range. Consequently, the prepared electrolytes showed high ionic conductivities from −125 to 70 °C and a wide potential window (0.0–5.6 V). The Li//NCA cells obtained with 1.28 M LiFSI–FEC/FEMC-D2 electrolyte presented excellent cycling stability in a temperature range from −85 to 70 °C (Fig. 29e). In contrast, traditional carbonate-based electrolytes (1 M LiPF6, EC/DMC) could only work in −20 to 25 °C. Moreover, a long-term stable performance (over 450 cycles) was obtained even at −20 °C (Fig. 29f). The calculated Li+ solvation/desolvation energies with different structures of the LiPF6–EC/DMC and superelectrolytes encourage researchers to continue to develop all-climate batteries in this direction (Fig. 29g).235
As we discussed above, liquefied gas electrolytes showed great application prospects at LT. Nevertheless, the corresponding performance at elevated temperature was inadequate due to the limitation of the FM (critical point of 44 °C). The Meng group used acetonitrile (AN) as a cosolvent to modify FM. AN has superior oxidation stability, low viscosity, a high dielectric constant, and a high-pressure window, which ensures the homogeneity of the electrolyte under high pressure. When 1.2 M LiTFSI and 1 M AN in FM served as the electrolyte, AN could improve the stability of Li anodes by fully coordinating with Li+. The prepared electrolyte showed excellent ionic conductivity (>4 mS cm−1) from −20 to 75 °C. Further, Li symmetrical cells demonstrated stable Li plating/stripping performance over a wide-temperature range from −60 to 55 °C.236
In addition to the above liquid and liquefied gas electrolytes, the all-temperature solid-state battery was reported to operate from −20 °C to 60 °C. The low mitigation rate of Li+ across the interface between the active material and solid electrolyte has been unravelled, which is the major bottleneck to achieve good electrochemical performances over a wide range of temperatures, especially at LT and RT. Xie et al. realized the smooth operation of solid-state batteries in the full temperature range by coating nickel-rich cathodes and matching sulphide-based electrolytes (choline-rich Li5.5PS4.5Cl1.5). Furthermore, LiNbO3 (LNO) was evenly coated on the surfaces of LiNi0.7Co0.1Mn0.2O2 (NCM712) particles, which ensured fast ion transport and tackled the side reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interface under HT conditions. The LNO@NCM712 electrode provided a low polarization voltage and showed a higher capacity of 79.3 mA h g−1 than the NCM712 electrode (35.7 mA h g−1) at −20 °C. The Li//Li5.5PS4.5Cl1.5//LNO@NCM712 battery delivered an initial discharge capacity of 130 mA h g−1 at 5C and 60 °C with an excellent capacity retention of 88% over 300 cycles.237 Besides, an ASS photo-assisted rechargeable LAB was reported to operate from −73 °C to 120 °C.238
Developing suitable electrolyte that has facile Li+ desolvation and wide-temperature feasibility is key to advancing all climate RLBs. For example, WIS and GPE with groups that can interact strongly with water are promising in ALIB systems. Adding effective electrolyte additives to supress the water evaporation and reduce the water content in the electrolyte is also a practical solution. Designing lean electrolytes with functional additives and weaker solvation behaviour is critical for large-scale applications of all-climate LSB systems. A fluorinated carbonate-based electrolyte helps in enhancing the interface compatibility between the electrolyte and the electrode and avoiding the SEI and CEI damage. Moreover, the fluoroborate-based Li salt gives the battery a wide-temperature operating range. Safety concerns arising from the flammable organic electrolyte can be addressed using flame-retardant electrolytes, SSEs, and stable thermal separators. High concentration electrolyte, localized high-concentration electrolyte, and dual-salt electrolyte are also available strategies to form robust SEIs, suppress LT Li dendrite growth, and improve HT cycling stability.
5.3. Thermal management strategies for all-climate RLBs
Battery performance and operable temperature windows always require better trade-offs. Although the study of energy-storage materials is the mainstream direction, the thermal management of the environment and the interactions between its components is still a critical factor affecting the working temperature range of the battery. Systematic studies on the correlation between the thermal factor and state-of-health are necessary. Thus, the battery thermal management system (BTMS) has received significant attention, which is an effective way to control the temperature increase/decrease during the charge/discharge process.
Temperature is a double-edged sword. In the past ten years, the fires and explosions caused by thermal runaways have been the cause of multiple product recalls. Meanwhile, the discounted LT cruising range is the Achilles heel that restricts EVs applied in high altitude and high latitude regions. To evaluate the battery's internal temperature in real-time and realize auxiliary heating at LT and the function of early warning at HT, in situ battery temperature monitoring is vital. The Tarascon group ruled out the coupling effect of strain by introducing a loosely arranged single-mode optical fibre sensor with a diameter of 150 μm into the middle of the jelly roll of an 18650 cell, which could monitor the dynamic chemical and thermal states of a cell during operation (Fig. 30a). Based on this sensor, the cell's heat capacity contribution is readily assessed, allowing for full parametrization of the thermal model. In addition, changing the fibre morphology and the functional relationship between the wavelength and temperature could accurately reflect the changes in SEI morphology and realize multi-scale monitoring.239
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagram of the integration of an optical fibre into the large central void (∼1500 μm) of the jelly-roll-type battery. The reflected spectra monitor the physical perturbations of the FBG sensor (caused by temperature, pressure or strain). Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic diagram of a self-heating battery structure. (c) The evolution of cell voltage and temperature during V = 0.4 V activation (inset) and subsequent 1C discharge at −20 °C. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the shape memory alloy-actuated thermal regulator. (e) Schematic diagram of the principle of opening and closing the temperature control system. Comparison of battery performance with the thermal regulator always on and always off for representative cold (−20 °C, (f)) and hot (45 °C, (g)) ambient temperatures. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (h) Schematic diagram of the three cooling methods for battery systems includes air cooling, liquid cooling and phase-change material cooling. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. 

5.3.1. Battery packages with heating function. 
As mentioned above, sluggish ion diffusion dynamics and Li dendrite growth can be easily triggered at LT, inducing battery deactivation and short circuits. Hence, a heat strategy for batteries at LT is a promising way to widen the working temperature zone. For example, direct current (DC) heating and alternating current (AC) heating strategies can balance the heat generation rate and battery lifetime. As shown in Fig. 30b, a self-heating strategy was proposed by using a third electrode, which was inserted into LIBs to heat batteries to normal temperature for only a few seconds. Fig. 30c shows battery voltage and surface temperature evolutions during the activation process followed by a 7.5 A h discharge at −20 °C, and the battery exhibited an enhanced high voltage to remain “healthy” throughout the activation and discharge processes. Interestingly, the cell activation took only 19.5 s from −20 °C. Although the three-electrode strategy inherently reduced the energy density, its energy density was still much higher than that of the two-electrode system under LT conditions, thus enabling a more extended cruising range for an electric car, especially in icy environments.13 Then, a series of studies were conducted to investigate the performance of the self-heating strategy. Hao et al. reported a thermal regulator that adjusted its thermal conductance as a function of temperature for the BTMS. As presented schematically in Fig. 30d, flexible shape memory alloy (SMA) wires were routed around the thermal regulator and used in tension. In Fig. 30e, the red and blue lines were conceptual stress–strain curves of the SMA at a critical temperature. The solid grey line indicated the stress in the SMA wire at that strain due to the bias spring. When the temperature was too high or too low, the change in SMA parameters would stimulate the heating or cooling element so that the battery maintained the ideal operating temperature. Moreover, for a cold environment (Fig. 30f), the thermal regulator became thermally insulating to retain the battery-generated heat. Compared with the common “always ON” design, the thermal regulator helped the battery yield more usable capacity. For a hot environment (Fig. 30g), the thermal regulator became thermally conducting to dissipate heat and prevented the battery from overheating. As a comparison, the “always OFF” design, which performed well at LT, now resulted in the batteries heating to unsafe levels. Compared with a baseline BTMS, the smart thermal regulator could enhance the battery capacity at −20 °C, which also limited the battery temperature rise to 5 °C in a hot environment (over 45 °C).240
Moreover, battery internal heating has been proposed for fast charging under LT conditions. A multilayer nickel foil as both the heater and the temperature sensor were embedded into the battery. It could pre-heat a 9.5 A h pouch cell from −50 °C to RT within 1 min. As a result, the battery could reach an 80% state of charge within 15 min at −50 °C.241 Subsequently, a thermally modulated LFP (TM-LFP) blade battery was reported. The battery realized fast charging in 10 min and operated at a working temperature around 60 °C in all weather, eliminating the anxiety about mileage and ambient temperature.242 The result exhibited enormous potential for large-scale adoption in upcoming mass-market EVs.


5.3.2. Battery packages with cooling function. 
Batteries sometimes spontaneously become hot, and it is very challenging to keep them cool. Future applications, such as long-range EVs and large-scale smart grids, need thousands of cells in a battery pack. These are prone to overheating. Heat-removal strategies must be proposed to make the battery both light and powerful. In recent years, researchers and advanced auto companies have been increasing the development of cooling systems. Many cooling strategies have been reported. In general, they include three mainstream management systems.243
As shown in Fig. 30h, air (natural air cooling and forced air cooling) or liquid cooling has been widely used to control the difference between maximum temperature and local temperature in the battery. The temperature control accuracy and efficiency of air cooling need to be improved. Liquid cooling methods, including immersion and surround types, show good cooling efficiency, and the immersion type will reduce the possibility of battery short circuits. Moreover, the circulating cooling system has been applied in EVs (e.g., Tesla). Compared to passive cooling with air cooling, active liquid cooling systems require an additional electrical drive.244 In addition to the above strategies, the phase-change material (PCM) cooling method can also realize the temperature control of the battery. Its basic principle is to absorb the heat generated by the battery through the phase transformation of the external material. PCMs like paraffin wax can maintain the temperature over a small range before phase transformation completion, which can alleviate the heat growth rate to a certain extent.245 But in the case of high ambient temperature, this system may fail. And, this method only stores heat and requires additional devices to take away the stored heat and restore it to its original form.43,246
It is necessary to establish an effective BTMS to achieve rapid preheating at LT, circulating cooling at HT, and maintaining a reasonable working temperature zone for RLBs. Such dynamic adjustment requires the appropriate coupling of the temperature monitoring system, heat dissipation system, and heating/cooling system, and rapid and sensitive thermal response to achieve dynamic balance.247,248

5.4. Technical application and actual performance
The research and development of materials and systems is a booster for the progress of the EV industry. However, most of the currently reported mA h/A h-level laboratory-scale pouch cells are not sufficient for real automotive-level applications.141,249
At present, EVs are usually equipped with NCM-based or LFP-based batteries, but their LT/HT performance is dissatisfactory. As shown in Fig. 31a and b, most EVs followed a similar relationship between the temperature range and endurance mileage, regardless of manufacture or model. Both cold and hot temperatures impacted mileage, while the cold climate had a stronger influence than the hot one. In addition, we checked the battery life test standards of different countries and regions. Taking the New European Driving Cycle (NEDC) as an example, the accessories of the car (air conditioning, lights, heated seats, etc.) were turned off during the test, implying that the cruising range declared by the car manufacturer inclined to a theoretical value.250–252
 Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of the relationship between the cruising range of an EV and the ambient temperature based on actual driving conditions (the grey part of the ordinate is the mileage reduction caused by the ambient temperature; the orange part is the mileage reduction caused by the in-vehicle auxiliary equipment). (b) The reality of the EV range. The blue line is the expected average range at the selected temperature for that vehicle. The red and green lines indicate the worst and best range distributions (10th and 90th percentiles). The curve is based on the driving data of the following car models: BMW I3, KIA Soul, Mercedes-Benz B-Class, Nissan Leaf, Tesla Model S, and so on. (a and b) Data deduced from https://www.geotab.com. Schematic diagram of the (c) pouch cell- and (d) battery pack-level gravimetric specific energies and volumetric energy densities of the EVs. (c and d) Data deduced from ref. 242. (e) The comparison between batteries exposed to temperate and hot climates. (f) Battery degradation comparison between the liquid cooling and the passive air cooling. (e and f) Data deduced from https://www.geotab.com. The above data are only used for scientific research studies rather than the comparison of EV brands. 
In addition, the round-trip efficiency of the existing car batteries is mostly lower than 90–95% (based on RT testing). Considering LT/HT storage, battery self-discharge, and heat loss during charging and discharging, the round-trip efficiency is likely to decay to 70–80% or less under extreme conditions. Based on the data collection of EVs, the battery capacity attenuation is more than 3–5% per year under a non-extreme temperature environment, and the capacity decay inevitably turns worse upon long-term exposure of the EVs to LT or HT. On the whole, the health state of EV batteries decreases non-linearly to form an initial drop, and then continues to decrease with a far more moderate pace. Towards the end of its life, the battery displays a final significant drop. Moreover, Fig. 31c and d list the energy and volume densities of the pouch cells and battery packs carried by ten common EV models. Based these data, the ratio of the indirect active components (BTMS, etc.) has a significant impact on the final energy density of the battery pack. However, the configuration weight of different models and the auxiliary equipment will affect the final actual cruising range. It is recommended that the gravimetric energy density of the pouch cell is not less than 280 W h kg−1 and the volume energy density is not less than 550 W h L−1. At −20 °C, the energy density reaches at least 80% of the RT value when evaluating the practicality of the battery.45,242,253
BTMSs play a critical role in actual automotive application, and most EVs have already been equipped with BTMSs. In HT environments, batteries are cooled by circulating cooling water to make the battery work in a feasible temperature range, while many high-end EVs have a LT charging preheating function, which ensures that the battery pack runs under suitable working conditions. Some models also added battery self-heating function. For example, Tesla Model Y was equipped with a heat pump, which was a very efficient temperature-control method. In addition, vehicles driven in hot climates showed a notably faster decrease rate than those in moderate climates (Fig. 31e), which highlighted the importance of BTMS design. On comparing a liquid cooling system and a passive air-cooling system, the latter was found to exhibit a higher average degradation rate (4.2%) than the former (2.3%), implying that good thermal management meant good health of the EV battery pack (Fig. 31f).254–256
However, the introduction of a BTMS increases the overall volume and mass of the battery pack, thus reducing its energy density. At present, most EVs have gravimetric cell-to-pack ratios (GCTP; that is, the ratio of specific energy at the pack level to that at the cell level) of 0.55–0.65, meaning that 35–45% of the pack weight is taken by inactive elements such as thermal management systems. Moreover, the volumetric cell-to-pack ratio (VCTP) of most EVs is below 0.4. Interestingly, some battery suppliers such as CATL and BYD introduced cell-to-pack integration (CTP), making GCTP and VCTP reach 0.85 and 0.62, respectively. The related tests showed that the blade-type LFP battery pack provided a higher energy density than traditional NCM-based packs. However, the large ionic and electronic transfer resistances of the thick LFP cathode made the cruising range of the EV with the blade-type battery pack decrease sharply at LT. It is necessary to reduce the weight and volume of the BTMS as much as possible. Nickel foil could be embedded in the battery as an internal heater, achieving a heating rate of more than 1 °C s−1, which meant that even at −30 °C the battery only needed 90 seconds to reach 60 °C before running (driving).13 After introducing the nickel foil heat, the specific energy of the battery pack only decreased by 1.3%, and its cost just increased by 0.47%.241,257 In addition, this battery structure was proven to be available in EVs.258 At −20 °C, even though preheating consumed ∼10.8% energy produced by the battery pack, heat activated LFP-based batteries still provided a cruising range of 260 km, which was much better than that without a preheating system (13 km). This cruising range also exceeded that of EVs with an NCM622-based battery pack operating at −20 °C (110 km), validating its feasibility.242 GCTP and VCTP are expected to reach more than 0.85 and 0.65, respectively, which requires designing dense battery packs and BTMSs.
5.5. Cost and resource analysis
The prices of Li salts, solvents and their upstream products have increased in recent years, and Fig. 32a lists the prices of these materials. The prices of conventional solvents such as EC are less than 5000 USD per ton, those of some additives such as FEC exceed the 50000 USD per ton, and that of LiDFOB is even more than 100000 USD per ton. Therefore, it is necessary to control the amount of additives and propose cost-efficient additives. Moreover, Fig. 32b presents the annual mining production of the main transition-metals of intercalation-type cathodes. There were three classes extending from the cheaper (Fe), moderately priced (Al and Mn) to the most expensive (Co and Ni). Over the last 5 years, the price of Co has sky-rocketed, implying that cathode materials with high Co fractions would become more and more expensive. In addition, the prices of EV battery cathode materials have also soared: the price of LFP reaching 15500 USD per ton and the price of NCM811 increasing to 42000 USD per ton (Fig. 32c). Considering the cost effectiveness and sustainability of battery manufacture chains, the recycling and appropriate disposal of battery components should be paid much attention.7,259–261
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic diagram of the prices of solvents, additives, and lithium salts (based on the Chinese market in the fourth quarter of 2021). (b) The annual global (co-)production of metals from mineral mining. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The prices of the main cathode materials (based on the Chinese market in the fourth quarter of 2021). 
6. Conclusions and outlook
The past decades have witnessed ever-increasing research activity for wide-temperature RLBs. At present, the range of applications for full temperature RLBs is extensive, and the market is likely underestimated. Wide-temperature battery applications include, but are not limited to, EVs, large-scale energy storage, national defence and military, and polar/high-altitude/deep-sea exploration. To improve the temperature tolerance of the energy storage battery, it is necessary to start with the reaction mechanism, material design, and battery thermal management. In this process, multiple strategies are often required to be reasonably coupled.
By summarizing the previous reports, we provide the components of RLBs in different temperature zones (Fig. 33) and their corresponding performance (Table 1). For the current development of LT RLBs, we have sorted out some advanced battery systems: Li//LVP, Li//NCM523 and LTO//LMO. LVP and spinel LMO with structure design and electrolyte optimization have fast ion diffusion and low desolvation energy barriers, facilitating LT application. The NCM523 systems with high-concentration electrolytes and fluorinated solvents provide excellent LT cycling performance and CEs (Table 1) due to their low desolvation energy barrier. Moreover, the LTO//LMO system has achieved large-scale production.
 Fig. 33  Schematic diagram of the representative battery components in different temperature zones. Data deduced from ref. 79, 166, 193, 235, 247 and 248. 
Table 1 The list of representative batteries and their performance in different temperature zones




Temperature range
Cathode
Anode
Electrolyte
Rate performance (mA h g−1)
Columbic efficiency
Capacity decay rate
Ref.




LT RLBs
LVP
Li
1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC
106/5C, −20 °C
∼99%/5C, −20 °C, 450 cycles
0.026% per cycle/450 cycles/5C/−20 °C

79





NCM523
Li
5.0M LiTFSI/LiDFOB in TMS/EA/HFE/FEC
102/1C, −40 °C
∼97.5%/1C, −40 °C, 200 cycles
0.029% per cycle/200 cycles/1C/−40 °C

248



HT RLBs
NCM (75/10/15)
Graphite
1 M LiPF6 in EC/EMC
232/1C, 55 °C
N/A
0.016% per cycle/1000 cycles/1C/55 °C

166





LFP
Li
2.0 M LiTFSI in DOL/DME with AlI3
159/3C, 90 °C
∼99%/3C, 90 °C, 400 cycles
0.015% per cycle/400 cycles/3C/90 °C

247



WT RLBs
NCA
Li
1.28 M LiFSI in FEC/FEMC/D2 (−85 °C) 0.7 M LiBETI in FEC/DEC/M3 (65 °C)
96/0.3C, −85 °C; 174/0.5C, 65 °C
>99%, −85 °C; >99.4%, 65 °C;
0.037% per cycle/450 cycles/0.3C/−20 °C; 0.231% per cycle/65 cycles/0.5C/60 °C

235





LTO
Li
0.8 M LiTFSI/0.2 M LiDFOB in ADN/EC
130/1C, −20 °C; 180/1C, 150 °C
>99%, −20 °C; >99%, 150 °C;
0.049% per cycle/100 cycles/1C/−20 °C; 0.181% per cycle/50 cycles/1C/150 °C

193





In the future, Li//LFP with higher capacity compared to the Li//LVP system should be developed as a LT battery system, and the LT kinetics of LFP can be improved by doping with high valence metal elements. High capacity TiNb2O7 with rapid ion transport characteristics can be used as an anode material to couple with the high-voltage spinel LNMO and electrolyte, which can substitute the LTO//LMO system to improve the energy density of the battery. Moreover, non-polar fluorinated molecules can be developed as solvents to lower the desolvation energy barrier (such as fluoroacetonitrile, which has been industrially produced). Benefiting from the outstanding LT electrochemical performance of Li metal anodes (showing high CEs in Table 1), LT LSBs are also worthy of attention. The redox pathway can be altered by an electrolyte-optimized strategy to achieve a low desolvation energy barrier and suppress the LiPS shuttle effect.
For HT RLBs, the Achilles heels are the side reactions between electrodes and electrolytes as well as the overall thermal stability of the battery system. Currently, it is recommended that inorganic crystalline materials with excellent thermal stability be used as cathode materials, such as commercialized NCM and LFP materials. Moreover, gradient doping from the surface to the bulk is a promising strategy, which greatly extends the cycling life of the pack battery (Table 1). For the anode side, graphite and Li metal are appropriate choices. In addition, the Li//LCO system with LiDFOB-based electrolyte demonstrated a long-term stable HT performance (700 cycles, 1C, 60 °C), which was attributed to the film-forming properties of LiDFOB at HT.
In the next stage, when designing HT RLBs, more attention should be paid to interface side reactions. Layered nickel-rich materials are still promising, and the contents of nickel and cobalt should be optimized. For modification strategies, it is recommended to develop precise targeted doping and atomic-scale coating technologies (introducing as few inactive substances as possible). In terms of battery components, the role of HT-resistant separators, such as PI and PMIA, should be emphasized, and their cost should be reduced. In addition, solid-state batteries are auspicious candidates to enhance their HT performance if enhancing their ionic conductivities at RT and LT.
For all-climate RLBs, the designed material needs to consider the characteristics of HT and LT, which requires that each part of the component should not have apparent temperature sensitivity/defect. Recently, some battery systems exhibited good wide temperature performance (Table 1): Li//NCA and Li//LTO. For the Li//NCA system, non-polar solvents and fluorinated additives weaken the desolvation energy barrier, ensuring stable SEI formation to improve the CE and broaden the working temperature range of the battery. For the Li//LTO system, although it exhibited extraordinary wide-temperature performance, its energy density was quite low.
In the future, automakers and researchers should focus on improving the LT performance of existing RT/HT stable battery systems, as well as improving the energy density of existing all-temperature battery systems. Specifically, high capacity TiNb2O7 with fast ion transport characteristics can match with Li metal to construct a full battery, which can serve as a substitute for an all-temperature Li//LTO system. It is recommended to focus on atomic-level coating technology and develop a Li//LFP system which demonstrates stable RT/HT performance, and electrolyte modulation combined with atomic-level coating on the LFP surface can extend its operating temperature to LT. Moreover, the rational design of CTP technology and BTMSs enables the Li//LFP pack battery to operate at a suitable temperature, maximizing the energy density and service life (GCTP > 0.85, VCTP > 0.65). Considering the HT advantages of SSEs and LT merits of some organic liquid electrolytes, solid–liquid hybrid electrolytes are expected to balance safety, energy density, and full temperature properties. In addition, we have listed some of the key methods and technologies for future all-climate RLB investigations below:
(1) Intelligent screening of temperature-dependent materials via machine learning
The study of wide-temperature batteries includes many complicated factors. However, the mainstream research method is trial and error, that is, from synthesizing materials, preparing electrodes, adapting electrolytes, assembling batteries, to testing performance. But even if only material factors are considered, it is difficult for the human brain to process >10100 possibilities. As subversive battery research and development methods, artificial intelligence and machine learning can assist researchers in effectively analyzing huge data parameters. In addition, methods based on artificial intelligence and machine learning can filter out interference options that do not meet the expected model (temperature preset) and provide predictions of potential materials or battery systems.
(2) 
          In situ characterization of the evolution of materials at variable temperatures
More advanced characterization techniques are required as well, such as cryogenic focused ion beam (cryo-FIB), in situ scanning transmission electron microscopy (STEM)/EELS, in situ differential electrochemical mass spectrometry, in situ variable temperature XRD, ultrasound imaging technology and neutron diffraction, to precisely probe the ion conduction mechanisms, interfacial reactions, valence states, cell internal conditions and electrochemical properties. It is expected that understanding the electrochemical and chemical phenomena (e.g., wettability, dendrite formation, gas production, and SEI regeneration) observed by these state-of-the-art techniques will guide the development of wide-temperature RLBs.
(3) Integrated evaluations for mass production and practical application
Whether it is the design of cathode materials or the development of new electrolytes, it must meet the requirements of scale-up production and practical application of large-capacity single cells. Obviously, most of the currently reported mA h/A h laboratory-grade levels are far from adequate for real automotive-grade applications. In more than 400 research articles on LT/HT RLBs reported before 2022, most data are based on coin cells under the conditions of low current density, low active-material loading, and excessive electrolyte. Therefore, in order to understand the real problem and realize a feasible solution for wide-temperature RLBs, more work and attention need to be shifted to the parameters and related tests that can truly reflect the actual use.
Considering the ever-increasing need for advanced energy storage systems, more and more cutting-edge methods, theoretical tools, and strategies outlined here will be put to practical applications, and the above-mentioned issues will be eventually resolved, which will further pave the way for large-scale commercialization and industrial development.
Author contributions
J. C. and K. Z. proposed the topic of the review. Q. Z. and H. L. conducted the literature search. Y. F., Z. W., and L. Z. organized the figures and tables. J. C., K. Z., H. M., and Y. F. discussed, wrote, and revised the manuscript. All authors participated in the manuscript discussion.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (2019YFA0705600), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22005155 and 52072186), the 111 Project from the Ministry of Education of China (B12015), and the Young Elite Scientist Sponsorship Program by CAST (2019QNRC001), and was financially supported by the Haihe Laboratory of Sustainable Chemical Transformations. We also thank Dr Nanping Deng from Tiangong University for his valuable advice.
Notes and references
U.S. Energy Information Administration, Annual Energy Outlook 2021, https://www.eia.gov/.
Z. Yang, J. Zhang, M. C. Kintner-Meyer, X. Lu, D. Choi, J. P. Lemmon and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3577–3613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-M. Tarascon and M. Armand, Nature, 2001, 414, 359–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Crabtree, Science, 2019, 366, 422–424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Manthiram and J. B. Goodenough, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 323 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schmuch, R. Wagner, G. Hörpel, T. Placke and M. Winter, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 267–278 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, 4098 CrossRef PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2011, 11, 19–29 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and K. S. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1167–1176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, Q. Zhang, L. Li, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Chem, 2018, 4, 2786–2813 CAS .
M. R. Palacin and A. de Guibert, Science, 2016, 351, 1253292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, G. Zhang, S. Ge, T. Xu, Y. Ji, X. Yang and Y. Leng, Nature, 2016, 529, 515–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, G. Zhou, J. Liu, J. Yu, M. B. Effat, J. Wu and F. Ciucci, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001235 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gupta and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2001972 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Chen, F. Mo, D. Wang, Y. Guo, Z. Liu, X. Li, Q. Li, G. Liang and C. Zhi, Adv. Sci., 2020, 8, 2002590 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9820 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Waqas, S. Ali, C. Feng, D. Chen, J. Han and W. He, Small, 2019, 15, 1901689 CrossRef PubMed .
T. L. Kulova, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2020, 8638–8661 CrossRef .
Q. Li, G. Liu, H. Cheng, Q. Sun, J. Zhang and J. Ming, Chem. – Eur. J., 2021, 27, 15842–15865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhou, G. Li, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107136 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Ren, H. Hsu, X. Feng, G. Xu, M. Zhuang, H. Gao, L. Lu, X. Han, Z. Chu, J. Li, X. He, K. Amine and M. Ouyang, Joule, 2018, 2, 2047–2064 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, Y. Yao, G. Zhu, C. Yan, L. Jiang, C. He, J. Huang and Q. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3806–3833 RSC .
Z. Liu, X. Luo, L. Qin, G. Fang and S. Liang, Adv. Powder Mater., 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.apmate.2021.10.002 .
X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 3883–3894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, B. Wang, X. Liao, K. Zhao, Z. Yang, F. Xia, C. Sun, Z. Wang, C. Fan, J. Zhang and Y. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000907 CrossRef CAS .
R. Akolkar, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 84–89 CrossRef CAS .
R. Akolkar, J. Power Sources, 2013, 232, 23–28 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Love, O. A. Baturina and K. E. Swider-Lyons, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2015, 4, 24–27 CrossRef .
D. Yaakov, Y. Gofer, D. Aurbach and I. C. Halalay, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1383–A1391 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11503–11618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Zhang, W. Li, B. Ma and X. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 5926–5940 RSC .
A. Ramanujapuram and G. Yushin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802624 CrossRef .
Y. Na, X. Sun, A. Fan, S. Cai and C. Zheng, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2020, 32, 973–982 CrossRef .
G. Zhu, K. Wen, W. Lv, X. Zhou, Y. Liang, F. Yang, Z. Chen, M. Zou, J. Li, Y. Zhang and W. He, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 29–40 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Zhang, G. Xing, S. Chou and Y. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3323–3351 RSC .
R. Zhao, S. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Gu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 299, 557–577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hou, M. Yang, D. Wang and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904152 CrossRef CAS .
F. Single, B. Horstmann and A. Latz, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17810–17814 RSC .
W. He, W. Guo, H. Wu, L. Lin, Q. Liu, X. Han, Q. Xie, P. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Wang, X. Yu and D. L. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2005937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jin, B. Zhu, Z. Lu, N. Liu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700715 CrossRef .
X. Lin, M. Salari, L. M. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848–5887 RSC .
P. Lyu, X. Liu, J. Qu, J. Zhao, Y. Huo, Z. Qu and Z. Rao, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 31, 195–220 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, B. Chen, T. Fang, Y. Li, Z. Zhou, Q. Wang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1902023 CrossRef .
M.-T. F. Rodrigues, G. Babu, H. Gullapalli, K. Kalaga, F. N. Sayed, K. Kato, J. Joyner and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17108 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, C. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xu and J. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6783–6819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Haregewoin, A. S. Wotango and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1955–1988 RSC .
E. J. Plichta, M. Hendrickson, R. Thompson, G. Au, W. K. Behl, M. C. Smart, B. V. Ratnakumar and S. Surampudi, J. Power Sources, 2000, 94, 160–162 CrossRef .
X. Dong, Y. Lin, P. Li, Y. Ma, J. Huang, D. Bin, Y. Wang, Y. Qi and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5623–5627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, H. Xia, Z. Zhu, Z. Lv, S. Cao, J. Wei, Y. Luo, Y. Xiao, L. Liu and X. Chen, CCS Chem., 2020, 2, 1245–1255 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, D. Lu, J. Zheng, S. Jiao, L. Luo, C. Wang, K. Xu, J. Zhang and W. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 42761–42768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, P. Li, N. Wang, Z. Fang, C. Wang, X. Dong and Y. Xia, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9640–9643 RSC .
X. Liu, X. Shen, H. Li, P. Li, L. Luo, H. Fan, X. Feng, W. Chen, X. Ai, H. Yang and Y. Cao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003905 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liao, H. Li, M. Xu, L. Xing, Y. Liao, X. Ren, W. Fan, L. Yu, K. Xu and W. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800802 CrossRef .
J. Huang, Z. Guo, Y. Ma, D. Bin, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800272 CrossRef .
L. Shan, Y. Wang, S. Liang, B. Tang, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, B. Lu and J. Zhou, InfoMat, 2021, 3, 1028–1036 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Xie, H. Liu, P. Wang, C. Deng, B. Lu, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, nwab177 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Yang, S. Liang, B. Lu and J. Zhou, Small Struct., 2021, 2, 2100119 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tron, S. Jeong, Y. D. Park and J. Mun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14531–14538 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Rustomji, Y. Yang, T. K. Kim, J. Mac, Y. J. Kim, E. Caldwell, H. Chung and Y. S. Meng, Science, 2017, 356, 1351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, D. M. Davies, Y. Yin, O. Borodin, J. Z. Lee, C. Fang, M. Olguin, Y. Zhang, E. S. Sablina, X. Wang, C. S. Rustomji and Y. S. Meng, Joule, 2019, 3, 1986–2000 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, Y. Yin, D. Xia, A. Chen, J. Holoubek, J. Scharf, Y. Yang, K. H. Koh, M. Li, D. M. Davies, M. Mayer, T. Han, Y. Meng, T. A. Pascal and Z. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 3395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Q. Hou, W. Huang, H. Xu, X. Wang, W. Yu, R. Li, K. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xie and K. P. Loh, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3498–3506 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Choi, J.-W. Son, Y. S. Yoon and J. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2006, 158, 1419–1424 CrossRef CAS .
G. Nagasubramanian, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 99–104 CrossRef .
S. Tan, L. Wang, L. Bian, J. Xu, W. Ren, P. Hu and A. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 277, 139–146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Li, Y. Su, Y. Lu, L. Bao, J. Wang, M. Wang and F. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8641–8648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Li, L. Gao, X. Zhao, D. Han, S. Gan, S. Guo and L. Niu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 9, 1802946 CrossRef .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Bi, S. Zhao, C. Huang and C. Nan, J. Power Sources, 2018, 389, 240–248 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Tang, H. Xia, Y. Zeng, L. Qiao, Z. Zhu, Z. Lv, Y. Zhang, X. Ge, S. Xi, Z. Wang, Y. Du and X. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14038–14042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. K. Park, Y. Cho, S. Lee, H.-C. Yoo, H.-K. Song and J. Cho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1621 RSC .
H. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2020, 15, 12041–12067 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rui, Y. Jin, X. Feng, L. Zhang and C. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 2109–2114 CrossRef CAS .
C. Masquelier and L. Croguennec, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6552–6591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, Y. Guo, J. Su, J. Xiong, Y. Zhang and L. Wan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1155–1160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, Y. Xu, C. Zhao, X. Yang and Q. Jiang, Electrochim.
Acta, 2012, 83, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Pi, Y. Zhao, X. Tian, Q. An, Q. Wei and L. Mai, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400107 CrossRef .
Z. Ye, Y. Jiang, L. Li, F. Wu and R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, M. Liu, D. Guo, J. Wang, X. Chen, J. Li, H. Jin, Z. Yang, X. Chen and S. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 6406–6411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Yan, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and H. Jiang, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 12278–12326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qie, W. Chen, H. Xu, X. Xiong, Y. Jiang, F. Zou, X. Hu, Y. Xin, Z. Zhang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2497 RSC .
A. Magasinski, P. Dixon, B. Hertzberg, A. Kvit, J. Ayala and G. Yushin, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Sides and C. R. Martin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 125–128 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dong, Y. Yang, B. Wang, Y. Cao, N. Wang, P. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2000196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, K. Xu and T. R. Jow, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cheng, R. Zhang, C. Zhao and Q. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10403–10473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, Z. Chen, F. Pan, Y. Cui and K. Amine, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 35–53 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, S. Dsoke, T. Mecozzi and R. Marassi, Electrochim. Acta, 2005, 51, 536–544 CrossRef CAS .
F. Nobili, M. Mancini, S. Dsoke, R. Tossici and R. Marassi, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7090–7097 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, B. Yang, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16606–16610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Lee, K. Lee, J. Lim, M. Li, S. Noda, S. J. Kwon, B. DeMattia, B. Lee and S. W. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2009397 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cai, C. Yan, Y. Yao, L. Xu, X. Chen, J. Huang and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 13007–13012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Pohjalainen, T. Rauhala, M. Valkeapää, J. Kallioinen and T. Kallio, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2277–2283 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, H. Zhang, L. Fang, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2030–2040 RSC .
C. Huang, S. Zhao, H. Peng, Y. Lin, C. Nan and G. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14339–14351 RSC .
C. M. Park, J. H. Kim, H. Kim and H. J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
E. Markevich, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, 2407–2412 CrossRef .
T. Subburaj, W. Brevet, F. Farmakis, D. Tsiplakides, S. Balomenou, N. Strataki, C. Elmasides, B. Samaniego and M. Nestoridi, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 354, 136652 CrossRef CAS .
S. Choi, Y. G. Cho, J. Kim, N. S. Choi, H. K. Song, G. Wang and S. Park, Small, 2017, 13, 1603045 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Tan, R. Hu, H. Zhang, X. Lan, J. Liu, H. Wang, B. Yuan and M. Zhu, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 36, 242–250 CrossRef .
Y. Lu, X. Hou, L. Miao, L. Li, R. Shi, L. Liu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7020–7024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ma, Z. Pan, L. Miao, C. Chen, M. Han, Z. Shang and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3158–3162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, H. Dai, S. Zhu, Y. Wu, M. Sun, Y. Chen, K. Fan, C. Zhang, C. Wang and W. Hu, eScience, 2021, 1, 60–68 CrossRef .
X. Dong, Z. Guo, Z. Guo, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2018, 2, 902–913 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16071 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, M. S. Kim, Z. Tu, S. Choudhury, T. Tang and L. A. Archer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2701–2750 RSC .
Z. Wang, Z. Sun, J. Li, Y. Shi, C. Sun, B. An, H. Cheng and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 3178–3210 RSC .
P. Li, H. Kim, J. Ming, H. Jung, I. Belharouak and Y. Sun, eScience, 2021, 1, 3–12 CrossRef .
A. C. Thenuwara, P. P. Shetty, N. Kondekar, S. E. Sandoval, K. Cavallaro, R. May, C. Yang, L. E. Marbella, Y. Qi and M. T. McDowell, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2411–2420 CrossRef CAS .
J. Holoubek, M. Yu, S. Yu, M. Li, Z. Wu, D. Xia, P. Bhaladhare, M. S. Gonzalez, T. A. Pascal, P. Liu and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1438–1447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Sun, Y. Shi, F. Qi, X. Gao, H. Yang, H. Cheng and F. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Bao, Y. Cui, E. J. Dufek, J. B. Goodenough, P. Khalifah, Q. Li, B. Y. Liaw, P. Liu, A. Manthiram, Y. S. Meng, V. R. Subramanian, M. F. Toney, V. V. Viswanathan, M. S. Whittingham, J. Xiao, W. Xu, J. Yang, X. Yang and J. Zhang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 180–186 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Thenuwara, P. P. Shetty and M. T. McDowell, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 8664–8672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, T. Rojas, K. Wang, S. Liu, D. Wang, T. Chen, H. Wang, A. T. Ngo and D. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 534–542 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, G. Wang, J. Ju, Y. Zhao, W. Kang, N. Deng and B. Cheng, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 320–355 CrossRef .
F. Wu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1569–1614 RSC .
Z. Wang, X. Shen, S. Li, Y. Wu, T. Yang, J. Liu, T. Qian and C. Yan, J. Energy Chem., 2022, 64, 496–502 CrossRef .
Y. Feng, G. Wang, L. Wang, J. Ju, W. Kang, N. Deng and B. Cheng, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 851, 156859 CrossRef CAS .
C. Fan, Y. Zheng, X. Zhang, Y. Shi, S. Liu, H. Wang, X. Wu, H. Sun and J. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703638 CrossRef .
Z. Jiang, Z. Zeng, X. Liang, L. Yang, W. Hu, C. Zhang, Z. Han, J. Feng and J. Xie, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2005991 CrossRef .
G. Cai, J. Holoubek, D. Xia, M. Li, Y. Yin, X. Xing, P. Liu and Z. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 9114–9117 RSC .
J. Holoubek, H. Liu, Z. Wu, Y. Yin, X. Xing, G. Cai, S. Yu, H. Zhou, T. A. Pascal, Z. Chen and P. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 303–313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Ji, L. Zhou, X. Shen, L. Gao, J. Liu, T. Yang, T. Qian and C. Yan, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 13847–13856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, R. Fang, D. Xie, W. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Xia, X. Wang, X. Xia and J. Tu, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 196–208 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, Y. Zhao and X. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2921–3004 RSC .
F. Wu and Y. Yu, Joule, 2018, 2, 815–817 CrossRef .
T. Liu, J. P. Vivek, E. Zhao, J. Lei, N. Garcia-Araez and C. P. Grey, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6558–6625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Song, S. Wang, X. Song, J. Wang, K. Jiang, S. Huang, M. Han, J. Xu, P. He, K. Chen and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1205–1211 RSC .
B. Liu, W. Xu, J. Zheng, P. Yan, E. D. Walter, N. Isern, M. E. Bowden, M. H. Engelhard, S. T. Kim, J. Read, B. D. Adams, X. Li, J. Cho, C. Wang and J. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2525–2530 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, L. Wang, Y. Zhao, S. Li, X. Fu, B. Wang and H. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001619 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Kohlmeyer, G. A. Horrocks, A. J. Blake, Z. Yu, B. Maruyama, H. Huang and M. F. Durstock, Nano Energy, 2019, 64, 103927 CrossRef CAS .
J. Piątek, S. Afyon, T. M. Budnyak, S. Budnyk, M. H. Sipponen and A. Slabon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2003456 CrossRef .
M. Wu, Y. Li, X. Liu, S. Yang, J. Ma and S. Dou, SmartMat, 2020, 2, 5–11 CrossRef .
B. H. P. Ramadass, R. White and B. N. Popov, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 614–620 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Ni, K. Zhang, F. Cheng and J. Chen, Mater. Today, 2021, 43, 132–165 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, J. Lee, J. W. Jung, J. Park, T. Jang, H. S. Kim, J. S. Nam, H. Lim, K. R. Yoon, W. H. Ryu, I. D. Kim and H. R. Byon, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14549–14578 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Han, K. Liu, M. Wang, K. Wang, L. Fang, H. Chen, J. Zhou and X. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704195 CrossRef .
S. Ge, Y. Leng, T. Liu, R. S. Longchamps, X. Yang, Y. Gao, D. Wang, D. Wang and C. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay7633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yamagiwa, D. Morita, N. Yabuuchi, T. Tanaka, M. Fukunishi, T. Taki, H. Watanabe, T. Otsuka, T. Yano, J.-Y. Son, Y. Cui, H. Oji and S. Komaba, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 160, 347–356 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, J. Xiong, X. Shi, B. Zhu, Y. Cheng, H. Zhao and Y. Xia, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 38, 599–608 CrossRef .
L. Hu, Z. Zhang and K. Amine, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 35, 76–79 CrossRef CAS .
M. Genovese, A. J. Louli, R. Weber, C. Martin, T. Taskovic and J. R. Dahn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, 3342–3347 CrossRef .
Z. Geng, J. Lu, Q. Li, J. Qiu, Y. Wang, J. Peng, J. Huang, W. Li, X. Yu and H. Li, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 23, 646–652 CrossRef .
X. Chen, W. Xu, M. H. Engelhard, J. Zheng, Y. Zhang, F. Ding, J. Qian and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2346 RSC .
S. Zhang, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1423–1428 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Yang, J. Yao, Z. Chen, C. Lu, X. Du, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang and G. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9785–9788 RSC .
Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Yang, X. Cao, X. Zhu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 15572–15581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, M. Salari, D. Jiang, J. Chapman Varela, B. Anasori, D. J. Wesolowski, S. Dai, M. W. Grinstaff and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 787–808 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lin, R. Kavian, Y. Lu, Q. Hu, Y. Shao-Horn and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 6601–6606 RSC .
Y. Qiao, Y. He, K. Jiang, Y. Liu, X. Li, M. Jia, S. Guo and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802322 CrossRef .
C. Yang, J. Chen, T. Qing, X. Fan, W. Sun, A. V. Cresce, M. S. Ding, O. Borodin, J. Vatamanu, M. A. Schroeder, N. Eidson, C. Wang and K. Xu, Joule, 2017, 1, 122–132 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ahmed, M. M. Rahman, S. Chandra Sutradhar, N. S. Lopa, T. Ryu, S. Yoon, I. Choi, S. Lee and W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 709–716 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, B. Song and A. Manthiram, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3006–3059 RSC .
A. Manthiram and H. Y. Asl, Science, 2020, 369, 140–141 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xu, Z. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Cui and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4092–4123 RSC .
T. Waldmann, B.-I. Hogg and M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 107–124 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Tapesh Joshi, Gleb Yushin and Thomas F. Fuller, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1915–A1921 CrossRef .
S. Solchenbach, G. Hong, A. T. S. Freiberg, R. Jung and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A3304–A3312 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, Y. Xiao, S. Dou, Y. Kang and S. Chou, eScience, 2021, 1, 13–27 CrossRef .
J. U. Choi, N. Voronina, Y. K. Sun and S. T. Myung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2002027 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Kong, P. Ping, Q. Wang and J. Sun, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, 1697–1704 CrossRef .
C. W. Park, J. H. Lee, J. K. Seo, W. Y. Jo, D. Whang, S. M. Hwang and Y. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 2145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, Z. Chen, H.-J. Noh, D.-J. Lee, H.-G. Jung, Y. Ren, S. Wang, C. S. Yoon, S.-T. Myung and K. Amine, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 942–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Shi, J. Liang, Y. Yin, J. Zhang, X. Yu and Y. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801751 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Liu, P. Oh, X. Liu, S. Myeong, W. Cho and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500274 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, C. Xie, R. Ruffo, H. Peng, D. K. Kim and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4109–4114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, M. Jeong and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1623–1629 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, J. Zhou, M. Bai, W. Wu, S. Li and Y. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13364–13371 RSC .
D. D. MacNeil, Z. Lu, Z. Chen and J. R. Dahn, J. Power Sources, 2002, 108, 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zaghib, J. Dubé, A. Dallaire, K. Galoustov, A. Guerfi, M. Ramanathan, A. Benmayza, J. Prakash, A. Mauger and C. M. Julien, J. Power Sources, 2012, 219, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, Y. Yao, W. Cai, L. Xu, S. Kaskel, H. S. Park and J. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 49, 335–338 CrossRef .
H. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2004, 128, 61–66 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, I. Belharouak, Y. K. Sun and K. Amine, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 959–969 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yi, Y. Xie, Y. Zhu, R. Zhu and H. Shen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 448–454 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, W. Zuo, Y. Cai, S. Chen, S. Zhang and J. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4938–4944 RSC .
H. Yang, M. Munisamy, M. T. Kwon, W. Kang and S. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 42781–42789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Fu, A. Xu, Y. Song, J. Ju, H. Sun, Y. Yan and S. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 387, 138461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, X. Rui, G. Long, W. Chen, Q. Yan and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7354–7358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Zeng, X. Lin, C. Xu, X. Xu and Y. Luo, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 4594–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yuan, K. Wen, D. Chen, Y. Liu, Y. Dong, C. Feng, Y. Han, J. Han, Y. Zhang, C. Xia, A. Sun and W. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101420 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, S. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2017, 4, 917–933 CrossRef CAS .
M. Su, G. Huang, S. Wang, Y. Wang and H. Wang, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1131–1156 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, R. He, M. Li, M. O. L. Chee, P. Dong and J. Lu, Mater. Today, 2020, 41, 143–155 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X. Shen, X. Wang, L. Peng, T. Hu, P. Zhang and J. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2020, 477, 228680 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, L. Sheng, L. Wang, H. Xu and X. He, Electrochem. Commun., 2021, 124, 106948 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Q. Hu, S. Guo, L. Yu and X. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2008088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Xiao, X. Cao and J. Liu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 13312–13348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, G. V. Zhuang, J. L. Allen, U. Lee, S. Zhang, P. N. Ross, Jr. and T. R. Jow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7708–7719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Huang, A. Pei, Y. Li, F. Shi, X. Yu and Y. Cui, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 664–670 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zheng, J. Xiong, B. Zhu, X. Shi, Y. Cheng, H. Zhao and Y. Xia, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9307–9318 RSC .
Q. Zhou, S. Dong, Z. Lv, G. Xu, L. Huang, Q. Wang, Z. Cui and G. Cui, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 10, 1903441 CrossRef .
M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kalaga, H. Gullapalli, G. Babu, A. L. M. Reddy and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600218 CrossRef .
J. Hwang, H. Okada, R. Haraguchi, S. Tawa, K. Matsumoto and R. Hagiwara, J. Power Sources, 2020, 453, 227911 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kurita, J. Lu, M. Yaegashi, Y. Yamada, S.-i. Nishimura, T. Tanaka, T. Uzumaki and A. Yamada, J. Power Sources, 2012, 214, 166–170 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, M. H. Engelhard, D. Mei, S. Jiao, B. J. Polzin, J. Zhang and W. Xu, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17012 CrossRef CAS .
T. Dong, J. Zhang, G. Xu, J. Chai, H. Du, L. Wang, H. Wen, X. Zang, A. Du, Q. Jia, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1197–1203 RSC .
D. Yu, X. Pan, J. E. Bostwick, C. J. Zanelotti, L. Mu, R. H. Colby, F. Lin and L. A. Madsen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2003559 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, A. M. Nolan, J. Lu, J. Wang, X. Yu, Y. Mo, L. Chen, X. Huang and H. Li, Joule, 2020, 4, 812–821 CrossRef CAS .
F. Han, A. S. Westover, J. Yue, X. Fan, F. Wang, M. Chi, D. N. Leonard, N. J. Dudney, H. Wang and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 187–196 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fu, M. Wan, B. Zhang, Y. Yuan, Y. Jin, W. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Li, L. Wang, J. Jiang, J. Lu and Y. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2000952 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wang, M. Yang, G. Zou, D. Liu and Q. Peng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhao, X. Li, X. Chen, B. Li, S. Kaskel, Q. Zhang and J. Huang, eScience, 2021, 1, 44–52 CrossRef .
D. Deng, F. Xue, C. Bai, J. Lei, R. Yuan, M. Zheng and Q. Dong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 11120–11129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, C. Guo, J. Chen, A. Naveed, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 791–795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, J. Zhang, C. Wang, R. Hu, X. Du, B. Tang, H. Qu, H. Wu, X. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Yang and G. Cui, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 51, 154–160 CrossRef .
W. Yan, J. Wei, T. Chen, L. Duan, L. Wang, X. Xue, R. Chen, W. Kong, H. Lin, C. Li and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105510 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Feng, G. Wang, W. Kang, N. Deng and B. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 365, 137344 CrossRef CAS .
X. Luo, X. Lu, X. Chen, Y. Chen, C. Song, C. Yu, N. Wang, D. Su, C. Wang, X. Gao, G. Wang and L. Cui, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14788–14798 RSC .
Z. Zhou, T. Zhao, X. Lu, H. Cao, X. Zha and Z. Zhou, J. Power Sources, 2018, 396, 542–550 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wang, L. Zhu, X. Chen, Q. Ma, L. Wang, X. Wang and W. Yan, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 411, 128540 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lan, H. Zhang, J. Fan, Q. Xu, H. Li and Y. Min, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 2734–2744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhao, C. Ma, Z. Yang, G. Chen, L. Wang, H. Yue, D. Zhang and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 1212–1220 RSC .
H. Li, Q. Jin, D. Li, X. Huan, Y. Liu, G. Feng, J. Zhao, W. Yang, Z. Wu, B. Zhong, X. Guo and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 22971–22980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Gao, G. Zhu, H. Chen, S. Chen, X. Wang, G. Wu and Y. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 248–259 CrossRef .
K. Chen, D. Yang, G. Huang and X. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 632–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Kwak, Rosy, D. Sharon, C. Xia, H. Kim, L. R. Johnson, P. G. Bruce, L. F. Nazar, Y. K. Sun, A. A. Frimer, M. Noked, S. A. Freunberger and D. Aurbach, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 6626–6683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yi, Y. Liu, Y. Qiao, P. He and H. Zhou, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1378–1384 CrossRef CAS .
V. Giordani, D. Tozier, H. Tan, C. M. Burke, B. M. Gallant, J. Uddin, J. R. Greer, B. D. McCloskey, G. V. Chase and D. Addison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2656–2663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xia, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Science, 2018, 361, 777–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, H. Li, H. Sun, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, M. Liao, X. Sun and H. Peng, Small, 2018, 14, 1703454 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Fan, Y. Zhang, Q. Xu, J. Wang, L. Lei, Y. Sun and P. D. Lund, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 21, 457–463 CrossRef .
H. Liu, Z. Chen, L. Zhou, H. Man, Q. Zeng, K. Pei, G. Chen, Q. Wang, Y. Song, X. Li, Y. Zhou, F. Fang, J. Liu, D. Sun and R. Che, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 41, 703–714 CrossRef .
Z. Song, K. Feng, H. Zhang, P. Guo, L. Jiang, Q. Wang, H. Zhang and X. Li, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104175 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Jung, M. W. Jang, J. Hassoun, Y. K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 516 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, Q. Li, M. H. Engelhard, Y. He, X. Zhang, D. Mei, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21496–21505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ren, X. Zhang, Z. Shadike, L. Zou, H. Jia, X. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, B. E. Matthews, C. Wang, B. W. Arey, X. Q. Yang, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2004898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, L. Zou, Y. Xu, X. Cao, M. H. Engelhard, B. E. Matthews, L. Zhong, H. Wu, H. Jia, X. Ren, P. Gao, Z. Chen, Y. Qin, C. Kompella, B. W. Arey, J. Li, D. Wang, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Banis, A. Lushington, X. Yang, Q. Sun, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, Q. Li, B. Wang, W. Xiao, C. Wang, M. Li, J. Liang, R. Li, Y. Hu, L. Goncharova, H. Zhang, T. K. Sham and X. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4509 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Ma, Y. Feng, X. Liu, Y. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Chen, C. Yan and W. Wei, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 32, 46–54 CrossRef .
W. Li, H. Yao, K. Yan, G. Zheng, Z. Liang, Y. M. Chiang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xiang, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, L. Yuan, X. Liu, Z. Cheng, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Shen, J. Jiang and Y. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 3510–3521 RSC .
X. Fan, X. Ji, L. Chen, J. Chen, T. Deng, F. Han, J. Yue, N. Piao, R. Wang, X. Zhou, X. Xiao, L. Chen and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 882–890 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Yin, D. M. Davies, M. Zhang, M. Mayer, Y. Zhang, E. S. Sablina, S. Wang, J. Z. Lee, O. Borodin, C. S. Rustomji and Y. S. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2209–2219 RSC .
L. Peng, H. Ren, J. Zhang, S. Chen, C. Yu, X. Miao, Z. Zhang, Z. He, M. Yu, L. Zhang, S. Cheng and J. Xie, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 43, 53–61 CrossRef .
S. Wang, H. Song, X. Song, T. Zhu, Y. Ye, J. Chen, L. Yu, J. Xu and K. Chen, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 39, 139–145 CrossRef .
J. Huang, L. Albero Blanquer, J. Bonefacino, E. R. Logan, D. Alves Dalla Corte, C. Delacourt, B. M. Gallant, S. T. Boles, J. R. Dahn, H.-Y. Tam and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 674–683 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hao, J. Li, S. Park, S. Moura and C. Dames, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 899–906 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, G. Zhang, S. Ge and C. Wang, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci.
U. S. A., 2018, 115, 7266–7271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, T. Liu and C. Wang, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 176–185 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xu, J. Lee, D. Kwon, L. Kong and M. Pecht, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2021, 150, 111437 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. McKerracher, J. Guzman-Guemez, R. G. A. Wills, S. M. Sharkh and D. Kramer, Adv. Energy Sustainability Res., 2021, 2, 2000059 CrossRef .
G. Offer, A. Hales, L. Diaz and M. Marzook, Nature, 2020, 582, 485–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Z. Wei, W. He and J. Zhao, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 150, 304–330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Huo, S. Chen, W. Cai and S. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102347 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, H. Hua, P. Lai and J. Zhao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101775 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, D. Zhan, X. Tan, P. Lyu and J. Rao, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2021, 195, 117088 CrossRef .
P. Dechent, A. Epp, D. Jöst, Y. Preger, P. M. Attia, W. Li and D. U. Sauer, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2351–2355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, H. Wang, Z. Lin and M. Ouyang, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 249, 119403 CrossRef .
W. Li, E. M. Erickson and A. Manthiram, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 26–34 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mao, J. Wang and J. Li, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2018, 137, 356–367 CrossRef .
K. Liu, J. Wang, T. Yamamoto and T. Morikawa, Appl. Energy, 2018, 227, 324–331 CrossRef .
Z. Cano, D. Banham, S. Ye, A. Hintennach, J. Lu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 279–289 CrossRef .
X. Yang, T. Liu, Y. Gao, S. Ge, Y. Leng, D. Wang and C. Wang, Joule, 2019, 3, 3002–3019 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, S. Ge, N. Wu, Y. Mao, F. Sun and C. Wang, IEEE Electrif. Mag., 2019, 7, 12–21 Search PubMed .
X. Judez, G. Eshetu, C. Li, L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, H. Zhang and M. Armand, Joule, 2018, 2, 2208–2224 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 911–914 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vaalma, D. Buchholz, M. Weil and S. Passerini, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18013 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Yang Feng
	Yang Feng received his MS degree in 2021 from the School of Textile Science and Engineering at Tiangong University, Tianjin, China. Currently, he is a PhD student in Prof. Kai Zhang's group with the College of Chemistry at Nankai University, Tianjin, China. His current research focuses on synthesis and characterization of advanced materials for wide temperature rechargeable lithium-based batteries.

Limin Zhou
	Limin Zhou received her PhD in 2019 from the Department of Materials Science and Engineering at Wuhan University of Technology and her MS degree from the College of Chemistry from Nankai University in 2015. Then, she jointed Professor Yong-Mook Kang's group as a postdoctoral researcher at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering in Korea University. Her current research focuses on synthesis and characterization of advanced materials for rechargeable batteries.

Kai Zhang
	Kai Zhang was born in Tianjin, China, in 1987 and earned his BS in science in 2010 from the College of Chemistry at Nankai University (China). In 2015, he received his PhD in engineering from Nankai University under the supervision of Professor Jun Chen. Then, he joined the group of Professor Yong-Mook Kang as a post-doc in the Department of Energy and Materials Engineering in Dongguk University-Seoul (Korea). Currently, he is a professor at Nankai University. He has been selected as a member of the Young Elite Scientist Sponsorship Program funded by CAST. His research focuses on advanced battery materials and wide-temperature electrochemical energy-storage devices.

Jun Chen
	Jun Chen received his BS and MS degrees from Nankai University in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and his PhD degree from the University of Wollongong (Australia) in 1999. He held a NEDO fellowship in the National Institute of AIST Kansai Center (Japan) from 1999 to 2002. Then he joined Nankai University as a Full Professor in 2002. He is currently an academician of the Chinese Academy of Sciences, a fellow of The World Academy of Sciences (TWAS), the Director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), and the Vice President of Nankai University. His research focuses mainly on nanomaterials chemistry and high-energy batteries. He is the founding Editor-in-Chief of eScience.

Broader context
With ever-increasing energy demands and environmental concerns, there is an urgent need for renewable energy power generation. Because of the intermittency and randomness of renewable energy, electrochemical energy storage (EES) devices play a vital role in shifting electricity load from peak periods to off-peak ones. Among various EES devices, rechargeable lithium batteries (RLBs), including lithium-ion and lithium-metal systems, are well-known and widely used owing to their high energy density and environmental friendliness. However, most of the RLBs are harnessed only in mild environments. Operating at low temperature (LT, below 0 °C) or high temperature (HT, above 60 °C) will sharply reduce battery performance. Building RLBs for wide-temperature applications is highly demanding for various specific applications which include, but are not limited to, electric vehicles, renewable energy storage, national defence, and polar/high-altitude/deep-sea explorations. In this review, we focus on the working mechanism and design methods of wide-temperature RLBs, especially in material construction, fundamental structure–effectiveness relationships, system compatibility, and performance improvement strategies. It also provides prospects for high-energy-dense RLBs operating in wide-temperature-differential environments.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Stages in the development of RLBs for achieving high volumetric and gravimetric energy densities. (b) Global temperature distribution on January 14, 2022. Image from Climate Reanalyzer, Climate Change Institute, University of Maine, USA. (c) The number of publications on “high/low-temperature lithium batteries”, up to December 2021. Database: Web of Science. (d) A schematic diagram of RLBs with extreme temperature tolerance and reliable safety.	 
k = Ae−Ea/RT	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  (a) The relationship between the reaction constant and temperature based on the Arrhenius equation. (b) The relationship between cell electromotive force and temperature. (c) Schematic description of Li+ migration from the anode to cathode during the discharge process.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  (a) The effects of temperature and current density on dendrite growth. Data extracted from ref. 27. (b) Voltage vs. time at different temperatures. Data extracted from ref. 29. (c) Energy barriers of three types of electrolytes at different temperatures. Data extracted from ref. 30. (d) Schematic of the main challenges of RLBs at LT.	 
	(4)
	(5)
Tsolution = Twater − ΔTf = Kf·m	(6)

 	Fig. 4  (a) The electrochemical potentials of the cathode (μa) and anode (μc) are related to temperature. (b) Schematic illustration of the CEI (SEI) energy level shift to reach a new steady state as the chemical potential of the cathode (anode) shifts with temperature. Data deduced from ref. 10. (c) Comparison of the theoretical and experimental values of SEI thickness growth rates at different temperatures (t = 60 °C, κ0 = 4.5 ps m−1; t = 15 °C, κ0 = 0.3 ps m−1). Data deduced from ref. 39. (d) Schematic of the main challenges of RLBs at HT.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustrations of the solvation structure. Data deduced from ref. 49. (b) Schematic illustrations of the changes in commercial binary and high-entropy electrolytes at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.50 Copyright 2020, Chinese Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustrations of the solvation structures of the PC and PC-DEC electrolyte. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Cycling performance of LCO with various electrolytes at different temperatures. (b) Comparison of resistances from electrolytes as a function of temperature. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) The ionic conductivity as a function of time of a 1 M Li2SO4 aqueous electrolyte solution with ETG additive. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration describing the fabrication electrolytic conductivity and pressure with the temperature of the liquefied gas electrolytes. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Schematic illustration of the solvation mechanism and photos of 0.1 M LiTFSI in FM (left) and 0.3 M LiTFSI and 0.3 M THF in FM (right). (f) The CE of Li plating and stripping at various temperatures in the liquefied gas electrolyte. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram of main electrolyte modification strategies at LT.	 

 	Fig. 8  The temperature behaviour of several typical cathode materials. (a–d) Low and ambient temperature performance. (e–l) Schematic structures of the corresponding cathode materials. (a, e and i) Layered LiCoO2 (LCO). (b, f and j) Layered LiNi1/3Mn1/3Co1/3O2 (NCM). (c, g and k) Spinel LiMn2O4 (LMO). (d, h and l) Olivine-type LiFePO4 (LFP). The data of (a–d) were deduced from ref. 65, 67, 72 and 75.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of main processes occurring with ion/electron transfer during working and the synergistic effects of coating Li3BO3. (b) TEM image of the 3 wt% LBO-coated particles. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.68 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic illustration of the reaction mechanism of the preparation of a polyphenylene/NCM622 composite. (d) Electrochemical performance of the polyphenylene/NCM622 cathode at 0.5C and 20 °C. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image of the 10 nm LATP-coated particles. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Schematic illustration of lowering the surface energy barrier by modulating surface chemistry. (c) EELS mapping of Mn and Ni for LMO and LMO-Ni. (d) Simulation of the reaction rates of LMO and LMO-Ni at different temperatures. (e) Electrochemical performance of LMO and LMO-Ni cathodes at 0.2C and 20 °C. (b–e) Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Schematic illustration of the prepared LFP@C/CNT nanocomposite and corresponding HRTEM images. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of carbon-coated LVP with ion/electron transport channels. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2014, Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM images of V2O5 nanofibres. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2005, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  The significant challenges of graphite anodes at LT. (a) The effects of a thick SEI film on the interface resistance and the Li plating process. (b) The energy diagram of the corresponding charging process of graphite. (c) The influence of temperature on the apparent Li+ chemical diffusion coefficient (d) on graphite. Data deduced from ref. 92. (d) The cycle performance of the CG-1000 anode at −40 °C. Data deduced from ref. 93. (e) Scheme of the uneven dendritic growth on graphite. (f) Scheme of the correlation of dendrites on the anode surface with temperature.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) The secondary particle aggregates with different particle sizes. (b) The charge and discharge curves of the LTO-based half cells at 1C and −20 °C. Data deduced from ref. 95. (c) Schematic presentation of the peapod-like composite and its electron/ion-transfer pathways. (d) TEM image of the peapod-like composite anode. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Schematic representation of the hierarchically porous LTO–TiO2 (HP LTO–TO) microspheres and the HRTEM images of HP LTO–TO. (f) Rate performance of the HP LTO–TO microspheres at −20 °C. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagram of main electrode optimization strategies at LT.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic diagrams of Li deposition/stripping morphologies and SEI compositions at different temperatures. (b) SEM images of electrodeposited Li metal on Cu substrates with 0.2 mA cm−2 in the DOL/DME electrolyte at 20 and −60 °C. (c) High-resolution F 1s XPS spectra of the SEI. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.115 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of Li deposition on a Cu or EAM Cu substrate at LT, associated with deposition morphology and SEI composition. (e) SEM images of Li deposition on a Cu or EAM Cu substrate at −15 °C. (f) Cycling performance of a Li//LCO cell with an EAM Cu host at the temperatures switched between −15 and 25 °C. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.116 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic diagram of Li deposition/stripping morphology at LT. (a) Strong solvent–ion interaction resulting in desolvation and dendritic Li deposition morphologies. (b) Weak solvent–ion interaction resulting in a uniform deposition.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic of a typical LSB and the main challenges. (b) The compendium of LIPS evolution in the LSB. (c) Schematic diagram of reaction energy barriers at different temperatures. (d–k) Strategies to improve the LT performance of LSBs, (d–f) catalytic strategy, and (g–k) optimizing the Li+ coordination structure. (d) Schematic of the regulation process of MoSe2 for LIPS conversion. (e) The performance of LSBs with RGO@MoSe2 NSS at 0 and −25 °C for 0.1C. (d and e) Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) HAADF-STEM images of Ni@C/graphene (left) and atomic nickel characterization, some of which are circled (right). Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g) The significance of 1 M LiFSI DOL/DME and 1 M LiFSI DEE structures for ultra-low Li plating. (h) Li deposition profiles with different electrolytes at 0.5 mA cm−2. (i) Photographs of Cu current collectors with the Li deposition in different electrolytes and the corresponding SEM images at −60 °C. (j) The charge/discharge profiles of a Li//span full-cell at 0.1C and −60 °C. (k) The cycling performance of 1 M LiFSI DEE at −60 °C. (g–k) Reproduced with permission.125 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Challenges facing non-aqueous LABs. (b) High voltage hysteresis. (c) The slow kinetics of Li2O2 oxidation. (d–f) Light-assisted strategy. (d) Schematic illustration of the solar photothermal ASS-LAB. (e) IR image of the cathode coated on the LAGP with sunlight irradiation (Xe-lamp). (f) Cycle performance of ASS-LABs with Xe-lamp light irradiation at −73 °C (2.0–4.2 V and capacity limitation of 1000 mA h g−1). (d–f) Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g–i) Catalyst/electrolyte collaborative design strategy. Schematic diagrams of discharge (g) and charge (h) products based on the reaction 4Li + 3Co2 + 4e− ↔ 2Li2Co3 + C. (i) XRD patterns of the fresh Li and that cycled ten times at 0, −30, and −60 °C. (g–i) Reproduced with permission.133 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  Optical images of (a) fresh Al foil and Al foils after testing at 60 °C in 1 M LiTFSI based, 1 M LiTFSI–LiBOB-based, and 1 M LiPF6-based electrolytes (from left to right). Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Cycling performance of graphite//LCO full cells (1C, 2.75–4.2 V) with different electrolytes at 90 °C. Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the mechanism of molecular sieves (3 Å zeolite) sieving out excess solvent molecules in the solvation sheath. (d) Operando micro-Raman technology for characterizing the configuration of electrolyte inside zeolite channels. (e) 3D Raman spectra of electrolyte inside zeolite channels. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic diagram of a hybrid electrolyte-based battery structure. Cycling performance of an assembled full-cell (g) and (h) pouch cell. (f–h) Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 
	(7)

 	Fig. 19  Challenges of the electrodes at HT. Cathode particle (a) and carbon anode surface (b). Images adapted from ref. 159.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of graphene coating on Ni-rich oxide particles. (b) The bonding configuration between graphene and Ni-rich oxide. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2021, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of the oxide particle with decreasing and increasing Ni and Mn concentration. (d) The discharge capacity of NCM-based full cells at RT and HT (3.0–4.2 V and 1C). (c and d) Reproduced with permission.166 Copyright 2012, Nature Publishing Group. (e) The energy dispersive spectral (EDS) maps of the coating oxide particles. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the stabilization effect of the Li–Mg–PO4 surface modification. (g) Cycling performance of the bare and surface coated cathodes at 60 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (h) Cycling performance for different cathode materials in coin-type cells at 60 °C. (i) Cycling performance for pouch-type cells containing BLMO (right) and APLMO (left) after 200 cycles at 60 °C. (h and i) Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (j) Cycling performance for the Al3+, F−, and PO43− co-doped LMO and the pristine LMO electrodes in coin-type cells at 1C and 55 °C. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) DSC spectra of overcharged layered, spinel and olivine cathodes. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2012, Elsevier. (b) DSC data of LMO and LCO (solid lines: LMO, dashed lines: LCO) charged to different indicated voltages. Duplicate scans are from a nominally identical sample. (c) Analysis of DSC data (LFP: LiFePO4; LNCMO: LiNi0.375Co0.25Mn0.375O2; LMO: LiMn2O4; LNCO: LiNi0.8Co0.2O2; LNO: LiNiO2; LNO: LiCoO2; T1: onset temperature; T2: peak temperature; h: total evolved heat). (b and c) Data deduced from ref. 172.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Challenges facing the graphite SEI under HT conditions. (b) The charge–discharge profiles of the graphite//NCM523 battery in the first cycle at 25 °C and 60 °C. An EIS test of a graphite//NCM523 battery (c) resting at 25 °C, and (d) 1st and (e) 5th cycles at 25 and 60 °C. (b–e) Data deduced from ref. 174.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic diagram of main electrode, electrolyte and separator optimization strategies under HT conditions.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) The schematic of the SEI formation mechanisms at 90 °C. Data deduced from ref. 143. (b) Cycling performance of Li//LTO cells with the AE electrolyte at 5C and different temperatures (1–3 V). Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Schematic diagram of the formation of the protection layer, thermally responsive behaviour, and the corresponding polymerization mechanisms. (d) Thermal stability test of fully charged Li//LFP pouch cells with EC/DMC electrolyte and PPE at 130 °C. (e) Voltage–time curves of the Li//PPE//LFP pouch cells with EC/DMC electrolyte at 130 °C and PPE at 150 °C. (c–e) Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (f) Schematic diagram of the function of the dual-salt system. (g) Cycling performance of Li//NCM cells with different electrolytes at 60 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.198 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the PMMCPE fabrication process. (b) Schematic diagram of the function of PMMCPE in the Li//LCO cell. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Rate performance of MIC-based Li//LFP cells at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of the thermal runaway process of SSE-based LMBs. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Evolution of the Li content of dendrites in the bulk region of SSEs. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (f) Thermal stability test of the Li5B4/Li and pure Li at different temperatures. (g) Voltage profiles of the Li5B4/Li//Li5B4/Li symmetric cell operating at 200 °C. (f and g) Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic diagram of the LSB with STD (standard carbonate) electrolyte and IFR electrolyte. (b) Cycling performance of LSBs with the different electrolytes at 60 °C. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.207 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the gel-based soft LSB package. (d) SEM image of the prepared gel cathode. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.209 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (e) Schematic diagram of LSB based on the CuNWs–GN/PI/LLZO separator. (f) Thermal stability test of different separators. (g) Digital photo of a LIPS adsorption test. (h) Chemical adsorption of LIPSs and catalytic conversion process. (e–h) Reproduced with permission.44 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Schematic diagram of the LAB with LAGP and molten electrolyte. (b) Gibbs free energy of reactions in Li–air batteries as a function of temperature, indicating the possibility of a four-electron process. (a and b) Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Flexible solid-state LAB based on an HSE while powering a LED lamp. Reproduced with permission.220 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram of the structure and working mechanism of the fibre-shaped LAB. (e) Cycling performance of fibre-shaped LAB with different temperatures. (f) Charge–discharge curves of a fibre-shaped LAB for the 1st, 200th, and 380th cycles with 140 °C. (d–f) Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Cycling performance of coral-shaped LFP/graphene hybrids from −40 to 60 °C. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram of the tri-functional effect towards the LIPSs for a Zn-based host. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagram of the pre-lithiation process. (d) Rate performance of the L5VP battery from −40 to 55 °C. (c and d) Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) TEM image of the LTO particles with carbon bridges. (f) The charge–discharge profiles of the LTO//LNMO battery at different temperatures. (e and f) Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2011, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic diagram of ex situ LDE with some problems and the advantages of in situ PDE electrolytes. (b) Flame retardancy test. (c) Cycling performance of LSBs with different electrolytes from −20 to 50 °C. (a–c) Reproduced with permission.234 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) The electrolyte design strategy of the non-polar solvent. (e) Cycling performance of Li//NCA cells with different electrolytes from −85 to 70 °C. (f) Long-term cycling performance of Li//NCA cells with different electrolytes at −20 °C. (g) The calculated Li+ solvation/desolvation energies with different structures of the LiPF6–EC/DMC and super electrolytes. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagram of the integration of an optical fibre into the large central void (∼1500 μm) of the jelly-roll-type battery. The reflected spectra monitor the physical perturbations of the FBG sensor (caused by temperature, pressure or strain). Reproduced with permission.239 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Schematic diagram of a self-heating battery structure. (c) The evolution of cell voltage and temperature during V = 0.4 V activation (inset) and subsequent 1C discharge at −20 °C. (b and c) Reproduced with permission.13 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Schematic diagram of the shape memory alloy-actuated thermal regulator. (e) Schematic diagram of the principle of opening and closing the temperature control system. Comparison of battery performance with the thermal regulator always on and always off for representative cold (−20 °C, (f)) and hot (45 °C, (g)) ambient temperatures. (d–g) Reproduced with permission.240 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (h) Schematic diagram of the three cooling methods for battery systems includes air cooling, liquid cooling and phase-change material cooling. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Schematic diagram of the relationship between the cruising range of an EV and the ambient temperature based on actual driving conditions (the grey part of the ordinate is the mileage reduction caused by the ambient temperature; the orange part is the mileage reduction caused by the in-vehicle auxiliary equipment). (b) The reality of the EV range. The blue line is the expected average range at the selected temperature for that vehicle. The red and green lines indicate the worst and best range distributions (10th and 90th percentiles). The curve is based on the driving data of the following car models: BMW I3, KIA Soul, Mercedes-Benz B-Class, Nissan Leaf, Tesla Model S, and so on. (a and b) Data deduced from https://www.geotab.com. Schematic diagram of the (c) pouch cell- and (d) battery pack-level gravimetric specific energies and volumetric energy densities of the EVs. (c and d) Data deduced from ref. 242. (e) The comparison between batteries exposed to temperate and hot climates. (f) Battery degradation comparison between the liquid cooling and the passive air cooling. (e and f) Data deduced from https://www.geotab.com. The above data are only used for scientific research studies rather than the comparison of EV brands.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic diagram of the prices of solvents, additives, and lithium salts (based on the Chinese market in the fourth quarter of 2021). (b) The annual global (co-)production of metals from mineral mining. Reproduced with permission.261 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) The prices of the main cathode materials (based on the Chinese market in the fourth quarter of 2021).	 

 	Fig. 33  Schematic diagram of the representative battery components in different temperature zones. Data deduced from ref. 79, 166, 193, 235, 247 and 248.	 

LT RLBs	LVP	Li	1 M LiPF6 in EC/DMC	106/5C, −20 °C	∼99%/5C, −20 °C, 450 cycles	0.026% per cycle/450 cycles/5C/−20 °C	
79


	NCM523	Li	5.0M LiTFSI/LiDFOB in TMS/EA/HFE/FEC	102/1C, −40 °C	∼97.5%/1C, −40 °C, 200 cycles	0.029% per cycle/200 cycles/1C/−40 °C	
248

HT RLBs	NCM (75/10/15)	Graphite	1 M LiPF6 in EC/EMC	232/1C, 55 °C	N/A	0.016% per cycle/1000 cycles/1C/55 °C	
166


	LFP	Li	2.0 M LiTFSI in DOL/DME with AlI3	159/3C, 90 °C	∼99%/3C, 90 °C, 400 cycles	0.015% per cycle/400 cycles/3C/90 °C	
247

WT RLBs	NCA	Li	1.28 M LiFSI in FEC/FEMC/D2 (−85 °C) 0.7 M LiBETI in FEC/DEC/M3 (65 °C)	96/0.3C, −85 °C; 174/0.5C, 65 °C	>99%, −85 °C; >99.4%, 65 °C;	0.037% per cycle/450 cycles/0.3C/−20 °C; 0.231% per cycle/65 cycles/0.5C/60 °C	
235


	LTO	Li	0.8 M LiTFSI/0.2 M LiDFOB in ADN/EC	130/1C, −20 °C; 180/1C, 150 °C	>99%, −20 °C; >99%, 150 °C;	0.049% per cycle/100 cycles/1C/−20 °C; 0.181% per cycle/50 cycles/1C/150 °C	
193


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
