Self-healing polymer design from dynamic B–O bonds to their emerging applications  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2QM01128J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2QM01128J
(Review Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2023, 7, 381-404Self-healing polymer design from dynamic B–O bonds to their emerging applications

        
          
            Jie 
            Zheng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xin Yi 
            Oh†
b, 
      
        
          
            Enyi 
            Ye
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Wai Hon 
            Chooi
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Qiang 
            Zhu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xian Jun 
            Loh
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Zibiao 
            Li
          
          
        
      *abd
aInstitute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2), A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 1 Pesek Road, Jurong Island, 627833, Singapore
bInstitute of Materials Research and Engineering, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), Fusionopolis Way, Innovis, #08-03, Singapore 138634, Singapore. E-mail: lohxj@isce2.a-star.edu.sg; lizb@imre.a-star.edu.sg
cInstitute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology and Research), 62 Biopolis Drive, Proteos, Singapore 138673, Singapore. E-mail: Chooi_Wai_Hon@imcb.a-star.edu.sg
dDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, National University of Singapore, 9 Engineering Drive 1, Singapore 117576, Singapore
Received 
      5th November 2022
    , Accepted 7th December 2022First published on 9th December 2022AbstractRobust healable and reprocessable polymers have attracted increasing attention as viable alternatives to thermosets for increasing the service life of materials and reducing plastic-related waste. Recently, reversible covalent adaptable bonds have been extensively exploited in polymer chemistry for the construction of a myriad of recyclable materials. In this review, we summarize the latest developments related to healable polymers with dynamic B–O bonds, particularly in the form of boronic ester bonds, and their applications in various areas. Due to the robust bond strength, rapid exchange rate, and multiple stimulus-responsiveness of boronic ester bonds, they can deliver a facile platform for designing a wide range of functional healable polymers. Besides, both the fundamental characteristics and real engineering applications including drug delivery, bio-adhesives, tissue engineering, smart sensors, and flexible functional devices are discussed.
Jie Zheng
Jie Zheng obtained her PhD Degree from Nanyang Technological University (NTU). Currently, she is working as a Research Scientist at the Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Her research interests include the design and synthesis of novel structural polymers using living radical polymerization, nano-structured material modification, block copolymer self-assembly, and circular materials and their applications.
Xin Yi Oh
Xin Yi Oh received her PhD in 2022 from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) under the supervision of Prof. Atsushi Goto. Currently, she is working as a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) in Singapore. Her research interests are functional polymer synthesis including degradable polymers and hydrogels.
Wai Hon Chooi
Wai Hon Chooi is currently a Research Fellow at the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology, and Research), Singapore. He received his PhD in Biomedical Engineering from The University of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Barbara Chan in 2016. His scientific interests include biomaterials for tissue engineering, mechanobiology, and in vitro tissue models. His current research interests are primarily focused on the application of functionalized hydrogels for organoid development and spinal cord regeneration.
Xian Jun Loh
Prof. Xian Jun Loh completed his basic and postgraduate studies at the National University of Singapore. A polymer chemist by training, he is the Executive Director at both the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2), A*STAR. He is also the current President and member of the Executive Committee of the Singapore National Institute of Chemistry. As a pioneer in the area of biodegradable thermogels, he is highly knowledgeable in developing these materials for various applications including biomedical, engineering, cosmetics, personal care and food.
Zibiao Li
Zibiao Li obtained his PhD from the National University of Singapore (NUS). Currently, he is working as a Senior Research Scientist at the Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He is the Director of Sustainable Polymers in ISCE2 and holds an adjunct Associate Professor position with NUS. His research interests are focused on biodegradable and functional polymeric materials design, structural properties investigations, and their formulations for healthcare and consumer care applications.
1. Introduction
Thermosets, such as melamine resins, epoxy resins, silicone resins, and urea-formaldehyde, are an important class of polymers used in daily life. Due to the permanent crosslinking structural feature in thermosets, they exhibit robust mechanical strength, excellent thermal stability, and chemical/solvent resistance, making them the material of choice in diverse applications.1–4 However, this attractive structural character compromises their use in applications that require reprocessing, recycling, and damage healing ability. Moreover, these durable materials make waste management challenging, causing severe environmental pollution and economic loss. Thus, the development of robust polymers with recyclability is crucial as alternatives to thermosets.
The employment of self-healable polymers that enable spontaneous recovery from physical damage under suitable conditions represents an appealing and logical strategy to extend the life cycle of materials, diminishing the frequency of their replacement and reducing the environmental impact and economic loss.5–13 Self-healable polymers can be divided into two main classes, namely, extrinsic and intrinsic self-healing materials, depending on their damage-repair mechanisms.5,6 The former category undergoes damage repair via the polymerization of encapsulated reactivated agents. However, this type of self-healing solely permits damage restoration once given that depletion of the healing initiator occurs at the same position. Alternatively, intrinsic self-healing materials have aroused increasing attention because their replicated healing capability originates from the dynamic non-covalent or covalent bonds in the material. Examples of non-covalent bonds are hydrogen bonds, metal–ligand complexation, van der Waals interactions, π–π, ionic, and host–guest interactions. These non-covalent bonds feature reversibility, directionality, and sensitivity and are promising candidates for the construction of self-healable hydrogels, which can be used as injectable bioimplants, artificial shins, and printable biological compounds.5,9,10 By contrast, reversible covalent adaptable reactions involve transesterification, transamination of vinylogous urethanes, silyl ester exchange, oxime exchange, olefin metathesis, dioxaborolane metathesis, etc.1–4,14–16 Due to the stimulus-responsive bond exchange character, the crosslinking structures in covalent adaptable networks can be switched “on” and “off” when a specific stimulus is applied. In the absence of external triggers, the connected networks enable them to demonstrate thermoset-like properties such as good strength and thermostability. Nevertheless, these polymers enable reprocessing and self-repairing under the corresponding stimuli due to the dynamic nature of their networks. Compared to non-covalent bonds, covalent linkages are much stronger and exhibit better compatibility with diverse functionalities, imparting robust mechanical performances and new alluring properties to the resultant polymers, which can be applied in harsh service conditions or unexplored areas. Because of the rapid development of sustainable society, diverse reversible chemical reactions with different external triggers, such as heat, light, reductant, pH, glucose, and humidity, have been investigated, opening unprecedented possibilities to obtain self-repairable polymers via different environmental stimuli, expanding their applications in various domains.1–4
Reversible B–O bonds have gained substantial attention due to their strong bond strength (B–O bond ∼774.04 kJ mol−1vs. C–C bond ∼334.72 kJ mol−1) and high thermodynamic stability, imparting stability and mechanical properties to the final materials.6,7,17,18 Besides, the presence of the tricoordinate, Lewis-acidic boron atom in the B–O bond enables the generation of various organoboron species including boronic acid, boronic ester, boronate ester, borax, benzoxaborole, and boroxine. These versatile B–O bonds enable the construction of a range of functional self-healable polymers with new appealing properties, including flame retardancy, wear resistance, ablation resistance, and abrasion performance, providing various opportunities in applications such as luminescent and optoelectronic materials,19,20 stimulus-responsive materials,21 solid polymer electrolytes for battery applications,22,23 flame retardants,24,25 smart sensors,26,27 lubricant additives,28 solar cells,29 and various energy-related applications.30
Over the past decade, many efforts have been devoted to research on materials containing dynamic B–O bonds with different structural characteristics and functions, greatly contributing to the field of advanced functional materials.6,7,17,18 For instance, A. P. Bapat et al. summarized the research progress on bulk polymers with versatile B–O bonds for the design of healable thermosets to reduce polymer waste;7 M. M. Pérez-Madrigal and co-workers highlighted the recent research on hydrogel biomaterials based on polysaccharide building blocks and dynamic B–O linkages;17 X. Jing and colleagues elaborated the different structural characteristics and functions of polymers based on B–O bonds;18 and J. Park et al. summarized the reported intrinsic self-healing polymeric materials with reversible B–O bonds.6
In this review, the use of reversible B–O bonds as a flexible linkage for the fabrication of functional self-healing polymers and their state-of-art development will be discussed based on theory and bond attributes to explore their properties and new applications (Fig. 1). Special emphasis is given to the basic principles for improving the stability of B–O bonds in boronic ester linkages to endow the consequent polymers with enhanced hydrolytic stability, contributing to the development of next-generation robust healable polymers. Moreover, emerging applications of reversible B–O bond-based polymers in terms of their properties, such as strong mechanical strength, high thermodynamic stability, rapid bond exchange, and multi-stimulus responsiveness, will be discussed. Finally, we present a short perspective on the future research direction of dynamic B–O bond-based functional self-healing polymers.
 Fig. 1  Scheme illustration of polymers based on dynamic B–O linkages and their applications in various research fields. 
2. Nature of dynamic B–O bonds
The boron atom (B) is located in group IIIA of the periodic table, with three valence electrons for creating covalent bonds, resulting in the formation of multiple organoboron compounds, such as borane, boric acid, boronic acid, boronic ester, and boroxine. Among them, boronic acid is regarded as one of the key species due to its ability to construct a range of organoboron compounds containing dynamic B–O bonds.6,7,17,18
Generally, in aqueous medium, boronic acid can exist in the neutral state with a trigonal planar structure (i.e., boronic acid) or coordinate with a hydroxide ion to form a tetragonal geometry (i.e., boronate acid) according to the environmental pH value (Scheme 1). Both boronic acid and boronate acid can connect with diols to form cyclic boronic/boronate esters in the bulk or anhydrous organic solvent (Scheme 1). The reversibility of boronic/boronate ester linkages can be adjusted via multiple approaches. For instance, the reaction equilibrium can be shifted through hydrolysis/dehydration, via transesterification with externally added diols, and by direct metathesis between different boronic/boronate ester compounds. In the presence of diol compounds, boronic/boronate ester compounds can undergo rapid exchange reactions through the transesterification. However, diols normally manifest low thermal stability and are incompatible with many functional groups, resulting in the undesirable crosslinking reaction and formation of permanently polymer networks. By contrast, in the direct boronic/boronate ester metathesis reaction, no additional diol or water is needed, effectively avoiding the side reactions caused by diols. Besides, phenylboronic esters are reported to be sensitive to reactive oxygen species (ROS) (e.g., H2O2).31–33 Polymers with these structures can be degraded in aqueous medium under oxidation triggers, followed by a mechanism of sequential oxidation of aryl boronic ester and self-immolative process through a 1,4-/1,6 elimination reaction.33 This oxidation-sensitive feature can be employed for designing ROS-responsive triggers as bio-molecule-responsive materials, degradable polymers, and ROS-responsive on-demand delivery vehicles.6,7,18 This multiple dynamic controllability character makes boronic/boronate esters a promising platform for designing various dynamic polymer materials.6,7,18
 Scheme 1  Scheme illustration of (left) the reversible generation of boroxines from boronic acids and their metathesis reactions and (right) the reversible generation of boronic esters from boronic acids, and their transesterification and metathesis reactions. 
In addition, through the dehydration of boronic acids, another organoboron species, boroxine, can be achieved. Boroxine is an interesting dynamic motif with a cyclic trimer structure.34 The reversibility of boroxines can be accessed via hydration/dehydration. Accordingly, the dynamic boroxine/boronic acid equilibrium can be simply adjusted by controlling the concentration of water, facilitating the self-repairing of polymeric materials via the readily reversible B–O bonds in the absence of any external energy-demanding activation. In addition to the water responsiveness, the boroxine/boronic acid equilibrium can also be shifted via direct metathesis between different boroxines. Furthermore, due to their unique triangular planar structure, polymers containing boroxine linkages normally possess a high crosslinking density, enabling them to achieve polymer networks with robust mechanical behavior.34,35
3. Materials design with dynamic boronic ester bonds
Boron exhibits a strong electrophilic nature, which can accept electrons from nucleophilic species such as hydroxyl or amine, forming a dynamic covalent bond that functions as a versatile platform for the construction of functional healable material, for example, in materials science, biological field, and stimulus-responsive systems. Nevertheless, designing robust healable polymers with enhanced hydrolytic stability is still a challenge in organoboron-containing polymers given that the most widely used organoboron compounds (i.e., boronic esters and boroxines) suffer from low water/moisture resistance, significantly restricting their real-life applications. To overcome the water/moisture instability of boronic ester linkages, many strategies have been proposed, including the incorporation of a second robust connection into organoboron-containing polymers, employment of Lewis basic compound-coordinated organoboron-species/materials, and exploration of new B–O bonds with enhanced stability, to design polymers with enhanced hydrolytic stability. In this section, we discuss the design of polymers composed of B–O linkages through the development of dynamic boronic ester bonds to establish the general rule for designing other B–O bonds.
3.1. Polymers with boronic ester linkages
Boric acid, boronic acid or borate ions can coordinate with hydroxyl, forming a boronic ester bond. Generally, polymers containing free hydroxyl groups, such as poly vinyl alcohol (PVA) and polysaccharides (i.e., alginate, hyaluronic acid (HA), cellulose, laminarin, gelatin, and chitosan), are used for coordination with boron species to generate crosslinked polymers.17,36,37 Due to the existence of free hydroxyl groups (OHs) or moisture, the networks of the resultant polymers can be re-organized via transesterification between boronic ester linkages and OHs.
For example, in a PVA-based system (Fig. 2a), sodium tetraborate first dissociates into borate ion, boric acid, and sodium ion in water. Borate ion complexes subsequently react with monodiol and didiol, forming different PVA-borate coordination states such as intrachain bound, interchain bound, free, and dangling (Fig. 2a).38 In this system, the B–O coordination allows the formation of crosslinked hydrogels with good mechanical property. Besides, the produced hydrogel contains a substantial amount of water or other organic medium, and also responsive to moisture due to its hydrolytic labile B–O coordination. After hydrolysis, the free diol can coordinate with the boron again, contributing to its dynamic nature. Dei et al. fabricated a peelable organo-aqueous gel as a low-impact cleaning agent for the surfaces of paintings based on the reaction between poly(vinyl alcohol-co-vinyl acetate) (PVA–PVAc, containing ca. 20% VAc and ca. 80% VA groups) random copolymer and aqueous sodium tetraborate (Fig. 2b).39 The partially hydrolysed PVAc was advantageous because it contained large amounts and different types of organic solvents such as alcohols and ketones, which are commonly used as cleaning agents. Subsequently, this system was employed to clean the surface of ancient paintings by removing the brown patina and polyacrylate used for conservation. In another report, Weiss et al. developed a peelable organogel from 40% hydrolyzed PVAc (PVA–PVAc, containing ca. 60% VAc and ca. 40% VA groups) and benzene-1,4-diboronic acid (BDBA) (Fig. 2c). Compared to the previous report, this organogel was formed without the addition of water because of the solubility of BDBA in many organic solvents including dimethyl sulfoxide, dimethylformamide, tetrahydrofuran, 2-ethoxyethanol, and methanol.36 Also, this organogel could be used to clean the surface of portraits containing water-sensitive components, while the organo-aqueous gel in the previous report was not suitable for this task.
 Fig. 2  (a) Dissociation of sodium tetraborate in water and two steps of complexation between borate and PVA chains and schematic picture for the states of borate in PVA/borate hydrogels. Adapted with permission from ref. 38 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Representation of the structure of organo-aqueous gel of PVA–PVAc and borate ion. Adapted with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. (c) Representation of the structure of organogel of PVA–PVAc and BDBA. Adapted with permission from ref. 36 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
Besides PVA, polysaccharide-based polymer matrices have also been extensively used to manufacture dynamic hydrogels containing boronic ester linkages. For instance, Auzély-Velty and co-workers prepared a self-crosslinking hydrogel based on HA and tailored benzoxaborole (BOR) through BOR–HA diol complexation at physiological pH (Fig. 3a). Boronic ester formation is favoured at a pH value in the middle of the pKa of phenylboronic acid and pKa of diol. Therefore, they modified BOR by adding electron-withdrawing groups such as fluorine and nitro on the phenyl ring to reduce its pKa (from pKa = 8–9 to 6.3–7.7).40 The hydrogel could be formed at physiological pH and may be useful for application as an injectable scaffold for tissue engineering and cell therapy at around pH 7.4. In addition to HA, other polysaccharides with hydroxyl groups such as alginate, cellulose, and tannic acid have been used to form dynamic hydrogel networks with boron species. Alginate was reported for use in constructing a boronic ester network with 3-aminophenylboronic acid (Fig. 3b).41,42 Liang and co-workers designed a polyacrylamide and alginate-phenylboronic acid (PBA) hydrogel network and incorporated a moisture-insensitive polymer film polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), forming a bilayer structure to demonstrate hydroactuated functionality.43 With the attachment of an additional functional PDMS film to the hydrogel network, new stimuli (i.e., hydroactuated functionality) were introduced in the bilayer network. In another example, cellulose nanofibrils and tannic acid were added to a PVA–borax system to make the hydrogel more viscoelastic (Fig. 3c).44
 Fig. 3  (a) Self-healing HA hydrogels obtained from single BOR-modified HA conjugates that can self-assemble at physiological pH via dynamic benzoxaborole–HA linkages. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Structure of alginate and schematic illustration of the synthesis of hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Chemical structures of cellulose, tannic acid, and borate ion. Adapted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Boronic ester-containing hydrogel networks can also be synthesized using small molecules containing boronic esters via photo-initiated radical thiol–ene click chemistry. For instance, Sumerlin et al. synthesized a self-healing cross-linked polymer using a divinyl species containing borate ester via thiol–ene chemistry.45 After the disk-like samples had been cut, the borate ester groups were exposed and dissociated into free boronic acid and diol groups upon the addition of 2–3 drops of water to the exposed cut surfaces. Subsequently, self-healing gelation occurred between the free boronic acid and diol groups to zip up the cut surfaces. In another report, Anthanassiou and co-workers also utilized thiol–ene chemistry to design a bio-based reprocessable thermoset, a vitrimer, by thiol–acrylate coupling between epoxidized soybean oil acrylate and a diboronic ester dithiol dynamic crosslinker.46
As mentioned above, the dynamic behavior of boronic esters can be regulated not only by the reaction with externally added diols/water but also via direct metathesis reaction. Leibler and co-workers fabricated vitrimers based on the metathesis of dioxaborolanes (Fig. 4a) using two methods, namely, either by incorporating functional monomers during polymerization or by chemically modifying commercial polymers. In the first method, the authors synthesized poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS) containing pendant dioxaborolanes. In the other approach, dioxaborolane functionality was grafted onto the side chains of high-density polyethylene (HDPE). Later, bis-dioxaborolane was added as a cross-linker for the exchange reaction between dioxaborolanes, forming recyclable and reprocessable vitrimeric materials.47 In this system, the resulting PS vitrimer exhibited enhanced environmental stress-cracking resistance up to 30 MPa. The HDPE vitrimer showed enhanced creep resistance at 80 °C compared with the commercial thermoplastic precursor. In another report, Feng and co-workers fabricated a cholesteric liquid crystal elastomer (CLCE) containing a dioxaborolane network via thiol–ene chemistry (Fig. 4b).48 CLCE has a self-organized supramolecular helical periodic structure, which can selectively reflect circularly polarized light. Incorporating dynamic boronic ester bond in the network, CLCE was reversibly and dynamically tuned across the entire visible spectrum by mechanical stretching at room temperature. The color changed continuously from red to blue upon mechanical stretching and the entire process was fully reversible with no evident delay between mechanical relaxation and color recovery. Yang et al. prepared polyethylene wax vitrimer (PEWV) through the dioxaborolane exchange reaction for thermal interface materials (TIMs) with leakage-proof and high-energy-storage ability. Polyethylene wax was grafted with dioxaborolane maleimide, and further formed PEWV via the crosslinker bis-dioxaborolane. Due to the heterogeneity of the grafting and cross-linking reaction, PEWV could be phase-separated into a highly cross-linked phase and a slightly cross-linked phase. The high cross-linked phase manifested excellent energy storage performance, while the slightly cross-linked phase provided leakage-proof functionality.49
 Fig. 4  (a) Vitrimers based on the metathesis of dioxaborolanes. (i) General scheme of the metathesis reaction. (ii) Synthesis of copolymers containing pendant dioxaborolanes from functional monomers. (iii) Enhanced environmental stress-cracking resistance of PS vitrimers and enhanced creep resistance at 80 °C of HDPE vitrimer compared with the commercial thermoplastic precursor. Adapted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science (United States). (b) (i) Schematic process of fabricating CLCEs via a facile anisotropic deswelling method, combining two-stage thiol–acrylate Michael addition and photopolymerization reactions. (ii) Molecular structures used for the fabrication of CLCEs. (iii) Photographs of the red-reflecting CLCE film being mechanically stretched. Adapted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
3.2. Polymers with multitype dynamic exchange bonds
Due to the water instability feature of boronic ester bonds, the corresponding polymers generally suffer from relatively low mechanical behavior. An effective strategy to increase the mechanical strength of boronic ester-based polymers is to introduce another linkage in the original network to generate dual networks (DNs). In this system, the two linkages complement each other to ensure the integrity of the networks under external forces, thereby providing materials with reinforced mechanical strength, toughness, and malleability. In addition to boronic ester bonds, other chemical interactions such as hydrogen bonding,50–53 ionic interaction,54–57 and host guide effect58 are widely applied to combine high stretchability and strength with good self-healing capacity in a single material.5
As an example of using hydrogen bonding in DNs, Jiang et al. reported the preparation of an ultrafast self-healing DN hydrogel, consisting of a chemically crosslinked hydrogen bond-associated agarose gel for high tensile strength and a dynamic borate bond-associated PVA hydrogel for self-healing ability (Fig. 5a).51 The hydrogen bonding in the PVA–agarose network caused the hydrogel to possess better stability by retaining its original shape after 3 h exposure to a wet environment. Also, the cut PVA–agarose hydrogel healed automatically after contacting for 10 s at room temperature. Lu and co-workers fabricated a hydrogel containing cellulose nanocrystals (CNC) decorated with tannic acid (TA) and silver nanoparticle nanohybrids and PVA via dynamic boronic ester bond crosslinking (Fig. 5b).52 The formation of hydrogen bonding between the catechol groups of TA and PVA chains improved the mechanical and self-healing properties of the hydrogel. This nanocomposite hydrogel showed fast self-healing property after 2 cut halves were attached for 10 min. Xiao et al. developed a composite hydrogel (OCMC-DA/PB) using PVA–borax (PB) gel, dopamine-grafted oxidized carboxymethyl cellulose (OCMC-DA) and cellulose nanofibers (CNF) via multiple dynamic covalent borate-diol linkages and hydrogen bonds. In addition, neomycin (NEO) was incorporated in the hydrogel network as a cross-linker via dynamic cross-linking imine linkages between NEO and OCMC-DA.53 The mechanical strength of the composite hydrogel significantly improved from less than 20 kPa (PB) to around 55 kPa (OCMC-DA/PB). Other examples of using hydrogen bonding to construct DNs containing boronic esters include pyrogallol,59 corn starch,60 and silk fibronin,61 which contain numerous hydroxyl groups that can form hydrogen bonding to further improve the mechanical strength of the hydrogel.
 Fig. 5  (a) Structure of agarose/PVA DN hydrogel. (i) Schematic and architecture of the agarose/PVA DN hydrogel. (ii) Steadiness of PVA network hydrogels and agarose/PVA DN hydrogels. (iii) Strip-shaped agarose/PVA DN hydrogel with 1 wt% of agarose (I), the hydrogel was cut into two pieces (II), the hydrogel could heal automatically after contacting for 10 s at room temperature (III), and the healed hydrogel was stretched (IV). Adapted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic for the dynamic reversible borate ester bonds and hydrogen bonds in hydrogel and demonstration of the self-healing ability of the hydrogel in the ambient environment. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
DNs can also be formed using boronic ester linkages and ionic interactions with ions such as silver, calcium, iron, and zinc. As an example of the use of the silver ion (Ag+), Pei et al. reported the synthesis of a metallo-nucleoside hydrogel by mixing cytidine, boric acid, and silver nitrate (Fig. 6a).54 The diols on cytidine formed borate diester bonds with boric acid, resulting in the formation of cytidine borate diesters. Ag+ provided cross-linking property by forming Ag+-stabilized cytidine–cytidine base pairs. There are reports of DNs based on iron stabilized cross-linking, for example, PVA–borax and thionic acid-iron(III) with multi-walled carbon nanotubes (CNTs)55 (Fig. 6b), and PAA and iron(III) and dynamic tetrahedral borate bonds of PVA and borax.62 Tridentate coordination of iron to carboxylic acids in the above-mentioned examples, which is a highly dynamic and reversible interaction, contributing to a remarkable mechanical and self-healing performance. Boronic ester-based DNs containing calcium ion (Ca2+) interaction have also been widely studied. For instance, Chen et al. fabricated shape-memory supramolecular hydrogels using phenylboronic acid (PBA)-grafted alginate (alginate-PBA), PVA, and Ca2+.56,57 The cross-link of alginate and Ca2+ helped to maintain the permanent shape.57 The permanent shape was deformed into a temporary shape under H+ condition, and the temporary shape was memorized under OH− condition by the formation of boronic ester crosslinks between PVA and boronic acid. Upon treatment with acids or glucose, the boronic ester crosslinks were cleaved and the temporary shape recovered to its original (permanent) shape. Later, the same group designed a triple-shape-memory hydrogel consisting of polyacrylamide, alginate-PBA, PVA, and Ca2+ (Fig. 6c). This resulted in two non-interfering supramolecular interactions of both dynamic PBA–diol ester bonds and the chelation of alginate with Ca2+.63 The original hydrogel was fixed at its temporary shape I in CaCl2 solution and memorized temporary shape II in glycine (Gly)–NaOH solution (pH = 10.6). Through stepwise immersion in Gly solution (pH = 6) and K2CO3 solution, the hydrogel recovered to its original shape. Yang et al. synthesized a quadruple-shape-memory hydrogel using polyacrylamide (PAM), oxidized sodium alginate (OSA), and PVA to induce OSA–Ca2+, PVA–borax, and OSA–PAM supramolecular interactions based on imine, coordination, and borate bonds.64 Guo et al. synthesized a dynamic dual cross-link vitrimer using dithiol-bearing boronic ester cross-linked with epoxidized natural rubber. Besides the dynamic boronic ester bonds, they incorporated metal–ligand coordination bonds using zinc to form noncovalent Zn2+–O coordination bonds (Fig. 6d).65
 Fig. 6  (a) Formation of an injectable metallo-nucleoside hydrogel via borate diesters and cytidine–Ag+–cytidine base pairs self-assembly using electrostatic interactions to create a nanofibrous hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) DNs of PVA–borax and thionic acid-iron(III) with CNTs. Adapted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Shape-memory supramolecular hydrogel using alginate-PBA and PVA. Adapted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) DNs of dynamic boronic ester bonds and noncovalent Zn2+–O coordination bonds. Adapted with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
In the case of host–guest interaction, Gu et al. fabricated a hydrogel using O-carboxymethyl chitosan (O-CMCS), poly(β-cyclodextrin) with diamantine (PCD–CHO), PVA, and CNTs, abbreviated as OPPC. The host–guest complex of PCD–CHO, a cross-linker containing multiple aldehyde groups, was prepared, and then cross-linked with O-CMCS through Schiff base linkages. Borax was used as the second cross-linker to cross-link PVA through dynamic borate ester bonds.58 Besides excellent self-healing and stretchability, the hydrogel contained CNTs, which introduced good electrical conductivity. Therefore, this conductive hydrogel can be applied as a strain sensor with high sensitivity and good stability.
Although non-covalent interactions have been widely applied to for B–O-containing DNs, the incorporation of another covalent bond in these polymers is still desirable, imparting several advantages to the resultant networks, such as remarkably enhanced mechanical behavior, multi-stimulus responsiveness, and new interesting profiles. To date, the combined use of two dynamic covalent bonds in a single network to produce polymers with DNs has attracted great attention in the design of functional materials.1–4 For example, Tao et al. developed a double dynamic network hydrogel comprised of imine and borate ester for drug delivery applications (Fig. 7).66 A single polymeric crosslinker (MF-PEG) containing the above-mentioned two dynamic bonds was synthesized via the four-component Ugi reaction, and the subsequent reaction with PVA provided a hydrogel with self-healing self-adapting properties. Due to the complimentary interpenetrating dynamic network character, the resultant hydrogel exhibited enhanced mechanical behavior and mucoadhesive abilities. Besides good biocompatibility, this hydrogel could deliver an antitumor drug in a mouse model and demonstrated superior performance compared to conventional hydrogels. Additionally, two-covalent bond systems also demonstrate advantages in other B–O bonds, such as boroxine. For example, Raquez and co-workers designed a polyurethane (PU) network that was responsive to humidity and temperature with outstanding healing properties using iminoboronate and boroxine chemistry. The hydrogel network was sensitive to the ambient humidity due to the presence of water-driven dynamic boroxine/boronic acid equilibrium. In ambient moisture condition, the hydrogel became flexible but still reshapable due to the coordination between the imine nitrogen and boron atom, which could prevent the hydrolysis of the iminoboronate linkage. Therefore, the hydrogel could still maintain its physical shape with reshapability.67 Bai et al. reported the preparation of a polybutadiene (PB)-based vitrimer with high strength using imine-coordinated boroxine chemistry. The imine functionality provided toughness (up to 242 MPa) and N-coordinated boroxine contributed to the strength (up to 12 MPa) of the designed material, and its strength was comparatively higher than that of other PB-based polymers. In both reports, the hydrogel could be recycled or reprocessed under mild conditions ((80 °C, 10 bars, 10 min)67 and (70 °C, 4 MPa, 20 min)68). Besides, the introduction of partially permanent crosslinked components in the B–O-containing network could significantly increase the mechanical properties of the resultant polymers. As an example, Chen and colleagues developed an efficient shape-memory hydrogel based on “off-the-shelf” components, including acrylamide (AAm), bis-acrylamide (Bis), PVA, and borax. In this system, the permanent crosslinked part obtained by the chemical reaction of poly(acrylamide)s functioned as the framework of the resulting hydrogels to provide robust mechanical properties. Alternatively, the covalent adaptable network segment created by PVA–borax boronate ester linkages allowed the hydrogel to memorize its shape change and recover to its original structure under specific stimuli, such as acid conditions, or glucose-containing environment.69 In addition, other dynamic covalent bonds can be incorporated in existing dynamic boronic ester systems, namely orthogonal dynamic covalent bonding systems, forming gels with improved mechanical strength and multi-responsiveness.70 For example, Connal and co-workers fabricated hydrogels containing dynamic boronate ester and oxime with improved mechanical strength, exhibiting an increase in storage modulus from 4.6 to 8.5 kPa.71 Zhang et al. prepared a multi-responsive hydrogel with a multifunctional boronic acid-based cross-linker bis(phenylboronic acid carbamoyl) cystamine. Due to the presence of reversible and dynamic boronate ester and disulfide bonds, the hydrogel was sensitive to pH, glucose, and redox.72
 Fig. 7  (i) and (ii) Schematic illustration of a DN hydrogel with imine and borate ester linkages. (iii) Transformation experiment of hydrogel. (iv) Storage moduli (G′) and loss moduli (G′′) of pieces of hydrogel with time. (v) Ratio of G′s between self-healed and original hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
3.3. Polymer connected with boronic ester bonds supported by B–N interaction
The donor nature of electron-rich atoms, especially nitrogen (N), enables the formation of B–N dative coordination, which can be utilized to promote the stability of boronic ester linkages, conferring great mechanical strength and self-healing ability to the resulting polymers. N can interact with the boron in boronic ester in different ways, including B–N covalent bonding, B–N coordination, proximal B–N coordination in neighbouring position, and forming new nitrogen-coordinating boronic ester structures.
The classical Lewis pairs (LPs) between unhindered electron-poor Lewis acids (LAs) and Lewis bases (LBs) can form dynamic covalent cross-links in transient polymer networks (TPNs). Jäkle et al. demonstrated weak/strong organoborane LA and amine LB pairs in polystyrene(PS)/polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) blends, resulting in dynamically cross-linked TPN.73 The coordination of the borate anion and ammonium cation helps to form a well-organized transparent hydrogel network. Zheng et al. designed an anti-bacterial hydrogel using a PVA-tetrahydroxyborate anion hydrogel as a vector and pyrrolidinium ionic liquids (ILs) as antibacterial drugs, abbreviated as PVA/C4MPBr/B(OH)4−.74 Due to the coordination of B–N, the IL was dispersed well in the hydrogel system by virtue of electrostatic interactions between the ammonium cation and borate ion, resulting in the formation of a uniform and transparent hydrogel (Fig. 8a).
 Fig. 8  (a) Formation mechanism and schematic diagram of PVA/C4MPBr/B(OH)4− hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Chemical structure of SPUEs (orange dotted circle: intramolecular B–N coordination and blue dotted circle: intermolecular B–N coordination). Adapted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Design of diboronic ester cross-linkers with tunable exchange kinetics by neighboring N. Adapted with permission from ref. 76 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (d) Synthetic route for polymers containing dynamic pyrogallol-derived boronic ester cross-linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 77 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
The coordination of B–N in dioxaborolane (five-membered boronic diesters) can accelerate the reshuffling rate of dioxoborolane linkages, and then enhance the self-healing efficiency. Wu et al. synthesized a highly stretchable covalent adaptive network (CAN) with poly(propylene glycol) diglycidyl ether (PPG), 3-amino-1,-2-propanediol, and benzene-1,4-diboronic acid via the formation of dioxazaborocane (from B–N interaction) and dioxaborolane (from B–O and B–N interactions) linkages.78 Shi et al. fabricated a supramolecular guanosine-quadruplex hydrogel based on multicomponent self-assembly using guanosine (G), 2-formylboronic acid (2-FPBA), and tris(2-aminoethyl)amine (TAEA) in the presence of KCl. Iminoboronate bonds composed of cyclic boronates and imino bonds stabilized the hydrogel network.79 The association and dissociation of the borate ester linkages significantly depend on the pH and pKa of the borate and diol pairs, requiring a pH higher than the pKa to stabilize the hydrogel system. To stabilize the borate ester network, Wong and co-workers prepared a self-healing hydrogel with an alkaline monomer, dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate (DMAEMA), N-methylol acrylamide (NAM), and 1,4-benzene diboronic acid (BDBA). With an increase in the amount of DMAEMA, the mechanical strength of the hydrogel increased because the cross-linking densities of the borate ester linkages decreased due to the occupancy of boron to B–N coordination, making the hydrogel soft and tough.80 In another report, Ding et al. developed supramolecular polyurethane elastomers (SPUEs) using dynamic covalent boronic ester and B–N coordination with enhanced mechanical strength (Fig. 8b).75 In this work, the B–N coordination not only accelerated the reshuffling of the boronic ester at room temperature but also dramatically enhanced the mechanical properties (highest tensile toughness = around 182.2 MJ m−3 reported up to 2021 for polyurethane) by the intermolecular coordinated chain crosslinking and intra-molecular coordinated chain folding.
Another strategy to incorporate N into organoboron-containing polymers to increase their stability is the introduction of a neighboring nitrogen group at the boronic ester bond. This structure can accelerate the transesterification between boronic esters and the diol, and hence increase the healing speed of the resultant polymers.81 Also, the neighbouring nitrogen is positionally nearer to the B–O exchange center compared to the N-based additive, which is more likely to enhance the exchange reaction. For example, Guan and co-workers fabricated malleable and self-healing covalent polymer networks using telechelic diboronic ester small molecules to dynamically cross-link 1,2-diol-containing polymer backbones. They developed a fast and slow exchange crosslinker with variable transesterification kinetics by adding neighbouring N (Fig. 8c).76 The nitrogen atom of the ortho-aminomethyl acts as a proximal base to facilitate the proton transfer between the leaving group diol on the boronate and the protonated ammonium during transesterification, making the B–O exchange faster by 5 orders of magnitude. In another example, the coordination B–N bond lowers the acidity of phenylboronic acid and facilitates the formation of borate esters or boroxines. Otsuka et al. demonstrated the post-polymerization modification of polybenzoxazines (PBZs) based on the intrinsic reactivity of bis(2-hydroxybenzyl)amine (BHBA) in PBZs toward boronic acids to form dioxazaborecine (DOAB) moieties via intramolecular B–N interactions.82
Besides a nitrogen neighbouring group, other electron-rich atoms, such as oxygen can also be used to support B–O coordination. For example, Li and co-workers designed a tough and self-healing polymer using a cross-linker, PDMS with pyrogallol and a phenol compound with three hydroxyls, denoted as 3OH-PDMS. Two of the hydroxyls form a borate ester with boronic acid, while the other hydroxyl in pyrogallol can act as a proximal base to promote dynamic exchange of the B–O bonds due to the donor and Lewis base character of oxygen (Fig. 8d).77 In another report, Kloxin et al. designed a co-culture layered hydrogel network by reacting a polymer containing 2-acrylamidophenylboronic acid (2APBA) with PVA under aqueous conditions. The intramolecular coordination between the carbonyl oxygen of the acrylamido moiety and boron of the boronic acid group stabilized the formed borate ester.83
Recently, the new dynamic covalent chemistry of nitrogen-coordinating cyclic boronic diester (NCB) linkages was incorporated in vitrimers to enhance their stability via internal B–N dative coordination. Organoboron chemistry studies have established that cyclic boronic diesters are more stable than boronic acid monoesters, especially for cyclic boronic esters coordinated by electron donors (e.g., nitrogen-donor compounds). Based on this organoboron chemistry, Jing et al. synthesized a polyurethane vitrimer based on the chemical reactions of reactive hydrogen from nitrogen-coordinating cyclic boronic diester compounds (NCBC) with isocyanate from hexamethylene diisocyanate (THDI) (Fig. 9).84 The presence of dynamic covalent NCBC linkages contributed to enhanced water resistance in the vitrimers with almost no decrease in their glass transition temperature (Tg) and mechanical properties even after exposure to 40% RH at 30 °C for 4 weeks. Although the N → B coordination makes NCBCs more stable to water, NCB linkages are still dynamic to undergo exchange reactions upon heating without any catalyst. Later, the authors prepared a polystyrene vitrimer85 with excellent mechanical strength (from 30–45 MPa) based on the chemistry of NCBC linkages. In another work, Li et al. incorporated NCB linkages to fabricate a soy protein-based film with excellent mechanical strength, water resistance, and thermal stability.86
 Fig. 9  (i) Chemical route for the fabrication of PU vitrimers from the reaction of the active hydrogen in NCBC-1 with THDI. (ii) Storage modulus, tanδ curves, and stress–strain curves of PU1.1 after exposure to 40% RH for a certain time. (iii) Dynamic exchange reactions between NCBC linkages. Adapted with permission from ref. 84 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
4. Applications of functional polymers based on dynamic B–O bonds
The flexibility and versatility of B–O bonds make organoboron-containing polymers ideal for many applications, especially in the biomedical field. The stretchability, self-healing properties, and multi-responsiveness derived from the unique properties of the reversible B–O linkages enable the potential implementation of the resultant hydrogels for drug delivery, bioadhesives, tissue engineering, smart sensors, and flexible functional devices.6,17,87 For example, the ability of dynamic borate bonds to be reversibly broken and reformed is often exploited to impart the resultant polymer self-healing ability and stretchability to be used in adhesives and sensors. Additionally, the robust B–O bonds show high tolerance to diverse functionalities and/or additives, delivering fresh charming properties to the obtained materials, and thereby providing unprecedented opportunities in various areas, such as flexible electronic devices, batteries, coatings, and 3D printing. Here, we will discuss the recent development of functional healable polymers based on dynamic B–O for these applications.
4.1. Biomedical applications
Due to the reversible nature of the dynamic linkages, borate bond hydrogels are responsive to pH, sugar, and reactive oxygen species (ROS), which can be exploited for controlled drug delivery. For example, the hydrogel can be weakened by reducing the pH to release the drug on demand. Likewise, the injectability and biocompatibility of the resultant hydrogel are highly beneficial for clinical translation. However, early borate bond-based hydrogels often used high pH of more than pH 8 during gelation, which is not ideal for biomedical applications. Chen et al. overcame this pH issue using zwitterionic copolymers with benzoxaborole and catechol pendant groups, which allowed gelation at pH 7.4, greatly enhancing the cell survivability and enabling the gel to be used for 3D cell encapsulation.88 Zhao et al. further improved the mechanical strength of borate bond hydrogels with a dual cross-linked network from imine and benzoxaboronic bonds, which were shown to have a higher storage modulus (2231 Pa) compared to the single crosslinked network hydrogels (96 Pa and 1452 Pa from imine and benzoxaboronic bonds, respectively) (Fig. 10a).89 Crucially, the unique properties of the hydrogels with borate bonds such as injectability, multiple responsiveness, and biocompatibility were preserved. Besides, Tao et al. recently prepared a self-healing and injectable hydrogel based on reversible borate ester linkages.90 To effectively disperse magnetic nanoparticles (i.e., iron oxide nanoparticles (IONPs)) in the hydrogel to introduce magnetic properties, the phosphonic acid (PA) group was incorporated in the polymer via the Kabachnik–Fields (KF) reaction. This difunctional hydrogel could be remotely controlled via an external alternating magnetic field (AMF), displaying great potential application as a safe implant biomaterial for drug delivery, magnetocaloric, magnetic resonance imaging, and in other magnetic-related medical fields. Alternatively, as discussed in the previous section, hydrogels that are commonly used for cell encapsulation and drug delivery such as alginates, chitosans, HA, and PVA were also modified with dynamic borate linkages to acquire the multi-functionality that results from their reversible interactions.91–93 Notably, the alginate-boric acid system was also evaluated in an animal model. It was found that the excellent stretchability, self-healing, and multi-responsive characteristics of the hydrogel enhanced its retention along the gastrointestinal tract (Fig. 10b).92 Taken together, the results suggest the feasibility of designing ingestible drug delivery systems through the smart control of dynamic boronic eater bonds.
 Fig. 10  Hydrogels consist of borate bonds, which can enable drug delivery. (a) Schematic illustration of dual cross-linked network hydrogels from imine and benzoxaboronic bonds, which also enable the hydrogel to be self-healing and responsive towards pH, sugar, and ROS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Oral administration of alginate-BA with enhanced hydrogel retention along the gastrointestinal tract. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
Wound healing and antimicrobial strategies represent another example of practical clinical applications that hydrogels with dynamic boronic ester bonds can address. For instance, alginate-phenylboronic acid and cellulose nanofiber/PVA/borax hydrogels that are responsive to pH and ROS have been designed to deliver antibiotics and anti-inflammatory drugs for wound healing.94,95 Alternatively, antibacterial materials such as quaternary amine groups can be incorporated in polymers, which may synergistically inhibit the growth of harmful bacteria with the delivery of antibiotics.96 When utilized as a wound dressing, ultra-stretchability with excellent antimicrobial activity is desirable. Zhong et al. developed a wound dressing based on a PVA–borax gel that was dual-reinforced with dopamine-grafted oxidized carboxymethyl cellulose and cellulose nanofibers. The self-healing ability and reliable mechanical properties of the PVA–borax hydrogel also prolonged the stability of the dressing. Furthermore, the controlled release of neomycin antibiotic from the wound dressing was effective to reduce the growth of bacteria (Fig. 11a).53
 Fig. 11  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in wound dressings and bioadhesives. (a) Schematic illustration of an antimicrobial self-healing wound dressing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Alginate-boronate acid glue adhering to the mouse intestine. (ii) Tissue-adhesive strength of the alginate-boronate acid. (iii) Higher detachment force between the porcine tissues glued by cured alginate-boronate acid. Adapted with permission from ref. 42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH. 
Similar to their application as wound dressings, due to the remarkable mechanical strength and self-healing properties of borate-based hydrogels they can be applied for the development of bioadhesives, tissue sealants, and hemostatic agents. In this case, wet adhesion and biocompatibility are the major challenges in the development of in vivo bioadhesives. Hong et al. developed an alginate-boronic acid with a “cis-diol” moiety that mimics the catechol interactions in mussel adhesive proteins. The alginate-boronic acid could be cured by slightly increased pH to form soft gels, acting as a stable glue under physiological pH (Fig. 11b).42
In addition to drug delivery, the self-healing and shear thinning properties of dynamic borate linkages allow effective cell delivery and cell encapsulation without causing excessive shear stress, which leads to cell death. Furthermore, borate bonds are responsive to pH changes, and therefore can regulate the pH of the local microenvironment to improve the cell survivability. Likewise, cell release from the hydrogel is also possible in response to changes in pH and glucose concentration. Importantly, the biocompatibility of borate linkages has been tested by encapsulating cells in 3D with cancer cell lines, fibroblasts, or the more relevant stem cells,91,93,97 indicating their suitability in tissue engineering. Combining cells with the dynamic features of borate bonds, more complex tissue architectures such as layered structures can be built and self-assembled for 3D co-cultures (Fig. 12a).83 For instance, Tseng et al. created vascularized neural tissues by embedding a glucose-sensitive PEGDA-borax hydrogel as a sacrificial material in a non-sacrificial hydrogel containing neural stem cells (Fig. 12b).98 Recently, borate-based hydrogels have also been proposed for probing the cell-matrix interactions due to the viscoelastic properties of the dynamic boron linkages, which well mimic the native tissue niches.97,99 The resultant dynamic hydrogel demonstrated fast relaxation, which in turn activates mechanotransduction pathways of human mesenchymal stem cells and potentially regulates the cell fate (Fig. 12c).97 With the promising results exhibiting the suitability of these hydrogels for 3D cell culture, viscoelastic and dynamic hydrogels have great potential to answer biological questions and clinical applications.
 Fig. 12  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in cell encapsulation. (a) Layered hydrogel constructs for 3D co-culture of human pulmonary fibroblasts and human breast cancer cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Schematic representation of constructing vascularized neural tissue using glucose-sensitive sacrificial gel. (ii) Lumens created within the construct. (iii) Cells proliferated in the construct. (iv) Vascularized construct with interacting neural stem cells and endothelial cells after 3 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
4.2. Smart sensors
Hydrogel-based smart sensors that are flexible and wearable have attracted significant interest in tracking movements and monitoring physiologic signals. However, great challenges and demands remain in achieving the desired mechanical strength, tensile deformation capabilities, self-healing properties, self-adhesive capability, biocompatibility, antibacterial properties, high strain sensitivity, and stable electrical performances.12 Particularly, high stretchability and self-healing ability are highly desirable to ensure a stable performance and a long life span of strain sensors.
In this case, PVA–borax hydrogel systems have been widely used. Recent developments have focused on modifying PVA–borax hydrogel systems, such as nanocellulose/PVA/borax,100 starch/PVA/borax,101 proanthocyanidin/reduced graphene oxide/glycerol-plasticized PVA–borax,102 PVA/formylbenzoboric acid/polyethylenimine/MXene,103 dual network combination of β-cyclodextrin/ferrocene with PVA–borax and carbon nanotubes,100 PVA/tetrahydroxy borate/liquid metal particles,104 PVA/borax/sodium alginate/tannic acid,105 PVA/borax/silk fibroin/tannic acid,26 and/PVA/borax/okra polysaccharide/silver nanowires.106 These modified systems were tested to have enhanced mechanical strength, stretchability, self-healing time, signal response time, sensitivity, and adhesiveness. Interestingly, while most of these approaches include the addition of a conductive component such as carbon nanotubes or liquid metal particles, free borate and sodium ions alone appeared to be sufficient to offer stable electrical and conductivity performances.26,101,107 These hydrogel strain sensors are highly functional given that they have been assessed to adhere stably to different types of surfaces and can monitor large movements from joints and micro-deformations from smiling and breathing (Fig. 13a). In addition, some of these new systems also possess new features including antibacterial properties,26,100,108 the capability to detect movement directions,103 and being dissolvable.104 It will also be exciting to observe the potential development of hydrogel systems as an adhesive electrodes for electrocardiograph and electromyography.102
 Fig. 13  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in smart sensors. (a) (i) Dynamic ionic conductive hydrogel as a flexible strain sensor. (ii) Electrical resistance response of the hydrogel to distinguish small strain changes from smiling and breathing. Adapted with permission from ref. 26 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Relative resistance changes of the sensors as a result of (i) wrist movement, (ii) elbow movement, (iii) finger bending, and writing of letters (iv) “D”, (v) “H”, and (vii) “U”. Adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Liu and colleagues developed a smart elastomer sensor based on reversible borate bonds.27 In this system, a long functional polymer crosslinker containing multi boronic ester bonds in the backbone was used to copolymerize with n-butyl acrylate to produce a high-performance conductive elastomer with combined desirable profiles, such as high flexibility, low hysteresis, and self-repairing behavior. Exploiting these attractive features, the obtained elastomer demonstrated utility in real-time motion detection (such as writing) by attaching it to diverse joints, including the wrist, elbow, and finger (Fig. 13b).
Besides strain sensors, phenylboronic acid can act as a glucose sensor due to its affinity to the diol groups of glucose molecules. Previous attempts used phenylboronic acids for glucose detection through different readouts such as fluorescence and surface-enhanced Raman scattering, which have their disadvantages. Based on a micro-engineered optical diffuser structure that detects the size changes of phenylboronic acid-functionalized hydrogel films in response to glucose concentration changes, Elsherif et al. fabricated an optical glucose sensor integrated into a contact lens. This low-cost glucose sensor was sufficiently sensitive to detect glucose level changes in the physiological range and may be beneficial for continuous glucose monitoring.109
4.3. Flexible functional devices
Beyond biomedical applications and smart sensors, hydrogels based on dynamic borate bonds have also been applied to fabricate various flexible functional devices. For example, Zhang et al. utilized a perylene tetracarboxylic acid-functionalized gelatin/PVA hydrogel with dynamic PVA–borax linkages to encrypt data inside 3D fluorescent structures for data security and anti-counterfeiting strategies. The addition of borax to the hydrogel triggered shape memory, which protected the fluorescence in the hydrogel origami structures. Subsequently, the folded structure could be recovered by low pH before revealing the protected information (Fig. 14a).110
 Fig. 14  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in flexible devices. (a) 3D anti-counterfeiting platform created by reversible 3D structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) (i) Flexible ECD based on the dynamic borate linkage hydrogel electrolyte. (ii) Bleached and colored state of bending ECDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible TENGs to charge capacitors and power commercial electronics. Adapted with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Self-healing supercapacitor, also performing well at low temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
The superior stretchability and self-healing capability of dynamically crosslinked borate hydrogels have been found to be useful for fabricating flexible electrochromic devices (ECDs), which change their optical properties reversibly in response to electrical stimulation. In ECDs, highly flexible and mechanically strong conductive materials are essential for the electrolyte layer, which also tends to experience mechanical tension or thermal expansion. Thus, to address this, Chen et al. developed a highly stretchable and self-healable electrolyte layer using glycerol monomethacrylate, acrylamide, borax, and LiClO4. The dynamic borate–didiol interactions helped to achieve superior mechanical and self-healing properties in the hydrogel electrolyte layer. Subsequently, the flexible ECDs were tested to work well in both the flat and bent states with good cyclic stability. The promising results suggest that the ECDs developed with the dynamic borate bond can be used in smart mirrors, displays, and windows (Fig. 14b).111
As discussed above, PVA–borate hydrogels are a popular choice to create the flexible portion of wearables. The same properties of high stretchability, mechanical strength, self-healing, transparency, and electrical healing efficiency are also required in fabricating triboelectric nanogenerators (TENG), which are used to convert mechanical movement into electrical signals and power for wearables. Guan et al. combined polydopamine particles, multiwalled carbon nanotubes, and PVA/agarose hydrogel containing reversible crosslinking borate bonds into a reliable and self-healing TENG.112 Similarly, various conductive materials such as graphene,113 polydopamine–carbon nanotubes,114 and MXene nanosheets115 have been added to PVA–borax systems to enhance the conductivity of the hydrogel electrolyte layer, which also maintained the electric output performance after self-healing. Notably, the conductivity was shown to be dependent on the concentration of B(OH)4− ions and the viscoelasticity of the hydrogel, which could be further optimized for a higher output performance.116,117 These self-healing-TENGs were tested to harvest human motion energies and power an electronic watch or calculator, which indicates their potential future use in wearable devices and other flexible electronic devices (Fig. 14c).117
The above-mentioned properties are also requirements for supercapacitors applied in wearables. Often, conductive hydrogels possessing high mechanical properties, stretchability, and self-healing capacity are desirable.12,13 For instance, a polyaniline-PVA hydrogel with dynamic boronate bonds demonstrated 100% capacitance retention after repeated mechanical deformation, which suggests it can be developed into durable wearable electronics.118 Alternatively, a hydrogel electrolyte based on alginate/catechol–borate bonding was shown to be self-healable and tolerate a high content of inorganic salts. The resultant supercapacitor also performed well at low temperatures by maintaining at least 80% of its capacitance (Fig. 14d).119 Recently, similar hydrogel-based supercapacitors with different modifications such as sodium alginate/borate/dopamine–polypyrrole nanofibers,120 PVA/borax/agarose/multiwalled carbon nanotubes,121 PVA/borax/graphite oxide,122 and PVA/borax/nanocellulose/zinc123 also demonstrated high capacity and self-healing properties. These promising developments in flexible supercapacitors will enable their further extension to applications in wearable electronics and similar devices.
4.4. Other emerging applications
Although the majority of technological applications have been focusing on biomedical use and flexible devices, other emerging applications that also take advantage of the different properties of dynamic boronic ester bonds have been observed.
Similar to the strategy employed for stimulus-responsive drug delivery, the reversible crosslinking borate bonding was also explored as an on-demand self-cleaning surface. Asha et al. developed a sugar-responsive coating from polydopamine and benzoxaborole pendant-containing zwitterionic polymers, which was then grafted to a polydopamine-coated surface (Fig. 15a).124 Self-cleaning was initiated by the addition of sugar molecules that contain competitive cis-diol groups, removing the polymer coating along with the bacteria electrostatically adhered on the polymer layer. The polymer layer was also incorporated with antibacterial quaternary amine groups, making the coated surface antifouling and antibacterial. This dynamic self-cleaning can be a promising coating to prevent biofilm formation on medical devices and possibly other surfaces.124
 Fig. 15  Other emerging applications of dynamic borate bond hydrogels. (a) Self-cleaning surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (b) Tunable networks for hydrogel patterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (c) Self-healing solid polymer electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Dynamic covalent networks were also explored to induce dual switchable states for hydrogel patterning. Tan et al. designed pre-gel solutions with long PVA and a low ratio of PEG-diboronate cross-linkers (Fig. 15b).125 The pre-gels were extendable and could be pulled into thin strands, which subsequently could be patterned into thin lines. The pre-gels were also capable to be integrated into hydrogel printing to create standing 3D structures. The unique features of the dynamic covalent crosslink system allowed the facile conversion of the pre-gels to hydrogels with better mechanical strength, through pH control or incubation in polyethyleneimine. This approach offers an alternative to photo-crosslinking for patterning and switching hydrogel properties. This tunable and flexible system has the potential to be a handy tool for biological applications such as studying the cellular response to environmental changes and 3D printing applications.125 Besides, Hsu and coworkers developed a 3D-printable and glucose-sensitive boronate ester hydrogel for the construction of constructs with vascular-like channels using a commercial 3D bioprinter.126 In this system, the combination of a sacrificial boronate ester hydrogel and a non-sacrificial gel was required to fabricate a vascularized pattern in the construct. This 3D printable and stimulus-sensitive sacrificial hydrogel demonstrates great potential to generate other complicated and removable structures.
The dynamic borate linkages were also found to be useful as self-healing solid polymer electrolytes, similar to their applications in flexible electronics. Solid polymer electrolytes are advantageous for preventing leakage, which can be a problem with the commonly used liquid electrolytes. Owing to the anion-trapping property of the boron moieties, high lithium transference, electrochemical stability, and conductivity were achieved with the lithium-ion battery cells fabricated using gel polymer electrolytes with borate crosslinkers.22 Recently, poly(ethylene oxide)-based networks with boric acid and lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide were found to be effective solid polymer electrolytes with good mechanical properties (Fig. 15c).23 The dynamic networks also have an advantage in their ability to transition between solid and liquid and flow under appropriate conditions. Crucially, given that the electrolyte can be dissolved in water and the monomers can be recovered easily, the electrolytes are recyclable, which makes them ideal materials for green batteries.23 In addition to electrolytes, Xie et al. developed a novel polymeric binder consisting of poly(acrylic acid), hydroxypropyl polyrotaxane, and boronic ester bonds, which improved the durability of the silicon anode of lithium-ion batteries.127 As the silicon anodes undergo volumetric expansion during the repeated charge–discharge cycles, the self-healing and flexible hydrogel binder of the silicon anodes helped to maintain the electrode integrity. Consequently, the transfer capacity and performance stability of the Li-ion batteries were improved even at an elevated temperature of 55 °C. These collective developments and improvements can provide potential solutions for the design of next-generation batteries.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
Due to their unique electronic structure, robust bond strength, and multi-stimulus responsiveness, research on dynamic B–O bonds has been steadily gaining momentum and the associated high-performance polymers have gradually grown to become an exciting branch of materials with attractive profiles involving self-repairing, good amenability, shape-memory, robust mechanical behavior, and enhanced compatibility with different functionalities. Furthermore, these interesting properties can be further combined with other properties, including electronic and ionic attributes, contributing to applications in portable instruments and solid polymer electrolytes. In this review, we discussed the nature and structure of B–O linkages, focusing on the reversible boronic ester chemistry. In addition, reversible B–O bonds and the resultant functional self-healable polymer have applications ranging from drug delivery, bio-adhesives, tissue engineering, smart sensors, and flexible functional devices to batteries.
However, despite the great fundamental improvement that has been achieved, future efforts are still required to deeply investigate the dynamic B–O bond chemistry, overcoming the existing challenges associated with B–O bond-based polymer materials. Considering the improved material properties, the incorporation of Lewis-based components (such as Lewis-based additives and monomers containing Lewis basic neighboring groups) in B–O-based polymers is still a valuable research direction. Secondly, combing two or more reversible bonds (including B–O bonds) to achieve orthogonal controllable materials with improved performance and multiple responsiveness is desirable. To gain the desired orthogonal controllable materials containing B–O dynamic linkages, good compatibility of two or more crosslinking systems is compulsory. Given the hydrolytic labile nature of B–O bonds, the incorporated dynamic exchangeable reactions involving the hydroxyl group, such as transesterification and silyl ether linkage, should be avoided to amplify the synergetic effects from the multiple crosslinking systems to achieve materials with the desired properties. Additionally, exploring new structures consisting of B–O bonds with enhanced stability to deliver next-generation self-healing polymers with excellent water and oxidation resistance to meet new market requirements and regulations is appealing. Furthermore, fine control over the material properties by adjusting the network topology is an interesting but unexplored direction. Due to the highly correlated relationship between material properties and network architecture, further research based on the influence of the polymer architecture on material properties is unavoidable. The meticulous choice of building blocks is another important factor that requires consideration for the construction of advanced functional polymers. For example, polymers generated by bonding polysaccharides (such as alginate, hyaluronic acid, chitosan, and laminarin) and boronic ester linkages are promising candidates as biomaterial hydrogels for cell culture, drug delivery, and molecular therapeutics.17 The materials generated by the combination of polyethylene and dioxaborolane units can contribute to industrial applications.47 Finally, the implementation of bio-based or readily available start materials for the fabrication of new materials to reduce the investment cost and environmental impact is a desirable research direction for designing feasible alternatives to existing commodity thermosets.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the financial support from the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) under its AME Young Individual Research Grants (YIRG) (Grant No. A2084c0168), UGT HTPO seeds fund (Grant No. C211718004), and Career Development Award (Grant No. 202D8054).
References
N. Zheng, Y. Xu, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Dynamic Covalent Polymer Networks: A Molecular Platform for Designing Functions beyond Chemical Recycling and Self-Healing, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 1716–1745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, S. Wang, Y. Peng, J. Zhu, W. Zhao and X. Liu, Advances in sustainable thermosetting resins: From renewable feedstock to high performance and recyclability, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2021, 113, 101353 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Scheutz, J. J. Lessard, M. B. Sims and B. S. Sumerlin, Adaptable Crosslinks in Polymeric Materials: Resolving the Intersection of Thermoplastics and Thermosets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 16181–16196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Z. M. Png, S. H. Ng, G. X. Tham, E. Ye, S. S. Goh, X. J. Loh and Z. Li, Vitrimers: Current research trends and their emerging applications, Mater. Today, 2021, 51, 586–625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang and M. W. Urban, Self-healing polymers, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 562–583 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cho, S. Y. Hwang, D. X. Oh and J. Park, Recent progress in self-healing polymers and hydrogels based on reversible dynamic B–O bonds: boronic/boronate esters, borax, and benzoxaborole, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 14630–14655 RSC .
A. P. Bapat, B. S. Sumerlin and A. Sutti, Bulk network polymers with dynamic B-O bonds: Healable and reprocessable materials, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7, 694–714 RSC .
C. Li and J. Zuo, Self-Healing Polymers Based on Coordination Bonds, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1903762 CrossRef .
S. Terryn, J. Langenbach, E. Roels, J. Brancart, C. Bakkali-Hassani, Q. A. Poutrel, A. Georgopoulou, T. George Thuruthel, A. Safaei, P. Ferrentino, T. Sebastian, S. Norvez, F. Iida, A. W. Bosman, F. Tournilhac, F. Clemens, G. Van Assche and B. Vanderborght, A review on self-healing polymers for soft robotics, Mater. Today, 2021, 47, 187–205 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hornat and M. W. Urban, Shape memory effects in self-healing polymers, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 102, 101208 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, H. Gu, Y. He, Y. Zhang, W. Xu, J. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Xiong, A. Chen and Y. Feng, Dual dynamic bonds enable biocompatible and tough hydrogels with fast self-recoverable, self-healable and injectable properties, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 388, 124282 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cui, Q. Fu, L. Meng, S. Hao, R. Dai and J. Yang, Recent Progress in Natural Biopolymers Conductive Hydrogels for Flexible Wearable Sensors and Energy Devices: Materials, Structures, and Performance, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2021, 4, 85–121 CrossRef CAS .
T. Cheng, Y. Z. Zhang, S. Wang, Y. L. Chen, S. Y. Gao, F. Wang, W. Y. Lai and W. Huang, Conductive Hydrogel-Based Electrodes and Electrolytes for Stretchable and Self-Healable Supercapacitors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–27 Search PubMed .
N. J. Van Zee and R. Nicolaÿ, Vitrimers: Permanently crosslinked polymers with dynamic network topology, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2020, 104, 101233 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guerre, C. Taplan, J. M. Winne and F. E. Du Prez, Vitrimers: directing chemical reactivity to control material properties, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 4855–4870 RSC .
W. Denissen, J. M. Winne and F. E. Du Prez, Vitrimers: Permanent organic networks with glass-like fluidity, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 30–38 RSC .
E. Aeridou, D. Diáz Diáz, C. Alemán and M. M. Pérez-Madrigal, Advanced Functional Hydrogel Biomaterials Based on Dynamic B–O Bonds and Polysaccharide Building Blocks, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 3984–3996 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, S. Wang and X. Jing, Cross-linked polymers based on B-O bonds: synthesis, structure and properties, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 5534–5548 RSC .
H. E. Hackney and D. F. Perepichka, Recent advances in room temperature phosphorescence of crystalline boron containing organic compounds, Aggregate, 2021, e123 Search PubMed .
N. Ando, H. Soutome and S. Yamaguchi, Near-infrared fluorescein dyes containing a tricoordinate boron atom, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7816–7821 RSC .
S. K. Mellerup and S. Wang, Correction: Boron-based stimuli responsive materials (Chemical Society Reviews (2019), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3674,  10.1039/c9cs00153k) .
J. Shim, J. S. Lee, J. H. Lee, H. J. Kim and J. C. Lee, Gel Polymer Electrolytes Containing Anion-Trapping Boron Moieties for Lithium-Ion Battery Applications, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 27740–27752 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Jing and C. M. Evans, Catalyst-Free Dynamic Networks for Recyclable, Self-Healing Solid Polymer Electrolytes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 18932–18937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Morgan, J. L. Jurs and J. M. Tour, Synthesis, flame-retardancy testing, and preliminary mechanism studies of nonhalogenated aromatic boronic acids: a new class of condensed-phase polymer flame-retardant additives for acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene and polycarbonate, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 76, 1257–1268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dogan, S. D. Dogan, L. A. Savas, G. Ozcelik and U. Tayfun, Flame retardant effect of boron compounds in polymeric materials, Composites, Part B, 2021, 222, 109088 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, N. Lin, Y. He and B. Zuo, Self-Healing, Self-Adhesive Silk Fibroin Conductive Hydrogel as a Flexible Strain Sensor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 40013–40031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Yu, H. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Miao, X. Zhang and T. Liu, Highly Stretchable, Soft, Low-Hysteresis, and Self-Healable Ionic Conductive Elastomers Enabled by Long, Functional Cross-Linkers, Macromolecules, 2022, 55, 7845–7855 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Cai, W. Shang, L. Sun, D. Liu, D. Tong and S. Liu, Environmental friendly polyisobutylene-based ionic liquid containing chelated orthoborate as lubricant additive: Synthesis, tribological properties and synergistic interactions with ZDDP in hydrocarbon oils, Tribol. Int., 2017, 115, 297–306 CrossRef CAS .
J. Miao, Y. Wang, J. Liu and L. Wang, Organoboron molecules and polymers for organic solar cell applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 153–187 RSC .
Z. Huang, S. Wang, R. D. Dewhurst, N. V. Ignat’ev, M. Finze and H. Braunschweig, Boron: Its Role in Energy-Related Processes and Applications, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 8800–8816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. De Gracia Lux, S. Joshi-Barr, T. Nguyen, E. Mahmoud, E. Schopf, N. Fomina and A. Almutairi, Biocompatible polymeric nanoparticles degrade and release cargo in response to biologically relevant levels of hydrogen peroxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15758–15764 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, C. He, C. Xiao and X. Chen, Reactive Oxygen Species (ROS) Responsive Polymers for Biomedical Applications, Macromol. Biosci., 2016, 16, 635–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, M. Zhang, F. S. Du and Z. C. Li, Facile synthesis of H2O2-cleavable poly(ester-amide)s by Passerini multicomponent polymerization, ACS Macro Lett., 2017, 6, 11–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Ogden and Z. Guan, Recyclable, Strong, and Highly Malleable Thermosets Based on Boroxine Networks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 6217–6220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.
C. Lai, J. F. Mei, X. Y. Jia, C. H. Li, X. Z. You and Z. Bao, A Stiff and Healable Polymer Based on Dynamic-Covalent Boroxine Bonds, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8277–8282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Duncan, B. H. Berrie and R. G. Weiss, Soft, Peelable Organogels from Partially Hydrolyzed Poly(vinyl acetate) and Benzene-1,4-diboronic Acid: Applications to Clean Works of Art, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28069–28078 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, M. Maiti and A. Roy, A New Class of Boronic Acid-Derived Amphiphile-Based Gel Emulsions Capable of Entrapping and Releasing Vitamin B12 and Doxorubicin, ChemistrySelect, 2017, 2, 6929–6939 CrossRef CAS .
G. Huang, H. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. Chang, H. Zhang, H. Song, D. Xu and T. Shi, Strain Hardening Behavior of Poly(vinyl alcohol)/Borate Hydrogels, Macromolecules, 2017, 50, 2124–2135 CrossRef CAS .
I. Natali, E. Carretti, L. Angelova, P. Baglioni, R. G. Weiss and L. Dei, Structural and mechanical properties of ‘peelable’ organoaqueous dispersions with partially hydrolyzed poly(vinyl acetate)-borate networks: Applications to cleaning painted surfaces, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 13226–13235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Figueiredo, Y. Ogawa, J. Jing, V. Cosenza, I. Jeacomine, J. D. M. Olsson, T. Gerfaud, J. G. Boiteau, C. Harris and R. Auzély-Velty, Self-crosslinking smart hydrogels through direct complexation between benzoxaborole derivatives and diols from hyaluronic acid, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 3800–3811 RSC .
T. J. Jayeoye and T. Rujiralai, Green, in situ fabrication of silver/poly(3-aminophenyl boronic acid)/sodium alginate nanogel and hydrogen peroxide sensing capacity, Carbohydr. Polym., 2020, 246, 116657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Hong, M. Shin, E. Park, J. H. Ryu, J. A. Burdick and H. Lee, Alginate-Boronic Acid: pH-Triggered Bioinspired Glue for Hydrogel Assembly, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908497 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, L. Xiong, Y. Ai, Z. Liang and Q. Liang, Stretchable Multiresponsive Hydrogel with Actuatable, Shape Memory, and Self-Healing Properties, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800450 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ge, S. Cao, F. Shen, Y. Wang, J. Ren and X. Wang, Rapid self-healing, stretchable, moldable, antioxidant and antibacterial tannic acid-cellulose nanofibril composite hydrogels, Carbohydr. Polym., 2019, 224, 115147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Cash, T. Kubo, A. P. Bapat and B. S. Sumerlin, Room-temperature self-healing polymers based on dynamic-covalent boronic esters, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 2098–2106 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zych, J. Tellers, L. Bertolacci, L. Ceseracciu, L. Marini, G. Mancini and A. Athanassiou, Biobased, Biodegradable, Self-Healing Boronic Ester Vitrimers from Epoxidized Soybean Oil Acrylate, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 1135–1144 CrossRef CAS .
M. Röttger, T. Domenech, R. Van Der Weegen, A. Breuillac, R. Nicolaÿ and L. Leibler, High-performance vitrimers from commodity thermoplastics through dioxaborolane metathesis, Science, 2017, 356, 62–65 CrossRef .
J. Ma, Y. Yang, C. Valenzuela, X. Zhang, L. Wang and W. Feng, Mechanochromic, Shape-Programmable and Self-Healable Cholesteric Liquid Crystal Elastomers Enabled by Dynamic Covalent Boronic Ester Bonds, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202116219 CAS .
L. M. Peng, Z. Xu, W. Y. Wang, X. Zhao, R. Y. Bao, L. Bai, K. Ke, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang and W. Yang, Leakage-Proof and Malleable Polyethylene Wax Vitrimer Phase Change Materials for Thermal Interface Management, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 11173–11182 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, C. Zhang, Z. Yang, Q. Wu, P. Sun and X. Wang, Hierarchical Dynamics in a Transient Polymer Network Cross-Linked by Orthogonal Dynamic Bonds, Macromolecules, 2020, 53, 5937–5949 CrossRef CAS .
W. P. Chen, D. Z. Hao, W. J. Hao, X. L. Guo and L. Jiang, Hydrogel with Ultrafast Self-Healing Property Both in Air and Underwater, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1258–1265 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lin, Z. Wang, Y. Shen, L. Tang, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Huang and B. Lu, Natural skin-inspired versatile cellulose biomimetic hydrogels, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26442–26455 RSC .
Y. Zhong, F. Seidi, C. Li, Z. Wan, Y. Jin, J. Song and H. Xiao, Antimicrobial/Biocompatible Hydrogels Dual-Reinforced by Cellulose as Ultrastretchable and Rapid Self-Healing Wound Dressing, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 1654–1663 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, T. N. Plank, T. Zhu, H. Yu, Z. Ge, Q. Li, L. Li, J. T. Davis and H. Pei, Self-Assembly of Metallo-Nucleoside Hydrogels for Injectable Materials That Promote Wound Closure, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 19743–19750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zheng, Y. Li, L. Xu, Y. Huang, Z. Jiang and B. Li, Highly stretchable, healable, sensitive double-network conductive hydrogel for wearable sensor, Polymer, 2020, 211, 123095 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meng, P. Xiao, J. Gu, X. Wen, J. Xu, C. Zhao, J. Zhang and T. Chen, Self-healable macro-/microscopic shape memory hydrogels based on supramolecular interactions, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12277–12280 RSC .
H. Meng, J. Zheng, X. F. Wen, Z. Q. Cai, J. W. Zhang and T. Chen, PH- and sugar-induced shape memory hydrogel based on reversible phenylboronic acid-diol ester bonds, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36, 533–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ren, T. Ke, Q. Ling, L. Zhao and H. Gu, Rapid self-healing and self-adhesive chitosan-based hydrogels by host–guest interaction and dynamic covalent bond as flexible sensor, Carbohydr. Polym., 2021, 273, 118533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ma, H. Pang, H. Liu, Q. Yan, J. Li and S. Zhang, A tough, adhesive, self-healable, and antibacterial plant-inspired hydrogel based on pyrogallol-borax dynamic cross-linking, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2021, 9, 4230–4240 RSC .
Y. Qin, J. Wang, C. Qiu, X. Xu and Z. Jin, A Dual Cross-Linked Strategy to Construct Moldable Hydrogels with High Stretchability, Good Self-Recovery, and Self-Healing Capability, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2019, 67, 3966–3980 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yang, P. Qi, J. Ren, H. Yu, S. Liu, J. Li, W. Chen, D. L. Kaplan and S. Ling, Polyvinyl Alcohol/Silk Fibroin/Borax Hydrogel Ionotronics: A Highly Stretchable, Self-Healable, and Biocompatible Sensing Platform, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23632–23638 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ge, W. Yuan, W. Zhao, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, W. Wang, P. Chen, W. Huang, W. Si and X. Dong, Highly stretchable and autonomously healable epidermal sensor based on multi-functional hydrogel frameworks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5949–5956 RSC .
X. Le, W. Lu, J. Zheng, D. Tong, N. Zhao, C. Ma, H. Xiao, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and T. Chen, Stretchable supramolecular hydrogels with triple shape memory
effect, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 6715–6720 RSC .
M. Wang, J. Zhuge, C. Li, L. Jiang and H. Yang, Self-healing quadruple shape memory hydrogels based on coordination, borate bonds and temperature with tunable mechanical properties, Iran. J. Polym. Sci. Technol., 2020, 29, 569–579 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Z. Tang, Y. Liu, S. Wu and B. Guo, Mechanically Robust, Self-Healable, and Reprocessable Elastomers Enabled by Dynamic Dual Cross-Links, Macromolecules, 2019, 52, 3805–3812 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Yang, Y. Zeng, Y. Wu, Y. Wei and L. Tao, Self-Healing Hydrogel with a Double Dynamic Network Comprising Imine and Borate Ester Linkages, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 5576–5583 CrossRef CAS .
S. Delpierre, B. Willocq, G. Manini, V. Lemaur, J. Goole, P. Gerbaux, J. Cornil, P. Dubois and J. M. Raquez, Simple Approach for a Self-Healable and Stiff Polymer Network from Iminoboronate-Based Boroxine Chemistry, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3736–3744 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, L. Huang, R. Wu, W. Fan, Q. Dai, J. He and C. Bai, Assembling of Reprocessable Polybutadiene-Based Vitrimers with High Strength and Shape Memory via Catalyst-Free Imine-Coordinated Boroxine, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33305–33314 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chong Zhang, X. Xia Le, W. Lu, Y. Kun Jian, J. Wei Zhang and T. Chen, An “Off-the-Shelf” Shape Memory Hydrogel Based on the Dynamic Borax-Diol Ester Bonds, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Lascano, K. Da Zhang, R. Wehlauch, K. Gademann, N. Sakai and S. Matile, The third orthogonal dynamic covalent bond, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4720–4724 RSC .
J. Collins, M. Nadgorny, Z. Xiao and L. A. Connal, Doubly Dynamic Self-Healing Materials Based on Oxime Click Chemistry and Boronic Acids, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2017, 38, 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. Guo, Q. Su, J. Zhang, A. Dong, C. Lin and J. Zhang, Facile Access to Multisensitive and Self-Healing Hydrogels with Reversible and Dynamic Boronic Ester and Disulfide Linkages, Biomacromolecules, 2017, 18, 1356–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vidal, J. Gomezcoello, R. A. Lalancette and F. Jäkle, Lewis Pairs as Highly Tunable Dynamic Cross-Links in Transient Polymer Networks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15963–15971 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, Z. Yang, S. Ren, Y. Gao and L. Zheng, Multifunctional hydrogel based on ionic liquid with antibacterial performance, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 299, 112185 CrossRef CAS .
K. Song, W. Ye, X. Gao, H. Fang, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Li, S. Yang, H. Wei and Y. Ding, Synergy between dynamic covalent boronic ester and boron-nitrogen coordination: Strategy for self-healing polyurethane elastomers at room temperature with unprecedented mechanical properties, Mater. Horiz., 2021, 8, 216–223 RSC .
O. R. Cromwell, J. Chung and Z. Guan, Malleable and Self-Healing Covalent Polymer Networks through Tunable Dynamic Boronic Ester Bonds, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6492–6495 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhao, D. P. Wang, J. L. Zuo and C. H. Li, A Tough and Self-Healing Polymer Enabled by Promoting Bond Exchange in Boronic Esters with Neighboring Hydroxyl Groups, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3, 1328–1338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lyu, S. Sun and T. Wu, Highly stretchable covalent adaptive networks enabled by dynamic boronic diester linkages with nitrogen → boron coordination, J. Polym. Sci., 2022, 60, 72–80 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Liu, R. Ma, Y. Xu, Y. Zhang, B. Li, Y. An and L. Shi, A G-Quadruplex Hydrogel via Multicomponent Self-Assembly: Formation and Zero-Order Controlled Release, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13056–13067 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ji, J. Li, G. Zhang, W. Lan, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, Alkaline monomer for mechanical enhanced and self-healing hydrogels based on dynamic borate ester bonds, Polymer, 2019, 184, 121882 CrossRef CAS .
B. Marco-Dufort, R. Iten and M. W. Tibbitt, Linking Molecular Behavior to Macroscopic Properties in Ideal Dynamic Covalent Networks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 15371–15385 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsukamoto, J. Kida, D. Aoki and H. Otsuka, Post-polymerization modification of polybenzoxazines with boronic acids supported by B-N interactions, Polym. Chem., 2021, 12, 5266–5270 RSC .
M. E. Smithmyer, C. C. Deng, S. E. Cassel, P. J. Levalley, B. S. Sumerlin and A. M. Kloxin, Self-Healing Boronic Acid-Based Hydrogels for 3D Co-cultures, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 1105–1110 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Jiang, Y. Li and X. Jing, Boronic Ester Based Vitrimers with Enhanced Stability via Internal Boron-Nitrogen Coordination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 21852–21860 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, B. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Wang, W. Fan, H. Li, C. Bian and X. Jing, Fully recyclable and reprocessable polystyrene-based vitrimers with improved thermal stability and mechanical properties through nitrogen-coordinating cyclic boronic ester bonds, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 151157 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, S. Jin, S. Jiang, X. Li, J. Li, S. Q. Shi and J. Li, Bioinspired mineral–organic strategy for fabricating a high-strength, antibacterial, flame-retardant soy protein bioplastic via internal boron–nitrogen coordination, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 428, 132616 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Dufort and M. W. Tibbitt, Design of moldable hydrogels for biomedical applications using dynamic covalent boronic esters, Mater. Today Chem., 2019, 12, 16–33 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, D. Diaz-Dussan, D. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Y. Peng, A. B. Asha, D. G. Hall, K. Ishihara and R. Narain, Bioinspired Self-Healing Hydrogel Based on Benzoxaborole-Catechol Dynamic Covalent Chemistry for 3D Cell Encapsulation, ACS Macro Lett., 2018, 7, 904–908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, D. Diaz-Dussan, M. Wu, Y. Y. Peng, J. Wang, H. Zeng, W. Duan, L. Kong, X. Hao and R. Narain, Dual-Cross-Linked Network Hydrogels with Multiresponsive, Self-Healing, and Shear Strengthening Properties, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 800–810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. He, Y. Zeng, G. Liu, Y. Tian, Y. Wei, L. Zhao, L. Yang and L. Tao, Magnetic Self-Healing Hydrogel from Difunctional Polymers Prepared via the Kabachnik-Fields Reaction, ACS Macro Lett., 2022, 11, 39–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Figueiredo, J. Jing, I. Jeacomine, J. Olsson, T. Gerfaud, J. G. Boiteau, C. Rome, C. Harris and R. Auzély-Velty, Injectable Self-Healing Hydrogels Based on Boronate Ester Formation between Hyaluronic Acid Partners Modified with Benzoxaborin Derivatives and Saccharides, Biomacromolecules, 2020, 21, 230–239 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Hong, S. Kim, J. P. Park, M. Shin, K. Kim, J. H. Ryu and H. Lee, Dynamic Bonds between Boronic Acid and Alginate: Hydrogels with Stretchable, Self-Healing, Stimuli-Responsive, Remoldable, and Adhesive Properties, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 2053–2061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Furlani, P. Sacco, M. Cok, G. De Marzo, E. Marsich, S. Paoletti and I. Donati, Biomimetic, Multiresponsive, and Self-Healing Lactose-Modified Chitosan (CTL)-Based Gels Formed via Competitor-Assisted Mechanism, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng., 2019, 5, 5539–5547 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, F. Zhang, L. Long, Q. Kong, R. Luo and Y. Wang, Dual-responsive injectable hydrogels encapsulating drug-loaded micelles for on-demand antimicrobial activity and accelerated wound healing, J. Controlled Release, 2020, 324, 204–217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, Z. Zhang, K. Liu, X. Ji, P. Fatehi and J. Chen, A cellulose nanofibril-reinforced hydrogel with robust mechanical, self-healing, pH-responsive and antibacterial characteristics for wound dressing applications, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2022, 20, 312 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Cheng, S. Ding, Y. Zheng, M. Wu, Y. Y. Peng, D. Diaz-Dussan, Z. Shi, Y. Liu, H. Zeng, Z. Cui and R. Narain, Dual Cross-Linked Hydrogels with Injectable, Self-Healing, and Antibacterial Properties Based on the Chemical and Physical Cross-Linking, Biomacromolecules, 2021, 22, 1685–1694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tang, H. Ma, H. Tu, H. Wang, P. Lin and K. S. Anseth, Adaptable Fast Relaxing Boronate-Based Hydrogels for Probing Cell–Matrix Interactions, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800638 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Tseng, F. Y. Hsieh, P. Theato, Y. Wei and S. Hui Hsu, Glucose-sensitive self-healing hydrogel as sacrificial materials to fabricate vascularized constructs, Biomaterials, 2017, 133, 20–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Marozas, K. S. Anseth and J. J. Cooper-White, Adaptable boronate ester hydrogels with tunable viscoelastic spectra to probe timescale dependent mechanotransduction, Biomaterials, 2019, 223, 119430 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Z. Ren, F. Liu, L. Zhao, Q. Ling and H. Gu, Multifunctional Self-Healing Dual Network Hydrogels Constructed via Host-Guest Interaction and Dynamic Covalent Bond as Wearable Strain Sensors for Monitoring Human and Organ Motions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 14612–14622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Huang, J. Wu, L. Han, Z. Yang, Z. Jiang, R. Wang, Z. Huang and M. Xu, Ultrafast Self-Healing, Reusable, and Conductive Polysaccharide-Based Hydrogels for Sensitive Ionic Sensors, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 18506–18518 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pan, Q. Wang, P. He, K. Liu, Y. Ni, L. Chen, X. Ouyang, L. Huang, H. Wang and S. Xu, A bionic tactile plastic hydrogel-based electronic skin constructed by a nerve-like nanonetwork combining stretchable, compliant, and self-healing properties, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122271 CrossRef CAS .
W. Peng, L. Han, H. Huang, X. Xuan, G. Pan, L. Wan, T. Lu, M. Xu and L. Pan, A direction-aware and ultrafast self-healing dual network hydrogel for a flexible electronic skin strain sensor, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 26109–26118 RSC .
M. Liao, H. Liao, J. Ye, P. Wan and L. Zhang, Polyvinyl Alcohol-Stabilized Liquid Metal Hydrogel for Wearable Transient Epidermal Sensors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 47358–47364 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, Z. Ren, X. Liu, Q. Ling, Z. Li and H. Gu, A Multifunctional, Self-Healing, Self-Adhesive, and Conductive Sodium Alginate/Poly(vinyl alcohol) Composite Hydrogel as a Flexible Strain Sensor, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 11344–11355 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ma, K. Liu, L. Lao, X. Li, Z. Zhang, S. Lu, Y. Li and Z. Li, A stretchable, self-healing, okra polysaccharide-based hydrogel for fast-response and ultra-sensitive strain sensors, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 205, 491–499 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Robby, S. G. Kim, H. J. Jo, G. Lee, H. S. Lee, K. D. Lee, J. H. Ryu and S. Y. Park, Tumor microenvironment-responsive touch sensor-based pH-triggered controllable conductive hydrogel, Appl. Mater. Today, 2021, 25, 101259 CrossRef .
L. Fan, Z. He, X. Peng, J. Xie, F. Su, D. X. Wei, Y. Zheng and D. Yao, Injectable, intrinsically antibacterial conductive hydrogels with self-healing and pH stimulus responsiveness for epidermal sensors and wound healing, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 53541–53552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Elsherif, M. U. Hassan, A. K. Yetisen and H. Butt, Glucose Sensing with Phenylboronic Acid Functionalized Hydrogel-Based Optical Diffusers, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2283–2291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, X. Le, Y. Jian, W. Lu, J. Zhang and T. Chen, 3D Fluorescent Hydrogel Origami for Multistage Data Security Protection, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905514 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, Y. Shi, K. Sheng, J. Zheng and C. Xu, Dynamically Cross-Linked Hydrogel Electrolyte with Remarkable Stretchability and Self-Healing Capability for Flexible Electrochromic Devices, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 56544–56553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Guan, G. Lin, Y. Gong, J. Wang, W. Tan, D. Bao, Y. Liu, Z. You, X. Sun, Z. Wen and Y. Pan, Highly efficient self-healable and dual responsive hydrogel-based deformable triboelectric nanogenerators for wearable electronics, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13948–13955 RSC .
P. Liu, N. Sun, Y. Mi, X. Luo, X. Dong, J. Cai, X. Jia, M. A. Ramos, T. S. Hu and Q. Xu, Ultra-low CNTs filled high-performance fast self-healing triboelectric nanogenerators for wearable electronics, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 208, 108733 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, Y. Ni, X. Kong, S. Li, X. Chen, L. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Self-Healing and Elastic Triboelectric Nanogenerators for Muscle Motion Monitoring and Photothermal Treatment, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 14653–14661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Luo, L. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Li, J. Nie and Z. L. Wang, A Flexible Multifunctional Triboelectric Nanogenerator Based on MXene/PVA Hydrogel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2104928 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jing, H. Li, H. Y. Mi, P. Y. Feng, X. Tao, Y. Liu, C. Liu and C. Shen, Enhancing the Performance of a Stretchable and Transparent Triboelectric Nanogenerator by Optimizing the Hydrogel Ionic Electrode Property, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 23474–23483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lai, H. Wu, H. Lin, C. Chang, H. Chou, Y. Hsiao and Y. Wu, Entirely, Intrinsically, and Autonomously Self-Healable, Highly Transparent, and Superstretchable Triboelectric Nanogenerator for Personal Power Sources and Self-Powered Electronic Skins, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904626 CrossRef .
W. Li, F. Gao, X. Wang, N. Zhang and M. Ma, Strong and Robust Polyaniline-Based Supramolecular Hydrogels for Flexible Supercapacitors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9196–9201 CrossRef CAS .
F. Tao, L. Qin, Z. Wang and Q. Pan, Self-Healable and Cold-Resistant Supercapacitor Based on a Multifunctional Hydrogel Electrolyte, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15541–15548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Liu, Q. Gong, Z. Xia, Y. Yang, C. Chen and C. Qian, Facile preparation of stretchable and self-healable conductive hydrogels based on sodium alginate/polypyrrole
nanofibers for use in flexible supercapacitor and strain sensors, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2021, 172, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kim, J. W. Kim, J. Yun, Y. R. Jeong, S. W. Jin, G. Lee, H. Lee, D. S. Kim, K. Keum and J. S. Ha, A rationally designed flexible self-healing system with a high performance supercapacitor for powering an integrated multifunctional sensor, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 515, 146018 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, Y. Lv, G. Wei, J. Zhou, X. Gao, K. Sun, G. Ma and Z. Lei, A flexible and self-healing hydrogel electrolyte for smart supercapacitor, J. Power Sources, 2019, 431, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, J. Chen, W. Zhou, J. Xu and C. P. Wong, High-performance flexible and self-healable quasi-solid-state zinc-ion hybrid supercapacitor based on borax-crosslinked polyvinyl alcohol/nanocellulose hydrogel electrolyte, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 26524–26532 RSC .
A. B. Asha, Y. Y. Peng, Q. Cheng, K. Ishihara, Y. Liu and R. Narain, Dopamine Assisted Self-Cleaning, Antifouling, and Antibacterial Coating via Dynamic Covalent Interactions, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 9557–9569 CrossRef .
R. P. T. Tan, J. J. W. Cheng, B. H. Parikh, J. H. M. Wong, B. W. Soh, J. J. Chang, K. C. Tran, Y. Lee, P. L. Chee, Y. J. Boo, Q. Lin, L. Jiang, X. Su, J. Y. C. Lim, X. J. Loh and K. Xue, Versatile and Extendable Boronate-Based Tunable Hydrogel Networks for Patterning Applications, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 5091–5102 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Tsai, P. Theato, C. F. Huang and S. Hui Hsu, A 3D-printable, glucose-sensitive and thermoresponsive hydrogel as sacrificial materials for constructs with vascular-like channels, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100778 CrossRef .
Z. H. Xie, M. Z. Rong and M. Q. Zhang, Dynamically Cross-Linked Polymeric Binder-Made Durable Silicon Anode of a Wide Operating Temperature Li-Ion Battery, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 28737–28748 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† J. Z. and X. O. contribute equally to this work.This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
Table Content:

Jie Zheng
	Jie Zheng obtained her PhD Degree from Nanyang Technological University (NTU). Currently, she is working as a Research Scientist at the Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. Her research interests include the design and synthesis of novel structural polymers using living radical polymerization, nano-structured material modification, block copolymer self-assembly, and circular materials and their applications.

Xin Yi Oh
	Xin Yi Oh received her PhD in 2022 from Nanyang Technological University (NTU) under the supervision of Prof. Atsushi Goto. Currently, she is working as a Research Scientist at the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR) in Singapore. Her research interests are functional polymer synthesis including degradable polymers and hydrogels.

Wai Hon Chooi
	Wai Hon Chooi is currently a Research Fellow at the Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, A*STAR (Agency for Science, Technology, and Research), Singapore. He received his PhD in Biomedical Engineering from The University of Hong Kong under the supervision of Prof. Barbara Chan in 2016. His scientific interests include biomaterials for tissue engineering, mechanobiology, and in vitro tissue models. His current research interests are primarily focused on the application of functionalized hydrogels for organoid development and spinal cord regeneration.

Xian Jun Loh
	Prof. Xian Jun Loh completed his basic and postgraduate studies at the National University of Singapore. A polymer chemist by training, he is the Executive Director at both the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering (IMRE) and Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2), A*STAR. He is also the current President and member of the Executive Committee of the Singapore National Institute of Chemistry. As a pioneer in the area of biodegradable thermogels, he is highly knowledgeable in developing these materials for various applications including biomedical, engineering, cosmetics, personal care and food.

Zibiao Li
	Zibiao Li obtained his PhD from the National University of Singapore (NUS). Currently, he is working as a Senior Research Scientist at the Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy and Environment (ISCE2) at the Agency for Science, Technology and Research (A*STAR), Singapore. He is the Director of Sustainable Polymers in ISCE2 and holds an adjunct Associate Professor position with NUS. His research interests are focused on biodegradable and functional polymeric materials design, structural properties investigations, and their formulations for healthcare and consumer care applications.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme illustration of polymers based on dynamic B–O linkages and their applications in various research fields.	 

 	Scheme 1  Scheme illustration of (left) the reversible generation of boroxines from boronic acids and their metathesis reactions and (right) the reversible generation of boronic esters from boronic acids, and their transesterification and metathesis reactions.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Dissociation of sodium tetraborate in water and two steps of complexation between borate and PVA chains and schematic picture for the states of borate in PVA/borate hydrogels. Adapted with permission from ref. 38 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Representation of the structure of organo-aqueous gel of PVA–PVAc and borate ion. Adapted with permission from ref. 39 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. (c) Representation of the structure of organogel of PVA–PVAc and BDBA. Adapted with permission from ref. 36 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Self-healing HA hydrogels obtained from single BOR-modified HA conjugates that can self-assemble at physiological pH via dynamic benzoxaborole–HA linkages. Adapted with permission from ref. 40 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Structure of alginate and schematic illustration of the synthesis of hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 41 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Chemical structures of cellulose, tannic acid, and borate ion. Adapted with permission from ref. 44 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Vitrimers based on the metathesis of dioxaborolanes. (i) General scheme of the metathesis reaction. (ii) Synthesis of copolymers containing pendant dioxaborolanes from functional monomers. (iii) Enhanced environmental stress-cracking resistance of PS vitrimers and enhanced creep resistance at 80 °C of HDPE vitrimer compared with the commercial thermoplastic precursor. Adapted with permission from ref. 47 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science (United States). (b) (i) Schematic process of fabricating CLCEs via a facile anisotropic deswelling method, combining two-stage thiol–acrylate Michael addition and photopolymerization reactions. (ii) Molecular structures used for the fabrication of CLCEs. (iii) Photographs of the red-reflecting CLCE film being mechanically stretched. Adapted with permission from ref. 48 Copyright 2022 Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Structure of agarose/PVA DN hydrogel. (i) Schematic and architecture of the agarose/PVA DN hydrogel. (ii) Steadiness of PVA network hydrogels and agarose/PVA DN hydrogels. (iii) Strip-shaped agarose/PVA DN hydrogel with 1 wt% of agarose (I), the hydrogel was cut into two pieces (II), the hydrogel could heal automatically after contacting for 10 s at room temperature (III), and the healed hydrogel was stretched (IV). Adapted with permission from ref. 51 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic for the dynamic reversible borate ester bonds and hydrogen bonds in hydrogel and demonstration of the self-healing ability of the hydrogel in the ambient environment. Adapted with permission from ref. 52 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Formation of an injectable metallo-nucleoside hydrogel via borate diesters and cytidine–Ag+–cytidine base pairs self-assembly using electrostatic interactions to create a nanofibrous hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 54 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) DNs of PVA–borax and thionic acid-iron(III) with CNTs. Adapted with permission from ref. 55 Copyright 2020 Elsevier. (c) Shape-memory supramolecular hydrogel using alginate-PBA and PVA. Adapted with permission from ref. 63 Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) DNs of dynamic boronic ester bonds and noncovalent Zn2+–O coordination bonds. Adapted with permission from ref. 65 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (i) and (ii) Schematic illustration of a DN hydrogel with imine and borate ester linkages. (iii) Transformation experiment of hydrogel. (iv) Storage moduli (G′) and loss moduli (G′′) of pieces of hydrogel with time. (v) Ratio of G′s between self-healed and original hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 66 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Formation mechanism and schematic diagram of PVA/C4MPBr/B(OH)4− hydrogel. Adapted with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (b) Chemical structure of SPUEs (orange dotted circle: intramolecular B–N coordination and blue dotted circle: intermolecular B–N coordination). Adapted with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Design of diboronic ester cross-linkers with tunable exchange kinetics by neighboring N. Adapted with permission from ref. 76 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (d) Synthetic route for polymers containing dynamic pyrogallol-derived boronic ester cross-linkers. Adapted with permission from ref. 77 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  (i) Chemical route for the fabrication of PU vitrimers from the reaction of the active hydrogen in NCBC-1 with THDI. (ii) Storage modulus, tanδ curves, and stress–strain curves of PU1.1 after exposure to 40% RH for a certain time. (iii) Dynamic exchange reactions between NCBC linkages. Adapted with permission from ref. 84 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Hydrogels consist of borate bonds, which can enable drug delivery. (a) Schematic illustration of dual cross-linked network hydrogels from imine and benzoxaboronic bonds, which also enable the hydrogel to be self-healing and responsive towards pH, sugar, and ROS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Oral administration of alginate-BA with enhanced hydrogel retention along the gastrointestinal tract. Reprinted with permission from ref. 92 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in wound dressings and bioadhesives. (a) Schematic illustration of an antimicrobial self-healing wound dressing. Reprinted with permission from ref. 53 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Alginate-boronate acid glue adhering to the mouse intestine. (ii) Tissue-adhesive strength of the alginate-boronate acid. (iii) Higher detachment force between the porcine tissues glued by cured alginate-boronate acid. Adapted with permission from ref. 42 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 12  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in cell encapsulation. (a) Layered hydrogel constructs for 3D co-culture of human pulmonary fibroblasts and human breast cancer cells. Reprinted with permission from ref. 83 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (b) (i) Schematic representation of constructing vascularized neural tissue using glucose-sensitive sacrificial gel. (ii) Lumens created within the construct. (iii) Cells proliferated in the construct. (iv) Vascularized construct with interacting neural stem cells and endothelial cells after 3 days. Reprinted with permission from ref. 98 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in smart sensors. (a) (i) Dynamic ionic conductive hydrogel as a flexible strain sensor. (ii) Electrical resistance response of the hydrogel to distinguish small strain changes from smiling and breathing. Adapted with permission from ref. 26 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (b) Relative resistance changes of the sensors as a result of (i) wrist movement, (ii) elbow movement, (iii) finger bending, and writing of letters (iv) “D”, (v) “H”, and (vii) “U”. Adapted with permission from ref. 27 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Applications of dynamic borate bonds in flexible devices. (a) 3D anti-counterfeiting platform created by reversible 3D structures. Adapted with permission from ref. 110 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (b) (i) Flexible ECD based on the dynamic borate linkage hydrogel electrolyte. (ii) Bleached and colored state of bending ECDs. Adapted with permission from ref. 111 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. (c) Flexible TENGs to charge capacitors and power commercial electronics. Adapted with permission from ref. 117 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH GmbH. (d) Self-healing supercapacitor, also performing well at low temperatures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 119 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  Other emerging applications of dynamic borate bond hydrogels. (a) Self-cleaning surface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 124 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (b) Tunable networks for hydrogel patterning. Reprinted with permission from ref. 125 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. (c) Self-healing solid polymer electrolytes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† J. Z. and X. O. contribute equally to this work.

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2023
