Inverted ITO-free organic solar cells based on p and n semiconducting oxides . New designs for integration in tandem cells, top or bottom detecting de ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0EE00318B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0EE00318B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 453-458Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsInverted ITO-free organic solar cells based on p and n semiconducting oxides. New designs for integration in tandem cells, top or bottom detecting devices, and photovoltaic windows

        
          
            Jon 
            Ajuria
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ikerne 
            Etxebarria
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Werther 
            Cambarau
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Udane 
            Muñecas
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ramón 
            Tena-Zaera
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Juan Carlos 
            Jimeno
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Roberto 
            Pacios
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Microsystems, Ikerlan S. Coop, Goiru Kalea, 9, E-20500, Arrasate-Mondragon, Spain. E-mail: rpacios@ikerlan.es;  Fax: +34 943 796944;   Tel: +34 943 712400
bNew Materials Department, Centre for Electrochemical Technologies (CIDETEC), Paseo Miramón, 196, E-2009, Donostia-San Sebastian, Spain
cDepartment of Electronics and Communications, UPV/EHU, Parque Tecnológico de Bizkaia, E-48170, Zamudio, Spain
Received 
      29th July 2010
    , Accepted 20th September 2010First published on 22nd October 2010AbstractWe report organic photovoltaic devices in which the standard ITO transparent electric contact has been substituted by lower cost ultrathin metallic electrodes. Solution and vacuum processable n and p-type semiconductors provide the electrode with the rectifying behavior of the diode. We are in this way able to invert the built-in electric field at wish and make the device deliberately either top or bottom sensitive with the same efficiency depending on the application. Taking advantage of these new generation electrodes we furthermore report devices with fill factors over 70%—to our knowledge, the largest published to date for an organic photovoltaic cell—and power conversion efficiencies over the state-of-art with 3.5% in inverted P3HT:PCBM devices, ITO free designs over 2.5% and (semi)transparent photovoltaic devices with conversion efficiencies close to 2.6%. This breakthrough could once and for all trigger the fabrication of organic tandem solar cells and photovoltaic windows.

Broader context
A self-sustained society implies also by definition, self-sustainability in terms of energy. The growing power consumption—around five times larger than petrol extraction, along with the fact that more conventional sources of energy will inevitably exhaust—has made the search for new energies an urgent demand. The cost of electricity from fossil fuelled power stations is rising unpredictably with fuel resource exhaustions. The nuclear alternative offers only centralised and inflexible power. In addition, its competitiveness and safety are unproved. Photovoltaic electricity in contrast represents a clean and abundant resource which is available everywhere. Furthermore, it is especially appropriate as a decentralised power source and for meeting expensive peak demand. On the contrary, it is limited only by the high cost of the silicon wafers due to the tedious and expensive process to convert raw quartzite into semiconductor grade silicon. Novel photovoltaic materials such as organic semiconductors, in particular, could bring a step-change in costs that could enable the widespread implementation of photovoltaic power plants that is needed to cut the dependence on fossil fuelled electricity. Furthermore, OPV enables the production of low cost transparent photovoltaic devices for portable electronics and building applications where (semi)transparency and flexibility can play an attracting role.

Introduction
A self-sustained society implies also by definition, self-sustainability in terms of energy. The growing power consumption—around five times larger than petrol extraction, along with the fact that more conventional sources of energy will inevitably exhaust—has made the search for new energies an urgent demand. The cost of electricity from fossil fuelled power stations is rising unpredictably with fuel resource exhaustions. The nuclear alternative offers only centralised and inflexible power. In addition, its competitiveness and safety are unproved. Photovoltaic electricity in contrast represents a clean and abundant resource which is available everywhere. Furthermore, it is especially appropriate as a decentralised power source and for meeting expensive peak demand. On the contrary, it is limited only by the high cost of the silicon wafers due to the tedious and expensive process to convert raw quartzite into semiconductor grade silicon. Novel photovoltaic materials such as organic semiconductors, in particular, could bring a step-change in costs that could enable the widespread implementation of photovoltaic power plants that is needed to cut the dependence on fossil fuelled electricity.
The first solution-processed bulk heterojunction solar cell was published in 1995.1 After 3–4 years of hesitances and limited expectations, the number of publications started to unexpectedly rise with increments close to 65% per year. Reported conversion efficiencies have also grown at impressive rates of 0.5% per year. Standard devices fabricated with commercially available materials yield efficiencies around 4–5%,2 while the recently reported highest efficiency of 8.1% has been achieved with very novel materials specially synthesised for this application developed under very restricted and secretive conditions.3 The reason behind the remarkable advance of this technology relies on the possibility of solar cell production with printing processes on flexible lightweight substrates and the promise to make them semitransparent.
Today, innovative applications based on roll-to-roll organic modules have already been demonstrated.4 Moreover, the business potential and market opportunities of polymer solar cells cannot be more promising.5 Therefore, organic photovoltaics is no longer a scientific curiosity but an industrial objective with a few first companies interested in their commercialization and the very first products already penetrating in the market.6
On the other hand, the need of transparent conducting oxides (TCOs), particularly ITO, for the fabrication of efficient organic optoelectronic devices such as OLEDs, OPVs, and OPDs, and the scarcity of indium are currently the most price-increasing factors in nowadays organic devices.7 In parallel, the integration of organic photodetectors in CMOS compatible technologies demands top light detecting devices. It is then highly desirable to develop an ITO-free fabrication process in which the transparent electrode can be deposited either underneath or above the photoactive film depending on the customization level required for the final application.
Furthermore, this versatile transparent electrode would enable the fabrication of highly efficient tandem photovoltaic devices, one of the most promising approaches to maximize light harvesting of organic solar cells.8 A direct interesting side-effect of this new procedure is the possibility of producing low cost transparent photovoltaic devices for the long-wanted integration in power generating windows and other fashion ideas in building integrated photovoltaic (BIPV) applications where (semi)transparency can play an attracting role.
The search for materials with sufficiently high transparency and conductivity to be implemented in photovoltaic devices has become a fierce race with an uncertain ending.9 Great efforts made by many research groups have converted also exotic materials as carbon nanotubes and graphene films in promising candidates to win the bid.10 Alternative attempts rely on hybrid conducting polymer/metal grids that can be printed on flexible and lightweight substrates.11 However, in spite of intensive research on these materials, their performance is still not comparable to those of ITO films.
Similarly, materials with contrasting photoelectric work function at both sides of the photoactive film are needed to optimize charge transport, injection and collection processes, and maximize the photovoltages achieved under illumination.12 It is nevertheless generally accepted that the use of both, low work function materials as calcium and high work function as PEDOT:PSS, are the main sources of instability in organic solar cells.13 Trying to solve this problem and increase stability, either p or n-type semiconducting oxides have been used as electrode interfacial layers in ITO based polymer bulk heterojunction solar cells. Irwin et al. reported high efficient devices in which the high work function material (PEDOT:PSS) was substituted by a pulsed laser deposited NiO layer.14 In this case, unstable LiF was still used as the low work function material. Different oxides, such as TiOx,15V2O5,16WO3,17Cs2O3,18ZnO,19MoO3,20 amongst others, have been used in either standard or inverted architectures with the aim of replacing the more unstable calcium and PEDOT:PSS layers and increasing the stability of OPV devices, but always using ITO as the transparent conducting electrode.
We combine both approaches, ITO alternatives in addition to PEDOT:PSS and calcium replacements, to report ITO-free organic solar cells based on p and n-type semiconducting oxides with power conversion efficiencies close to 4% depending on the material combination. The process starts reversing the layer sequence of standard organic photovoltaic cells. The ITO layer is later replaced by an ultrathin metallic layer modified with an n-type semiconducting oxide to make the device rectify. Finally, the PEDOT:PSS layer is also substituted by a p-type semiconducting oxide covered with the same metal as before. Modifying the thickness of these two metallic layers we furthermore report either top or bottom detecting devices in addition to semitransparent photovoltaic cells. The same process is used to fabricate tandem solar cells as a proof of concept towards high efficient OPV devices with different absorbers.
Inverted photovoltaic devices
In the so-called inverted devices, where the large work function contact is on top of the device (Fig. 1), the electric field at 0 applied voltage is in opposite direction to standard devices (ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Ag). In the latter, once photogenerated charges have been created and successfully separated in the P3HT:PCBM film, holes will travel to the left in Fig. 1 (towards PEDOT:PSS) and electrons to the right (towards calcium). However, in the inverted design, holes will move to the right and electrons to the left. The charge generation and transport mechanisms do not have to be necessarily the same in both cases. They strongly depend on the light absorption profile (where within the bulk they are created), the electron and hole mobility (how they are transported from where they were created to the electrodes), and the nano domains formation of both components in the photoactive film (morphology and segregation).
 Fig. 1  Energy levels of all materials involved in the fabrication of OPV. The different alternatives to be used as rectifying electrodes are also depicted in red. The device is always built from left to right, i.e. ITO is the first (or bottom) layer in the standard design, while Au (or ITO) followed by ZnO are the first and second layer, respectively to be processed in the inverted architecture. Light normally incides from left. 

Fig. 2 shows the J–V characteristics of standard ITO/PEDOT/P3HT:PCBM/Ca/Ag (squares) and inverted ITO/ZnO/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT/Au (circles). The loss in Voc is compensated with an increased FF (see Table 1). Fig. 3 shows the absorption spectrum of the P3HT:PCBM layer and the EQE spectra of both standard and inverted devices. The improved performance of inverted devices is indicative of a more favorable morphology for the transport of electrons and holes along the PCBM and P3HT phases respectively. Results support previously reported experiments suggesting vertical segregation with a PCBM-rich phase closer to the ITO contact, and a growing gradient of polymer towards the upper electrode.21 In standard configuration, at maximum absorption wavelengths, light is absorbed—and most charges are generated—at the PEDOT:PSS/polymer interface following Beer–Lambert law. Holes are instantaneously collected at the PEDOT contact, while electrons have to travel across the whole thickness of the P3HT:PCBM (350 nm) film. With the suggested vertical segregation, electron transport through the PCBM decreasing gradient is not favorable. In the inverted architecture on the contrary, electrons are immediately collected at the ZnO/ITO contact, and holes have to travel through the increasing P3HT gradient towards the upper electrode leading to more favorable transport mechanisms. Inverted devices therefore seem to be a more convenient design for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells once both contacts are optimized.
Table 1 Photovoltaic performance of organic P3HT:PCBM solar cells for different electrodes




 
Standard
Inverted
ITO free
ITO free (top illuminated)
Semitransparent (ITO)
Semitransparent (ITO free)
ITO/ZnO/MoO3/Au

                  Au/ZnO/MoO3/Au





V
OC/V
0.62
0.59
0.58
0.56
0.58
0.54
0.59
0.57



J
SC/mA cm−2
9.86
9.65
7.12
5.59
7.85
6.52
8.33
6.93


FF (%)
57
62
61
56
56
54
71
65


PCE (%)
3.48
3.53
2.52
1.75
2.55
1.90
3.49
2.57




 Fig. 2  
J–V characteristics in dark (filled symbols) and under 1 SUN (open symbols) for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different electrodes: standard ITO/PEDOT/…/Ca/Ag (squares), inverted ITO/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (circles), bottom sensitive Au/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (triangles) and top sensitive Au/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (inverted triangles). Inset: same data in log scale. 
 Fig. 3  Absorption (plain line) and EQE spectra for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different electrodes: standard ITO/PEDOT/…/Ca/Ag (squares) and inverted ITO/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (circles). 
Ultrathin metallic layers as transparent electrodes
Once we have developed alternative rectifying contacts to additionally replace the calcium unstable contact, it is also desirable to substitute the scarce—and expensive ITO—by a lower cost and stable alternative. Fig. 2 also shows the J–V characteristics of ITO-free inverted devices where the ITO has been substituted by an ultrathin 5 nm layer of gold (triangles). Results are very similar (Table 1) and the slightly smaller Jsc observed can be explained due to the larger transmittance of the ITO layer with respect to the 5 nm thick gold layer (see Fig. 4). It is important to remark that starting from a common material (gold) we have been able to develop rectifying contacts modifying the metallic layer with additional solution processable electron and hole blocking layers (HBL) (see Fig. 1 for a schematic illustration). It is furthermore noticeable that the FF and Voc remain practically unchanged regardless the layer underneath the ZnO. The slightly lower efficiency is only due to the smaller Jsc leading to the conclusion that both electrodes (ITO and Au) are performing in similar terms concerning charge extraction and electrical conductivity. This achievement makes the device able to be either top or bottom detecting by only altering the thickness of gold layers. Fig. 2 additionally shows a top detecting ITO free inverted device where the lower ultrathin layer of gold has been made opaque, 100 nm, and the upper one has been made semi-transparent, 10 nm (inverted triangles). The only appreciable difference is a smaller Jsc due to the less transparent Au/PEDOT layer compared to Au/ZnO (see Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Transmittance of the different electrodes used for the fabrication of semitransparent organic photovoltaic devices. The thickness of the layers is shown in parentheses. In the inset, some of the semitransparent devices fabricated at IKERLAN. 
Semitransparent photovoltaic devices
We have therefore developed a low cost ITO free fabrication process for organic photovoltaic cells thanks to which it is possible to make the device either top or bottom light sensitive depending on the customization level required for the final application. By adjusting carefully the thickness of the ultrathin metallic electrodes, one can additionally design a semi-transparent photovoltaic device with the optical properties exclusively defined by the photoactive polymeric layer. Fig. 5 shows the J–V characteristics of a semitransparent inverted photovoltaic cell making use of the new developed ultrathin metallic electrodes. In this case, the bottom electrode comprises a 5 nm thick layer of gold underneath a 10 nm of ZnO, while the upper electrode consists of a 40 nm layer of PEDOT:PSS below a 10 nm thick gold layer. An identical device using ITO as the bottom electrode is also shown for comparison. The thickness of the active films used in devices for Fig. 2 and5 is essentially the same (350 nm), however, the Jsc measured for equivalent devices are different. The ITO free Au(5)/ZnO device produces 7.12 mA cm−2 while the semitransparent ITO free Au(5)/ZnO yields 6.52 mA cm−2. The difference is ascribed to an important loss of light reflection for the highly transparent ultrathin 10 nm layer of gold in comparison to the highly reflecting 100 nm thick gold layer (see also transmittances in Fig. 4). Similarly, ITO containing devices show the same effect. Again the difference between the 9.65 mA cm−2 measured for the inverted device in Fig. 1 and the 7.85 mA cm−2 for the semitransparent device in Fig. 5 is due to the more reflecting 100 nm Au upper electrode. The transparency of the whole device is limited by the thickness of the P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer (inset, Fig. 5), but in any case conversion efficiencies around 2.5% in semi-transparent—and 2% in ITO free semi-transparent—devices with transmission above 40% above 600 nm seem to be sufficiently appealing for building integration of photovoltaic windows in very light conditions in which not only can they convert light into electricity but also act as a blind partially shadowing and/or thermally isolating the inside.
 Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics under 1 SUN of semitransparent organic photovoltaic devices with and without ITO. Inset: transmittance of the whole device for different thicknesses of the photoactive layer. 
Tandem photovoltaic devices
Finally, the ability of depositing intermediate ultrathin metallic layers in stable devices for which oxidation is not an issue (e.g. need to use calcium) facilitates the fabrication of organic tandem devices. This is probably the most promising approach to maximize the light harvesting in photovoltaic devices thanks to the possibility of using different absorbers in every stacked cell. Taking into account the promising industrial potential of this advance, we targeted a device made with exclusively commercially available materials. Therefore, the ZnO hole blocking layer processed from an in-house nanoparticle dispersion has been substituted by a TiOx layer processed from a DuPont precursor, TNBT. Fig. 6 shows the J–V characteristics of individual inverted P3HT:PCBM cells of 90 and 150 nm thick photoactive layer, and a tandem cell with the following architecture ITO/TiOx(10)/P3HT:PCBM(90)/PEDOT(40)/Au(5)/TiOx(10)/P3HT:PCBM(150)/PEDOT(40)/Au(100). The Voc is twice that of a single cell which demonstrates that our tandem device is effectively working. The Jsc is theoretically limited by the subcell with the lowest current, and in this case by additional resistive losses caused by unbalanced currents.22 Although thicknesses and polymer:fullerene ratios can be tuned to achieve balanced currents, these initial reported results are a proof of concept that reveals a novel procedure to develop high efficient organic tandem solar cells. Further experiments will be carried out in order to maximize efficiencies and test different absorbers in this configuration.
 Fig. 6  
J–V characteristics under 1 SUN of a tandem device and the containing sub-cells. Inset: structure of the tandem cell with all its layers. P3HT (Rieke) and PCBM (Nano-C) were dissolved in chlorobenzene and stirred overnight at 90 °C prior blending to form a 50 mg ml−1 solution 1:1 by weight. P3HT:PCBM films were deposited by Dr Blade at 65 °C at different blade speeds. 
Replacing PEDOT:PSS by a p-type semiconducting transition metal oxide (MoO3)

        PEDOT:PSS is a very convenient organic conducting material to be used as an electrode since it is easily processed from solution. It is usually employed to smooth the rough surface of ITO and at the same time maximize the built-in electric field due to its large photoelectric work function. Although the adhesion properties over different substrates or materials can be problematic, it can also be deposited on top of the polymeric P3HT:PCBM in inverted structures with the help of a surfactant. In spite of its wide use, it is believed to be one of the main causes of degradation in OPV devices due to its high sensitivity to water, oxygen, and acidic nature. Therefore we made photovoltaic devices identical to those presented in Sections Inverted photovoltaic devices and Ultrathin metallic layers as transparent electrodes where the PEDOT:PSS layer is replaced by a vacuum deposited ultrathin layer of MoO3 of around 5 nm. The J–V characteristics and EQE of both architectures (ITO and Au as the bottom layer) are shown in Fig. 7 and Fig. 8. The Voc remains unaltered and the slightly decreased Jsc is compensated with an improved FF giving overall performances superior than those achieved in standard configuration and very similar to those inverted with PEDOT:PSS as the hole injection layer on top of P3HT:PCBM (see Table 1). The FF values reported in this paper are, to our knowledge, the largest published to date for an organic device. Under dark, when a negative voltage (or lower than Voc) is applied, the MoO3 layer acts as a very effective electron blocking layer stopping negative charges to be injected from the electrode to the LUMO of PCBM. However, when a positive voltage—greater than Voc—is applied, the MoO3 layer favors the injections of holes to the HOMO of P3HT. This high selectivity gives rise to lower dark negative currents and larger rectification ratios. Under illumination, the MoO3 layer prevents electrons in the LUMO of PCBM from going to the upper gold electrode, and consequently favors their way towards ZnO with larger electron affinity. Furthermore, photogenerated holes in the LUMO of P3HT are attracted by the larger ionization potential of MoO3 (see Fig. 1). These two facts lead to a very low dependent—and flat—photogenerated current on the applied voltage causing the observed large fill factor. The high FF and PCE values measured for all inverted designs compared to standard ones for which the same thick photoactive layers (∼350 nm) are employed confirm that inverted structures provide improved bulk morphology for charge transport in OPV devices. In addition, p and n-type semiconducting metal oxides show improved selective charge injection and extraction properties with respect to commonly used calcium and PEDOT:PSS, giving superior overall performances in terms of power conversion efficiencies.
 Fig. 7  
J–V characteristics in dark (filled symbols) and under 1 SUN (open symbols) for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different alternative electrodes: very sensitive to degradation materials, calcium and PEDOT:PSS, have been respectively substituted by more stable ZnO and MoO3 in inverted OPV devices (circles). ITO has additionally been replaced by an ultrathin metallic layer (triangles). Inset: same data in log scale. 
 Fig. 8  
          EQE
          spectra for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different alternative ZnO and MoO3 electrodes (circles) and replacing ITO with a 5 nm thick gold layer (triangles). 
Experimental
Device fabrication
Before device fabrication, both ITO coated and ITO free glass substrates were cleaned by ultrasonic treatments in acetone and isopropyl alcohol. For the deposition of the ultrathin metallic layer of gold by sputtering, the chamber was evacuated to a base pressure of 1 × 10−5 mbar. Next, Ar flow on the chamber was increased to 0.1 sccm until the chamber pressure rose to 2 × 10−3 mbar. Films were deposited at room temperature using a DC source.
For devices comprising TiOx as the hole blocking layer, TNBT from Dupont was diluted to 1:200 in isopropyl alcohol and spin-cast at 2000 rpm. Conversion of the precursor viahydrolysis into TiOx with a thickness of around 10 nm was achieved by the addition of a water drop and subsequent heating at 90 °C for 1 min.
For devices containing a layer of ZnO on top of ITO as the HBL, a nanoparticle dispersion was prepared according to the Pacholski et al. method.23 Briefly, 0.11 g of zinc acetate dihydrate was dissolved in 50 mL of methanol under vigorous stirring at 60 °C. Subsequently, a 0.03 M solution of KOH (25 mL) in methanol was added dropwise at 60 °C. The reaction mixture was stirred for 2 h at 60 °C. The obtained colloidal suspension, without any further purification treatment, was spin-cast at 2000 rpm for 30 s on the substrate. The ZnO deposition process was followed by a 5 minutes air annealing at 150 °C.
The P3HT:PCBM solution was prepared by mixing 25:25 mg in 1 mL of chlorobenzene. The solution was then heated overnight at 80 °C. Dr Blade was used to coat the P3HT:PCBM film. The plate temperature was set to 60 °C and the blade speed to 25 mm s−1. The substrate was then covered for 90 seconds with a Petri dish for slow drying of the film.

          PEDOT:PSS (AI 4083 from H. C. Stark) with the addition of 1% surfactant and heated to 90 °C was spin-cast on top of the P3HT:PCBM film and annealed in glove box at 110 °C for 10 min.
Device fabrication was completed by thermal evaporation of gold at room temperature under vacuum at a base pressure of 4 × 10−6 mbar. The deposited area of the electrode defines an active area of 9 mm2.
When depositing MoO3 in combination with gold, 5 nm thick metal oxide layer was thermally evaporated prior to gold under the same vacuum conditions. After fabrication, devices were annealed at 140 °C for 15 min.
Device characterization

Absorption spectra were taken using a white light source and an Ocean Optics spectrometer and software. J–V characteristics of the encapsulated devices were taken using a keithley 4200 source unit under 1 SUN AM1.5G illumination conditions from a xenon lamp based Oriel 9600 150 W Sun Simulator. External Quantum Efficiency (EQE) was measured using a Xe lamp illuminating at 30 Hz and an Oriel Cornerstone 260¼ monochromator. Signal was detected using a Merlin lock-in amplifier and processed with Oriel software. Calibration of both light spectra for J–V and EQE characterization was performed with an NREL certified monocrystalline silicon photodiode.
Conclusions
In summary, we have shown the possibility to fabricate ITO free and semitransparent inverted organic devices with efficiencies over 2.5%. The new generation electrodes consist of ultrathin metallic layers and solution/vacuum processable semiconducting oxides that act as hole and electron blocking layers providing the diode the rectification behavior. This achievement offers the possibility of fabricating versatile either top or bottom detecting devices, tandem solar cells and photovoltaic windows.
Acknowledgements
We thank financial support from Ministerio de Educación y Ciencia under the project HOPE CSD2007-00007 (Consolider-Ingenio 2010). R.T.-Z. acknowledges the support from the “Ramón y Cajal” Program of the Spanish MICINN.
Notes and references
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dennler, M. C. Scharber and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liang, Z. Xu, J. Xia, S.-T. Tsai, Y. Wu, G. Li, C. Ray and L. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E135 CrossRef CAS ; Solarmer Press Release, August 2010, http://www.solarmer.com/.
F. C. Krebs, T. D. Nielsen, J. Fyenbo, M. Wadstrøm and M. S. Pedersen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 512 RSC ; F. C. Krebs, J. Fyenbo and M. Jørgensen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8994,  10.1039/c0jm01178a ; F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jørgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873 RSC .
T. D. Nielsen, C. Cruickshank, S. Foged, J. Thorsen and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 1553 CrossRef CAS .
See http://www.konarka.com/, http://www.solarmer.com/, http://www.solar-press.com/.
R. García-Valverde, J. A. Cherni and A. Urbina, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2010, 18, 535 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, K. Lee, N. E. Coates, D. Moses, T. Nguyen, M. Dante and A. J. Heeger, Science, 2007, 317, 222 CrossRef CAS ; M. W. Wanlass, K. A. Emery, T. A. Gessert, G. S. Horner, C. R. Osterwald and T. J. Coutts, Sol. Cells, 1989, 27, 191 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and C. Chou, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 11 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, S. Fang, A. A. Zakhidov, S. B. Lee, A. E. Aliev, C. D. Williams, K. R. Atkinson and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2005, 309, 1215 CrossRef CAS ; P. Matyba, H. Yamaguchi, G. Eda, M. Chhowalla, L. Edman and N. D. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 637 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ameri, G. Dennler, C. Waldauf, H. Azimi, A. Seemann, K. Forbeich, J. Hauch, M. Scharber, K. Hingerl and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1592 CrossRef CAS ; F. C. Krebs, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 761 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brabec, A. Cravino, D. Meissner, N. S. Sariciftci, T. Fromherz, M. T. Rispens, L. Sanchez and J. C. Hummelen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2001, 11, 374 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jørgensen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 686 CrossRef ; K. Kawano, R. Pacios, D. Poplavskyy, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3520 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783 CrossRef CAS .
C. Waldauf, M. Morana, P. Denk, P. Schilinsky, K. Coackley, S. A. Choulis and C. J. Brabec, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 233517 CrossRef .
V. Shrotriya, G. Li, Y. Yao, C. Chu and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 073508 CrossRef .
C. Tao, S. Ruan, G. Xie, X. Kong, L. Shen, F. Meng, C. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Dong and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 043311 CrossRef .
G. Li, C. W. Chu, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang and Y. Yang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 2788 CrossRef CAS .
P. de Bruyn, D. J. D. Moet and P. W. M. Blom, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 1419 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Zhao, S. T. Tan, L. Ke, P. Liu, A. K. K. Kyaw, X. W. Sun, G. Q. Lo and D. L. Kwong, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 985 CrossRef CAS .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158 CrossRef CAS ; L. M. Chen, Z. Hong, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1434 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hadipour, B. de Boer, J. Wildeman, F. B. Kooistra, J. C. Hummelen, M. G. R. Turbiez, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and P. W. M. Blom, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1897 CrossRef CAS ; J. Burdick and T. Glatfelter, Sol. Cells, 1986, 18, 301 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
Table Content:

Broader context
A self-sustained society implies also by definition, self-sustainability in terms of energy. The growing power consumption—around five times larger than petrol extraction, along with the fact that more conventional sources of energy will inevitably exhaust—has made the search for new energies an urgent demand. The cost of electricity from fossil fuelled power stations is rising unpredictably with fuel resource exhaustions. The nuclear alternative offers only centralised and inflexible power. In addition, its competitiveness and safety are unproved. Photovoltaic electricity in contrast represents a clean and abundant resource which is available everywhere. Furthermore, it is especially appropriate as a decentralised power source and for meeting expensive peak demand. On the contrary, it is limited only by the high cost of the silicon wafers due to the tedious and expensive process to convert raw quartzite into semiconductor grade silicon. Novel photovoltaic materials such as organic semiconductors, in particular, could bring a step-change in costs that could enable the widespread implementation of photovoltaic power plants that is needed to cut the dependence on fossil fuelled electricity. Furthermore, OPV enables the production of low cost transparent photovoltaic devices for portable electronics and building applications where (semi)transparency and flexibility can play an attracting role.


 	Fig. 1  Energy levels of all materials involved in the fabrication of OPV. The different alternatives to be used as rectifying electrodes are also depicted in red. The device is always built from left to right, i.e. ITO is the first (or bottom) layer in the standard design, while Au (or ITO) followed by ZnO are the first and second layer, respectively to be processed in the inverted architecture. Light normally incides from left.	 


V
OC/V	0.62	0.59	0.58	0.56	0.58	0.54	0.59	0.57

J
SC/mA cm−2	9.86	9.65	7.12	5.59	7.85	6.52	8.33	6.93
FF (%)	57	62	61	56	56	54	71	65
PCE (%)	3.48	3.53	2.52	1.75	2.55	1.90	3.49	2.57

 	Fig. 2  
J–V characteristics in dark (filled symbols) and under 1 SUN (open symbols) for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different electrodes: standard ITO/PEDOT/…/Ca/Ag (squares), inverted ITO/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (circles), bottom sensitive Au/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (triangles) and top sensitive Au/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (inverted triangles). Inset: same data in log scale.	 

 	Fig. 3  Absorption (plain line) and EQE spectra for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different electrodes: standard ITO/PEDOT/…/Ca/Ag (squares) and inverted ITO/ZnO/…/PEDOT/Au (circles).	 

 	Fig. 4  Transmittance of the different electrodes used for the fabrication of semitransparent organic photovoltaic devices. The thickness of the layers is shown in parentheses. In the inset, some of the semitransparent devices fabricated at IKERLAN.	 

 	Fig. 5  
J–V characteristics under 1 SUN of semitransparent organic photovoltaic devices with and without ITO. Inset: transmittance of the whole device for different thicknesses of the photoactive layer.	 

 	Fig. 6  
J–V characteristics under 1 SUN of a tandem device and the containing sub-cells. Inset: structure of the tandem cell with all its layers. P3HT (Rieke) and PCBM (Nano-C) were dissolved in chlorobenzene and stirred overnight at 90 °C prior blending to form a 50 mg ml−1 solution 1:1 by weight. P3HT:PCBM films were deposited by Dr Blade at 65 °C at different blade speeds.	 

 	Fig. 7  
J–V characteristics in dark (filled symbols) and under 1 SUN (open symbols) for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different alternative electrodes: very sensitive to degradation materials, calcium and PEDOT:PSS, have been respectively substituted by more stable ZnO and MoO3 in inverted OPV devices (circles). ITO has additionally been replaced by an ultrathin metallic layer (triangles). Inset: same data in log scale.	 

 	Fig. 8  
          EQE
          spectra for P3HT:PCBM organic solar cells with different alternative ZnO and MoO3 electrodes (circles) and replacing ITO with a 5 nm thick gold layer (triangles).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2011
