To probe the performance of perovskite memory devices: defects property and hysteresis   - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC00266A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC00266A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 5810-5817To probe the performance of perovskite memory devices: defects property and hysteresis†

        
          
            Ziqi 
            Xu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zonghao 
            Liu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guanhaojie 
            Zheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Chen
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Huanping 
            Zhou
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Energy and Resources Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: happy_zhou@pku.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, College of Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100871, China
Received 
      17th January 2017
    , Accepted 25th April 2017First published on 25th April 2017AbstractHybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials offer a range of interesting characteristics that are suitable for optoelectronic devices, such as photovoltaics. Along with the fast rise in device performance, a current density–voltage (J–V) hysteresis originating from defects and their movement has attracted intense attention, which renders challenges regarding the stability and reliability of the novel materials. Here, we carefully probe the effects of defects in perovskite materials and across interfaces within the device, in which bistable conductive states are achieved for the next generation of nonvolatile memory. The memory device shows an operating voltage as low as 0.25 V, and a decent ON/OFF ratio. More importantly, we correlate the defect density and hysteresis-index of different perovskite films with the corresponding memory device performance. The findings enrich our understanding of the working mechanism of perovskite memory devices, which will also benefit other organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite optoelectronics.
1. Introduction
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite solar cells have been widely investigated because they offer great promise for third generation solar cells.1 This class of material possesses the advantages that are needed for an ideal absorber, including an appropriate and adjustable bandgap, high absorption coefficient, long carrier diffusion length and high tolerance of chemical defects.2 Therefore, the power conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells has been rapidly increased, by employing inexpensive solution processes at low temperatures.3 They also feature the compatibility of large-area fabrication and flexibility, that is attractive for further commercial production for optoelectronics.4 In contrast, perovskite materials and related devices exhibit some undesirable carrier behaviours in the bulk and in interfaces, e.g. hysteresis present in the current–voltage curves, which influences the stability and reliability assessment of the corresponding devices. However, on the other hand, the unique carrier behaviour could enable the potential application of perovskite in memory devices with excellent performance.5
Recently, resistive random access memory (RRAM) devices have been regarded as the most promising next generation nonvolatile memory devices due to their ultra-low power consumption, lower operational voltage, higher switching speed, endurance, high density, simple architecture and low cost.6–8 The fundamental resistive switching (RS) effect of RRAM originates from a saltation of resistance, reversible bistable state, and nonvolatile properties, which are mainly caused by the formation and rupture of a conductive filament or charge trapping by defects.9 Therefore, hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite materials with the unique carrier behaviour caused by the presence of defects and their movement can be utilized to fabricate nonvolatile memory devices. In 2015, Yoo et al. first reported an Au/CH3NH3PbI3−xClx/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) nonvolatile memory device, in which a remarkable appearance of the RS effect was demonstrated, with a low operating voltage of 0.8 V and an ON/OFF ratio of nearly 3.10 Later, Jaeho Choi et al. realized an improved device performance, such as resistive switching with an ON/OFF ratio greater than 106 and set voltages below 0.15 V, by employing special Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrates together with a mixed metal electrode.11 Also, perovskite memory devices were proved to be flexible, with a small sacrifice in device behaviour.12,13 In an attempt to further enhance the device characteristics, researchers have used Cu or Al as an electrode to achieve a much higher ON/OFF ratio with long cycle stability.14,15 Meanwhile, the energy level difference between perovskite and the electrode was also studied to adjust the operating voltage and the ON/OFF ratio in the presented perovskite memory devices.16–18 All these studies focused mainly on the fabrication of memory devices, and pointed out that the mechanism could be related to the migration of defects or charge trapping by defects. However, to the best of our understanding, there remain key challenges to clearly correlate the defect density/hysteresis behaviours with the performance of memory devices.
Here, we fabricate nonvolatile memory devices with a structure of indium tin oxide (ITO)/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag. These devices exhibit a resistive switching effect with an operating voltage of 0.25 V, which is the lowest voltage among the organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite based memristors on ITO conductive glass. Meanwhile, we calculated the defect density and hysteresis behaviour of different perovskite films and studied their impact on device performance. It was found that the defect density mainly affected the operating voltage, while the hysteresis behaviour impacted the ON/OFF ratio of the memory devices. Additionally, we demonstrated that flexible devices with a PET substrate remain stable after bending at a radius of curvature of 9.2 mm. The present work answers an open question regarding the relationship between current–voltage hysteresis and perovskite memory devices, which can also be used as a guide for advanced analogous devices and other optoelectronics.
2. Experimental details
2.1 Materials and device fabrication
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskite films were prepared by using simple solution methods. The detailed preparation methods of perovskite solution can be found in the ESI.†
The ITO substrate as the bottom electrode was cleaned by detergent, ethanol, acetone and isopropanol, respectively, and then dried in N2 gas. The surface of the substrates was treated by UV/O3 for 30 min before the next step. The perovskite solution was spin-coated on the ITO at 2000 rpm for 30 s, where ether was used as an anti-solvent to quickly drop onto the centre of the substrate during spin-coating. The obtained films were annealed at 100 °C for 5 min under a controlled environment of relative humidity at 30%. Finally, the device was completed by depositing a thermally evaporated MoO3 (50 nm) and Ag (150 nm) electrode with 0.102 cm2 under vacuum.
2.2 Measurement
A cross-sectional image of the device was obtained by scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (S4800). The current–voltage properties of the device were measured using a CHI660E electrochemical workstation. We applied a bias voltage to the Ag top electrode with the ITO bottom electrode grounded. The scanning rate for the current–voltage (I–V) curve was 0.1 V s−1. All samples were measured in a nitrogen glove box at room temperature. Photovoltaic performances were measured by using a Keithley 2400 source meter under simulated sunlight from an Oriel 300 solar simulator.
3. Results and discussion
A schematic illustration of the memory device structure is shown in Fig. 1(a). Accordingly, the simple structure consisted of a switching layer of CH3NH3PbI3, a top MoO3/Ag electrode, and a bottom ITO electrode. The bias was applied to the top Ag electrode, and the bottom ITO electrode was grounded. Different from previous studies, here we used the MoO3 as a buffer layer between the perovskite and the Ag electrode. The employment of MoO3 is beneficial to the operation of the corresponding memory devices. On one hand, the presence of MoO3 can decrease the energy level difference between the Ag electrode and perovskite, as described in Fig. 1(b). The relatively smaller energy level difference makes charge injection easier, which could further help to lower the operating voltage. On the other hand, without the MoO3 barrier layer, as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), the device exhibits no obvious memory properties, as is evident from the absence of a resistive switching effect in devices based on the structure ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/Ag. Fig. 1(c) displays the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the device, in which a uniform perovskite layer with thickness of 710 nm is distinguishable from the adjacent ITO and MoO3.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of the hybrid perovskite memory device. (b) Energy diagram of the perovskite memory device. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag structure. 
The I–V characteristics of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag device in a semi-log scale are shown in Fig. 2(a). It is apparent that the I–V curve displays bipolar resistive switching behaviour in a bias voltage sweep: 0 → 1 → 0 → −1.6 → 0 V. In detail, when a positive bias was applied to the device, the current density showed a tendency to increase slowly in the initial stage, indicating that the device exhibits a high resistance state (HRS, OFF state). Subsequently, an I–V saltation process was observed from 0.25 V to 0.5 V, namely a set process, meaning that a sudden increase in current occurs and the resistance switches from a high resistance state to a low resistance state (LRS, ON state). In general, the set process of a hybrid perovskite memory device is a region with a continuously biased voltage, except for a device based on a Cu anode.9–16 To visualize a clear set voltage, we applied a compliance current during the I–V test, according to reported work.10,12,18 As shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), the I–V curve depicts a sudden increase in current around 0.25 V when a compliance current of 0.01 A was applied. Therefore, 0.25 V was considered to be the operating voltage of the device. Strikingly, our device exhibits the lowest set voltage for perovskite memristors on conductive ITO glass. After the set process, the device retains the LRS although the bias voltage continues to increase. In contrast, with an increasing negative bias voltage, the device recovers its HRS, in the reset process.
 Fig. 2  (a) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag memristor device. (b) Current responses of the device at different applied voltage pulses during write-read-erase pulse cycles (specifically, 1 V to write, 0.2 V to read, then −1 V to erase and 0.2 V to read). 
To demonstrate the potential practical application of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag device as a rewritable resistance memory device, write-read-erase cycling tests were conducted to reveal the switching characteristics of the device, as shown in Fig. 2(b). The cycling pulse tests were designed as: 1 V to write, and 0.2 V to read, then −1 V to erase and 0.2 V to read. In addition, the I–V curve under a voltage sweep of 0 → 1 → 0 → −1 → 0 is shown in Fig. S3 (ESI†). The current was measured within 1/60 s at the end of each 0.1 s voltage pulse. The current responses to each read pulse (described as cycles) oscillated from 10−3 to 10−2 A, which can be repeated many times. The retention performance of the device at room temperature is shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†). The ON/OFF ratio at 0.1 V was more than 102 and the performance remained after 1000 s of testing. Moreover, after 240 hours, there was no significant degradation in the device performance, as shown in Fig. S5 (ESI†).
The switching behaviour of memristors can be mainly interpreted according to three regions: namely, ohmic, trap-filled limit (TFL) and space-charge limited conduction (SCLC), represented in Fig. 3(a). In order to further verify the conduction mechanism, we replotted the I–V curve on a double-log scale for the positive and negative voltage sweep regions, as shown in Fig. 3(b and c). The fitted results consist of an ohmic region (I ∝ V), a space-charge limited conduction (SCLC) region (I ∝ V2), and a sudden current increase region in between, called the trap-filled limited (TFL) region.19 In Fig. 3(b), in the voltage region ranging from 0 to 0.25 V, the ohmic conduction formed by the perovskite and metal anode is dominant, since the weak injection of electrons cannot fill all the traps in the perovskite materials. Then, in the sudden current increase region with a biased voltage from 0.25 V to 0.52 V, the injected electrons begin to fill the traps along with the rising voltage, until the voltage is large enough for all traps to be filled and the voltage is then called the VTFL (trap filled limitation voltage). This process is also named the set process, and the device transfers from HRS to LRS accordingly. Finally, SCLC is dominant in the following region, where the injected electrons have filled all the traps. In the voltage region ranging from 1 to 0 V, all of the traps have been filled and can be maintained due to the memory effect. Therefore, with voltage applied, the current is driven mainly by the mobile charge carriers injected from the contact, and the charge carrier density is dependent mainly on the mobility. As shown in Fig. 3(b), a likely linear relationship of I–V is dominant and the device exhibits LRS. In the reset process in Fig. 3(c), ohmic conduction is dominant when the negative voltage is applied from 0 to −1 V. Then the electrons trapped by the traps are extracted with the increasing voltage. Finally, in the region −1.6 to 0 V, the conduction varies from TFL, to SCLC, to ohmic.
 Fig. 3  Fitted I–V characteristics of the memory devices. (a) Semilogarithmic I–V characteristics with switching direction of applied voltages: 0 → 1 → 0 → -1.6 → 0 V. (b and c) Plots of logI–logV with fitted conduction mechanism in positive and negative sweeps, respectively. Blue: linear ohmic conduction. Green: trap-filled limitation. Red: space-charge-limited conduction. (d) Conductive mechanism combined with filamentary conduction and barrier modification. 
To examine the correlation between the materials defects and the memory device performance, we fabricated corresponding devices by varying the fabrication technique or the composition of the perovskite films. As shown in Fig. S6 (ESI†), a one-step stripping method utilizing a precursor mixture of PbI2 and CH3NH3I (MAI) with or without DMSO additive (named device One-step and One-step DMSO) was employed to form different perovskite films.20 Meanwhile, we also adopted the two-step interdiffusion method to achieve perovskite films with altered precursor solutions. These precursor solutions varied in their different inorganic/organic components, including PbI2-DMF/MAI-IPA (MACl), PbI2-acetonitrile (ACN)-DMF/MAI-IPA (MACl), PbI2-CsI-DMF/FAI-IPA (named device Two-step, Two-step ACN and Two-step FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3, respectively).21,22 The detailed fabrication procedure can be found in the ESI.† All the above film based devices were completed by utilizing the structure of ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag. In addition, we also made memory devices by substituting the Ag electrode with Au, where a two-step process with PbI2-DMF/MAI-IPA as the precursor was used to prepare the perovskite film (named device Two-step Au).
We measured the I–V characteristics of the aforementioned six kinds of devices, as shown in Table 1. They all display resistive switching behaviour, as shown in Fig. S7 (ESI†). We calculated their trap density, ntrap, by23–25 (1)where e is the elementary charge, VTFL is the trap-filled limit voltage, L is the thickness of perovskite film, ε0 is vacuum permittivity, and ε is the relative dielectric constant.
Table 1 Operating voltage and trap density of different devices




Device no.
Top electrode
Operating voltage (V)
Trap density (×1015 cm−3)




One-step
Ag
0.48
3.34


One-step DMSO
Ag
0.54
9.44


Two-step
Ag
0.45
6.12


Two-step Au
Au
0.79
12.2


Two-step ACN
Ag
0.47
18.3


Two-step FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3
Ag
0.63
33.9





Fig. 4(a and b) clearly illustrate the correlation between the defect density and the characteristics of the memory devices, e.g. the set voltage and ON/OFF ratio. We observed that devices One-step, One-step DMSO, Two-step, Two-step ACN have a relatively lower operating voltage (less than 0.5 V), as shown in Fig. 4(a). The calculated trap density is quite consistent with the trend in the operating voltage. The lower trap density of the film, the lower the operating voltage of the device, as represented in Fig. 4(b). This is probably because, when the same voltage is applied, the electrons will fill all the traps more easily in the films with the decreased trap density. Therefore, the device resistance can switch from HRS to LRS at a lower operating voltage. According to Fig. 4(c), we find that there is no significant trend between trap density and the ON/OFF ratio. In addition, we studied the influence of film thickness (350 nm, 480 nm, and 710 nm) on trap density, based on the structure of the One-step device, as shown in Fig. 4(d). This shows that a larger film thickness brings a smaller trap density, which may be associated with its larger grain size. Therefore, we suggest that the CH3NH3PbI3 film fabricated by the one-step method with a thicker film might achieve less hysteresis and higher stability for solar cells, because it has the lowest trap density in the same situation.
 Fig. 4  (a) Operating voltage of different devices. (b) Operating voltage and trap density of different devices. (c) ON/OFF ratio and trap density of different devices. (d) ON/OFF ratio and different film thicknesses. 
It is of particular interest to further probe the impact of J–V hysteresis that is observed in perovskite solar cells on the performance of memory devices. Therefore, the above five films were also used as absorber materials in solar cell devices based on a device structure of ITO/TiO2/CH3NH3PbI3/spiro-OMeTAD/MoO3/Ag. The fabrication processes for the films are exactly the same as those for the fabrication of the memory devices. It was observed that these devices exhibit different hysteresis to a certain degree. Generally, the prominent feature in the I–V hysteresis appears near the open-circuit voltage (Voc). Accordingly, an I–V hysteresis index (H-index) is defined by26 (2)where JRS (0.8Voc) and JFS (0.8Voc) express the current density at 80% of Voc for the reserve scan (RS) and forward scan (FS), respectively. In Table S1 (ESI†), hysteresis index values, together with other photovoltaic parameters e.g. open-circuit voltage (Voc), short-circuit current density (Jsc), fill factor (FF), and power conversion efficiency (PCE) under different scan directions are listed.
To visualize the comparison, the correlation between the H-index and the characteristics of the memory device, as well as the fabrication technique are plotted in Fig. 5. It was found that the devices based on a one-step method have a much larger H-index than those based on a two-step method, as shown in Fig. 5(a). Moreover, the perovskite films with a larger H-index in the solar cell devices do perform better as memory devices than those with smaller H-index, when considering the ON/OFF ratio. The H-index of the device is also linked with the trap density calculated above, where the comparisons are divided into two categories by taking account of the different fabrication methods and components, due to the complexity of solar cells. As shown by the circular points in Fig. 5(b), we find that the one-step perovskite film based device with a larger trap density also has a larger H-index, which further confirms various reported studies that the hysteresis is associated with the presence of traps. According to the triangular points in Fig. 5(b), there is a similar tendency between trap density and H-index for the two-step processed solar cell devices based on CH3NH3PbI3 (Cl). However, the two-step processed FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 film exhibits the largest trap density but the lowest H-index in the corresponding solar cell device, as shown in Fig. 5(b) by the pink point. It is quite interesting that the trap density in the materials does not necessarily lead to large hysteresis behaviour in the solar cell devices, which indicates that some other reasons might contribute to J–V hysteresis. Some experimental and simulation results have shown that both ion migration and interfacial defects cause the J–V hysteresis.27 Based on this statement, it is reasonable to suggest that ion migration behaves differently in FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3 and CH3NH3PbI3 (Cl). As is known, the radius of Cs+ is smaller than that of CH3NH3+, which possibly helps to hinder the I− movement in two aspects. On one hand, the incorporation of Cs+ in the perovskites results in cell lattice shrinkage, which thus requires a higher activation energy for I− hopping.28 On the other hand, the smaller size of Cs+ possibly provides higher electron affinity to bind the negatively charged ions. Therefore, the ion migration is significantly inhibited when Cs+ is incorporated in the mixed perovskites, which also suggests an alternative and feasible strategy to alleviate J–V hysteresis.
 Fig. 5  (a) H-index of different devices. (b) Trap density and H-index of different devices. (c) ON/OFF ratio and H-index of different devices. 
Regardless of the relationship between defect density and H-index, it is indeed observed that the larger H-index presented in solar cell devices leads to a larger ON/OFF ratio in the memory devices. This finding is unaffected by the different fabrication processes or the components that are used for the corresponding devices. A possible reason may relate to the defects in the bulk/interfaces, as well as the charge extraction/injection between the interfaces, which affects both hysteresis behaviour and the ON/OFF ratio. Recently, researchers have found that perovskite devices have the potential to serve as memory devices due to J–V hysteresis. The characteristics of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite based memory devices, such as the ON/OFF ratio, the set voltage, as well as write time are comparable to other inorganic semiconductor based devices. While the correlation between the hysteresis in perovskites solar cell devices and the performance of memory devices puzzled researchers because the origin of the hysteresis is complicated to a certain degree. Interestingly, although we have not gained a full picture of the operational mechanism of perovskite memory devices, a clear observation was found to be a hysteresis dependent ON/OFF ratio. To our understanding, there is no other report that identified the impact of hysteresis behaviour on the characteristics of memory devices. We admit that the memory performance of the perovskite devices did not reach a satisfactory level; however, the present study assists a better understanding of the operation mechanism and a way to improve it further.
The resistance switching mechanisms have not been well explained and there are two main hypotheses: filamentary conduction and barrier modification.13,29–32 With regard to the filamentary mechanism hypothesis, when a positive bias voltage is applied, the Ag atoms at the electrode would form Ag+ ions, and then migrate into the perovskite layer, combining with the electrons injected from the bottom ITO, and reducing to Ag atoms. As the voltage is further increased, the Ag filaments grow to bridge the two electrodes so that the resistance switches from HRS to LRS. Another speculation is that both filamentary conduction and barrier modification are involved in this process. This is because, before the bridge is completed, the conduction mechanism might be barrier modification, as shown in Fig. 3(d). When the positive bias voltage is applied in the ohmic region, the Ag bridge just starts to build, where there is a large barrier between the two electrodes so that the device exhibits HRS. When the voltage enters the TFL region, traps start to be filled, which decreases the barrier and some electrons might cross the barrier to combine with Ag atoms. Finally, as the voltage is increased into the SCLC region, the Ag bridge is completely built and traps have been filled without barriers, leading to the device being in LRS. Whereas, when a negative voltage is applied, the device would maintain LRS until a point at which Ag atoms start to form Ag+ ions and the electrons trapped by the traps begin to escape. Therefore, the device exhibits HRS again, and a cycle is completed. However, there is still a lack of sufficient evidence to support the above hypothesis and the formation of an Ag bridge needs further evidence, particularly because of the ready reaction between the Ag+ and I− in perovskite. On the basis of our experiments, we found that the barrier between the perovskite and the metal anode is indeed one of the reasons that is responsible for resistance switching. Fig. S9 (ESI†) shows the ON/OFF ratio of a memory device based on a one-step process by replacing the Ag with an Au electrode. Based on the comparison between the devices in Fig. S9 (ESI†), it can clearly be observed that the ON/OFF ratio of the Ag based device is larger than that of the Au based device. This is probably because the Ag electrode has a lower work function compared to the Au electrode, which leads to a larger barrier between the perovskite and the metal electrode, resulting in a larger current difference between LRS and HRS. Nevertheless, the operational mechanism of the memory devices still needs to be verified further.
Additionally, we fabricated a flexible perovskite memory device on a PET substrate to study its potential flexibility. The entire structure of this flexible device is similar to the above device architecture except for the replacement of the rigid glass by PET. We used a one-step method without any additives to fabricate the perovskite film. As shown by the blue curve in Fig. 6, the resistance switching effect was observed with a set voltage of 0.3 V, and an ON/OFF ratio of 15. The red curve represents the resistive switching properties of the device under bending states with a 9.2 mm radius of curvature. Interestingly, although a slight difference in current was observed between LRS and HRS, there is nearly no change in electrical properties after bending, with similar set voltage and ON/OFF ratio. Therefore, this indicates that PET/ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag devices exhibit good flexibility.
 Fig. 6  
I–V characteristics before and after bending (a radius of curvature of 9.2 mm). The inset photograph shows the bent state of the device. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, we demonstrated high performance nonvolatile memory devices based on the structure of ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag. These devices exhibit the resistive switching effect with an operating voltage at 0.25 V, which is the lowest voltage among lead halide perovskite memristors using the same device architecture. Additionally, a flexible perovskite memory device on a PET substrate was obtained to illustrate their further applications. Moreover, the defect density and hysteresis-index of different perovskite films were obtained and correlated with the memory device performance. We found that films with a lower defect density lead to a lower set voltage, and the severe hysteresis behaviour results in a better ON/OFF ratio of the resulting memory devices, which partially addresses concerns regarding current–voltage hysteresis and memory behaviour. The present work provides an in-depth understanding of perovskite memory devices, which also further helps in the rational design of perovskite solar cells or other optoelectronics.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge funding support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51672008), Young Talent Thousand Program and ENN Group. The authors thank Qingying Zhang for providing guidance for figures graphing.
Notes and references
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and I. S. Sang, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, H. Zhou, Y. Fang, A. Z. Stieg, T. B. Song, H. H. Wang, X. Xu, Y. Liu, S. Lu, J. You, P. Sun, J. McKay, M. S. Goorsky and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Best Research-Cell Efficiencies, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2016, http://go.nature.com/2exvAq0.
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 26, 6503 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Chen, C. F. Chen, C. T. Chen, J. Y. Yu, S. Wu, S. L. Lung, R. Liu and C. Y. Lu, Proc. IEDM, 2003, 750–753 Search PubMed .

          Y. B. Kim, S. R. Lee, D. Lee and B. L. Chang, In Symposium on VLSI Technology, IEEE, Honolulu, USA,  2011, p. 52 Search PubMed .
J. Ouyang, C. W. Chu, C. R. Szmanda, L. Ma and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 3, 918 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Waser and M. Aono, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Choi, S. Park, J. Lee, K. Hong, D. H. Kim, C. W. Moon, G. D. Park, J. Suh, J. Hwang, S. Y. Kim, H. S. Jung, N. G. Park, S. Han, K. T. Nam and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gu and J. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yan, B. Chen, H. Hu, S. Chen, B. Dong, X. Gao, X. Xiao, J. Zhou and D. Zou, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600160 CrossRef .
G. Lin, Y. Lin, R. Cui, H. Huang, X. Guo, C. Li, J. Dong, X. Guo and B. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10793 RSC .
C. Wang, Y. Chen, B. Zhang, S. Liu, Q. Chen, Y. Cao and S. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2015, 45, 484 RSC .
Y. Liu, F. Li, Z. Chen, T. Guo, C. Wu and T. W. Kim, Vacuum, 2016, 130, 109 CrossRef CAS .
C. Muthu, S. Agarwal, A. Vijayan, P. Hazra, K. B. Jinesh and V. C. Nair, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600092 CrossRef .
E. Yoo, M. Lyu, J. H. Yun, C. Kang, Y. Choi and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7824 RSC .
R. H. Bube, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 1733 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ahn, D. Y. Son, I. H. Jang, S. M. Kang, M. Choi and N. G. Park, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, Q. Chen, X. Wang and H. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J. Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J. P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzela, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989 CAS .
Q. Dong, Y. Fang, Y. Shao, P. Mulligan, J. Qiu, L. Cao and J. Huang, Science, 2015, 347, 967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Han, S. H. Bae, P. Sun, Y. T. Hsieh, Y. M. Yang, Y. S. Rim, H. Zhao, Q. Chen, W. Shi, G. Li and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim and N. G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Ball and A. Petrozza, Nat. Energy, 2016, 149 Search PubMed .
D. A. Jacobs, Y. Wu, H. Shen, C. Barugkin, F. J. Beck, T. P. White, K. Weber and K. R. Catchpole, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3094–3103 RSC .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. V. Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Chae, J. S. Lee, S. Kim, S. B. Lee, S. H. Chang, C. Liu, B. Kahng, H. Shin, D. W. Kim, C. U. Jung, S. Seo, M. J. Lee and T. W. Noh, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sawa, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 28 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lee, S. Han, S. H. Jeon, B. H. Park, B. S. Kang, S. E. Ahn, K. H. Kim, C. B. Lee, C. J. Kim, I. K. Yoo, D. H. Seo, X. S. Li, J. B. Park, J. H. Lee and Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Niu, P. Calka, M. A. D. Maur, F. Santoni, S. Guha, M. Fraschke, P. Hamoumou, B. Gautier, E. Perez, C. Walczyk, C. Wenger, A. D. Carlo, L. Alff and T. Schroeder, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 25757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc00266aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic structure of the hybrid perovskite memory device. (b) Energy diagram of the perovskite memory device. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag structure.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics of the ITO/CH3NH3PbI3/MoO3/Ag memristor device. (b) Current responses of the device at different applied voltage pulses during write-read-erase pulse cycles (specifically, 1 V to write, 0.2 V to read, then −1 V to erase and 0.2 V to read).	 

 	Fig. 3  Fitted I–V characteristics of the memory devices. (a) Semilogarithmic I–V characteristics with switching direction of applied voltages: 0 → 1 → 0 → -1.6 → 0 V. (b and c) Plots of logI–logV with fitted conduction mechanism in positive and negative sweeps, respectively. Blue: linear ohmic conduction. Green: trap-filled limitation. Red: space-charge-limited conduction. (d) Conductive mechanism combined with filamentary conduction and barrier modification.	 
	(1)

One-step	Ag	0.48	3.34
One-step DMSO	Ag	0.54	9.44
Two-step	Ag	0.45	6.12
Two-step Au	Au	0.79	12.2
Two-step ACN	Ag	0.47	18.3
Two-step FA0.9Cs0.1PbI3	Ag	0.63	33.9

 	Fig. 4  (a) Operating voltage of different devices. (b) Operating voltage and trap density of different devices. (c) ON/OFF ratio and trap density of different devices. (d) ON/OFF ratio and different film thicknesses.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 5  (a) H-index of different devices. (b) Trap density and H-index of different devices. (c) ON/OFF ratio and H-index of different devices.	 

 	Fig. 6  
I–V characteristics before and after bending (a radius of curvature of 9.2 mm). The inset photograph shows the bent state of the device.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c7tc00266a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
