Solar-powered electrochemical energy storage: an alternative to solar fuels  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA06950E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA06950E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2766-2782Solar-powered electrochemical energy storage: an alternative to solar fuels

        
          
            Mingzhe 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            William D. 
            McCulloch
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhongjie 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Brittany B. 
            Trang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Lu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Khalil 
            Amine
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Yiying 
            Wu
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry & Biochemistry, The Ohio State University, 100 West 18th Avenue, Columbus, Ohio 43210, USA. E-mail: wu@chemistry.ohio-state.edu;  Fax: +1-614-292-1685;   Tel: +1-614-247-7810
bChemical Science & Engineering Division, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, Illinois 60439, USA
Received 
      1st September 2015
    , Accepted 18th November 2015First published on 18th November 2015AbstractBecause of the intermittent nature of solar radiation, being able to simultaneously convert and store solar energy is a significant advance for efficiently harnessing solar energy. Solar fuels have already been recognized as a promising method towards this goal and have attracted tremendous research interest recently. Alternatively, this goal can also be achieved by using the solar-powered electrochemical energy storage (SPEES) strategy, which integrates a photoelectrochemical cell and an electrochemical cell into a single device. The integrated device is able to harvest solar energy and store it in situ within the device via a photocharging process and also distribute the energy as electric power when needed. This essay reviews the past SPEES research and analyzes its future prospects with a special emphasis on chemical design and material choices. We hope that the article will help draw more research attention to this field and stimulate additional exciting investigations toward more efficient solar energy utilization.
1. Introduction
Due to the drastic increasing energy demand of the modern society and limited supply of current fossil fuels, exploring alternative renewable energy sources has become one urgent and central mission for scientists. In pursuit of efficient and economic alternative energy sources, sunlight has been recognized as a promising green and sustainable next-generation energy source owing to its abundant supply and minimum negative environmental impact. Since Fujishima and Honda's report on photochemical water splitting by TiO2 in 1972 (ref. 1), harvesting and storing solar energy as chemical energy has been a research hotspot for decades. Solar fuels, based on the concept of using “artificial photosynthesis” to produce hydrogen or organic fuels, have shown great promise in simultaneously converting and storing solar energy.2–11 The use of solar fuel involves three steps: solar fuel generation (energy conversion), solar fuel storage (energy storage), and electric power production (energy distribution) (Scheme 1a). During the past few decades, significant achievements have been reported for the solar fuel generation step. Nevertheless, how to store and distribute the photo-generated solar fuel in an efficient and economic manner remains to be addressed. For instance, even though there have been breakthroughs in hydrogen production from water splitting, the hydrogen economy also needs more efficient hydrogen storage12–17 and inexpensive fuel cell18–22 technologies for it to be possible to use hydrogen power in practical applications.
 Scheme 1  Solar energy utilization: (a) the three-step process with conventional solar fuels, and (b) the integrated “all-in-one” process by using the SPEES strategy based on a solar battery. 
Conventionally, solar fuels store energy via breaking and forming chemical bonds in compounds that are generated and collected in photoelectrochemical (PEC) cells.23–27 Alternatively, the harvested solar energy may be stored electrochemically as a shift in the Nernst potential of redox electrolytes or in the chemical capacitance of an electrochemical (EC) cell. This can be achieved by using the solar-powered electrochemical energy storage (SPEES) strategy, which integrates a PEC cell and an EC cell (i.e., a battery or an electrochemical capacitor) into a single device.27–29 Upon solar illumination, the device can be photocharged with the harvested solar energy that can be stored in situ. The stored electrochemical energy can then be discharged and distributed as electric power when needed (Scheme 1b). This not only resolves the aforementioned challenges with conventional solar fuels, but also brings additional practical benefits, including minimized electron and energy loss during device-to-device transfer, simpler manufacturing process, lower fabrication costs, and higher compatibility with currently commercialized PEC and EC devices.
Although the SPEES concept was initially proposed as early as 1976 (ref. 30), thus far it has received less attention compared to the research enthusiasm shown for solar fuels. In this article, we aim to critically review the SPEES research progress and discuss its future prospects. We begin by discussing the general design and chemical principles of a solar battery which is a device that conveys the SPEES concept. A comprehensive review of various types of solar batteries will then follow. After summarizing the past research progress, we will provide an analysis of future directions with suggestions for the chemical design and material choices for solar batteries. The last portion of the article will briefly discuss another type of SPEES device based on the mechanical integration of PEC cells and EC cells.
2. General design and chemical principle of solar batteries
Solar batteries are based on the chemical integration of PEC cells and EC cells via the linkage of a redox electrolyte. A typical solar battery consists of an anode/anolyte half-cell and cathode/catholyte half cell, which are separated by an ion-selective membrane and store harvested solar energy in the form of Nernst potential shift of redox couples. The photoelectrode (PE) is used in contact with the redox-based electrolyte for solar energy harvesting and conversion.
Depending on the specific PE–electrolyte combination, solar batteries can be categorized into three different types (Scheme 2): (a) the photoanode–catholyte design, (b) the photocathode–anolyte design, and (c) the photoanode–catholyte|anolyte–photocathode tandem design. Because thus far most solar batteries have adopted the photoanode–catholyte design, we will use this as an example to illustrate the design detail and working mechanism of a solar battery. The other two designs are constructed in a similar fashion.
 Scheme 2  Schematic of a redox-based solar battery: (a) the photoanode–catholyte design, (b) the photocathode–anolyte design, and (c) the tandem design. 
In a photoanode–catholyte design-based solar battery, on the cathode side, a PE and a counter electrode (CE) are immersed in the redox-active catholyte (Cox/Cred), while on the anode side, an anode is immersed in the anolyte. Depending on the individual design of the solar battery, either the anode or anolyte is redox-active (Aox/Ared). An ion-selective membrane separates the anolyte and catholyte and allows specific ion transport. Some solar batteries also have catholyte and anolyte reservoirs for adjusting the flowing electrolyte amounts.
The photoelectrode as pictured in Scheme 3 possesses two energy levels (yellow bands), which allows for light harvesting. When using a semiconductor PE these upper and lower energy levels are analogues to the semiconductor's Conduction Band Minimum (CBM) and Valence Band Maximum (VBM), respectively. For a dye-sensitized photoelectrode the upper energy level is attributed to the CBM of the semiconductor while the lower corresponds to the dye's oxidation potential (approximated by the dye's Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO)). During the photocharging process, the PE and anode are connected to an external circuit. Upon illumination, in the semiconductor-based PE case, the PE harvests incident photons and generates electron–hole pairs (eqn (2.1)). The photo generated holes present in the valence band diffuse to the PE–catholyte interface and oxidize the catholyte (eqn (2.2)). Meanwhile, the photo-generated electrons in the conduction band move to the anode side through the external circuit and reduce the anode-active species (eqn (2.3)). In the device, a net ion-transport flows through the separator and balances the internal charge. In this process, the Nernst potential of the Cox/Cred couple (Ec) shifts positively while the Nernst potential of the Aox/Ared couple (Ea) shifts negatively, corresponding to the amount of harvested solar energy being electrochemically stored (Scheme 3a). The photocharging proceeds until the generated photovoltage on the PE can no longer support the net electric flow because of the increased redox potential difference (i.e. |Ec − Ea|), interfacial recombination, and internal resistance. PE + hυ → PE–e− + h+(2.1) h+ + Cred → Cox(2.2) PE–e− + Aox → Ared (through external circuit),(2.3)
 Scheme 3  The energy diagram of a solar battery: (a) the photocharging process, and (b) the discharging process. 
In the discharging process, the cathode and anode are connected to an external load. Electrons flow out of the anode and into the cathode, reducing the catholyte and oxidizing the active species on the anode side (eqn (2.4) and (2.5)). In this way, the device converts the stored chemical energy to electric power. Thermodynamically, the discharging process is a reversed charging process, with Ea shifting positively and Ec shifting negatively (Scheme 3b). Cox + e− → Cred(2.4) Ared → Aox + e−(2.5)
For solar batteries, the theoretical cell voltage is equal to the difference in redox potential between the catholyte/cathode and anolyte/anode. The photocharging current is proportional to the photoelectrode surface area, while the maximum capacity is controlled by the amount of redox-active species presented in the electrolyte/electrode. Thus, the power and energy capacity of a solar battery can be tuned independently: the power can be adjusted by the electrode surface area, and the device capacity can be adjusted by the amounts of catholyte and anolyte in the electrolyte reservoirs. The separation of power and energy capacity components is the same advantage as flow batteries.
The choice of electrolyte solvent not only affects the electrolyte solubility, electrolyte–solvent molecular interactions, and the device's operating voltage window, but also determines the solar battery's lifetime, fabrication cost, and environmental friendliness since the solvent is used in large amounts. Although thus far both water and common organic solvents have been used for lab-scale concept demonstrations, it is preferable to use water as the solvent in a practical solar battery considering the volatility, high cost, and environmental toxicity of large amounts of organic solvents. Moreover, the use of redox-active aqueous electrolytes offers the additional advantage of compatibility with the current Redox Flow Batteries (RFBs) systems and thus can be more easily commercialized.
The catholyte is crucial to the photoanode–catholyte based system because it acts as a bridge between the PEC and EC parts of the device. A proper Nernst potential is the first factor that needs to be considered when choosing a catholyte. Upon photocharging a solar battery, a more negative potential is necessary for the catholyte to have sufficient electron-injection driving force to deliver a large current to the PE. However, during discharging, a potential that is as positive as possible will maximize the obtainable output voltage. Therefore, there must be a trade-off on the catholyte potential to optimize both the operating current and the voltage. Secondly, the charge-transfer kinetics at the catholyte–CE interface should be fast during discharging, while the recombination kinetics at the catholyte–PE interface should be slow during photocharging. Moreover, because of the complicated solvation and hydrolysis process, the fundamental aqueous redox chemistry should be carefully investigated. Factors including the aqueous speciation, solubility, conductivity, ionic activity, energy storage capacity, electrochemical and photoelectrochemical stability should be examined. Finally, to move towards practical applications, the elemental earth abundance, environmental toxicity, and industry-level fabrication cost aspects should be considered as well.
In solar batteries, the maximum achievable cell voltage and photocharging current are determined by the PE's bandgap (or the energy difference between the dye's HOMO and semiconductor's CBM, for the dye-sensitized PE case). A larger bandgap offers higher achievable cell voltage but smaller photocurrent, and vice versa. The semiconductor's VBM (or the dye's HOMO) needs be more positive than the catholyte redox potential for the catholyte–PE electron transfer to have sufficient thermodynamic driving force. Meanwhile, the semiconductor's VBM should not be too positive to cause solvent oxidation on the PE surface. Therefore, both the material's optical bandgap and band edge alignment need to be carefully evaluated when investigating PE materials for solar batteries.
The choice of anolyte should match the PE and catholyte choices, with considerations on the Nernst potential, solution-phase redox chemistry, as well as chemical compositions. Thermodynamically, the anolyte redox potential should be as negative as possible for maximized cell voltage, meanwhile still more positive than the PE's CBM for spontaneous electron injection to support a fully photochargeable solar battery. Otherwise, the system will be operated at a “photoassisted charging” status with additional external power input required. Nevertheless, it should be noted that photoassisted charging devices have the unique advantage of being able to support a higher discharging voltage.31,32 Also, the anolyte will preferably have a similar elemental composition to its corresponding catholyte so that electrolyte cross-over contamination is easier to handle and the entire system suffers less damage when leakage occurs.
An ideal membrane separator should have high selective-ion conductivity, low permeability for reactive electrolyte species, high chemical and mechanical stability, and low fabrication cost. In fact, most membrane separators that have been developed for RFBs and fuel cells can be applied to solar batteries. For instance, the Nafion membrane is a good separator candidate because it is able to efficiently conduct protons and can also be modified to selectively conduct alkali cations (e.g. Li+, Na+ and K+).
Additionally, the solution-phase chemistry of the anolyte should also be carefully investigated. First, the redox kinetics of the anolyte at the anolyte–anode interface should be fast and efficient, with minimum voltage loss at high charging and discharging current. Secondly, the Hydrogen Evolution Reaction (HER) on the anode should be suppressed, either thermodynamically or kinetically, so that the hydrogen gas will not be evolved during the solar battery operation.
As discussed above, in a solar battery with the photoanode–catholyte design, the redox-based catholyte couple, Cox/Cred, acts as a critical bridge to link the PEC part with the EC part. In the following section, we will review existing solar battery systems categorized by different redox-based catholytes.
3. Solar batteries with different redox-based catholytes
3.1 Sulfur-based solar batteries
The first solar battery concept was proposed by Hodes et al. in 1976 (ref. 30 and 33). In their work, a polycrystalline CdSe electrode was used as the PE and immersed in an aqueous S/S2−catholyte. A Ag2S/Ag couple was used as the anode. The CdSe semiconductor has a bandgap of ∼1.4 eV and CBM at −1.0 V (vs. NHE; all potentials are referenced to the Normal Hydrogen Electrode, NHE, in this article). The redox potential of S/S2− and Ag2S/Ag couples lies at −0.45 V at pH = 14 and −0.69 V, respectively. Therefore, both the electrochemical oxidation of S2− and reduction of Ag+ are thermodynamically favorable. Upon illumination, photo-generated electron–hole pairs are separated at the PE–catholyte interface. The holes are injected into the catholyte and the electrons are transported through the external circuit (eqn (3.1) and (3.2)). The output electrons flow through the external load to provide electric power and also reduce Ag2S to S on the anode (eqn (3.3)). Therefore, upon illumination, the device simultaneously stores harvested solar energy and outputs electric power. In the dark, due to the reduction of electron Fermi level in the PE, the Ag anode is spontaneously oxidized, providing electrons to electrochemically reduce the S on the CE surface (eqn (3.4) and (3.5)). Through this process, the previously stored electrochemical energy is released as electricity. 2CdSe + 2hυ → 2CdSe–e− + 2h+(3.1) S2− + 2h+ → S(3.2) 2CdSe–e− + Ag2S → 2CdSe + Ag + S2− (through external circuit),(3.3) Ag + S2− → Ag2S + 2e−(3.4) S + 2e− → S2−(3.5)
In Hodes' initial design, the catholyte was in direct contact with the anode (Fig. 1a). Although the cell was able to be photocharged under illumination and discharged in the dark with a photovoltage around 130–150 mV (Fig. 1b), the storage efficiency was low. The researchers then improved their design by introducing a membrane separator and an anolyte to protect the anode and avoid the severe anode-catholyte recombination. They also pointed out that to reduce the fabrication cost for practical applications, the Ag+/Ag anode couple can be replaced by other metal couples such as Zn(OH)2/Zn and SnO32−/Sn (ref. 33).
 Fig. 1  The membrane-free three-electrode design of the sulfur redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic: (1), chalcogenide PE; (3), S2−/S solution; (4), load; (5), storage electrode; (6), inert counter-electrode, and (b) the open-circuit voltage against time profile: ↑, light on; ↓, light off. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: [Nature] (ref. 30), copyright (1976). 
In a follow-up work by Ang and Sammells,34 they studied two other sulfur-based battery configurations: (1), n-CdSe|Na2S/S/NaOH aqueous catholyte|Na+-Nafion|Na2Se/Se/NaOH aqueous anolyte|Pt, and (2), n-CdSe|Na2S/S/Na2Se/Se/NaOH aqueous catholyte|Na+-Nafion|NaOH aqueous anolyte|Cd. The second design was able to achieve better performance with a discharging voltage of 400 mV and current of 8.25 mA cm−2 after the photocharging.
Bratin and Tomkiewicz further optimized the sulfur-redox based system by employing a Nafion-315 membrane as the separator and Zn(OH)42−/Zn couple as the anode (eqn (3.6)) (ref. 35). They used the cell configuration of n-CdSe|S/Na2S/NaOH aqueous solution|Nafion|Na2Zn(OH)4/NaOH aqueous solution|Zn–C and found that the Nafion membrane exhibited low resistivity in alkaline solution as it efficiently conducted Na+ cations. Bratin and Tomkiewicz's device achieved a charge efficiency of 83% and voltage efficiency of 75%. Zn + 4OH− ↔ Zn(OH)42− + 2e−(3.6)
In 1987, Licht proposed a “light-variation-insensitive high-efficiency solar cell”.36–38 His design used a piece of single crystalline Cd(Se0.65Te0.35) semiconductor as the PE, a piece of CoS thin film as the CE, and a polysulfide-based aqueous electrolyte (1.0 M Cs2S4, 0.8 M CsHS and 0.8 M CsOH, Eo(Sj+12−/Sj2−) = −0.5 V) as the catholyte. The redox-active anode consists of a metallic tin electrode (Eo(Sn2+/Sn) = −0.95 V) immersed in an aqueous anolyte (1.8 M CsHS and 1.8 M CsOH). A sulfonated co-polymer of styrene and Teflon (Permion 1010 membrane), is used as the separator. The solar battery's electrodes were connected to an external load as shown in Fig. 2. Upon illuminating the PE, photo-generated holes are injected into the catholyte and electrons are transported to the external circuit (eqn (3.7) and (3.8)). The output electrons then can either (1) reduce SnS to Sn on the anode side (eqn (3.9)) or (2) flow through the external load for power output and then flow back to the CE (Fig. 2a). In the discharging process, the Sn anode is oxidized, releasing electrons to the external load and electrochemically reducing polysulfide in the catholyte (eqn (3.10) and (3.11)) (Fig. 2b). 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35) +2hυ → 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)–e− + 2h+(3.7) S2− + 2h+ + Sj2− → Sj+12− (simplified situation),(3.8) 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)–e− + SnS → 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35) + Sn + S2− (through external circuit),(3.9) Sn + S2− → SnS + 2e−(3.10) Sj+12− + 2e−→ S2− + Sj2− (simplified situation),(3.11)
 Fig. 2  The n-CdSe0.65Te0.35/Cs2Sx/SnS solar battery with P, S and L representing the photoelectrode, anode and external load, respectively: (a) electron flow upon illumination, (b) electron flow in the dark, and (c) two days outdoor operation of the solar battery under 1500 Ω load. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: [Nature] (ref. 33), copyright (1987). 
In Licht's work, the optimized device was able to simultaneously support a 1500 Ω external load and drive the electrochemical reduction of SnS to Sn for energy storage at a working condition of 0.33 mA and 0.495 V under illumination. Fig. 2c shows the device's very stable two-day outdoor performance. The device had a faradaic efficiency of 95% and an overall solar-to-electrical load conversion efficiency of 11.3%. The author pointed out that the PE was limiting the overall performance and thus this system could be further improved by optimizing the PE to deliver higher working photocurrent.37
Because the sulfur/polysulfide/sulfide couple has very rich redox chemistry (i.e., readily tunable redox potential with various co-existing redox-active species in solution),38 it is widely used in quantum dot solar cells (QD-DSCs)39–42 and metal–sulfur batteries.43–47 However, to date there have only been limited studies on sulfur-based solar batteries (those summarized above). This is mainly due to the high fabrication-cost single crystalline semiconductor and the toxicity of Cd-based photoelectrodes. The identification of economic and environmentally friendly photoelectrode materials which are compatible with the sulfur-based electrolyte will be the central topic for further development of sulfur-based solar batteries.
3.2 Iodine-based solar batteries
The triiodide/iodide (I3−/I−) redox couple is the most widely employed catholyte in solar batteries. Its Nernst potential lies at +0.5 V in water and +0.35 V in organic solvents (e.g. acetonitrile (MeCN)).48 The iodine redox-based solar battery was inspired by the use of I3−/I− couple as a redox electrolyte in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSCs).26,49 A typical DSC consists of a dye-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 film PE, an I3−/I− redox electrolyte, and a platinum-coated CE. In an iodine-based solar battery, the DSC's counter electrode is replaced by a membrane-separated anode half cell.
During the photocharging process, the chemisorbed dye molecules are photo-excited and inject electrons to the CB of TiO2. The oxidized dye molecules are then regenerated by I− anions. Meanwhile, the redox-active species on the anode side is reduced by electrons from the PE. Within the device, the membrane separator allows ion flow to balance the internal charge (eqn (3.12) to (3.15)). During the discharging process, the electricity output is obtained through the electrochemical oxidization of the Ared to Aox on the anode side and reduction of I3− to I− on the cathode side (eqn (3.16) and (3.17)). Dye + hυ → dye*(3.12) Dye* + TiO2 → dye+ + TiO2–e−(3.13) 2Dye+ + 3I− → 2dye + I3−(3.14) TiO2–e− + Aox → TiO2 + Ared (through external circuit),(3.15) 3I− + 2e− → I3−(3.16) Ared → Aox + e−(3.17)
In 2002, Hauch and Orel et al. reported the first I3−/I− redox-based solar battery (Fig. 3).50 They adopted a two-electrode design with a N3-senstized TiO2 PE, a LiI/LiI3/propylene carbonate (PC) catholyte, and a Pt-coated CE. A WO3 layer was placed underneath the PE to act as the anode. In this two-electrode WO3|LixWO3‖LiI|LiI3 design, the PE was mesoporous, allowing for Li+ transport. Meanwhile, the PE also acted as a separator to prevent the self-discharging reaction. Since the reduction potential of Li+-intercalation into WO3 is close to 0 V (ref. 51) and TiO2's CBM is about −0.5 V (ref. 52), electrons will inject into the WO3 from the TiO2 to form the charged LixWO3 species during an open-circuit photocharging process (eqn (3.18)). Meanwhile, I3− anions are produced in the catholyte by regenerating the oxidized dye molecules. For the discharging process, the WO3 electrode and Pt-based CE were connected to an external load for outputting power through the electrochemical reduction of I3− and oxidization of LixWO3. xLi+ + WO3 + xe− ↔ LixWO3(3.18)
 Fig. 3  The two-electrode iodine redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic: upper part, photocharging under open-circuit conditions; lower part, discharging via an external load, and (b) the voltage against time profile for discharging in the dark with different external loads. Reprinted from ref. 50, reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2002. 
After 1 hour's photocharging (1000 W m−2), the device achieved a Voc of 0.6 V and was able to be discharged to a capacity of 1.8 C cm−2. The researchers suggested that the battery's overall capacity was limited by the insufficient Li+ concentration in the electrolyte. They also highlighted that this device could be useful for indoor systems because of its improved performance under low illumination conditions and suggested that it could also be applied as a photoelectrochromic device because of the color switch between WO3 and LixWO3 (ref. 53).
Later in 2009, Segawa's group optimized Hauch and Orel's solar battery system with a three-electrode design (Fig. 4a).54 The catholyte was a LiI/LiI3/MeCN solution, while the anolyte was a LiClO4/MeCN solution separated by a Li+-Nafion membrane. The authors created a surface-oxidized WO3 anode (so-WO3) by thermally annealing the tungsten substrate in air. Compared to the conventional monoclinic nano-crystalline WO3 anode (nc-WO3), the so-WO3 anode showed higher Voc and better cycling stability because of its better Li+ diffusion at various Li+-intercalation depths (Fig. 4b). Under optimized conditions, a specific discharge capacity of 12 mA h g−1 and coulombic efficiency of >92% was reported for at least seven cycles. The authors believed that although the specific capacity was lower than those of lithium-ion batteries, there was room for improvement if suitable structural and morphological anode engineering were investigated. In 2012, Gao et al. reported a similar solar battery design but replaced the platinum CE with TiN nanotube arrays on a Ti mesh.55 They claimed that the TiN-decorated Ti nanostructure not only reduced the device fabrication cost but also facilitated catholyte diffusion to the CE for better current collection.
 Fig. 4  The three-electrode iodine redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic, and (b) the discharge curves with so-WO3 or nc-WO3 at 0.1 mA cm−2 current flow. Reprinted from ref. 54, reproduced with permission by The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2009. 
Segawa's group has also investigated using a conducting polymer, polypyrrole (PPy), as the anode material.56,57 The PPy was coated on a FTO substrate via electro-polymerization deposition. Since the redox potential of PPy+/PPy lies at −0.35 V vs. SCE, the external electron injection from TiO2 to PPy+ is favored. During photocharging and discharging, the ClO4− anodic doping and de-doping took place on the PPy anode, enabling the chemical energy storage and release processes (eqn (3.19)). The charge storage efficiency was up to 22% and was retained for more than ten cycles. PPy + xClO4− ↔ PPyx+: xClO4− + xe−(3.19)
Gao et al. further explored Hauch, Orel, and Segawa's pioneering work on iodine redox-based solar batteries by replacing the solid anode (i.e. LixWO3 and PPy) with redox-active anolyte species.58 This innovation is a significant advantage in terms of mass energy storage because the system's maximum capacity can be adjusted by changing the amount of the redox-active catholyte and anolyte in the electrolyte reservoirs, mimicking RFBs.59,60 Their first attempt used a [Fe(C10H15)2]+/[Fe(C10H15)2] (i.e. DMFc+/DMFc) couple as the redox-active anolyte. According to the cyclic voltammograms (CV), the DMFc+/DMFc couple showed good electrochemical reversibility with a redox potential more positive than the CBM of TiO2 (Fig. 5a) (eqn (3.20)). In their work, a Z907-dye sensitized TiO2 film was used as the PE and platinum-coated FTO glass was used as the CE and anode. The catholyte, a LiI/LiI3/LiClO4/PC solution, was separated from the anolyte, a DMFc+/DMFc/LiClO4/3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN) solution, by using a ceramic Li+-ion conductive membrane. The membrane allowed Li+ cation transport and for different solvents to be used on each side. After photocharging to a Voc close to 0.6 V, the solar battery was discharged at a sloped voltage plateau of ∼0.33 V (Fig. 5b). Although the overall photo-to-electricity efficiency was only 0.15%, their device showed good cyclability of ten cycles with more than 61% of the photocapacity utilized. DMFc+ + e− ↔ DMFc(3.20)
 Fig. 5  The solar battery based on iodine and DMFc redox couples: (a) cyclic voltammograms of the I3−/I− couple in PC and DMFc+/DMFc couple in MPN with scan rate as 10 mV s−1, and (b) the voltage against time profile for photocharging and discharging at a current flow of 0.03 mA. Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013. 
Gao's group also investigated using aqueous soluble redox couples as the solar battery anolyte, such as the Li2WO4/Li2+xWO4 and quinoxaline (C8H6N2/C8H6N2−) redox couples (eqn (3.21) and (3.22)).61,62 Both of these couples have slightly more negative Nernst potential in water compared to the DMFc+/DMFc couple in organic solvent. Therefore, these aqueous-compatible redox couples bring additional advantages including a higher working voltage (i.e. photocharged Voc close to 0.8 V), lower fabrication cost, and less environmental toxicity. Li2WO4 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ Li2+xWO4(3.21) C8H6N2 + e− ↔ C8H6N2−(3.22)
However, the performance of these systems is limited, mainly due to the low ion conductivity (up to 10−4 S cm−1 at room temperature) of the Li+-ion conductive ceramic membrane, which introduces a large voltage polarization at high current. Moreover, the brittle nature and high fabrication cost of the ceramic membrane hinder these systems from being used in large-scale applications. Therefore, the development of better ionic-conducive membranes is necessary for iodine-based systems to be further improved.
Most recently, in 2015, Wu and colleagues developed an aqueous lithium–iodine (Li–I) solar flow battery.32 In their device, the dye-sensitized TiO2 is used as the PE, the I3−/I− couple is used as the catholyte, and the Li+/Li couple is used as the anode (Fig. 6a). This was the first time that the dye-sensitized photoanode was immersed in an aqueous catholyte, which is an important step in improving the compatibility with current aqueous RFB systems. Since the redox potential of the Li+/Li couple (i.e., −3.04 V) is more negative than the conduction band of TiO2, an external voltage input is required for the charging process under illumination, which is called the “photoassisted charging” process (Fig. 6b). The cell was discharged at 3.3 V and charged at 2.8 V under solar illumination, exhibiting a “negative” charging overpotential (Fig. 6c). The voltage reduction due to the sunlight input translated to an energy savings of ∼20% as compared to conventional Li–I batteries.63–65 Although it can only be partially photocharged, this design presents significant advantages in terms of high working voltage (∼3 V) attributed from the integration of the Li+/Li redox anode.
 Fig. 6  The lithium–iodine solar flow battery: (a) device schematic, (b) the energy diagram of the photoassisted charging, and (c) the voltage profile comparison between the conventional charge, photoassisted charge and discharge of the cell. Reprinted from ref. 32 with permission, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. 
Although the iodine-based solar battery is attracting increasing research enthusiasm recently, it should be noted that the iodine catholyte has some intrinsic drawbacks which need to be carefully evaluated before implementing this system to practical applications: (1) the relatively low energy storage specific capacity of the iodine catholyte, due to the high molecular weight of iodine, (2) the significant visible light absorption of the triiodine/iodine catholyte, which prevents the back-side illumination of the device, and (3) the corrosive nature of the iodine-based electrolyte to many metals, which would limit them to be used as container or connection components for practical solar battery devices.
3.3 Vanadium-based solar batteries
Because of aqueous vanadium species' (i.e. the V3+/V2+ and VO2+/VO2+ couples, with Nernst potential as −0.26 V and +1.0 V, respectively) rich redox chemistry and fast kinetics, the vanadium-based RFB has been extensively investigated and is the most widely commercialized RFB technology in stationary electrical energy storage applications.59,60,66–70
The vanadate VO2+/VO2+ couple can also be applied as redox-based catholytes in solar batteries. In 2012, Liu and colleagues, who had previously explored TiO2/WO3–VO2+/VO2+ PEC cells,71 proposed the vanadium-based solar battery concept by integrating a TiO2 PE into an all-vanadium RFB cell.72 In Liu and colleagues' device, the TiO2 PE absorbs incident light to generate electron–hole pairs during the photocharging process. The holes diffuse to the PE–catholyte interface and oxidize the VO2+ while the electrons transport through the external circuit and electrochemically reduce the V3+ in the anolyte (eqn (3.23) to (3.25)). In the dark, the solar battery discharges in the same way as conventional vanadium RFBs, with the oxidization of V2+ in the anolyte and reduction of VO2+ in the catholyte (eqn (3.26) and (3.27)). They used a proton exchange membrane (e.g. Nafion) as the separator, allowing proton transport for balancing the internal charge between the catholyte and anolyte. Even though it is thermodynamically possible to split water in this design, both the hydrogen and oxygen evolution reactions (HER and OER) can be suppressed here because they are multi-electron processes and kinetically slower than the single-electron process of vanadium redox reactions. TiO2 + hυ → TiO2–e− + h+(3.23) h+ + VO2+ + H2O → VO2+ + 2H+(3.24) TiO2–e− + V3+ → TiO2 + V2+ (through external circuit),(3.25) V2+ → V3+ + e−(3.26) VO2+ + 2H+ + e− → VO2+ + H2O(3.27)
In Liu's aforementioned proof-of-concept study,72 the solar battery was able to be continuously photocharged for a long period of time (>25 h) and exhibited a Voc higher than 0.8 V in the dark with a faradic efficiency as high as 95%. Compared to other PE materials, the TiO2 showed remarkable stability in acidic environment and achieved an incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) of 12% at 350 nm. However, its large bandgap (3.2 eV) significantly limited the device's light absorption to the shorter-wavelength region of the solar spectrum.
Liu et al. also investigated using a WO3-decorated TiO2 hybrid electrode as a combined photoelectrode and energy storage electrode in their following studies.73,74 WO3 has a more positive CBM and more negative VBM compared to TiO2 because of its smaller bandgap (2.6 eV) and was expected to expand the solar battery's light-harvesting window. Upon photocharging, besides the photoelectrochemical reactions as described in eqn (3.23) to eqn (3.25), the intimate contact between the WO3 and TiO2 also facilitated electron injection from TiO2 to WO3, forming tungsten bronze (HxWO3). This intercalated charging product acts as extra energy storage (eqn (3.28)) (Fig. 7a and b). Meanwhile, this intercalation reaction also helps mitigate the electron–hole recombination. xe− + WO3 + xH+ ↔ HxWO3(3.28)
 Fig. 7  The all vanadium redox-based solar battery with the WO3–TiO2 hybrid photoelectrode: (a) the energy schematic, (b) the appearance of the hybrid WO3–TiO2 photoelectrodes (12 wt% WO3 doping) before and after Li+ intercalation, and (c) cell current against time profile with different photoelectrodes under alternate dark/illumination conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society. 
In Liu et al.'s study, the optimized hybrid TiO2 PE with 12 wt% WO3 loading yielded the highest photocurrent response. In the dark, the decomposition of HxWO3 delivered electrons to the external circuit and contributed an increased dark current. (Fig. 7c) Although the overall efficiency of this system was still limited, Liu's work has clearly demonstrated the feasibility of applying the solar battery concept in a commercialized all-vanadium RFB device.
Since the solar-battery research has not received much attention until the past few years, thus far all the reported studies on vanadium-based solar batteries have been conducted by Liu's group. However, it is reasonable to believe that along the increasing interests in solar batteries, more research will be reported on the vanadium-based system in the near future.
3.4 Other solar batteries
Besides the aforementioned sulfur, iodine, and vanadium redox-based systems, researchers have investigated many other solar batteries which have greatly expanded our knowledge in the exploration of practical solar batteries. They all share the same solar-powered electrochemical energy storage concept but exhibit their own characteristics, as manifested in their different redox-based catholytes and unique device designs.

Selenium- and bromine-based solar batteries. 
Ang and Sammells have investigated n-MoSe2|Br2/Br− and n-GaAs|Se22−/Se2− as PE–catholyte combinations for solar batteries.34,75 Their device with single-crystallized MoSe2 as the PE and Br2/Br− as the catholyte was able to achieve a Voc between 400 and 500 mV and a discharge current of ∼20 mA cm−2, outperforming its sister device based on the CdSe|S/S2− design. However, in this study, the electrolytes were kept static; the authors believed that the device performance could be further improved by adopting a flowing electrolyte design.


Metal-cation-based solar batteries. 
Many early stage studies employed cadmium chalcogenides (e.g. CdSe, CdS, CdTe, etc.) as the PE material. Because cadmium chalcogenides are easily and irreversibly decomposed, these studies employed alkali sulfur solutions as the electrolyte because the sulfur-containing electrolytes could protect the PE by forming a protective surface passivation layer. In 1981, Hada and colleagues introduced chemically stable TiO2 as the PE so that they could extend the library of usable redox-based catholytes by using a metal cation redox-based catholyte.76 They explored three different cell configurations: TiO2|Ce4+/Ce3+|separator|Ag+/Ag|Pt (Cell I), TiO2|Fe3+/Fe2+|separator|Cu2+/Cu|Pt (Cell II), and TiO2|Fe3+/Fe2+|separator|AgCl/Ag|Pt (Cell III). Among them, Cell I showed the best performance in terms of operating voltage and current. Although the PE instability issue was solved, these systems were limited by the TiO2's narrow ultra-violet absorption of the solar spectrum. Later, in 1984, Sharon et al. introduced an n-type Pb3O4 semiconductor (Eg = 2.1 eV) into the solar battery to enhance the light absorption of the PE.77 They used the cell configuration Pt|n-Pb3O4|Fe3+/Fe2+|salt bridge|IO3−/I−|Pt. Unfortunately, due to the severe charge recombination at the PE–catholyte interface, the device efficiency was low. They also explored n-BaTiO3 as the PE for solar batteries78 and a Voc of 600 mV was recorded for the Pt|BaTiO3|Ce4+/Ce3+|salt bridge|Fe3+/Fe2+|Pt configuration. In 1983, Yonezawa and Hada also explored replacing the TiO2 PE with an n-GaP semiconductor.79 n-GaP has an optical bandgap of 2.25 eV and thus absorbs more visible light. A ferrocyanide couple was used as the redox-based catholyte and the solar battery was configured as GaP|Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−|separator|Ni2+/Ni|Pt. A photocharging Voc of ∼0.8 V was recorded and an overall power efficiency of 1.9% was achieved, which was considerably higher than that of the TiO2-based device (0.14%).


Quinone redox-based solar batteries. 
Keita and Nadjo investigated a quinone-based redox-active species, sodium 9,10-anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonate/9,10-anthrahydroquinone-2,6-disulfonate (AQ/AQH2), as the catholyte in a solar battery using WSe2 as the PE.80 The configuration of the device was n-WSe2|I3−/I−|salt bridge|AQ/AQH2|C and it gave a Voc of larger than 150 mV. Interestingly, Kieta and Nadjo also demonstrated the feasibility of applying a p-type WSe2 as the photocathode in the system with the cell configured as p-WSe2|AQ/AQH2|salt bridge|I3−/I−|Pt. As will be discussed later, this use of a p-type PE presents its unique advantages for solar batteries.


The copper thiophosphate (Cu3PS4)-based solar battery. 
Cu3PS4 is an n-type semiconductor with a bandgap of 2.3 eV. It can store and release energy through its reversible Cu intercalation and de-intercalation. In Betz and co-workers' study, they proposed a unique solar battery design with Cu3PS4 as both the PE and redox-active cathode.81 This allowed them to build a device with the configuration of Cu3+xPS4|CuCl/MeCN|Cu2−yS. However, due to the severe recombination of Cu+ at the electrode–electrolyte interface and poor visible-light absorption of Cu3PS4, the solar battery only achieved a Voc of ∼100 mV.


The Prussian Blue-based solar battery. 
In Kaneko et al.'s 1990 report,82 they designed an all-solid-state device which used an n-CdS semiconductor as the PE to photocharge a Prussian Blue (iron(III) hexacyanoferrate(II), “PB”) symmetric battery with the configuration as CdS|PB|Nafion separator|PB. Upon photocharging, the PB on the cathode side was oxidized to Berlin Green (iron(III) ferricyanide, “BG”) by holes injected from the PE; while on the anode side, PB was electrochemically reduced to Prussian White (iron(II) hexacyanoferrate(II), “PW”). In the discharging process, both BG and PW were converted to PB. The device was able to use 65% of its theoretical capacity and had a coulombic efficiency of 36%.


The silver vanadate-based solar battery. 
Kanbara et al. proposed a Ag+/AgxV2O5 redox based solar battery using p-Si as the PE.83 The device had the configuration ITO/(p-Si)/SiOx|Ag|Ag6I4WO4|Ag6I4WO4/AgxV2O5. Ag6I4WO4 was used as a solid electrolyte for Ag+ ion conduction. The photocharging process was accomplished by reducing Ag+ to Ag on the anode side and oxidating AgxV2O5 to Agx−dV2O5 on the cathode side. In the dark, the electric-energy-releasing process happened in the reverse direction. The device showed a Voc of ∼0.55 V upon illumination and an excellent cycling performance of over 900 cycles.


Metal hydride-based solar battery. 
In 2001, Akuto and Sakurai proposed a metal hydride/air solar battery design with LaNi3.76Al1.24, as a solid redox-active anode.84 The device has a gas-phase cathode of O2/KOH and a PE of SrTiO3. Upon photocharging, the cell's equilibrium voltage is determined by the Nernst potential difference between the LaNi3.76Al1.24/LaNi3.76Al1.24Hn and O2/KOH redox couples. Their optimized solar battery had a photocharged Voc of ∼0.8 V and capacity of 950 mA h g−1 for at least 40 cycles. Because the device used a solid cathodic active electrode and a gas-phase anode, the theoretical capacity of such a system was expected to be much higher than conventional liquid-phase based solar batteries. However, the large bandgap of the PE (SrTiO3, Eg = 3.2 eV) led to a limited utilization of the visible light in the solar spectrum.


The poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT)-based solar battery. 
Another solar battery design by Yang and Gao et al.85 was based on a dye-sensitized TiO2 PE with a cell configuration of FTO|dye-TiO2|PEDOTx+/PEDOT|separator|PPyy+/PPy|FTO. In this device, the ClO4− anions act as a “rocking chair” and are intercalated into the PEDOT membrane from the PPy anode during photocharging, while during discharging, the anions are de-intercalated from the PEDOT and enter the PPy structure. The device was able to be photocharged to 0.76 V and deliver a capacity of ∼8 mA h g−1.


The iodine-based lithium–oxygen solar battery. 
In 2014, Wu and colleagues applied the solar battery idea to the lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) battery.31 A conventional Li–O2 battery is based on the formation and decomposition of Li2O2 on the air-electrode during the discharging and charging process.86–88 In Wu et al.'s study, they used an I3−/I− redox couple to integrate a dye-sensitized TiO2 PE with the air electrode (Fig. 8a). The solar energy absorbed by the PE was used to “pump” electrons to a higher energy level to reduce the battery's required charging potential (Fig. 8b). Their device was able to be photocharged at an external voltage of 2.8 V, much lower than that of a conventional Li–O2 battery (ca. >4 V) (Fig. 8c). This study introduced a new approach to address the overpotential issue in Li–O2 batteries. Very recently, Zhou and colleagues have reported a follow-up study that uses a g-C3N4 photocatalyst to replace the dye-sensitized TiO2 PE.89 Because of the more negative conduction band edge of g-C3N4 (−1.3 V), their Li–O2 solar battery has achieved a photocharging voltage as low as 1.9 V. However, similar to the Li–I solar battery,32 these Li–O2 solar batteries are not able to be fully photocharged and a power input was needed during the photoassisted charging process.
 Fig. 8  The lithium–oxygen solar battery: (a) device schematic, (b) the energy diagram of the photoassisted charging, and (c) the voltage profile comparison between conventional charge, charge with LiI additive and photoassisted charge. Reprinted from ref. 31 with permission, Copyright (2014), Nature Publishing Group. 

4. Prospects of solar batteries
As summarized in Section 3 and Table 1, the various solar battery models investigated so far form a solid basis for research in this area and clearly demonstrate that the solar battery concept can be an appealing alternative to conventional solar fuels. However, more research efforts are needed for the technology to be improved enough for its commercialization in the future. To be useful for practical applications, a successful solar battery should have the following characteristics: high solar energy conversion efficiency, tunable operating power, large capacity, long device lifetime, cost-effectiveness, and environmental-friendliness. In particular, the solar energy conversion efficiency, maximum operating power and capacity are the three most important and quantitative parameters for the evaluation of a specific solar battery design. Because of the solar battery's highly integrated nature, any modification of a device's component will change its interface with another part of the device and affect the overall performance. Therefore, device optimization does not only mean improving the functional performance of individual components, but more importantly, maintaining the whole system's compatibility. For the same reason, it is not quite possible to predict a particularly “optimized” solar battery configuration. Nevertheless, here we would like to discuss possible future directions for the key components and design of a solar battery.
Table 1 Summary of reported solar batteries




Catholyte redox couple
Photoelectrode
Active anode/anolyte
Transport ion
Solvent
Membrane separator
Photocharged cell voltage
Discharging current
Notes/reference




Sj+12−/Sj2−
CdSe
Ag2S/Ag

S
j
2−

H2O
Not used
0.15 V
N/A

30



Zn(OH)2/Zn
Zn2+
M+-specific membrane
0.43 V

33



HSnO3−/Sn
N/A
0.76 V


Se22−/Se2−
Na+
Na+-Nafion
0.4 V
0.75 mA cm−2

34



Cd2+/Cd
0.4 V
8.25 mA cm−2


Zn(OH)42−/Zn
Nafion-315
∼0.8 V
<10 mA

35



Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)
Sn2+/Sn
Cs+
Permion 1010
0.495 V
0.33 mA
Total eff.: 11.3%/36–38


I3−/I−
Dye-TiO2
LixWO3/WO3
Li+
PC
Not used
0.6 V
N/A
Cap.: 1.8 C cm−2/50


MeCN
Li+-Nafion
∼0.7 V
0.1 mA cm−2
Cap.: 12 mA h g−1/54


PPy+/PPy
PC
Selemion
0.7–0.8 V
N/A

56



MeCN
Li+-Nafion
0.639 V
30 μA cm−2

57



DMFc+/DMFc
PC/MPN
LISICON
∼0.6 V
<50 μA
Total eff.: 0.15%/58


WO4(2+x)−/WO42−
PC/H2O
0.76 V
∼0.1 mA cm−2

61



C8H6N2/C8H6N2−
∼0.8 V

62



Li+/Li
H2O/tetraglyme
3.5 V
0.5 mA cm−2
Photoassisted charging/32


VO2+/VO2+
TiO2
V3+/V2+
H3O+
H2O
Nafion
>0.8 V
N/A
Faradic eff.: 95%/72


WO3–TiO2
V3+/V2+, HxWO3
N/A
WO3 plays dual role./73 and 74


Br2/Br−
MoSe2
I3−/I−
K+
0.49 V
20.6 mA cm−2

34 and 75



Se22−/Se2−
GaAs
Cd2+/Cd
Na+
0.5 V
14.6 mA cm−2

34



Ce4+/Ce3+
TiO2
Ag+/Ag
NO3−
ACH-45T
∼0.8 V
∼3 mA

76



Fe3+/Fe2+
Cu2+/Cu
0.3 V
0.5 mA


AgCl/Ag
∼0.4 V
<1 mA


Pb3O4
IO3−/I−
N/A
Salt bridge
0.093 V
N/A

77



Ce4+/Ce3+
BaTiO3
Fe3+/Fe2+
K+
<0.56 V
<0.1 mA

78



Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−
GaP
Ni2+/Ni
N/A
CSV/ACH-45T
∼0.8 V
∼4.0 mA
Total eff.: 1.9%/79


I3−/I−
n-WSe2
AQ/AQH2
K+
KCl bridge
>0.15 V
∼1.0 mA cm−2

80



p-WSe2
N/A
Photocathode design/80


Cu3PS4/Cu3+xPS4
Cu3PS4
Cu2−yS/Cu2S
Cu+
MeCN
Not used
∼0.1 V
N/A

81



BG/PB
CdS
PB/PW
PB
All-solid device
∼0.7 V

82



Agx−dV2O5/AgxV2O5
ITO-pSi/SiOx
Ag+/Ag
Ag+
∼0.55 V
>900 cycles/83


O2/OH−
SrTiO3
LaNi3.76Al1.24/LaNi3.76Al1.24Hn
Not used
H2O
N/A
∼0.8 V
0.6 mA cm−2
Cap.: 0.95 A h−1/84


PEDOTx+/PEDOT
Dye-TiO2
PPy+/PPy
ClO4−
MeCN
0.76 V
N/A
Cap.: 8.3 mA h g−1/85


O2/Li2O2
Li+/Li
I3−/I−
DMSO
Not used
2.96 V
32 μA cm−2
Photoassisted charging/31


g-C3N4
Tetraglyme
<30 μA
Photoassisted charging/89




4.1 Catholyte materials
Among the various explored catholyte species, the polysulfide, iodide, and vanadium redox couples have been most widely studied. However, the polysulfide redox couple only works under basic conditions; the iodide redox couple has the corrosion issue and relatively low capacity; while the vanadium redox couple only works under acidic conditions. Therefore, besides further optimizing current catholytes, exploring other suitable redox couples that can operate under mild conditions is desired. Because solar batteries and RFBs share similar redox chemistry characteristics, developments in RFB catholytes can be very beneficial for solar batteries as well.59,60,72 In particular, the recently reported quinone-based redox family, which has tunable redox potentials, excellent redox kinetics, and low fabrication costs, should be of interest to solar battery research.90,91
4.2 Photoelectrode materials
To date, cadmium chalcogenides, TiO2, and dye-sensitized TiO2 are the three most widely applied PE materials in solar batteries. However, they all have certain limitations: cadmium chalcogenides are known carcinogens and have environmental hazards. For TiO2, its large bandgap (3.2 eV) results in very limited solar spectrum absorption and hinders efficient solar energy utilization. For dye-sensitized TiO2, the PE needs to be surface-pretreated for better contact with the aqueous catholyte because of its hydrophobic surface.92–94 Therefore, the exploration of efficient and stable PE materials is highly essential for the development of solar batteries. For photoanode based solar batteries, the PE materials are expected to have more negative CBM and small optical bandgap. Some semiconductors that are particularly interesting for solar battery PEs are the Si and III–V semiconductors,95–99 including GaAs, GaP and InP. These materials have suitable band alignments, high light-harvesting efficiency, and well-developed industrial fabrication techniques, which make them very promising for application in solar batteries.
4.3 The catholyte–photoelectrode combination
A good PE–catholyte combination should deliver high photocurrent and large photovoltage while minimizing interface charge recombination. The thermodynamic requirements for a fully photochargeable semiconductor photoelectrode based solar battery are shown in Scheme 4: The ideal catholyte–photoelectrode alignment should maximize the V1 for larger discharge voltage output, meanwhile minimize V2 for better sunlight harvesting. The electrochemical window of water also limits the PE’s CBM and VBM. On the kinetic side, detailed studies on the aqueous photoelectrochemsitry and surface electrochemistry of the semiconductor–electrolyte interface are necessary. Although there have been many previous PEC studies in aprotic solvents for sensitized solar cells and in aqueous solvents for water splitting, the aqueous semiconductor-redox electrolyte systems have been much less explored. It can alone be a very interesting research area and is worth investigating, not only for developing more efficient solar batteries, but also for contributing fundamental knowledge to aqueous photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry.
 Scheme 4  The energy diagram of a fully photochargeable solar battery with a semiconductor photoelectrode. 
4.4 The photocathode–anolyte and tandem based solar battery design
Most current solar batteries use the photoanode to photoelectrochemically oxidize the catholyte (Scheme 2a). In PEC cells, when an n-type PE is used, the oxidative corrosion on the PE–electrolyte surface by photo-generated minority carriers (holes) is usually detrimental to the long-term stability of the PE. By contrast, a p-type semiconductor will be photo-reductively protected in a PEC cell.100–102 Therefore, a solar battery designed to use its photocathode to photoelectrochemically reduce a redox-active anolyte will have a longer PE lifetime (Scheme 2b). In this configuration, the anolyte will be the key component that links the photocathode and catholyte. Furthermore, the tandem design, which has both the photoanode and photocathode in one device (Scheme 2c), also has unique advantages as it can achieve broader light absorption of the solar spectrum for better solar energy utilization. Although hardly any studies on the photocathode–anolyte or tandem based solar batteries have been reported thus far (except for Keita and Nadjo's attempt80), these two systems are of interest and well-worth exploring.
5. Mechanical integrated SPEES devices
The idea of direct integration of a PEC cell and an EC cell with one shared electrode, which is mechanically hooking a solar cell to a battery or a capacitor, has been explored for SPEES, too. These devices are intrinsically different from the solar batteries discussed in Section 3 as the integration is achieved here without a redox couple and thus do not strictly convey the in situ solar energy conversion and storage concept.103
The solar capacitor is based on integrating a solar cell and an electrochemical capacitor via a common electrode. Besides the shared common electrode, a solar capacitor also has a photoelectrode in the solar cell part and a counter electrode linked to its capacitor part. The solar cell component can be a dye-sensitized solar cell, polymer solar cell, or one of the emerging perovskite-halide solar cells. The electrochemical capacitor component is usually a carbon-based supercapacitor.104–118 During the photocharging process, the photoelctrode and counter electrode are connected. Upon illumination, the solar cell component harvests solar energy and converts it to electricity, which is then used to charge the integrated electrochemical capacitor component. In the discharging process, the shared electrode and counter electrode are connected to an external load for power output (Scheme 5).
 Scheme 5  The schematic of a solar capacitor. 
In solar capacitors, solar energy is first converted to electricity and then used to charge the electrochemical capacitor without the redox couple mediator. Therefore, instead of focusing on fundamental chemistry and exploring electrolyte/electrode materials as in solar battery research, the studies on solar capacitors have been more concerned with the engineering aspects of designing more efficient, compact, portable, and flexible devices. Compared to solar batteries, solar capacitors are more stable to photocharge–discharge cycles. They also respond to photocurrent quicker because of the fast-charging nature of the capacitor component. During the past five years, the innovations in fabricating fiber-shaped integrated solar capacitors have been recognized as a promising direction towards practical applications such as wearable electronic devices and large-scale printable devices.119–126 A detailed discussion on this topic has been recently presented in a book chapter by Peng in 2014 (ref. 127). Interested readers are recommended to refer to the book chapter.
Lastly, it should be noted that the mechanical integration of solar cells and batteries, which is intrinsically different from those discussed in Section 3, has also been reported as early as in 1984 (ref. 128). Licht and Wang have investigated a device using a multi-junction AlGaAs/Si solar cell to charge an integrated metal hydride battery in 1999 and 2000 (ref. 129 and 130). More recently, a power pack integrating four dye-sensitized solar cells and a lithium-ion battery that delivers a voltage around 3 V has also been reported.131
6. Conclusion
To summarize, the solar-powered electrochemical energy storage strategy has been identified as a promising and appealing alternative to conventional solar fuels. SPEES combines the solar energy conversion, storage, and distribution functions together by integrating a photoelectrochemical cell and an electrochemical cell into a single device. Besides resolving the fuel-storage and distribution challenges facing the current solar fuels, the SPEES strategy brings additional advantages including higher energy-transfer efficiency, simpler manufacturing process, and lower fabrication costs.
Although it remains relatively less explored than solar fuels, the SPEES research during the past few decades has successfully proved solar batteries' feasibility with many lab-scale conceptual demonstrations. It has also laid a solid foundation for basic chemical and cell design principles. Considering the fast development of PEC solar cells and the increasing commercialization of RFB technology, it is reasonable to believe that the solar battery concept will become an appealing practical approach for mass solar energy conversion, storage, and distribution in the near future. Meanwhile, the development of solar capacitors towards portable and wearable devices will also bring more power choices for future mobile electronic devices.
As the SPEES field sits at the intersection of photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry, research efforts from both the solar cell and battery communities are necessary for this technology to be further improved. For solar batteries, photoelectrochemistry and electrochemistry studies on developing more efficient and stable photoelectrode-aqueous redox electrolyte combinations should be of top priority at the current stage. For solar capacitors, engineering higher-efficiency and longer-lifetime fiber-shaped wearable and flexible devices represents an important move toward bringing solar-powered energy solutions to the consumer market. We hope that by offering a comprehensive review of past SPEES research and critically discussing on its developing prospects, this essay has drawn a clear, concrete, and promising picture of the solar-powered electrochemical storage research. We expect that more research attention will be drawn to this relatively less-explored but very promising field and hope that more exciting investigations will be reported, further driving technology towards more-efficiently utilizing solar energy.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge funding support from the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Science and Engineering (Award: DE-FG02-07ER46427). We thank C. Chen for her detailed and valuable comments on the manuscript. J. Lu, and K. Amine are supported by the Center for Electrical Energy Storage, an Energy Frontier Research Center funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Office of Basic Energy Sciences.
Notes and references
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, K. Teramura, D. Lu, T. Takata, N. Saito, Y. Inoue and K. Domen, Nature, 2006, 440, 295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gust, T. a. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Gray, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Listorti, J. Durrant and J. Barber, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 929–930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Magnuson, M. Anderlund, O. Johansson, P. Lindblad, R. Lomoth, T. Polivka, S. Ott, K. Stensjö, S. Styring, V. Sundström and L. Hammarström, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1899–1909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Hurst, Science, 2010, 328, 315–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Styring, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 357 RSC .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 CAS .
L. Alibabaei, H. L. Luo, R. L. House, P. G. Hoertz, R. Lopez and T. J. Meyer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4133–4145 CAS .
A. D. K. Jones and T. Bekkedahl, Nature, 1997, 386, 377 CrossRef .
L. Schlapbach and A. Zuttel, Nature, 2001, 414, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. L. Rosi, J. Eckert, M. Eddaoudi, D. T. Vodak, J. Kim, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2003, 300, 1127–1129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. C. Rowsell and O. M. Yaghi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4670–4679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Sakintuna, F. Lamari-Darkrim and M. Hirscher, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 1121–1140 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Murray, M. Dinca and J. R. Long, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1294–1314 RSC .

          D. Linden, Handbook of batteries and fuel cells, New York, McGraw-Hill Book Co.,  1984, vol. 1, pp. 1075, no individual items are abstracted in this volume Search PubMed.

          K. Kordesch and G. Simader, Fuel Cells and Their Applications, VCH,  1996 Search PubMed .
L. Carrette, K. Friedrich and U. Stimming, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 5–39 CrossRef CAS .
A. Arico, S. Srinivasan and V. Antonucci, Fuel Cells, 2001, 1, 133–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Varcoe and R. C. Slade, Fuel Cells, 2005, 5, 187–200 CrossRef CAS .
G. Murphy, Sol. Energy, 1978, 21, 403–407 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Albery, Acc. Chem. Res., 1982, 15, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
S. Soedergren, A. Hagfeldt, J. Olsson and S.-E. Lindquist, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 5552–5556 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Licht, ECS Trans., 2007, 2, 1–14 Search PubMed .

          S. Licht, Encyclopedia of Electrochemistry, Semiconductor Electrodes and Photoelectrochemistry,  2002, vol. 6, pp. 317–345 Search PubMed .

          T. Miyasaka, Encyclopedia of Applied Electrochemistry,  2014, pp. 1587–1591 Search PubMed .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, Nature, 1976, 261, 403–404 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, X. Ren, L. Ma and Y. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, W. D. McCulloch, D. R. Beauchamp, Z. Huang, X. Ren and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8332–8335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Manassen, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 532–534 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Ang and A. F. Sammells, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1980, 70, 207–222 RSC .
P. Bratin and M. Tomkiewicz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 2469–2473 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, G. Hodes, R. Tenne and J. Manassen, Nature, 1987, 326, 863–864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht and J. Manassen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1064–1070 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, Nature, 1987, 330, 148–151 CrossRef CAS .
I. Robel, V. Subramanian, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 2385–2393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18737–18753 CAS .
A. Kongkanand, K. Tvrdy, K. Takechi, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 4007–4015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-L. Lee and C.-H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2008, 185, 584–588 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Liang, J. T. Robinson, Y. Li, A. Jackson, Y. Cui and H. Dai, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2644–2647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, B. Ding, L. Shen, P. Nie, J. Han and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4490–4496 CAS .
S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Choi, J.-K. Kim, G. Cheruvally, J.-H. Ahn, H.-J. Ahn and K.-W. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2007, 52, 2075–2082 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Rauh, K. M. Abraham, G. F. Pearson, J. K. Surprenant and S. B. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 523–527 CrossRef CAS .

          J. L. Dean, Lange's Handbook of Chemistry, McGraw Hill, LoCo, 14th edn,  1992 Search PubMed .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. Hauch, A. Georg, U. O. Krašovec and B. Orel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1208–A1211 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bohnke and G. Robert, Solid State Ionics, 1982, 6, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Alpuche-Aviles and Y. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3216–3224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hauch, A. Georg, S. Baumgärtner, U. O. Krašovec and B. Orel, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 2131–2136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, S. Uchida, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, ECS Trans., 2009, 16, 27–34 CAS .
N. Yan, G. Li, G. Pan and X. Gao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A1770–A1774 CrossRef CAS .
H. Nagai and H. Segawa, Chem. Commun., 2004, 974–975 RSC .
Y. Saito, A. Ogawa, S. Uchida, T. Kubo and H. Segawa, Chem. Lett., 2010, 39, 488–489 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. l Cao, G. R. Li, X. P. Gao, X. P. Ai and H. X. Yang, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 802–806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Weber, M. Mench, J. Meyers, P. Ross, J. Gostick and Q. Liu, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2011, 41, 1137–1164 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Q. Luo, B. Li, X. Wei, L. Li and Z. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 970–986 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yan, G. Li and X. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 7012–7015 CAS .
N. Yan, G. Li and X. Gao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A736–A741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and H. R. Byon, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1630–1635 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, M. Hong, N. Bonnet Mercier, G. Yu, H. C. Choi and H. R. Byon, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1085–1092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, L. Wang and H. R. Byon, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1896 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Rychcik and M. Skyllas-Kazacos, J. Power Sources, 1988, 22, 59–67 CrossRef CAS .
G.-J. Hwang and H. Ohya, J. Membr. Sci., 1996, 120, 55–67 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oriji, Y. Katayama and T. Miura, Electrochim. Acta, 2004, 49, 3091–3095 CrossRef CAS .
L. Joerissen, J. Garche, C. Fabjan and G. Tomazic, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 98–104 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aaron, C.-N. Sun, M. Bright, A. B. Papandrew, M. M. Mench and T. A. Zawodzinski, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2013, 2, A29–A31 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, F. Liu and J. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2012, 213, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wei, D. Liu, C. Hsu and F. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 45, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, Z. Wei, C.-j. Hsu, Y. Shen and F. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 435–441 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, W. Zi, S. D. Sajjad, C. Hsu, Y. Shen, M. Wei and F. Liu, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2632–2639 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Ang and A. F. Sammells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 233–236 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hada, K. Takaoka, M. Saikawa and Y. Yonezawa, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1981, 54, 1640–1644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharon, S. Kumar, N. Sathe and S. Jawalekar, Sol. Cells, 1984, 12, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sharon and A. Sinha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1982, 7, 557–562 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yonezawa, M. Okai, M. Ishino and H. Hada, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 1983, 56, 2873–2876 CrossRef CAS .
B. Keita and L. Nadjo, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1984, 163, 171–188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Betz, S. Fiechter and H. Tributsch, J. Appl. Phys., 1987, 62, 4597–4605 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kaneko, T. Okada, H. Minoura, T. Sugiura and Y. Ueno, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 291–293 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kanbara, K. Takada, Y. Yamamura and S. Kondo, Solid State Ionics, 1990, 40, 955–958 CrossRef .
K. Akuto and Y. Sakurai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148, A121–A125 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, H. Yang, X. Ai, G. Li and X. Gao, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 69–72 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J.-M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, L. Li, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun, F. Wu and K. Amine, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5611–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Luntz and B. D. McCloskey, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11721–11750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. Li, S. Wu, K. Liao, K. Zhu, J. Yi and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2664–2667 CAS .
B. Huskinson, M. P. Marshak, C. Suh, S. Er, M. R. Gerhardt, C. J. Galvin, X. Chen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, R. G. Gordon and M. J. Aziz, Nature, 2014, 505, 195–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, W. Xu, L. Cosimbescu, D. Choi, L. Li and Z. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6669–6671 RSC .
C. Law, S. C. Pathirana, X. Li, A. Y. Anderson, P. R. Barnes, A. Listorti and T. H. Ghaddar, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 4505–4509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Law, O. Moudam, S. Villarroya-Lidon and B. O'Regan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 23387–23394 RSC .
F. Bella, C. Gerbaldi, C. Barolo and M. Grätzel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3431–3473 RSC .
B. Tian, X. Zheng, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. A. Green, Solar cells: operating principles, technology, and system applications,  1982 Search PubMed .

          N. J. Ekins-Daukes, in Solar Cell Materials, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd,  2014, pp. 113–143 Search PubMed .
M. Yamaguchi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 75, 261–269 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cotal, C. Fetzer, J. Boisvert, G. Kinsey, R. King, P. Hebert, H. Yoon and N. Karam, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 174–192 CAS .
A. Heller, B. Miller, H. Lewerenz and K. Bachmann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 6555–6556 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, B. Miller and F. Thiel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1981, 38, 282–284 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lewerenz, D. Aspnes, B. Miller, D. Malm and A. Heller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 3325–3329 CrossRef CAS .
A. Morales-Acevedo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 196101 CrossRef .
T. Miyasaka and T. N. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3934 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Murakami, N. Kawashima and T. Miyasaka, Chem. Commun., 2005, 3346–3348 RSC .
T. Miyasaka, N. Ikeda, T. N. Murakami and K. Teshima, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 480–487 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu, J.-G. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-C. Wang, K.-C. Huang and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6225–6231 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Hsu, H.-W. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-W. Hu and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6232–6238 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lo, C. Li and H. Jiang, AIP Adv., 2011, 1, 042104 CrossRef .
P. A. Mini, S. V. Nair and K. R. Subramanian, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 1153–1157 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 954–958 CAS .
M. Skunik-Nuckowska, K. Grzejszczyk, P. J. Kulesza, L. Yang, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, E. Johansson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 91–99 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, X. Huang, C. Li and H. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4093–4096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Westover, K. Share, R. Carter, A. P. Cohn, L. Oakes and C. L. Pint, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 213905 CrossRef .
J. Xu, H. Wu, L. Lu, S. F. Leung, D. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Fan, G. Shen and D. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1840–1846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Takshi, H. Yaghoubi, T. Tevi and S. Bakhshi, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 621–626 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shi, H. Dong, R. Zhu, H. Li, Y. Sun, D. Xu, Q. Zhao and D. Yu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 670–678 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, Y.-B. Cheng and M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1782–1787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wee, T. Salim, Y. M. Lam, S. G. Mhaisalkar and M. Srinivasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 413–416 CAS .
J. Bae, Y. J. Park, M. Lee, S. N. Cha, Y. J. Choi, C. S. Lee, J. M. Kim and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3446–3449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977–11980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, H. Wu, S. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 CAS .
T. Song and B. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 408–410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897–1902 CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pan, Z. Yang, P. Chen, J. Deng, H. Li and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., 2014, 126, 6224–6228 CrossRef .

          H. Peng, Fiber-Shaped Energy Harvesting and Storage Devices, Springer,  2015 Search PubMed .
H. Gerritsen, W. Ruppel and P. Würfel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2037–2041 CrossRef CAS .
S. Licht, B. Wang, T. Soga and M. Umeno, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 4055–4057 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zou, N. Maesako, T. Nomiyama, Y. Horie and T. Miyazaki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2000, 62, 133–142 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guo, X. Xue, S. Wang, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2520–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Solar energy utilization: (a) the three-step process with conventional solar fuels, and (b) the integrated “all-in-one” process by using the SPEES strategy based on a solar battery.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic of a redox-based solar battery: (a) the photoanode–catholyte design, (b) the photocathode–anolyte design, and (c) the tandem design.	 
PE + hυ → PE–e− + h+	(2.1)
h+ + Cred → Cox	(2.2)
PE–e− + Aox → Ared (through external circuit),	(2.3)

 	Scheme 3  The energy diagram of a solar battery: (a) the photocharging process, and (b) the discharging process.	 
Cox + e− → Cred	(2.4)
Ared → Aox + e−	(2.5)
2CdSe + 2hυ → 2CdSe–e− + 2h+	(3.1)
S2− + 2h+ → S	(3.2)
2CdSe–e− + Ag2S → 2CdSe + Ag + S2− (through external circuit),	(3.3)
Ag + S2− → Ag2S + 2e−	(3.4)
S + 2e− → S2−	(3.5)

 	Fig. 1  The membrane-free three-electrode design of the sulfur redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic: (1), chalcogenide PE; (3), S2−/S solution; (4), load; (5), storage electrode; (6), inert counter-electrode, and (b) the open-circuit voltage against time profile: ↑, light on; ↓, light off. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: [Nature] (ref. 30), copyright (1976).	 
Zn + 4OH− ↔ Zn(OH)42− + 2e−	(3.6)
2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35) +2hυ → 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)–e− + 2h+	(3.7)
S2− + 2h+ + Sj2− → Sj+12− (simplified situation),	(3.8)
2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)–e− + SnS → 2Cd(Se0.65Te0.35) + Sn + S2− (through external circuit),	(3.9)
Sn + S2− → SnS + 2e−	(3.10)
Sj+12− + 2e−→ S2− + Sj2− (simplified situation),	(3.11)

 	Fig. 2  The n-CdSe0.65Te0.35/Cs2Sx/SnS solar battery with P, S and L representing the photoelectrode, anode and external load, respectively: (a) electron flow upon illumination, (b) electron flow in the dark, and (c) two days outdoor operation of the solar battery under 1500 Ω load. Reprinted by permission from Macmillan Publishers Ltd: [Nature] (ref. 33), copyright (1987).	 
Dye + hυ → dye*	(3.12)
Dye* + TiO2 → dye+ + TiO2–e−	(3.13)
2Dye+ + 3I− → 2dye + I3−	(3.14)
TiO2–e− + Aox → TiO2 + Ared (through external circuit),	(3.15)
3I− + 2e− → I3−	(3.16)
Ared → Aox + e−	(3.17)
xLi+ + WO3 + xe− ↔ LixWO3	(3.18)

 	Fig. 3  The two-electrode iodine redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic: upper part, photocharging under open-circuit conditions; lower part, discharging via an external load, and (b) the voltage against time profile for discharging in the dark with different external loads. Reprinted from ref. 50, reproduced by permission of The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2002.	 

 	Fig. 4  The three-electrode iodine redox-based solar battery: (a) device schematic, and (b) the discharge curves with so-WO3 or nc-WO3 at 0.1 mA cm−2 current flow. Reprinted from ref. 54, reproduced with permission by The Electrochemical Society, copyright 2009.	 
PPy + xClO4− ↔ PPyx+: xClO4− + xe−	(3.19)
DMFc+ + e− ↔ DMFc	(3.20)

 	Fig. 5  The solar battery based on iodine and DMFc redox couples: (a) cyclic voltammograms of the I3−/I− couple in PC and DMFc+/DMFc couple in MPN with scan rate as 10 mV s−1, and (b) the voltage against time profile for photocharging and discharging at a current flow of 0.03 mA. Reprinted from ref. 58 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2013.	 
Li2WO4 + xLi+ + xe− ↔ Li2+xWO4	(3.21)
C8H6N2 + e− ↔ C8H6N2−	(3.22)

 	Fig. 6  The lithium–iodine solar flow battery: (a) device schematic, (b) the energy diagram of the photoassisted charging, and (c) the voltage profile comparison between the conventional charge, photoassisted charge and discharge of the cell. Reprinted from ref. 32 with permission, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society.	 
TiO2 + hυ → TiO2–e− + h+	(3.23)
h+ + VO2+ + H2O → VO2+ + 2H+	(3.24)
TiO2–e− + V3+ → TiO2 + V2+ (through external circuit),	(3.25)
V2+ → V3+ + e−	(3.26)
VO2+ + 2H+ + e− → VO2+ + H2O	(3.27)
xe− + WO3 + xH+ ↔ HxWO3	(3.28)

 	Fig. 7  The all vanadium redox-based solar battery with the WO3–TiO2 hybrid photoelectrode: (a) the energy schematic, (b) the appearance of the hybrid WO3–TiO2 photoelectrodes (12 wt% WO3 doping) before and after Li+ intercalation, and (c) cell current against time profile with different photoelectrodes under alternate dark/illumination conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74, Copyright (2015), American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  The lithium–oxygen solar battery: (a) device schematic, (b) the energy diagram of the photoassisted charging, and (c) the voltage profile comparison between conventional charge, charge with LiI additive and photoassisted charge. Reprinted from ref. 31 with permission, Copyright (2014), Nature Publishing Group.	 

Sj+12−/Sj2−	CdSe	Ag2S/Ag	
S
j
2−
	H2O	Not used	0.15 V	N/A	
30

Zn(OH)2/Zn	Zn2+	M+-specific membrane	0.43 V	
33

HSnO3−/Sn	N/A	0.76 V
Se22−/Se2−	Na+	Na+-Nafion	0.4 V	0.75 mA cm−2	
34

Cd2+/Cd	0.4 V	8.25 mA cm−2
Zn(OH)42−/Zn	Nafion-315	∼0.8 V	<10 mA	
35

Cd(Se0.65Te0.35)	Sn2+/Sn	Cs+	Permion 1010	0.495 V	0.33 mA	Total eff.: 11.3%/36–38
I3−/I−	Dye-TiO2	LixWO3/WO3	Li+	PC	Not used	0.6 V	N/A	Cap.: 1.8 C cm−2/50
MeCN	Li+-Nafion	∼0.7 V	0.1 mA cm−2	Cap.: 12 mA h g−1/54
PPy+/PPy	PC	Selemion	0.7–0.8 V	N/A	
56

MeCN	Li+-Nafion	0.639 V	30 μA cm−2	
57

DMFc+/DMFc	PC/MPN	LISICON	∼0.6 V	<50 μA	Total eff.: 0.15%/58
WO4(2+x)−/WO42−	PC/H2O	0.76 V	∼0.1 mA cm−2	
61

C8H6N2/C8H6N2−	∼0.8 V	
62

Li+/Li	H2O/tetraglyme	3.5 V	0.5 mA cm−2	Photoassisted charging/32
VO2+/VO2+	TiO2	V3+/V2+	H3O+	H2O	Nafion	>0.8 V	N/A	Faradic eff.: 95%/72
WO3–TiO2	V3+/V2+, HxWO3	N/A	WO3 plays dual role./73 and 74
Br2/Br−	MoSe2	I3−/I−	K+	0.49 V	20.6 mA cm−2	
34 and 75

Se22−/Se2−	GaAs	Cd2+/Cd	Na+	0.5 V	14.6 mA cm−2	
34

Ce4+/Ce3+	TiO2	Ag+/Ag	NO3−	ACH-45T	∼0.8 V	∼3 mA	
76

Fe3+/Fe2+	Cu2+/Cu	0.3 V	0.5 mA
AgCl/Ag	∼0.4 V	<1 mA
Pb3O4	IO3−/I−	N/A	Salt bridge	0.093 V	N/A	
77

Ce4+/Ce3+	BaTiO3	Fe3+/Fe2+	K+	<0.56 V	<0.1 mA	
78

Fe(CN)63−/Fe(CN)64−	GaP	Ni2+/Ni	N/A	CSV/ACH-45T	∼0.8 V	∼4.0 mA	Total eff.: 1.9%/79
I3−/I−	n-WSe2	AQ/AQH2	K+	KCl bridge	>0.15 V	∼1.0 mA cm−2	
80

p-WSe2	N/A	Photocathode design/80
Cu3PS4/Cu3+xPS4	Cu3PS4	Cu2−yS/Cu2S	Cu+	MeCN	Not used	∼0.1 V	N/A	
81

BG/PB	CdS	PB/PW	PB	All-solid device	∼0.7 V	
82

Agx−dV2O5/AgxV2O5	ITO-pSi/SiOx	Ag+/Ag	Ag+	∼0.55 V	>900 cycles/83
O2/OH−	SrTiO3	LaNi3.76Al1.24/LaNi3.76Al1.24Hn	Not used	H2O	N/A	∼0.8 V	0.6 mA cm−2	Cap.: 0.95 A h−1/84
PEDOTx+/PEDOT	Dye-TiO2	PPy+/PPy	ClO4−	MeCN	0.76 V	N/A	Cap.: 8.3 mA h g−1/85
O2/Li2O2	Li+/Li	I3−/I−	DMSO	Not used	2.96 V	32 μA cm−2	Photoassisted charging/31
g-C3N4	Tetraglyme	<30 μA	Photoassisted charging/89

 	Scheme 4  The energy diagram of a fully photochargeable solar battery with a semiconductor photoelectrode.	 

 	Scheme 5  The schematic of a solar capacitor.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
