Carbon dot-based composites for catalytic applications  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC01014F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC01014F
(Tutorial Review)
Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4034-4054Carbon dot-based composites for catalytic applications

        
          
            Bin Bin 
            Chen
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Meng Li 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Cheng Zhi 
            Huang
          
        
      *c
aCollege of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China
bSchool of Chemistry & Molecular Engineering, East China University of Science and Technology, Shanghai, 200237, PR China
cKey Laboratory of Luminescence and Real-Time Analytical System, Chongqing Science and Technology Bureau, College of Pharmaceutical Science, Southwest University, Chongqing 400715, China. E-mail: chengzhi@swu.edu.cn
Received 
      21st March 2020
    , Accepted 18th May 2020First published on 19th May 2020AbstractCarbon dots (CDs) have been regarded as prospective carbon nanomaterials for catalytic applications due to their advantages such as low toxicity, strong and broad optical absorption, high chemical stability, and rapid electron transfer properties. To further improve their function, CD-based composites or hybrid materials have been developed by integrating CDs into different functional nanomaterials such as inorganic nanostructures, biomaterials, polymers and so on. This review presents and discusses the current development of CD-based composites. After the introduction of the methods for the preparation of CD-based composites, we focus on the description of the factors affecting the synthesis of CD-based composites. Lastly, the advantages of CD-based composites in catalytic applications such as photocatalysis, chemical catalysis, peroxidase-like catalysis, Fenton-like catalysis and electrocatalysis are described.
1. Introduction
Nanocomposites have aroused increasing research interest in recent years because of their great application prospects in analysis, energy, catalysis and other fields.1–4 By integrating different nanostructures, a composite or hybrid material with more superior properties can be formed. Therefore, this strategy can effectively remedy the shortcomings of individual materials, and provide significant opportunity in enhancing the versatility of their applications.
Fluorescent carbon dots (CDs) as a new class of carbon nanomaterials have attracted considerable attention owing to their unique chemical and optical properties.5–12 In view of their differences in structure and quantum confinement, the fluorescent CDs can be further divided into quasi-spherical carbon quantum dots (CQDs) consisting of multiple layers of graphitic sheets, flaky graphene quantum dots (GQDs) consisting of single- or oligo-layers of graphitic sheets, and amorphous carbon nanodots (CNDs) consisting of cross-linked linear polymers.13–15 Recently, CDs have been widely used for bio- and chemosensing,16–23 photovoltaic devices,24–26 cellular imaging,27–29 and cancer treatment.30–33
Because of their notable advantages such as superior electron transfer ability, low toxicity, stable fluorescence and high chemical stability, the CDs have emerged as a new type of light-harvesting material.34–42 In order to further improve and extend their functions, fluorescent CDs are usually combined with other functional materials to form CD-based composites. The advantages of CDs such as nanoscale size, high dispersion and abundant surface groups make them form nanocomposites with other components much easily. To date, CD-based composites have been successfully fabricated with inorganic nanostructures,43–48 polymers,49–52 biomaterials53–55 and other carbon materials,56–59 and are intensively explored in catalytic applications such as photocatalysis60–63 because CDs can function not only as efficient catalysts, but also as multifunctional components in catalyst design to promote the wider spectrum absorption and separation of electrons and holes, as well as to stabilize photolysis semiconductors.64 Moreover, CDs as a new type of carbon nanoenzyme show excellent peroxidase-like activity.65
In this review, we summarize and review the recent progress achieved in the field of CD-based composites, and provide a comprehensive summary and discussion on their construction methods. Lastly, we focus on their catalytic applications such as photocatalysis, peroxidase-like catalysis, electrocatalysis, Fenton-like catalysis and chemical catalysis.
2. Green synthesis of carbon dot
The fabrication of CDs can generally be classified into “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches. The former can be achieved by splitting carbon materials by physical or chemical approaches. The latter involves the pyrolysis or carbonization of small organic molecules.19 Conventional methods for the synthesis of CDs often involve high temperatures, organic solvents or acidic/alkaline conditions, which is the opposite of the core principles of green chemistry. With the increasing concern of environmental sustainability, developing greener approaches for preparing CDs is highly desirable. Currently, green synthesis technologies of CDs can be divided into two categories: biomass synthesis and sustainable synthesis.
Biomass synthesis is considered as a “bottom-up” synthesis strategy through high temperature carbonization of biomass or “green” precursors that refer to substances which are either naturally occurring or are derivatives of renewable natural products or processes.66 It's a very effective way to convert waste materials into more valuable products (e.g. CDs). Particularly, the recouping of waste materials by carbonization to CDs have the added benefit of reclaiming a waste stream that might otherwise simply find its way into already-overflowing landfills.67 Using biomass as a starting material can greatly reduce the use of toxic organic compounds. Biomass synthesis of CDs is usually carried out in aqueous solution, and no other substances need to be added, making the whole synthesis process of CDs perform in a non-toxic and safe environment. There are many kinds of biomass precursors, which can be simply classified as organism, waste materials and protein products (Fig. 1).68 Because of the renewability of biomass, the low-cost synthesis of CDs is possible, which is of great significance for the large-scale industrial production of CDs.
 Fig. 1  Some of the biomass or “green” precursors used for the preparation of CDs. 
Sustainable synthesis is currently a new green synthesis approach, which refers to the synthesis of CDs in a relatively moderate way without any external energy supply, mainly including base catalysis, self-exothermic synthesis and a reduction method.23,68,69 Among sustainable synthesis techniques, self-exothermic synthesis is underway at ambient temperature and pressure without the use of strong acid and alkaline solutions, and only depends on the exothermic heat of the chemical reagent itself such as the decomposition of hydrogen peroxide (H2O2). H2O2, a clean and green oxidant, can release a lot of heat in a short time when it is decomposed into oxygen by a catalyst. The as-released heat can cause an increase in the temperature of the solution from room temperature to above 90 °C. So much heat from this highly exothermic reaction system can rapidly prompt the formation of the CDs. Obviously, the self-exothermic reaction promoting the formation of the carbon core is very cost-effective, making the preparation of CDs easy without an external energy supply. In addition, the base catalysis and reduction method are also underway at room temperature, therefore, enormous savings can be achieved in consuming energy. Although these strategies don't need external energy consumption, the requirements for carbon precursors are severe, which limits their further developments.
3. Construction of CD-based composites
The construction of CD-based composites or hybrids can be classified as physical mixing, chemical bonding, and in situ growth. Physical mixing involves blending of the CDs with other materials by simply stirring or ultrasonication and then combining them together through noncovalent interactions such as electrostatic adsorption, hydrogen-bond interaction70–72 or π–π stacking interaction.73,74 Chemical bonding is based on the covalent interactions between CDs and other materials, such as covalent-binding. And in situ growth is considered as the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of the nanostructure on the surface of another nanomaterial. The construction process of CD-based composite catalysts is simple, safe and efficient, and could be achieved in aqueous solution, with the assistance of heating at most. Water was used as a prevailing medium in the construction process of CD-based composites because of its safety, convenience, and solubility for CDs and other nanomaterials. The construction of CD-based composites was usually completed in one step, either by stirring or heating in an water bath without expensive and complex equipment.
3.1 Physical mixing
The preparation of CD-based composites through physical mixing is very simple, requiring only mixing and stirring of CDs and other nanomaterials in the solution.75 The formation of nanocomposites is mainly attributed to electrostatic adsorption, hydrogen-bonds and π–π stacking interaction. The hydrogen-bond interaction involves a hydrogen atom located between a pair of other atoms having a high affinity for electrons. The formation of a hydrogen-bond is mainly through electrostatic attraction, and the donor atom effectively shares its hydrogen with the acceptor atom. Such a bond is weaker than an ionic bond or covalent bond but stronger than van der Waals forces. The π–π stacking interaction is a weak intermolecular interaction, which usually exists between two aromatic rings that are relatively electron-rich and electron-deficient. GQDs with a large π-conjugated network can be well used as the support for π–π conjugate materials through π–π stacking. Although this method is facile and rapid, the interaction between CDs and nanostructures is weak and unstable, which limits charge separation and transfer at their interfaces.76
Electrostatic interaction is the most facile and effective way to construct CD-based nanocomposites only requiring CDs and other nanostructures with opposite charges. Tan's group77 developed a layer-by-layer (LbL) assembly strategy for constructing carbon–metal nanocomposites comprising of GQDs with positive charge and metal nanocrystals with negative charge (Fig. 2). The electrostatic attractive interaction could act as the predominant driving force to achieve the alternating deposition of GQDs and metal nanocrystals in aqueous solution. These (M/GQD)n (M = Au, Ag, Pt) multilayer thin films showed highly efficient photoelectrochemical water splitting under simulated solar light irradiation, which attributed to the synergistic effect of the metal nanocrystals and GQD building blocks.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration for LbL assembly of the (M/GQD)n (M = Au, Ag, Pt) multilayer thin films.77 Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Chemical bonding
The abundant functional groups on the surface of CDs make them form into composites with other materials by chemical bonding in aqueous solution much easily. The chemical binding of CD-based composites is mainly through covalent-binding such as the metal–oxygen bond.
Covalent-binding such as the metal–oxygen bond is an important chemical bonding approach for constructing the CDs-based nanocomposites. Wang's group40 reported the synthesis of heterostructures composed of CDs and TiO2 by thermal condensation and used as a photochromic system for photodegradation of methylene blue. The construction of composites was through the formation of a Ti–O–C bond between TiO2 and –OH groups on the CD surface. Methylene blue with blue color could transform to leuco-methylene blue which is colorless in one minute upon UV-vis light irradiation, indicating that the CD/TiO2 nanocomposite catalysts had high efficiency in the degradation of organic dyes. Li's group78 prepared the N-doped CD-modified ZnFe2O4 (CDs/ZnFe2O4) yolk–shell composites by a facile hydrothermal deposition method based on the group interaction on the surfaces of the CDs and ZnFe2O4 (Fig. 3). The CDs could be well dispersed onto the surface of ZnFe2O4 nanospheres with the help of the coordination effect or electrostatic effect because of the surface –COOH and –NH2 groups. The composite catalysts showed both wide light absorbance and low carrier recombination, which is attributed to high photocatalytic performance and degradation ability towards o-dichlorobenzene, a hazardous gaseous pollutant. Under visible light irradiation, the removal efficiency of o-dichlorobenzene was about 50% using ZnFe2O4 NPs as the control, but could reach 74% when using 3% NCDs/ZnFe2O4, therefore, an about 25% improvement in catalytic efficiency after the introduction of CDs into ZnFe2O4.
 Fig. 3  Synthesis of CD/ZnFe2O4 yolk–shell nanospheres.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, the CD-based composites can also be constructed by some other covalent bonds. Kang's group79 developed the CD/cobalt phosphide (CDs/CoP) nanocomposites as electrocatalysts for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in an alkaline electrolyte. The formation of composites was owing to the electrostatic interaction as well as the covalent binding between CoP and CDs by the Co–P–O bond. In contrast to a physical mixture of CoP and CDs, the CD/CoP nanocomposites by chemical bonding showed faster electron transfer and lower charge-transfer impedance at the composite interface, which was attributed to a better OER activity. When the amount of CDs in the composite was 6 mg (28.79 wt% C), the CD/CoP nanocomposites showed the best electrocatalytic activity with an overpotential of 400 mV in 1 M KOH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, which was obviously lower than the CoP with an overpotential of about 440 mV under same measurements. Therefore, the optimal CD/CoP composite had better OER properties than the pure CoP.
3.3 
          In situ growth
Compared with physical mixing, the CD-based composite catalysts produced by in situ growth are more stable and thus can promote charge separation at their interfaces.76 Due to the tight structure between two components, the composites can achieve high-efficiency charge transfer.
The CDs have been used as an excellent support for the nucleation and growth of the pristine nanocrystals because of the oxygen-related functional groups on the surface. Due to the oxygenated groups such as –OH groups with reductive function on the surface, the CDs can be used as reductants for reducing noble metal ions to form CD/metal NP composites.80,81 Meanwhile, the CDs as stabilizers can prevent nanomaterials from aggregating because residual oxygen-related groups of the CD surface made the CD-based nanocomposites well dispersible in aqueous solution. Liu's group82 prepared CD-based AuPd bimetallic nanocomposites (CDs/AuPd) in aqueous solution by using CDs as reducing and stabilizing agents. The composites showed good water solubility that may be attributed to the interaction of the residual –OH groups of CDs with the AuPd NPs by hydrogen bonding to protect them from aggregation. Qin's group83 reported the preparation of the nickel/CD (Ni/CDs) hybrid by a simple reduction method. The Ni/CDs with a core–shell structure were formed with an ultrathin CD layer of about 2 nm on the NiNP surface in the reduction of CDs. The binding of CDs and Ni might be due to the bonding interactions between the carboxylate groups and the metal. Briefly, the CDs could act as reductants for reducing metal ions to metal NPs due to the –OH groups on the CD surface, and the –OH groups were then transformed into CO groups. Meanwhile, the CDs could act as stabilizers to protect metal NPs from aggregating because –OH groups could interact with metal NPs by hydrogen bonding.
In addition to the nucleation and growth of other components on the surface of CDs, the CDs can also be grown in situ on other nanomaterial surface through the carbonization of reaction precursors on the surface of nanomaterials and further combine them together. Yuan's group84 reported the preparation of CD-coated microbially reduced graphene oxide (CDs/M-rGO) composites by heating the mixture of bacterial cells and M-rGO (Fig. 4). The CD/M-rGO composites showed excellent stability due to the strong strength of the covalent heteroatom–carbon bond and the strong interaction between the CDs and the graphene support.85 The composite catalysts exhibited higher electrocatalytic activity due to the synergistic effect of heteroatom doping and numerous surface/edge defects that caused the high-density distribution of highly active and stable catalytic sites, and the strong coupling effects between CDs and graphene that could promote the charge transport and ionic motion during the catalytic reaction. Kim's group86 prepared MoSx-doped hollow CD (MoSx/CD) composites by heating MoS2 nanosheets and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone under an O2 atmosphere. The N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone could be oxidized by O2 at high temperatures to produce the corresponding oxidation products.87,88 The MoS2 nanosheets could obviously promote this oxidation process, resulting in the rapid production of polymers containing five- and six-membered heterocycles. These polymers were then carbonized into CDs with hollow structures. The higher photocatalytic activity toward the aerobic oxidative coupling of amines was due to both the pyridinic nitrogen in CDs and MoSx doping. Under visible light irradiation, the conversion efficiency from benzylamine to N-benzylidenebenzylamine catalysed by MoSx/CDs could reach a high yield of 97%, which was significantly higher than the conversion efficiency (below 10%) catalysed by MoS2.
 Fig. 4  Schematic procedure for the preparation of graphene-based materials assisted by microbes (a); TEM image of C-rGO at low magnification (b); HRTEM image of C-rGO at high magnification (c); SEAD pattern of C-rGO (d); TEM image of M-rGO at low magnification (e); HRTEM image of M-rGO at high magnification (f); SEAD pattern of C-rGO (g); TEM image of CDs/M-rGO at low magnification (h); HRTEM image of CDs/M-rGO at high magnification (i), inset: HRTEM image of one carbon dot; SEAD pattern of CDs/M-rGO (j).84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Influencing factors of composite construction
Influencing factors of composite construction mainly include the pH of the solution, reaction temperature, reaction time and so on. Conversely, these factors greatly influence and control the structure, stability and availability of nanocomposites. In this section, we will focus on how each factor affects the structures and properties of nanocomposites.
4.1 The pH of the solution
The pH of the solution has a great influence on the construction of nanocomposites by changing the surface state of CDs. Liu's group89 clearly demonstrated that the pH-reversible effect was due to the change of the surface state on the N,S co-doped CQD (N,S-CQD) surface. The surface nitrogen of N,S-CQDs-OH existed in the form of imino groups in an alkaline environment (pH = 10). However, the imino groups could be transformed into –NH2 groups under acidic conditions (pH = 3) (Fig. 5a). The structural transition between C–NH2 under acidic conditions and CNH under alkaline conditions resulted in the change of fluorescence of N,S-CQDs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism involved in fluorescence transition under different pH conditions.89 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Representation of the energy levels and electronic transitions in CDs under different pH conditions. E1, E2, and E3 are conceptual, sequentially increasing energy bands under different conditions.90 Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, the change of the pH greatly influences the surface charge of CDs through protonation–deprotonation. Choudhury's group90 revealed that the pH-dependent behavior in CDs was due to two prototropic equilibria, phenol/phenolate and carboxylic/carboxylate, that occurred at the surface of CDs (Fig. 5b). When the pH increased from 2.6 to 9, the zeta potential of CDs changed from 0.13 mV to −7.8 mV, which was in accordance with the phenomenon of pH-induced deprotonation of the surface functional groups. The deprotonation may cause electrostatic doping/charging to CDs and shift the Fermi level, and therefore could affect the fluorescence of CDs.91 The strong vibrational coupling of the –OH groups on the surface of CDs with the sp2 carbon domains at low pH due to hydrogen-bonding effects could cause the energy level broadening.92,93 Upon deprotonation, these hydrogen-bonding effects were eliminated. Moreover, Lin's group94 demonstrated that the pH-dependent behavior of citric-acid-derived CDs was attributed to the –COOH and –NH2 groups on their surface. With the increase of pH, the –COOH group became deprotonated (–COO−) and the –NH2 groups became the protonated form (–NH3+). Due to the protonation–deprotonation of –COOH and –NH2 groups, the CDs showed pH-dependent fluorescence. Therefore, the pH of the solution directly affects the surface charge of NPs by protonation–deprotonation, which has a significant influence on the electrostatic self-assembly of nanostructures.
In addition, the pH of the solution can also influence the dispersion state of CDs in aqueous solution. Zhang's group95 found that the red shift of the absorption peak of CDs was due to both the formation of larger particles and the increase of the pH value. The authors demonstrated that the CDs were dissolved as isolated species in the aqueous solution under low pH, while the aggregation of CDs appeared with the increase of pH due to noncovalent molecular interactions, such as the hydrogen bond between the –COOH groups.96 Therefore, the pH of the solution affects not only the surface charge of CDs but also their dispersed state in solution.
Therefore, the pH of the solution can control the electrostatic assembly of composites by tuning the surface charge of nanostructures. Ding's group97 prepared CD/Zn(OH)2 nanosheet composites by microwave heating ZnNO3·6H2O and CD solution with pH 6.5. In the formation of composites, –COOH groups on the surface of CDs could be used as good ligands and coordinate with Zn2+. Furthermore, the –OH groups on Zn(OH)2 and the –COOH groups of CDs could form a hydrogen bond, which afforded the composite growth along specific directions.98 The pH of the solution had an important influence on the rate of ionic motion and coordinating interaction, eventually determining the growth of final composites.99 The composites tended to form a bulk structure when the pH value was higher than 6.5, while the ZnO nanospheres were obtained when the pH value was lower than 6.5.
4.2 Reaction temperature
The reaction temperature greatly affects the formation of composites, especially in the in situ synthesis of composites because in situ synthesis is regarded to be the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of the nanostructure on the surface of another nanomaterial.
The reaction temperature determines the crystallinity or carbonization degree of CDs. Giannelis's group100 investigated the carbonization degree of CDs at different temperatures. With the pyrolysis of citric acid and ethanolamine precursors at 180 °C for 30 min, no NPs were formed, instead, the amide-containing fluorophore molecules could be obtained by a simple intermolecular condensation reaction accompanied by the loss of water molecules.101 Pyrolysis at higher temperature (230 °C for 30 min) produced single carbogenic cores with surface organic groups that impart dispersibility. Further pyrolysis (300 °C for 60 min) produced carbon NPs with an average diameter of 8 nm. Further pyrolysis at 400 °C for 60 min gives rise to clustering and the formation of larger and nonuniform carbogenic particles with diameters in the order of a few hundred nanometers, presumably due to aggregation. Therefore, amorphous fluorescent nanoclusters could be formed at low temperature, while a carbogenic core was formed at the expense of the molecular fluorophores as the pyrolysis proceeds to higher temperatures. Similarly, Xu's group102 also clarified that small organic molecule polymer nanodots, i.e. CNDs, could be formed through intermolecular and intramolecular dehydration at a low temperature of 160 °C for 10 min, while the carbogenic core began to appear at a high temperature of 200 °C for 10 min. On prolonging the reaction time (30 min), the crystalline CQDs were finally generated. The authors demonstrated that the formation process of CDs could be described as intramolecular and/or intermolecular dehydration, polymerization and carbide nucleation.
The reaction temperature affects not only the core structure of CDs, but also their surface state. The surface passivation degree of CDs could be controlled by varying the process temperature as –NH2 groups were unstable and tended to leave the surface at higher temperatures. Therefore, the CDs prepared at higher temperature (240 °C) had more surface traps, while the CDs obtained at lower temperature (160 °C) possessed more –NH2 groups.103 Meanwhile, the doping concentration of heteroatoms is closely related to the reaction temperature. Ding's group104 demonstrated that the doping concentration of the sulphur atom in sulphur-doped CQDs (S-CQDs) showed a linear relationship with the reaction temperature. The decrease in doping concentrations with the increase in reaction temperature was directly attributed to the removal effect of the heteroatom in the sp2 carbon structure under high temperature.105
Based on the above discussion, the reaction temperature mainly affects the structural properties of composites. Xi's group106 prepared CD/Co3O4 composites by heating the mixture of polyacrylamide and Co3O4 NPs at 260 °C. The polyacrylamide could be carbonized into CDs that further wrapped the Co3O4 NPs to form CD/Co3O4 nanocomposites. Mahalingam's group107 prepared Eu3+-doped LaF3/CD composites with an average diameter of 13–14 nm through a hydrothermal method at 200 °C for 10 h. However, on heating the composites at 400 °C, the CDs would be removed from the composites. The formed CDs with the size of about 3–4 nm exhibited the amorphous nature.
Meanwhile, the reaction temperature can also determine the final morphology of the composites by controlling the growth rate of nanostructures. Higher temperatures favour the epitaxial growth of single crystal nanostructures due to a high growth driving force. Zheng's group81 prepared the composites composed of reduced state CDs and AuNPs (CDs/AuNPs) by simply mixing CDs with HAuCl4 solution. The –OH groups on the surface of CDs as a reductive group could reduce HAuCl4 to form AuNPs, meanwhile, the CDs attached on the surface of AuNPs protected AuNPs from aggregating. Furthermore, the authors explored the formation of AuNPs at different temperatures. At low temperature (40 °C), the diameter of AuNPs was about 9 nm, while the diameter of AuNPs increased to about 15 nm at higher temperatures (60–100 °C). The yield of AuNPs prepared at 100 °C was very low due to the oxidation of CDs by dissolved oxygen at 100 °C, meanwhile, the diameter of AuNPs did not increase monotonically with the temperature. This was because Au nuclei could form at 40 °C but the growth was slow, but three overlapping steps (nucleation formation, random attachment to polycrystalline nanowires, and smoothing of the nanowires via intra-particle ripening to dots) occurred at higher temperatures.
4.3 Reaction time
The in situ growth of the composites is followed by a time-dependent process. The extension of reaction time can obtain the larger nanocomposites, therefore, the reaction time mainly affects the structure and size of composites by controlling their growth. Luo's group108 prepared 2D interlaced BiOCl/CQD composites by a template-free coprecipitation method at room temperature. The authors clarified the formation process of the composites by time-dependent experiments. The size of composites was 50–150 nm and the thicknesses was about 10–20 nm when the reaction time was 1 h. The thickness of the composites did not obviously change, while the length and width increased as the reaction time increased from 1 h to 8 h, and BiOCl nanosheets became curled, minimizing the surface free energy. The composites intersected more closely when the time was extended to 12 h. The whole process could be divided into three overlapping steps: (i) the nucleation, growth and assembly of the composites; (ii) further growth of the composites; and (iii) the aggregation of the interlaced composites (Fig. 6). Xing's group109 reported the synthesis of CQD/Ni(OH)2 composites based on the CQD-induced assembly of 2D ultrathin Ni(OH)2 nanosheets into a 3D porous hierarchical structure. The authors clarified the structural evolution of CQD/Ni(OH)2 composites at different reaction stages. In the first place, many Ni(OH)2 nanosheets with hierarchical structures of 1.5–2 μm in size were formed, indicating that the self-assembly was very fast (Fig. 7a and b). The size of the hierarchical structures assembled by the ultrathin nanosheets increased to 3 μm when the time was prolonged to 3 h, and the pore density of the surrounded petals increased concomitantly (Fig. 7c). The strong electrostatic interaction between the Ni2+ ions and CQDs drove them to combine with each other, yielding the self-assembly of Ni(OH)2 nuclei around the CQDs (Fig. 7d).
 Fig. 6  Illustration of the possible formation process of the interlaced 2D BiOCl/CQD nanosheets.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from IOP science. 
 Fig. 7  FESEM images of the obtained hierarchical porous structures at different reaction times: (a) 1.5, (b) 2, and (c) 3 h. (d) Schematic diagram of the evolution of 3D hierarchical porous structures.109 Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 Springer. 
The reaction time can also control the loading of CDs on other nanostructures. Lai's group110 reported the preparation of CD/TiO2 nanotube array composites by an electrochemical approach for photocatalytic pollutant degradation. By adjusting the electrochemical deposition time, the loading of CDs on TiO2 could be well controlled. The number of CDs obviously increased as the deposition time increased from 5 min to 30 min. However, excessive deposition time (40 min) made the CDs aggregate to form nanoclusters and block the nanotubes.
5. Classification of CD-based composite catalysts
Over the past few years, many efforts have been made to prepare functional nanostructures with excellent catalytic activity. Among these materials, CDs have been proven to have great potential in the catalysis field due to the advantages of CDs such as strong light absorption, good electron transfer, nanoscale size, high dispersion and abundant surface groups. In order to further enhance their properties, a great number of functional nanomaterials have been integrated with CDs to form CD-based composites. Therefore, the hybridization of CDs with these nanomaterials represents a robust strategy for developing new composite catalysts. These nanomaterials mainly can be divided into metal NPs, metal oxides, bismuth-based metal compounds, carbon materials and so on.
5.1 CD/metal composites
Metal NPs can be well hybridized with CDs to form CD/metal composites. The formation of CD/metal composites is mainly through the nucleation and growth of metal NPs on the surface of CDs because the CDs can serve as reductants for reducing metal ions to metal NPs based on the –OH groups on the CD surface.
Metal NPs are dispersed as nanosized particles on supporting substrates with high surface areas to enhance accessibility and to reduce costs. Metal NPs such as AuNPs and AgNPs have been proved to possess good photocatalytic abilities because of their surface plasma resonance (SPR) absorption.111–117 The incorporation of metal NPs onto the surface of CDs is able to make photogenerated carriers in CDs transfer to their conduction bands.118–120 In addition, the good electron transportation capability and good chemical stabilities of CDs in composites can further improve the photocatalytic activity. Meanwhile, the electronic interactions between metal NPs and the supporting substrates also play an important role in determining the electrocatalytic activity as a result of the manipulation of the electronic energy of the metal NPs and hence the interactions with oxygen.121 Therefore, CD/metal composites have often been designed for catalytic utilization.
5.2 CD/metal oxide composites
Metal oxides are widely hybridized with CDs to form CD/metal oxide composites. Metal oxides have attracted great attention due to their highly enhanced electronic, optical and catalytic activity. The CD modified metal oxide photocatalysts possess a better photocatalytic activity because the combination with CDs could not only extend the photoresponse into the visible range but also promote the separation of photoinduced electron–hole pairs.
Zinc oxide (ZnO) as an important group II–VI semiconductor material showed good photocatalytic activity because of its outstanding electrical and optical properties.122 However, the wide band gap (3.37 eV) of ZnO limits its use as a UV light photocatalyst, which represents a major limitation as only 5% of sunlight is usable or captured by ZnO. In order to enhance the visible light photocatalytic activity of ZnO, the construction of the heterojunction of ZnO and CDs has provided an effective pathway to improve the photocatalytic activity because CDs exhibit excellent electron transfer properties and serve as a multifunctional component in photocatalyst design to promote wider spectrum absorption.
Fe3O4 nanocrystals as low-cost and environmentally friendly catalysts have showed high efficiency catalytic activity towards several organic reactions.123–125 The easy removal and reusability of Fe3O4 nanocrystals from the reaction mixture by magnetic separation is an important advantage for ecological and economical demands. The CDs have been proven to exhibit excellent catalytic performance for various organic transformations due to their inherent acidic and oxidative properties.126,127 The presence of –COOH groups on the surface of CDs makes them effective stabilizers for Fe3O4 nanocrystals, and cooperative interactions might influence the activity of the metal oxides as catalysts.
Binary metal oxides such as ZnFe2O4, CuBi2O4 and CuMn2O4 have aroused particular interest because of their remarkable magnetic, electrical and optical properties.128–130 Among them, spinel nickel cobaltite (NiCo2O4) with a narrow band gap of about 2.0 eV is regarded as a promising photocatalyst due to its low-cost and magnetic separation properties.131 However, the fast recombination of photogenerated carriers of single NiCo2O4 severely restricts its further application. In order to improve its photocatalytic activity, the introduction of CDs into the binary metal oxides is an efficient strategy, which can provide more reaction sites, further promoting the interfacial charge transfer from the semiconductor matrix to them.
5.3 CD/bismuth-based metal compound composites
Bismuth-based photocatalysts such as Bi2WO6, Bi2O3 and BiVO4 have been used as promising materials for photocatalysis because of their low energy band gap, non-toxic nature, unique morphology, and excellent optical properties.
Bismuth tungstate (Bi2WO6) consisted of alternate stacking of [Bi2O2] layers and perovskite-type layers with oxygen atoms shared between layers, which displayed an excellent photodegradation efficiency under visible light.132–135 The good photocatalytic performance is because Bi2WO6 nanosheets not only have a large surface area to increase the reaction place but also promote the efficiency of the electron–hole separation.136 However, the photocatalytic activity of Bi2WO6 is still limited because of weak light absorbance and fast charge recombination. The hybridization of CDs with Bi2WO6 can further improve the light harvesting and efficiency of the electron–hole separation.
Bismuth oxyhalides (BiOX, X = Cl, Br, I) as important V–VI–VII ternary semiconductor compounds have drawn increasing attention because of their excellent catalytic properties. All BiOX have a tetragonal matlockite structure, a layer structure characterized by [Bi2O2] slabs interleaved by double slabs of halogen atoms.137 The high photocatalytic activity of BiOX is mainly attributed to their open crystalline structures and the indirect optical transition. Moreover, the electrostatic field between layers can effectively induce the separation of photogenerated charge carriers.138 BiOCl showed the highest photocatalytic activity under UV irradiation, while BiOI shows the best visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity because of its small energy gap. BiOBr with a band-gap of 2.7 eV possesses the best photocatalytic oxidation and reduction activity under full light spectrum irradiation.137 However, the photocatalytic performance of BiOX is still limited due to its low absorption of visible light, high valence band (VB) position, low transfer efficiency of photogenerated charges and high recombination rate of photoexcited electron–hole pairs.139 The hybridization of CDs with bismuth oxyhalides can improve the photocatalytic performance due to the efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers at their interface.
5.4 CD/carbon material composites
Carbon materials have been widely applied for the catalytic applications because of their unique electronic structures. Ultrathin 2D nanosheets with atomic thickness have attracted considerable attention, mainly including graphene, graphene oxide (GO), and graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4). In addition, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) as the 1D nanomaterials with the diameter ranging from 1 to 100 nm have attracted rapidly growing attention because of their high aspect ratio, large specific surface area, and excellent electronic or ionic charge transport properties.
Graphene as a single-layer carbon nanosheet with a hexagonal packed lattice structure displays many excellent properties, such as the quantum hall effect, large specific surface area (2630 m2 g−1), high carrier mobility at room temperature (about 10000 cm2 V−1 s−1), good optical transparency (about 97.7%), high Young's modulus (about 1 TPa) and good thermal conductivity (3000–5000 W m−1 K−1).1 Generally, graphene can serve as an electron mediator, increase visible-light absorbance, provides abundant reaction sites and induce the adsorption of pollutants via π–π interactions in graphene composites.140 However, graphene tends to irreversibly agglomerate and precipitate in aqueous solutions because of strong π–π stacking or van der Waals interactions between individual graphene nanosheets, which greatly restricts its further application.141–143 The introduction of CDs into graphene nanosheets can effectively prevent the aggregation of graphene due to the abundant functional groups on the surface of CDs.
g-C3N4 have been widely applied to photocatalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction and photodegradation because of its relatively narrow band gap (2.7 eV) for sunlight absorption.144 g-C3N4 can form π-conjugated graphitic planes with tri-s-triazine ring units assembled by the sp2 hybridization of carbon and nitrogen. The tri-s-triazine ring unit with a high condensation degree enables g-C3N4 to possess desirable stability as well as electronic structure.145–147 However, the adjacent CN layers in g-C3N4 are stacked by the weak van der Waals interaction with weak electron coupling, which is unfavorable for the electron transfer and photoactivity.148,149 In addition, the efficiency of bulk g-C3N4 under visible-light illumination is limited by the marginal absorption of visible light and high charge recombination rate.150 Considering that the analogous π-conjugated systems of g-C3N4 and CDs potentially stabilize the hybrids, the combination of these two nanostructures can further improve the photocatalytic activity.
CNTs, the most common 1D nanomaterials, consisted of folded graphene layers with a cylindrical hexagonal lattice structure.151 CNTs can assemble either as multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) or as single-walled CNTs (SWCNTs) packed in 2D triangular lattices depending on their growth condition. The CNTs showed extremely high Young's modulus, stiffness, and flexibility.151 However, the high hydrophobicity and cytotoxicity limit their further application. To obtain homogeneously dispersed CNTs in water, CDs are used to stabilize CNTs. Moreover, the CDs immobilized on the CNT surface can effectively alter their cellular interaction properties, resulting in a decreased cytotoxicity.56
6. Catalytic applications
CDs can be used as highly efficient catalysts for various reactions, including the “click reaction”,36 photooxidation reaction,152,153 ring-opening reactions,154 and aldol condensation35 and so on. But the CDs are mainly used to modulate and enhance the catalytic activity of other nanostructures in CD-based composite catalysts because CDs not only exhibit stable fluorescence, but also display super conductivity and rapid electron transfer properties.155–157 Therefore, CD-based composite catalysts usually exhibit better catalytic performances than the corresponding single nanomaterials due to the more efficient electron transfer at the interface of CDs and other nanomaterials. CD-based composite catalysts have been used in photocatalysis, peroxidase-like catalysis, electrocatalysis, Fenton-like catalysis and chemical catalysis. Due to the low toxicity of CDs, the CD-based composite catalysts usually have the characteristics of safety and non-toxicity. Meanwhile, the catalytic systems using CD-based composites as catalysts are basically carried out in aqueous solution because of the good water solubility of CDs. Importantly, catalytic conditions of CD-based composite catalysts are usually carried out at room temperature and in an atmospheric environment without harsh environmental requirements.
6.1 Photocatalysis
Photocatalysts have been considered as hopeful materials for application in clean energy and the treatment of pollutants.158–165 The catalytic performance of conventional photocatalysts such as TiO2,166 BiPO4,167 Bi2O3,168–170 Bi2WO6,136,171,172 BiVO4,173,174 and BiOX (X = Cl, I, Br)175–178 has been limited due to weak light absorbance, wide band gap and fast charge recombination. The design of CD-based composite photocatalysts can enhance light utilization efficiency and photocatalytic performance because the conjugated π structure of CDs can promote photogenerated charge transfer and CDs can also serve as electron acceptors after photoexcitation. Currently, CD-based composite photocatalysts have been widely used in the photodegradation of organic pollutants, with the degradation efficiency of more than 90%. Meanwhile, CDs have the advantages of abundant surface functional groups and wide light absorption region. Benefiting from the wide light absorption range of CDs, it is possible for photocatalysis to be in progress under solar light irradiation. It can not only improve the efficiency of the photocatalytic reaction, but also greatly reduce the cost by using solar light or visible light instead of ultraviolet light. Therefore, the CDs have been regarded as very promising candidates for designing efficient and stable composite photocatalysts. Herein, we summarize the fundamental multifaceted roles and diverse applications of CDs in CD-based composite photocatalyst systems.

Electron mediators. 
Photocatalytic activity strongly depends on the transport and separation efficiency of photogenerated electrons and holes in the photocatalyst. However, free charge carriers (electrons and holes) can be trapped or scattered by defects, causing the increased recombination probability. Therefore, promoting the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes is an effective approach to realize high efficiency photocatalysis. It has been demonstrated that nanoscale heterojunctions with an intimate interface can greatly improve the separation of electron–hole pairs. In CD-based composite photocatalysts, the photoexcited electrons from other photocatalysts can be shuttled in the conducting network of CDs, retarding the recombination of photogenerated carriers at the composite interface.
CO2 is the main cause of global warming, contributing up to 65% of global greenhouse gas emissions, and global warming will cause many serious environmental problems such as sea level rising and land desertification. Carbon capture and storage as an important strategy can reduce CO2 emissions, but is costly and energy intensive. The photocatalytic reduction or conversion of CO2 by using a photocatalyst is very attractive because the CO2 reduction/conversion can not only reduce the emissions of CO2, but also produce valuable products including gas and liquid chemicals such as methane and methanol.180–182 Huang's group179 designed the composites of CQDs with a carbon layer (CL) covering Cu2O catalysts (CL@CQDs/Cu2O), which offered high activity and stability for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 (Fig. 8). The composite catalysts improved both electron generation and transfer because the CL protected the Cu2O from photo-corrosion under light irradiation, enhanced light absorption and acted as an efficient electron transfer medium.183,184 The photo-induced holes would be easily transported to CQDs where they were consumed by H2O to yield O2, while the electrons remained at Cu2O to reduce the adsorbed CO2 to methane and methanol. Thus, this process effectively hindered the undesirable recombination between photogenerated electrons and holes and ensured high activity as well as a lifetime of electrons and holes for reactions. Under visible light irradiation, the CL@CQD/Cu2O composite photocatalysts showed high rates of photocatalytic conversion of CO2 with water and produced a high yield of valuable methanol (249 μmol g−1 after 2.5 h of reaction), which was significantly higher than the yield (below 25 μmol g−1 after 2.5 h of reaction) of methanol catalysed by the Cu2O catalyst alone.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light on CL@CQDs/Cu2O.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Photocatalytic reduction using CD-based composites is mainly focused on the reduction of hexavalent chromium (Cr6+) and CO2. Cr6+ was considered as one of the toxic heavy metals in nature, which exhibited higher toxicity than Cr3+.185–187 Photocatalytic reduction is a facile and clean method for reducing Cr6+ to less harmful Cr3+, and then precipitate Cr3+ in the form of Cr(OH)3 at neutral or alkaline pH.188 The efficiency of Cr6+ reduced to Cr3+ is closely related to the inhibition of charge recombination, the high adsorption of Cr6+ and the rapid desorption of Cr3+.189 The surface of CDs is rich in chemical groups such as hydroxyl groups and carboxyl groups, and thus can act as the adsorption site for adsorbing and capturing Cr6+. Meanwhile, the CDs can capture photoinduced electrons to inhibit their recombination with holes. Traditional catalysts (such as CdS and SnS2 nanocrystals) for the photoreduction of Cr6+ are not only highly toxic, but can also poison the photocatalyst after repeated recycles. CD-based composite photocatalysts represent a simple, clean and convenient method for removing Cr6+ to achieve the purpose of purifying sewage. Bian's group190 firstly reported the incorporation of CDs into TiO2 mesocrystals for the photocatalytic reduction of Cr6+ (Fig. 9). The TiO2 consisted of ordered aligned TiO2 nanocrystal building blocks promoting the charge transport within the TiO2 superstructure.191,192 Moreover, the introduction of CDs into TiO2 promoted Cr6+ adsorption and facilitated Cr3+ desorption due to the oxygen containing groups on the CD surface. Importantly, the CDs with good conductivity improved the separation efficiency of photoinduced charges. The enhanced photocatalytic reduction was attributed to the adsorption–photoreduction–desorption mechanism. Based on the calculated rate constants, the reaction rate of 0.75 wt% CDs/TiO2 was about 5.4 times higher than that of the pure TiO2. Meanwhile, the photoreduction efficiency of Cr6+ could reach as high as 100% under the catalysis of 0.75 wt% CD/TiO2 composite catalysts, which was obviously higher than the photoreduction efficiency (about 70%) catalysed by pure TiO2 catalysts.
 Fig. 9  A proposed adsorption–photoreduction–desorption mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of Cr6+ in the presence of CD/TiO2 composites.190 Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier. 


Spectral converters. 
Many conventional photocatalysts such as BiPO4 and ZnO are wide-bandgap semiconductors that can only be excited by UV light, which greatly limits their further development because UV light only accounts for 4% of the total solar power. CDs can act as a spectral converter in CD-based composite photocatalysts for extending the light absorption range of conventional photocatalysts from the UV to the visible light region by up-conversion fluorescence properties of CDs. Liu's group193 reported the synthesis of a ternary photocatalyst (Ag/CQDs/g-C3N4) comprising single atom-dispersed Ag, CQDs and ultrathin g-C3N4 for photocatalytic degradation of naproxen (Fig. 10). Naproxen in the aquatic environment could not be completely removed by wastewater treatment plants, and could cause harmful toxicological consequences and adverse ecological impact on the microbiological aquatic systems.194,195 The Ag/CQD/g-C3N4 composite photocatalysts as the environmentally compatible and cost-effective treatment strategy could be well used for the elimination of naproxen contamination. The CQDs exhibited strong absorption under a longer wavelength of light because of the up-conversion fluorescence properties of CQDs. Furthermore, the separation efficiency and mobility of the photoinduced carriers of g-C3N4 was dramatically improved by the Ag and CQDs. Therefore, the improved broad-spectrum photocatalytic performance was mainly attributed to the synergistic catalytic effect of Ag and CQDs in the composite catalysts. Compared with the degradation efficiency (58.9%) of Ag/g-C3N4 catalysts, the Ag/CQD/g-C3N4 composites exhibited a higher degradation efficiency of about 87.5% under visible light irradiation. When the quantity of CQDs was increased from 0 to 1.0 wt%, the kinetic rate constant gradually increased from 0.0368 to 0.0883 min−1.
 Fig. 10  Schematic photocatalytic mechanism for Ag/CQDs/g-C3N4 under broad-spectrum light irradiation.193 Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier. 
Moreover, Zeng's group196 prepared CQD modified monolayer Bi2WO6 nanosheet (CQDs/Bi2WO6) composites for the photocatalytic degradation of methylene orange and bisphenol A. The composites showed a highly efficient transfer of photogenerated electrons from Bi2WO6 to CQDs and full light spectrum absorption because of the introduction of CQDs.
Moreover, the CQDs could further reduce the electron and hole recombination rate, which favors the effective charge separation of Bi2WO6, thereby improving the photocatalytic activity. The authors further revealed that O2˙−, ˙OH and h+ were the main active species during the photocatalytic process. Under visible light irradiation, the CQD/Bi2WO6 composites displayed a high activity for the degradation of methylene orange with a degradation efficiency of 94.1%, and for the degradation of bisphenol A with a degradation efficiency of 99.5%. The rate constants for CQDs/Bi2WO6 were 3 times (for methylene orange degradation) and 5 times (for bisphenol A degradation) as high as that of pure Bi2WO6, which indicated that CQD/Bi2WO6 composite materials could be efficient photocatalysts for photocatalytic removal of methylene orange and bisphenol A in wastewater.


Photosensitizers. 
In addition to acting as an electron mediator, CDs showed down-conversion and up-conversion fluorescence rendering them as promising photosensitizers in the photocatalyst. Conventional photosensitizers are either expensive (ruthenium-based dyes), toxic (CdSe/CdS QDs) or unstable (organic dyes), which are unsuitable for their practical applications and also do not meet the requirements of green chemistry.198–200 Compared with conventional photosensitizers, CDs display high solubility in aqueous solutions because the surface of CDs is rich in oxygen-containing groups. Moreover, CDs are expected to replace toxic CdS/CdSe QDs due to their low toxicity. Martindale’ group197 developed a photocatalytic H2 production system in aqueous solution using CQDs as the photosensitizer in combination with a molecular Ni catalyst (NiP, nickel bis(diphosphine) complex) (Fig. 11). The CQDs in photocatalytic systems could absorb UV and visible light and directly transfer photoexcited electrons to solution-based molecular electron acceptors and catalysts. Furthermore, the authors demonstrated that the CQDs acted as excellent photosensitizers in the photocatalytic process: the CQDs were firstly excited under solar irradiation and then the photogenerated electrons transferred to the Ni catalyst, which enabled the excitation of the Ni catalyst. Meanwhile, the photoinduced CQDs were quenched with EDTA (electron donor) to inhibit the recombination of photogenerated carriers. Therefore, the excited electrons from the Ni catalyst led to the reduction of aqueous protons. Under solar light irradiation, CQDs produced reducing equivalents in a homogeneous photocatalytic system with a Ni catalyst, giving an activity of 398 μmolH2 (gCQDs)−1 h−1.
 Fig. 11  Representation of solar H2 production using the hybrid CQD-NiP system described in this work. Irradiation of CQDs results in the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons to the catalyst NiP with subsequent reduction of aqueous protons. The electron donor EDTA carries out quenching of photoinduced vacancies in the CQDs.197 Reprinted with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. 

6.2 Peroxidase-like catalysis
Peroxidases are a class of efficient enzymes and have been widely used in various fields, such as biotechnology and chemical industry.201 However, natural peroxidases always suffer from high costs in production and purification, and the sensitivity of their catalytic activity to the environment. However, artificial catalysts have the advantages of facile preparation, design flexibility, and high catalytic activity.202 Among all these materials, CDs have emerged as carbon nanoenzymes recently, which showed higher peroxidase-like activity than GO and CNTs due to their size effect and enriched active sites.203–206 Herein, we summarize the fundamental multifaceted roles of CDs in CD-based peroxidase-like catalyst systems.

Active phase. 
The CDs as carbon nanoenzymes can be the active phase that can be used for catalyzing various substrates such as 3′,5,5′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)155,156 and p-phenylenediamine (PPD).207 Huang’ group156 demonstrated that the nature of peroxidase-like activities of the CDs is due to an increase in the electron density and mobility in the CDs because of electron transfer from lone-pair electrons in TMB amino groups to the CDs. This would accelerate the electron transfer from the CDs to H2O2, and increase the oxidation rate of TMB in the presence of H2O2. Qu's group208 prepared oxygenated group enriched GQDs (O-GQDs) with ultrahigh peroxidase-like activity in a wide range of pH values by a facile oxidation reflux route. The O-containing groups (carbonyl and carboxyl groups) on the O-GQD surface can be the active sites and binding sites of substrates in the catalytic process, while the hydroxyl groups can inhibit the catalytic activity. The O-GQDs showed multiple times higher enzymatic activity compared to classical nanozymes. By the combination of glucose oxidase which could oxidize glucose to produce gluconic acid and could convert oxygen into H2O2 as by-products, a simple, cheap, and efficient approach of glucose detection was proposed (Fig. 12). This method showed the highest sensitivity with the limit of detection (LOD) of 200 nM due to their ultrahigh peroxidase-like activity.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of colorimetric detection of H2O2 and glucose by using glucose oxidase and O-GQDs.208 Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. 


Electron mediators. 
Metal oxides such as CuO, Co3O4 and MnO2 have been reported to exhibit enzyme mimetic activity.210–212 In order to further improve the catalytic activity, coupling CDs with metal oxides is an ideal strategy. The CDs can act as the electron mediators in the CD-based peroxidase-like catalyst systems. Organic dyes have been widely used in industrial production, but their great toxicity not only threatens human health, but also causes serious damage to the water environment. In addition to photocatalysts, peroxidase-like catalysts are also a promising strategy for the oxidation of organic dyes in wastewater treatment. Qin's group209 constructed a CD/Co composite by a facile chemical reduction for the catalytic oxidation of TMB in the presence of H2O2. The H2O2 could be absorbed on the composite surface and then be decomposed into ˙OH. Subsequently, the good electron transport properties of CDs promoted the electron transfer from the ˙OH to the reaction substrate (TMB), and the TMB could be easily oxidized by the ˙OH (Fig. 13). Therefore, the CD/Co composites could be well applied for the catalytic oxidation of organic dyes in wastewater treatment.
 Fig. 13  Possible mechanism for the CD/Co/H2O2/TMB system.209 Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 


Support. 
Metal and metal oxides have good peroxidase-like activity, but the aggregation of the catalyst easily leads to the significant reduction of their catalytic activity. CDs not only function as effective surface-stabilizing agents for the metal or metal oxides but also contribute to the enhancement of the catalytic activity of the composite through their intrinsic peroxidase activity. Sarma's group213 prepared the magnetically recoverable iron oxide/CND (Fe3O4/CND) composites as effective catalysts for the cyclooxidative tandem synthesis of quinazolinones using alcohols as starting materials. CNDs could not only be used as the stabilizing agent for the Fe3O4 NPs, but also enhance the catalytic activity of the Fe3O4 NPs by producing reactive oxygen species (ROS) due to the intrinsic peroxidase activities of CNDs. These ROS could have extended stability on the NP surface with an enhanced lifetime that can promote the oxidation reactions. The Fe3O4/CND composites showed high catalytic activity for the syntheses of quinazolinones in the presence of tert-butyl hydroperoxide with a high yield of 94% in an aqueous medium. However, the use of bare Fe3O4 NPs as the catalyst resulted only in 57% yield of the product, which could be attributed to the possible agglomeration of the Fe3O4 NPs under thermal reaction conditions. Therefore, the introduction of CDs into Fe3O4 NPs could efficiently improve the catalytic activity of Fe3O4 catalysts.

6.3 Electrocatalysis
Currently, most hydrogen is produced industrially by steam reforming, that is, the reaction of methane and water to form hydrogen and CO2.214 But methane is not a renewable energy source and the problem of CO2 release is also not solved. And oxygen is produced industrially by separating liquid air, or by using an oxygen generator. With the increasing energy shortage and environmental pollution, it is needed to develop new conversion systems or renewable alternative energy sources.79
Electrochemical H2 and O2 production from water splitting provides a renewable and scalable process for the storage of a considerable amount of clean energy.215–218 In the process of the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER), catalysts have been required for the HER and OER to reduce the overpotentials and improve the energy conversion efficiency.219–221 Currently, noble-metal Pt-based materials have been used as catalysts for the HER, while Ir or Ru-based compounds show high activity toward the OER.214,222 However, the scarcity and high costs of noble metal catalysts greatly limit their further development.
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) shows great application prospects in fuel cells and rechargeable batteries.223 The ORR usually requires more energy input because of the sluggish kinetics of the ORR at a low temperature (80–100 °C), which hinders their further development.224,225 Catalysts have been used for promoting the ORR at the cathode in fuel cells and rechargeable batteries. Among catalysts, Pt-based materials are considered as the most efficient ORR catalysts.226–228 However, the high manufacturing costs and poor durability limit the widespread application of Pt-based catalysts.
CD-based composites have been proven to be excellent electrocatalysts for the OER, HER and ORR. Herein, we summarize the fundamental multifaceted roles of CDs in CD-based composite electrocatalyst systems.

Electron mediators. 
Due to the multistep proton-coupled electron transfer process, the OER is kinetically slow, thus electrolysis must require a relatively higher potential than thermodynamic potential (1.23 V) for water splitting (H2O → H2 + ½O2).229,230 Kang's group231 prepared CQD/NiFe-LDH nanoplate composites as electrocatalysts for the OER in alkaline electrolytes. The CQD/NiFe-LDH composites showed good stability because of the strong electrostatic interactions between CQDs and NiFe-LDH and the formation of a C–O–Ni/Fe bond. The composite catalysts displayed excellent OER electrocatalytic efficiency with a small overpotential of ∼305 mV in 0.1 M KOH and ∼235 mV in 1 M KOH at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. The good electrocatalytic activity was mainly attributed to the NiFe-LDH phase and further enhanced by the strong association of the LDH with CQDs, which are small and exhibit excellent conductivity, rapid electron transfer, and electron reservoir properties (Fig. 14). Importantly, the small size of CQDs may provide a large specific surface area for a more convenient electrocatalytic reaction, and the rapid electron transfers from CQDs to NiFe-LDH on the surface could further improve the electrocatalytic activities. Moreover, Yu's group232 prepared coral-shaped MoS2/GQD composites for the electrochemical HER. The bandgap of the pure MoS2 monolayer was 1.76 eV (Fig. 15a), while the bandgap of the composite catalysts dropped to zero (Fig. 15b), which resulted in easier electronic transportation and higher electric conductivity of MoS2/GQDs and therefore the kinetics of electrocatalysis for the HER. The charge transfer occurred mainly between the contact area and somewhere in the vicinity of the interface from the graphene layer to MoS2 (Fig. 15c). The main feature of the MoS2@GQD composite was that the electrons transferred from the graphene layer to MoS2 directionally and resulted in the formation of an “electron rich” MoS2 (Fig. 15d). The Tafel slope of MoS2/GQD composites was only 40 mV dec−1, which was significantly lower than that of coral MoS2 (63 mV dec−1). Therefore, the MoS2/GQD composite catalysts showed excellent HER electrocatalytic efficiency with a small overpotential of ∼120 mV in 0.5 M H2SO4 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 14  Schematic model of the roles of CQDs in the high electrocatalytic activity of CQD/NiFe-LDH nanocomposites.231 Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  (a and b) Band structures of MoS2 and coral MoS2@GQDs. The red circles represent graphene states. (c) The 3D different charge density distribution of the coral MoS2@GQDs. The pale green and yellow regions represent the charge depletion and accumulation space. (d) Adsorption configurations of an H atom on the Mo edge sites.232 Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 


Active phase. 
Currently, heteroatom-doped CDs have been proven to be one of the promising metal-free catalysts for the ORR. The enhanced catalytic activity is due to the doping-induced charge/spin redistributions, which change the chemisorption mode of O2 and/or reduce the ORR potential to promote the ORR at the doped carbon electrode.233–235 However, enhanced catalytic activity is limited owing to the low electrical conductivity of the CDs with high percolation threshold values. To solve the question, CD-based composites have been used well for the ORR. Qu's group236 prepared N-doped GQDs with oxygen-rich functional groups by an electrochemical approach. Subsequently, the authors constructed graphene-supported N-GQD (N-GQD/graphene) composites by the hydrothermal treatment of GOs and N-GQDs for the ORR in an alkaline medium. In addition, the ORR onset potential was at ca. −0.16 V with a reduction peak at ca. −0.27 V, which were close to those of the commercial Pt/C catalyst, indicating the great catalytic ability of N-GQDs/graphene with a good conductivity of ca. 40 S cm−1 for the ORR.
Moreover, Shan's group237 reported the synthesis of the CD decorated GO (CD/GO) hybrid as the metal-free electrocatalyst for the ORR. The CD/GO composites showed excellent ORR electrocatalytic activity with more positive onset potential and high kinetic current density (up to 18.4 mA cm−2 at −0.70 V) compared with the commercial Pt/C catalyst in alkaline media. The high electrocatalytic activity was attributed to the faster reaction kinetics with a higher transferred electron number per oxygen molecule at the composite modified electrode surface.

6.4 Fenton-like catalysis
The decompositions of H2O2 catalyzed by transition metal ions in homogeneous and heterogeneous systems are known as Fenton-like reactions or modified Fenton processes, which are the main strategies used for the production of ˙OH radicals.238 However, the drawbacks such as the narrow pH range of reaction and the accumulation of iron sludge greatly limit their development.239 In order to overcome these drawbacks of the homogeneous Fenton process, Fenton-like catalysts such as metal or nonmetallic materials have been developed and show good catalytic activities.

Electron mediators. 
Recently, some oxidants (e.g., cerium(IV)) and reactive oxygen species (e.g., peroxynitrous acid) can trigger the chemiluminescence emission of CDs by electron-transfer annihilation or resonance energy transfers.240 In the Fenton reaction, CDs can serve as the electron donor for promoting the Fenton process. Lu’ group241 developed a facile method for the preparation of CD-based composite catalysts consisting of CDs and dodecylbenzenesulfonate-layered double hydroxides (DBS-LDHs). The composite catalysts could function as effective heterogeneous Fenton-like catalysts for the decomposition of acidified H2O2 to produce ˙OH radicals. The mechanism of the present Fenton process is summarized in Fig. 16. Firstly, the CDs absorbed on the DBS-LDH surface could donate an electron to acidified H2O2 to generate more ˙OH radicals. ˙OH radicals as a strong oxidant could easily attack the DBS molecules on the LDH surface to produce SO42− ions,242 accompanied by the chemiluminescence emissions from the excited .243 Then, the excited  could transfer their energy to the adjacent CDs to produce the excited CDs. Finally, the excited CDs returned to their ground states with an intense chemiluminescence emission. Such heterogeneous Fenton-like catalysts could realize the degradation of DBS without any external energy input, showing a promising application for the oxidative degradation of organic contaminants in wastewater treatment applications.
 Fig. 16  Possible mechanism for carbon dot-DBS-LDH nanocatalysts for the decomposition of acidified H2O2 to produce abundant ˙OH radicals.241 Reprinted with permission from ref. 241 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 

6.5 Chemical catalysis
In recent years, catalysis is being widely used in promoting synthetic organic transformations. These catalysts usually consist of nano-dimensional active components such as metal and metal oxides dispersed over a solid support. In addition to the catalysis described above, the application of CD-based composites in the field of chemical catalysis is relatively rare, mainly including the oxidation reaction,244 reduction reaction,245,246 Suzuki–Miyaura reaction,247 biodiesel production,248 ring-opening reaction,249 and Maillard reaction,250 and acid catalysis includes esterification, Beckmann rearrangement and aldol condensation.251

Support. 
Although metal NPs display good catalytic abilities due to their SPR absorption, major drawbacks of such nanocatalysts include the aggregation of metal NPs and the need for additives and stabilizers that hamper the catalytic reaction process. Currently, CDs represent an important choice of support because of their high surface functionality, chemical stability in various media, and inertness to supported metals.
Veratryl alcohol can be selectively oxidized to veratryl aldehyde in the presence of catalysts and thus has been often used as a model compound to study the reaction process of decomposition or chemical transformation of natural abounded lignin for the production of biofuels and aromatic chemicals.252,253 AuNPs supported on various matrices have been employed to catalyze alcohol oxidation, which showed higher selectivity and less possibility to be deactivated by oxygen.254,255 On this basis, Zhang's group244 developed AuNP/GQD composites for exploring the catalytic properties in veratryl alcohol oxidation. The oxygen-related groups on the GQD surface can effectively prevent the AuNPs from aggregation, thus the AuNP/GQD composites showed good dispensability and stability in aqueous solution. The GQDs with rich –COOH groups showed high peroxidase-like activity in an acidic environment.256 Through π–π stacking, veratryl alcohol was absorbed on the composites, and the active species singlet oxygen primarily generated by GQDs with H2O2 under acidic conditions oxidized the reactant; the superoxide anion and traces of singlet oxygen generated by both AuNPs and GQDs with H2O2 oxidized the reactant under alkaline conditions, and thus the reaction was faster (Fig. 17). The conversion of veratryl alcohol to veratric acid was improved to more than 99% in alkaline aqueous medium. The excellent selectivity and conversion efficiency of the oxidation catalyzed by Au/GQDs are contributed by each component and their interaction.
 Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism for veratryl alcohol oxidation with Au/GQDs as catalysts at different pH values.244 Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Moreover, Karak's group247 reported the synthesis of a nanohybrid system of Pd–Ag hybrid NPs supported over CDs by a facile UV-light-driven reduction process. The nanohybrid was employed as the heterogeneous catalyst for promoting the Suzuki–Miyaura cross-coupling reactions of aryl boronic acids with aryl bromides and aryl chlorides under ligand-free and ambient conditions. When only PdNPs were used, the reaction proceeded sluggishly, with a very low yield of 16%. Under optimized conditions, the composite catalysts showed high catalytic activity in terms of short reaction times (<1 h) and high yields (>90%).

7. Advantages, challenges and future direction
7.1 Advantages
In the CD-based composite catalysts, CDs can function not only as efficient catalysts, but also as multifunctional components in composite catalyst design to promote wider spectrum absorption and separation of electrons and holes, and stabilize photolysis semiconductors. Compared with other materials such as metal, metal oxides and bismuth-based metal compounds, CDs show various advantages, including facile preparation, low toxicity, good water solubility, low-cost, excellent optical properties and good electron transfer capability.

Facile preparation. 
The preparation of CDs is very facile, including “top-down” and “bottom-up” methods. Most of the CDs are prepared by one-step synthesis that uses one or several starting materials, through the traditional processes such as hydrothermal/solvothermal, microwave, ultrasonication, and pyrolysis of organic precursors.


Low toxicity. 
The fundamental elements in the CDs are carbon and oxygen elements, which usually do not contain toxic metal elements. Thus, CDs display very low toxicity compared with toxic CdS/CdSe QDs.


Good water solubility. 
The CDs usually show good solubility and stability in aqueous solution because the surface of CDs is rich in hydrophilic groups such as carboxyl, amino and hydroxyl groups. Importantly, the CDs have good dispersion in solution because of their small particle size, while the metal catalysts tend to aggregate. The excellent stability of CDs in solution is attributed to the electrostatic stabilization (the surfaces of CDs are passivated by carboxyl and hydroxyl groups). In CD/metal and CD/metal oxide composite catalysts, CDs can be used as a good support to prevent metal and metal oxides from aggregating, thus greatly improving their catalytic activity.


Low-cost. 
The development of green synthesis techniques provides the possibility of large-scale preparation of CDs at low cost. The use of biomass or “green” precursors not only effectively reduces the cost of CD synthesis, but also conforms to the concept of green chemistry. Traditional noble metal catalysts such as Au, Ag and Pt are expensive, which limits their practical applications.


Excellent optical properties. 
One of the most noteworthy characteristics of CDs is their excellent optical properties. Firstly, CDs show strong optical absorption in the UV region with a long tail extending into the visible range and even to the near infrared (NIR) region. Secondly, CDs display fully-color-tunable fluorescence emission from the blue to the NIR region. Thirdly, CDs show good up-conversion fluorescence that is an anti-Stokes emission. That is to say, CDs can emit light with higher energy than the excitation wavelength. Therefore, CDs can be used as a good photosensitizer and spectral converter for enhancing the photocatalytic activity of other materials. Meanwhile, the fluorescence of CDs can be used to monitor the progress of some catalytic reactions, which provides the possibility for real-time and visual monitoring of catalytic reactions.


Outstanding electronic properties. 
The CDs show the outstanding electronic properties and the CDs can act as excellent electron donors and acceptors. Due to the superior electron transfer ability, the CDs have been introduced into photocatalytic systems for further improving the photocatalytic activity of other materials.

7.2 Issues and challenges
Although the CDs have been proved to have great application prospects in the field of catalysis, there are still many issues and challenges worthy of further study. Firstly, the defects of CDs greatly affect their optical and electronic properties. However, there is currently no method and technology to precisely control the number of CD defects. Secondly, there have been large amounts of research on the construction of CD-based composites. However, a simple and controllable construction of CD-based composites is still a crucial issue. Thirdly, there are few studies on the photostability of CD-based composites, representing one main challenge for this type of photocatalyst development.257 Fourthly, the fluorescence mechanism of CDs is still unclear, indicating that the transfer route of photogenerated electrons need to be further investigated. Finally, most of the CDs used in photocatalysis show strong absorption in the UV region, indicating a limited light-harvesting ability. Further studies enable CDs to be excited in the visible or even NIR region.
7.3 Future direction
CDs have emerged in the field of catalysis, but there is still great scope for the continued development of CD materials with improved performance for catalysis. Currently, there are many research studies on the application of CDs in photocatalysis, but few in electrocatalysis, especially in chemical catalysis. Moreover, CDs are usually used as the support or promoter in the CD-based composite catalysts, but there are few examples directly used as the active phase. Element doping or surface functionalization is an effective way to enable CDs with good catalytic activity. Moreover, developing new synthetic procedures for the preparation of heteroatom-doped CDs with enhanced catalytic activity by tuning the intrinsic photophysical properties of CDs is a good choice.
The weak absorption of long wavelength light is one of the main limiting factors in the application of CDs in photocatalysis. Some studies show that the long wavelength absorption of CDs is closely related to the surface oxidation degree and graphitic nitrogen. Thus, the preparation of CDs with long wavelength absorption is highly beneficial to improve the utilization of sunlight. Moreover, one of the main limiting factors affecting the yield of H2 production is the rapid decay of the majority of the initial excited states on the picosecond timescale in the photocatalytic H2 generation of CDs. Therefore, the synthesis of CDs that have a greatly increased proportion of long-lived excited states will be greatly helpful to improve the yield of charge extraction by catalytic species.
The construction mode of CD-based composite catalysts has an important influence on their catalytic activity. The preparation of CD-based composites by in situ growth is based on the heterogeneous nucleation and growth of the other component on the surface of the CDs. Although the low energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation allows the formation of the other component on the CDs, the homogeneous nucleation process still occurs simultaneously and reduces the quantity of available CD-based composites.76 Thus, further efforts in CD-based composites are to develop new synthetic strategies toward effective combinations of two components.
Finally, the development of new catalysts with enhanced robustness and that are able to operate at high catalytic rates with suitably low overpotential is a major approach to improve the overall performance of CD photosystems.258 Moreover, deeper understanding of CD excited state potentials may allow CDs to be applied in a broad range of photocatalytic systems. A typical example is the great application prospect of CDs in light driven organic transformation, in which precious-metal inorganic dyes are currently being used.
8. Conclusions and outlook
CDs as a new type of carbon-based fluorescent nanomaterial have been well used for catalytic fields. Although many breakthroughs have been obtained from their fundamental optical–physical properties to potential applications, there are still many problems to be solved. Compared with traditional QDs, CDs show low toxicity, but the effect of CDs on humans is still unclear. CDs show tune fluorescence, but the fluorescence mechanism of CDs is still unclear because the difficulty in determining the structure leads to the absence of a universally applicable luminescence mechanism.
To improve and extend the functions of nanomaterials, CDs are usually combined with other functional nanomaterials to form nanocomposites. The construction of CD-based composites mainly includes physical mixing, chemical bonding, and in situ growth. The combination type of composites has an important influence on their catalytic applications because the efficiency and rate of electron or energy transfer are different at their interface under different interaction mechanisms. In the in situ synthesis of composites, although the low energy barrier for heterogeneous nucleation allows the formation of other component on the CDs, the homogeneous nucleation process still occurs simultaneously and reduces the quantity of available CD-based heterostructures. Therefore, more efforts need be made to develop new methods for constructing the CD-based composite catalysts.
The nanomaterials used for constructing CD-based composite catalysts mainly have metal, oxides, bismuth-based metal compounds, and carbon materials. Some other functional nanomaterials such as biomaterials and copper chalcogenide are rarely reported. The construction of new CD-based composites is of great significance for expanding their catalytic applications.
Moreover, in the field of catalysis, CD-based composites are mainly used in photocatalysis. The exploration of CDs in other catalytic reactions is still very deficient. In summary, we believe that CD-based composites as novel catalysts hold a bright future even though there still exist some debates and challenges to overcome.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
We are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC, Grant No. 21976144).
References
X. Huang, X. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
M. Zhi, C. Xiang, J. Li, M. Li and N. Wu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 72–88 RSC .
A. Borenstein, O. Hanna, R. Attias, S. Luski, T. Brousse and D. Aurbach, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12653–12672 RSC .
R. Yang, S. Liu and H. Cui, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 1143–1150 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, D. Li, L. Tian, W. Xiang, T. Wang, W. Hu, Y. Hu, S. Chen, J. Chen and Z. Dai, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 4438–4442 RSC .
C. He, H. Yan, X. Li and X. Wang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2279–2285 RSC .
Z. Y. Ding, F. F. Li, J. L. Wen, X. L. Wang and R. C. Sun, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1383–1390 RSC .
Q.-Y. Yu, G.-Y. Zhai, T.-L. Cui, H. Su, Z.-H. Xue, J.-J. Zhang, P. J. Pauzauskie, S.-i. Hirano, X.-H. Li and J.-S. Chen, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 434–439 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qin, Y. Dong, M. Wang, Z. Zhu, M. Li, X. Chen, D. Yang and Y. Shao, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, Z. X. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2016, 161, 875–880 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, J. H. He, C. M. Li, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2019, 191, 443–448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Chen, R. S. Li, M. L. Liu, H. Y. Zou, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2018, 178, 172–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Cayuela, M. L. Soriano, C. Carrillo-Carrion and M. Valcãrcel, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1311–1326 RSC .
M. L. Liu, L. Yang, R. S. Li, B. B. Chen, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3611–3617 RSC .
B. B. Chen, M. L. Liu, C. M. Li and C. Z. Huang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 270, 165–190 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Chen, M. L. Liu, L. Zhan, C. M. Li and C. Z. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4003–4009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Cheng, C. M. Li, R. Z. Mu, Y. F. Li, T. T. Xing, B. B. Chen and C. Z. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 11358–11365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Chen, Z. X. Liu, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2016, 141, 2676–2681 RSC .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, C. M. Li and C. Z. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 968–981 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. He, Y. Y. Cheng, T. Yang, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2018, 1035, 203–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, J. H. Liu, R. S. Li, Y. F. Li, C. Z. Huang and S. J. Zhen, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2019, 1063, 144–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, T. Yang, J. Wang, X. D. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2017, 5, 015003 CrossRef PubMed .
B. B. Chen, Z. X. Liu, W. C. Deng, L. Zhan, M. L. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5127–5132 RSC .
Y. Li, Y. Hu, Y. Zhao, G. Q. Shi, L. E. Deng, Y. B. Hou and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 776–780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. C. Huang, Y. T. Shen, Y. Li, W. J. Zheng, Y. J. Xue, C. Q. Qin, B. Zhang, J. X. Hao and W. Feng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13043–13052 RSC .
J. B. Essner and G. A. Baker, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1216–1263 RSC .
B. B. Chen, X. Y. Wang and R. C. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 9681–9684 RSC .
Q. Q. Zhang, B. B. Chen, H. Y. Zou, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2018, 100, 148–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Zhang and C. Huang, J. Pharm. Anal., 2019, 9, 127–132 CrossRef PubMed .
X. L. Guo, Z. Y. Ding, S. M. Deng, C. C. Wen, X. C. Shen, B. P. Jiang and H. Liang, Carbon, 2018, 134, 519–530 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Sun, Q. Xin, Y. Yang, H. Shah, H. Q. Cao, Y. F. Qi, J. R. Gong and J. B. Li, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 715–718 RSC .
H. Z. He, X. H. Zheng, S. Liu, M. Zheng, Z. G. Xie, Y. Wang, M. Yu and X. T. Shuai, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 10991–10998 RSC .
K. D. Patel, R. K. Singh and H.-W. Kim, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 434–469 RSC .
L. Hao, S. J. Guo, C. X. Li, H. Hui, L. Yang and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10004–10012 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, H. C. Zhang, Y. Liu, X. Han, R. H. Liu, H. T. Li and Z. H. Kang, ACS Catal., 2017, 4, 781–787 CrossRef .
Z. X. Liu, B. B. Chen, M. L. Liu, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 1494–1498 RSC .
H. Liu, R. S. Li, J. Zhou and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2017, 142, 4221–4227 RSC .
J. Wang, R. S. Li, H. Z. Zhang, N. Wang, Z. Zhang and C. Z. Huang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2017, 97, 157–163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. X. Liu, H. Y. Zou, N. Wang, T. Yang, Z. W. Peng, J. Wang, N. Li and C. Z. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 490–496 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wang, X. Xiao, C. Zhou, F. Lyu, L. Fu, C. Wang and S. Ruan, Nanoscale Adv., 2019, 1, 1819–1825 RSC .
J. Zhang, S. Wu, X. Lu, P. Wu and J. Liu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 14152–14161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lai, Y. Jin, L. Shi, R. Zhou, Y. Zhou and D. An, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 591–601 RSC .
H. Li, R. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Huang, H. Yu, H. Ming, S. Lian, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17470–17475 RSC .
F. Li, F. Tian, C. Liu, Z. Wang, Z. Du, R. Li and L. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 8389–8396 RSC .
D. K. Khajuria, V. B. Kumar, D. Gigi, A. Gedanken and D. Karasik, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19373–19385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Dong, Q. Lou, G. Q. Huang, J. J. Guo, X. H. Wang and T. L. Huang, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 7337–7346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhao, Y. J. Ma, D. Song, Y. Liu, Y. P. Luo, S. Lin and C. Y. Liu, Anal. Methods, 2017, 9, 4770–4775 RSC .
B. Ryplida, G. Lee, I. In and S. Y. Park, Biomater. Sci., 2019, 7, 2600–2610 RSC .
J. J. Huang, Z. F. Zhong, M. Z. Rong, X. Zhou, X. D. Chen and M. Q. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 70, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Zhu, L. H. Zhang, K. Van Vliet, A. Miserez and N. Holten-Andersen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10409–10418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Wu, W. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Zhan, C. F. Hu, J. L. Zhuang, H. R. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, B. F. Lei and Y. L. Liu, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1701150 CrossRef .
Y. J. Chung, K. Kim, B. I. Lee and C. B. Park, Small, 2017, 13, 1700983 CrossRef PubMed .
T. T. Bui and S. Y. Park, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4245–4253 RSC .
H. Q. Zhang, P. W. Dai, L. Z. Huang, Y. H. Huang, Q. T. Huang, W. X. Zhang, C. Wei and S. R. Hu, Anal. Methods, 2014, 6, 2687–2691 RSC .
Q. Xiao, S. Y. Lu, C. S. Huang, W. Su and S. Huang, Sensors, 2016, 16, 1874–1889 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mandani, P. Majee, B. Sharma, D. Sarma, N. Thakur, D. Nayak and T. K. Sarma, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 7622–7632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wei, Q. Huang, S. Hu, H. Zhang, W. Zhang, Z. Wang, M. Zhu, P. Dai and L. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 149, 237–244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Yan, Q. T. Huang, C. Wei, S. R. Hu, H. Q. Zhang, W. X. Zhang, W. Z. Yang, P. H. Dong, M. L. Zhu and Z. M. Wang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 115317–115325 RSC .
M. Zhao, J. Zhang, H. Xiao, T. Hu, J. Jia and H. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 1635–1638 RSC .
S. Sharma, A. Umar, S. K. Mehta, A. O. Ibhadon and S. K. Kansal, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 7445–7456 RSC .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, X. Wang, L. Mu, M. Yuan, B. Liu and H. Shi, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 359, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, J. Yan, C. Shen, F. Xi, X. Dong and J. Liu, J. Mater. Sci., 2018, 53, 12103–12114 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, Y. Zheng, T. Fang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhu, Q. Liang, H. Sheng, Z. Li, C. Chen and X. Wang, Sci. China: Chem., 2020, 63, 149–181 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Liu, H. Huang, H. T. Li, Y. Liu, J. Zhong, Y. Y. Li, S. Zhang and Z. H. Kang, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Sun, A. D. Zhao, N. Gao, K. Li, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7176–7180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Sharma, P. Tiwari and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8904–8924 RSC .
J. B. Essner, C. H. Laber, S. Ravula, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 243–250 RSC .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, C. M. Li and C. Z. Huang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 449–471 RSC .
B. B. Chen, R. S. Li, M. L. Liu, H. Z. Zhang and C. Z. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4958–4961 RSC .
A. Pal, M. P. Sk and A. Chattopadhyay, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 5758–5762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. He, J. L. He, L. Wang, Z. H. Yu, H. R. Zhang, Y. L. Liu and B. F. Lei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 918–926 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. He, J. L. He, Z. H. Yu, H. R. Zhang, Y. L. Liu, G. Q. Hu, M. T. Zheng, H. W. Dong, J. L. Zhuang and B. F. Lei, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 2495–2501 RSC .
G. Li, Y. Liu, J. Niu, M. Pei and W. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2018, 6, 4380–4384 RSC .
H. Ding, F. Zhang, C. Zhao, Y. Lv, G. Ma, W. Wei and Z. Tian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27396–27401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, X. Li, Z. Zhou, W. Liu, K. Li, J. Gao, Y. Zhao and Q. Wang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 13058–13068 RSC .
S. L. Hu, Y. F. Zhou, C. R. Xue, J. L. Yang and Q. Chang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9426–9429 RSC .
Z. P. Zeng, F. X. Xiao, H. Phan, S. F. Chen, Z. Z. Yu, R. Wang, T. Q. Nguyen and T. T. Y. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1700–1713 RSC .
J. N. Li, X. Y. Li, L. B. Zeng, S. Y. Fan, M. M. Zhang, W. B. Sun, X. Chen, M. O. Tadé and S. M. Liu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 3877–3887 RSC .
M. M. Zhu, Y. J. Zhou, Y. Sun, C. Zhu, L. L. Hu, J. Gao, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 5459–5464 RSC .
S. Barua, P. K. Raul, R. Gopalakrishnan, B. Das, Vanlalhmuaka and V. Veer, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2345–2350 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Wang, Y. J. Long, Q. L. Wang, H. J. Zhang, X. X. Huang, R. Zhu, P. Teng, L. P. Liang and H. Z. Zheng, Carbon, 2013, 64, 499–506 CrossRef CAS .
L. Q. Yang, X. Y. Liu, Q. J. Lu, N. Huang, M. L. Liu, Y. Y. Zhang and S. Z. Yao, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2016, 930, 23–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, D. Wang, X. Liu, X. Wang, W. Liu and W. Qin, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 5861–5867 RSC .
L. H. Zhou, P. Fu, Y. Q. Wang, L. H. Sun and Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7222–7229 RSC .
H. Jin, H. Huang, Y. He, X. Feng, S. Wang, L. Dai and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7588–7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Park, F. Raza, S.-J. Jeon, D. Yim, H.-I. Kim, T. W. Kang and J.-H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14796–14803 RSC .
C. Berrueco, P. Álvarez, S. Venditti, T. J. Morgan, A. A. Herod, M. Millan and R. Kandiyoti, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 3008–3015 CrossRef CAS .
L. Poulain, A. Monod and H. Wortham, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2007, 187, 10–23 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Song, F. Y. Quan, Y. H. Xu, M. L. Liu, L. Cui and J. Q. Liu, Carbon, 2016, 104, 169–178 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Choudhury, J. M. Chethodil, P. M. Gharat, P. K. P. and H. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 1389–1395 CrossRef PubMed .
X. F. Jia, J. Li and E. K. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5572–5575 RSC .
Y. M. Chung, B. Raman, D.-S. Kim and K. H. Ahn, Chem. Commun., 2006, 186–188 RSC .
X. X. Liu, C. L. Yang, B. Z. Zheng, J. Y. Dai, L. Yan, Z. J. Zhuang, J. Du, Y. Guo and D. Xiao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 255, 572–579 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dhenadhayalan, K. C. Lin, R. Suresh and P. Ramamurthy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1252–1261 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Wang, Z. Z. Xu, H. Cheng, H. H. Lin, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 82, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, X. Yang, J. Li, D. Li and E. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 237–239 RSC .
J. Hou, T. Y. Zhou, L. Wang, P. Zhang and L. Ding, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 230, 615–622 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pisson, N. Morel-Desrosiers, J. P. Morel, A. de Roy, F. Leroux, C. Taviot-Guého and P. Malfreyt, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1482–1490 CrossRef CAS .
B. Guan, T. Wang, S. Zeng, X. Wang, D. An, D. Wang, Y. Cao, D. Ma, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 246–262 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mitchell and E. E. Reid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1931, 53, 1879–1883 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. He, M. J. Shu, Z. Yang, Y. J. Ma, D. Huang, S. S. Xu, Y. F. Wang, N. T. Hu, Y. F. Zhang and L. Xu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 422, 257–265 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Li, S. L. Zhang, S. A. Kulinich and H. B. Zeng, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4976–4983 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, Q. L. Guo, D. Chen, Z. D. Liu, X. H. Zheng, A. L. Xu, S. W. Yang and G. Q. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5750–5759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Zhou, J. J. Gu, C. X. Tian, D. C. Jiang, Y. Chen and K. Xi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39480–39483 RSC .
T. Samanta, C. Hazra and V. Mahalingam, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 106–109 RSC .
F. Deng, X. Y. Lu, F. Zhong, X. L. Pei, X. B. Luo, S. L. Luo, D. D. Dionysiou and C. Au, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 065701 CrossRef PubMed .
G. J. Wei, K. Du, X. X. Zhao, Z. J. Wang, M. Liu, C. Li, H. Wang, C. H. An and W. Xing, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3005–3017 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, J. Y. Huang, H. T. Sun, K. Q. Zhang and Y. K. Lai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 16046–16058 RSC .
K.-I. Shimizu, Y. Murata and A. Satsuma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19043–19051 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shankar, A. Rai, A. Ahmad and M. Sastry, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 275, 496–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Xie, Y. Y. Cheng, M. L. Liu, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2019, 144, 2011–2016 RSC .
S. J. Zhen, W. L. Fu, B. B. Chen, L. Zhan, H. Y. Zou, M. X. Gao and C. Z. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 93645–93648 RSC .
Y. F. Xie, M. L. Liu, W. Y. Lv, X. Li, P. F. Gao, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2019, 201, 280–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lan, H. Y. Zou, Z. X. Liu, M. X. Gao, B. B. Chen, Y. F. Li and C. Z. Huang, Talanta, 2015, 143, 469–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Chen, H. Liu, C. Z. Huang, J. Ling and J. Wang, New J. Chem., 2015, 39, 1295–1300 RSC .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, H. Li, H. Xu, H. Li and R. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11433–11443 RSC .
H. Choi, S.-J. Ko, Y. Choi, P. Joo, T. Kim, B. R. Lee, J.-W. Jung, H. J. Choi, M. Cha, J.-R. Jeong, I.-W. Hwang, M. H. Song, B.-S. Kim and J. Y. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 732 CrossRef CAS .
L. Timperman, Y. J. Feng, W. Vogel and N. Alonso-Vante, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 7558–7563 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kołodziejczak-Radzimska and T. Jesionowski, Materials, 2014, 7, 2833–2881 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Hudson, Y. Feng, R. S. Varma and A. Moores, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4493–4505 RSC .
M. B. Gawande, R. Luque and R. Zboril, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 3312–3313 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma, S. Dutta, S. Sharma, R. Zboril, R. S. Varma and M. B. Gawande, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3184–3209 RSC .
B. Majumdar, S. Mandani, T. Bhattacharya, D. Sarma and T. K. Sarma, J. Org. Chem., 2017, 82, 2097–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Su, S. Perathoner and G. Centi, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5782–5816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shi, F. Guo, H. Wang, C. Liu, Y. Fu, S. Yuan, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 433, 790–797 CrossRef .
F. Guo, W. Shi, H. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2017, 4, 1714–1720 RSC .
D. P. Shoemaker, J. Li and R. Seshadri, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11450–11457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Cui, H. Lin, Y.-Z. Liu, J.-B. Li, P. Sun, X.-C. Zhao and C.-J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14083–14087 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, F. Duan, Y. Zheng and Y. Xie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 12866–12871 CrossRef CAS .
D.-L. Huang, G.-M. Zeng, C.-L. Feng, S. Hu, X.-Y. Jiang, L. Tang, F.-F. Su, Y. Zhang, W. Zeng and H.-L. Liu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4946–4951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tang, J. Wang, G. Zeng, Y. Liu, Y. Deng, Y. Zhou, J. Tang, J. Wang and Z. Guo, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 306, 295–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xu, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. L. Feng, S. Hu, M. H. Zhao, C. Lai, Z. Wei, C. Huang, G. X. Xie and Z. F. Liu, Sci. Total Environ., 2012, 424, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 3537–3545 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, Y. Su, X. Jin, H. Xie and C. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1, 90–112 RSC .
H. Li and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7805–7810 RSC .
Q. Hu, M. Ji, J. Di, B. Wang, J. Xia, Y. Zhao and H. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 519, 263–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ryu, E. Lee, S. Lee and J. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 15616–15618 RSC .
K. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Yang, J. Luo, C. Li and S. Luan, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 3055–3060 CrossRef CAS .
C.-I. Wang, A. P. Periasamy and H.-T. Chang, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 3263–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Geng, L. Niu, Z. Xing, R. Song, G. Liu, M. Sun, G. Cheng, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Xu, L. Lu and L. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 638–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4517–4521 RSC .
X. Wang, X. Chen, A. Thomas, X. Fu and M. Antonietti, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1609–1612 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M.-Z. Wu and Y.-P. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Ajayan, L. S. Schadler, C. Giannaris and A. Rubio, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 750–753 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Shao, W. T. Wu, R. Q. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, Z. T. Li, Y. Wang, J. T. Zheng, W. Xia and M. B. Wu, J. Catal., 2016, 344, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Li, R. H. Liu, S. Y. Lian, Y. Liu, H. Huang and Z. H. Kang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 3289–3297 RSC .
H. T. Li, C. H. Sun, M. Ali, F. L. Zhou, X. Y. Zhang and D. R. Macfarlane, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8420–8424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Mohammadpour, A. Safavi and M. Shamsipur, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 255, 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Shi, Q. L. Wang, Y. J. Long, Z. L. Cheng, S. H. Chen, H. Z. Zheng and Y. M. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6695–6697 RSC .
T. Liu, Z. W. Cui, J. Zhou, Y. Wang and Z. G. Zou, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2017, 12, 375–382 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Phang and L.-L. Tan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5882–5905 RSC .
M. Z. Rahman, M. G. Kibria and C. B. Mullins, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1887–1931 RSC .
Y.-Y. Li, Y. Si, B.-X. Zhou, T. Huang, W.-Q. Huang, W. Hu, A. Pan, X. Fan and G.-F. Huang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 3135–3145 RSC .
D. Sarma, B. Majumdar and T. K. Sarma, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 6717–6726 RSC .
M. L. Liu, B. B. Chen, R. S. Li, C. M. Li, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4154–4160 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Q. Liu, J. Liu, B. Han, X. Q. Hu, F. Yang, Z. W. Xu, Y. C. Li, S. R. Jia, Z. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 5765–5771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Wu, L. Y. Zhan, W. Y. Fan, J. Z. Song, X. M. Li, Z. T. Li, R. Q. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, J. T. Zheng and M. B. Wu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 6640–6644 CrossRef .
J. Tian, Y. H. Leng, Z. H. Zhao, Y. Xia, Y. H. Sang, P. Hao, J. Zhan, M. C. Li and H. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 419–427 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Zhang, P. Chen, M. H. Zhuo, F. L. Wang, Y. H. Su, T. S. Chen, K. Yao, Z. W. Cai, W. Y. Lv and G. G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 129–139 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, W. Wang, H. Xu, S. Sun and M. Shang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 1776–1782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Bian, J. Zhu, S. Wang, Y. Cao, X. Qian and H. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 6258–6262 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Shao, L. Wang, L. Zhang, X. Li and Y. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2009, 333, 242–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qian, D. Yue, Z. Tian, M. Reng, Y. Zhu, M. Kan, T. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, X. Yue, J. Luo and C. Wang, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 65–73 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, W. Wang, S. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Xu and W. Zhu, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 252, 120–124 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, D. Li, Y. Zheng, W. Chen, Y. He, Y. Shao, X. Fu and G. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 104, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xia, S. Yin, H. Li, H. Xu, L. Xu and Y. Xu, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 5249–5258 RSC .
Y. Liu, W. Yao, D. Liu, R. Zong, M. Zhang, X. Ma and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 163, 547–553 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, B. Xu, H. Lin and S. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2013, 228, 482–488 CrossRef CAS .
F. Duo, C. Fan, Y. Wang, Y. Cao and X. Zhang, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 38, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Deng, Y. Liu, X. Zeng, D. Wiley and J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4419–4422 RSC .
S. Ponnurangam, I. V. Chernyshova and P. Somasundaran, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 244, 184–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 2544–2574 RSC .
J. Liu, C. Guo, X. Hu and G. Zhao, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 339–348 RSC .
M. Inagaki, F. Kojin, B. Tryba and M. Toyoda, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1652–1659 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, T. Hisatomi, Y. Suzuki, Z. Pan, J. Seo, M. Katayama, T. Minegishi, H. Nishiyama, T. Takata, K. Seki, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1675–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Annangi, S. Bonassi, R. Marcos and A. Hernández, Mutat. Res.-Rev. Mutat., 2016, 770, 140–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. A. Alcedo and K. E. Wetterhahn, in Int. Rev. Exp. Pathol, ed. G. W. Richter and K. I. M. Solez, Academic Press,  1990, vol. 31, pp. 85–108 Search PubMed .
L. Xu, X. Bai, L. Guo, S. Yang, P. Jin and L. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 357, 473–486 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Barrera-Díaz, V. Lugo-Lugo and B. Bilyeu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 223–224, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Kubacka, M. Fernández-García and G. Colón, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1555–1614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhang, M. J. Xu, H. Li, H. Ge and Z. F. Bian, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 226, 213–219 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian, T. Tachikawa and T. Majima, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1422–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, F. Cao, H. Li and Z. Bian, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 3494–3499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Wang, Y. F. Wang, Y. P. Feng, Y. Q. Zeng, Z. J. Xie, Q. X. Zhang, Y. H. Su, P. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Yao, W. Y. Lv and G. G. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 510–520 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, R. C. Flowers, H. S. Weinberg and P. C. Singer, Water Res., 2011, 45, 5218–5228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Arany, R. K. Szabó, L. Apáti, T. Alapi, I. Ilisz, P. Mazellier, A. Dombi and K. Gajda-Schrantz, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 262, 151–157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, Y. Deng, H. Dong, Y. Liu, L. Wang, B. Peng, C. Zhang and F. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 222, 115–123 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Martindale, G. A. Hutton, C. A. Caputo and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 6018–6025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Gross, A. Reynal, J. R. Durrant and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 356–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Wilker, K. E. Shinopoulos, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4316–4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yin, S. Ma, C. Wu and Y. Fan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 1852–1858 RSC .
A.-X. Zheng, J.-R. Wang, J. Li, X.-R. Song, G.-N. Chen and H.-H. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 36, 217–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Li, H. Liu, B. B. Chen, H. Z. Zhang, C. Z. Huang and J. Wang, Anal. Methods, 2016, 8, 2494–2501 RSC .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. H. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. B. Zhan, G. H. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, B. Guo, Z. Rao, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, M. Lan, B. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Guo, H. Wang, Q. Jia, G. Niu, X. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Meng, P. Wang, C.-S. Lee, W. Zhang and X. Han, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, X. Ren, J. Zhang, W. Zhang, X. Chen and X. Meng, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 1988–1992 RSC .
X. L. Ren, J. Liu, J. Ren, F. Q. Tang and X. W. Meng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19641–19646 RSC .
H. Wang, C. Q. Liu, Z. Liu, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Small, 2018, 14, 1703710 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Liu, C. Yang, X. Wang, D. Wang, A. Iqbal, W. Liu and W. Qin, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2467–2474 CrossRef CAS .
A.-L. Hu, Y.-H. Liu, H.-H. Deng, G.-L. Hong, A.-L. Liu, X.-H. Lin, X.-H. Xia and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 61, 374–378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mu, Y. Wang, M. Zhao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2540–2542 RSC .
X. Liu, Q. Wang, H. Zhao, L. Zhang, Y. Su and Y. Lv, Analyst, 2012, 137, 4552–4558 RSC .
B. Majumdar, D. Sarma, S. Jain and T. K. Sarma, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 13711–13719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878–3888 RSC .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. Mckone, S. W. Boettcher, M. Qixi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, Z. Qin, B. McElhenny, F. Zhang, S. Chen, J. Bao, Z. M. Wang, H.-Z. Song and Z. Ren, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21488–21495 RSC .
W. Li, Z. Wei, B. Wang, Y. Liu, H. Song, Z. Tang, B. Yang and S. Lu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 277–284 RSC .
Y. P. Liu, Q. J. Li, R. Si, G. D. Li, W. Li, D. P. Liu, D. J. Wang, L. Sun, Y. Zhang and X. X. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606200 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Greeley, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Bonde, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 909–913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Reier, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1765–1772 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Debe, Nature, 2012, 486, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, M. Jaroniec, Y. Jin and S. Z. Qiao, Small, 2012, 8, 3550–3566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Y. Xue, L. Qu, H.-J. Choi and J.-B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823–4892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chen and P. Holt-Hindle, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3767–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. G. Ellert, M. V. Tsodikov, S. A. Nikolaev and V. M. Novotortsev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2014, 83, 718–732 CrossRef .
G. Q. He, Y. Song, K. Liu, A. Walter, S. Chen and S. W. Chen, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 831–838 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. M. Koper, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 660, 254–260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Tang, J. Liu, X. Y. Wu, R. H. Liu, X. Han, Y. Z. Han, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. H. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 7918–7925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Guo, K. Yu, H. L. Li, R. J. Qi, Y. Y. Zhang, H. L. Song, T. Zheng, Z. Q. Zhu and M. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3653–3660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Cheon, J. H. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Goddeti, J. Y. Park and S. H. Joo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8875–8878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Niu, R. H. Zhu, H. Yan, H. B. Zeng, S. Cosnier, X. J. Zhang and D. Shan, Carbon, 2016, 109, 402–410 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Shi, C. Lu, D. Yan and L. N. Ma, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2013, 45, 58–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. N. Tušar, D. Maučec, M. Rangus, I. Arčon, M. Mazaj, M. Cotman, A. Pintar and V. Kaučič, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 820–826 CrossRef .
L. K. Charkoudian, D. M. Pham and K. J. Franz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12424–12425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, Q. Yao, W. Guan, C. Lu and J.-M. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 10441–10447 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Y. Deng, M. Shen, W. Han, Z. Chen, D. Xu and X. Ji, Desalination, 2009, 249, 1022–1029 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Zhang, C. Lu and J.-M. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 14711–14716 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, S. Guo and J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 6318–6321 RSC .
Y. Yang, W. Zhu, B. Shi and C. Lü, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4017–4029 RSC .
Y. Yang, H. Duan, S. Xia and C. Lü, Polym. Chem., 2020, 11, 1177–1187 RSC .
R. Bayan and N. Karak, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 8868–8876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Macina, T. V. de Medeiros and R. Naccache, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 23794–23802 RSC .
H. Li, C. Sun, M. Ali, F. Zhou, X. Zhang and D. R. MacFarlane, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 8420–8424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wei, C. Xu, L. Wu, J. Wang, J. Ren and X. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3564–3567 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li, R. Liu, W. Kong, J. Liu, Y. Liu, L. Zhou, X. Zhang, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 867–873 RSC .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 671–680 RSC .
H. Fan, Y. Yang, J. Song, G. Ding, C. Wu, G. Yang and B. Han, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 600–604 RSC .
X. Yu, Y. Huo, J. Yang, S. Chang, Y. Ma and W. Huang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2013, 280, 450–455 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. Pina, E. Falletta and M. Rossi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 350–369 RSC .
Y. Zhang, C. Wu, X. Zhou, X. Wu, Y. Yang, H. Wu, S. Guo and J. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1816–1819 RSC .
R. Wang, K. Q. Lu, Z. R. Tang and Y. J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3717–3734 RSC .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Some of the biomass or “green” precursors used for the preparation of CDs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration for LbL assembly of the (M/GQD)n (M = Au, Ag, Pt) multilayer thin films.77 Reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthesis of CD/ZnFe2O4 yolk–shell nanospheres.78 Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic procedure for the preparation of graphene-based materials assisted by microbes (a); TEM image of C-rGO at low magnification (b); HRTEM image of C-rGO at high magnification (c); SEAD pattern of C-rGO (d); TEM image of M-rGO at low magnification (e); HRTEM image of M-rGO at high magnification (f); SEAD pattern of C-rGO (g); TEM image of CDs/M-rGO at low magnification (h); HRTEM image of CDs/M-rGO at high magnification (i), inset: HRTEM image of one carbon dot; SEAD pattern of CDs/M-rGO (j).84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism involved in fluorescence transition under different pH conditions.89 Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Elsevier. (b) Representation of the energy levels and electronic transitions in CDs under different pH conditions. E1, E2, and E3 are conceptual, sequentially increasing energy bands under different conditions.90 Reprinted with permission from ref. 90 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Illustration of the possible formation process of the interlaced 2D BiOCl/CQD nanosheets.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission from IOP science.	 

 	Fig. 7  FESEM images of the obtained hierarchical porous structures at different reaction times: (a) 1.5, (b) 2, and (c) 3 h. (d) Schematic diagram of the evolution of 3D hierarchical porous structures.109 Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2017 Springer.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the proposed mechanism of photocatalytic CO2 reduction under visible light on CL@CQDs/Cu2O.179 Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  A proposed adsorption–photoreduction–desorption mechanism of photocatalytic reduction of Cr6+ in the presence of CD/TiO2 composites.190 Reproduced from ref. 190 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic photocatalytic mechanism for Ag/CQDs/g-C3N4 under broad-spectrum light irradiation.193 Reproduced from ref. 193 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  Representation of solar H2 production using the hybrid CQD-NiP system described in this work. Irradiation of CQDs results in the direct transfer of photoexcited electrons to the catalyst NiP with subsequent reduction of aqueous protons. The electron donor EDTA carries out quenching of photoinduced vacancies in the CQDs.197 Reprinted with permission from ref. 197 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of colorimetric detection of H2O2 and glucose by using glucose oxidase and O-GQDs.208 Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 13  Possible mechanism for the CD/Co/H2O2/TMB system.209 Reprinted with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic model of the roles of CQDs in the high electrocatalytic activity of CQD/NiFe-LDH nanocomposites.231 Reprinted with permission from ref. 231 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a and b) Band structures of MoS2 and coral MoS2@GQDs. The red circles represent graphene states. (c) The 3D different charge density distribution of the coral MoS2@GQDs. The pale green and yellow regions represent the charge depletion and accumulation space. (d) Adsorption configurations of an H atom on the Mo edge sites.232 Reprinted with permission from ref. 232 Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Possible mechanism for carbon dot-DBS-LDH nanocatalysts for the decomposition of acidified H2O2 to produce abundant ˙OH radicals.241 Reprinted with permission from ref. 241 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism for veratryl alcohol oxidation with Au/GQDs as catalysts at different pH values.244 Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
