Temporal-spatial-energy resolved advance multidimensional techniques to probe photovoltaic materials from atomistic viewpoint for next-generation ener ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1EE01165K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1EE01165K
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 4760-4802Temporal-spatial-energy resolved advance multidimensional techniques to probe photovoltaic materials from atomistic viewpoint for next-generation energy solutions

        
          
            Vishal 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Nisika
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Mukesh 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      *
      Functional and Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Punjab-140001, India. E-mail: mkumar@iitrpr.ac.in
Received 
      19th April 2021
    , Accepted 23rd July 2021First published on 23rd July 2021AbstractSolar cell technologies have attracted great attention considering their potential to meet the global energy demand in a sustainable fashion. There have been extensive research efforts to increase the efficiency of conventional and newly developed photovoltaic (PV) materials, while looking for new candidates to maximize the solar conversion efficiency. In this direction, advanced characterization tools capable of analysing material properties multi-dimensionally are continuously being developed, enabling researchers to fundamentally understand various aspects of material properties. This has equipped researchers with various tools to simultaneously engineer the structural, morphological, electrical, chemical and optical properties of materials to improve the performance of devices. Herein, we present the recent advances in the development of multidimensional characterization tools capable of probing material properties with high spatial, energy and temporal resolution simultaneously. Numerous advantages associated with mapping material properties under in situ/operando conditions to unveil various aspects of material properties in parallel are disclosed. In addition, the integration of various characterization tools to visualize the evolution of carrier dynamics under the influence of various external stimuli is discussed in detail. Together with discussing the advantages of multidimensional mapping tools over conventional tools, various outlooks for realizing next-generation characterization tools are provided to facilitate the commercialization and development of next-generation solar cell modules.
Vishal Kumar
Vishal Kumar completed his Master's degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2020 from the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India. He worked under the supervision of Prof. Mukesh Kumar for his Master's dissertation. His research interest includes the synthesis and optics of carbon quantum dot-metal nanoparticle hybrid nanostructures for enhanced optoelectronic applications.
Nisika
Nisika received her Master's Degree in Physics (Materials Science) in 2015 from Kurukshetra University, India. Then she joined the research group of Prof. Mukesh Kumar at the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar (India) as a doctoral student in 2016. Her major research interests include interface engineering in optoelectronic devices especially photovoltaic devices.
Mukesh Kumar
Dr Mukesh Kumar received his PhD degree in physics from IIT Delhi, India, in 2010. He was a Research Associate with South Dakota State University, Colorado School of Mines, and National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA, from 2010 to 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Physics, IIT Ropar, India. His current research focuses on the synthesis of low cost kesterite-based solar cells, solar blind photodetector devices and 2D materials for optoelectronic and sensing applications.

Broader context
Photovoltaic (PV) materials, which convert solar energy directly into electricity, offer a rational solution to meet the challenge of the increasing global energy demand sustainably. However, even after substantial research efforts, their solar conversion efficiencies remain lower than the maximum theoretical achievable efficiencies (especially, for newly developed PV technologies such as perovskite and kesterite materials). The performance of solar cell modules is mainly influenced by the carrier dynamics, which span the order of magnitudes across the spatial, energy and temporal resolutions. Herein, we presented the role of various advanced characterization tools developed over the last decade in enhancing the performance of solar cell modules based on various PV materials. The integration of ultrafast spectroscopic techniques with conventionally used characterization tools enables probing of PV materials to track the carrier dynamics with high spatial, temporal and energy resolution simultaneously. Additionally, newly developed in situ and operando characterization tools provide unique means to map the evolution of the structural, electrical, and optical properties of materials in parallel when exposed to various external stimuli such as temperature, humidity, and pressure. These recently developed characterization tools provide unique and invaluable insights to improve the carrier management and provide pathways to design new materials for developing next-generation high-performance solar cell modules.

1. Introduction
Photovoltaics (PV) offers a rational and sustainable solution for meeting the soaring global energy demands and ongoing climate crisis by directly converting solar energy into electricity.1,2 The share of photovoltaics among US renewable energy production is projected to rise from 11% in 2017 to 48% by 2050, making it the fastest growing renewable energy sector.3 In this direction, various photovoltaic materials have been widely studied by the research community to reduce the manufacturing costs, while improving the device performance.4 Conventional PV technologies such as c-Si, CdTe, CIGS, and GaAs have been widely commercialized.5–7 However, these technologies require vacuum processibility and use hazardous or rare materials, which ultimately increase the manufacturing costs. Thus, to overcome this issue, new solution-processed PV modules based on dye-sensitized materials,8 quantum dots,9 and perovskites10 are being developed rapidly owing to their easy and cost-effective processibility. Besides, kesterite,11 2D material heterojunction,12 organic,13 polymer14 and various other hybrid solar cells are constantly being developed in parallel, which show potential for light harvesting using cost-effective and environmentally friendly precursors.
However, even after decades of research, the experimentally achieved device efficiencies remain comparatively lower than the maximum attainable Shockley–Queisser limit (SQL) (as shown in Fig. 1a).15,16 Mature expensive PV technologies such as c-Si and GaAs have attained a large fraction of the allowed SQL efficiency ηSQL (>75%). In contrast, the efficiencies of new cheaper technologies such as quantum dot, organic, polymer and kesterite solar cells remain comparatively low ηSQL (<50%) owing to their poor carrier and light management (as shown in Fig. 1b). Among them, perovskite solar cells (PSCs), relatively new solar harvesting materials (with ηSQL>50%), have been widely studied owing to their extraordinary structural and optoelectronic properties. Various strategies such as substrate patterning,17 integration of plasmonics18 or 2D materials,19 interface engineering,20 defect passivation,21 and morphology engineering22 have been applied to enhance the light absorption and the improve carrier transport. However, the efficiency of these devices is still far from the theoretical SQL. In addition to low PCE values, these devices suffer from poor stability and scalability issues compared to the mature PV technologies, hindering their commercialization.23,24
 Fig. 1  (a) Theoretical SQL and maximum attained efficiencies for various photovoltaic materials. (b) I–V characteristics of different photovoltaic materials with attained fraction of SQL with trend showing increasing solar conversion efficiency with suitable carrier and light management. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Various phenomena probed at various temporal, spatial and energy resolutions using different material characterization tools. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Institute of Physics. 
To improve the efficiency and commercialization of new PV technologies, in-depth understanding of the degradation and scalability issues is mandatory. Therefore, the structural, chemical, morphological and electronic properties of various PV materials have been thoroughly studied using various characterization tools.25,27,28 However, despite the extensive research efforts, the fundamental understanding of light-matter interactions, carrier dynamics evolution under the influence of various external factors, and other factors remains ambiguous. The major reason for this is associated with the difficulty in monitoring the dynamics of fundamental carriers (electrons, holes, excitons, and phonons) using conventional material characterization tools, which strongly influences the device performance. In the case of carrier generation, the relaxation and transport dynamics extend orders of magnitude in spatial, temporal and energy resolutions simultaneously (as shown in Fig. 1c).29 For instance, carriers are generated/separated and interact among themselves on a sub-picosecond timescale, which is strongly dependent on the local electrical, structural, chemical and morphological properties of the material at the nanoscale. After the transport of carriers through the individual grains, grain boundaries, charge transport layers (CTLs), they can be collected at the metal contacts.30,31 The investigation of these processes inevitably requires tools capable of probing a wide spatial resolution range (nm for individual grains to mm at metal/CTL contact). In addition, all these processes occur on different timescales, such as generation at the as–fs timescale, relaxation at the ps–ns timescale, and transportation and collection at the μs–ms timescale (illustrated in Fig. 1c). Besides, charge carriers can get trapped at various defect sites, the study of which is necessary to understand the mechanism behind device hysteresis and degradation. Additionally, material probing at different energies of the spectrum can enable real-time visualization of carriers, such as bandgap, sub-bandgap and intra-band transitions (as depicted in Fig. 1c).25 Furthermore, carrier excitation at different energies can provide vital information about the structural, chemical, optoelectronic and morphological properties of materials. Therefore, it is essential to develop advanced characterization tools that can correlate the device performance with the electrical, structural, morphological and chemical aspects (local and bulk) of material properties.
To achieve breakthroughs in photovoltaic efficiency, researchers have integrated multiple material characterization tools to visualize carrier dynamics with high spatial, temporal and energy resolution simultaneously.32–34 Considering that these characterization tools can probe material properties multi-dimensionally, they can be employed for the following tasks in addition to performing conventional material characterization:
• Mapping the heterogeneity of carrier dynamics across the device architecture.
• Imaging the evolution of the local/bulk structural, electrical, optical, morphological and chemical properties of materials under in situ/operando conditions.
• Mapping the evolution of carrier dynamics under the influence of various external factors such as thermal loading, strain, bias, and humidity.
• Determination of structural, topography, morphology, chemical, and electrical properties in parallel with atomic spatial, temporal and energy resolution.
Numerous review articles on the advancements in characterization tools are available in the literature, which focus on individual techniques in detail.27,35–39 However, a systematic review covering the recently developed multi-dimensional material characterization tools for probing a wide range of photovoltaic material properties is still lacking. Therefore, herein, we focus on the recent advancements in the integration of various characterization tools for mapping material properties with the highest realized temporal, spatial and energy resolutions. Special emphasis is placed on the integration of ultrafast and in situ/operando spectroscopic techniques with various material mapping techniques capable of resolving carrier dynamics excited at different energies with atomic spatial resolution. Consequently, this can enable real-time visualization of carrier evolution under the influence of various factors such as light irradiation, thermal loading, and exposure to moisture. Here, we present the application of these recently developed characterization tools for probing the properties of photovoltaic materials from an atomistic point-view, but these tools can find application in other research areas also. This article is divided into the following sub-sections for a better realization of the topic under consideration:
• The first section reviews the recent advancements in ultrafast spectroscopic techniques together with the importance of probing the carrier dynamics at different timescales.
• Recent advances in developing characterization tools to probe material properties at different energies are discussed.
• Then, integration of various characterization tools capable of multidimensional mapping with nanoscale spatial resolution are discussed.
• Finally, we present concluding remarks and various outlooks for developing characterization tools to realize next-generation high-performance photovoltaic devices.
2. Advanced transient spectroscopic techniques
Transient spectroscopic techniques employ ultra-short laser pulses to study photoinduced dynamic processes in atoms, molecules and nanostructures on extremely short timescales (from attosecond to nanosecond duration). Various ultrafast techniques have been developed owing to the advancements in sophisticated instrumentation, ultrashort time pulse generation, wavelength tunability and deeper understanding of light-matter interactions (especially in the non-linear regime). With an increase in temporal resolution, these techniques provide better insights into charge carrier dynamics, evolution of carrier population with time, relaxation processes, recombination losses, and trap states, which make it feasible to push the performance of solar cells beyond conventional limits. In this section, we discuss the development of various transient spectroscopic techniques and the role of the evolution of ultrashort pulses in better understanding the carrier dynamics.
2.1. Various ultrafast spectroscopy techniques
Ultrafast spectroscopic techniques monitor the temporal evolution of chemical reactions via the application of a pump pulse to initiate the reaction, followed by a delayed probe pulse to monitor the progress of the ongoing reaction.25 Ideally, the pump pulse is kept highly tunable to efficiently initiate different transitions, while the probe pulse is preferably broadband to extract maximum information about system dynamics. After striking the sample, the probe pulse is captured by an array of detectors, which records the delay-dependent differential absorption (ΔA), transmission (ΔT) and reflective (ΔR) spectra. Based on the various peaks observed in the differential absorption, transmission and reflective spectra, different contributions can be comprehended as follows:40,41
• Bleaching due to depopulation of the ground state.
• Photo-induced absorption (PIA) due to carrier population in the excited state.
• Stimulated emission due to relaxation of the excited state to the ground state.
• Absorption of products formed during charge transfer processes.
• Shift in ground-state absorption due to the Stark effect.
The critical analysis of the above-mentioned contributions together with effective tuning of the wavelength of the pump pulse and delay time of the probe pulse discloses a vast amount of information about the charge carrier dynamics, generation of various intermediate products, trap-states, relaxation pathways and various other phenomena in photovoltaic materials.42–45 Also, the advancement in sophisticated instrumentation has led to the development of other alternative advanced spectroscopic techniques such as pump–push–probe and pump–dump–probe spectroscopy. A schematic showing these spectroscopic techniques is illustrated in Fig. 2a–c.
 Fig. 2  Various transient spectroscopic techniques. (a) Schematic depicting the carrier population for pump–probe (PP), (b) TA spectra of perovskite films for varying carrier concentrations (n0), and time-dependent Te for (c) varying pump power (at same n0) and (d) varying n0 (same pump power). Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic description of pump–push–probe (PPP) spectroscopy, (f) TA spectra of perovskite films at different pump–probe delays, (g) push induced signals with and without bphen and (h) dependence of varying push energies on hot electron harvesting. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Schematic representation of pump–dump–probe (PDP) spectroscopy, time- and frequency-resolved data for P3HT films for (j) PP probing and (k) PDP probing for dump pulse arriving at a delay of 2 ps and (l) comparison of spectral peak evolution dynamics for stimulated emission (SE) and non-equilibrium ground state (NGS) traces. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. 
Pump pulse of sufficient energy strikes the photovoltaic material, generating electron/hole (e/h) pairs, which are scanned using a delayed probe pulse, consequently providing information about the evolution of the e/h carrier population, as shown in Fig. 2a. For instance, Fig. 2b shows the transient absorption (TA) spectra recorded at a delay of 10 ps for perovskite thin films when irradiated by a pump energy of 1.82 eV for various carrier densities.46 Together with the detection of a bleaching peak near 1.65 eV (attributed to band filling), a broader PIA region near the pump energy is recognized. Fig. 2c and d present the cooling profiles of charge carriers with time using the Maxwell–Boltzmann distribution.47 They clearly show that not only the irradiation energy has to be optimized (higher initial Te for high pump energy, Fig. 2c), but also the carrier density (slowest cooling profile for n0 = 6.0 × 1018 cm−3, Fig. 2d) to maximize the cooling time for the excited charge carriers to be harvested before recombination or other losses. Moreover, the integration of other techniques with pump–probe spectroscopy provides better insights for tracking the evolution of charge carriers. This has enabled researchers to map the carrier diffusion length,48 engineer nanocrystals to maximize hot carrier harvesting,49 and dope various donor species to maximize hot carrier extraction43 in various photovoltaic materials.
Using the secondary perturbation pulse in the pump–probe configuration, researchers can control and study the evolution of the excited-state species. This technique, which is termed pump–push–probe (PPP) spectroscopy, utilizes an additional pulse of sufficient energy, which strikes the sample following the pump pulse to re-excite the carrier population to an even higher electronic state (shown in Fig. 2e), revealing information about the dynamics of the excited carrier energy state. For instance, harvesting of hot electrons in perovskite solar cells has been successfully demonstrated using PPP spectroscopy, where the use of a push pulse re-excites the decaying hot carriers to a higher energy state, following which they are more likely to be harvested using the bathophenanthroline (Bphen) electron transport layer.50 The TA spectra for perovskite thin films at various pump–probe delay times, as presented in Fig. 2f, show the presence of two bleaching regions (observed at 1.63 eV and 2.58 eV, originating from filling of the band edge and valence/conduction bands, respectively) and a PIA region. The push pulse is directed at the sample with delay of 3 ps after the pump pulse, and thus the hot carriers in perovskite thin films are completely thermalized (reported thermalization time of methylammonium lead iodide perovskite is ∼2 ps), which can then be re-excited to a higher state. These re-excited thermalized carriers can then be harvested using the bathophenanthroline (Bphen) layer (as they have energy to cross the Schottky barrier at the interface), as shown in Fig. 2g. Furthermore, the dependence of the hot carrier (HC) extraction efficiency on the push energy has been determined. At a higher push energy, a greater HC extraction efficiency is realized (step-like profile for 2.07 and 1.98 eV, Fig. 2h), while it degrades a decrease in pump energy (due to the inability of HC to surpass the Schottky barrier formed at the interface of the two layers). In addition to HC harvesting, PPP spectroscopy has also been successfully employed in organic solar cells to explain how charge separation overcomes Coulombic interactions.51 Moreover, PPP spectroscopy has been employed to quantitatively determine the hot electron cooling time in various perovskite thin films52 and determine the relaxation pathways for high energy excitons,53 thus increasing our understanding of hot carrier harvesting. These opportunities empower researchers to achieve power conversion efficiencies (PCE) beyond the SQL for single-junction solar cells.
Analogous to PPP spectroscopy, pump–dump–probe (PDP) spectroscopy also employs an additional perturbation pulse, but instead of re-exciting excited carriers to an even higher electronic state as in PPP, the application of a dump pulse deactivates the excited stage to the ground state in PDP spectroscopy. The dump pulse often has a wavelength falling in the emission wavelength range of the system, which in turn transfers carriers from the excited state to the non-equilibrium ground state (NGS) by stimulated emission, as shown in Fig. 2i. Further, a probe pulse is used to compare the resonating initial ground state and final NGS to generate a picture of the carrier relaxation pathways following excitation. For instance, Busby et al. investigated the excited-state self-trapping and ground state relaxation pathways of excitons in P3HT using PDP spectroscopy.54 The observed red-shift in the stimulated emission (SE) band can be attributed to the self-trapping of excited excitons in PP spectroscopy (from ΔOD plot shown in Fig. 2j). PDP spectroscopy is then employed to track the evolution of NGS to reveal the structural and electronic configuration of NGS in contrast to that in the initial ground state (from ΔΔOD data depicted in Fig. 2k). Thus, the ΔΔOD data in PDP spectroscopy tracks the evolution of the initial ground state, similar to how the ΔOD data tracks the evolution of the excited-state in PP spectroscopy. The ΔΔOD map reveals that the initially formed ground state by the application of a dump pulse (at 2 ps following the excitation pulse), is red-shifted (2.4 eV) from the thermally equilibrated ground state (2.74 eV), which then blue shifts to finally reach the equilibrated ground state. This red-shift in the ground state is mainly attributed to the reorganization of the excited-state potential energy surface, which occurs within the first ∼500 fs following excitation. The kinetics of SE and NGS (Fig. 2l) reveals that excited-state self-trapping occurs significantly faster compared to torsional relaxation of the ground state by application of a dump pulse. Accordingly, the PDP technique facilitates not only tracking of the evolution of NGS with respect to the initial ground state, but also confirms the presence of any defect states, which discourage the de-excitation of carriers.55 Also, it can be employed to study the dynamics of excited charge carriers to reveal their various relaxation pathways.56 Thus, this technique provides significant contribution to the basic understanding of the evolution of the ground state system after de-excitation or relaxation of charge carriers for various solar energy harvesting systems at the molecular level.
2.2. Carrier dynamics at different temporal resolutions
Photovoltaic materials absorb photons of sufficient energy, leading to the generation of charge carriers, which then need to be separated and collected efficiently to harness solar energy. The efficiency of a solar cell is determined quantitatively using the short-circuit current density (JSC), open-circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF), which mainly depend on the charge-carrier dynamics.15 However, the carrier dynamics spans a wide range of temporal resolutions, from the generation of charge carriers on the attosecond–femtosecond timescale to collection on the microsecond–millisecond timescale.25 In between, the carriers encounter various interactions (electron–electron, electron–phonon, and phonon–phonon), thermalization, dispersion, relaxation, separation and transport across the various layers of the solar cell configuration on different timescales, ranging from the picosecond-microsecond timescale.29 In addition, carriers can become trapped, leading to longer relaxation time periods for charge carriers.57 Moreover, the recently developed perovskite solar cells suffer from ion migration (occurring on the millisecond–second timescale), which is responsible for material degradation and performance hysteresis, limiting the device performance.58 Thus, a fundamental understanding of the charge-carrier dynamics on different timescales is necessary to enhance the performance of various solar harvesting materials. To tackle this problem, various advanced tools are constantly being developed, which can probe material properties over wide temporal resolution magnitudes to get a full picture from charge generation (as–fs), thermalization (ps), carrier recombination and transport (ns), migration in the charge transport layers (μs), and I–V hysteresis (ms–s) to stable operation of solar cells (days–years) (as shown in Fig. 1c).

2.2.1. Carrier generation. 
The advent of attosecond science has enabled researchers to accomplish various feats, ranging from visualization of electronic motion at the atomic scale59 to capturing moments of carrier generation in photovoltaic materials.60 Carriers can either be promoted from the VB to the CB via inter-band transition or can be accelerated in the same band via intra-band transitions, as shown in Fig. 3a.60 By actively monitoring the time delay between the applied field and absorptive response in GaAs, researchers have portrayed the carrier promotion to the CB with sub-femtosecond resolution (Fig. 3a). By comparing experimental observations with theoretical calculations, it can also be concluded that the intra-band transitions are mainly responsible for increased carrier concentration under excitation from an infrared pump in GaAs. Additionally, ultrafast charge generation on the attosecond timescale has been studied using recently developed clock-hole clock spectroscopy in 2D photovoltaic nanomaterials.64,65 Exciton generation in perovskite nanocrystals also occurs within femtoseconds following photoexcitation. By measuring the pump-induced change in the reflected THz field, ΔE(t,τp), the increase in nanocrystal photoconductivity (due to the generation of charge carriers) can be effectively monitored. Fig. 3b clearly shows that amplitude of ΔE(t,τp) (which depicts the build-up photoconductivity in a nanocrystal), reaches the maximum within 400 fs of irradiation.61 Moreover, the exciton signature tends to vanish around the 1 ps mark, and thereafter excitons dissociate into free charge carriers. P3HT thin films realize even faster exciton generation (within 40 fs following irradiation), after which they dissociate to form polarons under 140 fs.66
 Fig. 3  Charge dynamics on different time scales. (a) Charge generation in GaAs via the promotion of an electron from the VB to CB (interband transition) and acceleration of electrons within the band (intraband motion). Corresponding energy-dependent delay between applied field and absorption response. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Variation in ΔE(t,τp) with time and corresponding spectral amplitude for different pump–probe delay times, representing photoconductivity buildup in perovskite nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Auger recombination time and hot carrier lifetime variation with nanocrystal volume and size for perovskite nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) PL decay dynamics for CH3NH3PbIXCl3−X perovskite with different carrier transport layers at the grain boundary for varying film morphologies. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (e) Charge transport within multicrystalline solar cell layers calculated using transient photocurrent and photovoltage profiles under varying steady-state bias voltage. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2016, the American Institute of Physics. 


2.2.2. Carrier relaxation and transportation. 
After carrier generation, carriers start to thermalize via various carrier interactions (electron–electron, electron–phonon, and phonon–phonon) and relax to lower-energy state around the ps timescale. This phenomenon induces significant energy loss and establishes an upper limit for the JSC and VOC of solar cell devices.67 However, if it is possible to harvest generated carriers before the onset of thermalization, the efficiency of solar cells can be increased further, even beyond the SQL. The cooling profile of hot carriers has been successfully engineered and monitored using ultrafast spectroscopic techniques to push the solar cell efficiency past the SQL. Fig. 3c shows the dependence of the hot carrier lifetime on nanocrystal volume, revealing that larger nanocrystals have a longer hot carrier lifetime (∼30 ps), providing ample time for charge carriers to migrate to the charge transfer layers (CTLs).49 Nevertheless, the Auger recombination rate also increases with an increase in nanocrystal size, which is highly undesirable. Therefore, nanocrystal size requires detailed optimization to maximize the harvesting of hot electrons, while minimizing Auger recombination. The real-time monitoring of hot carriers using advanced characterization tools not only deepens our understanding of the charge dynamics on an ultrafast timescale, but also facilitates knowledge to engineer hot carrier lifetime adopting various approaches. These methods include utilizing various perovskite materials,52 controlling the charge carrier density46 and irradiation energy,68 and doping perovskite nanocrystals with metallic elements69 to achieve the long-standing dream of harvesting hot carriers in solar cells.


2.2.3. Carrier recombination and transport in bulk absorbers. 
After various carrier interactions, the generated charge carriers can either migrate to the charge transport layers (CTLs) for harvesting using electrodes or recombine again (which leads to wastage of harvested solar energy) on the ns timescale.70 Therefore, the ns charge carrier dynamics directly influences the device efficiency and has been studied extensively. After photoirradiation of photovoltaic materials with sufficient energy (excitation wavelength), the generated charge carriers recombine and emit photons. By tracking the decay profile of these individual photons with time, the transient PL spectra for a given nanomaterial can be derived (measured using time-correlated single photon counting (TCSPC) or ultrafast spectroscopic techniques), which deliver vital information about the charge recombination dynamics. For instance, Fig. 3d presents the carrier lifetime decay profile of perovskite thin films when integrated with charge transport layers (CTLs): PCBM (electron transport layer) and spiro-OMeTAD (hole transport layer). The carrier lifetime becomes significantly shorter following the integration of CTLs with perovskite films, indicating effective carrier extraction by CTLs.62 In addition to CTLs, the film morphology can also modulate the charge recombination dynamics, as can be seen in Fig. 3d. The PL lifetime profile for darker film regions (grain boundaries or voids) shows faster decay and demonstrates better charge extraction efficiency in comparison to the bright regions (in the vicinity of the grain boundaries). A large number of studies has been conducted to successfully engineer the carrier lifetime, such as using different CTLs,71 use of different precursors,72 passivation of recombination centres,73 and controlling the carrier concentration74 and nanocrystal grain size.75 In addition, to gain deeper insights to reveal various trap states and recombination pathways, temperature-dependent PL coupled with the recently developed advanced characterization tools can be employed.76,77


2.2.4. Interfacial transportation and recombination. 
After being extracted by CTLs, charge carriers start to diffuse within these layers (vertically or laterally) to reach the electrodes, which often occurs on a timescale in the order of μs. The choice of CTL with an absorber layer greatly influences the charge carrier transport mechanism, thereby having a strong impact on the solar harvesting efficiency of the device.78 Transient photocurrent (TPC) and photovoltage (TPV) characterization can effectively monitor the charge-carrier dynamics and quantify the generated built-in electric field at the interface of various solar cell structures. Fig. 3e depicts the TPC and TPV curves under a given steady state bias voltage and illumination intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Single-exponential fits quantify the TPC decay time (τc) to be around 10 μs in the short-circuit condition and charge recombination time (τr) is ∼70 μs (from TPV decay curves) in the open-circuit voltage condition.63 With an increase in the bias voltage, the peak values of the photocurrent and photovoltage decrease together with a decrease in the decay rates, as can be seen in Fig. 3e. The estimated effective charge collection time (τj) (evaluated from τc and τr values) was calculated to be 11.8 μs (shorter than the recombination time (τr)), which directly demonstrates the efficient collection of charge carriers before recombination. Not only the choice of CTL,79 but also the CTL conductivity, doping, film thickness, density of defect states,80 and absorber film quality81 need to be precisely engineered to maximize the charge diffusion in the CTL. Consequently, this leads to an improvement in charge carrier harvesting, which boosts the device performance.


2.2.5. Defect dynamics and carrier collection. 
Although the charge carriers are harvested within μs following irradiation, the time-dependent evolution of the device performance such as current–voltage (I–V) hysteresis (highly undesirable), often takes place on the ms–s timescale.82 The I–V hysteresis in solar cells is mainly ascribed to the slow defect state dynamics or ion migration. The defect state dynamics can be effectively explored using thermal admittance spectroscopy or deep-level transient spectroscopy, which measure the capacitance or conductance variation with changing frequency and temperature.83 The capacitance-frequency spectra recorded for perovskite thin film reveal that defect states require several ms to respond to an applied bias. This implies that trapped charge carriers are released after ms of the applied bias, accounting for the unusual photovoltaic behaviour (I–V hysteresis).84 Drive level capacitance profiling (DLCP), another advanced characterization tool, can profile various trap states with high energy and spatial resolution, enabling the analysis of the trap states at various interfaces in the solar cell configuration.85 Likewise, the photothermal-induced resonance microscopy technique can effectively probe ion migration in perovskite thin films. It reveals that the MA groups present in thin films get redistributed with the application of electric poling and accumulate near the cathode region, which not only leads to hysteresis in the I–V curves but also degrades the stability of perovskite solar cells.86 Additionally, ion migration may depend on various factors such as nanocrystal quality87 and irradiation intensity,88 which takes place on a timescale of seconds inside nanocrystals. Thus, although the carrier extraction by electrodes occurs on the μs timescale, the charge carrier dynamics occurring on the ms (defect state dynamics) or s (ion migration) timescale can greatly influence the device performance. Besides the time management of charge carriers from the attosecond–second (as–s) timescale, solar cell devices must operate continuously at the same efficiency not only for days but for years (20 years or more) under varying environmental conditions such as rain, moisture, and fatigue. Therefore, the performance of fabricated solar cell devices needs to be properly monitored using advanced tools that can stimulate all-natural conditions artificially at an accelerated pace.23,89
Thus, the invention of various ultrafast spectroscopic tools has enabled researchers to study the charge carrier dynamics over a wide timescale, covering charge generation, motion through various potentials, transportation by CTLs, and extraction by electrodes to monitor the stable solar cell device operation. Consequently, these advanced tools have empowered researchers to study the carrier dynamics at various interfaces, ranging from the absorber/CTL interface, inside absorber/CTL films, and impact of various external stimuli on carrier dynamics. Many new spectroscopic techniques are also constantly being developed based on PP, PPP and PDP spectroscopy. By controlling the time pulse duration and wavelength of the pump/probe, the light-matter interactions in various photovoltaic materials can be investigated fundamentally, which can provide knowledge to design next-generation solar cell devices with ultra-high efficiency even surpassing the SQL.

3. Probing PV materials with broad electromagnetic spectrum
Semiconductor nanostructures interact with different energy wavelengths in numerous ways, for example, visible and near-infrared irradiation is mostly absorbed in solar cell materials (corresponding to the bandgap of the material), THz radiation causes molecules to rotate or vibrate about their position, and X-rays can lead to core excitation or ionization, as shown in Fig. 1c. The development of free-electron lasers and recent advances in the generation of ultrashort pulses in the THz region to the hard X-ray regime provide a unique opportunity to probe solar converting materials at different energies. This approach allows researchers to examine the charge carrier dynamics, structural dynamics on ultra-short timescales under irradiation, evolution of molecular chemistry of critical atoms and many more. In this section, the advanced characterization tools integrating transient spectroscopic techniques at different pump/probe energies (X-ray or deep UV, visible, infrared and THz region) are discussed in detail.
3.1. X-Ray characterization under in situ/operando conditions

3.1.1. Investigating carrier dynamics. 
X-ray characterization has been widely used to probe the structure of solar cell materials for decades to ensure the formation of the desired crystal and probe the chemistry of molecules. However, the integration of ultrafast spectroscopic techniques with X-ray or extreme ultraviolet (XUV) laser sources has facilitated the development of unique tools to investigate the structural dynamics, probe the local environment of molecules, and study the charge carrier dynamics in various solar harvesting materials.39 For instance, ultrafast XUV spectroscopy has been successfully employed to investigate the electron and hole dynamics simultaneously in germanium thin films (Fig. 4a).90 Germanium thin films were first irradiated with a Vis-NIR pump to generate e/h pairs, followed by broadband XUV pulse to excite the core level electrons. The positive differential absorption (displayed in Fig. 4a) depicts the hole concentration, resulting in increased XUV absorption below the M4,5 edge. Likewise, negative absorption indicates the electron concentration, given that the excited electrons in the CB block XUV absorption. Various differential absorption peaks vanish ∼1150 fs after irradiation, indicating the recombination of e/h pairs. Thus, this technique allows real-time monitoring of the generation, evolution and finally recombination of e/h pairs. An alternative technique, ultrafast extreme ultraviolet reflection absorption (XUV-RA) spectroscopy, has also been developed, which not only permits the charge generation and dynamics to be monitored, but also enables calculation of the exciton radius to better understand the exciton dynamics and trapping in metal oxide semiconductors.91 In addition, XUV spectroscopy has been successfully employed to reveal various relaxation pathways,92 heat diffusion on ultrafast timescales93 and monitor charge carrier tunnelling and back diffusion at the absorber/CTL interface94 with great precision.
 Fig. 4  Transient X-ray characterization. (a) Carrier dynamics study using ultrafast XUV spectroscopy with positive and negative differential absorption representing VB (holes) and CB (electrons), respectively. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Charge transfer rate for different blends of PCPDTBT:PCMB thin films at different photon energies probed using core-hole clock spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) XANES spectra of RuN3 adsorbed on TiO2 nanoparticle (top) and corresponding XAS spectra for RuN3 and RuN3+ (below) to compute the change in bond length during charge transfer. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. (d) XPS study to analyse the evolution of Pb 5d (Pb2+ and Pb) with time to monitor the phase separation and chemistry of mixed-ion perovskite films at the molecule level under visible irradiation. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) Photoemission images at different pump energies and delay times as a function of electron momentum using time and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy in GaAs. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society. 
Pump–probe techniques have the capability to probe the carrier dynamics spanning a wide range of timescales; however, their resolution is limited by the pulse width and delay between pulses, and therefore these techniques require sophisticated instrumentation to probe the attosecond carrier dynamics. However, core–hole clock (CHC) is an advanced spectroscopy technique based on deconvoluting different Auger processes from core–hole decay (promoted by X-ray or XUV sources) at various energies. Additionally, the core atom levels can be explored using CHC instead of valence orbitals (as in pump–probe spectroscopy), which facilitates elemental study together with accurate identification of orbitals.95Fig. 4b depicts the successful employment of the CHC technique to monitor the charge transfer rates in various blends of PCPDTBT/PCBM thin films, which are widely used as CTLs in organic photovoltaics. Careful inspection of Auger spectra for different samples reveals that at certain blend ratios, the charge transfer rate can be maximized (∼170 as for PCPDTBT:PCBM of 1:2), enabling better carrier harvesting.96 Furthermore, CHC has been successfully employed to determine the charge transfer rates in various CTLs,100 different sized polymeric chains,101 and engineering charge transfer rate in transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs),65 allowing users to select the best CTL to maximize carrier harvesting.
Analogous to ultrafast XUV spectroscopy, ultrafast X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) has also proven to be beneficial in understanding the structural and electronic dynamics in various solar harvesting materials. For instance, X-ray absorption near-edge spectroscopy (XANES) is employed to determine the evolution of the local electronic state of the RuN3 molecule as it is oxidized after transferring an electron to TiO2 (XANES spectra at Ru K-edge with laser on and off, Fig. 4c).97 During this process, the absorption edge energy gets upshifted by 0.23 eV owing to the higher effective oxidation state of the Ru centre after photoinduced electron transfer. Furthermore, the information related to the shift in bond length due to electron transfer can be gathered by analysing the XAS spectra (Fig. 4c). The Ru–NCS bond length shortens by 0.06 Å after electron injection to the TiO2 lattice, providing knowledge about the structural evolution of molecules at ultrafast timescales during charge transfer processes. Besides, transient extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) has enabled researchers to examine the metal-to-ligand charge transfer,102 determine individual bond enthalapy,103 discover relaxation pathways for intermediate products during charge generation and transfer on an ultrafast timescale.104 Additionally, integration of theoretical models with experimental results from ultrafast X-ray spectroscopy provides deeper understanding about the evolution of the carrier dynamics,105 relaxation pathways,106 and impact of various ligands on carrier dynamics,107 which permit researchers to design solar cell materials with minimal losses.


3.1.2. Analysis of chemical traits. 
Another X-ray source technique, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), is a widely used surface sensitive technique to identify the elements and their oxidation state, together with the overall electronic structure and density of states in materials.108 Integration of the time domain with conventional XPS not only allows users to study the final material state, but also encourages monitoring of the formation of various intermediate products during the reaction or synthesis process, expediting researchers to engineer synthesis pathways effectively.109Fig. 4d depicts the transient XPS of perovskite nanostructures, which is conducted to evaluate various photoinduced changes.98 Using a low intensity X-ray irradiation source together with visible light irradiation, the evolution of the elemental composition of Pb and its corresponding oxidation states in the perovskite nanocrystal can be monitored under real-life situations. These results allow researchers to gather information about ion migration, material peeling and related losses in perovskite films under real-life conditions. Besides, in situ XPS analysis was performed during annealing of MoOx (used as hole-selective contacts for Si solar cells) deposited over a-Si and c-Si films. This investigation revealed the formation of an SiOx layer with an increase in temperature, which explains the observed increased contact resistance after annealing responsible for poor device perfromance.110 Similarly, in kesterite solar cells, XPS analysis at the material heterojunction can provide important information about the role of inter-ion diffusion,111 interfacial vacancies,112 and annealing temperature113 on device performance. In addition, XPS depth profiling performed on solar cell materials is an appropriate tool to analyse the material configuration at different depths to unveil chemical environment at various interfaces in the solar cell configuration.114 Also, various technological advancements have enabled researchers to better control the energy of irradiation beams and size of irradiating ion clusters, which facilitates the probing of organic or organic/inorganic solar cells without damaging the crystal structure.115,116 Other chemical characterization techniques such as energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), secondary ion mass spectroscopy (SIMS) and atom probe tomography (APT) are also widely applied for probing the local chemical environment with high spatial resolution, which are discussed in detail later in this review.


3.1.3. Mapping electronic band structure. 
To select a material with maximum solar capturing capabilities, its electronic structure and respective density of states need to be precisely traced. Accordingly, angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) is a powerful spectroscopic tool in this direction. This technique has the capability to resolve the electronic states of materials in energy and momentum space, which can quantify and enable visualization of various quasi-particles dispersions and many-body correlations.117 ARPES can be applied to determine valence band dispersions, illuminating electron hopping, while determining the electron effective mass,118 3D fermions in perovskite nanocrystals119 and evolution of electronic band structure with doping.120 The integration of ultrafast lasers with ARPES enables the equilibrium electronic structure to be perturbed, followed by recording the resulting transient ARPES spectra to reveal the hidden quasiparticle dispersions and evolution of electronic structure on ultrashort timescales in solar harvesting materials.121 Furthermore, time-resolved-ARPES (TR-ARPES) can effectively monitor the evolution of charge carriers over energy-resolved, momentum-resolved and time-resolved distributions. This particular technique can track the transient changes in electronic distribution functions, enabling visualization of ultrafast intervalley scattering in the generated hot carriers.125 Tanimura et al. mapped the saddle point excitons in GaAs under different irradiation energies along electron momentum space to model various dispersions in the CB using TR-ARPES (Fig. 4e).99 For low excitation energy (2.30 and 2.48 eV), 3 peaks could be identified, whereas only one sharp peak could be identified at higher pump energy (2.98 eV), which was attributed to photoemission from the saddle point in GaAs. Another study was performed on InSb wafers using TR-ARPES, disclosing ultrafast scattering and relaxation processes for hot photoinjected hot carriers.126


3.1.4. Probing crystal structure. 
Besides material selection, crystal structure greatly influences the solar conversion efficiency of a solar cell because undesirable crystal or phase formation adversely affects the device performance. X-ray diffraction (XRD) is a powerful analytical tool for phase identification and to provide information about the unit cell of a material under study.127 Thus, using XRD, crystal formation can be studied at various intermediate steps, and consequently, synthetic routes can be modified, leading to better device efficiency. Over time, various modifications have been introduced to conventional XRD to provide deeper insights into the formation of crystals and various phases. For instance, grazing incidence wide-angle X-ray scattering (GIWAXS) can distinguish the formation of the CsPbI3 perovskite black phase (optically active, desirable) from the yellow phase (undesirable) upon thermal strain.122Fig. 5a shows the GIWAXS t–T profile and strain state in a perovskite thin film as it undergoes various phase transitions under cyclic thermal loading. Moreover, evaluation of the shift in interplanar distances (Δd⊥) disclosed no considerable hysteresis with an increase in temperature (from GIWAXS plots), implying that the black phase perovskite thin films synthesized by modulating the strain during crystal growth exhibited good stability. Similarly, the application of in situ GIWAXS was found to be highly beneficial for determining the evolution of the molecular arrangement of organic solar cell materials.128 Its counterpart, GISAXS (grazing incidence small-angle X-ray scattering), can even probe nanoscale structures inside films at comparably smaller length scales (∼few nm).129 Another modification to XRD, which is grazing incident X-ray diffraction (GIXRD), can identify crystal planes and unit parameters not only on the surface but along the depth of deposited films by changing the incident angle of the irradiating beam. Fig. 5b depicts the strain distribution at varying depths (50, 200 and 500 nm) in strained (compressive) and strain-free perovskite thin films.123 Modulation of the strain in perovskite thin films facilitates a unique approach to optimize strain so that carrier transport can be maximized without degrading the solar cell performance. Similarly, in situ GIXRD patterns can provide useful information regarding crystallization and phase segregation during annealing in organic solar cells.130 Also, in situ XRD analysis can provide deeper insights into printing cost-effective Ag contacts on Si solar cells,131 unwanted phase segregation in kesterite solar cells during material processing,132 and CIGS material degradation under thermal loading.133 In addition, using XRD coupled with ultrafast lasers, the structural dynamics of materials undergoing various transitions can be determined on ultrashort timescales. Wu et al. showed that the intensity of all the Bragg peaks decreases within 10 picoseconds of irradiation, implying that perovskite thin films undergo crystal modification within 10 ps following photoexcitation (Fig. 5c).124 Moreover, a reduced peak intensity was observed at a higher pump energy, arising from the greater crystal rearrangement (Fig. 5c), which is attributed to the higher lattice temperature attained under higher excitation energies. This work shed light on how hot carriers distribute their energy to the lattice, which undergoes rearrangement, thereby hindering the extraction of hot carriers. Thus, modification of the conventional XRD (GIWAXS, GIXRD, and ultrafast XRD) can reveal important information about the solar absorbing crystal lattice, allowing researchers to engineer strain,134 monitor phase transitions on an ultrafast timescale,135 track device performance fluctuation under continuous irradiation,136 study the impact of strain generation on the stability of solar absorbing materials,137 and evolution of nanocrystals during their synthesis on an ultrafast timescale,138 together with many other feats.
 Fig. 5  Advanced X-ray characterization tools. (a) GIWAXS t-T profile of strained perovskite film for high-temperature yellow to black phase transition and corresponding anisotropic lattice parameter and unit cell distortions (Δd⊥) of the black phase. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Residual strain distribution at varying depths in strain-free and compressive strained perovskite thin film studied using GIXRD and various tilt angles. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Variation in diffraction peak intensity for varying Q (A−1) and pump energy to study photo-induced perovskite nanocrystal on ultrashort timescales. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Combining ultrafast XES and XDS spectroscopy to study photoinduced electron transfer in RuCo complex, XES kinetic trace at 6.93 keV with single-exponential fit (top) and (ΔT(t)) kinetics with corresponding single-exponential fit (down). Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Volumetric rendering of band-mapping measurement before and after irradiation (top) and corresponding differential excited state signal around K/K′ and Σ/Σ′ points in the first conduction band (bottom) for mapping 3D band structure in WeS2. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, American Institute of Physics. 


3.1.5. Multi-dimensional X-ray techniques. 
Transient X-ray characterization provides a plethora of information about the crystal structure of materials, its evolution, chemistry of elements around target molecules and other data. However, performing these characterizations individually has proven to be very time consuming and some information may get lost or misinterpreted when characterization is performed at different facilities around the world. Thus, to overcome this problem, researchers around the world have been trying to integrate various spectroscopic techniques into one combined characterization instrument. This not only reveals invaluable information about the nanocrystal structure and its chemical behaviour, but also pushes the resolution limit of individual characterization techniques even further. For instance, the integration of X-ray emission spectroscopy (XES) and diffuse X-ray scattering (XDS) with XAS provides information about non-equilibrated intramolecular charge transfer over large interatomic distances with a temporal resolution 100 times greater than individual spectroscopic techniques.32 The ultrafast XAS spectra presented in Fig. 5d show the transport of electrons from photoexcited Ru to the tetrapyrido phenazine (tpphz) bridge in under 50 fs, following which they migrate through the tpphz bridge in ∼0.5 ps. Subsequently, they get localized to the Co acceptor, which undergoes spin state transitions in ∼1.9 ps (measured using XES spectra, Fig. 5d). In parallel, XDS tracks the structural changes developed around the Co centre (ΔR ∼ 0.2 Å) and its surrounding medium, together with the determining rate of solvent heating (∼12 ps). Thus, a complete picture can be generated, revealing the structural rearrangement of the system and surrounding environment as carriers are transferred through the molecule bond length (Ru-tpphz-Co) using ultrafast XAS coupled with the XED and XDS techniques.32
Another team of researchers combined momentum microscopy (MM), XPS and X-ray photoelectron diffraction (XPD) with ultrafast lasers, while integrating a sample stage having multiple degrees of freedom with the sample preparation chamber. This technique has been employed to conduct detailed electronic, chemical and structural analysis in parallel on ultrashort timescales at varying temperatures with high precision control over the spatial and rotational axis.33 Ultrafast XPS provides information about the local chemical environment and excitation of core levels of WeS2, while the carrier dynamics can be studied via time-resolved MM (trMM). Fig. 5e shows the transient electronic structure of the valence and excited states resolved in energy (E) and momentum space (kx and ky) both with and without pump irradiation. The temporal evolution of the photoemission intensity was also recorded. It indicates that excited carriers, which are localized in the K and K′ valleys, scatter rapidly to energetically lower Σ and Σ′ valleys. Moreover, MM in the maximum k-space field-of-view can assist XPD measurements on ultrafast timescales to reveal the structural dynamics of the system during the charge transfer and relaxation processes. Other groups from around the world have also systematically integrated different spectroscopic techniques to obtain resolution limits beyond the capabilities of conventional characterization techniques. For example, coupling of low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) with ARPES to map the electronic structure of perovskite nanocrystals,139 time-resolved two-photon photoemission spectroscopy with photoemission electron microscopy to investigate quasiparticle lifetimes along energy and momentum space,140 and ultrafast XAS and resonant inelastic scattering (RIXS) to probe the electronic structure of excited states.141 The aforementioned studies have shown the potential of integrating different X-ray spectroscopic techniques to reveal invaluable information about the electronic, structural and chemical properties of various solar harvesting materials.

3.2. Multidimensional optical characterizations
The visible electromagnetic region (400–700 nm) occupies a substantial percentage of the solar spectrum (>40%). Hence, the band gap of solar cell materials is generally engineered to harvest the full spectrum of visible irradiation. Therefore, optical characterization can directly measure the performance of solar harvesting materials and provide beneficial information to engineer better solar cell devices. PL spectroscopy is a widely used characterization technique, which relies on measuring the emitted photons from the recombination of charge carriers, disclosing vital information about the dynamics, transportation and recombination of carriers. However, in situ PL measurements can track the evolution of device performance over time and facilitate the engineering of the synthetic processes of absorber materials to modify material properties. For instance, Pellet et al. traced the rapid halide exchange in metal halide perovskites experimentally (halide conversions can greatly influence the perovskite structure and solar harvesting capability). They showed that the halide substitution rate can vary for different halide conversions (slower for bromide to iodide).142Fig. 6a presents the in situ PL profiles for halide substitution (MAPbCl3 to MAPbBr3 and MAPbCl3 to MAPbI3), which show that the PL peaks get red-shifted (attributed to decrease in bandgap) as halide exchange takes place. The emission intensity also varies at different time stamps of the reaction, which is ascribed to the signature of some intermediate states, corresponding to weak emission behaviour. In addition, the asymmetrical rate constants for the halide exchange reversible process has also been monitored using ultrafast absorption spectroscopy, demonstrating the thermodynamic stability of certain halide perovskite over others.143,144 In addition to photoirradiation, thermal perturbations can also induce halide exchange, as confirmed by the time evolving absorption profiles of metal halide perovskites under thermal loads.145
 Fig. 6  Characterization in the visible energy range. (a) In situ PL profiles to determine rapid halide exchange under continuous irradiation (406 nm). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (b) Time-resolved PL profiles for CH3NH3PbI3 thin films at varying temperatures and corresponding carrier lifetimes for various phases of a perovskite film at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, US National Academy of Sciences. (c) Absorption normalized PL maps and corresponding calculated quantum yield map over deposited hybrid perovskite thin films. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (d and e) Spatial control over excitons at MoSe2–WSe2 interface by controlling the power intensity of the irradiating laser and in-plane electric field (by applying voltage Vds) measured using PL spectrometry. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Transient absorption microscopy (TAM) images of pristine perovskite and perovskite/CTL thin films to determine charge generation and migration on ultrafast timescales over different spatial positions, where the colour signifies the sign and amplitude of the TAM signal. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. 
Solar cell materials undergo various phase transitions at varying temperatures. Different crystal phases are associated with the corresponding defect densities, carrier mobilities, and recombination rate, which greatly influence the device performance. To obtain information about the carrier recombination rates and the carrier lifetimes across various phases in solar harvesting materials, temperature-dependent PL can be employed. The PL profiles of perovskite nanostructures are shown in Fig. 6b, across a wide temperature range from 80 K to 440 K.146 The carrier lifetime changes drastically in the temperature range of 790 ns (80 K) to 1 ns (360 K) to 300 ns (440 K) given that perovskite thin films experience phase changes from orthorhombic (80 K) to tetragonal (360 K), and finally cubic (440 K). The study finally concluded that rather than screening the effects or abrupt anomalies in thermal factors, phase changes are the dominant factors responsible for the enhancement in lifetime at higher temperature for organic–inorganic perovskites. Likewise, the PL intensity is also influenced by temperature. Also, the annealing temperature needs to be optimized carefully because annealed perovskite films show high PL quenching, thus leading to better carrier extraction by the CTL.147 Additionally, temperature-dependent PL spectroscopy can reveal the fast energy transfer mechanisms at low temperatures in doped perovskite films,148 carrier lifetime under varying temperature149 and monitor hot carrier dynamics.69 To further gain deeper insight into how light energy is absorbed, transformed and lost during the whole solar harvesting process, bandgap engineering under thermal loads150 and engineering of electron–phonon coupling strength to minimize energy loss151 have been interrogated using temperature-dependent PL spectroscopy.
Newly developed perovskite solar cells are very cheap owing to their solution processibility over large areas without the requirement of expensive vacuum machinery. However, this approach may lead to the inhomogeneous deposition of the solar absorbing layer, inducing an inhomogeneous device performance distribution over the perovskite film. Thus, to monitor the heterogeneous performance distribution, researchers have integrated absorbance and PL spectroscopy with microscopy techniques, determining the optical properties of the deposited films entirely. Draguta et al. mapped the absorption and emission properties of an entire metal halide perovskite film area, as displayed in Fig. 6c.152 Additionally, the trap state density and quantum yield variation were computed for the entire film region. The trap state density varied significantly over the deposited film (depicted in Fig. 6c), inducing inhomogeneous carrier dynamics, which explains the observed variation in solar harvesting capability of the deposited thin films. Furthermore, absorption and PL microscopy has also been successfully employed to quantify the local carrier dynamics at the grain boundaries,153 identify different phases distributed over the film154 and determine the impact of the environment on the device performance.155
Photogenerated charge carriers are separated by an in-built electric field, which mainly depends on the absorber/CTL layer material and their doping concentrations. However, an applied external electric field can effectively tune the junction properties, which has a strong impact on the charge dynamics and performance of the absorber layer. PL measurements under varying bias voltages can effectively the tune interface properties to reveal the carrier recombination dynamics, ion migration routes, and dynamics of trap densities, which greatly influence the fill factor of solar cell devices. Kim's group demonstrated spatial control over the movement of excitons in the WSe2/MoSe2 heterostructure, as confirmed by intensity-dependent (Fig. 6d) and voltage-dependent PL (Fig. 6e) measurements.156 By controlling the laser intensity or applying an external electric field at the TMDC interface, the lifetime of the interlayer excitons can be improved significantly, enabling more efficient carrier harvesting before recombination occurs. Similarly, spatial control of exciton movement has been demonstrated by placing single-layer MoSe2 over a metallic mirror.157 Moreover, this technique can illuminate various recombination pathways for generated charge carriers by modulating the interface properties,158 investigate the hysteresis mechanism at different applied bias159 and analyse the dependence of FF and VOC on the electric field induced at the interface.160 Additionally, voltage-controlled PL microscopy can provide real-time images of reversible or irreversible ion migration under the application of an external electric field.161,162 Thereby, this technique manifests vital information about the hysteresis caused by ion migration and slow decay of charge carriers trapped in the defect states.
Transient absorption spectroscopy (TAM) is very useful in revealing the carrier dynamics on a wide timescale range (as discussed in Section 2). However, this spectroscopic technique can only investigate the carrier dynamics at certain points in sample space, which limits its capability to reveal charge dynamics over s large area of deposited film. With technological advancements, researchers have successfully integrated space-resolved microscopy techniques with time-resolved spectroscopic techniques. This combination permits the space-time resolution of the carrier dynamics in solar harvesting materials.163 For instance, Simpson et al. performed TAM analysis over a 20 μm × 20 μm (greater than grain size ∼1–4 μm) area of perovskite/CTL films (colour signifies amplitude and sign of different absorption signals, Fig. 6f).164 By spatially and temporally probing the carrier dynamics over the deposited film, they revealed that the electronic excited-state relaxation kinetics is highly sensitive to the location of laser irradiation. TAM has also been successfully employed to image the co-existence of excitons and free charge carriers in individual grains of perovskite nanocrystals,165 map the suppression of carrier diffusion at the grain boundary,166 and quantify the carrier dynamics across smaller and larger grains.167 These studies clarify the role of local structure (grain and grain boundaries) in the generation, transportation and relaxation of carriers, providing tools to engineer crystal structures to maximize carrier harvesting. Moreover, TAM has been successful employed to observe the carrier transport over 200 nm in perovskite films,168,169 experimentally visualize of ultrafast carrier cooling,170 charge separation and recombination in PIN junction nanowires171 and imaging of electronic trap states in real time.172 Therefore, TAM enables real-time visualization of carrier dynamics on ultrafast timescales with precise spatial control, providing means to engineer carrier motion to maximize the device performance.
3.3. Advanced infrared spectroscopic techniques
Perovskite materials have received immense attention from the scientific community owing to their easy processibility and crystal structure, leading to intrinsic optical properties. However, their crystal structure is susceptible to various external stimuli, degrading the device performance even under normal working conditions. Their structure can be modified or even destroyed under high energy irradiation (X-rays or even visible light), making it very hard to study the original crystal structure. Accordingly, IR spectroscopic techniques are the best tools to deal with these types of soft materials. Furthermore, IR spectroscopy coupled with ultrafast spectroscopy can reveal the vibrational dynamics of these materials on ultrashort timescales. For instance, Munson et al. used time-resolved infrared spectroscopy (TR-IR) to reveal the reason for the long recombination rate in halide perovskites by analysing the vibrational aspects of CH3NH3+ ions on ultrashort timescales (∼ns).173 The evolution of the N–H bend vibrational mode could be easily quantified using the TR-IR spectra, as shown in Fig. 7a. Considering that the N–H bend is strongly coupled to the inorganic lattice of the structure, it can provide vital information about the structural fluctuation in the perovskite crystal under irradiation. Moreover, the TR-IR spectra recorded at different temperatures were used to determine the delocalization lengths of the photogenerated carriers. With an increase in temperature (from 150 to 300 K), the delocalization length was reduced drastically, which caused the carriers to get self-trapped into polarons, explaining the longer recombination time in perovskites. Besides, further advances in ultrafast IR spectroscopy have enabled researchers to directly observe the dissociation of excitons into free carriers,177 monitor the carrier dynamics over wide temporal resolutions178 and quantify the hot-carrier cooling rates in various perovskites.52 Moreover, analysis of ultrafast IR spectroscopy data enables tracking thermal dissipation from the excited organic mode to inorganic sublattice (across crystal structure) under irradiation.179
 Fig. 7  Advanced characterization tools in IR region. (a) TR-IR spectrum using IR probe and 532 nm pump and corresponding spectrum spanning mid-IR spectral region (inset depicting 2D freq-time plot). Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) Ultrafast Raman spectra for perovskite films under resonant (Epump = 2.46 eV) and non-resonant conditions (Epump = 1.86 eV) and corresponding average over different probes. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Real-time observation of organic cations in perovskite lattice, 2D-IR response at 1 ps delay and corresponding cross-sections of 2D spectrum at varying delay times. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. AFM topography and IR broadband images and their corresponding topographical and IR response together with nano-FTIR spectra at various points for pristine CsFAMA (d) and degraded CsFAMA (e) perovskite thin films. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Raman spectroscopy is another widely used vibrational spectroscopy tool for non-destructive chemical analysis, providing detailed information about chemical structure, crystallinity and various vibrational modes in materials. It relies on inelastic scattering of incident photons (can be UV, visible or IR) from vibrating molecules, which results in an upward or downward shift in photon energy, which is termed the anti-Stokes or Stokes shift, respectively.180 It is different from IR spectroscopy (which provides similar complementary information), given that Raman spectra result from light scattering and the change in the polarizability of molecules, whereas IR spectroscopy relies on the light absorption and change in dipole moment of molecules. The integration of ultrafast lasers in Raman spectroscopy offers an opportunity to visualize the coupling of electrons with phonons upon photoexcitation, which can be extended to analyse the electronic–lattice interactions in solar harvesting systems. By recording the Raman shift following photoexcitation on ultrafast timescales in perovskite nanocrystals, additional phonon modes were observed at 89 and 106 cm−1 in resonant condition (not observed in continuous and non-resonant Raman) stimulated due to the displacive excitation process (shown in Fig. 7b).174 These additional modes provide vital information about the transient lattice oscillations in the perovskite crystal upon irradiation, which get completely relaxed within the phonon lifetime (∼1 ps). Thus, ultrafast Raman spectroscopy brings electron–phonon interactions into consideration with high temporal resolution and enables experimental visualization of the lattice distortions upon carrier generation, which is not possible using conventional Raman spectroscopy. Moreover, ultrafast Raman spectroscopy has been successfully employed to determine the conformational relaxation dynamics of excitons on the ps timescale,181 measure electronic temperatures from the generation of hot carriers,182 reveal the role of polarons in charge separation183 and interrogate structural changes in excited or charge-separated states in various polymeric films184,185 used as the CTL in solar cell devices.
Soft solar harvesting materials (such as perovskites and organic molecules) can undergo reorientation or several structural changes under the action of external stimuli, which can significantly influence the electronic structure, and hence performance of these materials.186 Considering that these structural changes occur within fs–ps following irradiation at the molecular bond length, it is very difficult to visualize these orientations in real-life conditions. However, recent advances in ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy have successfully captured the orientation of organic molecules and its corresponding influence on their electronic properties under irradiation. Fig. 7c shows the 2D TR-IR spectrum of a perovskite thin film, where the peaks at 1470 and 1445 cm−1 were identified as the symmetric bending modes for bleaching and excited-state absorption, respectively.175 The symmetric mode gets reoriented via two ways, i.e., faster reorientation (∼300 fs) due to wobbling-in-a-cone motion around the crystal lattice and slower reorientation (∼3 ps) owing to shifting of the molecular dipole with respect to the iodide lattice. These timescales are associated with the contribution to the dielectric constant due to molecular motion. Other studies highlighted the role of organic molecule reorientation in slow carrier recombination,187 lattice vibration transference from the organic to inorganic lattice179 and influence on hydrogen bonding in perovskite nanocrystals to maximize the carrier recombination time188 by the application of recently developed vibrational spectroscopic tools.
In addition to Raman and ultrafast vibrational spectroscopy, Fourier-transform infrared (FTIR) spectroscopy is also widely applied, which is a non-destructive characterization tool. It can accurately determine the vibrational modes by recording the material response to IR radiation, thus serving as a finger-print of individual materials.189 FTIR has been successfully employed to evaluate the impact of various factors such as film morphology190 and humidity191,192 on the device performance. In addition, FTIR has been employed to quantify the extent of hydrogen bonding between organic cations and different halides in perovskites193 and determine the electron–phonon coupling constants,194 which greatly influence the carrier dynamics. However, the spatial resolution of FTIR is limited by the optical diffraction limit, making it difficult to probe individual grains in solar harvesting materials. Thus, to tackle this, infrared spectroscopy has been combined with scanning probe microscopy, providing a spatial resolution of up to 10 nm. Consequently, Szostak et al. used synchrotron infrared nano-spectroscopy (nano-FTIR) to map the chemical composition of individual grains in perovskite films.176 The topographical and IR broadband images for pristine and degraded perovskite films are depicted in Fig. 7d and e, respectively. A smooth topography was observed across individual grains; however, the IR response varied even within the same grain. This depicts that there is heterogeneity in vibrational activity across individual grains independent of surface topography (Fig. 7d and e). Moreover, nano-FTIR conducted at various points inside the same grain could identify the position of the cations (FA molecule) inside the individual grains, given that areas without FA molecules showed strong vibrational activity. Other similar modifications such as peak-force infrared microscopy to determine heterogeneity in deposited perovskite films,195 infrared photoinduced force microscopy to map sub-nm patterns in polymeric films,196 and scanning-type scanning near-field optical microscopy to map contaminants in polymeric films,197 are constantly being developed to the probe chemical nature of solar harvesting materials with the highest spatial resolution.
3.4. Progress in THz spectroscopy tools
Carrier dynamics dictate various parameters such as VOC, JSC and FF, determining the performance of solar harvesting devices. However, carriers such as excitons and phonons, which greatly influence the electrical and thermal properties of materials, only interact considerably with low energy irradiation, typically in the terahertz (THz) frequency regime. Thus, probing material properties with THz radiation can provide imperative information about their physical parameters such as carrier density, mobility, thermal conductivity and diffusion length of carriers.198 Additionally, ultrafast THz spectroscopic techniques can quantify the dynamic response function of excitons, free carriers and phonons. Moreover, visualization of discrete, internal quantum transitions between dark and bright excitonic states in perovskite films is also possible using ultrafast THz spectroscopy (schematically illustrated in Fig. 8a). Sharp photoinduced absorption peaks were observed at frequencies above 10 meV at low temperature (8 K), corresponding to the internal transition between the Rydberg states, A1 (1s → 2p) and A2 (1s → 3p), yielding exciton binding energy E1s = 13.5 meV (from the Δσ(ω) variation with temperature plot, Fig. 8b).199 Moreover, by performing conductivity measurements at resonance (399 nm) and below-resonance excitation (790 nm) for various delay times (shown in Fig. 8c), the evolution of the excited exciton population can be precisely tracked. Besides, the cooling profiles for the excited carriers at resonance and below-resonance condition can be determined, imparting vital information about the evolution of exciton–phonon interactions on ultrashort timescales. In addition, direct visualization of free carrier-excitons interactions leading to ultrafast carrier relaxation dynamics200 and dissociation of excitons into free charge carriers within ∼1 ps of irradiation have been observed61 owing to the advancements in ultrafast-THz spectroscopic techniques.
 Fig. 8  Probing solar harvesting materials via THz spectroscopy. (a) Schematic of exciton dispersion, depicting various internal quantum transitions, (b) temperature-dependent Δσ(ω) spectra probed at various energies and (c) time-dependent Δσ(ω) measurements for varying excitation energies. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Time-resolved THz reflectivity measurements for perovskite film and corresponding 2D frequency/delay time map and dephasing time profile for coherent and in-coherent oscillations. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) THz conductivity measurements with varying temperatures for different parameters such as phonon-oscillator strength (ωp,m2), phonon resonance frequency (fm) and phonon-scattering rate (Γm) of low and high THz phonon modes. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (f) THz absorption maps for perovskite film undergoing annealing (90 °C) and upon UV irradiation (355 nm). Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites show remarkable tolerance to defects, which is believed to be originate from the correlated motion of charge carriers and lattice vibrations, forming large polarons. However, probing these polaronic interactions is considered difficult owing to their very low binding energies (∼meV) and various interactions, leading to ultrafast dissociation (∼fs–ps) of large polarons.204 However, recent advancements in THz spectroscopy have enabled visualization of the dynamics of large polarons, which are mainly responsible for the enhanced carrier lifetime in perovskite nanocrystals. Fig. 8d shows the differential THz reflectivity measurements for perovskite thin films. A sharp peak can be observed at ∼4.6 THz owing to screening of the polar lattice by charge carriers under irradiation, providing evidence of the formation of large polarons.201 The coherent oscillations at higher frequencies in the spectra depict the internal motion of the charge carriers within the polarons. Moreover, the dynamics of polaron formation and quantum beat dephasing has been analysed with sub-meV energy and femtosecond temporal resolution in parallel, originating from the relative motion of the charge carriers coupled with their longitudinal optical phonon cloud. Likewise, other recent studies also revealed the presence of large polarons205 and phonon-polariton in perovskite deposited on metamaterials206 using ultrafast THz spectroscopy. Thus, information from ultrafast THz spectroscopy can enable researchers to optimize the morphology and composition of perovskite films to effectively engineer electronic-lattice interactions for enhanced device performance.
Perovskite materials show strong defect tolerance in contrast to Shockley-Read-Hall (SRH) theory, owing to low-frequency phonon-photogenerated carrier coupling.207 Thus, the phonon-dispersion relations in the low frequency regime need to be accurately quantified, given that they can greatly influence the carrier dynamics in solar harvesting materials. To shed light on the phonon dynamics, La-o-vorakiat et al. studied the evolution of phonon modes across an orthorhombic-tetragonal phase shift using ultrafast THz spectroscopy. This investigation revealed the evolution of the vibration modes associated with the Pb-I bonds in perovskites across various phases with an increase in temperature.202Fig. 8e depicts the Lorentzian parameters describing THz conductivity for deposited perovskite films undergoing a phase change with a variation in temperature. The plots present the variation in phonon-oscillator strength (ωp,m2), phonon resonance frequency (fm) and phonon-scattering rate (Γm) of the low and high THz phonon modes at different temperatures. Clear discontinuity in the parameter variation can be found at around 165 K, which is marked by a phase transition from orthorhombic to tetragonal phase, owing to the shift in dielectric constant at the phase transition region. The phonon modes evolved from two to four peaks with a decrease in temperature are marked by a phase shift, which allow the measurement of carrier mobility values at low temperatures. Consequently, this provides vital information in establishing the relationship between the low-energy phonon modes and transport properties of charge carriers. In addition, ultrafast THz spectroscopy successfully revealed the reason for the increased efficiency of thiourea-doped CIGS solar cells,208 elucidated varying carrier mobility values with an increase in PEA doping in perovskites,209 impact of varying the size and morphology of SnS nanocrystals on carrier mobility and dynamics on an ultrashort timescale,210 among various other feats. This knowledge provides better insight to engineer film morphology, passivation strategies and crystal structure to promote device performance.
In addition to monitoring the carrier dynamics, THz spectroscopy has also been widely used to inspect the kinetics of crystal formation, which is helpful for designing new pathways to synthesize solar harvesting materials with enhanced device performances. For instance, Park et al. performed real-time THz spectroscopy under varying annealing and UV irradiation conditions to monitor the crystallization kinetics in perovskite films.203In situ THz spectrometry revealed that absorption in perovskite films increased significantly (at 1 and 2 THz) during annealing, which is attributed to the phase transition to a tetragonal phase (Fig. 8f). Moreover, an increment in absorption was also observed when the pre-annealed films were irradiated with UV irradiation (∼355 nm), owing to the structural change in the PbI2 residues at the grain boundary of the perovskite (MAPbI3) crystalline films. Similarly, THz spectroscopy has also been applied to successfully analyse the structural deformation of the Pb–I bond due to the incorporation of the CH3NH2 defect.211 Moreover, the interpretation of other phenomena such as back-scattering of free carriers from heavily disordered perovskite films,212 inspecting synthesis routes to achieve diffusion lengths as long as 3 μm,213 and impact of halide substitution on carrier mobility, recombination rate and diffusion length214 has been made possible owing to the recent advancements in THz spectroscopic techniques.
4. Multidimensional spatial mapping techniques
The electrical and optical properties of solar cell devices vary to a great extent in the vertical and lateral dimensions owing to various factors such as heterogeneous material deposition,215 degradation,216 and inhomogeneous phase crystallization.217 Consequently, this greatly influences the solar conversion efficiency of various photovoltaic materials. Thus, there is an immediate requirement to probe photovoltaic materials multidimensionally with atomic spatial resolution to accurately determine various inhomogeneities associated with material properties. In the past decade, various improvements and developments have been made to detector and data acquisition systems, which have pushed the resolution limits of various conventionally used material mapping techniques. Moreover, the integration of these techniques with other material characterization tools permit researchers to inspect the local chemical, structural, electrical and optical properties of different photovoltaic materials. In this section, we discuss the various advancements in the field of multidimensional material mapping techniques to probe materials with atomic resolution.
4.1. Electron microscopy (EM) techniques
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM)-based techniques are widely applied and uniquely suited for imaging and site-specific structural and analytical mapping in various solar harvesting materials. However, the basic design of TEM has remained constant, in which an electron beam passes through the sample and detectors at the far end develop the sample image from scattered electrons. However, the resolving power of TEM has improved by more than 1000 times due to the development of high-powered electromagnets and aberration correctors to attain sub-angstrom resolution. The drastic improvement in TEM resolution has enabled real-time observation of nanostructure formation at atomic resolution,218 the variation in bonding length during a reaction,219 mapping individual defects in nanostructures,220 and various other feats. However, to push the resolution limit, samples are subjected to a high energy electron beam, which can damage or reorient the crystal structure of materials. This makes it harder to investigate a sample or provides wrong information about the original crystal structure.
Thus, to overcome this, Muller's group combined an electron microscope pixel-array detector and full-field ptychography with the necessary dynamic range. They achieved sub-angstrom resolution (0.39 Å) at a lower beam energy (80 keV) to recover phase information from the full phase space.221 A comparison of the images taken by various EM techniques (coherent bright-field, incoherent high-angle annular dark-field (ADF), integrated centre-of-mass (iCoM) and full-field ptychography) is shown in Fig. 9a, together with the diffractogram intensities on the logarithmic scale. According to Fig. 9a, it is clear that the information limit of ptychography is close to 5α (α is the numerical aperture of the lens). At this resolution limit, sulphur vacancies can be easily visualized directly, which strongly influences the solar harvesting and catalytic properties of monolayer MoS2. Moreover, recent advances in TEM have enabled the counting of individual atoms in synthesized nanostructures226 and tracking the migration of individual atoms in nanostructures,227 empowering researchers to track and engineer various synthetic routes to maximize device performance.
 Fig. 9  Electron microscopy of various solar harvesting materials. (a) Comparison of single-layered MoS2 images taking via different EM techniques. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Comparison of standard TEM cryo-EM images of perovskite NWs exposed to electron dose (∼ 500 e− Å−2) and cryo-images taken under varying UV irradiation and exposure to moisture. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) STEM images depicting variation in vertical phase morphology and microstructure before and after exposure to air (after 6 days) and EELS mapping revealing formation of Pb particles after exposure to air. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (d) CL images of whole film (top and middle) and single domain (below) taken at varying times of light soaking, depicting real-time phase separation in lead halide perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) 4D S-UEM images under photoirradiation with low contrast regions (left) depicting energy loss and high contrast regions (right) depicting energy gain. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
Hybrid organic–inorganic perovskites can undergo phase transformation or degrade even under ambient conditions when exposed to electron beam irradiation, thermal loads or light irradiation. Consequently, this hinders the atomistic perspective of the actual crystal structure, responsible for degradation or phase transformation. Thus, to image perovskite nanocrystals, it is necessary to lower the electron dose and temperature of the surrounding medium to unveil information about the actual nanocrystal structure. Accordingly, various groups have probed the perovskite structure at lower electron beam intensities, revealing various grain boundaries, stacking faults and defects in synthesized nanostructures.228,229 However, it has proven to be a great challenge for researchers to minimize the influence of thermal loads. Thus, to overcome this, cryogenic-electron microscopy (cryo-EM) has been employed, in which the prepared samples under observation are cooled to cryogenic temperatures. This technique has also facilitated the visualization of biomolecules (leading to the Nobel Prize in Chemistry 2017), polymers and batteries, without any beam damage or influence of external stimuli.230–232 Applying cryo-EM to perovskites, researchers have been able to not only map the atomic structure but also successfully highlight the influence of UV irradiation and moisture on the perovskite crystal structure.222 The standard TEM image of perovskite NW, as shown in Fig. 9b, clearly depicts the degradation of MAPbI3 to PbI2 upon exposure to a high-energy electron beam. However, the cryo-TEM images for the same nanostructures captured using a very low electron dose (∼12 e− Å−2) show a smooth surface, mitigating the damage caused by the high-energy electron beam to reveal the original crystal structure. Exposure to UV irradiation can also damage the perovskite structure, which was previously thought to originate from the TiO2 CTL. However, cryo-TEM revealed that even without a TiO2 layer, the structure of perovskite NWs is damaged under low doses of UV radiation, contradicting the old hypothesis. Likewise, perovskite decomposition upon exposure to humidity has been successfully imaged by cryo-TEM almost instantaneously (∼10 s), which was not recognized by XRD or absorption analysis even at longer exposure times (∼2 h).222 In addition, cryo-TEM has enabled real-time visualization of the crystallization processes in perovskites,233 the role of CTL to passivate interfacial defects,234 and crystalline nature of perovskite precursor inks,235 together other feats without damage from the electron beam or temperature-induced segregations. However, care must be taken during sample preparation for cryo-TEM, given that it is believed that cryogenic temperatures can induce additional amorphization of the sample under study.236
Besides real-time imaging, electron microscopy can also be employed for in-depth elemental analysis of samples with nanometre spatial resolution. When electrons penetrate a sample and interact with the material, characteristic X-rays are produced. The generated X-rays are then detected by an energy dispersive detector to perform qualitative and quantitative elemental analysis, which is termed energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX).237 EDX mapping has been successfully employed to monitor cation exchange in perovskite nanocrystals (NCs), which in turn blue-shifts the absorption capabilities of the resulting NCs, enabling a wider region of the solar spectrum to be covered.238 For even better spatial resolution, electron energy loss spectroscopy (EELS) can be performed for site-specific elemental analysis. The STEM images shown in Fig. 9c display the structural degradation induced by exposure to ambient air.223 The EELS mapping shown in Fig. 9c reveals that exposure of the perovskite film to air led to the accumulation of Pb particles in the absorber film, which are highly undesirable for device performance. Similarly, heat-induced elemental migration leading to the degradation of perovskite films has been recorded using in situ EELS analysis in TEM.239 Likewise, EELS mapping has been successfully employed for the real-time imaging of elemental diffusion under biasing,240,241 revealing various degradation mechanisms in solar harvesting materials. Consequently, this technique provides valuable insight for researchers to engineer synthetic routes to increase the stability of perovskite-based solar devices under the influence of various external stimuli.
Over the years, various other EM techniques have been continually developed, allowing researchers to better probe and map material properties, which reveal new ways to push the solar device performance. For instance, cathodoluminescence (CL) microscopy has been developed to characterize the composition, optical and electrical properties of materials with nm spatial resolution.242 Bischak et al. imaged the real-time phase segregation under illumination using CL microscopy.224Fig. 9d shows the video images of the perovskite film recorded at a time difference of 10 s and 30 s under visible illumination. The emergence of iodide-rich clusters was recognized (high CL intensity), whose size increased under continuous visible irradiation.224 Moreover, CL imaging can also be performed over individual grains to provide information about local structural dynamics under light irradiation (Fig. 9d). Owing to its high spatial resolution and robust data collection capability, CL microscopy has been widely applied to quantify the optical and electronic properties of various solar harvesting materials.242 Electron beam-induced current (EBIC) measurements can also be executed using the EM microscopy instrument, where the collected current generated near the p–n junction due to incident electron beams gives valuable information about the device junction. By changing the biasing or doping in individual layers of the solar cell device, the corresponding changes can be recorded by monitoring the changes in the EBIC intensity, revealing that the device junction is strongly influenced by external parameters.243,244 In addition, owing to the interaction of the electron beam with individual atoms in EM, researchers have demonstrated precise doping of individual elements in solar harvesting materials with atomistic precision.245,246
The curiosity of researchers to map the carrier dynamics at targeted sites has led to the development of 4D ultrafast electron microscopy (4D-UEM). This powerful technique is the result of the integration of aberration-corrected detectors and ultrafast spectroscopic techniques in EM microscopy, enabling the mapping of material properties with femtosecond temporal and sub-nanometre spatial resolution in parallel. After the electron beam excites the electrons to the conduction band, the resulting electrons have higher probability to be emitted as secondary electrons (SEs).225 Consequently, this leads to bright contrast in the images scanned at ultrashort time-stamps owing to the energy gain (depicted in Fig. 9e, right panel). PV materials such as Si and CdSe show this bright contrast when the electron beam strikes the sample.247,248 On the contrary, in some PV materials such as GaAs and InGaN nanowires, the incident electron beam leads to energy loss through scattering processes, leading to suppression of SEs, resulting in darker contrast (Fig. 9e, left panel).248,249 With this information, real-time visualization of the carrier dynamics and resulting structural changes occurring on ultrafast timescales in solar harvesting materials can be visualized. 4D-UEM has been successfully employed to probe the surface and bulk trap state dynamics in perovskite films, which greatly influence the optoelectronic properties of devices.250 In-depth analysis revealed that shallow trap states (in bulk) have high-defect tolerance, while excited carriers trapped in deep traps (on surface) relax non-radiatively (∼44 ps), contributing to the overall energy loss following excitation. This provides useful insights to engineer the surface of perovskite nanocrystals to minimize non-radiative losses. Transient absorption microscopy (TAM) can also be used as an alternative to image real-time carrier dynamics on ultrafast timescales. However, 4D-UEM provides better spatial resolution, thus allowing researchers to probe photovoltaic materials at desired interfaces more precisely. Thus, 4D-UEM empowers researchers to successfully visualize the carrier generation and dynamics at p–n junctions,251 in nanowires,252 doped thin films,253 and image ultralong diffusion lengths in single crystal structures254 in various photovoltaic materials on ultrafast timescales. Moreover, the high spatial resolution achieved in TEM can be used to analyse the impact of carrier generation or recombination on atomic structures on ultrashort timescales.255 Additionally, other TEM techniques such as EELS are being constantly incorporated into 4D-UEM, providing deeper insight about material chemistry and structural dynamics on ultrashort timescales.256 Thus, it can be seen that EM has become an all-in-one multidimensional characterization tool, providing information about multiple aspects of material properties, imparting deeper insights for researchers to engineer material properties, leading to enhanced device performances.
4.2. Atomic force microscopy (AFM) techniques
Atomic force microscopy (AFM) or scanning probe microscopy (SPM) is a powerful tool used for 3D imaging of almost all types of samples, including metals, semiconductors, polymers, and biological samples. AFM consists of a sharp tip attached to a cantilever, which is scanned over the sample surface using a feedback system to control various parameters, enabling mapping of the sample topography with sub-nanometre resolution. Since its invention in 1986 by Noble Laureate Gerd Binning together with Calvin Quate and Christoph Gerber, it has undergone various advancements, making it almost imperative to study any measurable force interactions such as van der Waals, electrical, magnetic and thermal interactions.37,257 For instance, conductive-AFM (c-AFM) allows imaging of morphology and real-time visualization of electronic properties with nanometre resolution.258 Moreover, photoconductive-AFM (pc-AFM) maps the local electrical response from a material under light to reveal heterogeneous ISC and VOC generation, even among individual grains.259 Recently, researchers developed a new analytical technique termed tomographic-AFM (T-AFM), where pc-AFM scans of films are performed, which is followed by nanomachining of the film using the AFM probe, facilitating 3D mapping of the material photoelectric properties. This technique allows mapping photocurrent heterogeneity along the depth of deposited thin films for individual grains and grain boundaries (as depicted in Fig. 10a).260 Two types of grain boundaries were identified in a perovskite thin film using detailed mapping, where one enhances carrier conduction, while the other proved trivial in assisting carrier transport. Thus, it provides a new approach to engineer grain boundary structures to improve carrier transport, which was previously unknown. Meanwhile, pc-AFM has also enabled direct visualization of enhanced hot electron harvesting at nanostructure edges,261 degradation of perovskites under light and voltage stresses,262 and role of post-processing techniques to increase grain size,263 providing unique insights to enhance the solar harvesting efficiency.
 Fig. 10  3D imaging of photovoltaic materials using AFM. (a) Schematic of photoconductive-AFM revealing photocurrent variation throughout perovskite thin film and corresponding photocurrent variation at the grain boundaries and individual grains. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Topography of monolayer WSe2 together with nano-PL image and corresponding nano-PL and nano-Raman spectra. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (c) MIM (MIM-Im and MIM-Re) images of perovskite films over the span of 6 days, revealing photoconductivity degradation on exposure to humidity. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Time-resolved EFM for mapping carrier dynamics in sulfonated polyaniline thin films and EFM images at different time stamps just after applying a pump bias (−2 V) and removing the bias. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Time-resolved KPFM on perovskite film, revealing the hysteresis dynamics, CPD imaging at initial and 2.5 ms after applying bias across device and corresponding ΔCPD profiles taken at various times, revealing the dynamics of the internal electric field generated due to carrier motion. Reproduced with permission.267 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Various spectroscopic techniques, such as PL and Raman spectroscopy, reveal invaluable information about carrier interactions and dynamics. However, the spatial resolution of these techniques is limited by the diffraction limit (∼μm), making them inadequate to probe local carrier dynamics. Thus, to address this problem, researchers have integrated these spectroscopic techniques with AFM, which can convey information about carrier dynamics, even within individual grains. For instance, Park et al. incorporated PL and Raman spectroscopy with the AFM setup for monitoring the evolution of carrier dynamics in monolayer WSe2 layers under strain.264Fig. 10b illustrates the topographic and corresponding tip-enhanced PL images of WSe2, where the crystal face and edges with different twin boundaries (TBs) can be observed. The PL and Raman signals get enhanced along the crystal face in contrast to the edges and nucleation sites (NS). Moreover, when stain is applied to these monolayers using the AFM tip, the PL peak experiences a red-shift owing to the change in the bandgap of WSe2 under strain. This provides useful information to engineer carrier dynamics by modifying the synthesis route or apply external stimuli. Another recent study revealed the integration of optical spectroscopy with AFM, enabling real-time visualization of the carrier lifetime, transport time and diffusion lengths in perovskite thin films.268 Likewise, tip-enhanced PL and Raman microscopy has been employed successfully for imaging PL heterogeneity within the same MoS2 layer,269 mapping the phonon correlation length with a change in the thickness of GaS films,270 and influence of defects on carrier dynamics in single-layered nanostructures.271
Besides carrier dynamics, the interaction of semiconducting materials with different regions of the electromagnetic spectrum is equally important to interrogate to determine various material properties such as impedance, dielectric constant, dopant density, and photoconductivity.272 In this regard, the integration of microwaves with AFM has facilitated the mapping of various material properties at sub-diffraction spatial resolutions. For instance, Chu et al. employed microwave impedance microscopy (MIM) to quantify the decrease in photoconductivity with perovskite degradation at the microscopic scale.265 The amplitude of MIM-Re and MIM-Im (representing the real and imaginary parts of tip-sample admittance, respectively) continued to decrease with time for perovskite films exposed to 35% relative humidity. The microwave signal analysis revealed that rather than grains or grain boundaries, the material bulk properties such as film crystallinity mainly influence the photoconductivity variation, given that the photoconductivity remained almost uniform across individual grains and grain boundaries. Moreover, researchers recognized that the film degradation process starts by the disintegration of the grains rather than the elongation of existing grain boundaries. Other modifications in MIM involve using a pulsed optical source to measure the local carrier lifetime,273 use of correctors to increase the signal-to-noise ratio for determining the degradation mechanism in perovskites,274 near-field scanning microwave microscopy (NSMM) for mapping the inhomogeneity in photovoltaic films,275 and scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM) for mapping potential-induced degradation in c-Si films.276 Furthermore, coupling of THz waves with scattering-type scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM) enables photoconductivity mapping at sub-diffraction scales in various nanostructures.277,278 Similarly, IR lasers integrated with AFM enable chemical characterization of nanostructures with high-spatial resolution (∼10 nm), which can reveal important information about various vibrational modes among individual grains.176,195
Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM) and Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM) are non-contact AFM-based techniques, which are widely used to map the electrostatic and electronic surface properties, such as work function and local surface potential, with nanometre spatial resolution.279,280 The function of EFM is based on the principle of measuring the change in electrostatic force between the tip and sample, while KPFM utilizes bias adjustment between the sample and tip for quantitative mapping of the local surface potential. These techniques have been successfully employed to quantify the influence of ion migration on local surface potentials,281,282 surface potential modifications via doping various species,283,284 and inhomogeneous potential distribution at the grain and grain boundaries.285 Recent advances in data acquisition, analysis and instrumentation have enabled real-time mapping of local charge dynamics on the microsecond or nanosecond timescale together with sub-nanometre spatial resolution using AFM systems.286 Taking advantage of this, Kajimoto et al. mapped the carrier dynamics in sulfonated polyaniline (SPAN) thin films using time-resolved EFM (tr-EFM).266Fig. 10d displays the real-time images at various time stamps after applying and removing the bias (−2 V) between the source and drain. By monitoring the evolution of the EFM maps after setting the applied bias to zero, the carrier discharge dynamics was evaluated, showing that the charges remain for longer times at the centre of the film (Fig. 10d, right). Additionally, the carrier profiles were computed at varying probe delay times, which match closely with the carrier hopping model, illustrating carriers are transported via hopping barriers between the carrier trap sites in SPAN films. Likewise, Weber et al. employed time-resolved KPFM (tr-KPFM) by applying a pulsed voltage across the cross-section of the perovskite solar cell structure to reveal the mechanism behind current–voltage hysteresis.267 The static and transient (2.5 ms) CPD (contact potential difference) maps together with the local surface potential decay profiles at varying delay times are shown in Fig. 10e. By analysing the ΔCPD maps across the cross-section of the device structure, it was found that during the first 2.5 ms, the local potential decreases, after which it increases owing to screening of the internal electric field by the charge carriers present at the perovskite/SnO2 interface. Furthermore, the important information that ion migration can only screen the internal electric field by maximum of 10% was also quantified. This suggests that the formation and release of interfacial charges is mainly responsible for the observed hysteresis rather than ion migration. Other modifications to the tr-EFM and KPFM techniques have been successfully used to trace the carrier dynamic heterogeneity across thin films and at various interfaces.287–290 Besides the above-mentioned advancements, various other modifications are constantly being done to develop the AFM setup (as described in Table 1) to reveal more information about the crystal structure, carrier dynamics and influence of various parameters on the device performance.
Table 1 Various AFM modifications introduced to investigate photovoltaic materials with atomic resolution




Technique
Resolution limit
Operation
Information derived
Ref.




AFM
∼0.1–5 nm
AFM tip is scanned over sample in contact, non-contact or tapping mode
3D topography of sample

291



Conductive-AFM (c-AFM)
∼0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA
Voltage is applied between tip and sample where tip is in contact with sample
Local current variation over the sample surface

258



Photoconductive-AFM (pc-AFM)
∼ 0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA
AFM tip scans the sample under light irradiation with applied bias between tip and sample
Local current variations in the sample under irradiation

292



Tomographic photoconductive-AFM (T-AFM)
∼0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA
Nanomachining of each layer of sample with AFM tip while taking pc-AFM measurements over individual layers
Local current variation across the surface and depth of the sample

260



Transient photo-response AFM (TP-AFM)
∼10 nm + ∼pA–500 nA + ∼10 μs
Synchronisation of laser illumination with AFM tip, with bias applied between tip and sample
Mapping local carrier dynamics, diffusion length, transport time

268



Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS)
Raman spectroscopy with ∼10 nm spatial resolution
Raman laser is incorporated with AFM tip made of metal (generally gold)
Probing local vibrational modes of sample

293



Tip-enhanced PL spectroscopy (TEPL)
PL spectroscopy with ∼10 nm spatial resolution
PL laser is incorporated with AFM tip made of metal (generally gold)
Probing local optical properties along with carrier recombination and trapping dynamics of sample

294



Photothermal-induced resonance microscopy (PTIR)
Chemical characterization with ∼20 nm spatial resolution
Measuring transient thermal expansion induced by laser pulses incorporated with AFM tip
Mapping chemical distribution or heterogeneity even within same grains

295



Scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM)
Chemical or electrical characterization with ∼20 nm spatial resolution
Laser light is focused through aperture of size smaller than excitation wavelength (generally through hole in AFM tip)
Mapping local chemical environment or conductivity of the sample

176,277



Scanning microwave impedance microscopy (s-MIM)
Electrical properties with ∼100 nm spatial resolution
Microwaves are focused on the sample via AFM tip
Mapping local electrical conductivity and permittivity of the sample

296



Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM)
Electrical properties with ∼1–10 nm spatial resolution
Bias is applied between sample and metallic tip and a sensitive capacitance sensor records capacitance
Mapping local electrical conductivity and doping concentration of sample

297



Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)
Surface potential with ∼10–20 nm spatial resolution
AFM tip is scanned over sample in non-contact mode with applied bias between tip and sample
Mapping local surface potential variation of the sample

298



Time-resolved KPFM (tr-KPFM)
Surface potential with ∼20–50 nm spatial and ∼10 μs temporal resolution
Integrating fast free force recovery (F3R) with KPFM instrument
Mapping local surface potential and carrier dynamics of the sample

288



Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM)
Electrostatic force with ∼15–50 nm spatial resolution
Bias is applied between sample and tip, with tip hovering over sample
Mapping local electrical properties of the sample

299



Time-resolved EFM (tr-EFM)
Electrostatic force with ∼50–100 nm spatial and ∼10–100 ns temporal resolution
Signal averaging and analysing the cantilever motion scanned over tip with bias applied between tip and sample
Mapping carrier dynamics of specific sites of the sample

286



Scanning thermo-ionic microscopy (STIM)
Electrochemistry with ∼10–100 nm spatial resolution
Uses strain induced via thermal loads applied via laser or resistive heating, incorporated with AFM
Tracking ionic motion locally under the influence of thermal loading

300



Piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM)
∼10–20 nm
Pre-set AC bias is applied between tip and sample, which expands or compresses the sample
Imaging and manipulation of piezoelectric or ferroelectric domains

301



Scanning thermal microscopy (SThM)
Temperature with ∼20–50 nm spatial resolution
Nanofabricated thermal probe fitted with resistive elements is placed at tip, which is scanned over sample
Imaging of local temperature and thermal conductivity of the sample

302





4.3. Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) techniques
Scanning tunnelling microscopy (STM) is a powerful 3D imaging tool, which offers atomic resolution (<0.1 nm) for material characterization. It works on the principle of quantum tunnelling, where a sharp conductive tip is scanned over the sample with bias applied between the sample and tip, allowing electrons to tunnel from the sample to the tip. The tunnelling current is a function of distance between the tip, applied bias and local density of states (LDOS) of the sample, which ensures accurate 3D imaging and bandgap mapping with atomic resolution.303 A large amount of high quality information can be retrieved from STM analysis, as prominent by the fact that its inventors Gerd Binning and Heinrich Rohrer were honoured with the Noble Prize in 1986. STM analysis has been proved to be successful in revealing the atomic structure, electronic properties and electronic states with high spatial resolution in various solar harvesting materials.308,309 Furthermore, the STM technique has revealed the mechanism behind increased charge separation using thinner PbI2 passivation layers around perovskite crystals.304Fig. 11a displays the scanning tunnelling spectroscopy (STS) maps across individual grains with a varying PbI2 thickness in the dark and under illumination. These STS images indicate that the energy bandgap of the perovskite film shifts downwards under illumination for grain B with a thinner PbI2 layer. The detailed analysis revealed that a thinner PbI2 passivation layer enabled the photogenerated carriers to transfer from inside the nanocrystal to outside, where they can be extracted using suitable CTLs. In contrast, thicker PbI2 layers not only hindered the efficient transfer of charge carriers, but also offered additional recombination sites, which consequently increased the recombination probability. Thus, this report signifies that the thickness of the passivation layer should be properly optimized to achieve efficient photogenerated carrier transport. The STS analysis conducted over PCBM clusters revealed the non-heterogeneity in electron and hole dynamics over the film surface during operation at the nanoscale. Thus, it quantitatively relates the photovoltaic performance at the nanoscale to macroscopic device performance.310 Also, in situ STM mapping tracks the various stages and intermediate product formation in the growth of crystalline perovskite films on Au(111). It provides deeper insights to engineer synthetic pathways to minimize material degradation.311 In addition, STM has also been employed to reveal device deuteration due to perovskite aging,312 bandgap tuning due to air exposure,313 and band alignment at 2D/3D interfaces.314
 Fig. 11  3D topography and bandgap mapping using STM. (a) Bandgap mapping of different grains with different thickness of PbI2 layer under dark and light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Precise control of doping in graphene/BN layers by application of STM tip voltage excitation and corresponding dI/dV maps for pristine graphene under STM voltage (Vg = −20 V) and map of same region after erasing the doping pattern by applying an STM voltage (Vg = 0 V). Reproduced with permission.305 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (c) Real-time STM images showing ionic motion in perovskite films due to the presence of various vacancies. Reproduced with permission.306 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) STM topography scan and corresponding THz-STM images of InAs nanodots for THz pulse arriving 500 fs before (−500 fs) and after (+500 fs) the pump pulse. Reproduced with permission.307 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group. 
To enhance the device performance, photovoltaic materials are often doped with different elements to achieve bandgap tuning, and hence increase their absorption region.315,316 STM can not only map the bandgap tuning, but can also be used to procure rewritable doping patterns with nanoscale control. Velasco et al. applied STM tip voltage excitations together with the application of a gate electric field to obtain spatial control of charge doping in graphene/boron nitride heterostructures.305 The dI/dV plots in Fig. 11b clearly depict that when the STM tip voltage (Vg = 0 → 30 V) increases, the local area undergoes transformation from p-type doping to heavily doped n-type region. Moreover, the doping patterns can be reversed simply by holding Vg = 0, which acts as an erasure pulse to omit any previous doping patterns. The action of the erasure pulse (Vg = 0 V) can be clearly observed in Fig. 11b, showing that the dI/dV maps of the pristine graphene and same region after the erasure pulse (Vg = 0 V) are almost identical. In addition, photo-induced doping has also been demonstrated in graphene/boron nitride heterostructures.317 However, this investigation lacks precise spatial control of doping using STM voltage pulses. Nonetheless, other studies have demonstrated the use of STM techniques to obtain atomistic doping control and map the corresponding electronic structures.318,319 In addition, the integration of other spectroscopic techniques with STM/STS can provide profound knowledge about the electronic structure of materials. For instance, by combining Raman spectroscopy with the conductive tip of STM, the atomic-scale optical characterization of local electronic states can be conducted.320 Similarly, the STM setup coupled with tip-enhanced PL spectroscopy (TEPL) can achieve sub-nanometre resolution mapping of local molecular exciton energy.321
Density functional theory (DFT) predicts that reorientation of the polar organic part of perovskite nanocrystals can lead to the formation of distinct structural and electronic domains.322,323 Thus, to experimentally verify this mechanism, researchers employed STM at atomic resolution to probe perovskite films. It has been recognized that atomic arrangement along the depth of the deposited perovskite film is significantly different compared to the surface, owing to the reorientation of the MA cation attached to the halide anion, leading to the formation of ferroelectric and antiferroelectric domains.323 Furthermore, the atomic resolution of STM is beneficial to map the real-time ionic motion in perovskite films, as shown in Fig. 11c.306 The different ionic motions traced using STM include the reorientation of ions, movement along the surface and movement from the surface to the bulk. This vital information facilitates researchers to modify the synthetic routes to modulate the ionic motion, which greatly influences the performance and stability of perovskite-based solar harvesting devices. Electronic phase separation within ∼10–20 nm has also been observed using STM/STS mapping of mixed halide perovskite films, originating from the variation in the halide ratio in two areas.324 Likewise, real-time tracking of halide atoms in mixed halide perovskites using STM revealed the influence of halide substitution on the bandgap and stability of perovskite nanocrystals.325 Additionally, the atomistic origin of surface defects in perovskite films,326 band alignment tuning for different stacking configurations of TMDCs,327 and influence of an electric field on perovskite grains and grain boundaries have been investigated using the STM/STS techniques.328
Besides integration with static spectroscopic techniques, the STM technique has also been integrated with ultrafast spectroscopic techniques to achieve sub-nanometre spatial resolution with <6 fs temporal resolution.329 Cocker et al. mapped InAs nanodots using THz-STM (shown in Fig. 11d) to probe the local carrier dynamics.307 In comparison to the dark condition (−500 fs), the photoexcited InAs nanodot image (+500 fs) appears quite brighter, owing to the change in the THz-induced tunnel current due to the presence of additional photoexcited carriers. The rise and decay times for the photoinduced nanodot were calculated to be 500 fs and 1 ps, respectively, revealing the local carrier dynamics at the nanodot surface. Furthermore, single molecule transport measurements utilizing STM have been successful in experimentally quantifying the plasmonic hot carrier distributions.330 This imperative information paves the way to design next-generation plasmonic solar cells or photodetector devices. Thus, STM/STS investigation provides deeper insights about various aspects influencing the bandgap and electronic structure of photovoltaic materials, which can be further used to design materials with superior properties for solar harvesting applications. It is a powerful analytical tool that can map material topology, electronic states and bandgap alignment in parallel at atomic spatial resolution with great precision. However, there is still room for focused efforts to investigate the origins of defect formation and material degradation due to the application of external factors such as an electric field, temperature, and humidity in parallel. Moreover, the evolution of local electronic states with passivation at the heterojunction and grain boundaries demands more detailed investigation. To accomplish this, suitable adjustments need to be developed together with STM setups to enable STM/STS investigations under in situ and operando conditions. This will provide researchers deeper insights to engineer new material synthetic and processing pathways for fabricating next-generation high-performance photovoltaic devices.
4.4. Advanced elemental mapping techniques
Accurate elemental mapping can provide desirable information about the distribution of various elements within photovoltaic materials, which greatly influence the formation of different phases and crystal structures. In the previous sections, we discussed EDX, EELS, XPS and various modified characterization techniques for elemental analysis. However, these techniques are limited by their spatial resolution (<20 nm) and chemical sensitivity (∼0.01–0.1%).331,332 Conversely, atom probe tomography (APT) can be applied to perform 3D analysis with spatial resolution reaching <0.1 nm to map even single atoms present in the sample.333 APT analysis not only provides detailed information about the doping concentration, but also accurately maps the position of individual doping elements in the sample.334 Encouraged by the atomic resolution of APT, Kohl et al. performed APT to understand the CIGS device degradation mechanism under exposure to moisture.335 3D APT profiles for aged sample (Fig. 12a) clearly shows that water molecules get trapped in the grain boundaries, where alkali ions (K+) get accumulated. The samples without alkali doping were found to be almost free of water seeping. Thus, the alkali doping needs to be optimized very carefully. This is because a lower alkali doping results in a poor solar harvesting performance, whereas at a higher concentration, the device performance will degrade due to water accumulation near the alkali atoms. Similarly, APT has been successfully employed to reveal the role of CTL in perovskite solar cells,338 grain and grain boundary analysis for sulfurized CIGSSe films,339 and mapping film compositions at varying thickness in alloyed CdTe solar cells.340 Thus, APT permits researchers to precisely calibrate the chemical composition and structure of materials to engineer desirable properties.
 Fig. 12  Elemental mapping in photovoltaic materials. (a) APT specimens of reference (before) and aged (after) CIGS sample treated with potassium (Cu+: blue, H3O+: red, and K+: grey iso-surface), with water molecules being accumulated on the grain boundaries at the K iso-surfaces. Reproduced with permission.335 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (b) TOF-SIMS 3D tomography maps for two-cation perovskite processed at different temperatures to investigate the phase segregation and cation distribution along the surface and depth of the film. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) SIMS map and corresponding effective bandgap distribution map for Se-doped CdTe films. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. 
Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) is another highly sensitive surface analysis technique, with its elemental detection limit reaching parts per billion (ppb).38 In this technique, a focused ion beam (FIB) strikes the sample and removes a small part of the sample, leading to the ejection of secondary ions. The emitted secondary ions are then analysed using a mass spectrometer, which assists in building the chemical profile of the material. The recently developed nano-SIMS has even pushed the spatial resolution limit (<50 nm), while maintaining the chemical sensitivity of SIMS. Nano-SIMS has enabled real-time mapping of halide segregation at the nanoscale,341 role of doping foreign salts in the absorber layer to enhance device stability,342 and illuminating the role of cations in the crystallization of perovskite films.343 In addition, the integration of high-resolution imaging with depth-profiling facilitates 3D mapping of the variation in the composition of materials with high spatial control. Fig. 12b displays the 3D tomography analysis of double-cation perovskite films using nano-SIMS performed by Harvey et al.336 At a low processing temperature, there a smaller domain of inorganic cations is formed (blue region), which coalesced at a higher processing temperature, leading to the suppression of phase segregation, resulting in increased device performance. Thus, this investigation depicts the importance of precise mapping of various species to optimize their chemical composition in solar harvesting materials to enhance the device performance. Likewise, ToF-SIMS analysis has shed light on the degradation in perovskite devices induced by exposure to a humid environment,344 ion migration345 and metal migration from the top or bottom contacts.346
With technological advancements and development of better data acquisition systems, various modifications such as the crater within crater approach to accurately map elements in multi-junction solar cells347 and new ion sources to probe organic materials without damage348 are continuously being developed. Moreover, by incorporating different material characterization techniques with surface analysis techniques, rich information about material properties can be explored. For instance, by incorporating CL spectroscopy with nano-SIMS analysis, real-time mapping of Se doping for defect passivation in CdTe cells has been performed.337 The presence of Se effectively reduces the bandgap of CdTe films to absorb lower energy photons, as shown in the nano-SIMS and CL maps recorded over the same area in Fig. 12c. The XRD peak for CdTe(111) shifts right with an increase in Se concentration owing to bandgap bowing, shifting the lattice constant to reach the zinc blende limit.349 Consequently, this decreases the bandgap of CdSeTe despite the higher bandgap of CdSe compared to CdTe. This results in the generation of an effective electric field between the CdTe and CdSeTe layers, which promotes charge carrier separation. Doping of Se in CdTe can also shift the band alignment from cliff-type (large recombination losses) to spike-like band alignment with an offset of ∼70 meV (suppresses recombination), leading to an increase in device performance.350 Besides, CL spectroscopy analysis revealed that the presence of Se not only effectively passivates defects, but also increases the carrier diffusion length. Similarly, by considering the I–V and EDX maps in parallel with nano-SIMS, researchers successfully disclosed the various losses occurring at the Si–metal interface, which limit the device performance.351 Other modifications such as integrating FIB-ToF-SIMS with the AFM setup,352 FIB-ToF-SIMS with APT,353 and development of cryo-focused ion beams for probing soft materials354 are continuously being carried out to push the chemical sensitivity and spatial resolution limits to get deeper insights about material composition influencing device performance.
4.5. Other recently developed techniques
Technological advances have enabled researchers to integrate multiple material characterization instruments to fundamentally understand light-matter and various other interactions at the atomic scale. For instance, Man et al. incorporated photoemission electron microscopy (PEEM) with ultrafast pump–probe techniques with the aim to make a full movie describing the light interaction with the InSe/GaAs heterojunction to generate carriers following photoexcitation.355 Later, the generated carriers gets accumulated in lower energy states in InSe from the higher states of GaAs (shown in Fig. 13a, red region for delay times <10 ps). Owing to the inhomogeneous spatial charge distribution, internal electric fields were created, which prohibited further charge transfer at later times (blue region build-up at delay time >10 ps). Finally, at higher delay times (∼100 ps), all the generated carriers returned to the ground state by e/h recombination. Thus, the full movie describing the carrier dynamics in space, energy and time provides invaluable insights in the operation and evolution of carriers in solar harvesting materials. Similarly, overlaid PL and time-resolved PEEM (TR-PEEM) analysis has enabled nanoscale mapping of trap clusters, which limit the performance of perovskite solar cells.356 Likewise, by incorporating STM with SEM, researchers explored the influence of varying electrical contacts and mechanical strain induced by STM on the electrical and photovoltaic properties of p–i–n junction GaAs nanowires.357 In another study, researchers combined ultrafast, tabletop XUV lasers with PEEM to perform TR-XUV-μ-ARPES analysis capable of imaging the dark exciton dynamics in atomically thin semiconductor nanostructures.34 Other modifications to incorporate multiple instruments to better probe the carrier dynamics with the highest possible spatial and temporal resolution are constantly being made.
 Fig. 13  Recent advances in material characterization tools. (a) Electron transport mapping in InSe/GaAs heterostructure, with electron accumulation (red region) and depletion (blue region) at varying times after photoexcitation. Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) In situ TEM images of single TiO2 nanowire/CdSe QD heterojunction for varying interface areas and corresponding plot for photocurrent density vs change in interface area. Reproduced with permission.358 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) GC-MS analysis for quantifying the decomposition products released by annealing precursors and using different cell structures for perovskite solar cells. Reproduced with permission.359 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic showing structural orthorhombic to tetragonal phase transition and corresponding neutron diffraction maps showing transition of MA+ cation with increasing temperature in CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Material deposition and crystal growth greatly influence the performance of photovoltaic materials. Therefore, numerous efforts are being made in the area of in situ characterization to monitor each step of crystallization in great detail. For instance, researchers recently synthesized single TiO2 nanowire/CdSe QDs heterojunction solar cells inside a photoelectric TEM setup to study and engineer interface properties to maximize device performance.358 By varying the position of the Pt tip electrode, they varied the net interface area (vacuum, electrode, and QD/NW interface), as shown in Fig. 13b. They observed that the photocurrent density declined sharply with an increase in the interface area, as shown in Fig. 13b. Thus, this study showed the importance of interface engineering (which serves as centres for carrier recombination) to maximize the solar harvesting efficiency. In another study, researchers analysed the electrical properties of perovskite films at different stages of material deposition, revealing the influence of various factors on device performance in great detail.361 Similarly, researchers have also integrated material deposition stages with custom-built systems, incorporating various material characterization tools capable of studying the influence of different factors (temperature, strain, pressure, etc.) on carrier dynamics.33 Likewise, other studies employed in situ current–voltage and structural evolution analysis with material deposition,362 heat-induced degradation pathways by studying chemical, optical and morphological aspects,239,363 and influence of applied bias at the material interface.240,364 In parallel, other in situ characterization techniques are constantly being developed to study the electrical, chemical and morphological aspects of various photovoltaic materials in great detail.
In the quest to gain knowledge about the crystal structure and phases influencing the carrier dynamics, researchers are also trying other innovative ways to get an atomistic view-point of photovoltaic materials. One way is to use the spectroscopic techniques used in other branches of science and engineering to probe material properties. For example, Shi et al. demonstrated the use of gas chromatography–mass spectroscopy (GC-MS) to study the perovskite degradation mechanisms under thermal loading for the first time.359 By carefully recording the amount of various decomposition products released by perovskite precursors at different temperatures (shown in Fig. 13c), they mapped the contribution of various precursors to device degradation. Additionally, they provided various cell device design schematics to suppress the evolution of volatile products from perovskite films (shown in Fig. 13c) to maximize the device stability. Likewise, detailed thermal gravimetric-mass spectroscopy (TG-MS)365 and TG-FTIR366 analyses have been done to quantify various products released from perovskite degradation under thermal stresses. In other studies, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has been employed to study the local structure segregation, cation dynamics and structural evolution of perovskite nanocrystals.367–369 Camera-based non-destructive techniques such as hyperspectral imaging have also been utilized to image the spectrally resolved PL, electroluminescence and optical bandgap to determine the charge transfer efficiencies in perovskite thin films.370,371
Recently, neutron spectroscopy techniques have also been applied to photovoltaic materials to study the atomic dynamics undergoing a crystal phase change process. By using neutron diffraction data at increasing temperature (95–180 K), researchers imaged the real-time transformation of the CH3NH3+ cation from order to disorder in CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskites.360 In addition, neutron diffraction maps (shown in Fig. 13d) show the transition from a multidomain to single-domain structure in the perovskite crystal undergoing a phase transition from an orthogonal to tetragonal phase. Similarly, quasi-elastic neutron scattering (QENS) spectroscopy was applied to hybrid perovskites, revealing that the MA+ cation attached to the inorganic lattice reorients itself within ∼14 ps at room temperature.372 Various other studies employing various neutron scattering techniques have provided deeper insight into how atomic motion and reorientation of single atoms can influence the electrical and solar-harvesting capability of materials.373,374 Neutron reflectometry in combination with structural characterization techniques have provided information about the crystal structure and degradation pathways, together with the thickness of the device structure.375,376 Similarly, Muon spin spectroscopy (μSR) can provide information about the surface defect layer width377 or quantify the halide concentration to minimize ion migration,378 providing information about the surrounding environment of region under investigation. This in turn enables researchers to get better insights into how the structural properties of materials influence the light-matter interactions, knowledge of which can be applied to design next-generation high-performance solar harvesting materials.
5. Conclusions and future prospects
Herein, we reviewed the various advancements in the development of multi-dimensional material characterization tools to map material properties with atomic spatial, temporal and energy resolutions. These advancements have pushed the efficiencies of newer PV technologies such as perovskites from 3.8% to over 25% in a short period. The developments are mainly driven by various technological advancements, new emerging PV materials and increasing curiosity of researchers to probe material properties fundamentally. The integration of ultrafast spectroscopic techniques with various material characterization tools has enabled researchers to track the impact of various external factors on crystal structural, chemical and electronic properties at ultrashort timescales. These techniques facilitate researchers to track the full life cycle of carriers, starting from generation to separation, transportation, trapping and finally collection at metal contacts to generate electricity. Additionally, the integration of electron microscopy or scanning probe techniques with in situ/operando characterizations has enabled real-time visualization of the local crystal chemistry or structure influence on the solar harvesting capability of various PV materials. Moreover, mapping of the electronic bandgap under material segregation, doping or ionic movement provides detailed and precise knowledge of various degradation mechanisms in newly developed perovskite and organic material-based PV modules. Furthermore, to engineer the material properties of various layers, 3D mapping techniques with atomic spatial resolution can be utilized, which can reveal vital information about buried material structures. Also, better understanding of hot carrier cooling and multiple exciton generation mechanisms has opened pathways to augment the photocurrent generation and push the PV performance efficiencies beyond the SQL.
However, the scalability issues associated with perovskite and organic materials has not been addressed although the degradation induced by individual factors such as temperature and humidity has been evaluated rigorously. Nonetheless, more attention should be devoted to determining the role of real-life conditions such as temperature, pressure, humidity fluctuations in parallel to enable better commercialization of newer PV technologies. Moreover, the performance of earth-abundant and environmentally friendly kesterite solar cells has remained stagnant for many years owing to the poor understanding of their material composition and various interfaces, which require considerable attention. To further push the device performance limits (even beyond the SQL) and to resolve the degradation and scalability issues, further in-depth understanding of the electronic, structural, and chemical aspects of materials is mandatory. Other challenges and outlooks associated with developing next-generation material characterization techniques for realizing high-performance PV modules (as illustrated in Fig. 14) are discussed below:
 Fig. 14  Various prospects for the development of next-generation characterization tools capable of probing material properties multidimensionally with high spatial, temporal and energy resolution. Reproduced with permission.379 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission.380 Copyright 2018, the American Physical Society. Reproduced with permission.381 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.382 Copyright 2020, American Institute of Physics. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2019, Institute of Physics. 
• Characterization tools for next-generation solar cells: the recent demonstration of the extraction of hot carriers50 and multiple exciton generation384 holds great promise for designing next-generation solar cells with efficiencies surpassing the SQL. However, solar cell devices based on these mechanisms are still only exhibited with theoretical background and still need to be demonstrated experimentally. To date, these phenomena are mainly studied using ultrafast spectroscopic techniques. However, these techniques are inadequate for determining the device performance quantitatively. Therefore, the development of new characterization tools capable of determining the energy generation contributions from these phenomena, together with conventional J–V measurements is mandatory. This will not only enable researchers to tweak the properties of material to maximize the photocurrent generation, but also provide useful insights to engineer the device architecture for next-generation PV modules. Furthermore, other indirect modes of solar harvesting technologies, such as thermophotovoltaic,385 solar thermoelectric cells386 and other hybrid modules387 demand appropriate attention. Their harvesting efficiency is still low for commercialization; however, focused research efforts on these technologies can contribute significantly to cost-effective solutions for charging various wearable products. To achieve this, new characterization tools need to be developed, which can provide deeper insight into the working principles of these devices, providing valuable information to boost their energy harvesting efficiencies.
• Basic understanding of material properties: the fundamental knowledge of material properties and various phenomena associated with light/matter interactions, carrier generation and interactions is highly essential to push the efficiencies beyond the SQL. Thus, the development of new tools capable of probing the fundamental properties of materials directly or indirectly becomes mandatory. Some efforts have already been made in this direction, providing insights into the dynamics of fundamental carriers at the quantum level. For instance, the recently developed laser picoscopy can map valence electrons at picometre spatial resolution, which plays an imperative role in discovering the electronic and chemical properties of materials.388 However, if this technique can be further integrated with ultrafast lasers, fundamental information about the evolution of valence electrons profiles (which strongly influence the material properties) can be retrieved. Likewise, breakthroughs in the production of ultrashort laser pulses reaching attosecond temporal resolution has enabled real-time visualization of inter-band and intra-band transitions.60 Nevertheless, the development of zeptosecond lasers in the future can provide access to the visualization of carrier transport along the molecule bond length or even capture the moment of light–matter interaction leading to carrier generation.
• Mapping phonons: over the past decade, great advancements have been made in mapping the charge carriers with atomistic spatial resolutions using electron microscopy and scanning tip techniques. However, other fundamental carriers such as phonons are somewhere left behind. THz or various vibrational spectroscopy techniques are widely used to probe the phonon dynamics, but real-time visualization of phonons is still lacking in PV materials. Understanding phonon dynamics is crucial to account for various thermal/recombination losses, hot carrier harvesting, and consequently to break through the theoretical SQL barrier. Therefore, the development of characterization tools capable of resolving phonon dynamics and various heterogeneities over the sample surface becomes prerequisite. Recently, by combining space and angle-resolved vibrational spectroscopy with electron microscopy, researchers have successfully mapped the phonon propagation around defects in SiC with high spatial resolution.389 Thus, more work is required in this direction to fully understand the phonon dynamics in various PV materials to better understand the carrier interactions limiting the solar harvesting efficiency.
• Development of efficient machine learning algorithms: artificial intelligence has made great progress in the past decade, influencing almost every sector of society. Efficient machine learning (ML) algorithms can analyse large chunks of data and recognize patterns, which is an impossible task for any human. The incorporation of multiple characterization tools has led to a new problem, i.e., analysis of loads of generated information. In addition, researchers are unable to comprehend data from multidimensional mapping techniques, given that it is very difficult for the human mind to grasp information properly beyond 3 dimensions. Therefore, researchers are starting to incorporate ML algorithms into various characterization tools to analyse s large amount of data, comprehend multidimensional mapping data, draw patterns to extrapolate data and design new experiments to achieve desired results. The development of ML algorithms offers the opportunity to accelerate efficient material characterization in the following ways:
(i) Accelerated material discovery with optimized electrical and optical properties to be used in the absorber/buffer and transport layers in the solar device architecture to maximize solar harvesting.390 This can eliminate the need for rigorous experimentation and characterization to optimize materials for better device performance.
(ii) Data correlation among the information obtained using different material characterization tools to produce multidimensional data maps, revealing information about multiple aspects of material properties in parallel.391
(iii) By analysing vast amount of existing literature, ML algorithms can be trained to correlate different properties such as electrical, thermal, optical and structural properties of a material.392 Additionally, using these models, thousands of experiments can be performed virtually, eliminating the need to perform experiments leading to undesirable results. This will save valuable time and resources and may also provide useful insight to design experiments to achieve desired results.
(iv) Sometimes noise patterns in data can contain vital information about material properties. However, the human brain may not be able to draw patterns from such data, but ML algorithms can be trained to analyse noisy data signals, which can produce critical information about material properties.393
(v) Humans are prone to various prejudices, errors and biases, leading to inaccurate or incomplete analysis of obtained data. It is often the case that researchers only analyse data that shows promise while avoiding other data. Even the area selection for the sample under consideration (as small areas can be investigated in electron or scanning probe techniques) can be biased based on operator experience, which may restrict the access to useful information. However, ML can be made free of all these prejudices and biases with proper training, enabling the proper retrieval and analysis of data, which may lead to the discovery of new phenomena in various materials.
• Development of robust theoretical models: to understand the carrier dynamics at a wide range of spatial, temporal or energy resolutions, different characterizations need to be performed. Additionally, the carrier dynamics evolution patterns are often different for various PV materials. Therefore, there is an urgent requirement to develop robust theoretical models that can quantify the carrier evolution in wide range of materials at different spatial, temporal or energy resolutions. For instance, if a sample is characterized at high spatial (or temporal) resolution and feeding that information to a model that can provide information about carrier dynamics even at narrow temporal (or spatial) resolutions, it can provide useful insight into the fundamentals of carrier dynamics. Also, in this way, the function of multidimensional mapping using conventional characterization tools can be achieved without spending millions of dollars to design multidimensional mapping techniques.
• Basic instrumentation tools: technological advances in basic instrumentation such as the development of sensitive detectors, coherent laser sources have enhanced the resolution limit of various devices many times. For instance, the development in aberration correctors, high-powered electromagnets and sensitive detectors has increased the spatial resolution in TEM by over 1000 times in the last two decades.394 However, they are still far from their absolute limits, given that an electron beam with an energy of 100–300 keV (corresponds to λ = 3.7–2 pm) corresponds to an attainable resolution in the vicinity of ∼50 pm.395 Therefore, there needs to be more focus on further minimizing electron beam spreading, aberration in electron lenses and developing better data acquisition systems. Likewise, recently Baker et al. showed that the fundamental limit on achievable coherence in lasers is underestimated considerably.396 The development of lasers based on new quantum limits promises the enhancement in coherence of laser beams multi-fold. These lasers can be used to produce ultrashort pulses, which can push the limits of currently achieved temporal resolutions. Similarly, focused efforts are necessary to enhance the performance of other basic instrumentation tools, which can assist in pushing the resolution limits of various material characterization techniques.
• Real-life testing: material degradation is one of the major issues hindering the commercialization of new cost-effective PV technologies (perovskites and organic solar cells). Currently, the influence of various external factors such as temperature, humidity, fatigue, and pressure on the device performance has been examined individually at the laboratory scale. However, in real-life situations, all these factors simultaneously affect the device performance. Thus, for effective commercialization, the carrier dynamics evolution under the impact of these factors collectively needs to be thoroughly investigated. In this regard, there is an urgent need to develop an all-in-one real-life testing setup or chamber that can be integrated with various in situ/operando characterization techniques to probe material properties under real-life conditions. This will provide valuable information to engineer material properties, which can assist in the prevention of material segregation or degradation. Besides, it may also provide insight to develop new materials, which may have the capability to withstand harsh or severe environmental conditions (extreme temperature, pressure fluctuations, fatigue, etc.) for various applications.
• Data acquisition and analysis: to interpret a vast amount of information about material properties at different points, most characterization tools are integrated with various data acquisition and analysis tools. For instance, XRD or UV-Vis spectrometry directly provide users the peak position of various elements/planes or absorption capability of materials, rather than solving the Bragg's equation or Beer–Lambert's law manually for each data point. Thus, the resolution limit of tools is sometimes limited by the accuracy of data acquisition and analysis systems. Hence, data acquisition systems also demand a timely upgrade to improve the resolution limits of various characterization tools.
Thus, the development of advanced characterization tools capable of probing materials with atomistic resolutions multidimensionally has provided imperative information to engineer material properties. The combination of ultrafast spectroscopy techniques with various material characterization tools has made it possible to achieve the long-standing dream of researchers to record a movie of the carrier lifetime from generation, recombination, and transportation to finally collection. Nevertheless, additional efforts are required to understand the light-matter interactions fundamentally, which can significantly contribute to boosting the solar harvesting efficiencies. Besides the above-mentioned perspectives, continuous efforts in the direction of integrating multiple characterization tools to map material properties multidimensionally are required. Thus, the collective efforts of physicists, engineers, chemists, materials scientists and even policy makers are required to develop new advanced characterization tools to gain in-depth understanding of material properties fundamentally. These efforts will enable to meet the increasing global energy demands using carbon-free resources to ensure sustainable economic and scientific development.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar for the research grant. One of the authors (Nisika) sincerely acknowledge fellowship from the Ministry of Electronics & Information Technology (MeitY), Government of India.
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Lewis, Science, 2007, 315, 798–801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Centre for climate and energy solutions, https://www.c2es.org/content/renewable-energy/.
M. S. Cengiz and M. S. Mamiş, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2015, 2015, 256101 CrossRef .
C. A. Wolden, J. Kurtin, J. B. Baxter, I. Repins, S. E. Shaheen, J. T. Torvik, A. A. Rockett, V. M. Fthenakis and E. S. Aydil, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2011, 29, 030801 CrossRef .
E. Płaczek-Popko, Opto-Electron. Rev., 2017, 25, 55–64 CrossRef .
I. Massiot, A. Cattoni and S. Collin, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 959–972 CrossRef .
L. M. Gonçalves, V. de Zea Bermudez, H. A. Ribeiro and A. M. Mendes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 655–667 RSC .
M. Yuan, M. Liu and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–9 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kaur, N. Kumar and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3069–3090 RSC .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ameri, P. Khoram, J. Min and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4245–4266 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 71–81 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kumar, N. Nisika and M. Kumar, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2021, 9, 2001150 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, D. Pandey, J. Thomas and T. Roy, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802722 CrossRef PubMed .
Nisika, K. Kaur and M. Kumar, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 21547–21584 RSC .
S. Akin, N. Arora, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, R. H. Friend and M. I. Dar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903090 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, C. Wang and X. Zhan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703147 CrossRef .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z.-K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rong, Y. Hu, A. Mei, H. Tan, M. I. Saidaminov, S. I. Seok, M. D. McGehee, E. H. Sargent and H. Han, Science, 2018, 361, eaat8235 CrossRef PubMed .
C. S. Ponseca, P. Chábera, J. Uhlig, P. Persson and V. Sundström, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 10940–11024 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. M. Kochmann and J. S. Amelang, in Multiscale Materials Modeling for Nanomechanics, ed. C. R. Weinberger and G. J. Tucker, Springer International Publishing, Cham,  2016, pp. 159–193 DOI:10.1007/978-3-319-33480-6_5 .
Z. Fan, L. Zhang, D. Baumann, L. Mei, Y. Yao, X. Duan, Y. Shi, J. Huang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900608 CrossRef .
J. Hieulle, C. Stecker, R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700295 CrossRef .
J. Shi, Y. Li, Y. Li, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Joule, 2018, 2, 879–901 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Li, J.-Y. Ma, Q.-Q. Ge, J.-S. Hu, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28518–28523 CrossRef CAS .
M. Schwalm, C. Lange, W. W. Rühle, W. Stolz, K. Volz and S. Chatterjee, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 6277–6287 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Canton, K. S. Kjær, G. Vankó, T. B. van Driel, S.-I. Adachi, A. Bordage, C. Bressler, P. Chabera, M. Christensen, A. O. Dohn, A. Galler, W. Gawelda, D. Gosztola, K. Haldrup, T. Harlang, Y. Liu, K. B. Møller, Z. Németh, S. Nozawa, M. Pápai, T. Sato, T. Sato, K. Suarez-Alcantara, T. Togashi, K. Tono, J. Uhlig, D. A. Vithanage, K. Wärnmark, M. Yabashi, J. Zhang, V. Sundström and M. M. Nielsen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kutnyakhov, R. P. Xian, M. Dendzik, M. Heber, F. Pressacco, S. Y. Agustsson, L. Wenthaus, H. Meyer, S. Gieschen, G. Mercurio, A. Benz, K. Bühlman, S. Däster, R. Gort, D. Curcio, K. Volckaert, M. Bianchi, C. Sanders, J. A. Miwa, S. Ulstrup, A. Oelsner, C. Tusche, Y.-J. Chen, D. Vasilyev, K. Medjanik, G. Brenner, S. Dziarzhytski, H. Redlin, B. Manschwetus, S. Dong, J. Hauer, L. Rettig, F. Diekmann, K. Rossnagel, J. Demsar, H.-J. Elmers, P. Hofmann, R. Ernstorfer, G. Schönhense, Y. Acremann and W. Wurth, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2020, 91, 013109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Madéo, M. K. L. Man, C. Sahoo, M. Campbell, V. Pareek, E. L. Wong, A. Al-Mahboob, N. S. Chan, A. Karmakar, B. M. K. Mariserla, X. Li, T. F. Heinz, T. Cao and K. M. Dani, Science, 2020, 370, 1199–1204 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Hidalgo, A. F. Castro-Méndez and J. P. Correa-Baena, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900444 CrossRef .
K. Song, L. Liu, D. Zhang, M. P. Hautzinger, S. Jin and Y. Han, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1904006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, B. Huang, E. Nasr Esfahani, L. Wei, J. Yao, J. Zhao and W. Chen, npj Quantum Mater., 2017, 2, 56 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Lorenz, A. V. Ievlev and O. S. Ovchinnikova, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002201 CrossRef CAS .
L. X. Chen, X. Zhang and M. L. Shelby, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4136–4152 RSC .

          S. S. K. Raavi and C. Biswas, Digital Encyclopedia of Applied Physics,  2019, pp. 1–49 Search PubMed.
M. Pazoki, U. B. Cappel, E. M. J. Johansson, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 672–709 RSC .
E. M. Grumstrup, M. M. Gabriel, E. E. M. Cating, E. M. Van Goethem and J. M. Papanikolas, Chem. Phys., 2015, 458, 30–40 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, J. Chen, J. R. McBride and T. Lian, Science, 2015, 349, 632–635 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Menke, A. Cheminal, P. Conaghan, N. A. Ran, N. C. Greehnam, G. C. Bazan, T.-Q. Nguyen, A. Rao and R. H. Friend, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 277 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, K. Wang and M. C. Beard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 16399–16407 RSC .
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 53–59 CrossRef CAS .
D. von der Linde and R. Lambrich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 42, 1090–1093 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gélinas, A. Rao, A. Kumar, S. L. Smith, A. W. Chin, J. Clark, T. S. van der Poll, G. C. Bazan and R. H. Friend, Science, 2014, 343, 512–516 CrossRef .
M. Li, S. Bhaumik, T. W. Goh, M. S. Kumar, N. Yantara, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar, N. Mathews and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lim, D. Giovanni, Q. Zhang, A. Solanki, N. F. Jamaludin, J. W. M. Lim, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar, M. S. Pshenichnikov and T. C. Sum, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax3620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. R. Hopper, A. Gorodetsky, J. M. Frost, C. Müller, R. Lovrincic and A. A. Bakulin, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2199–2205 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Tapping and T. W. Kee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1040–1047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Busby, E. C. Carroll, E. M. Chinn, L. Chang, A. J. Moulé and D. S. Larsen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2764–2769 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Kraatz, M. Booth, B. J. Whitaker, M. G. D. Nix and K. Critchley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 24102–24109 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Gaab and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 10801–10806 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang and K. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3188–3198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, X. Wen, T. Bu, S. Chen, J. Yang, W. Chen, F. Huang, Y. Cheng and B. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31452–31461 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uiberacker, T. Uphues, M. Schultze, A. J. Verhoef, V. Yakovlev, M. F. Kling, J. Rauschenberger, N. M. Kabachnik, H. Schröder, M. Lezius, K. L. Kompa, H. G. Muller, M. J. J. Vrakking, S. Hendel, U. Kleineberg, U. Heinzmann, M. Drescher and F. Krausz, Nature, 2007, 446, 627–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Schlaepfer, M. Lucchini, S. A. Sato, M. Volkov, L. Kasmi, N. Hartmann, A. Rubio, L. Gallmann and U. Keller, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 560–564 Search PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundström and D. G. Cooke, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700–3707 RSC .
X. Wen, R. Sheng, A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, A. Benda, S. Woo, Q. Ma, S. Huang and M. A. Green, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3849–3853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shi, D. Li, Y. Luo, H. Wu and Q. Meng, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2016, 87, 123107 CrossRef .
Y. Garcia-Basabe, A. R. Rocha, F. C. Vicentin, C. E. P. Villegas, R. Nascimento, E. C. Romani, E. C. de Oliveira, G. J. M. Fechine, S. Li, G. Eda and D. G. Larrude, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 29954–29962 RSC .
F. O. L. Johansson, U. B. Cappel, M. Fondell, Y. Han, M. Gorgoi, K. Leifer and A. Lindblad, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 10335–10342 RSC .
D. Herrmann, S. Niesar, C. Scharsich, A. Köhler, M. Stutzmann and E. Riedle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18220–18233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fu, Q. Xu, G. Han, B. Wu, C. H. A. Huan, M. L. Leek and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1300 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-H. Fang, S. Adjokatse, S. Shao, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 243 CrossRef PubMed .
T. C. Sum, N. Mathews, G. Xing, S. S. Lim, W. K. Chong, D. Giovanni and H. A. Dewi, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 294–302 CrossRef CAS .
E. Serpetzoglou, I. Konidakis, G. Kakavelakis, T. Maksudov, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 43910–43919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Fang, F. Wang, S. Adjokatse, N. Zhao, J. Even and M. Antonietta Loi, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16056–e16056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jung, K. Budzinauskas, S. Öz, F. Ünlü, H. Kuhn, J. Wagner, D. Grabowski, B. Klingebiel, M. Cherasse, J. Dong, P. Aversa, P. Vivo, T. Kirchartz, T. Miyasaka, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, L. Perfetti and S. Mathur, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 785–792 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yamada, T. Nakamura, M. Endo, A. Wakamiya and Y. Kanemitsu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11610–11613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Nie, H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, A. J. Neukirch, G. Gupta, J. J. Crochet, M. Chhowalla, S. Tretiak, M. A. Alam, H.-L. Wang and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2015, 347, 522–525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, T. Wang, Z. Li, H. Li, T. Ye, C. Wetzel, H. Li and S.-F. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 16482 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Woo, J. W. Choi, J. Shin, S.-H. Chin, M. H. Ann and C.-L. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 4066–4074 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yu, Y. Guo, S. Yuan, J.-S. Zhao, Y. Qin and X.-C. Ai, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 12347–12353 RSC .
H.-C. Hsieh, C.-Y. Hsiow, K.-F. Lin, Y.-C. Shih, L. Wang, C. Renaud and T.-P. Nguyen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 17601–17611 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Le Corre, M. Stolterfoht, L. Perdigón Toro, M. Feuerstein, C. Wolff, L. Gil-Escrig, H. J. Bolink, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6280–6287 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, C. Bi, Y. Shao, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6503–6509 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Unger, E. T. Hoke, C. D. Bailie, W. H. Nguyen, A. R. Bowring, T. Heumüller, M. G. Christoforo and M. D. McGehee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3690–3698 RSC .
J. Bollmann and A. Venter, Phys. B: Condens. Matter, 2018, 535, 237–241 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2927–2934 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, C. Bao, Y. Liu, Q. Jiang, W.-Q. Wu, S. Chen, X. Dai, B. Chen, B. Hartweg, Z. Yu, Z. Holman and J. Huang, Science, 2020, 367, 1352–1358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan, J. Chae, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Z. Xiao, A. Centrone and J. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500615 CrossRef .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. F. Barnes, B. C. O’Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, W. Zhang, V. M. Burlakov, D. J. Graham, T. Leijtens, A. Osherov, V. Bulović, H. J. Snaith, D. S. Ginger and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zürch, H.-T. Chang, L. J. Borja, P. M. Kraus, S. K. Cushing, A. Gandman, C. J. Kaplan, M. H. Oh, J. S. Prell, D. Prendergast, C. D. Pemmaraju, D. M. Neumark and S. R. Leone, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15734 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Biswas, J. Husek, S. Londo and L. R. Baker, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1228–1233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-F. Lin, M. A. Verkamp, J. Leveillee, E. S. Ryland, K. Benke, K. Zhang, C. Weninger, X. Shen, R. Li, D. Fritz, U. Bergmann, X. Wang, A. Schleife and J. Vura-Weis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 27886–27893 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Jager, C. Ott, C. J. Kaplan, P. M. Kraus, D. M. Neumark and S. R. Leone, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2018, 89, 013109 CrossRef .
S. K. Cushing, I. J. Porter, B. R. de Roulet, A. Lee, B. M. Marsh, S. Szoke, M. E. Vaida and S. R. Leone, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay6650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Menzel, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2212–2223 RSC .
F. O. L. Johansson, M. Ivanović, S. Svanström, U. B. Cappel, H. Peisert, T. Chassé and A. Lindblad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 12605–12614 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, G. Smolentsev, J. Guo, K. Attenkofer, C. Kurtz, G. Jennings, J. V. Lockard, A. B. Stickrath and L. X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 628–632 CrossRef CAS .
U. B. Cappel, S. Svanström, V. Lanzilotto, F. O. L. Johansson, K. Aitola, B. Philippe, E. Giangrisostomi, R. Ovsyannikov, T. Leitner, A. Föhlisch, S. Svensson, N. Mårtensson, G. Boschloo, A. Lindblad and H. Rensmo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 34970–34978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tanimura and K. Tanimura, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 102, 045204 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. A. L. Borges, L. S. Roman and M. L. M. Rocco, Top. Catal., 2019, 62, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
A. Batra, G. Kladnik, H. Vázquez, J. S. Meisner, L. Floreano, C. Nuckolls, D. Cvetko, A. Morgante and L. Venkataraman, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1086 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, S. E. Canton, G. Smolentsev, C.-J. Wallentin, Y. Liu, Q. Kong, K. Attenkofer, A. B. Stickrath, M. W. Mara, L. X. Chen, K. Wärnmark and V. Sundström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8804–8809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Mara, R. G. Hadt, M. E. Reinhard, T. Kroll, H. Lim, R. W. Hartsock, R. Alonso-Mori, M. Chollet, J. M. Glownia, S. Nelson, D. Sokaras, K. Kunnus, K. O. Hodgson, B. Hedman, U. Bergmann, K. J. Gaffney and E. I. Solomon, Science, 2017, 356, 1276–1280 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Britz, B. Abraham, E. Biasin, T. B. van Driel, A. Gallo, A. T. Garcia-Esparza, J. Glownia, A. Loukianov, S. Nelson, M. Reinhard, D. Sokaras and R. Alonso-Mori, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 2660–2666 RSC .
K. Khalili, L. Inhester, C. Arnold, R. Welsch, J. W. Andreasen and R. Santra, Struct. Dyn., 2019, 6, 044102 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Khalili, L. Inhester, C. Arnold, A. S. Gertsen, J. W. Andreasen and R. Santra, Struct. Dyn., 2020, 7, 044101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. E. Van Kuiken, N. Huse, H. Cho, M. L. Strader, M. S. Lynch, R. W. Schoenlein and M. Khalil, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1695–1700 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Baer, K. Artyushkova, C. R. Brundle, J. E. Castle, M. H. Engelhard, K. J. Gaskell, J. T. Grant, R. T. Haasch, M. R. Linford, C. J. Powell, A. G. Shard, P. M. A. Sherwood and V. S. Smentkowski, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2019, 37, 031401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Neppl and O. Gessner, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2015, 200, 64–77 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, C.-Y. Lee, Y. Wan, S. Lim and B. Hoex, J. Appl. Phys., 2018, 124, 073106 CrossRef .
C. Yan, J. Huang, K. Sun, S. Johnston, Y. Zhang, H. Sun, A. Pu, M. He, F. Liu, K. Eder, L. Yang, J. M. Cairney, N. J. Ekins-Daukes, Z. Hameiri, J. A. Stride, S. Chen, M. A. Green and X. Hao, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 764–772 CrossRef CAS .
Nisika, K. Kaur, M. K. Yadav, A. Bag and M. Kumar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2021, 118, 041601 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Sousa, A. F. da Cunha, J. P. Teixeira, J. P. Leitão, G. Otero-Irurueta and M. K. Singh, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 287–294 CrossRef CAS .
Nisika, K. Kaur, K. Arora, A. H. Chowdhury, B. Bahrami, Q. Qiao and M. Kumar, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126, 193104 CrossRef .
C. Noël, S. Pescetelli, A. Agresti, A. Franquet, V. Spampinato, A. Felten, A. di Carlo, L. Houssiau and Y. Busby, Materials, 2019, 12, 726 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Neppl, A. Shavorskiy, I. Zegkinoglou, M. Fraund, D. S. Slaughter, T. Troy, M. P. Ziemkiewicz, M. Ahmed, S. Gul, B. Rude, J. Z. Zhang, A. S. Tremsin, P.-A. Glans, Y.-S. Liu, C. H. Wu, J. Guo, M. Salmeron, H. Bluhm and O. Gessner, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 171, 219–241 RSC .
B. Lv, T. Qian and H. Ding, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2019, 1, 609–626 CrossRef .
M.-I. Lee, A. Barragán, M. N. Nair, V. L. R. Jacques, D. Le Bolloc’h, P. Fertey, K. Jemli, F. Lédée, G. Trippé-Allard, E. Deleporte, A. Taleb-Ibrahimi and A. Tejeda, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 26LT02 CrossRef .
Y. Obata, R. Yukawa, K. Horiba, H. Kumigashira, Y. Toda, S. Matsuishi and H. Hosono, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 155109 CrossRef .
K. Takahashi, M. Imamura, J. H. Chang, T. Tanaka, K. Saito, Q. Guo, K. M. Yu and W. Walukiewicz, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8026 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Hazama, Y. Ishida, L. Zhu, C. Kim, S. Shin and H. Akiyama, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2018, 10, 034056 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Steele, H. Jin, I. Dovgaliuk, R. F. Berger, T. Braeckevelt, H. Yuan, C. Martin, E. Solano, K. Lejaeghere, S. M. J. Rogge, C. Notebaert, W. Vandezande, K. P. F. Janssen, B. Goderis, E. Debroye, Y.-K. Wang, Y. Dong, D. Ma, M. Saidaminov, H. Tan, Z. Lu, V. Dyadkin, D. Chernyshov, V. Van Speybroeck, E. H. Sargent, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Science, 2019, 365, 679–684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, X. Niu, Y. Fu, N. Li, C. Hu, Y. Chen, X. He, G. Na, P. Liu, H. Zai, Y. Ge, Y. Lu, X. Ke, Y. Bai, S. Yang, P. Chen, Y. Li, M. Sui, L. Zhang, H. Zhou and Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 815 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, L. Z. Tan, X. Shen, T. Hu, K. Miyata, M. T. Trinh, R. Li, R. Coffee, S. Liu, D. A. Egger, I. Makasyuk, Q. Zheng, A. Fry, J. S. Robinson, M. D. Smith, B. Guzelturk, H. I. Karunadasa, X. Wang, X. Zhu, L. Kronik, A. M. Rappe and A. M. Lindenberg, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1602388 CrossRef PubMed .
J. i. Kanasaki, H. Tanimura and K. Tanimura, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 237401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tanimura, J. Kanasaki and K. Tanimura, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 045201 CrossRef .
A. A. Bunaciu, E. g. Udriştioiu and H. Y. Aboul-Enein, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2015, 45, 289–299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Moseguí González, C. J. Schaffer, S. Pröller, J. Schlipf, L. Song, S. Bernstorff, E. M. Herzig and P. Müller-Buschbaum, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3282–3287 CrossRef .
W.-R. Wu, U. S. Jeng, C.-J. Su, K.-H. Wei, M.-S. Su, M.-Y. Chiu, C.-Y. Chen, W.-B. Su, C.-H. Su and A.-C. Su, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6233–6243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Agostinelli, S. Lilliu, J. G. Labram, M. Campoy-Quiles, M. Hampton, E. Pires, J. Rawle, O. Bikondoa, D. D. C. Bradley, T. D. Anthopoulos, J. Nelson and J. E. Macdonald, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1701–1708 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fields, M. I. Ahmad, V. L. Pool, J. Yu, D. G. Van Campen, P. A. Parilla, M. F. Toney and M. F. A. M. van Hest, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ren, M. Richter, J. Keller, A. Redinger, T. Unold, O. Donzel-Gargand, J. J. S. Scragg and C. Platzer Björkman, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 976–981 CrossRef CAS .
M. Theelen, R. Hendrikx, N. Barreau, H. Steijvers and A. Böttger, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 943–952 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, Y. Lei, Y. Li, Y. Yu, J. Cai, M.-H. Chiu, R. Rao, Y. Gu, C. Wang, W. Choi, H. Hu, C. Wang, Y. Li, J. Song, J. Zhang, B. Qi, M. Lin, Z. Zhang, A. E. Islam, B. Maruyama, S. Dayeh, L.-J. Li, K. Yang, Y.-H. Lo and S. Xu, Nature, 2020, 577, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Kirschner, B. T. Diroll, P. Guo, S. M. Harvey, W. Helweh, N. C. Flanders, A. Brumberg, N. E. Watkins, A. A. Leonard, A. M. Evans, M. R. Wasielewski, W. R. Dichtel, X. Zhang, L. X. Chen and R. D. Schaller, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 504 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, R. Asadpour, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, O. Durand, J. W. Strzalka, B. Chen, R. Verduzco, P. M. Ajayan, S. Tretiak, J. Even, M. A. Alam, M. G. Kanatzidis, W. Nie and A. D. Mohite, Science, 2018, 360, 67–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Deng, H. Wei, X. Zheng, Z. Yu, Y. Shao, J. E. Shield and J. Huang, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5616 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Gorkhover, S. Schorb, R. Coffee, M. Adolph, L. Foucar, D. Rupp, A. Aquila, J. D. Bozek, S. W. Epp, B. Erk, L. Gumprecht, L. Holmegaard, A. Hartmann, R. Hartmann, G. Hauser, P. Holl, A. Hömke, P. Johnsson, N. Kimmel, K.-U. Kühnel, M. Messerschmidt, C. Reich, A. Rouzée, B. Rudek, C. Schmidt, J. Schulz, H. Soltau, S. Stern, G. Weidenspointner, B. White, J. Küpper, L. Strüder, I. Schlichting, J. Ullrich, D. Rolles, A. Rudenko, T. Möller and C. Bostedt, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 93–97 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zu, P. Amsalem, D. A. Egger, R. Wang, C. M. Wolff, H. Fang, M. A. Loi, D. Neher, L. Kronik, S. Duhm and N. Koch, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 601–609 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Haag, T. Eul, P. Thielen, N. Haag, B. Stadtmüller and M. Aeschlimann, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2019, 90, 103104 CrossRef .
A. S. M. Ismail, Y. Uemura, S. H. Park, S. Kwon, M. Kim, H. Elnaggar, F. Frati, Y. Niwa, H. Wadati, Y. Hirata, Y. Zhang, K. Yamagami, S. Yamamoto, I. Matsuda, U. Halisdemir, G. Koster, B. M. Weckhuysen and F. M. F. de Groot, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 2685–2692 RSC .
N. Pellet, J. Teuscher, J. Maier and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2181–2188 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Yoon, S. Draguta, J. S. Manser, O. Sharia, W. F. Schneider, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 290–296 CrossRef CAS .
S. Draguta, O. Sharia, S. J. Yoon, M. C. Brennan, Y. V. Morozov, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat, W. F. Schneider and M. Kuno, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 200 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Elmelund, B. Seger, M. Kuno and P. V. Kamat, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 56–63 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, W.-L. Chen, B. J. Foley, J. Lee, J. P. C. Ruff, J. Y. P. Ko, C. M. Brown, L. W. Harriger, D. Zhang, C. Park, M. Yoon, Y.-M. Chang, J. J. Choi and S.-H. Lee, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 201704421,  DOI:10.1073/pnas.1704421114 .
J. J. van Franeker, K. H. Hendriks, B. J. Bruijnaers, M. W. G. M. Verhoeven, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601822 CrossRef .
R. Bakthavatsalam, A. Biswas, M. Chakali, P. R. Bangal, B. P. Kore and J. Kundu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4739–4748 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yakunin, B. M. Benin, Y. Shynkarenko, O. Nazarenko, M. I. Bodnarchuk, D. N. Dirin, C. Hofer, S. Cattaneo and M. V. Kovalenko, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 846–852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kong, G. Liu, J. Gong, Q. Hu, R. D. Schaller, P. Dera, D. Zhang, Z. Liu, W. Yang, K. Zhu, Y. Tang, C. Wang, S.-H. Wei, T. Xu and H.-K. Mao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 8910–8915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Draguta, S. Thakur, Y. V. Morozov, Y. Wang, J. S. Manser, P. V. Kamat and M. Kuno, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 715–721 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, aaa5333,  DOI:10.1126/science.aaa5333 .
K. Galkowski, A. A. Mitioglu, A. Surrente, Z. Yang, D. K. Maude, P. Kossacki, G. E. Eperon, J. T. W. Wang, H. J. Snaith, P. Plochocka and R. J. Nicholas, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 3222–3230 RSC .
R. Brenes, C. Eames, V. Bulović, M. S. Islam and S. D. Stranks, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706208 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Jauregui, A. Y. Joe, K. Pistunova, D. S. Wild, A. A. High, Y. Zhou, G. Scuri, K. De Greve, A. Sushko, C.-H. Yu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, D. J. Needleman, M. D. Lukin, H. Park and P. Kim, Science, 2019, 366, 870–875 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, G. Scuri, J. Sung, R. J. Gelly, D. S. Wild, K. De Greve, A. Y. Joe, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, P. Kim, M. D. Lukin and H. Park, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2020, 124, 027401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dreessen, D. Pérez-del-Rey, P. P. Boix and H. J. Bolink, J. Lumin., 2020, 222, 117106 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, T. De Rosia and K. Weeks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 24389–24396 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stolterfoht, V. M. Le Corre, M. Feuerstein, P. Caprioglio, L. J. A. Koster and D. Neher, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2887–2892 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, X. Wen, C. F. J. Lau, T. Young, J. Yun, M. A. Green, S. Huang and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 9060–9068 RSC .
D. L. Jacobs, M. A. Scarpulla, C. Wang, B. R. Bunes and L. Zang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7893–7902 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu and J.-X. Cheng, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 152, 020901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Simpson, B. Doughty, B. Yang, K. Xiao and Y.-Z. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3041–3047 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nah, B. Spokoyny, C. Stoumpos, C. M. M. Soe, M. Kanatzidis and E. Harel, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 285–288 CrossRef CAS .
O. F. Williams, N. Zhou, J. Hu, Z. Ouyang, A. Kumbhar, W. You and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2019, 123, 11012–11021 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Snaider, Z. Guo, T. Wang, M. Yang, L. Yuan, K. Zhu and L. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1402–1408 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Y. Wan, M. Yang, J. Snaider, K. Zhu and L. Huang, Science, 2017, 356, 59–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, J. S. Manser, Y. Wan, P. V. Kamat and L. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nah, B. M. Spokoyny, C. M. M. Soe, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and E. Harel, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 1044–1048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Gabriel, E. M. Grumstrup, J. R. Kirschbrown, C. W. Pinion, J. D. Christesen, D. F. Zigler, E. E. M. Cating, J. F. Cahoon and J. M. Papanikolas, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3079–3087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Simpson, B. Doughty, B. Yang, K. Xiao and Y.-Z. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1725–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Munson, G. S. Doucette, E. R. Kennehan, J. R. Swartzfager and J. B. Asbury, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 7061–7073 CrossRef CAS .
G. Batignani, G. Fumero, A. R. Srimath Kandada, G. Cerullo, M. Gandini, C. Ferrante, A. Petrozza and T. Scopigno, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1971 CrossRef .
A. A. Bakulin, O. Selig, H. J. Bakker, Y. L. A. Rezus, C. Müller, T. Glaser, R. Lovrincic, Z. Sun, Z. Chen, A. Walsh, J. M. Frost and T. L. C. Jansen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3663–3669 CrossRef CAS .
R. Szostak, J. C. Silva, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, M. M. Soares, R. O. Freitas, A. Hagfeldt, H. C. N. Tolentino and A. F. Nogueira, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw6619 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jha, H.-G. Duan, V. Tiwari, P. K. Nayak, H. J. Snaith, M. Thorwart and R. J. D. Miller, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 852–860 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdellah, A. M. El-Zohry, L. J. Antila, C. D. Windle, E. Reisner and L. Hammarström, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1226–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Guo, A. Mannodi-Kanakkithodi, J. Gong, Y. Xia, C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, B. T. Diroll, J. B. Ketterson, G. P. Wiederrecht, T. Xu, M. K. Y. Chan, M. G. Kanatzidis and R. D. Schaller, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 482 CrossRef .
D. A. Long, New York, 1977, 1–12 Search PubMed .
W. Yu, J. Zhou and A. E. Bragg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1321–1328 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ferrante, A. Virga, L. Benfatto, M. Martinati, D. De Fazio, U. Sassi, C. Fasolato, A. K. Ott, P. Postorino, D. Yoon, G. Cerullo, F. Mauri, A. C. Ferrari and T. Scopigno, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, A. J. Neukirch, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, M. Lai, S. R. Ellis, D. Dietze, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang, S. Tretiak and R. A. Mathies, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2525 CrossRef PubMed .
T. J. Magnanelli and A. E. Bragg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 438–445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Bragg, W. Yu, J. Zhou and T. Magnanelli, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 3990–4000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma and L.-W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 248–253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. A. Taylor, D. Tiwari, M. Duchi, P. M. Donaldson, I. P. Clark, D. J. Fermin and T. A. A. Oliver, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 895–901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Park, N. Kornienko, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, M. Lai, J. B. Neaton, P. Yang and R. A. Mathies, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4151–4157 CrossRef CAS .

          P. R. Griffiths, J. A. De Haseth and J. D. Winefordner, Fourier Transform Infrared Spectrometry, Wiley,  2007 Search PubMed .
J. Idígoras, A. Todinova, J. R. Sánchez-Valencia, A. Barranco, A. Borrás and J. A. Anta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13583–13590 RSC .
Z. Gan, Z. Yu, M. Meng, W. Xia and X. Zhang, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 031107 CrossRef .
C. Müller, T. Glaser, M. Plogmeyer, M. Sendner, S. Döring, A. A. Bakulin, C. Brzuska, R. Scheer, M. S. Pshenichnikov, W. Kowalsky, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7835–7841 CrossRef .
T. Glaser, C. Müller, M. Sendner, C. Krekeler, O. E. Semonin, T. D. Hull, O. Yaffe, J. S. Owen, W. Kowalsky, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2913–2918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sendner, P. K. Nayak, D. A. Egger, S. Beck, C. Müller, B. Epding, W. Kowalsky, L. Kronik, H. J. Snaith, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 613–620 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Wang, M. Wagner, Y. Yan, D. S. Jakob and X. G. Xu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700255 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Nowak, W. Morrison, H. K. Wickramasinghe, J. Jahng, E. Potma, L. Wan, R. Ruiz, T. R. Albrecht, K. Schmidt, J. Frommer, D. P. Sanders and S. Park, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501571 CrossRef .
F. Huth, A. Govyadinov, S. Amarie, W. Nuansing, F. Keilmann and R. Hillenbrand, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3973–3978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao and E. E. M. Chia, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1900783 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, L. Men, Z. Liu, Y. Mudryk, X. Zhao, Y. Yao, J. M. Park, R. Shinar, J. Shinar, K.-M. Ho, I. E. Perakis, J. Vela and J. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, A. Solanki, M. Manjappa, S. Ramesh, Y. K. Srivastava, P. Agarwal, T. C. Sum and R. Singh, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaax8821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lan, B. J. Dringoli, D. A. Valverde-Chávez, C. S. Ponseca, M. Sutton, Y. He, M. G. Kanatzidis and D. G. Cooke, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5558 CrossRef PubMed .
C. La-o-vorakiat, H. Xia, J. Kadro, T. Salim, D. Zhao, T. Ahmed, Y. M. Lam, J.-X. Zhu, R. A. Marcus, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle and E. E. M. Chia, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1–6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Park, A. R. Kim, J. T. Hong, J. Y. Park, S. Lee and Y. H. Ahn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 401–406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng and L.-w. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1219–1230 RSC .
E. Cinquanta, D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, M. Gandini, M. J. P. Alcocer, Q. A. Akkerman, C. Vozzi, L. Manna, F. De Angelis, A. Petrozza and S. Stagira, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 122, 166601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Kim, N. Y. Ha, J.-Y. Park, S. Lee, D.-S. Kim and Y. H. Ahn, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 6690–6696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chu, Q. Zheng, O. V. Prezhdo, J. Zhao and W. A. Saidi, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaw7453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Lee, D.-H. Cho, J. M. Bae, M. E. Kim, J. Park and Y.-D. Chung, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104855 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS .
B. G. Alberding, A. J. Biacchi, A. R. Hight Walker and E. J. Heilweil, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15395–15406 CrossRef CAS .
I. Maeng, Y. M. Lee, J. Park, S. R. Raga, C. Kang, C.-S. Kee, B. D. Yu, S. Hong, L. K. Ono, Y. Qi, M.-C. Jung and M. Nakamura, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 5811 CrossRef PubMed .
C. La-o-vorakiat, T. Salim, J. Kadro, M.-T. Khuc, R. Haselsberger, L. Cheng, H. Xia, G. G. Gurzadyan, H. Su, Y. M. Lam, R. A. Marcus, M.-E. Michel-Beyerle and E. E. M. Chia, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wehrenfennig, M. Liu, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2269–2275 RSC .
C. Wehrenfennig, G. E. Eperon, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1584–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Tennyson, T. A. S. Doherty and S. D. Stranks, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 573–587 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Berhe, W.-N. Su, C.-H. Chen, C.-J. Pan, J.-H. Cheng, H.-M. Chen, M.-C. Tsai, L.-Y. Chen, A. A. Dubale and B.-J. Hwang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 323–356 RSC .
M. Kumar, A. Dubey, N. Adhikari, S. Venkatesan and Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3134–3159 RSC .
W. Gao, P. Tieu, C. Addiego, Y. Ma, J. Wu and X. Pan, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9590 CrossRef .
K. Cao, S. T. Skowron, J. Biskupek, C. T. Stoppiello, C. Leist, E. Besley, A. N. Khlobystov and U. Kaiser, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaay5849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-C. Chen, C. Zhu, E. R. White, C.-Y. Chiu, M. C. Scott, B. C. Regan, L. D. Marks, Y. Huang and J. Miao, Nature, 2013, 496, 74–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Z. Chen, Y. Han, P. Deb, H. Gao, S. Xie, P. Purohit, M. W. Tate, J. Park, S. M. Gruner, V. Elser and D. A. Muller, Nature, 2018, 559, 343–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Li, W. Huang, Z. Zhang, G. Chen, H. Wang, G.-H. Wu, N. Rolston, R. Vila, W. Chiu and Y. Cui, Joule, 2019, 3, 2854–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, O. Dyck, W. Ming, M.-H. Du, S. Das, C. M. Rouleau, G. Duscher, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 32333–32340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Bischak, C. L. Hetherington, H. Wu, S. Aloni, D. F. Ogletree, D. T. Limmer and N. S. Ginsberg, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1028–1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, A. Adhikari, B. S. Shaheen, H. Yang and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 985–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Geuchies, C. van Overbeek, W. H. Evers, B. Goris, A. de Backer, A. P. Gantapara, F. T. Rabouw, J. Hilhorst, J. L. Peters, O. Konovalov, A. V. Petukhov, M. Dijkstra, L. D. A. Siebbeles, S. van Aert, S. Bals and D. Vanmaekelbergh, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 1248–1254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bals, S. Van Aert, C. P. Romero, K. Lauwaet, M. J. Van Bael, B. Schoeters, B. Partoens, E. Yücelen, P. Lievens and G. Van Tendeloo, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. U. Rothmann, J. S. Kim, J. Borchert, K. B. Lohmann, C. M. O’Leary, A. A. Sheader, L. Clark, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston, P. D. Nellist and L. M. Herz, Science, 2020, 370, eabb5940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Zhu, L. Liu, X. Ying, C.-E. Hsiung, R. Sougrat, K. Li and Y. Han, Science, 2018, 359, 675–679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adrian, J. Dubochet, J. Lepault and A. W. McDowall, Nature, 1984, 308, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Li and Y. S. Meng, Joule, 2018, 2, 2225–2234 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ballauff and Y. Lu, Polymer, 2007, 48, 1815–1823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tidhar, E. Edri, H. Weissman, D. Zohar, G. Hodes, D. Cahen, B. Rybtchinski and S. Kirmayer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13249–13256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, B. Han, Q. Hu, M. Gu, Y. Zhu, W. Yang, Y. Zhou, D. Luo, F.-Z. Liu, R. Cheng, R. Zhu, S.-P. Feng, A. B. Djurišié, T. P. Russell and Z. He, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 991–1002 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Dutta, N. K. Noel and C. B. Arnold, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 5980–5986 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and P. Gao, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 010901 CrossRef CAS .

          D. B. Williams and C. B. Carter, Transmission electron microscopy, Springer,  1996, pp. 3–17 Search PubMed .
W. van der Stam, J. J. Geuchies, T. Altantzis, K. H. W. van den Bos, J. D. Meeldijk, S. Van Aert, S. Bals, D. Vanmaekelbergh and C. de Mello Donega, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 4087–4097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Divitini, S. Cacovich, F. Matteocci, L. Cinà, A. Di Carlo and C. Ducati, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15012 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Jeangros, M. Duchamp, J. Werner, M. Kruth, R. E. Dunin-Borkowski, B. Niesen, C. Ballif and A. Hessler-Wyser, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7013–7018 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Jung, D. Kim, S. Kim, J. Park, V. P. Dravid and B. Shin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802769 CrossRef .
H. Guthrey and J. Moseley, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903840 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras, N. Schäfer, T. Rissom, M. N. Kelly, J. Haarstrich, C. Ronning, G. S. Rohrer and A. D. Rollett, Acta Mater., 2016, 118, 244–252 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abou-Ras and T. Kirchartz, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 6127–6139 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Hudak, J. Song, H. Sims, M. C. Troparevsky, T. S. Humble, S. T. Pantelides, P. C. Snijders and A. R. Lupini, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5873–5879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jesse, B. M. Hudak, E. Zarkadoula, J. Song, A. Maksov, M. Fuentes-Cabrera, P. Ganesh, I. Kravchenko, P. C. Snijders, A. R. Lupini, A. Y. Borisevich and S. V. Kalinin, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 255303 CrossRef PubMed .
O. F. Mohammed, D.-S. Yang, S. K. Pal and A. H. Zewail, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7708–7711 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, V. A. Melnikov, J. I. Khan and O. F. Mohammed, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3884–3890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho, T. Y. Hwang and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 2094–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, H. Yu, Y. Li, A. Hu, J. Wang, G. Lu, X. Li, H. Yang, L. Dai, S. Wang and Q. Gong, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 2932–2938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Najafi, T. D. Scarborough, J. Tang and A. Zewail, Science, 2015, 347, 164–167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Gabriel, J. R. Kirschbrown, J. D. Christesen, C. W. Pinion, D. F. Zigler, E. M. Grumstrup, B. P. Mehl, E. E. M. Cating, J. F. Cahoon and J. M. Papanikolas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1336–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cho, T. Y. Hwang and A. H. Zewail, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 2094–2099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. El-Zohry, B. S. Shaheen, V. M. Burlakov, J. Yin, M. N. Hedhili, S. Shikin, B. Ooi, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, Chem, 2019, 5, 706–718 CAS .
O.-H. Kwon, B. Barwick, H. S. Park, J. S. Baskin and A. H. Zewail, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3557–3562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Carbone, B. Barwick, O.-H. Kwon, H. S. Park, J. Spencer Baskin and A. H. Zewail, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 468, 107–111 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Howard, R. Lahoti and M. S. Leite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Si, S. Zhang, S. Ma, Z. Xiong, A. Kausar, Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, A. Sattar, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903922 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Leblebici, L. Leppert, Y. Li, S. E. Reyes-Lillo, S. Wickenburg, E. Wong, J. Lee, M. Melli, D. Ziegler, D. K. Angell, D. F. Ogletree, P. D. Ashby, F. M. Toma, J. B. Neaton, I. D. Sharp and A. Weber-Bargioni, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, Y. Zhou, N. P. Padture and B. D. Huey, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, H. Lee and J. Y. Park, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 891–896 CrossRef .
A. Gomez, S. Sanchez, M. Campoy-Quiles and A. Abate, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 94–100 CrossRef CAS .
O. S. Game, J. A. Smith, T. I. Alanazi, M. Wong-Stringer, V. Kumar, C. Rodenburg, N. J. Terrill and D. G. Lidzey, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10943–10956 RSC .
K.-D. Park, O. Khatib, V. Kravtsov, G. Clark, X. Xu and M. B. Raschke, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2621–2627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chu, M. Yang, P. Schulz, D. Wu, X. Ma, E. Seifert, L. Sun, X. Li, K. Zhu and K. Lai, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 2230 CrossRef .
K. Kajimoto, K. Araki, Y. Usami, H. Ohoyama and T. Matsumoto, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2020, 124, 5063–5070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Weber, I. M. Hermes, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, C. Gort, V. W. Bergmann, L. Gilson, A. Hagfeldt, M. Graetzel, W. Tress and R. Berger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2404–2413 RSC .
B. Bahrami, A. H. Chowdhury, A. Gurung, S. Mabrouk, K. M. Reza, S. I. Rahman, R. Pathak and Q. Qiao, Nano Today, 2020, 33, 100874 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, N. J. Borys, C. Ko, J. Suh, W. Fan, A. Thron, Y. Zhang, A. Buyanin, J. Zhang and S. Cabrini, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
R. S. Alencar, C. Rabelo, H. L. Miranda, T. L. Vasconcelos, B. S. Oliveira, A. Ribeiro, B. C. Públio, J. Ribeiro-Soares, A. S. Filho and L. G. Cançado, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 7357–7364 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lee, B. G. Jeong, S. J. Yun, Y. H. Lee, S. M. Lee and M. S. Jeong, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9982–9990 CrossRef CAS .

          S. M. Anlage, V. V. Talanov and A. R. Schwartz, Scanning probe microscopy, Springer,  2007, pp. 215–253 Search PubMed .
S. R. Johnston, E. Y. Ma and Z.-X. Shen, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2018, 89, 043703 CrossRef .
S. Berweger, G. A. MacDonald, M. Yang, K. J. Coakley, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu, F. W. DelRio, T. M. Wallis and P. Kabos, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1796–1801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Weber, J. B. Schlager, N. A. Sanford, A. Imtiaz, T. M. Wallis, L. M. Mansfield, K. J. Coakley, K. A. Bertness, P. Kabos and V. M. Bright, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2012, 83, 083702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Jiang, C. Xiao, H. R. Moutinho, S. Johnston, M. M. Al-Jassim, X. Yang, Y. Chen and J. Ye, Sol. Energy, 2018, 162, 330–335 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, X. Chen, S. Mills, T. Ciavatti, Z. Yao, R. Mescall, H. Hu, V. Semenenko, Z. Fei, H. Li, V. Perebeinos, H. Tao, Q. Dai, X. Du and M. Liu, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 2645–2651 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maissen, S. Chen, E. Nikulina, A. Govyadinov and R. Hillenbrand, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1279–1288 CrossRef CAS .
W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel and S. Lee, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
P. Girard, Nanotechnology, 2001, 12, 485 CrossRef .
J. L. Garrett, E. M. Tennyson, M. Hu, J. Huang, J. N. Munday and M. S. Leite, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 2554–2560 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Almadori, D. Moerman, J. L. Martinez, P. Leclère and B. Grévin, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2018, 9, 1695–1704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Tennyson, B. Roose, J. L. Garrett, C. Gong, J. N. Munday, A. Abate and M. S. Leite, ACS Nano, 2018, 13, 1538–1546 Search PubMed .
K. Kaur, Nisika, A. H. Chowdhury, Q. Qiao and M. Kumar, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 854, 157160 CrossRef .
M. Vishwakarma, D. Varandani, C. Andres, Y. E. Romanyuk, S. G. Haass, A. N. Tiwari and B. R. Mehta, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 183, 34–40 CrossRef CAS .
D. U. Karatay, J. S. Harrison, M. S. Glaz, R. Giridharagopal and D. S. Ginger, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2016, 87, 053702 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Araki, Y. Ie, Y. Aso, H. Ohoyama and T. Matsumoto, Commun. Phys., 2019, 2, 1–8 CAS .
L. Collins, M. Ahmadi, T. Wu, B. Hu, S. V. Kalinin and S. Jesse, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8717–8729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Giridharagopal, J. T. Precht, S. Jariwala, L. Collins, S. Jesse, S. V. Kalinin and D. S. Ginger, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 2812–2821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Collins, M. Ahmadi, J. Qin, Y. Liu, O. S. Ovchinnikova, B. Hu, S. Jesse and S. V. Kalinin, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 445703 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Giessibl, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2003, 75, 949–983 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Coffey, O. G. Reid, D. B. Rodovsky, G. P. Bartholomew and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 738–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shao and R. Zenobi, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 37–61 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, D. Y. Lee, M. G. Kang, Y. Koo, T. Kim and K.-D. Park, Nanophotonics, 2020, 9, 3089–3110 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Katzenmeyer, V. Aksyuk and A. Centrone, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 1972–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tuteja, P. Koirala, V. Palekis, S. MacLaren, C. S. Ferekides, R. W. Collins and A. A. Rockett, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 7020–7024 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Jiang, J. Moseley, C. Xiao, S. Harvey, S. Farrell, E. Colegrove, W. K. Metzger and M. M. Al-Jassim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 209, 110468 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Jakob, H. Wang and X. G. Xu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4839–4848 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Ding, J. An, J. B. Xu, C. Li and R. Y. Zeng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223109 CrossRef .
E. N. Esfahani, A. Eshghinejad, Y. Ou, J. Zhao, S. Adler and J. Li, Microsc. Today, 2017, 25, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Yang, A. Bhatnagar, Z.-D. Luo and M. Alexe, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 43070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Heiderhoff, T. Haeger, N. Pourdavoud, T. Hu, M. Al-Khafaji, A. Mayer, Y. Chen, H.-C. Scheer and T. Riedl, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 28306–28311 CrossRef CAS .
B. Voigtländer, V. Cherepanov, S. Korte, A. Leis, D. Cuma, S. Just and F. Lüpke, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2018, 89, 101101 CrossRef .
M.-C. Shih, S.-S. Li, C.-H. Hsieh, Y.-C. Wang, H.-D. Yang, Y.-P. Chiu, C.-S. Chang and C.-W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 1154–1160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Velasco, L. Ju, D. Wong, S. Kahn, J. Lee, H.-Z. Tsai, C. Germany, S. Wickenburg, J. Lu, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zettl, F. Wang and M. F. Crommie, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1620–1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Stecker, K. Liu, J. Hieulle, R. Ohmann, Z. Liu, L. K. Ono, G. Wang and Y. Qi, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12127–12136 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Cocker, V. Jelic, M. Gupta, S. J. Molesky, J. A. J. Burgess, G. D. L. Reyes, L. V. Titova, Y. Y. Tsui, M. R. Freeman and F. A. Hegmann, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 620–625 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sahare, P. Ghoderao, S. B. Khan, Y. Chan and S.-L. Lee, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 15970–15992 RSC .
U. Dasgupta, A. Bera and A. J. Pal, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 582–591 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maturová, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1385–1392 CrossRef PubMed .
L. She, M. Liu, X. Li, Z. Cai and D. Zhong, Surf. Sci., 2017, 656, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .
B. Murali, S. Dey, A. L. Abdelhady, W. Peng, E. Alarousu, A. R. Kirmani, N. Cho, S. P. Sarmah, M. R. Parida, M. I. Saidaminov, A. A. Zhumekenov, J. Sun, M. S. Alias, E. Yengel, B. S. Ooi, A. Amassian, O. M. Bakr and O. F. Mohammed, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 1119–1126 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, S. Vishwanath, X. Liu, H. Zhou, S. M. Eichfeld, S. K. Fullerton-Shirey, J. A. Robinson, R. M. Feenstra, J. Furdyna, D. Jena, H. G. Xing and A. C. Kummel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4258–4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Dasgupta, S. Chatterjee and A. J. Pal, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 353–360 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, U. Dasgupta and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20177–20187 CrossRef CAS .
G. Paul, S. Chatterjee, H. Bhunia and A. J. Pal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 20194–20199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ju, J. Velasco, E. Huang, S. Kahn, C. Nosiglia, H.-Z. Tsai, W. Yang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Crommie, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 348–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, D. Wong, J. Velasco Jr, J. F. Rodriguez-Nieva, S. Kahn, H.-Z. Tsai, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zettl, F. Wang, L. S. Levitov and M. F. Crommie, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 1032–1036 Search PubMed .
J. Velasco, J. Lee, D. Wong, S. Kahn, H.-Z. Tsai, J. Costello, T. Umeda, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, A. Zettl, F. Wang and M. F. Crommie, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5104–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, M. Müller, Y. Sun, I. Hamada, A. Hammud, M. Wolf and T. Kumagai, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 5725–5731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yang, G. Chen, A. Ghafoor, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, J. Yang, V. Sandoghdar, J. Aizpurua, Z. Dong and J. G. Hou, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 693–699 CrossRef CAS .
C. Motta, F. El-Mellouhi, S. Kais, N. Tabet, F. Alharbi and S. Sanvito, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, H.-S. Kim, H. Lin, M. V. Lee, Y. Li, N.-G. Park and Y. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 16049–16054 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Yost, A. Pimachev, C.-C. Ho, S. B. Darling, L. Wang, W.-F. Su, Y. Dahnovsky and T. Chien, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 29110–29116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hieulle, X. Wang, C. Stecker, D.-Y. Son, L. Qiu, R. Ohmann, L. K. Ono, A. Mugarza, Y. Yan and Y. Qi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3515–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Palotas, X. Yuan, T. Hou, H. Lin, Y. Li and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2060–2065 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Hill, A. F. Rigosi, K. T. Rim, G. W. Flynn and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4831–4837 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wieghold, N. Shirato, V. Rose and L. Nienhaus, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 125303 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garg and K. Kern, Science, 2020, 367, 411–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Reddy, K. Wang, Z. Kudyshev, L. Zhu, S. Yan, A. Vezzoli, S. J. Higgins, V. Gavini, A. Boltasseva, P. Reddy, V. M. Shalaev and E. Meyhofer, Science, 2020, 369, 423–426 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Newbury* and N. W. M. Ritchie, Scanning, 2013, 35, 141–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sezen and S. Suzer, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 534, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .

          M. K. Miller, Atom probe tomography: analysis at the atomic level, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
K. Nomoto, H. Sugimoto, A. Breen, A. V. Ceguerra, T. Kanno, S. P. Ringer, I. P. Wurfl, G. Conibeer and M. Fujii, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 17845–17852 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kohl, N. A. Rivas, J. de Wild, D. G. Buldu, G. Birant, G. Brammertz, M. Meuris, F. U. Renner, J. Poortmans and B. Vermang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 5120–5125 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Harvey, Z. Li, J. A. Christians, K. Zhu, J. M. Luther and J. J. Berry, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28541–28552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. M. Fiducia, B. G. Mendis, K. Li, C. R. M. Grovenor, A. H. Munshi, K. Barth, W. S. Sampath, L. D. Wright, A. Abbas, J. W. Bowers and J. M. Walls, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 504–511 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Sina, P. Parikh, T. Uekert, B. Shahbazian, A. Devaraj and Y. S. Meng, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5594–5600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Keller, R. Schlesiger, I. Riedel, J. Parisi, G. Schmitz, A. Avellan and T. Dalibor, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 592–598 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Poplawsky, W. Guo, N. Paudel, A. Ng, K. More, D. Leonard and Y. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gratia, G. Grancini, J.-N. Audinot, X. Jeanbourquin, E. Mosconi, I. Zimmermann, D. Dowsett, Y. Lee, M. Grätzel, F. De Angelis, K. Sivula, T. Wirtz and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15821–15824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lin, N. Sakai, P. Da, J. Wu, H. C. Sansom, A. J. Ramadan, S. Mahesh, J. Liu, R. D. J. Oliver, J. Lim, L. Aspitarte, K. Sharma, P. K. Madhu, A. B. Morales-Vilches, P. K. Nayak, S. Bai, F. Gao, C. R. M. Grovenor, M. B. Johnston, J. G. Labram, J. R. Durrant, J. M. Ball, B. Wenger, B. Stannowski and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2020, 369, 96–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Dang, K. Wang, M. Ghasemi, M.-C. Tang, M. De Bastiani, E. Aydin, E. Dauzon, D. Barrit, J. Peng, D.-M. Smilgies, S. De Wolf and A. Amassian, Joule, 2019, 3, 1746–1764 CrossRef CAS .
W.-C. Lin, H.-Y. Chang, K. Abbasi, J.-J. Shyue and C. Burda, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600673 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, X. Meng, Y. Bai, S. Xiao, C. Hu, Y. Yang, H. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1103–1111 RSC .
K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, N. Mine, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Abate, M. Saliba, W. Tress, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6306–6314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Michałowski, W. Kaszub, P. Knyps, K. Rosiński, B. Stańczyk, K. Przyborowska and E. Dumiszewska, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37694–37698 CrossRef .
V. S. Smentkowski, G. Zorn, A. Misner, G. Parthasarathy, A. Couture, E. Tallarek and B. Hagenhoff, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2013, 31, 030601 CrossRef .
D. E. Swanson, J. R. Sites and W. S. Sampath, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 389–394 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng, E. Colegrove, J. N. Duenow, J. Moseley and W. K. Metzger, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 128, 053102 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kumar, M. Pfeffer, B. Willsch, O. Eibl, L. Yedra, S. Eswara, J.-N. Audinot and T. Wirtz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 160, 398–409 CrossRef .
J. A. Whitby, F. Östlund, P. Horvath, M. Gabureac, J. L. Riesterer, I. Utke, M. Hohl, L. Sedláček, J. Jiruše, V. Friedli, M. Bechelany and J. Michler, Adv. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2012, 2012, 180437 Search PubMed .
W. D. A. Rickard, S. M. Reddy, D. W. Saxey, D. Fougerouse, N. E. Timms, L. Daly, E. Peterman, A. J. Cavosie and F. Jourdan, Microsc. Microanal., 2020, 26, 750–757 CrossRef PubMed .
N. A. Rivas, A. Babayigit, B. Conings, T. Schwarz, A. Sturm, A. Garzón Manjón, O. Cojocaru-Mirédin, B. Gault and F. U. Renner, PLoS One, 2020, 15, e0227920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. L. Man, A. Margiolakis, S. Deckoff-Jones, T. Harada, E. L. Wong, M. B. M. Krishna, J. Madéo, A. Winchester, S. Lei, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan and K. M. Dani, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 36–40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. S. Doherty, A. J. Winchester, S. Macpherson, D. N. Johnstone, V. Pareek, E. M. Tennyson, S. Kosar, F. U. Kosasih, M. Anaya, M. Abdi-Jalebi, Z. Andaji-Garmaroudi, E. L. Wong, J. Madéo, Y.-H. Chiang, J.-S. Park, Y.-K. Jung, C. E. Petoukhoff, G. Divitini, M. K. L. Man, C. Ducati, A. Walsh, P. A. Midgley, K. M. Dani and S. D. Stranks, Nature, 2020, 580, 360–366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Holmér, L. Zeng, T. Kanne, P. Krogstrup, J. Nygård, L. de Knoop and E. Olsson, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 175–181 CrossRef .
H. Dong, F. Xu, Z. Sun, X. Wu, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhai, X. D. Tan, L. He, T. Xu, Z. Zhang, X. Duan and L. Sun, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 950–956 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, M. P. Bucknall, T. L. Young, M. Zhang, L. Hu, J. Bing, D. S. Lee, J. Kim, T. Wu, N. Takamure, D. R. McKenzie, S. Huang, M. A. Green and A. W. Y. Ho-Baillie, Science, 2020, 368, eaba2412 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yang, W. Ming, M.-H. Du, J. K. Keum, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, J. Huang, D. B. Geohegan, X. Wang and K. Xiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705801 CrossRef .
S. Ternes, T. Börnhorst, J. A. Schwenzer, I. M. Hossain, T. Abzieher, W. Mehlmann, U. Lemmer, P. Scharfer, W. Schabel, B. S. Richards and U. W. Paetzold, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901581 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alsari, O. Bikondoa, J. Bishop, M. Abdi-Jalebi, L. Y. Ozer, M. Hampton, P. Thompson, M. T. Hörantner, S. Mahesh, C. Greenland, J. E. Macdonald, G. Palmisano, H. J. Snaith, D. G. Lidzey, S. D. Stranks, R. H. Friend and S. Lilliu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 383–393 RSC .
A. A. Sutanto, R. Szostak, N. Drigo, V. I. E. Queloz, P. E. Marchezi, J. C. Germino, H. C. N. Tolentino, M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. F. Nogueira and G. Grancini, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 3992–3998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Helmich, D. C. Walter, D. Bredemeier, R. Falster, V. V. Voronkov and J. Schmidt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2018, 185, 283–286 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Juarez-Perez, Z. Hawash, S. R. Raga, L. K. Ono and Y. Qi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3406–3410 RSC .
A. E. Williams, P. J. Holliman, M. J. Carnie, M. L. Davies, D. A. Worsley and T. M. Watson, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19338–19346 RSC .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, E. Salager, A. Rakhmatullin, C. P. Grey, L. Emsley and S. D. Stranks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 7813–7826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Piveteau, M. Aebli, N. Yazdani, M. Millen, L. Korosec, F. Krieg, B. M. Benin, V. Morad, C. Piveteau, T. Shiroka, A. Comas-Vives, C. Copéret, A. M. Lindenberg, V. Wood, R. Verel and M. V. Kovalenko, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1138–1149 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Kubicki, D. Prochowicz, A. Hofstetter, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and L. Emsley, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7232–7238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. El-Hajje, C. Momblona, L. Gil-Escrig, J. Ávila, T. Guillemot, J.-F. Guillemoles, M. Sessolo, H. J. Bolink and L. Lombez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2286–2294 RSC .
B. Chen, J. Peng, H. Shen, T. Duong, D. Walter, S. Johnston, M. M. Al-Jassim, K. J. Weber, T. P. White, K. R. Catchpole, D. Macdonald and H. T. Nguyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802790 CrossRef .
A. M. A. Leguy, J. M. Frost, A. P. McMahon, V. G. Sakai, W. Kockelmann, C. Law, X. Li, F. Foglia, A. Walsh, B. C. O’Regan, J. Nelson, J. T. Cabral and P. R. F. Barnes, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7124 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Breternitz, M. Tovar and S. Schorr, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 16613 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Wienhold, X. Jiang and P. Müller-Buschbaum, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2020, 116, 120504 CrossRef CAS .
A. Urbina, J. Abad, A. J. Fernández Romero, J. S. Lacasa, J. Colchero, J. F. González-Martínez, J. Rubio-Zuazo, G. R. Castro and P. Gutfreund, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 191, 62–70 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, L.-M. Wang, S. Liu, L. Guo, S. Dong, G. Ma, Z. Cao, X. Zhan, X. Gu, T. Zhu, Y.-P. Cai and F. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3637–3646 CrossRef CAS .
H. V. Alberto, R. C. Vilão, R. B. L. Vieira, J. M. Gil, A. Weidinger, M. G. Sousa, J. P. Teixeira, A. F. da Cunha, J. P. Leitão, P. M. P. Salomé, P. A. Fernandes, T. Törndahl, T. Prokscha, A. Suter and Z. Salman, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 025402 CrossRef CAS .
R. García-Rodríguez, D. Ferdani, S. Pering, P. J. Baker and P. J. Cameron, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22604–22614 RSC .
K. Miyata, T. L. Atallah and X.-Y. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701469 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Stern, L. P. René de Cotret, M. R. Otto, R. P. Chatelain, J.-P. Boisvert, M. Sutton and B. J. Siwick, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 165416 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Yang, S. Xiao, N. Zhang, Y. Fan, G. Qu and Q. Song, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 10653–10661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Alvertis, R. Pandya, C. Quarti, L. Legrand, T. Barisien, B. Monserrat, A. J. Musser, A. Rao, A. W. Chin and D. Beljonne, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 084103 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Schleder, A. C. M. Padilha, C. M. Acosta, M. Costa and A. Fazzio, JPhys Mater., 2019, 2, 032001 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, R. Begum, J. Fu, Q. Xu, T. M. Koh, S. A. Veldhuis, M. Grätzel, N. Mathews, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4197 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lenert, D. M. Bierman, Y. Nam, W. R. Chan, I. Celanović, M. Soljačić and E. N. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 126–130 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kraemer, Q. Jie, K. McEnaney, F. Cao, W. Liu, L. A. Weinstein, J. Loomis, Z. Ren and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16153 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Cotfas, P. A. Cotfas, D. Ciobanu and O. M. Machidon, J. Energy Eng., 2017, 143, 04017055 CrossRef .
H. Lakhotia, H. Y. Kim, M. Zhan, S. Hu, S. Meng and E. Goulielmakis, Nature, 2020, 583, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, C. Liu, C. A. Gadre, L. Gu, T. Aoki, T. C. Lovejoy, N. Dellby, O. L. Krivanek, D. G. Schlom, R. Wu and X. Pan, Nature, 2021, 589, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Zheng, K. Yang, Q. Zhang, A. A. Shah, Z. Wu, Y. Sun, L. Feng, D. Chen, Z. Xiao, S. Lu, Y. Li and K. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaay4275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Burnett and P. Withers, Nat. Mater., 2019, 1 Search PubMed .
K. Hatakeyama-Sato and K. Oyaizu, Commun. Mater., 2020, 1, 49 CrossRef .
L. C. O. Tiong, J. Kim, S. S. Han and D. Kim, npj Comput. Mater., 2020, 6, 196 CrossRef .
R. Courtland, Nature, 2018, 563, 462–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. M. Ross, Liquid Cell Electron Microscopy, Cambridge University Press,  2016 Search PubMed .
T. J. Baker, S. N. Saadatmand, D. W. Berry and H. M. Wiseman, Nat. Phys., 2021, 17, 179–183 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Vishal Kumar
	Vishal Kumar completed his Master's degree in Mechanical Engineering in 2020 from the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, India. He worked under the supervision of Prof. Mukesh Kumar for his Master's dissertation. His research interest includes the synthesis and optics of carbon quantum dot-metal nanoparticle hybrid nanostructures for enhanced optoelectronic applications.

Nisika
	Nisika received her Master's Degree in Physics (Materials Science) in 2015 from Kurukshetra University, India. Then she joined the research group of Prof. Mukesh Kumar at the Indian Institute of Technology Ropar (India) as a doctoral student in 2016. Her major research interests include interface engineering in optoelectronic devices especially photovoltaic devices.

Mukesh Kumar
	Dr Mukesh Kumar received his PhD degree in physics from IIT Delhi, India, in 2010. He was a Research Associate with South Dakota State University, Colorado School of Mines, and National Renewable Energy Laboratory, USA, from 2010 to 2013. He is currently an Associate Professor at the Department of Physics, IIT Ropar, India. His current research focuses on the synthesis of low cost kesterite-based solar cells, solar blind photodetector devices and 2D materials for optoelectronic and sensing applications.

Broader context
Photovoltaic (PV) materials, which convert solar energy directly into electricity, offer a rational solution to meet the challenge of the increasing global energy demand sustainably. However, even after substantial research efforts, their solar conversion efficiencies remain lower than the maximum theoretical achievable efficiencies (especially, for newly developed PV technologies such as perovskite and kesterite materials). The performance of solar cell modules is mainly influenced by the carrier dynamics, which span the order of magnitudes across the spatial, energy and temporal resolutions. Herein, we presented the role of various advanced characterization tools developed over the last decade in enhancing the performance of solar cell modules based on various PV materials. The integration of ultrafast spectroscopic techniques with conventionally used characterization tools enables probing of PV materials to track the carrier dynamics with high spatial, temporal and energy resolution simultaneously. Additionally, newly developed in situ and operando characterization tools provide unique means to map the evolution of the structural, electrical, and optical properties of materials in parallel when exposed to various external stimuli such as temperature, humidity, and pressure. These recently developed characterization tools provide unique and invaluable insights to improve the carrier management and provide pathways to design new materials for developing next-generation high-performance solar cell modules.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Theoretical SQL and maximum attained efficiencies for various photovoltaic materials. (b) I–V characteristics of different photovoltaic materials with attained fraction of SQL with trend showing increasing solar conversion efficiency with suitable carrier and light management. Reproduced with permission.15 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Various phenomena probed at various temporal, spatial and energy resolutions using different material characterization tools. Reproduced with permission.25 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.26 Copyright 2016, Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 2  Various transient spectroscopic techniques. (a) Schematic depicting the carrier population for pump–probe (PP), (b) TA spectra of perovskite films for varying carrier concentrations (n0), and time-dependent Te for (c) varying pump power (at same n0) and (d) varying n0 (same pump power). Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Schematic description of pump–push–probe (PPP) spectroscopy, (f) TA spectra of perovskite films at different pump–probe delays, (g) push induced signals with and without bphen and (h) dependence of varying push energies on hot electron harvesting. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Schematic representation of pump–dump–probe (PDP) spectroscopy, time- and frequency-resolved data for P3HT films for (j) PP probing and (k) PDP probing for dump pulse arriving at a delay of 2 ps and (l) comparison of spectral peak evolution dynamics for stimulated emission (SE) and non-equilibrium ground state (NGS) traces. Reproduced with permission.48 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  Charge dynamics on different time scales. (a) Charge generation in GaAs via the promotion of an electron from the VB to CB (interband transition) and acceleration of electrons within the band (intraband motion). Corresponding energy-dependent delay between applied field and absorption response. Reproduced with permission.60 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Variation in ΔE(t,τp) with time and corresponding spectral amplitude for different pump–probe delay times, representing photoconductivity buildup in perovskite nanocrystal. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) Auger recombination time and hot carrier lifetime variation with nanocrystal volume and size for perovskite nanocrystals. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) PL decay dynamics for CH3NH3PbIXCl3−X perovskite with different carrier transport layers at the grain boundary for varying film morphologies. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2014, the American Chemical Society. (e) Charge transport within multicrystalline solar cell layers calculated using transient photocurrent and photovoltage profiles under varying steady-state bias voltage. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2016, the American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 4  Transient X-ray characterization. (a) Carrier dynamics study using ultrafast XUV spectroscopy with positive and negative differential absorption representing VB (holes) and CB (electrons), respectively. Reproduced with permission.90 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Charge transfer rate for different blends of PCPDTBT:PCMB thin films at different photon energies probed using core-hole clock spectroscopy. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) XANES spectra of RuN3 adsorbed on TiO2 nanoparticle (top) and corresponding XAS spectra for RuN3 and RuN3+ (below) to compute the change in bond length during charge transfer. Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright 2011, the American Chemical Society. (d) XPS study to analyse the evolution of Pb 5d (Pb2+ and Pb) with time to monitor the phase separation and chemistry of mixed-ion perovskite films at the molecule level under visible irradiation. Reproduced with permission.98 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) Photoemission images at different pump energies and delay times as a function of electron momentum using time and angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy in GaAs. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2020, the American Physical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Advanced X-ray characterization tools. (a) GIWAXS t-T profile of strained perovskite film for high-temperature yellow to black phase transition and corresponding anisotropic lattice parameter and unit cell distortions (Δd⊥) of the black phase. Reproduced with permission.122 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Residual strain distribution at varying depths in strain-free and compressive strained perovskite thin film studied using GIXRD and various tilt angles. Reproduced with permission.123 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Variation in diffraction peak intensity for varying Q (A−1) and pump energy to study photo-induced perovskite nanocrystal on ultrashort timescales. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Combining ultrafast XES and XDS spectroscopy to study photoinduced electron transfer in RuCo complex, XES kinetic trace at 6.93 keV with single-exponential fit (top) and (ΔT(t)) kinetics with corresponding single-exponential fit (down). Reproduced with permission.32 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Volumetric rendering of band-mapping measurement before and after irradiation (top) and corresponding differential excited state signal around K/K′ and Σ/Σ′ points in the first conduction band (bottom) for mapping 3D band structure in WeS2. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2020, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 6  Characterization in the visible energy range. (a) In situ PL profiles to determine rapid halide exchange under continuous irradiation (406 nm). Reproduced with permission.142 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. (b) Time-resolved PL profiles for CH3NH3PbI3 thin films at varying temperatures and corresponding carrier lifetimes for various phases of a perovskite film at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission.146 Copyright 2017, US National Academy of Sciences. (c) Absorption normalized PL maps and corresponding calculated quantum yield map over deposited hybrid perovskite thin films. Reproduced with permission.152 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (d and e) Spatial control over excitons at MoSe2–WSe2 interface by controlling the power intensity of the irradiating laser and in-plane electric field (by applying voltage Vds) measured using PL spectrometry. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (f) Transient absorption microscopy (TAM) images of pristine perovskite and perovskite/CTL thin films to determine charge generation and migration on ultrafast timescales over different spatial positions, where the colour signifies the sign and amplitude of the TAM signal. Reproduced with permission.164 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  Advanced characterization tools in IR region. (a) TR-IR spectrum using IR probe and 532 nm pump and corresponding spectrum spanning mid-IR spectral region (inset depicting 2D freq-time plot). Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (b) Ultrafast Raman spectra for perovskite films under resonant (Epump = 2.46 eV) and non-resonant conditions (Epump = 1.86 eV) and corresponding average over different probes. Reproduced with permission.174 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Real-time observation of organic cations in perovskite lattice, 2D-IR response at 1 ps delay and corresponding cross-sections of 2D spectrum at varying delay times. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2015, the American Chemical Society. AFM topography and IR broadband images and their corresponding topographical and IR response together with nano-FTIR spectra at various points for pristine CsFAMA (d) and degraded CsFAMA (e) perovskite thin films. Reproduced with permission.176 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 8  Probing solar harvesting materials via THz spectroscopy. (a) Schematic of exciton dispersion, depicting various internal quantum transitions, (b) temperature-dependent Δσ(ω) spectra probed at various energies and (c) time-dependent Δσ(ω) measurements for varying excitation energies. Reproduced with permission.199 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Time-resolved THz reflectivity measurements for perovskite film and corresponding 2D frequency/delay time map and dephasing time profile for coherent and in-coherent oscillations. Reproduced with permission.201 Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) THz conductivity measurements with varying temperatures for different parameters such as phonon-oscillator strength (ωp,m2), phonon resonance frequency (fm) and phonon-scattering rate (Γm) of low and high THz phonon modes. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (f) THz absorption maps for perovskite film undergoing annealing (90 °C) and upon UV irradiation (355 nm). Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  Electron microscopy of various solar harvesting materials. (a) Comparison of single-layered MoS2 images taking via different EM techniques. Reproduced with permission.221 Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Comparison of standard TEM cryo-EM images of perovskite NWs exposed to electron dose (∼ 500 e− Å−2) and cryo-images taken under varying UV irradiation and exposure to moisture. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (c) STEM images depicting variation in vertical phase morphology and microstructure before and after exposure to air (after 6 days) and EELS mapping revealing formation of Pb particles after exposure to air. Reproduced with permission.223 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (d) CL images of whole film (top and middle) and single domain (below) taken at varying times of light soaking, depicting real-time phase separation in lead halide perovskite films. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (e) 4D S-UEM images under photoirradiation with low contrast regions (left) depicting energy loss and high contrast regions (right) depicting energy gain. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  3D imaging of photovoltaic materials using AFM. (a) Schematic of photoconductive-AFM revealing photocurrent variation throughout perovskite thin film and corresponding photocurrent variation at the grain boundaries and individual grains. Reproduced with permission.260 Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (b) Topography of monolayer WSe2 together with nano-PL image and corresponding nano-PL and nano-Raman spectra. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (c) MIM (MIM-Im and MIM-Re) images of perovskite films over the span of 6 days, revealing photoconductivity degradation on exposure to humidity. Reproduced with permission.265 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Time-resolved EFM for mapping carrier dynamics in sulfonated polyaniline thin films and EFM images at different time stamps just after applying a pump bias (−2 V) and removing the bias. Reproduced with permission.266 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (e) Time-resolved KPFM on perovskite film, revealing the hysteresis dynamics, CPD imaging at initial and 2.5 ms after applying bias across device and corresponding ΔCPD profiles taken at various times, revealing the dynamics of the internal electric field generated due to carrier motion. Reproduced with permission.267 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

AFM	∼0.1–5 nm	AFM tip is scanned over sample in contact, non-contact or tapping mode	3D topography of sample	
291

Conductive-AFM (c-AFM)	∼0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA	Voltage is applied between tip and sample where tip is in contact with sample	Local current variation over the sample surface	
258

Photoconductive-AFM (pc-AFM)	∼ 0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA	AFM tip scans the sample under light irradiation with applied bias between tip and sample	Local current variations in the sample under irradiation	
292

Tomographic photoconductive-AFM (T-AFM)	∼0.1–5 nm + ∼pA–500 nA	Nanomachining of each layer of sample with AFM tip while taking pc-AFM measurements over individual layers	Local current variation across the surface and depth of the sample	
260

Transient photo-response AFM (TP-AFM)	∼10 nm + ∼pA–500 nA + ∼10 μs	Synchronisation of laser illumination with AFM tip, with bias applied between tip and sample	Mapping local carrier dynamics, diffusion length, transport time	
268

Tip-enhanced Raman spectroscopy (TERS)	Raman spectroscopy with ∼10 nm spatial resolution	Raman laser is incorporated with AFM tip made of metal (generally gold)	Probing local vibrational modes of sample	
293

Tip-enhanced PL spectroscopy (TEPL)	PL spectroscopy with ∼10 nm spatial resolution	PL laser is incorporated with AFM tip made of metal (generally gold)	Probing local optical properties along with carrier recombination and trapping dynamics of sample	
294

Photothermal-induced resonance microscopy (PTIR)	Chemical characterization with ∼20 nm spatial resolution	Measuring transient thermal expansion induced by laser pulses incorporated with AFM tip	Mapping chemical distribution or heterogeneity even within same grains	
295

Scattering scanning near-field optical microscopy (s-SNOM)	Chemical or electrical characterization with ∼20 nm spatial resolution	Laser light is focused through aperture of size smaller than excitation wavelength (generally through hole in AFM tip)	Mapping local chemical environment or conductivity of the sample	
176,277

Scanning microwave impedance microscopy (s-MIM)	Electrical properties with ∼100 nm spatial resolution	Microwaves are focused on the sample via AFM tip	Mapping local electrical conductivity and permittivity of the sample	
296

Scanning capacitance microscopy (SCM)	Electrical properties with ∼1–10 nm spatial resolution	Bias is applied between sample and metallic tip and a sensitive capacitance sensor records capacitance	Mapping local electrical conductivity and doping concentration of sample	
297

Kelvin probe force microscopy (KPFM)	Surface potential with ∼10–20 nm spatial resolution	AFM tip is scanned over sample in non-contact mode with applied bias between tip and sample	Mapping local surface potential variation of the sample	
298

Time-resolved KPFM (tr-KPFM)	Surface potential with ∼20–50 nm spatial and ∼10 μs temporal resolution	Integrating fast free force recovery (F3R) with KPFM instrument	Mapping local surface potential and carrier dynamics of the sample	
288

Electrostatic force microscopy (EFM)	Electrostatic force with ∼15–50 nm spatial resolution	Bias is applied between sample and tip, with tip hovering over sample	Mapping local electrical properties of the sample	
299

Time-resolved EFM (tr-EFM)	Electrostatic force with ∼50–100 nm spatial and ∼10–100 ns temporal resolution	Signal averaging and analysing the cantilever motion scanned over tip with bias applied between tip and sample	Mapping carrier dynamics of specific sites of the sample	
286

Scanning thermo-ionic microscopy (STIM)	Electrochemistry with ∼10–100 nm spatial resolution	Uses strain induced via thermal loads applied via laser or resistive heating, incorporated with AFM	Tracking ionic motion locally under the influence of thermal loading	
300

Piezoelectric force microscopy (PFM)	∼10–20 nm	Pre-set AC bias is applied between tip and sample, which expands or compresses the sample	Imaging and manipulation of piezoelectric or ferroelectric domains	
301

Scanning thermal microscopy (SThM)	Temperature with ∼20–50 nm spatial resolution	Nanofabricated thermal probe fitted with resistive elements is placed at tip, which is scanned over sample	Imaging of local temperature and thermal conductivity of the sample	
302


 	Fig. 11  3D topography and bandgap mapping using STM. (a) Bandgap mapping of different grains with different thickness of PbI2 layer under dark and light irradiation. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (b) Precise control of doping in graphene/BN layers by application of STM tip voltage excitation and corresponding dI/dV maps for pristine graphene under STM voltage (Vg = −20 V) and map of same region after erasing the doping pattern by applying an STM voltage (Vg = 0 V). Reproduced with permission.305 Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (c) Real-time STM images showing ionic motion in perovskite films due to the presence of various vacancies. Reproduced with permission.306 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (d) STM topography scan and corresponding THz-STM images of InAs nanodots for THz pulse arriving 500 fs before (−500 fs) and after (+500 fs) the pump pulse. Reproduced with permission.307 Copyright 2013, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 12  Elemental mapping in photovoltaic materials. (a) APT specimens of reference (before) and aged (after) CIGS sample treated with potassium (Cu+: blue, H3O+: red, and K+: grey iso-surface), with water molecules being accumulated on the grain boundaries at the K iso-surfaces. Reproduced with permission.335 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. (b) TOF-SIMS 3D tomography maps for two-cation perovskite processed at different temperatures to investigate the phase segregation and cation distribution along the surface and depth of the film. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. (c) SIMS map and corresponding effective bandgap distribution map for Se-doped CdTe films. Reproduced with permission.337 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 13  Recent advances in material characterization tools. (a) Electron transport mapping in InSe/GaAs heterostructure, with electron accumulation (red region) and depletion (blue region) at varying times after photoexcitation. Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (b) In situ TEM images of single TiO2 nanowire/CdSe QD heterojunction for varying interface areas and corresponding plot for photocurrent density vs change in interface area. Reproduced with permission.358 Copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) GC-MS analysis for quantifying the decomposition products released by annealing precursors and using different cell structures for perovskite solar cells. Reproduced with permission.359 Copyright 2020, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Schematic showing structural orthorhombic to tetragonal phase transition and corresponding neutron diffraction maps showing transition of MA+ cation with increasing temperature in CH3NH3PbBr3 perovskite single crystals. Reproduced with permission.360 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 14  Various prospects for the development of next-generation characterization tools capable of probing material properties multidimensionally with high spatial, temporal and energy resolution. Reproduced with permission.379 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. Reproduced with permission.380 Copyright 2018, the American Physical Society. Reproduced with permission.381 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.382 Copyright 2020, American Institute of Physics. Reproduced with permission.383 Copyright 2019, Institute of Physics.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
