IR spectroscopic investigations of chemical and photochemical reactions on metal oxides: bridging the materials gap  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00914J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00914J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1875-1932IR spectroscopic investigations of chemical and photochemical reactions on metal oxides: bridging the materials gap

        
          
            Yuemin 
            Wang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Christof 
            Wöll
          
          
        
      *
      Institute of Functional Interfaces, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, 76344, Germany. E-mail: yuemin.wang@kit.edu; christof.woell@kit.edu
Received 
      14th December 2016
    First published on 21st February 2017AbstractIn this review, we highlight recent progress (2008–2016) in infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRRAS) studies on oxide powders achieved by using different types of metal oxide single crystals as reference systems. Precise polarization- and azimuth-dependent IRRAS data recorded for single crystal substrates has allowed for fundamental insights into the surface chemistry and photochemistry of numerous probe molecules on various surfaces exposed by three very important metal oxides (ZnO, TiO2, and CeO2). When using carbon monoxide (CO) as a probe molecule, deep insight into the role of defects in the surface chemistry of oxides can be gained, as will be demonstrated by the characterization of different imperfections (e.g., O vacancies, nanofacets) present at oxidic samples. In addition, photostimulated excitations, e.g., electron or hole polaronic trap states, can be studied using IR-spectroscopy. Reliable and comprehensive reference data acquired for different oxide monocrystal model systems enables atomic-level insights into the structural, electronic, and reactive properties of the substantially more complex nanostructured oxide particles. We foresee that future application of IR spectroscopy to other challenging systems, including polar oxide surfaces with their often complex reconstruction patterns and oxide-supported highly dispersed metal particles, will provide a major advancement in the understanding of heterogeneous catalysts (539 references).
Yuemin Wang
Yuemin Wang is head of the research group “Surface Catalysis” at the Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2015). He studied Chemistry at the Nankai University and received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max-Planck Society in 2002. He joined the Ruhr-University of Bochum as a group leader in 2004. He served as Visiting Professor at the University of Technology Dalian (2008–2010). His research interests are in the area of Surface Chemistry and Catalysis, especially vibrational spectroscopic studies on metal oxides and metal–organic frameworks.
Christof Wöll
Christof Wöll is Director of the Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG) at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2009). He studied Physics at the University of Göttingen and received his PhD in 1987 at the Max-Planck-Institute of Dynamics and Self-Organization. In 1996 he took over the chair for Physical Chemistry at the University of Bochum (until 2009) and founded the collaborative research center SFB 558. He has received several awards including the van't Hoff Prize of the German Bunsen Association. He is a member of the “Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina” and is the Spokesperson of the German Physical Society (DPG) Surface Physics Division (since 2016). His research activities focus on fundamental processes in Surface Physics and Surface Chemistry, in particular development and advancement of techniques for the characterization of molecular adsorbates and oxide surfaces as well as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs and SURMOFs).
1. Introduction
Metal oxides represent one of the most important solid materials based on countless applications in many different areas, such as heterogeneous catalysis, photocatalysis, and the fabrication of active and passive components in electronic devices and chemical sensors.1–33 Metal oxides play an important role in virtually every heterogeneous catalyst, either as the active component or as a support material. Despite the huge research efforts of many groups, a fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry of real oxide catalysts is still lacking and many crucial questions remain unanswered. This is due to the great complexity of nanostructured oxide materials that expose different surface terminations as well as various types of defects (e.g., oxygen vacancies, edges, corners, surface reconstruction, and nanofacets). Thus, the fabrication and engineering of complex oxide nanoparticles is still largely based on empirical rules. Innovative advancements toward the rational design of oxide systems require a detailed atomic-scale understanding, first of monocrystalline model systems and then of the complex oxide nanoparticles—often decorated with metal clusters—used in technical applications.
The most efficient method to elucidate the surface properties of nanostructured oxide catalysts, as well as to unravel fundamental processes governing heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis, is the surface science approach, which is based on thorough investigations of well-defined, macroscopic model catalysts.34–38 Experimental results obtained from a surface science study are also required for a thorough theoretical analysis, because a meaningful validation of electronic structure calculations is only possible for substrates with well-defined structures.18,39,40 However, although the surface science approach has been very successful in metals,34,38,40–43 fundamental studies on oxide single-crystal surfaces are challenging due to the inherent experimental difficulties arising from the insulating and semiconducting properties of many oxide materials.
These problems have motivated research into a special type of model system, i.e., oxide thin films grown epitaxially on appropriate metal substrates as an alternative. This approach has been tremendously successful over the past three decades, with the publication of numerous studies characterizing the structural, electronic, and reactive properties of oxide thin films as well as the various metal nanoparticles supported on them.13,18,28,32,33,44–53 Note, however, that the surface properties of oxide thin films (in particular those with thicknesses less than 20 nm) can be strongly influenced by the metal substrates. As a result, the question of how different the properties of oxide thin films are from the corresponding bulk material is up for debate. In the case of ZnO, for example, the growth of thin films with a thickness below 10 layers leads to the formation of a new thin-film modification of ZnO that substantially deviates from the bulk wurtzite structure.54–62 In this review, we mainly focus on bulk samples; oxidic thin films will only be addressed very briefly.
Infrared spectroscopy is among the most informative techniques for understanding adsorption and reactions on solid surfaces.63–72 Unlike the multitude of studies reported for metals, however, infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy (IRRAS) studies on well-defined surfaces of oxide single crystals are rather scarce. This lack of information is due to the extremely low reflectivity in the infrared regime of dielectric substrates, which until recently has believed to render the surface science approach for the understanding of heterogeneous catalysis on oxides practically impossible.73 In 2002, Kattner and Hoffmann estimated that the optical properties of oxides lead to a decrease of the signal-to-noise (S/N) ratio by one to two orders of magnitude relative to metals (for a detailed analysis, see Section 2.5). As a result of these considerations, they concluded that “it would make the detection of monolayer quantities of a medium-to-weak adsorber on a dielectric surface a hopeless task”.73 IR data for molecular adsorbates on well-defined oxide single-crystal surfaces are urgently needed as reference, since the application of IR spectroscopy to oxide powders—the most technologically relevant form of oxides—is straightforward and many data are available for the interaction of molecular adsorbates on such nanoparticles. Without a proper reference, identification of the many vibrational bands observed for molecules adsorbed on the different surfaces and facets exposed by oxide particles would be very prone to misassignments.
The last decade has seen substantial progress in instrumentation, and a number of groups report obtaining high-quality data for molecular adsorbates on oxide monocrystals. Here, we will demonstrate these recent advances and discuss in some detail data acquired using a sophisticated ultrahigh vacuum IR spectroscopy (UHV-FTIRS) apparatus74 on metal oxides in two relevant forms: single crystals and polycrystalline nanoparticles (Fig. 1). The innovative design not only allows us to record IRRAS data at grazing incidence on model oxide catalysts, but also enables transmission IR experiments on oxide powders supported on an inert metal mesh. In particular, this apparatus collects high-quality IR data with extremely high sensitivity and stability, which are essential for probing molecular species adsorbed on insulating oxide single-crystal surfaces.74
 Fig. 1  The UHV apparatus “THEO” at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG), combining a state-of-the-art FTIR spectrometer (Bruker Vertex 80v) with a multi-chamber UHV system (Prevac). (1) Vacuum FTIR spectrometer. (2) IR chamber. (3) Electron analyzer (VG Scienta R4000). (4) Analysis chamber (XPS, UPS, and Auger). (5) Preparation chamber equipped with LEED, AES, and TDS. (6) Distribution chamber. (7) Load-lock. (8) Magazine. 
This paper presents an overview of recent progress in IR spectroscopic investigations on three of the most important metal oxides, ZnO, TiO2, and CeO2. We present results obtained for both oxide single crystals and nanoparticles.58,75–99 In addition to the results obtained in our laboratory, we include IRRAS results on TiO2 single-crystal surfaces that have been reported by several other groups.100–112 We demonstrate that the surface properties and chemical reactivity of oxide single-crystal surfaces can be successfully monitored by polarization-dependent IRRAS using various probe molecules (CO, CO2, NO, H2O, CH2O, HCOOH, and CH3OH). We will particularly focus on the identification of hydroxyl species formed by the interaction of oxides with water or alcohols. Furthermore, we discuss the corresponding chemical reactions that occur when these adsorbates interact with the perfect and defective parts of the oxide surfaces. In many cases, the IRRAS studies need to be complemented by other surface-sensitive techniques, e.g., high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy (HREELS)69,113,114 and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). In addition, theoretical calculations based on density functional theory (DFT) are often required to interpret the IRRAS data.
We also show that IR spectroscopy is a powerful technique for obtaining fundamental information on the photochemical properties of metal oxides. In the past few years, IR data have provided detailed insight into the nature of oxide photocatalytic activity and the mechanisms of photoinduced reactions at oxide surfaces. In particular, it was found that IR spectroscopy is well suited to probing electrons or holes in various polaronic trap states generated in oxides via UV irradiation.83,85 Overall, on the basis of thorough IRRAS studies conducted on oxide single-crystal surfaces, substantial progress in the atomic-level understanding of the surface chemistry and photochemistry of more complex oxide nanoparticles has been achieved. In a number of cases, the results obtained for single crystals could be used to interpret results from powder particles. Such a bridging of the materials gap between macroscopic monocrystals and nanostructured oxide powders is now within sight.
1.1 Using CO as a probe molecule to characterize perfect and defective oxide substrates
Many of the results described in this review were obtained using carbon monoxide (CO) as a probe molecule, since this small molecule can be adsorbed in a straightforward fashion on both oxide powders and single-crystal substrates. However, note that a careful investigation into the adsorption of this diatomic molecule on oxide surfaces is not a straightforward task. The study of CO adsorbed on single-crystal surfaces of bulk oxide materials is severely hampered since typical electron-based spectroscopies, including photoelectron spectroscopies, can lead to an electron-stimulated desorption of CO adsorbates. Thus, investigations of CO adlayers on oxides with these standard techniques face severe difficulties. For example, the characterization of CO adsorbed on ZnO single-crystal surfaces by XPS using a standard laboratory X-ray source is only possible when measurements are recorded in ambient (typically 1 × 10−6 mbar) CO.115,116 CO from the background is needed to replenish the adlayer as it continuously loses molecules via electron-stimulated desorption. Without this, the coverage of CO would be quickly reduced, making further characterizations with XPS (or any other techniques) impossible. The same electron-stimulated desorption, caused by either primary or secondary excitations, also applies to CO on other oxides, so that a reliable characterization of CO adlayers with XPS, LEED, and UPS is a difficult task.
In addition, typically the binding energies of CO adsorbed on oxide substrates are rather low. This thus requires the sample to be cooled to cryogenic temperatures to achieve high coverage formation. The low binding energy and the above-mentioned technical difficulties are why there is a lack of information on CO adsorbed on single-crystal oxide surfaces. Even recent publications state (2015) “However, as with H2, CO does not adsorb on either CeO2(111) or CeO2(100) in UHV,”28 or (2013) “under UHV conditions CO does not adsorb on CeO2(111).”117
In fact, IRRAS is the ideal method for an unambiguous characterization and identification of CO adsorbates on oxide single-crystal surfaces. Observation of the characteristic stretch frequency unambiguously identifies CO, and from the shifts relative to the gas phase value, it is possible to draw important conclusions on the type of bonding to the substrate. In addition, IR photons are sufficiently low in energy to make photo-induced desorption very unlikely. As discussed below, the application of IRRAS to oxide single-crystal surfaces suffers from major technical problems; however, recently these problems have been overcome. One goal of this review is to collect recent, precise IRRAS characterizations of CO and other small adsorbates on oxide surfaces, in order to provide the basis for a reliable identification of IRRAS data recorded for CO adsorbed on oxide particles.
2. Zinc oxide (ZnO)
2.1 Background
Zinc oxide (ZnO) is a direct, wide bandgap metal oxide with desirable physical and chemical properties.10,15,118–122 It plays a crucial role in heterogeneous catalysis and has been used either as a catalyst or as a support material for many industrial processes. The most important of these processes is the conversion of syngas (mixture of H2, CO, and CO2) into methanol, the third most important product worldwide.119,122 The nature of ZnO-related active components in methanol synthesis is still under debate and represents one of the most interesting topics in catalysis.123,124 In addition, ZnO is an important photoactive oxide and has been applied in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC).125–127 However, fundamental insights into the photochemical properties of this material are largely missing.
Bulk ZnO exposes a wurtzite crystal structure in which both zinc and oxygen atoms are fourfold coordinated. The mixed-terminated nonpolar ZnO(100) surface is the most energetically favorable and exposes Zn–O ion pairs. In these pairs, both ions are one-fold coordinatively unsaturated and act as Lewis acid and base sites, respectively.128 In contrast to the nonpolar (100) surface, the two polar ZnO surfaces—oxygen-terminated (000) and Zn-terminated (0001)—are electrostatically unstable due to uncompensated surface charges and are expected to undergo reconstruction.11,54,129–134 It has been proposed that the clean adsorbate-free O–ZnO surface exhibits a (1 × 3) structure with a high abundance of surface O vacancies,129 while the clean Zn–ZnO surface is stabilized by a high concentration of one-layer O-terminated step edges yielding Zn-deficient, triangularly shaped nanopits.135 The surface structure of both polar O and Zn–ZnO surfaces is sensitive to the presence of adsorbates.129,135–137 Recent experimental and theoretical work54,131–134 has allowed us to gain deeper insight into the stabilization mechanisms for complex polar ZnO surfaces. The surface chemistry of various ZnO single crystals has been described in more detail in a previous review.11 Here, we focus on IR spectroscopic studies of ZnO systems ranging from single crystals to more complex nanostructured particles in both heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis.
2.2 CO on stoichiometric ZnO
The adsorption of CO on ZnO surfaces is important, not only because CO is a component of syngas, the gas mixture (H2/CO/CO2) from which methanol synthesis is produced on an industrial scale,119 but also because CO is an almost ideal probe molecule for characterizing active sites exposed by oxide surfaces.70,138,139 In general, the interaction between CO and metal oxides is complex and can occur via different processes. (i) Typically, upon CO adsorption, the electrostatic interaction with the electric field of surface metal cations occurs due to the polarization of the adsorbed CO molecule (Stark effect). This strengthens the internal C–O bond, thus causing a shift of the CO stretch mode to a higher frequency (blueshift) with respect to the gas phase value.70 (ii) In the presence of surface metal cations with empty orbitals (which act as Lewis acid sites), electrons can be donated from the CO 5σ orbital to the substrate. Given that the CO 5σ orbital has a weak antibonding nature, such an electron donation will result in a blueshift of the CO stretching frequency. (iii) In the reverse direction, electron back-donation from filled states in the substrate into the CO 2π* antibonding orbital may occur, which will weaken the force constant of the internal C–O bond and lead to a redshift in frequency. The latter reduction in the stretch frequency is characteristic of CO interactions with metal surfaces and is described in the context of the Blyholder model.140 Similar behavior is expected upon CO adsorption on reduced oxide surfaces, where the removal of O atoms leads to the formation of electron-rich metal cation sites. For transition metals in particular, the partially filled d orbitals provide binding sites for CO molecules.
Recently, the adsorption of CO on two mixed-terminated surfaces of zinc oxide, ZnO(100) and ZnO(110), was investigated by polarization-dependent IRRAS at different substrate temperatures.76 This extensive set of experiments enabled a thorough analysis of the coverage-dependent frequency shift of CO adsorbed at an oxide single-crystal surface. The IRRAS data display nearly the same vibrational features for CO adsorption on both nonpolar surfaces. At very low coverage (θ → 0), the isolated CO molecules (singletons) show only a single, well-defined IR band at 2192 cm−1, in good agreement with the frequency observed by HREELS for the ZnO(100) surface.141,142 Note, however, that the line width in the IRRAS data (about 2 cm−1) is substantially smaller than that in the HREELS experiments (∼25 cm−1).69,113,114 The rather large blueshift (49 cm−1) in the stretch frequency of CO adsorbed on these ZnO substrates, compared to the gas phase value, is attributed to a combination of two effects: electron donation from the CO 5σ orbital to the surface Zn cations (Lewis acid sites)143,144 and electrostatic interactions with the electric field of the substrate (Stark effect).145
Furthermore, the polarization-dependent IR data allows information to be inferred for the adsorption geometry of the surface-bound CO. For CO adsorption on both polar surfaces, only one negative CO band was detected for p-polarized light, while no signal was observed for s-polarized light. This indicates that the transition dipole moment (TDM) of the C–O stretch mode mainly interacts with the normal pn,z component of the incident light. These findings suggest that CO is bound to the surface Zn2+ sites on both nonpolar surfaces at an only slightly tilted geometry. A large tilt can be excluded, since for a substantial component of the TDM parallel to the surface, the CO stretch vibration should also be visible for s-polarized light. This conclusion is supported by DFT calculations, where CO is found to adsorb on both surfaces at a tilted geometry (30° for ZnO(100) and 41.4° for ZnO(110),146 see Fig. 2).
 Fig. 2  (a) IRRAS data recorded after exposing ZnO(100) to CO at 60 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured with p-polarized light incident along the [110] azimuth. (b) IRRAS data recorded after exposing ZnO(110) to different doses of CO at 110 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured with p-polarized light incident along the [0001] azimuth. The upper panel shows the adsorption geometry of CO on both mixed-terminated ZnO surfaces. Color code: oxygen (CO) = red, carbon = green, oxygen (ZnO) = red, zinc = gray (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.76 Copyright 2016, Elsevier). 
Interestingly, a substantial redshift, ∼22 cm−1 in frequency, was observed when the CO coverage was increased to saturation. For a full monolayer, the CO band was detected at ∼2170 cm−1 for both nonpolar ZnO surfaces. The coverage-induced frequency shift has been proposed to originate from lateral adsorbate–adsorbate interactions, including both dynamic and substrate-mediated static effects.147,148 For CO adsorbed on oxides, these two effects result in opposite frequency shifts. The dynamic interaction corresponds to dipole–dipole coupling between neighboring CO molecules, leading to a blueshift in frequency (as observed for CO/metal systems149). The coupling occurs when adjacent oscillators show the same intrinsic frequency and are oriented parallel to each other. The static shift is attributed to the interaction between CO adsorbates through the substrate and depends to the ability of the adsorbed molecules to transmit negative charge to the neighboring adsorption sites.150 This latter effect leads to a redshift in the ν(C–O) frequency with increasing coverage.
The total frequency shift of the CO band originates from the sum of the above two adsorbate–adsorbate interactions: Δν = Δνdyn + Δνstat. Considering CO adsorption on oxide (dielectric) substrates, the image dipoles, which provide an important contribution for CO/metal systems,151,152 are absent. In this case, the dynamic effect results from the direct (through-space) dipole–dipole coupling between adsorbed CO molecules. The contribution of the dynamic adsorbate–adsorbate interaction (Δνdyn = ν − ν0) can be estimated by the modified Hammaker equation:153  where ν0 is the frequency of isolated CO at coverage θ → 0 (singleton), αv is the dynamic polarizability, Σ0 is the direct dipole sum, and αe is the electronic polarizability. Based on the αv (0.057 Å3) and αe (1.89 Å3) values given in the literature,151 Δνdyn can be estimated to be +6.5 cm−1 at full monolayer for CO/ZnO(100). At θ = 1 ML, a total frequency shift Δν = −23 cm−1 was observed. This corresponds to a static shift (Δνstat = Δν − Δνdyn) of −29.5 cm−1. For the ZnO(110) surface, the Δν value is estimated to be −22 cm−1 (ν0 = 2192 cm−1, ν = 2170 cm−1 at θ = 1 ML) and Δνstat = −28.5 cm−1. These findings reveal that the substrate-mediated static interaction in CO adlayers is the dominant effect, whereas the contribution of the dynamic effect is rather small.76
The substantial CO frequency shift observed for CO adsorption on both nonpolar ZnO single-crystal surfaces is in excellent agreement with the IR results reported for ZnO nanoparticles.76,154–156 In these experiments, performed using ZnO powders exposed to CO, the frequency of the CO band decreased substantially from 2192 to 2168 cm−1 when the CO coverage increased to saturation (1 ML). These results indicate that the CO adsorption on nanostructured ZnO powders leads to the formation of a majority CO species adsorbed to the most abundant (100) facet (with a portion of the (110) surface). This conclusion, that the major fraction of the surfaces exposed by the ZnO nanoparticles belongs to these two mixed-terminated surfaces, is corroborated with results from transmission electron microscopy (TEM).157
2.3 Interaction of CO with coadsorbates on ZnO substrates
When chemical reactions occur on oxide powder catalysts under real conditions, different species are expected to coexist on the particle surfaces. Therefore, it is of great interest to study the interaction between CO and other coadsorbates on ZnO surfaces. Although it is tacitly assumed in most work that the binding energies of individual molecules on oxides are not substantially affected by the presence of coadsorbates, here we discuss a case in which such adsorbate–adsorbate interactions substantially affect the individual binding energies. In the following, we present a systematic UHV-FTIRS investigation of CO coadsorbed with CO2 on polycrystalline ZnO. In this case, the IR results revealed significant substrate-mediated interactions between the coadsorbates.92
Upon CO adsorption on the pristine ZnO nanoparticles at 110 K, an intense IR band was observed at 2187 cm−1. This band originated from a majority CO species bound to Zn2+ cation sites within (100) facets, which take up most of the ZnO powder particle surface area (see the discussion presented above and Fig. 3). When the ZnO powder samples are exposed to CO2 at 200 K, a large number of IR bands in the low-frequency regime (1600–1000 cm−1) are observed. These vibrations are assigned to various carbonate species (discussed in detail in the following section). Importantly, when the CO2-covered particles are subsequently exposed to CO, an additional CO band at 2215 cm−1 appears, which is substantially blueshifted relative to the 2187 cm−1 band for pure CO adlayers. The temperature-dependent IR results (see Fig. 3) reveal that the new CO species has stronger bonds to the substrate, and the corresponding vibrational band disappears only after heating to 200 K. This is in contrast to the 2187 cm−1 band, which disappears completely already after heating to 140 K. The obvious conclusion that the species of 2215 cm−1 is bound substantially stronger was corroborated by a different set of measurements that applied microcalorimetry and TPD to CO and CO2 adsorbates on ZnO powders.142 In this study, the adsorption energy of CO on CO2-modified ZnO was determined to be 45–65 kJ mol−1 (0.47–0.67 eV) depending on the coverage. This value is clearly larger than that measured for the CO2-free samples (about 35 kJ mol−1, 0.36 eV).142
 Fig. 3  (a) The CO region, and (b) the carbonate region of the UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles (A) to CO2 at 200 K in an UHV chamber (B). The sample was subsequently exposed to CO at 110 K (C) and heated to the indicated temperatures (D–M) (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.92 Copyright 2010, Elsevier). 
To clarify this unusual effect, observed for CO coadsorbed on the ZnO powders pretreated by exposure to CO2, we studied the coadsorption of CO and CO2 on ZnO model systems by HREELS and TPD.142 The HREELS data, recorded after CO adsorption on the CO2-modified ZnO(100) monocrystal surface, revealed a C–O vibration at 2200 cm−1 with a slight blueshift with respect to that for CO on pure ZnO(100) (2192 cm−1). The frequency shift was accompanied by a substantial increase in the binding energy, from 31 kJ mol−1 (0.32 eV) to ∼55 kJ mol−1 (0.57 eV). These findings are in excellent agreement with the coadsorption behavior of CO and CO2 on ZnO powder samples. On the basis of ab initio DFT calculations, the enhanced interaction between CO and ZnO with the blueshift in frequency was attributed to carbonate species formation via CO2 activation on ZnO(100), as discussed in the following section. Because of the carbonate formation, the Lewis acidity of the surface Zn cations adjacent to the carbonate species was enhanced, which—according to calculations—increased the 5σ donation from CO to the surface Zn2+ ions. The 5σ orbital is weakly antibonding, so the enhanced electron donation strengthened the internal C–O bond and resulted in a blueshift of the ν(C–O) band. In addition, this effect strengthened the interaction between the CO and surface Zn cations and thus led to an increase in the CO adsorption energy. Altogether, the IR results, in conjunction with other experimental and theoretical data, demonstrated that substrate-mediated cooperative effects might lead to substantial changes in the individual adsorbate binding energies. Such indirect intermolecular interactions need to be considered in a more detailed modeling of chemical processes on oxide surfaces.
2.4 CO on thin ZnO adlayers
The availability of reference data for CO adsorbed on well-defined single-crystal surfaces not only allows conclusions to be drawn regarding the surfaces exposed by ZnO powder particles, but also aids in the interpretation of data acquired for ZnO thin films. Previous studies have suggested that such ZnO coatings are present on the surfaces of Cu particles and are the active component of the Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalysts used for methanol synthesis under reaction conditions.158,159 It has also been proposed that the thin ZnO adlayers supported on different metal substrates adopt a depolarized structure that differs substantially from the wurtzite bulk.54–62 To address the nature of such thin ZnO films supported on Cu substrates, we conducted a thorough IRRAS study on the surface properties and chemical reactivity of thin ZnO layers formed by oxidation of a brass(111) single-crystal surface (Cu/Zn ratio 9:1) with molecular oxygen at elevated temperatures.58
The combined XPS and scanning tunnel microscopy (STM) investigations revealed that the exposure of the brass(111) substrate to O2 at room temperature resulted in the formation of a thin ZnO adlayer with an average thickness of about 1.7 Å, corresponding to about one monolayer. Oxidation of the brass substrate at higher temperatures (520 K) resulted in a slight (20%) increase in the ZnO adlayer thickness. The evolution of thin ZnO adlayers was monitored by IRRAS using CO as a probe molecule, with the corresponding results shown in Fig. 4. For the thickest ZnO adlayer (2 ML) prepared at 520 K, an intense CO band was observed at 2116 cm−1. This band exhibited an anomalous redshift of 50–70 cm−1 compared to the IR data for ZnO single-crystal surfaces, discussed above.76 The IR results for thinner ZnO layers formed at lower temperatures are fully consistent with those obtained at 520 K, as only a slight redshift of 8 cm−1 was found for the CO band. It should be noted that this redshifted CO band cannot be assigned to CO bound to Cu or oxidized Cu atoms, as confirmed by reference experiments for CO adsorption on the oxidized Cu(111) surface (see Fig. 4). The observation of only one CO vibrational band also indicates the presence of a closed ZnO film.
 Fig. 4  (a) Left: Comparison of RAIRS results for the adsorption of CO on brass(111) and Cu(111) surfaces (normalized representation of spectra). Right: Model of CO adsorption on the brass(111) surface. The corresponding values for the CO stretch frequency are indicated. (b) Theoretical results for the structure of a ZnO bilayer supported on a Cu(111) substrate; CO binds through its carbon atom to the top Zn cations. This new thin-film phase differs from wurtzite in both geometry and chemical activity (reproduced with permission from Schott et al.58 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH). 
In addition, temperature-dependent IR data revealed that the substantial redshift of the CO vibrational band, measured for the thin ZnO layer relative to wurtzite ZnO surfaces, was accompanied by a large increase in the CO binding energy to 0.54 eV. This fairly large value has to be compared to those reported for CO on various ZnO single-crystal surfaces: 0.32 eV for (100), 0.28 eV for Zn–ZnO(0001), and 0.18 eV for O–ZnO(000).11
Overall, these unexpected IRRAS data provide direct spectroscopic evidence that the thin ZnO adlayers must differ from normal wurtzite. An extensive set of DFT calculations supports this conclusion. The theoretical results demonstrated the strong interactions between thin layers of ZnO and the Cu(111) substrate, leading to the formation of a stable ZnO bilayer with a novel structure (see Fig. 4b). According to the calculation, the structure of this thin ZnO adlayer is substantially compressed relative to the wurtzite bulk, but is clearly not planar as in the graphitic ZnO films observed on Ag(111)60 and Pd(111) substrates.59 More importantly, the DFT data revealed a substantial charge transfer from the Cu(111) substrate to the ZnO adlayer, resulting in the formation of more electron-rich Znδ+ species. Note that such Znδ+ species has been proposed in previous work.123,158,159 In this case with the higher Zn electron density, one would expect an increase in the back-donation into the antibonding CO 2π* orbital, leading to a redshift of the CO stretch frequency and an increase in the CO binding energy. Indeed, the calculated frequency shows a pronounced redshift of 101 cm−1 relative to CO bound to wurtzite ZnO(100), and a binding energy of 0.52 eV that is increased by 0.16 eV relative to ZnO(100). These theoretical results are in good agreement with experimental observations.58
2.5 CO2 activation on ZnO
The activation of CO2 to yield valuable organic chemicals is among the most important and challenging topics in catalysis, considering limited fossil fuel resources and increased global warming caused by greenhouse gas emissions.160–166 The surface chemistry of CO2 on various model oxide surfaces (e.g., CaO, MgO, Cr2O3, RuO2, and PdO) has been the subject of a number of experimental studies.167–174 The interaction between CO2 and ZnO is of particular interest with regard to the synthesis of methanol from syngas (CO/CO2/H2) over ZnO-based catalysts (ZnO/Cu/Al2O3).123,124 Here, ZnO is the key component and it plays a crucial role in the activation of the rather inert CO2 molecule. The same statement applies to the interaction of methanol with ZnO substrates.175
We first briefly summarize the results of CO2 adsorption on various ZnO single-crystal surfaces. These investigations used HREELS in conjunction with He atom scattering (HAS), TPD, low-energy electron diffraction (LEED), XPS, and DFT calculations.90,171,176 The experimental and theoretical data consistently demonstrated that the stoichiometric, nonpolar ZnO(100) surface can activate CO2 even at low substrate temperatures (95 K), leading to the formation of an unusual tridentate carbonate species. DFT calculations for this system suggested a structural model in which the carbonate is bound to the surface O and Zn atoms by three covalent bonds involving the C and both O atoms of the adsorbed CO2 molecule (see Fig. 5a).171 Depending on the coverage and temperatures, two different, highly ordered carbonate structures were identified: a saturated, close-packed (1 × 1) phase at full monolayer (ML) coverage with a binding energy of 0.47 eV, and an open (2 × 1) adsorbate phase with a substantially higher binding energy of 0.7 eV.171
 Fig. 5  (a) Ball-stick model of the tridentate carbonated formed after CO2 adsorption on ZnO(100) (color code: red = oxygen, gray = zinc, black = carbon). (b) Calculated reflectivity difference between the clean (R0) and CO2-covered ZnO(100) substrate as a function of incidence angle for the p-polarized (n- and t-component: dashed lines, sum: solid line) and s-polarized (bold solid line) light at 1617 cm−1. The insets show the asymmetric and symmetric carboxylate vibrations, which are excited by s- and pn-light for light incident along the [110] direction. (c and d) Expected signals in IRRA spectra based on (left panel) calculations and (right panel) experimental IRRA spectra of CO2 on ZnO(100) at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with s- and p-polarized light at 100 K. The sketch shows the orientation of the tridentate on the surface with the arrows indicating the movement during the vibrations. The big light and dark gray arrows indicate the orientation of the transition dipole moment (TDM) of the vibrations. Together with the experimental data recorded for the ZnO(100) single crystal, we show ZnO powder particle spectra.90 (c) Incident beam along [0001] and (d) [110] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.84 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The clean adsorbate-free polar O–ZnO surface is stabilized by a severe restructuring, yielding a surface with a high concentration of surface O vacancies.11 This surface is also able to activate CO2 to yield a bidentate carbonate as the majority species. The thermal dissociation of this carbonate species was characterized by a broad CO2 desorption peak centered at 350 K. In addition, the impinging CO2 molecule can interact via its carbon atom with a single-surface O atom yielding a carbonate-like species. The latter is weakly bound to the surface and desorbs as CO2 at 150 K.90 These experimental results are supported by DFT calculations.177
The unusual adsorption geometry of tridentate carbonates on ZnO(100) derived by DFT calculations, as described above, is fully consistent with a recent IRRAS study presented by Buchholz et al.84 The aim of these detailed polarization- and azimuth-dependent IRRAS investigation was to provide a direct experimental determination of the adsorption geometry of CO2 on ZnO(100).
Before presenting these results, we first generally discuss how the orientation of molecular adsorbates is determined using polarization-dependent IRRAS for light incident along different azimuths of the substrates. Such a determination, which is not possible for metal surfaces due to the so-called surface selection rule178,179 (see below), is the basis for the huge potential of IR spectroscopy for characterizing molecular adsorbates on oxide single-crystal surfaces.
When applying IRRAS to molecular adsorbates on metal surfaces the surface selection rule has a number of implications: (I) only vibrational modes with a transition dipole moment (TDM) oriented perpendicularly to the metal substrate can be excited by p-polarized light. (II) The absorbance is always positive (i.e., the reflectivity is reduced at the position of the vibrational band). (III) Vibrations having a TDM oriented exclusively parallel to a metal substrate are invisible in IRRAS; furthermore, s-polarized light is completely screened by the metal electrons.
In contrast, for dielectrics and in particular for oxides, the situation is much more complex. Both s- and p-polarized components of the incident light can interact with adsorbate vibrations (Fig. 5b). The s-polarized light (E-vector, Es) is oriented parallel to the surface and perpendicular to the incidence direction. Interestingly, the sign of absorbance bands excited by s-polarized light (Es) is always negative, i.e., the reflectivity is increased at the position of the vibrational band. In the case of p-polarized light, the electric field vector must be decomposed into two components: one oriented parallel to the surface (tangential p-polarized light, Ep,t) and one normal to the surface (normal p-polarized light, Ep,n) (Fig. 5b). The sign of the IRRAS signals excited by the p-polarized components Ep,t and Ep,n depends on the incidence angle θ and the refractive index n of the substrate, but they are always opposite to each other; i.e., if Ep,t is negative then Ep,n is positive, and vice versa (Fig. 5b). The Ep,n component couples only to vibrations with a component of the TDM perpendicular to the surface. The component of the TDM parallel to the surface can be excited either by the Es or Ep,t component, depending on the azimuth orientation.
For a detailed quantitative analysis of the sign and intensity of the IRRAS bands, one has to calculate the reflectivity, e.g., using the three-phase model as described by Hansen180,181 and Mielezarski et al.182 for dielectric materials. Within this approach, the reflectivity difference ΔRi is calculated separately for each component i of the incident light (Es, Ep,t, and Ep,n), by subtracting the reflectivity of the adsorbate-covered substrate (Ri) from that of the clean substrate (R0i) according to the following formula:182ΔRi(θ) = R0i(θ) − Ri(θ)Ri(θ) = R0i(θ)/10ΔAi(θ)where  and  with the absorbance ΔAi      and  j = nj + ikjwhere nj is the refractive index of layer j,  denotes the complex index of refraction n + ik, k is the extinction coefficient, and d2 refers to the thickness of the adsorbate layer.
The left panels of Fig. 5c and d present the calculated reflectivity differences as a function of incidence angle θ for the p-polarized (ΔRpt, ΔRpn, and their sum ΔRp) and s-polarized (ΔRs) light at 1617 cm−1 arising from the asymmetric stretching mode νs(OCO) of carbonate. The corresponding ΔRi curves for the symmetric vibration νs(OCO) around 1340 cm−1 are virtually identical and are not displayed here. Based on the calculated ΔRi curves, we analyzed the sign and intensity of the IR bands considering the adsorption geometry of tridentate carbonate described in Fig. 5a. The carboxylate adopts an upright geometry with the backbone O–C–O plane oriented along the [0001] direction and perpendicular to the substrate. In this case, the TDM of the νs(OCO) vibration is perpendicular to the surface. We thus expect a negative signal for p-polarized light incident along either the [0001] or [110] azimuth at θ = 80°, due to the coupling to the normal component of the E vector Ep,n; this mode cannot be excited by s-polarized light for both azimuths. In contrast to νs(OCO), the TDM of the νas(OCO) mode is oriented parallel to the surface exactly along the [0001] direction. Consequently, this mode can couple to the tangential component Ep,t of p-polarized light incident along the [0001] azimuth, but cannot interact with the p-polarized light incident along the [110] azimuth. In addition, the νas(OCO) vibration can be excited by s-polarized light incident along the [110] azimuth, but no contribution is expected for s-polarized light incident along the [0001] direction. The calculated IRRAS data are summarized in the left panels of Fig. 5c and d.
The experimental IRRA spectra obtained by an exposure of 1.5 L CO2 at 100 K are illustrated in the right panels of Fig. 5c and d. For light incidence along the [0001] azimuth, the spectrum shows one negative band at 1344 cm−1 and one positive band at 1591 cm−1 arising respectively from the νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) vibrations, whereas these vibrations were not detected in the corresponding s-polarized spectrum. The IR data recorded for IR light incident along the [110] direction are rather different. In that case, we observe distinct negative bands at 1340 cm−1 in the p-polarized spectrum and at 1584 cm−1 in the s-polarized spectrum (Fig. 5d). Overall, the experimental results (as regards both, sign and intensity of the vibrational bands) are in excellent agreement with the calculated spectra, thus supporting the adsorption configuration of the unexpected tridentate carbonate as obtained from the DFT calculations.
In addition, the calculated IRRAS data reveal that the intensity of p-polarized IR bands on ZnO is substantially weaker (about two orders of magnitude) compared to that of metals,73 due to the absence of image dipoles in dielectric substrates. In fact, if the incidence angle is equal to the Brewster angle, no p-polarized IR signal is reflected and p-polarized IRRAS becomes impossible for such incidence angles. This low reflectivity of oxides for IR light explains why IRRAS investigations of oxide single-crystal surfaces are much more challenging than investigations of metals.
For comparison, the UHV-FTIRS data for CO2 adsorbed on ZnO nanoparticles are also displayed in Fig. 5. We systematically studied the activation of CO2 on pure and hydroxylated ZnO nanoparticles by UHV-FTIRS.90Fig. 6 presents a complete set of temperature-dependent IR results obtained after CO2 adsorption on ZnO powder particles at 100 K and its subsequent heating to the indicated temperatures. The interaction of CO2 with ZnO resulted in a large number of IR bands that strongly vary depending on the sample temperature. This indicated the coexistence of various CO2-related species with different binding energies. The detailed reference data acquired in our thorough investigation of CO2 adsorption on various ZnO single-crystal surfaces provided us with molecular-level insight into the surface chemistry of CO2 on more complex nanostructured ZnO powders. Overall, the activation of CO2 on pure and hydroxylated ZnO nanoparticles is extremely sensitive to the surface structure. The following different types of carbonate species were identified: (1) a tridentate carbonate as a majority species formed on the perfect ZnO(100) surface (1617/1343 cm−1 at 1 ML and 1590/1332 cm−1 at 0.5 ML); (2) a bidentate carbonate resulting from CO2 activation on O vacancy sites of the reconstructed polar O–ZnO surface (1621/1292 cm−1); and (3) additional monodentate (1543/1313 cm−1) or polydentate (1466/1386 cm−1) carbonate species formed via the interaction of CO2 with various types of defects, such as steps, edges, vacancies, and hydroxyl groups.89,90
 Fig. 6  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles (A) to 1 × 10−5 mbar CO2 at 100 K and then heating to (B) 100 K, (C) 180 K, and (D) 200 K. (b) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles to 1 × 10−4 mbar CO2 at room temperature in an UHV chamber and then heating to (A) 300 K, (B) 325 K, (C) 350 K, (D) 375 K, (E) 400 K, (F) 425 K, (G) 450 K, (H) 475 K, (I) 500 K, (J) 525 K, (K) 550 K, and (L) 600 K (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.90 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
The insights gained from these studies could also be used to characterize ZnO clusters embedded inside ZIF-8 metal–organic frameworks (MOFs). The surfaces exposed by these guest ZnO nanoparticles were characterized by UHV-FTIRS using CO2 as a probe molecule.91 Again, despite the great complexity of the corresponding IR data, we were able to precisely assign the vibrational bands based on the reference data recorded for ZnO single-crystal surfaces. Briefly, the IR results revealed that ZnO nanoparticles formed inside the pores of ZIF-8 exhibit a high population of both O–ZnO and Zn–ZnO polar surfaces as well as defect sites. This substantially differs from pure wurtzite ZnO powders exposing predominantly nonpolar ZnO(100) facets. This finding could be related to the reduced size of ZnO clusters and the caging effect of MOFs.91
2.6 CO oxidation to CO2 on Au/ZnO
The detailed results acquired using IR spectroscopy, together with other surface-sensitive techniques, allowed us to gain a fundamental understanding of the surface chemistry of CO and CO2 on ZnO surfaces of both the model systems and powder materials. In fact, this knowledge enabled us to subsequently investigate more complex systems, e.g., small metal particles deposited on oxide supports. We demonstrate this approach by presenting the results of a thorough IR study on the low-temperature CO oxidation over ZnO-supported gold nanoparticles.97 In contrast to bulk gold, Au nanoparticles are highly reactive, as they have been found to oxidize CO at temperatures even below room temperature.183,184 The catalytic activity of oxide-supported Au nanoparticles depends on many factors: charge transfer between Au and substrate, particle size and shape, interfacial sites, nature of the support, and preparation methods.185–202 In the following, we describe the high-quality UHV-FTIRS data used to provide detailed insight into the reaction mechanisms of low-temperature CO oxidation on differently pretreated Au/ZnO catalysts.97
The Au/ZnO catalysts used in this study were prepared by a colloidal deposition method.203 This preparation yields Au nanoparticles that are highly dispersed on the surfaces of the ZnO powder particles, with an average particle size of around 5.5 nm as determined by TEM.97 The active sites of O2-pretreated Au/ZnO catalysts were probed by CO adsorption at 110 K (see Fig. 7). Two intense IR bands were observed at 2181 and 2106 cm−1, which exhibit opposite frequency shifts with respect to the gas phase value (2143 cm−1). The former band is characteristic of CO bound to Zn2+ cations on predominant nonpolar ZnO(100) facets. The redshifted band at 2106 cm−1 is assigned to CO that is bound more strongly to neutral Au atoms, as confirmed by temperature-dependent IR experiments. The ZnO-related IR band disappears at 140 K, whereas the CO species adsorbed to Au desorbs completely only upon heating to 180 K.97 The electron back-donation from Au to the empty CO 2π* orbital weakens the internal C–O bond and thus strengthens the interaction between CO and Au. Furthermore, CO prefers to adsorb at the interfacial low-coordinated Au sites, while the Au terrace sites are inert for CO adsorption at 110 K.204,205
 Fig. 7  UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing (A) clean O2-pretreated Au/ZnO catalyst to (B) CO (10−4 mbar) at 110 K, and subsequently exposing to O2 (10−4 mbar) at 110 K for (C) 7, (D) 14, (E) 21, (F) 28, (G) 35, (H) 42, and (I) 49 min. The model shows schematically the oxidation of CO with activated O2 at the Au/ZnO interface, yielding CO2 and carbonate species bound to various ZnO facets (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.97 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
When the ZnO particles with submonolayer coverage of CO were further exposed to O2 at 110 K, low-temperature CO oxidation to CO2 occurred as evidenced by the gradual attenuation of both CO bands and the appearance of a new IR signal at 2347 cm−1, which is characteristic of physisorbed CO2 (Fig. 7). Simultaneously, the IR data revealed a large number of low-lying bands at 1650–1250 cm−1. These bands were assigned to various carbonate species formed via interaction of the product CO2 with the ZnO substrate. These carbonate-related IR bands were unambiguously identified based on the detailed IR and HREELS data for CO2 activation on ZnO surfaces of both single crystals and powder particles, as discussed in Section 2.5 (for details see Noei et al.97).
Reference experiments in which CO was adsorbed on pristine ZnO powder particles revealed that these oxide particles are inactive for CO oxidation. Based on these results, we can conclude that the Au/ZnO interfacial sites with low-coordinated Au species are responsible for the high catalytic activity toward this reaction, as demonstrated by the observed direct reaction of Au-bonded CO (2106 cm−1) with activated oxygen. Surprisingly, the ZnO-related CO band at 2181 cm−1 is also consumed during the reaction. A closer analysis revealed that the CO adsorbed on ZnO serves as reservoir for reactants. Given that CO is rather weakly bound to ZnO with a binding energy around 30 kJ mol−1, these CO molecules are mobile enough to diffuse readily to the perimeter sites at the Au/ZnO interface, where they react with impinging oxygen to yield CO2.
In addition, the IR data recorded for the ZnO-supported Au particles provided direct evidence for the activation of molecular O2. When Au/ZnO was first exposed to O2 and then to CO at 110 K, no indication for CO oxidation was observed, indicating that CO pre-adsorption is vital for the O2 activation on Au/ZnO. The activation of O2 occurred at the Au–ZnO interfacial sites and was accompanied by a blueshift of the Au–CO band to 2119 cm−1 with a shoulder at 2138 cm−1 (Fig. 7). These new IR bands indicated the presence of Oδ−–Auδ+–CO and O2δ−–Auδ+–CO complexes formed via an interaction between CO and the activated atomic and molecular oxygen species at low-coordinated Au sites.206 The blueshift in frequency is a consequence of electron transfer from Au to adsorbed oxygen, thus lowering the electron 2π* back-donation effect.
Interestingly, the CO oxidation reaction leads to a new IR band at 2200 cm−1 (see Fig. 7). This band shifts to 2214 cm−1 when the samples are annealed to higher temperatures and exhibits a rather high thermal stability; it can be observed up to temperatures of 190 K. This band is characteristic of CO molecules coadsorbed on the ZnO(100) facet with carbonate species produced via CO oxidation. This substrate-mediated adsorbate–adsorbate interaction leads to an increase in the Lewis acidity of embedded Zn2+ cations, which accounts for the blueshift of the CO band and the pronounced enhancement of the CO binding energy, in agreement with the results for ZnO single crystals and nanoparticles (see Section 2.3).92,142
For Au/ZnO catalysts without O2 pretreatment, negatively charged Auδ− species were identified as confirmed by the typical CO band at 2077 cm−1. The corresponding UHV-FTIRS data revealed that the Auδ− nanoparticles also exhibited high catalytic activity for the low-temperature CO oxidation at 110 K, as observed for neutral Au0 species.97
In summary, the systematic IR investigation provided us with an atomic-scale understanding of the CO oxidation mechanism on ZnO-supported Au particles. Briefly, the reaction is initiated by CO adsorption on low-coordinated Au sites at the Au/ZnO interface. This activated CO is then able to capture an O2 molecule, forming an OC–O2 intermediate complex. Also, the adsorbed O2 is activated by a charge transfer from the Au/ZnO substrate. As a result, the O–O bond is dissociated to yield CO2. The remaining atomic O is bound to adjacent Au atoms and reacts readily with a second CO. The consumed CO is replenished from a reservoir of CO molecules bound to bare parts of the ZnO substrate. There, the CO binding energy is weaker than it is to the Au nanoparticles, resulting in a low activation energy for diffusion. Even at 110 K, the molecular adsorbate can reach the rim of the Au nanoparticles, where it is activated and can react with an O2 molecule or an adsorbed O atom. Some of the product CO2 stays (at 110 K) at the ZnO surface to form various strongly bound carbonate species.97
2.7 Water on ZnO
The interaction of water with metal and oxide surfaces is a topic of fundamental interest.207,208 In catalysis, water is present in many chemical reactions, either as a reactant, product, solvent or contamination. Studies on the hydration process of ZnO surfaces are of particular importance for an atomic-level understanding of numerous catalytic reactions such as methanol production from synthesis gas and the water–gas shift reaction. To date, extensive efforts have been devoted to elucidate the interaction of water with different ZnO single crystal surfaces.88,129,136,209–220 The results from experiments and theoretical calculations revealed that water adsorption on ZnO is a complicated process. Depending on the crystallographic orientation and surface terminations, different scenarios have been observed such as complete or partial dissociation of water yielding various types of hydroxyl groups, molecular or associative adsorption (intact water molecules), formation of water bilayers and multilayers, as well as wetting.11
The adsorption of water on the mixed-terminated ZnO(100) surface was first investigated by Zwicker and Jacobi.209 The TDS and UPS results indicated the presence of intact water adlayer bound to the three-fold coordinated Zn2+ sites. In these early studies no indication of dissociation was detected. Later, Meyer et al. reported a systematic, theoretical and experimental multi-technique study on the lateral structure of water monolayer at this surface by employing HAS, LEED, STM and He-TDS.211,212 The combined experimental data showed that water adsorption leads to the formation of a well ordered (2 × 1) superstructure. The theoretical results from Car–Parrinello ab initio molecular dynamic calculations211–213 suggested the presence of a stable (2 × 1) structure that consists of pairs of water molecules, one dissociated and one intact (see Fig. 8a). The unusual thermal stability of this half-dissociated water adlayer was attributed to the formation of hydrogen bonds between intact H2O species and both, substrate O-atoms and neighboring water molecules. In addition, high-resolution STM images demonstrated the presence of a second structure with a (1 × 1) periodicity containing intact water molecules, and, according to theory, with a very similar total energy.213 DFT calculations indicated a rather low activation barrier (less than 50 meV) between these two coexisting structures. Consequently, the dissociation of water on ZnO(100) is quasi-reversible at 300 K.212,213
 Fig. 8  (a) Side view of the atomic structure of half-dissociated (2 × 1) water monolayer adsorbed on the non-polar ZnO(100) surface (Zn: grey, O: red, O(H2O): blue, H: green). (b) Polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRAS data obtained after D2O adsorption of one monolayer on ZnO(100) at 110 K. The spectra were recorded respectively with p- and s-polarized light incident along the [0001] and [110] directions (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.220). (c) DRIFT spectra recorded at 323 K after (A) heating ZnO nanoparticles to 773 K and then cooling in helium (25 ml min−1) to 323 K; (P) exposing the pretreated ZnO sample to D2O in saturation with a He flow rate of 25 ml min−1 for 10 min at 323 K. During D2O dosing the DRIFT spectra were taken continuously and are shown in curves B–P (indicated by the arrows). (d) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles to 9000 L H2O at 300 K and subsequent heating to different temperatures in the UHV chamber (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.89 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The half-dissociated (2 × 1) structure of water molecules on ZnO(100) at room temperature was further characterized by HREELS.214 Three OH stretching bands were observed at ∼3190, 3670 and 3700 cm−1, revealing the coexistence of intact H2O (∼3190 and 3700 cm−1) and hydroxyl species (3670 cm−1). The rather broad, low-frequency OH vibration at 3190 cm−1 is characteristic for unusually strong hydrogen bonding between H2O, surface O atoms and adjacent water molecules within the (2 × 1) adlayer, as discussed above (see Fig. 8a).
Recently, Yu et al. carried out a thorough IRRAS investigation that allowed us to gain more detailed insights into this hydroxylated ZnO(100) surface.220Fig. 8b shows the polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRAS results recorded after a saturated D2O adsorption of full monolayer on ZnO(100) at 110 K. Three OD stretching bands appear at 2260, 2710 and 2720 cm−1. Correcting for the expected isotope shifts reveals an excellent agreement of these bands with the OH bands at 3190, 3670 and 3700 cm−1 observed in the HREELS experiments, see above. The fact that the OD band at 2710 cm−1 (negative sign) was seen only for p-polarized light incident along both the [0001] and [110] directions, indicates that the hydroxyl species formed via D2O dissociation adopt an orientation nearly perpendicular to the substrate surface, in line with the DFT calculations (see Fig. 8a). Importantly, the IR data displays a broad and strongly red-shifted OD band centered at about 2260 cm−1 for both s- and p-polarized light incident primarily along the [110] azimuth. These findings provide direct spectroscopic evidence for the very strong hydrogen bonding between water and substrate O atoms, where the H-bonds are placed across the trench in a tilted configuration (Fig. 8a). In addition, the weak shoulder at 2720 cm−1 is assigned to the non-H-bonded (“dangling”) OD groups of the D2O molecules. The latter can exist as minority species at the water cluster boundaries.
A different strategy to prepare OH-groups at the ZnO(100) surface is by exposure to atomic hydrogen at room temperature. This procedure yields an 1H(1 × 1) structure, with one H atom per unit cell bound to a substrate O-atom.141 This hydroxylated surface was characterized by a HREELS investigation, which revealed a single vibrational band at 3645 cm−1 originating from the isolated OH species. Interestingly, a significant energetic broadening of the incoherent elastic peak was observed in the HREELS data, which was attributed to the excitation of low-energy plasmons resulting from the finite density of charge carries in the conduction band. The 1H(1 × 1) structure leads to the formation of partially filled electronic states, and thus renders a metallic character to the ZnO(100) surface, as corroborated by ab initio band-structure calculations.141
It is known that the clean, reconstructed polar O-terminated ZnO(000) surface is extremely reactive and exists only under strict UHV conditions.11 On the basis of a combined HAS and LEED analysis, Kunat et al. reported a transformation of the clean O–ZnO surface to a more stable hydroxylated H(1 × 1) O–ZnO structure when exposed to water.129,136 The corresponding HREELS data revealed a new OH band at 3621 cm−1, which is characteristic for the hydroxyl species formed via dissociative adsorption of water molecules on defect sites (e.g. oxygen vacancies) or via the interaction of atomic hydrogen with surface oxygen atoms.113,216 The thermal stability of hydroxyl species on various ZnO surfaces was investigated using TPD.113,141,214,216 For the ZnO(100) surface a dominating desorption state at 370 K was detected (corresponding to a binding energy of 99 kJ mol−1), whereas the OH groups formed on the O–ZnO surface are more stable and desorb completely only upon annealing to 800 K.
The adsorption of water on the hydroxylated H(1 × 1) O–ZnO surface was studied by IRRAS in conjunction with HAS and XPS.88 The combined results revealed the formation of well-ordered (1 × 1) water mono- and bilayers as well as amorphous water 3-D islands, depending on the water coverage and substrate temperatures. Furthermore, it was found that exposure of the H(1 × 1) O–ZnO surface to atomic hydrogen leads to a similar plasmon-induced broadening of the incoherent elastic peak in HREELS as observed for the ZnO(100) surface.141,216 However, for the O–ZnO surface the doping of H atoms at interstitial sites occurs giving rise to shallow donor states.216 The latter can be thermally dissociated, thus donating electrons to the conduction band. A quantitative analysis yielded a donor level ionization energy of 25 ± 5 meV.216 This phenomenon was also observed for ZnO nanoparticles using UHV-FTIRS.87 The IR results provided reliable evidence that the diffusion of atomic or molecular hydrogen creates bulk interstitial H atoms acting as n-type donors, in line with the HREELS observation for ZnO single crystals.216
The various frequencies and assignments of hydroxyl species formed on different single crystal ZnO surfaces are summarized in Table 1. This reference data then allowed an assignment of the complex IR spectra obtained for ZnO nanoparticles (NPs) after exposure to water by diffuse reflectance infrared spectroscopy (DRIFTS) and UHV-FTIRS.89Fig. 8c presents the DRIFTS data recorded for increasing amounts of D2O adsorption on ZnO powders at 323 K. Both molecular and dissociative adsorption occurs giving rise to a large number of OD bands showing expected red-shifts in frequency with respect to the corresponding OH data (see Table 1). Additionally, the temperature-dependent UHV-FTIRS results in Fig. 8d provided deep insights into the thermal stability of various OH/H2O species. Overall, the comprehensive reference data from the ZnO single crystal surfaces allowed a consistent assignment of the IR bands observed for ZnO powders (for a detailed analysis of water adsorbed on ZnO NPs see Noei et al.89).
Table 1 Assignment and vibrational frequencies (in cm−1) of different OH (OD) species formed after H2O and D2O adsorption on ZnO powder surfaces.89 For comparison, the frequencies of the OH (OD) bands observed on various ZnO single crystal surfaces are also given (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.89 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry)




OH
OD
Isotopic shift
Intensity, line width
Single crystals
Assignment


OHa
ODb





a 
Ref. 141, 214 and 216.
b 
Ref. 220.





3687
2716
1.36
Weak, narrow
3700
2720
H2O on ZnO(100)


3672
2707
1.36
Strong, narrow
3670
2710
OH on ZnO(100) with coadsorbed H2O


3656
2698
1.36
Weak, narrow
3645


OH on ZnO(100)


3639
2683
1.36
Weak, narrow
3645


OH on ZnO(100)


3620
2669
1.36
Strong, narrow
3621


OH on ZnO(000)


3564
2626
1.35
Strong/weak broad
—


OH on defect sites


3448
2551
1.36
Middle/weak broad
—


OH on defect sites




2.8 HCOOH on ZnO
The adsorption of formic acid (HCOOH) on ZnO surfaces provides an important model system highly relevant for understanding ZnO-based heterogeneous catalysts as well as dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). It has been proposed that the HCOOH/HCOO species occur as reaction intermediates in the conversion of syngas to methanol over ZnO-based catalysts.221,222 Regarding DSSCs (or Grätzel cells), carboxylate groups are frequently used to anchor photosensitizers and other functional groups to oxide substrates (e.g., ZnO and TiO2).7,127,223 Therefore, a study on the HCOOH/ZnO system is of fundamental interest for understanding the grafting of more complex molecules via carboxylate groups with ZnO. However, very little information is available for this important model system. Especially lacking are results from vibrational spectroscopy that would provide, from the frequencies of the carboxylate vibrations, information on the particular type of the carboxylate bonds to the substrate. In the following, we present the results from a recent combined experimental (IRRAS) and theoretical (DFT) study for HCCOH adsorption on ZnO surfaces for both single crystals and powder samples.81

Fig. 9a shows the azimuth- and polarization-dependent IRRAS data obtained after exposing the ZnO(100) surface to 5 L HCOOH at a substrate temperature of 300 K. Two IR bands were observed at about 1580 and 1373 cm−1, respectively. The sign and intensity of the observed IR bands depend strongly on the polarization and direction of the light incidence. These vibrational bands are characteristic of formate species, and are assigned to the νas(OCO) and νs(OCO) carboxylate vibrations, respectively. This observation immediately reveals that, upon adsorption, formic acid is deprotonated on ZnO(100), yielding formate species. The precise values of the symmetric and asymmetric stretch vibrations and, in particular, the frequency splitting around 200 cm−1 between these two vibrational modes allow us to conclude that the carboxylate is bound to the substrate in a bidentate fashion.224,225
 Fig. 9  (a) IRRAS data of HCOOH on ZnO(100), for the incident beam (left) along [0001] and (right) along [110] at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with p- and s-polarized light at 300 K. For comparison, the powder IR data are also shown. Note that the intensity of IR single crystal data is multiplied by a factor of 2000. (b) Expected signals in IRRA spectra based on reflectivity calculations for the bidentate configuration oriented along the [110] direction. The expected carboxylate IR signals for an incidence beam along the (left panel) [0001] and (right panel) [110] azimuth are shown. The dotted lines show the expected spectral features for a bidentate with its molecular axis tilted by 45°. The adsorption geometry is sketched with arrows indicating the vibration movements. The transition dipole moments (TDM) are indicated respectively by a big light and dark gray arrow for the νas(OCO) and νs(OCO) vibrations. (c) Sketch of the possible adsorption geometries, the quasi-bidentate, and the bidentate. Red small arrows show the direction of the νas(OCO) vibration, and the big red arrow indicates the orientation of TDM. Blue small arrows show the direction of the νs(OCO) vibration, and the blue arrow indicates the orientation of TDM (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.81 Copyright 2014, Springer). 
The IRRAS data recorded for different azimuths further demonstrated the presence of two stable formate species that have molecular planes oriented orthogonal to each other. DFT calculations were used to identify these two different adsorbates. The most stable formate is the bidentate structure with a molecular plane oriented along the [110] azimuth (Fig. 9c). Fig. 9b shows the calculated IR signals expected for this bidentate configuration using the reflectivity calculations for dielectric substrates described in Section 2.5. Based on the experimental and calculated IR results, this formate species is characterized by the νas(OCO) mode at 1573/1570 cm−1. This mode is excited either by the p-polarized (Ep,t component) light incident along the [110] direction, or by the s-polarized light incident along the [0001] azimuth via coupling with the transition dipole moment (TDM) of the νas(OCO) vibration oriented along the [110] direction. Based on the theoretical results, the second stable adsorbate species with a molecular plane oriented along the [0001] direction (Fig. 9c) is proposed as a quasi-bidentate configuration. According to this adsorption model, the carboxylic acid is not completely deprotonated, but the carboxylate group is bound via the hydrogen of the hydroxyl group to a surface O atom.226,227 A second bond is formed, as with the bidentate species discussed above, by the interaction of the carbonyl oxygen to a surface Zn atom. For this configuration, the TDM of the νas(OCO) vibration is oriented along the [0001] azimuth, and thus can interact with the Ep,t component of the p-polarized light incident along [0001], as well as with the s-polarized light incident along the [110] direction. In Fig. 9a, the observed IR bands at 1589 (positive sign) and 1577 cm−1 (negative sign) are in excellent agreement with the expected azimuth- and polarization-dependence for this particular adsorbate geometry. This quasi-bidentate species (which is not fully deprotonated) shows a larger frequency splitting than the bidentate formate. This is attributed to the additional hydrogen bound to the surface O ions in the former case.
It is interesting to compare these results on the bonding motifs of formic acid to a well-defined ZnO single-crystal surface with IR data recorded for ZnO nanoparticles exposed to HCOOH (Fig. 9a). In the powder data, two intense and broad bands appear at about 1580 and 1365 cm−1, respectively. They are characteristic for the bidentate formate and the quasi-bidentate species formed upon adsorption of formic acid on ZnO(100) surfaces. This is reasonable, since this orientation is the most prominent among the facets exposed by ZnO powder particles (see Section 2.5). The weak peak at 1624 cm−1 is assigned to the ν(CO) vibration of a monodentate formate species, which is likely to form on the polar O- and Zn-terminated ZnO surfaces.177,228,229 In addition, the broad nature of the IR bands indicates the presence of some minority formate species produced at various defect sites. However, these additional vibrational bands could not be resolved due to inhomogeneous broadening.
2.9 Photogenerated hole polarons in ZnO
Polarons represent a key intermediate in photochemistry and in photovoltaics. They result from dissociation of the excitons, formed by relaxation of the e–h pair excited in the primary photoabsorption process. The dissociation of the neutral exciton to yield electrons, e, and holes, h, is of crucial importance in the conversion of photon energy in chemical or electrical energy. After splitting, the charge carriers, free electrons, and free holes will be trapped in polaronic states. These polarons can migrate through the semiconductor and, e.g., trigger reactions in adsorbed molecular species.2,230–232 Although polarons are crucial for oxide-based photochemistry, optoelectronics, and photovoltaics,2 little is known about the lifetimes and binding energies of these pseudo-particles. In case of ZnO, an important photoactive oxide, excitons have been studied in some detail, and their lifetimes (around 60 ps)233,234 and binding energies (60 meV)235,236 have been determined experimentally. Whereas the ultrafast formation and decay timescales of excitons in ZnO234 are largely governed by electronic dynamics, the formation of polarons involves the motion of nuclei and thus occurs on a much longer timescale. We are not aware of any time-resolved studies of this polaron formation process.
Recently, Sezen et al.83 performed a thorough time-resolved (ms timescale) IRRAS study on the photoexcited polarons in ZnO(100) single crystals with a time resolution of 100 ms. Their groundbreaking results demonstrated that IRRAS is well suited to probe photoinduced polaron dynamics in oxide single crystals.

Fig. 10a presents the polarization-dependent IRRAS data recorded in situ during UV illumination (365 nm) of the ZnO(100) crystal at 118 K. Upon UV irradiation, several pronounced IR absorption bands were observed: a sharp band at 1288 cm−1 (160 meV), most prominent for p-polarized light, and an absorption edge (AE)-like feature at ∼1630 cm−1 (202 meV), superimposed with a fine structure with peaks at 1790 and 2140 cm−1. The lifetime—that is, the time constant of the decaying signal—was determined to be 25 s at 75 K for the 1630 cm−1 band (Fig. 10b). The lifetime has a pronounced temperature dependence, and it reduces to 14 s at a substrate temperature of 140 K. We can rule out the possibility that photoinduced excitons are responsible for these IR bands, since they have a much shorter lifetime, around 60 ps.233,234 The UV-generated features are thus assigned to polaronic states. Since e-polarons are not expected to be stable in ZnO,237–240 these excitations were tentatively attributed to h-polarons. This assignment was corroborated by experiments where e-polarons were produced via chemical doping, which can be achieved by exposing the ZnO substrate to H (or D) atoms produced by thermal dissociation of H2 (or D2).141,241,242 In contrast to TiO2 (see Section 3.11), the corresponding IR spectra recorded after chemical n-doping were clearly different from those recorded after UV illumination (physical doping, see Fig. 10a). These findings provide strong evidence for the assignment of the UV-induced features seen in ZnO to hole polarons.
 Fig. 10  (a) Steady state (during ultraviolet light irradiation) IR spectra (p- and s-polarization) of ZnO(100) recorded at 118 K. (b) Time dependence of the intensity of the sharp feature at 1630 cm−1 on starting and terminating ultraviolet (UV) irradiation at 75 K with the time constants (TC) indicated for the rise and decay of the signal. (c) The transients of IR absorbance arise from a ZnO(100) single crystal after initiation of the UV light excitation at 110, 120, and 130 K. (d) Arrhenius plot of the initial rates of IR absorbance increase as a function of substrate temperature (reproduced with permission from Sezen et al.83 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group). 
A detailed analysis using different theoretical approaches revealed that the broad AE-like feature around 1630 cm−1 originates from the electron transition from the top of the valence band (VB) into a hole polaronic state.83 Interestingly, the h-polarons in ZnO were found to be of medium size; thus, they are substantially different from the small polarons typical for oxides. Based on the theoretical results, the fine structure superimposed on the AE was related to the different densities of electronic states deeper in the VB. The sharp IR absorption band at 1288 cm−1 shows a strong polarization dependence, which suggests a different physical character. The time-resolved IRRAS data show that the initial h-polaron formation rate exhibits a pronounced temperature dependence (Fig. 10c). An Arrhenius analysis of the intensity of the 1630 cm−1 feature as a function of substrate temperature yields an apparent activation energy of 245 meV (Fig. 10d).
The interpretation of the time-resolved IRRAS results was substantially aided by a thorough first principles-based electronic structure analysis, in which the binding energies of various large and small electron and hole polarons were calculated.83 It is characteristic for large polarons that the corresponding charge-induced lattice distortions extend over large distances, while small polarons are essentially localized at a single ion, resulting in a short-range displacement field only. On the basis of the theoretical calculations, the AE-like feature around 1600 cm−1 is attributed to hole polarons of intermediate coupling strength. The calculated polaron binding energy of 240 meV and the position of the peak maximum at ∼1500 cm−1 are in good agreement with the experimental results. The polarization-dependent feature at 1288 cm−1 is assigned to an intermediate surface polaron. These findings have important implications for the photochemical properties of ZnO. In particular, the fairly large polaron binding energies must be considered in order to derive a detailed energy balance of photoinduced reactions at semiconductor surfaces.
3. Titanium dioxide (TiO2)
3.1 Background
TiO2 represents one of the most investigated oxide materials, as it has a broad range of applications in areas such as catalysis,8,243 photocatalysis,2,17,19,244 and solar cells.7,223 Titanium is also a popular material for the fabrication of medical implants, and the biocompatibility of titania has become a topic of considerable importance.245,246 One reason for the huge interest in this important oxide originates from the seminal work of Fujishima and Honda,247 who first described the TiO2-based photoelectrocatalysis of water to generate hydrogen. Since then, TiO2 has been extensively studied by a growing number of experimental and theoretical approaches, all aiming at a better in-depth understanding and ability to engineer the catalytic and photocatalytic properties of TiO2-based systems. Many review articles have been published that describe the progress made in this field.2,8,16,17,19–22,243,244,248–250 Importantly, a number of fundamental studies using the surface science approach on TiO2 single-crystal model systems provided numerous atomic-level insights into catalytic and photocatalytic processes occurring on titania surfaces. TiO2 possesses two most important polymorphs, rutile and anatase, which expose different atomic arrangements at their surfaces. Among them, the energetically most stable rutile (110) surface has proven to be an ideal model surface for fundamental investigations on semiconducting oxide materials.2,8,17,20,21,243,244,248,250 STM has been extensively used, since it can be straightforwardly applied to study the surface chemistry and photochemistry of different TiO2 single crystals.251–271 In part, the tremendous success of the STM approach results from the fact that titania can be provided with the electrical conductivity required for STM by slight annealing (changing the color to blue or even completely black). For detailed insights into the thermally driven and photochemical reactions on TiO2 single-crystal surfaces probed by STM, we refer the reader to two recent excellent review papers.243,244
In this review, we highlight recent UHV-FTIRS studies reported for rutile and anatase TiO2 surfaces, ranging from well-defined single crystals to nanostructured powders. In addition to the results reported by our group, we will also briefly discuss IRRAS results on TiO2(110) reported by other groups. Overall, these results demonstrate that IR spectroscopy is well suited to characterize the structural, electronic, and photochemical properties of TiO2.
3.2 CO on TiO2
The adsorption of CO on TiO2 surfaces is an important topic as this process is involved in catalytic reactions such as low-temperature CO oxidation,191 CO hydrogenation,272 and the water-gas shift reaction.273 In addition, CO is an appropriate probe molecule for characterizing the surfaces of oxides, as discussed in Section 2 for ZnO. Here, we present IRRAS results for CO adsorption and photoinduced oxidation on both rutile TiO2(110) and anatase TiO2(101) surfaces. In contrast to ZnO, oxygen vacancies play an important role in this reducible oxide (Ti can exist in multiple oxidation states, Ti3+ and Ti4+). We will discuss in some detail how CO can be used to characterize these defects, which are of crucial importance for the surface chemistry of TiO2.

3.2.1 CO on rutile TiO2(110). 
The interaction of CO with stoichiometric and reduced TiO2(110) surfaces has been the subject of a large number of experimental and theoretical investigations.98,100,101,274–284 For the stoichiometric (or fully oxidized) surface, CO is weakly bound (via the C atom) to five-fold coordinated Ti5c sites. Coverages can reach a monolayer (ML), corresponding to one CO per surface Ti5c site. Experimental investigations using, e.g., TPD and theoretical studies101,279,281 reveal that the CO binding energy varies strongly depending on coverage. The fairly large binding energy (0.36 eV) for single CO molecules is almost reduced by half within a full monolayer (0.20 eV). The DFT results further suggest the formation of an ordered (2 × 1) adlayer at 1 ML. This structure exhibits a glide symmetry plane, where CO molecules are slightly tilted in alternating directions by ∼20° relative to the surface normal.281 The reduced TiO2(110) surface—where, as a result of oxygen loss, a number of O-vacancies are present—shows TPD spectra similar to those for the stoichiometric TiO2(110).101,281 A weaker shoulder at around 170 K, however, indicates the presence of more strongly bound species. A CO binding energy of 0.44 eV is obtained from the desorption temperature that is considerable higher than that (0.2–0.36 eV) seen for the pristine surface.281 In addition, in these experiments, a maximum coverage of 1.5 ML could be achieved by lowering the substrate temperature to 30 K. At low temperatures, additional CO molecules adsorb at the bridging oxygen (Obr) sites with a lower binding energy of 0.15 eV.101,279
The IRRAS data reported by Xu et al.93,100 (Fig. 11) demonstrated that only a single IR band at 2188 cm−1 is visible for CO on the stoichiometric TiO2(110) surface. The related frequency is blueshifted by 45 cm−1 relative to the gas phase value, which is characteristic for CO adsorbed at Ti4+5c cations and is in agreement with previously reported HREELS data.281 A second IR band at 2178 cm−1 appeared when the substrate was reduced, indicating the presence of an additional CO species that must be related to the presence of surface Obr vacancies (VO) (see Fig. 11a). This assignment to different CO species rather than to a new chemical species was supported by isotopic substitution experiments. For 13CO, two IR bands were detected at 2137 and 2129 cm−1, respectively, thus showing the expected isotopic shift.100 Interestingly, STM investigations by Zhao et al.266 revealed that the defect-related CO species is not directly bound to VO sites, but prefers to adsorb at Ti4+5c cations located at second-nearest neighbor sites of the O vacancy (site 1 labeled in Fig. 11b). This unexpected observation was corroborated by DFT calculations, which showed that the excess electrons at VO sites are delocalized over multiple neighboring Ti atoms.93,270 Consequently, CO is bound more strongly to site 1 (Fig. 11b) due to the enhanced charge back-donation from Ti to the CO 2π* orbital, and as evidenced by the slight redshift in frequency of the 2178 cm−1 band relative to that of CO bound to regular Ti4+5c cations (sites 2–5 in Fig. 11b). Based on the temperature-dependent IRRAS experiments,100 the binding energies of CO adsorbed at defect-related Ti4+5c (site 1 in Fig. 11b) and regular Ti4+5c (sites 2–5) were determined to be 32 and 31 kJ mol−1 (0.33 and 0.32 eV), respectively, in agreement with DFT calculations.93,266 A recent STM and theoretical study pointed out that, in rutile, excess electrons can localize at any lattice Ti atoms, forming a small polaron.285 Therefore, the two distinct CO species identified here by IRRAS can be further attributed to CO that is coupled (2178 cm−1) and not coupled (2188 cm−1) to a polaron. The IR investigations on polaronic states generated in rutile by UV irradiation and chemical doping will be discussed in detail in Section 3.11.
 Fig. 11  (a) RAIRS data for CO adsorbed on perfect and reduced rutile TiO2(110) surfaces at 110 K. (b) The CO species adsorbed on different Ti sites (labeled 0–5) are also sketched in the ball-and-stick model of the rutile TiO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.93 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH). 
This novel approach of using CO as a probe molecule to characterize defect sites on an oxide surface was also applied to rutile TiO2 powder particles.93 Note that, in contrast to STM, IR spectroscopy can be applied to oxide powders in a straightforward fashion. The UHV-FTIRS data showed a single band at 2184 cm−1 for CO adsorbed on the oxidized TiO2 powder particles. After reduction of the particulate TiO2 by annealing to 900 K in UHV to produce O vacancies, a weak but distinct new band evolved at 2174 cm−1. Based on the IRRAS data for reduced TiO2(110) single-crystal surfaces, this IR feature was assigned to CO bound to Ti5c sites proximal to O vacancies (site 1 indicated in Fig. 11b). These results demonstrated that O vacancy sites created by the reduction of TiO2 can be directly monitored by UHV-FTIR spectroscopy, using CO as a probe molecule for well-defined model systems as well as for the technologically relevant oxide powders. The potential of this novel approach was demonstrated by unraveling the mechanism of reductive coupling of formaldehyde (CH2O) to ethylene (C2H4), an important C1–C1 coupling reaction.286 The IRRAS data recorded for the powder samples clearly revealed that this reaction occurs via activation of CH2O at surface VO sites, forming a diolate species (–OCH2CH2O–). Upon heating to 600 K, this species undergoes deoxygenation to yield ethylene. The conversion efficiency of CH2O to C2H4 was found to correlate well with the density of O vacancies at the surface of the TiO2 nanoparticles.93
Petrik and Kimmel101 published an azimuth- and polarization-dependent IRRAS study of the adsorption geometry of CO on the reduced TiO2(110) surface as a function of CO coverage. Fig. 12a shows the IRRAS results recorded for both p- and s-polarized light incident along the [10] and [001] directions. Based on these IRRAS data, the authors deduced that, at a coverage up to 1 ML, CO adsorbs at Ti4+5c perpendicular to the surface, giving rise to a (1 × 1) adlayer structure. This structure is inconsistent with the (2 × 1) pattern proposed by Kunat et al.281 When the coverage increased to 1.5 ML, a new low-lying CO band was observed. They concluded that the additional CO molecules are bound to surface Obr sites oriented parallel to the surface along the [10] azimuth (see Fig. 12a). Recently, Hu et al.284 evaluated different structure models by first principles simulations of the IRRAS spectra at a broad coverage range from 0.125 to 1.5 ML based on DFT vibrational calculations. The calculated polarization-dependent IR spectra are shown in Fig. 12b, and they are in excellent agreement with the experimental IRRAS data (Fig. 12a). However, the interpretation of the spectra reported by Hu et al.284 is partly different from that proposed by Petrik and Kimmel.101 Hu et al. found the results to be consistent with a tilted CO adsorption geometry within a (2 × 1) superstructure, as originally proposed by Kunat et al.281 on the basis of diffraction data and DFT calculations. For CO coverages higher than 1 ML, which can only be achieved at very low temperatures, Hu et al.284 confirmed that the additional CO molecules indeed reside above Obr atoms, with the CO axis tilted slightly (11°) with respect to the surface plane.
 Fig. 12  (a) Experimental IRRAS spectra for 1.5 ML CO adsorption on TiO2(110) and suggested adsorption structure (reproduced with permission from Petrik and Kimmel.101 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). (b) Simulated IRRAS spectra and the suggested adsorption structure based on DFT calculations of the PBE type. Red (lattice) and green (CO) balls are O, gray are Ti, and black are C atoms (reproduced with permission from Hu et al.284 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 


3.2.2 CO on anatase TiO2(101). 
In contrast to investigations on the prototypical rutile TiO2(110) surface, IRRAS studies on anatase single-crystal surfaces are rather scarce.82,94,96 It is known that anatase nanoparticles predominantly expose (101) facets, which, according to theoretical work, exhibit the lowest free energy for this modification of titania.287,288 The anatase TiO2(101) surface shows a sawtooth-like morphology and is terminated by under-coordinated two-fold oxygen (O2c) anions and five-fold Ti (Ti5c) cations (see Fig. 13A). The structural and electronic properties of this surface have been extensively investigated by STM in conjunction with DFT calculations.262,263,268,289–299 Interestingly, it was found that, in case of TiO2(101), oxygen vacancies (VO) created by substrate reduction are not stable at the surface but migrate to subsurface sites, even at temperatures far below 300 K.262,295
 Fig. 13  (A) Calculated CO adsorption configuration on the anatase (101) surface in the presence of a subsurface oxygen vacancy. (B) STM images of CO adsorbed on anatase (101) as a function of substrate temperature. A full monolayer of CO was dosed at T = 78 K and the surface was annealed to increasing temperatures in ∼5 K steps. (C) IRRAS data of different doses of CO adsorbed at 95 K on (a) stoichiometric and (b) reduced anatase (101) surfaces with non-polarized light. (c) IRRAS data of 1 L CO adsorbed at 70 K on stoichiometric TiO2(101) with p-polarized light incident along [010] and [−101] directions and s-polarized light incident along the [010] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Setvin et al.82 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
Recently, Setvin et al.82 reported a multi-technique study on anatase TiO2(101) using CO as a probe molecule. The surface geometry and the sites where CO adsorbed were obtained from STM. The STM images in Fig. 13B show a nearly full monolayer (1 ML) of CO on the substrate cooled to 78 K, where almost all surface Ti5c sites are occupied by an adsorbate. Annealing the sample to a higher temperature leads to gradual desorption of adsorbed CO molecules. Based on the decrease in CO coverage as a function of temperature, the binding energy (Ead) of CO was estimated to be 0.34 eV. From the conventional TPD, the Ead was determined to be 0.37 eV for isolated CO, which shifts slightly to lower values at a higher coverage (0.31 eV at 0.85 ML) and reveals a much smaller Ead decrease than for rutile TiO2(110) (see Section 3.2.1).101,279,281 This is in agreement with the STM observation and DFT calculations.82 These findings demonstrate that the effect of the CO–CO repulsion interaction is much smaller on anatase(101) than on rutile(110).

Fig. 13C presents the corresponding IRRAS data. For CO adsorbed on the stoichiometric TiO2(101) surface, a single band at 2185 cm−1 was detected at low coverage. With increasing exposure to CO, the band shifts slightly downward to 2181 cm−1 at 1 ML coverage. The small redshift in frequency is in good agreement with the rather weak static CO–CO interaction, as concluded from an analysis of the temperature-dependent STM data and the TPD results. The azimuth- and polarization-resolved IR results (panel c in Fig. 13C) show that, for p-polarized light, the CO band is independent of the directions of light incidence. No IR signals could be observed when using s-polarization. These observations suggest that CO adopts an orientation nearly perpendicular to the surface.82
Surprisingly, the IRRAS data for the reduced TiO2(101) only show a single CO peak at 2181 cm−1. The creation of O vacancies thus does not result in a new surface species, which is in pronounced contrast to the rutile TiO2(110) surface where a distinct new band was observed after reduction (see Fig. 11).93 These IR results thus provide direct evidence that the reduced anatase TiO2(101) does not contain any significant concentration of O vacancies in the near-surface region, and corroborates the conclusions from STM work as discussed above.
The difference in the behavior of the O vacancies may be related to the different character of the corresponding polarons. For the reduced rutile TiO2(110), excess electrons will always be localized at lattice Ti atoms, giving rise to small polarons.285 In contrast, electrons in anatase prefer a free-carrier state and the corresponding polarons are thus larger. In fact, DFT calculations82 conducted for hypothetical O vacancies in the first subsurface layer of anatase TiO2(101) yielded a substantial redshift in frequency of ∼30 cm−1 for CO adsorbed above such subsurface O vacancies. This was not seen in the experimental data. This observation suggests that oxygen vacancies are not only absent in the top layer, but also in the first subsurface layer. These results nicely confirm that CO as a probe molecule is highly sensitive to the presence of O vacancies. Whereas the STM approach is superior for investigating these defects for single crystal surfaces, this technique cannot be applied to powders in a straightforward fashion. IR spectroscopy, on the other hand, can be applied to both, model systems and the technologically relevant form of titania, powders. IR studies are thus well suited to bridge the materials gap in the case of titania.

3.3 Photooxidation of CO on TiO2
The photooxidation of CO adsorbed on a substrate with O2 to yield CO2 is an important model system in photochemistry. On well-defined surfaces of TiO2, the most important oxide in photocatalysis, this photo-induced reaction was first studied by Yates and coworkers.300–302 In the case of a rutile TiO2(110) surface, they found two photoinduced processes relevant for this system that occurred upon UV irradiation of a cold (100 K) substrate: photooxidation of CO to yield CO2 and photodesorption of chemisorbed O2. These two processes were related to different forms of O2 species that were activated at the surface via photogenerated charge carriers. Yates et al. argued that lattice oxygen was not involved in the CO2 photoproduction. Later, Petrik and Kimmel303 reinvestigated this system using isotope labeling experiments at a lower temperature (30 K). They concluded that O2 molecules adsorbed in an oxygen vacancy exhibit higher reactivity for CO photooxidation than the O2 chemisorbed at a Ti5c site. Photostimulated desorption (PSD) of O2 and CO, as well as photoproduction of CO2, were observed with comparable yields. Based on the angular distribution of the CO2 PSD results, they proposed that CO2 is produced from O2 activated at a surface VO site and CO adsorbed at an adjacent Ti5c site via a transition state, in agreement with theoretical predications.280
Despite extensive investigations into the photochemistry at TiO2 surfaces, many important issues have remained unresolved. An important example is the fact that, in general, anatase powder particles exhibit photocatalytic activities that are an order of magnitude higher than those of rutile.2,304–306 Although many different hypotheses for rationalizing these surprising differences have been proposed,307 there is no generally accepted explanation. Therefore, the results obtained following a systematic surface science study on the photocatalytic activity of anatase (101) and rutile (110) single-crystal surfaces is highly interesting. In these experiments, the photooxidation of CO to CO2 on both surfaces was monitored in a UHV-compatible environment by IRRAS.94,98

Fig. 14a presents the in situ IRRAS data recorded for a CO pre-adsorbed anatase TiO2(101) surface under UV light (3.40 eV) irradiation in an O2 atmosphere (10−7 mbar) at 100 K.94 The IR band at 2180 cm−1 is assigned to CO bound to surface Ti5c cations. The photooxidation of CO occurs with exposure to O2 under UV illumination, as confirmed by a gradual attenuation of the CO band. No attenuation is observed in the absence of O2. This is explained by the fact that photostimulated CO desorption comes into play only for photon energies high enough (above 4.3 eV) to create electronic excitations within the CO.308 The photocatalytic production of CO2 is nicely corroborated by the appearance of a new IR band at 2340 cm−1 originating from the νas(OCO) vibration of the photoreaction product, CO2. The positive sign of the 2340 cm−1 band in the IR spectra reveals that the adsorbed CO2 adopts a linear configuration parallel to the substrate surface. No other vibrational bands are observed, indicating that the CO photooxidation proceeds without the formation of intermediates. Importantly, based on the decline of the CO signal as a function of the UV irradiation time (Fig. 14b) and the known UV light intensity, the cross section can be determined and yields a value of 2.0 × 10−17 cm2.
 Fig. 14  Photooxidation of CO on TiO2 monitored by IRRAS. (a) In situ IRRAS data of CO and CO2 during photoinduced CO oxidation reaction on the anatase TiO2(101) single-crystal surface at 100 K. The sample was first exposed to CO (10−7 mbar) and then exposed to O2 (10−7 mbar) and UV light (3.4 eV, 2 × 1014 photons cm−2 s−1) for different times. (b) Comparison of the reaction cross section Q of CO photooxidation on rutile TiO2(110) and anatase TiO2(101). Plotted is the ln(C0/Ct) as a function of the UV irradiation time. C0 is the initial CO coverage before UV irradiation, and Ct is the CO coverage after irradiation at time t. The blue squares are the data for CO on anatase TiO2(101) as shown in (a). The red circles denote data for CO on rutile TiO2(110) (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.94 Copyright 2011, American Physical Society). 
In order to unravel the origin for the substantial differences in photocatalytic activity between rutile and anatase, a similar set of experiments was performed for the stoichiometric rutile TiO2(110) surface. Prior to UV irradiation, the IRRAS data showed one single CO band at 2190 cm−1. This stretch frequency is characteristic for CO adsorbed at Ti5c sites within the perfect parts of the surface.98 Also, in this case the photoinduced CO oxidation was observed using IRRAS. The IR results revealed again that this reaction is a direct process without the forming of intermediates such as formate or carbonate species. The corresponding photoreaction cross section Q was determined to amount to 1.0 × 10−18 cm2 for rutile TiO2(110),98 and this value is in good agreement with the cross sections determined from the photoinduced desorption experiments reported by Yates and coworkers.301 The substantial difference in photoactivity—approximately 20 times greater for anatase than for rutile—cannot be related to surface or subsurface oxygen vacancies. For the rutile TiO2(110), the surface oxygen will be quickly regenerated at VO defect sites (few percent) because of the continuous supply of molecular O2 (10−7 mbar), which provides a strongly oxidizing environment. For anatase, as discussed in Section 3.2.2, the TiO2(101) does not possess any surface oxygen vacancies and there are also no pronounced subsurface oxygen vacancy sites in TiO2(101).
To identify the reason for the strong difference in photooxidation cross section observed for this important model reaction on the two different forms of TiO2, additional experiments were conducted to measure the e–h lifetimes in the bulk of the two titania modifications. Contactless transient photoconductance measurements revealed a much longer lifetime of photoexcited electron and hole pairs in anatase (>10 ns) than in rutile (<1 ns).94 This huge difference in e and h lifetimes likely accounts for the larger photocatalytic efficiency of anatase vs. rutile. Longer lifetimes facilitate the transport of the photogenerated charge carriers from the bulk to the surface where the photochemical reaction takes place. The large charge carrier lifetime discrepancy between anatase and rutile has been proposed to result from differences in the electronic band structures. Whereas most theoretical calculations suggest that rutile has a direct band gap, anatase exhibits an indirect band gap.309,310 In the presence of indirect band gaps, the recombination of the photogenerated charge carriers in anatase is strongly delayed, thus increasing the photogenerated charge carrier lifetimes. Consequently, the diffusion length of e–h pairs excited in the bulk will increase and thus increase the possibility that they reach molecular adsorbates at the surface before they recombine.
3.4 CO2 on TiO2
The adsorption of CO2 on TiO2 is an interesting topic relating to the photoreduction of CO2 to methanol and other valuable hydrocarbons on TiO2-based catalysts.166,311–316 In addition, CO2 can also be used as a probe molecule to characterize the structure and adsorption sites of different TiO2 surfaces, as discussed in detail for CO2/ZnO systems.317,318 To date, the interaction between CO2 and the prototypical rutile TiO2(110) surface has been extensively studied using various experimental methods, including STM, HREELS, and TPD, as well as with theoretical approaches.317–325 The general consensus is that the interaction of CO2 is strongest with surface oxygen vacancy sites (VO). In addition, the diffusion barrier for CO2 from the VO sites was determined to be 0.14 eV,323 while the STM results indicated that CO2 is very diffusive on the Ti5c rows even at a temperature as low as 15 K.325
Lin et al.103 presented a systematic IRRAS investigation of the CO2 adsorption on TiO2(110). The goal of these studies was acquiring a thorough understanding of the coverage-dependent binding geometries of various CO2 species and their dynamic interconversion. In contrast to the strong interaction of CO2 with ZnO surfaces yielding various carbonate species (see Section 2.5), the TPD data revealed that CO2 is weakly bound to TiO2(110). Three desorption peaks were detected at 163 K (0.17 ML), 145 K (1.0 ML), and 122 K (1.5 ML), corresponding to the presence of three different CO2 species with binding energies (Ea) of 0.45, 0.38, and 0.34 eV, respectively.103 A more thorough identification of these CO2 species is possible using IRRAS data in conjunction with ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations. Fig. 15 illustrates the azimuth- and polarization-resolved IR data recorded after CO2 adsorption at 25 K as a function of coverage. In the case of a fully oxidized surface, only one CO2 band could be detected for all coverages, namely the asymmetric stretch νas(OCO) vibration. The frequencies of the surface adsorbate amounted to 2332–2363 cm−1, very similar to the gas phase value (2349 cm−1). These small shifts relative to the gas phase confirm that the corresponding CO2 species adsorb only weakly to the surface and that the linear geometry of the molecule is essentially unchanged.162
 Fig. 15  (a) s-Polarized FTIR spectra from CO2 on TiO2(110) as a function of coverage (θ = 0–1 ML) acquired at 25 K. The IR beam is directed (A) along the [10] and (B) along the [001] azimuth of the TiO2(110) surface (see the illustrations). Bold blue and red traces correspond to coverages that saturate the 163 and 139 K peaks in TPD, respectively. (b) The corresponding p-polarized FTIR spectra. (c) Models of the evolution of adsorbed CO2 molecules on TiO2(110) as a function of coverage (reproduced with permission from Lin et al.103 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
The IRRAS data recorded for s- and p-polarization were carefully analyzed based on the reflectivity principles of dielectric substrates,181,182 as discussed in detail in Section 2.5. The analysis suggests that, at all coverages, the CO2 adopts a canted configuration, with the molecular axis slightly tilted with respect to the surface normal. This binding geometry is fully consistent with the results of geometry optimizations carried out with DFT calculations.103
In the case of the reduced substrate, CO2 prefers to adsorb at surface oxygen vacancy sites (VO, ∼0.05 ML). Additional CO resides on adjacent Ti5c sites and is stabilized by CO adsorbed on neighboring VO sites. Lin et al.103 argued that these CO species bound to VO and adjacent Ti5c sites account for the highest-temperature TPD peak (desorption of 0.17 ML CO2) in the TPD data, with a binding energy of Ea = 0.45 eV. The IR bands at 2346.5 and 2342.2 cm−1 were assigned to such defect-related CO2 species. For larger exposures, additional CO2 adsorbates are seen, which were proposed to bind more weakly to Ti5c sites (Ea = 0.38 eV). The STM and theoretical data demonstrated consistently that, up to a coverage of 0.5 ML, the Ti5c-bound CO2 is highly mobile at 50 K and diffuses via a rotation-tumbling mechanism along the Ti5c row (see Fig. 15c).103 This hypothesis was supported by the IRRAS investigations. The spectra recorded for the light incident along the two high-symmetry directions, the [10] and [001] azimuths, are very similar, indicating that the ensemble average of the adsorbed CO2 has nearly equal components along both directions. The CO2 diffusion is hindered at higher coverages and an ordered (2 × 2) zigzag adlayer was observed in STM at full monolayer. The evolution of the p-polarized spectra as a function of CO2 coverage (Fig. 15b) was attributed to the dipole–dipole coupling within the adsorbate adlayer. This coupling effect led to the splitting of the νas(OCO) mode into an in-phase (negative absorbance band) and an anti-phase vibration (positive band), as confirmed by recent DFT calculations.104 The dipole–dipole coupling is enhanced with increasing CO coverage, thus causing a blueshift of the in-phase νas(OCO) vibration. However, this effect is much smaller on the anti-phase νas(OCO) mode.
The TPD results suggested that a further increase in the exposure yields a third species (coverages of 1.5 ML) which corresponds to the adsorption of CO2 at O2c sites with an Ea = 0.34 eV.103 This species was identified by a recent IRRAS study in conjunction with theoretical simulations of the IR spectra.104 In this study, Xu et al. demonstrated that CO2 resides on O2c sites in a configuration parallel to the surface along the [10] azimuth, with a strong coupling with CO2 adsorbed at Ti5c sites. The calculated coverage-dependent vibrational frequencies were in excellent agreement with the experimental results.104 In addition, Xu et al. performed an IRRAS study of the coadsorption of CO and CO2 on the reduced TiO2(110) surface. They found that CO replaces the pre-adsorbed CO2 at regular Ti5c sites, while CO2 always replaces the pre-adsorbed CO at Ti5c sites that are next nearest to bridge O vacancies (site 1 in Fig. 11). They proposed a thermodynamic equilibrium model to qualitatively explain the competitive adsorption mechanisms depending on the binding energies and kinetic energies of various CO and CO2 species.104
3.5 NO on TiO2
A detailed understanding of the surface chemistry of NO on TiO2 is of great interest in catalysis and photocatalysis, since NO is one of the main components of atmosphere pollution.17,326 The thermal reduction of NO to N2O over TiO2 powder samples was first reported by Boccuzzi et al.327 Yates and coworkers328,329 further investigated this reaction on both oxidized and reduced TiO2(110) single-crystal surfaces, and the formation of (NO)2 dimers at Ti5c sites was suggested as a reaction intermediate. In the following, we discuss recent UHV-FTIRS results for NO adsorption on TiO2 surfaces for both single crystals and powder particles;95,99,105 this allows for deeper insights into the mechanism of this important reduction reaction and the nature of the intermediates.
Exposing the oxidized rutile TiO2(110) surface to NO at 100 K first leads to the formation of cis-(NO)2 dimer species, as confirmed by the observation of characteristic IR bands at about 1875 and 1745 cm−1. These two vibrations are assigned to the symmetric νs and asymmetric νas stretch vibrations of the NO dimer, respectively. The IRRAS results showed that this doublet appears already at very low coverage. A single IR band originating from the stretch vibration of an isolated NO monomer could not be detected. This finding reveals that, even at the low temperature of 100 K, the diffusivity of NO adsorbates is sufficiently large for all NO adsorbates to dimerize. The structure of the (NO)2 species is indicated in Fig. 16. This dimerization leading to the formation of an N–N bond is typical for NO adsorbed on oxides surfaces,330,331 and the corresponding binding energies were obtained from DFT calculations (see Table 2).99 With increasing NO coverage, the reduction reaction takes place as evidenced by the gradual attenuation of the (NO)2-related bands and the appearance of a new vibrational band at 2243 cm−1, which is assigned to the ν(N–N) vibration of N2O. At an exposure of ∼5 L NO, the (NO)2 dimers are nearly fully converted to N2O (Fig. 16a). Similar observations were made for the reduced TiO2(110) surface (Fig. 16b).
 Fig. 16  (a) IRRAS data of NO adsorbed on the oxidized TiO2(110) surface at 100 K with different NO exposure. The light incidence plane is along the [001] direction. (b) IRRAS data of NO adsorbed on the reduced TiO2(110) surface at 100 K with different NO exposure. The light incidence plane is along the [10] direction. (c and d) Calculated ΔR for the (NO)2 dimer adsorbed (c) on Ti4+5c sites and (d) at VO sites as a function of incidence angle for p-polarized and s-polarized light at 1746 or 1876 cm−1. The following optical constants were used for two adsorption sites: (c) Ti4+5c sites: refractive index n3 = 2.4, extinction coefficient k3 = 0; (b) VO sites: n3 = 1.9, k3 = 0. For the adsorbate layer on both sites, the following parameters were used: thickness d2 = 1.14 Å, n2 = 1.5, k2 = 0.3. θB denotes the Brewster angle of TiO2(110) substrates (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.105 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Table 2 Adsorption energies (Ead in kJ mol−1) and characteristic vibrational frequencies (in cm−1) and intensities (in km mol−1) for different NxOy species on the TiO2(110) surface. See text for the technical details of the DFT calculation. Experimental frequencies were obtained by UHV-FTIR spectroscopy on TiO2 powder. The adsorption energies of the N2O2 species are reported relative to two isolated NO monomers in the gas phase as a reference point (reproduced with permission from Stodt et al.99 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry)




Structure

E
ad

Mode

ν
exp.


ν
calc.





NO (Nad)
34.6

ν
NO

1873
1893


NO (Oad)
13.6

ν
NO

1732
1755


N2O2 (NNad)
62.7

ν
s,O–NN–O

1903
1877



ν
a,O–NN–O

1752
1763


N2O2 (Nad)
77.7

ν
s,O–NN–O

1922
1951



ν
a,O–NN–O

1852
1823


N2O2 (rec.)
59.3

ν
N–O2

—
2051



ν
N–O1

—
1759


N2O (Nad)
32.8

ν
N–N

2258
2289



ν
NN–O

—
1366


N2O (Oad)
29.8

ν
N–N

2240
2250



ν
NNO

1254
1227


NO2 (Oad)
39.1

ν
N–O2

1598
1629



ν
N–O1

1254
1249


NO2 (OOad)
32.2

ν
a,O–N–O

1566
1611



ν
s,O–N–O

1298
1310




Overall, the IRRAS results demonstrated that the NO reduction on rutile TiO2(110) occurs also for the fully oxidized surface, and the presence of oxygen vacancies (VO) is not required. The reduction reaction is initiated by the (NO)2 dimer formation at the Ti5c rows, which is then converted to N2O at higher NO exposures as follows:95,105NOad + NOad → (NO)2,ad(NO)2,ad → N2Oad + Oad
The presence of reacted Oad species was identified via an additional set of IRRAS results on rutile TiO2(110) monocrystal surfaces decorated with Au clusters, as reported by Xu and coworkers.102 They found that NO does not adsorb on Au clusters at a substrate temperature of 90 K, whereas the NO reduction reaction still was detected as occurring at the pristine TiO2(110) surface. The corresponding evolution of the charge state of Au clusters was characterized using CO as a probe molecule. The results indicated that the as-deposited Au clusters on rutile TiO2(110) are neutral Au0 species showing typical CO bands at 2105–2112 cm−1, in agreement with previous work.191,332 The pre-adsorption of NO leads to a significant blueshift of the CO band by 16–26 cm−1, which was attributed to the presence of Oad species produced by the reduction of the (NO)2 dimer to N2O. As a result, the neutral Au atoms at the interfacial sites are oxidized to Auδ+ cations via charge transfer to the neighboring Oad species, which accounts for the observed blueshift of the CO band as discussed for CO oxidation on Au/ZnO surfaces in Section 2.6.
Interestingly, the IRRAS data recorded for NO/r-TiO2(110) systems indicated a strong azimuth dependence. For NO adsorption on the oxidized rutile TiO2(110) surface, both (NO)2-related bands are negative for the light incident along the [10] direction, while they exhibit opposite signs for the light incident along the [001] direction (Fig. 16a).105 Surprisingly, a sign reversal of the NO vibrational bands was seen when the molecule was adsorbed on the reduced rutile TiO2(110) surface. In that case, both (NO)2-related vibrations remained unshifted in frequency, but they gave rise to positive absorbance bands for the light incident along the [10] azimuth (Fig. 16b). To understand the unexpected sign variation of the IR bands upon surface reduction, Xu et al.95,105 performed a detailed analysis of the interaction between the transition dipole moments (TDM) and electric fields based on the reflectivity principles at dielectric substrates, as described in Section 2.5.
The calculated ΔR curves for s- and p-polarized (pt and pn) light are illustrated in Fig. 16c and d. The reflectivity changes ΔR depend strongly on the polarization, the incidence angle of IR light, the optical properties of the substrate, and the orientation of the transition dipole governing the vibration. These results provide direct evidence that the cis-N2O2 dimer adsorbed to the Ti5c sites adopts a bidentate configuration bound via two N atoms to the substrate, in accordance with the DFT calculations.105 When it comes to the reduced TiO2(110) surface, the situation becomes more complex. The cis-(NO)2 dimer is likely to adsorb at bridge VO sites in a monodentate configuration (Fig. 16d). Xu et al. proposed that this species is probably not involved in the NO reduction reaction at 100 K. Importantly, the calculated results demonstrated that the geometry change of the (NO)2 dimer at VO sites does not account for the variation in the sign of the IR bands.
The observed sign reversal was attributed to the decrease in the refractive index n3, from 2.4 for the oxidized rutile TiO2(110) to a value below 2.0 for the reduced one.333 This difference in optic properties originates from the n-doping of TiO2 in the presence of O vacancies acting as electron donors. It has been proposed that the excess electrons in TiO2(110) are localized at lattice Ti atoms forming small polarons,285 which is likely responsible for the change in the local optical constant at VO sites. These data demonstrate that changes in the optical constant of TiO2 caused by vacancy doping can be monitored by IRRAS using NO as a probe molecule.
As in a number of previously discussed cases, as well as for the case of NO adsorbed on titania, IR spectroscopy proved capable of bridging the materials gap. In a study reported by Noei et al.,99 nanometer-sized rutile powder particles were investigated by UHV-FTIRS. The clean, adsorbate-free rutile TiO2 powder sample was first prepared by annealing to 850 K under UHV conditions. After subsequent exposure of the activated sample to NO at 110 K, a large number of distinct IR bands were observed (Fig. 17a). The intensities of the individual peaks are strongly dependent on the coverage and substrate temperature, indicating the presence of various NxOy-related surface species formed upon adsorption and subsequent reactions of NO at the surface. These complex IR results were carefully analyzed based on the detailed knowledge acquired from the IRRAS investigations for NO adsorbed on the rutile TiO2(110) surface. Electron microscopy has shown that the predominant surface orientation exposed by the rutile TiO2 powder particles is (110). The vibrational frequencies and assignment of all the observed IR bands are summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 17  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean rutile TiO2 powder to NO (1 × 10−4 mbar) at 110 K in a UHV chamber and subsequent heating to the indicated temperatures. (b) Equilibrium structures calculated with DFT/B3LYP for different NxOy species adsorbed on the rutile(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Stodt et al.99 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The assignment of the vibrational bands was further assisted by the results published by Stodt et al.,99 who performed ab initio periodically embedded cluster calculations to evaluate possible adsorption structures for NO, (NO)2, N2O, and NO2 species on TiO2 substrates. The calculated structures with different binding energies and vibrational frequencies are shown in Table 2. The consistent experimental and theoretical results provided deeper insight into the surface chemistry of NO on rutile nanoparticles. Briefly, after adsorption on the TiO2 surface, NO first undergoes dimerization forming (NO)2, which is decomposed into N2O and an oxygen atom. The latter species can either react with a neighboring NO molecule to yield NO2, or recombine with a second adsorbed O to form O2.
3.6 Water on TiO2
A fundamental understanding of water adsorption on solid surfaces, in particular on the surface of oxides, is very important because water is involved in many catalytic and photocatalytic processes.17,19,207,247 The H2O/TiO2 system is also of pronounced interest with regard to the photocatalytic splitting of water to yield hydrogen.17,19,21,334 The interaction between water and rutile TiO2(110) single-crystal surfaces has been the subject of numerous experimental and theoretical investigations.258,335–356 Different adsorption models, including molecular, dissociative, and mixed adsorption, have been proposed in the literature. Whereas many researchers agree that oxygen vacancies on rutile substrates induce dissociation of water, the question of whether H2O remains intact on perfect parts of the surface is under debate.357
Important progress toward a consistent picture of water surface chemistry on the rutile TiO2 model surface has been achieved in recent IRRAS studies presented by Kimmel and coworkers.109,110 They performed a systematic investigation into the interaction of water with stoichiometric and reduced r-TiO2(110) surfaces. Aided by results of ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations, they derived a rather consistent picture of the structure of water thin films on this substrate,109 as well as the reaction kinetics of water with surface oxygen vacancies (VO).110
For 1 ML of D2O adsorption, the corresponding IRRAS data showed a narrow band at 2605 cm−1 and a broad band at 2320 cm−1. The sign and intensity of these bands was strongly dependent on the light polarization and the direction of light incidence. The s- and p-polarized IR results, together with the structure and dynamic simulations, demonstrated that water binds molecularly at the Ti5c sites at 1 ML coverage.109 The formation of hydrogen bonds between adjacent molecules was proposed to lead to the presence of 1D chains. Each adsorbed D2O molecule thus forms two H-bonds with its neighbors at the Ti5c rows along the [001] direction. As a result, the corresponding OD vibration occurs at 2605 cm−1. The other D in D2O forms a relatively strong H-bond with a substrate Obr atom, accounting for the broad OD band at 2320 cm−1.

Fig. 18d presents the IRRAS data after D2O adsorption of 2 ML for s- and p-polarized light incident along both [10] and [001] azimuths. In this case, the spectra show one narrow band at 2605 cm−1 and two broad, low-lying bands at 2380 and 2235 cm−1. For comparison, Fig. 18a–c display the calculated structure and vibrational density of states (VDOS) obtained using AIMD simulations. In addition, the IR spectra were analyzed based on d-parameter theory.358 Overall, there is good agreement between the experimental and simulated results, as observed for water adsorption at 1 ML.109 The narrow peak at 2605 cm−1 was detected for water coverages of both 1 ML and 2 ML, in agreement with the HREELS results on TiO2(110).337 This band originates from the long, weak H-bonds along the [001] direction between adjacent water molecules in both the first and second layers. Stronger H-bonds occur between first- and second-layer D2O as well as between second-layer D2O and surface Obr atoms, which are characterized by the broader OD vibrations at 2235 and 2380 cm−1, respectively. The H-bond between the second-layer D2O and bridging Obr is oriented more normal to the surface (Fig. 18b), and thus it contributes more to the coupling with the pn-component, as confirmed by the dominating negative band at 2380 cm−1.
 Fig. 18  Structure and dynamics for θ = 2 ML D2O on TiO2(110). (a) Top view and (b) side view of the calculated structure. (c) Calculated VDOS (solid lines) and d(ω) parameters (dashed lines) versus frequency. The same colors are used for each direction for both the VDOS and d parameters. (d) IRAS spectra for s- and p-polarized light along both azimuths (solid lines) and simulated spectra (dashed lines) using the d(ω) shown in (c) (reproduced with permission from Kimmel et al.109 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Petrik and Kimmel110 further investigated by IRRAS the reaction kinetics of water with oxygen vacancies (VO) on reduced TiO2(110) surfaces, in conjunction with electron- and photon-stimulated desorption (ESD, PSD). Water reacts with surface O vacancies leading to a narrow negative OD band at 2737 cm−1 (3711 cm−1 for OH) in the p-polarized spectra, revealing the formation of bridging hydroxyl species oriented normal to the surface (see Fig. 19). They studied the reaction kinetics by monitoring the evolution of the bridging hydroxyls as a function of substrate temperature. They found that this reaction starts at a temperature around 150 K and completes at T > 250 K. The coverages of the reacted hydroxyls, water molecules, and unoccupied VO sites were determined based on the temperature-dependent IRRAS, ESD, and PSD experiments. From an Arrhenius analysis of the reaction kinetic results, they reported a Gaussian distribution of activation energies centered at 0.545 eV with ΔEa = 0.125 eV. This value is very close to that (∼0.5 eV) reported in STM and in a theoretical study of the water monomer hopping along the Ti5c rows of the same surface,342,349 indicating that the thermally activated diffusion of water is the rate-limiting process for its reaction with oxygen vacancies on the reduced TiO2(110) surface (Fig. 19).
 Fig. 19  Schematic of the reactions of H2O on reduced TiO2(110) (reproduced with permission from Petrik and Kimmel.110 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
3.7 CH2O on TiO2
Formaldehyde (CH2O) plays a crucial role as a reagent, intermediate, or product in numerous catalytic and photocatalytic reactions, such as methanol synthesis,123,359 methanol oxidation,360–366 and hydrocarbon production.367–369 A thorough surface science study of CH2O adsorption on the TiO2(110) surface is of particular importance for understanding relevant processes such as photocatalytic oxidation of formaldehyde in the control of air pollution and photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons.313 Despite the fact that this molecule easily polymerizes, making this compound difficult to handle, many groups have investigated this important model system.286,370–380
In an earlier HRRELS and TPD study, the formation of paraformaldehyde (polyoxymethylene, POM) at Ti5c rows was proposed, which was followed by a temperature-induced C–C coupling reaction at O2c vacancy sites (VO) that yielded ethylene when heated to 600 K.286 A later STM study revealed that, at low substrate temperatures (75 K), CH2O preferentially adsorbs on surface VO sites.378 Zhang and coworkers378–380 proposed two different coupling reactions that occur upon annealing to 170 K: (1) the VO-bound CH2O couples with a CH2O adsorbed at Ti5c to yield a diolate species; and (2) two VO-bound CH2O molecules interact forming ethylene that desorbs at ∼215 K. Evidence for the high-temperature channel was provided by XPS and TPD investigations.328,376,377 A more recent polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRAS study80 examined a broad coverage range, from isolated CH2O monomers to thick multilayers. The detailed IR results led to substantial progress in understanding the formaldehyde surface chemistry on TiO2 substrates.
The IRRAS results, together with TPD, STM, and theoretical results, demonstrated consistently that the adsorption and reactions of CH2O on the oxidized TiO2(110) surface are rather complex. The IRRAS data enable the identification of a fairly large number of different species, with relative concentrations depending on the temperature and CH2O coverage (see Fig. 20A). For coverages lower than 0.1 ML and at low temperatures (45–65 K), the predominant species are isolated CH2O monomers adsorbed to Ti5c surface sites. This species was clearly seen in STM (Fig. 20B) and gave rise to a characteristic ν(CO) band at 1709 cm−1 in the IRRAS data. The detailed IR spectra, recorded with s- and p-polarized light incident along both the [001] and [10] azimuths, provided evidence that the CH2O monomers adopt an asymmetric geometry, with the CO axis tilted in either the [10] or the [001] direction (Fig. 20B). This conclusion is in agreement with DFT calculations reported for the same system.80 With increasing CH2O exposure of the cold (65 K) substrate, the formation of CH2O multilayers was monitored using IRRAS. The growth of CH2O multilayers (characteristic ν2 frequency of 1731 cm−1) is initiated by the adsorption of second-layer CH2O on bridging Obr sites (ν2 = 1727 cm−1). From the disappearance of the corresponding vibrational bands, the CH2O multilayers were found to desorb completely upon heating to 120 K, in excellent agreement with the TPD results.80
 Fig. 20  (A) Ball-and-stick model for the adsorption of CH2O on the TiO2(110) surface: (a) CH2O monomer in η1(O) configuration, (b) paraformaldehyde, (c) dioxymethylene. Color code: oxygen (CH2O) = pink, carbon = green, hydrogen = white, oxygen (TiO2) = red, titanium = gray. (B) STM image taken on a clean reduced TiO2(110) surface after dosing with 0.07 ML formaldehyde at 45 K. (b) Line profile along the dashed green line in (a) (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society). 
Temperature-dependent IRRAS data demonstrated that the CH2O monomers undergo polymerization when the substrate is heated to temperatures higher than 70 K. The reaction product, paraformaldehyde (polyoxymethylene, POM), shows two characteristic ν(C–O) vibrations at 1164 and 1109 cm−1, respectively (Fig. 21). This coupling reaction likely involves the formation of CH2O dimers as intermediates, as visualized in the STM images (Fig. 20B). The thermal conversion of CH2O monomers to POM chains is completed at 120 K (Fig. 21). The polarization and azimuth dependence of the IRRAS data revealed that the POM chains are oriented primarily along the [001] direction, but with a substantial amount of distortion. Upon further heating, the POM polymer strands decompose at ∼250 K, leading to the desorption of CH2O. This is in agreement with the TPD results. A careful analysis of the azimuth- and polarization-dependent IRRAS data suggested the presence of a further reaction product, dioxymethylene (DOM). DOM is a minority species and it was proposed to have been formed via a reaction of the chemisorbed CH2O monomers with O atoms, from either the substrate (O2c ions) or oxygen adatoms (Oad) bound to Ti5c sites. This DOM species exhibits a characteristic ν(C–O) vibration at 1075/1065 cm−1.
 Fig. 21  Polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRA spectra obtained after exposing oxidized TiO2(110) to 2 L of CH2O at 110 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured respectively with p-polarized light incident along the (a) [10] and (b) [001] azimuth and with s-polarized light incident along the (c) [10] and (d) [001] azimuth at 110 K (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society). 
3.8 HCOOH on TiO2

3.8.1 HCOOH adsorption on rutile TiO2(110). 
HCOOH is the simplest carboxylic acid, and it can be applied as a probe molecule to investigate the anchoring of more complex organic molecules via carboxylate groups to TiO2 substrates.381,382 A number of investigations have addressed the adsorption of HCOOH on the rutile TiO2(110) surface.106–108,343,383–393 There is a general consensus that HCCOH adsorbs dissociatively on TiO2(110), yielding a formate species bound to Ti5c sites and a hydroxyl group at a neighboring bridging Obr site.343
Hayden et al.106 reported the first IRRAS study on this system. Based on the azimuth-dependent IR results, they proposed the formation of two kinds of formate species with their molecular planes oriented orthogonally to each other. The majority species was a bidentate formate (species A) bound to two Ti5c sites, with the OCO plane aligned along the [001] direction in a C2v symmetry. This was characterized by the νs(OCO) vibration at 1363 cm−1 and the νas(OCO) mode at 1566 cm−1 showing opposite signs. This species is the main constituent of the ordered (2 × 1) adlayer observed in LEED.384,386 They suggested the presence of a minority formate (species B), that has a molecular plane oriented along the [10] direction. Species B was proposed to bind with one oxygen atom to Ti5c sites, and with the other oxygen atom to a bridging oxygen vacancy (VO) site. The corresponding νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) stretch vibrations were observed at 1393 and 1535 cm−1, and the corresponding IRRAS bands again exhibited opposite signs.106
Recently, Mattsson et al.107 reinvestigated the adsorption of formic acid on differently modified TiO2(110) surfaces by polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRAS (see Fig. 22). The IR results were compared to spectra simulations based on spin-polarized DFT calculations. The combined data confirmed that the most abundant species is the bidentate formate bound to two Ti5c atoms (species A), as proposed by Hayden et al.106 The characteristic νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) vibrational bands were detected at 1359 and 1534 cm−1, respectively. However, Mattsson et al. did not find any evidence for the formate species B. Instead, they demonstrated the presence of a minority formate species that adsorbs to one Ti5c atom in a monodentate configuration and interacts via H bonding with a hydroxyl defect at bridging Obr rows, with the OCO plane oriented perpendicularly to the [001] direction.107 This minority species accounts for the observation of a weak IR band at 1562 cm−1 in p-polarized light incident along the [10] azimuth. More importantly, they compared the adsorption of HCOOH on reduced and stoichiometric (oxidized) TiO2(110) surfaces. The IRRAS spectra appeared almost identical and were independent of the different surface preparations. This unexpected finding was interpreted to be due to the high reactivity of the surface oxygen vacancies (VO), thus leading to rapid hydroxylation of VO sites during sample preparation even under UHV conditions, in agreement with STM observation.257 These results revealed that the hydroxyl defects also play an important role in the surface chemistry of TiO2(110), considering that the hydroxylated oxide surfaces represent more realistic model systems.
 Fig. 22  IRRAS spectra of formate adsorbed on sputtered and reduced TiO2(110) single crystal, as measured with (a) and (c) s-polarized light, (b) and (d) p-polarized light, and the IR beam incident in (a) and (b) the [10] direction, and (c) and (d) the [001] direction. For comparison, DRIFT spectra of formate adsorbed on rutile nanoparticles (6–80 nm) acquired in synthetic air at atmospheric pressure is also shown at the bottom of each graph (adapted from Österlund394). The solid lines mark the positions of IRRAS peaks on single-crystal TiO2(110), while the dashed lines mark the positions of the peaks in the deconvoluted DRIFT spectra on the rutile NP at 1358, 1371, 1536, and 1562 cm−1 (reproduced with permission from Mattsson et al.108 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC). 
Mattsson et al.108 further studied the adsorption and photodecomposition of HCOOH on differently modified TiO2(110) surfaces by IRRAS, utilizing s- and p-polarized light incident along both the [001] and [10] azimuths (see Fig. 22). For the reduced TiO2(110), the majority bidentate formate (species A) was clearly identified in IRRAS, as observed for the stoichiometric surface. The IR spectra, recorded for the highly defective TiO2(110) prepared by sputtering, appear substantially different and no longer show any azimuth dependence (Fig. 22). This indicated that the adsorption geometries of formate species were changed and their orientations became random. These findings were attributed to the presence of a rough surface created by sputtering and containing significant amounts of low-coordinated reduced Ti3+ cations.
The IRRAS results acquired on TiO2 single-crystal surfaces could again be used to bridge the material gap and provided an interpretation of the IR results obtained for rutile nanoparticles (NPs) exposed to formic acid.394 As illustrated in Fig. 22, HCOOH adsorption on rutile NPs leads to four distinct IR bands, at 1358, 1375, 1536, and 1562 cm−1. These data are very similar to those for TiO2(110) and are characteristic of bidentate formates (species A) and monodentate formates coupled via H bonding with an adjacent OH group. This is expected, since the low surface energy r-TiO2(110) face is the most abundant facet exposed by rutile NPs. This conclusion is supported by TEM images.394 Interestingly, the concentration of the minority monodentate species is clearly higher for the rutile NPs than for the monocrystal substrates, indicating that the powder particles contain a higher amount of OH defects formed via hydroxylation of oxygen vacancies or protonation of surface O atoms.
The photodecomposition of formate species adsorbed on TiO2(110) surfaces was also monitored by IRRAS.108 The results revealed that the formate photodecomposition rate on monocrystal substrates was much lower than that reported for rutile NPs. This discrepancy was correlated with the absence of O2 electron scavenger and a limited supply of surface hydroxyls on TiO2(110) under UHV conditions. The defective surface prepared by sputtering exhibits a higher photoactivity for formate decomposition, which was attributed to the structure change of adsorbed formate species, increased surface OH population, and higher oxygen availability.108


3.8.2 HCOOH adsorption on anatase TiO2(101). 
It is known that most TiO2 nanoparticles (NPs) show the anatase modification, which exhibits significantly higher photocatalytic activity than that of rutile.17,395 It has been proposed that the anatase(101) surface, which exhibits the lowest free energy and thus occupies the main fraction of surfaces exposed by anatase TiO2 NPs,287,288 is relatively inert. Many molecules (e.g., H2O, CH3OH, and HCOOH) have been reported to adsorb associatively on this surface.287,396–398 This important model surface has been the subject of numerous STM and theoretical investigations.262,263,268,285,292–299,399–401 In contrast to the rutile TiO2(110), there are very few IRRAS studies on the anatase single-crystal surfaces.82,94,96
In one of the few studies available, the interaction of HCOOH with the anatase TiO2(101) was investigated by Xu et al.96 The coverage- and temperature-dependent IRRAS results provided evidence that formic acid does not adsorb intact, in an associative fashion, on this surface as previously thought. Instead, it undergoes deprotonation, thus yielding formate species as with the case of rutile substrates. Based on these findings, the authors proposed that two different types of formate species would occur. The first one binds to the regular surface Ti5c sites with one O atom, thus adopting a monodentate configuration. This species is characterized by the two positive IRRAS bands at 1315 and 1647 cm−1 assigned to the νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) stretching modes, respectively. A second doublet was observed at 1362 and 1598 cm−1, suggesting the presence of a bidentate formate species. Further polarization-resolved IRRAS studies are required to thoroughly understand the surface chemistry of HCOOH on stoichiometric and reduced anatase TiO2(101) surfaces.

3.9 Methanol on TiO2
Alcohol chemistry on titania surfaces is a very important topic in heterogeneous catalysis and photocatalysis, in particular in the context of thermal and photostimulated oxidation of organic contamination on TiO2.2,17,19,243,244 Methanol, the simplest alcohol, is frequently used as a probe molecule to characterize active sites on oxide surfaces.8,243 Because of the position of its highest occupied electronic orbital, this small molecules is also used as a hole scavenger in photochemistry.19,244 The temperature-induced chemistry and photochemistry of methanol adsorbed on the prototypic rutile TiO2(110) surface has been studied by many groups using various experimental and theoretical approaches, with several reviews published on this subject.8,21,243,244 Despite intensive investigations conducted over the last two decades, many fundamental issues concerning the interaction of this small alcohol with titania surfaces have not yet been addressed or are under debate. Even for the interaction between methanol and the stoichiometric (fully oxidized) TiO2(110) surface, a general consensus has not yet been achieved. Whether methanol dissociates or binds intact to Ti5c sites upon adsorption on r-TiO2(110) has not been conclusively answered, neither by experimental work402–408 nor theoretical efforts.409–412 One serious problem that hinders a reliable experimental characterization of an ordered methanol adlayer on r-TiO2(110) is the electron-induced decomposition and/or desorption when using LEED or other techniques in which primary or secondary electrons come into play.8 As a result, the complex LEED pattern reported by Henderson et al.403 for the CH3OH adlayer on r-TiO2(110) has been difficult to reproduce. Very recently, Silber et al.77 reinvestigated this important model adsorbate system by employing two appropriate techniques: HAS (with a thermal energy less than 80 meV) and IRRAS. For both techniques, beam damage can be strictly ruled out. The interpretation of the experimental results was assisted by a thorough theoretical study.
In Fig. 23, we present HAS results that show clearly a well-defined but rather complicated diffraction pattern formed after methanol adsorption on TiO2(110), i.e., a L(1 × 3) structure with “L” standing for “leaning.” It was proposed that this ordered adlayer contains a tilted repeat unit that has the size of three surface unit cells. This model is in full accord with the earlier seminal study by Henderson and coworkers.403 Note that the structure of this methanol adlayer cannot be described by a simple (1 × 3) superstructure, because there are no additional diffraction peaks along the [001] azimuth (Fig. 23c).
 Fig. 23  (a) Energetically most favorable layer of intact methanol molecules at 2/3 ML surface coverage as obtained from the DFT calculations. Ti, O, C, and H atoms are shown in gray, red, black, and cyan, respectively. The L(1 × 3) unit cell is indicated by solid lines. Consecutive [001] rows are shifted by one lattice constant along [001] due to substrate-mediated repulsions between molecules along the [10] direction. (b) Diffraction pattern of a L(1 × 3) unit cell. (c) HAS angular distributions of the clean and methanol-covered surface reveal a L(1 × 3) unit cell. (d) IRRAS spectra of methanol (CH3OH) and deuterated methanol (CD3OD) adsorbate layer on the rutile TiO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Silber et al.77 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group). 
An extensive set of accurate DFT calculations was performed to gain molecular-level insights into the surface chemistry of CH3OH on r-TiO2(110). After a systematic evaluation of a large number of adsorbate configurations with different methanol coverages, the authors concluded that the L(1 × 3) diffraction pattern corresponds to a saturated CH3OH adsorption of 2/3 monolayer (ML), which is the most thermodynamically stable configuration over a wide range of temperature and pressure conditions. Based on these theoretical results, there is an absence of pairs of methoxy species (DD) for this structure, because the pronounced substrate-mediated adsorbate–adsorbate repulsion makes full dissociation less favorable. Instead, two other configurations were found to be more stable: a half-dissociated (MD) or a molecular intact adsorption configuration (MM). Both pairs are strongly stabilized via the formation of intermolecular H-bonds. The calculated binding energies for both MD and MM structures were approximately 0.72 eV, suggesting that these two adsorption configurations are very close in energy. In fact, the difference was so small that it was not possible to determine based on the calculations whether methanol dissociates at least in part (MD pairs, 50% dissociated) or not (MM pairs). Only the presence of a fully dissociated adlayer (DD pairs) could be excluded.
Based on the above, additional experimental input was needed to address whether a substantial faction of molecules are dissociated. In fact, IRRAS data recorded for saturated monolayers of methanol on rutile TiO2(110) would be well suited for investigating this question. If the methanol molecule is deprotonated, a substrate hydroxyl species is expected to form at surface bridge O2c sites. It would exhibit a characteristic vibrational frequency at about 3710 cm−1, as observed for the dissociative adsorption of water at oxygen vacancy Ov sites (Section 3.6).110 Since no such data have been previously recorded, IR experiments were performed. The corresponding IRRAS data (Fig. 23d) show an OH-stretch band centered at 3300 cm−1, which is substantially broadened with a full width at half maximum (FWHM) of ∼200 cm−1. When using deuterated CD3OD for isotopic substitution experiments, this feature is redshifted to about 2500 cm−1 with a FWHM of ∼150 cm−1. The pronounced broadening of the OH (OD) band unambiguously demonstrates the formation of H-bonds between adjacent adsorbates,109 in excellent agreement with the theoretical predictions. More importantly, no sharp OH (OD) band was detected that resulted from the hydroxyl species formed via proton transfer to a substrate O atom. This thus revealed that all CH3OH species within the L(1 × 3) structure should stay intact in a MM configuration. An O–H stretch vibration at 3261 cm−1 was calculated for the MM species that was consistent with the experimental observation.77
A close inspection of the theoretical data revealed that the significant substrate-mediated interaction between adjacent methanol adsorbates originates from the lifting of surface relaxations. This effect, together with the formation of intermolecular H-bonds, gives rise to the formation of the complex, well-ordered L(1 × 3) superstructure containing pairs of intact CH3OH molecules and unoccupied substrate sites. In summary, the combined HAS, IRRAS, and DFT investigations led to the derivation of a rather complicated picture for the adsorption of methanol on rutile TiO2(110). The final structure results from the balance between strong bonding to the substrate and the corresponding lifting of surface relaxation, giving rise to an effective substrate-mediated adsorbate–adsorbate repulsion. These important findings are quite general, and such substrate relaxations are likely to also be relevant for other adsorbates on titania, as well as on other metal oxides.
3.10 Acetone on TiO2
The interaction of acetone ((CH3)2CO) with the rutile TiO2(110) surface has been extensively studied as an important model system413–423 regarding the applications of titania in catalysis and photocatalysis.424–427 Henderson investigated the thermal and photoinduced reactions of acetone on TiO2(110) and found that acetone is photoactive solely in the presence of coadsorbed oxygen species.413–419 The reaction mechanism proposed in this work involves two steps, illustrated in Fig. 24A. The photochemical process is initiated by a thermal reaction between acetone, adsorbed molecularly at Ti5c sites in a η1 configuration, and chemisorbed oxygen forming an η2-acetone diolate ((CH3)2COO) as an intermediate. The second step is a photoreaction that ejects a methyl radical from the acetone diolate. Consequently, the latter is converted to an acetate species.
 Fig. 24  (A) Schematic of a reaction channel for acetone adsorbed on oxidized TiO2(110) that leads to CH3 emission off-normal to the surface via the acetone diolate intermediate. (B) Schematic of a possible reaction pathway for acetone adsorbed on oxidized TiO2(110) that leads to CH3 emission normal to the surface via an acetone enolate intermediate. (a) → (b) UV irradiation leads to nonthermal reactions between acetone and adsorbed oxygen that produce enolate. (b) → (c) η2(C,O)-enolate is photoactive and ejects a CH3 radical normal to the surface leaving ketene. (c) → (d) Ketene converts to acetate, either during irradiation or during postirradiation TPD. Note that a number of chemisorbed oxygen forms are active in the acetone photooxidation, such as O2−, O22−, Oa, etc. However, only Oa is shown (reproduced with permission from Petrik et al.111 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
The above reaction mechanism was confirmed by a recent IRRAS study combined with TPD and angle-resolved photostimulated desorption (AR-PSD).111 The IRRAS data recorded for s- and p-polarized light incident along both the [10] and [001] azimuths provide direct spectroscopic evidence for the η2-acetone diolate species as the photoactive precursor formed via thermal reaction of η1-acetone with predosed oxygen at Ti5c sites. The η2-acetone diolate was characterized by the IR bands at ∼1195, ∼1178, and 1013 cm−1 that are assigned primarily to the ρ(CH3) mode coupled to νs(CCC) and/or νs(OCO) vibrations of acetone diolate. However, the contribution of the uncoupled νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) stretch vibrations of acetone diolate cannot be ruled out. The presence of this species was further supported by 18O/16O isotopic exchange experiments. The activated oxygen can exist at the surface in different forms, such as O2−, O22−, Oad, etc.
At low acetone coverage (0.17 ML), UV irradiation at 30 K leads to the appearance of two new bands at 1454 and ∼1429 cm−1 in the p-polarized spectra and a weak band at 1510 cm−1 in the s-polarized spectra. These are characteristic of the νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) vibrations of an acetate species. This assignment was supported by isotopic substitution experiments with D6-acetone (Fig. 25). The photoinduced acetate production was accompanied by the release of CH3 radicals. Simultaneously, the acetone diolate bands disappeared completely after UV irradiation.111 The AR-PSD results displayed a CH3 distribution with an “off-normal” component at 66° from the surface normal along the [10] direction, in good agreement with the orientation of the C–CH3 bonds in the η2-acetone diolate (see Fig. 24A). The IRRAS data further revealed that acetate is adsorbed with both O atoms to the Ti5c sites along the [001] direction, in agreement with the previous observation from electron-stimulated desorption ion angular distribution (ESDIAD) experiments300 and DFT calculations.428 In contrast to the high-temperature thermal production channel,415,418,428 the acetate was identified as a direct product from the photodecomposition of acetone at temperatures as low as 30 K.111
 Fig. 25  Differential absorbance IRAS spectra in (a) p- and (b) s-polarized modes for 0.17 ML and 0.60 ML of hydrogenated (H6-) and deuterated (D6-) acetone dosed on an oxidized TiO2(110) surface without UV irradiation (red and light blue traces) and after UV irradiation (dark blue and green traces). The IR beam is parallel to the [10] azimuth (s-vector is along the Ti and O rows). The samples were irradiated for 60 s with a photon fluence of ∼6 × 1017 photons per cm2 with energies >3 eV (reproduced with permission from Petrik et al.112 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
As the acetone coverage increased from 0.17 to 0.6 ML, it was found that the amount of the “off-normal” CH3 PSD component remained unchanged, consistent with the IRRAS data showing that the intensity of the acetone diolate also does not increase for coverage higher than 0.17 ML (Fig. 25).112 At higher coverage, only the increase in the “normal” component of the CH3 PSD was observed. Based on the experimental results, Petrik et al.112 proposed a second photoreaction channel for acetone decomposition at higher coverage. As shown in Fig. 24B, a direct photoinduced reaction occurs in the first step, in which acetone reacts with activated oxygen to yield an acetone enolate species. The latter acts as an intermediate with its C–CH3 bond directed along the surface normal, which accounts for the “normal” component detected in the CH3 PSD. However, the acetone enolate was not identified in IRRAS (Fig. 25), and further investigations are required for a deeper understanding of the new photoreaction pathway illustrated in Fig. 24B.112
3.11 Aromatic carboxylic acids on TiO2
Benzoic acid (BA) and terephthalic acid (TPA, often also referred to as benzenedicarboxylic acid (BDC)) are the two simplest aromatic carboxylic acids. The adsorption of BA and TPA molecules on the rutile TiO2(110) surface represents an important model system for understanding the anchoring of more complex dye molecules to the TiO2 substrate, e.g., in the Grätzel-cell.7,223 Based on the STM, ESDIAD, and LEED results, Guo et al.429,430 proposed that BA adsorbs dissociatively on the TiO2(110) surface to form benzoate species, which are bound via the bidentate carboxylate groups to the Ti5c atoms in an upright adsorption geometry. They reported that the attractive interaction between adjacent benzoates results in the formation of T-shape dimers along the [10] direction. These findings were supported by XPS and STM investigations.431–433 For the adsorption of TPA on TiO2(110), two distinct adsorption configurations were proposed based on near-edge X-ray absorption fine structure spectroscopy (NEXAFS), STM, and noncontact atomic force microscopy (NC-AFM) data.434–437 At low coverages (up to 0.30 ML), TPA adopts a disordered and flat-lying adsorption geometry, while at full monolayer, a conversion from a flat-lying to an upright orientation occurs. In addition, the combined experimental and theoretical investigations proved that TPA molecules undergo dimerization at saturation coverage.434,435,437 Recently, Buchholz et al.75 used IRRAS in conjunction with DFT calculations to investigate the adsorption of BA and TPA molecules on TiO2(110). The detailed IR results (in particular the observation of different OH bands) allow the following issues to be addressed: (1) molecular vs. dissociative adsorption, (2) coverage-dependent adsorption structures, and (3) origin of the dimer formation.
The IRRAS data provided direct spectroscopic evidence that the adsorption of both BA and TPA molecules on TiO2(110) at 300 K leads to deprotonation, yielding carboxylate groups bound to the Ti5c sites and hydroxyls at bridging Obr sites. The latter was unambiguously identified by the observation of the characteristic OH band at 3700 cm−1. Careful analysis of the data by employing reflectivity calculations on dielectric substrates revealed that, at low coverage, the benzoate adsorbs at Ti5c sites in an upright bidentate geometry, in agreement with STM observations.429,430 TPA, on the other hand, adopts a flat-lying geometry with both carboxylates bound to the surface, each of them in a monodentate configuration. Further increasing the coverage of TPA results in a conversion from flat-lying to upright-oriented species. A full monolayer is formed at saturation, and the IR data indicate dimerization of neighboring molecules due to pronounced attractive intermolecular interactions between the COOH groups pointing away from the surface. The authors proposed that the BA dimers are stabilized by the interaction between adjacent phenyl rings, while the TPA dimerization is correlated with the formation of double hydrogen bonds between neighboring apical carboxylic groups.75
3.12 Photogenerated electron polarons in TiO2
Understanding the nature of electron trap states in TiO2 is of great importance since these states play a crucial role in photo- and charge-induced photocatalytic reactions. The trapping of charges—electrons as well as holes—in titania has been the subject of numerous experimental and theoretical studies.438–449 Despite extensive investigations, a general consensus on the precise binding energies of polaronic states and a proper description of their nature has not yet been achieved. This is because most of the experimental work focused on TiO2 powder particles, for which it is difficult to make a straightforward comparison to theoretical calculations. Results on well-defined TiO2 single crystals, which would allow for such a comparison, are scarce. Recently, Sezen et al.85 investigated shallow trap states of electrons in TiO2, both nanoparticles and single crystals, by employing IR spectroscopy.
The trap states in both rutile TiO2 powders and single-crystal TiO2(110) were populated by two different methods: n-doping via exposure to H atoms and photoexcitation. The corresponding IR spectra were found to be quite similar, demonstrating that e-polarons are responsible for the signatures in the IR data.85 Note that this is not the case for ZnO, where the UV-induced IR absorbance features were not detected after n-doping of ZnO with atomic H, indicating the hole polaronic states (see Section 2.9).83 Importantly, the high-quality IRRAS data recorded for rutile TiO2(110) single crystals revealed that UV irradiation leads to the appearance of a sharp feature at 910 cm−1 (112 meV) with two additional absorption features at 1205 and 1375 cm−1. According to the DFT calculations, the binding energies of electron polarons (which are the result of a complex interplay between a relaxation of the lattice ions and the trapped electron, Fig. 26) amount to 380 meV, consistent with the results of optical studies.438–440,442,444 A direct excitation of electrons trapped in such a polaron state into the conduction band thus cannot explain the absorption feature observed in TiO2(110) single-crystal IR data. Instead, these features were assigned to the excitation of electrons from the ground state of an intrinsic polaron trap into the excited hydrogenic states within the polaron trap potential well (see Fig. 26). However, this interpretation has been questioned and, at present, it appears likely that the excitations seen in the IR data are related to polarons in the vicinity of defects, e.g., bulk O vacancies or Ti interstitials.
 Fig. 26  Schematic electronic structure, the hydrogenic potential, and the electron spin density. Left panel, top: schematics showing the excitation of electrons within shallow trap states by absorption of IR photons. Left panel, bottom: electron spin density at self-trapped polaron Ti3+ site in bulk rutile as obtained from DFT calculations (see text). Axial and equatorial Ti–O distances are given in angstroms. Stoichiometric bulk values are 1.951 (axial) and 1.939 (equatorial). Right panel: Hydrogenic potential at polaron Ti3+ site in bulk rutile showing the different excitations giving rise to absorption bands in the IR data (reproduced with permission from Sezen et al.85 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group). 
4. Cerium oxide (CeO2)
4.1 Background
Among all oxides, ceria (CeO2) plays a special role because of the low activation energy needed to remove oxygen atoms from the stoichiometric compound. As one of the most easily reducible oxides, it has received increased attention from both fundamental and technological perspectives. Cerium oxide has been extensively utilized as a crucial component in catalysts or as support material in numerous catalytic reactions, such as oxidations of CO and hydrocarbons, low-temperature water–gas shift (WGS), and the conversion of syngas to alcohols (see Fig. 27).4,450–455 The importance of ceria originates from its unique redox properties and high oxygen storage capacity (OSC), as described in the seminal review article by Trovarelli.4 The fact that oxygen vacancies can be rapidly formed and eliminated in CeO2 makes this particular oxide an ideal material, e.g., for three-way catalysts, which is of great importance in the context of automobile exhaust emission control.36
 Fig. 27  Histogram of number of publications on ceria (blue bars) and publications on ceria associated with catalysis (red bars) from 1994 to 2015 (Source: Web of Science, Jan 9, 2016, reproduced with permission from Montini et al.30 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society). 
Ceria is a wide-bandgap semiconductor (5.5–6.0 eV).456 The valence and conduction bands are formed prominently by O2p and Ce5d states, respectively.457 The unoccupied Ce 4f states are located within the bandgap and become populated after reduction of CeO2 to yield electron-rich Ce3+ cations.458–460 In the bulk of CeO2, the Ce atoms are 8-fold coordinated. The O atoms are coordinated in a tetrahedral fashion with four Ce atoms. The three energetically most stable low-index crystallographic surfaces of ceria exhibit (111), (110), and (100) orientations. All of these surfaces expose coordinatively unsaturated Ce4+ and O2− ions with different atomic arrangements. The CeO2(111) is a nonpolar surface of Tasker type 2, in which the stacking unit contains three layers with the Ce layer sandwiched between two oxygen layers, thus resulting in zero net dipole moment of the stacking unit.461 The mixed-terminated CeO2(110) surface is also nonpolar, with each layer containing stoichiometric CeO2 units (Tasker type 1). Bulk-truncated CeO2(100) is a polar surface of Tasker type 3, and is either O- or Ce-terminated.461 The (1 × 1) CeO2(100) surface is unstable as a result of uncompensated surface charges, and surface reconstruction is expected to occur. A straightforward solution for removing the electrostatic instability would be to transfer 50% oxygen atoms from an O-terminated to a Ce-terminated surface.28 However, understanding the stabilization mechanism of the polar CeO2(100) surface is a difficult task; as for other polar oxide surfaces, experimental facts are scarce so far.
From previous theoretical work, a general consensus has been achieved that the surface stability follows the sequence CeO2(111) > CeO2(110) > CeO2(100).28,462–469 Regarding the reducibility, computational work mostly using DFT revealed that the (110) surface has the lowest oxygen vacancy formation energy, suggesting that this particular surface orientation should exhibit an extremely high activity for reactions involving O transfer.39,470
Recently, CeO2 nanocrystals with controlled morphologies, such as nanopolyhedra, nanorods, and nanocubes exposing differently oriented crystallographic surface planes, have been fabricated.26,471–478 It was found that these CeO2 nanoparticles (NPs) exhibit strong structure–activity relationships, and a higher catalytic performance was observed generally for the rod-shaped ceria NPs.471–475 To achieve molecular-level insights into the surface chemistry of nanostructured ceria particles, surface science studies on single crystal-based model catalysts with well-defined surfaces are required. To date, the structure and chemical reactions on various ceria surfaces have been investigated by a variety of experimental and theoretical approaches. Mullins28 provides detailed information in an excellent review. IR results recorded for ceria powder materials have been extensively reported.479–493 However, in contrast to ZnO and TiO2, where IRRAS has been utilized to monitor the adsorption and reactions in an almost routine fashion, the application of IRRAS to well-characterized CeO2 single-crystal surfaces is still very rare. This lack of reliable reference data makes a precise assignment of corresponding IR bands observed for ceria NPs virtually impossible. Consequently, a fundamental understanding of complex nanostructured ceria is still missing. Here, we discuss the recent progress reported by Yang et al.,78,79,86 who were able to monitor the surface structure and active sites on oxidized and reduced CeO2(111) and CeO2(110) surfaces by employing azimuth- and polarization-dependent IRRAS using CO and methanol as probe molecules. To bridge the material gap, additional UHV-FTIRS investigations on nanostructured ceria particles were performed to determine the complex surface atomic structure of ceria nanorods.79
4.2 CO on CeO2

4.2.1 CO adsorption on CeO2(111). 
The surface chemistry of CeO2(111) single-crystals has been studied by a number of groups using experimental and theoretical approaches.494–506 Most of the previous work aimed at unraveling the properties of oxygen vacancies, as these defects are generally believed to play a crucial role in all redox reactions occurring over CeO2-based catalysts.36 In earlier work, it was suggested that the excess two electrons created by the formation of an oxygen vacancy are localized on two Ce cations at nearest-neighbor positions relative to the defect, thus yielding two reduced Ce3+ ions adjacent to the oxygen vacancy.498 However, the localization of the two excess electrons was revised recently by a combination of STM measurements and DFT calculations,501–506 which revealed that the additional electrons are virtually located some distance away from the vacancy site (e.g., site 2 in Fig. 28a).
 Fig. 28  (a) Ball-and-stick model of the CeO2(111) surface (top view) with (A) top or (B) subsurface oxygen vacancy (VO). The position of the vacancy is indicated by the dashed circle. Color code: red = top surface oxygen, light red = subsurface oxygen, white = Ce4+, blue = Ce3+. (b) and (c) Experimental IRRA spectra of different doses of CO (b) at 68 K on stoichiometric CeO2(111) and (c) at 74 K on reduced CeO2(111) at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with p-polarized light incident along the [−110] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.86 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry). 
As discussed in Section 3.2, by using CO as a probe molecule, IR spectroscopy has proven to be well suited to investigations of the nature of O vacancies for different TiO2 single crystals. Although a large set of IR data is available for CO adsorption on ceria powder particles, reliable spectroscopic signatures on the adsorption of this simple diatomic molecule on well-defined ceria substrates have only become available recently (see the discussion in Section 1.1). As a result, the precise assignment and, in particular, the identification of defect-related IR bands of CO adsorbed on ceria powder particles is still controversial. To overcome this lack of IRRAS data for molecular adsorbates bound to well-defined CeO2 surfaces, Yang et al.86 performed a thorough IRRAS characterization of CO adsorption on both oxidized and reduced CeO2(111) surfaces. The well-resolved vibrational bands in these IRRAS data now provide the basis for an unambiguous characterization and detection of oxygen vacancies via stretch frequencies of CO adsorbed close to such defects. In particular, these data allow for the correction of previous, often conflicting, assignments of CO vibrational bands derived from ceria powder data.
The fully oxidized, stoichiometric CeO2(111) surface exposes 3-fold coordinated O2−3c and 7-fold coordinated Ce4+7c ions within a stable (1 × 1) structure.28 The IRRAS data recorded after CO adsorption at ∼70 K with p-polarized light incident along both the [−110] and [−211] azimuths show a single sharp negative band at 2154 cm−1 (Fig. 28b). In contrast, only a very weak negative peak was detected for the corresponding s-polarized spectra for light incident along the two high-symmetry directions. These findings indicate that CO is bound to surface Ce4+7c sites in a nearly perpendicular geometry, i.e., the molecular axis is oriented normal to the substrate surface. From an analysis of the temperature-dependent experiments, the binding energy of this CO species was determined to be 0.27 eV. These IR results were nicely corroborated by the data from first principle DFT studies. The calculated frequency (2145 cm−1) and binding energy (0.28 eV) for CO adsorbed at Ce4+7c sites within an ideal, stoichiometric surface are fully consistent with the experimental data.
For the reduced CeO2(111) surface, prepared by annealing in UHV, the defect concentration is about 9% (i.e., 9% of the O atoms in the top surface plane are missing), as estimated from XPS data.86 IRRAS results recorded after exposing this defective substrate to CO revealed an additional, dominating vibrational feature at 2163 cm−1, shifted by about 10 cm−1 with respect to the frequency seen for the perfect substrate (2154 cm−1). This new band must be due to CO adsorbed at surface sites in the vicinity of defects (Fig. 28c). Temperature-dependent IRRAS data again allowed the binding energy of this species to be estimated at 0.31 eV, a value slightly higher than that for the fully oxidized surface. Interestingly, the defect-induced CO vibration is blueshifted by about 10 cm−1, in contrast to the observation made for TiO2 surfaces (Section 3.2). A redshift of 10 cm−1 was found for CO on the reduced rutile TiO2(110) surface. In the case of anatase TiO2(101), no frequency shift was observed due to the fact that O vacancies created by reduction are located deeper in the bulk and they are thus invisible to adsorbed CO. A comparison to ZnO is hampered because this oxide is not reducible (Zn only exists in one oxidation state, Zn2+). As a result, O vacancies in a comparable form to rutile TiO2 and CeO2 do not exist.
The most straightforward assignment of the new CO vibrational band at 2163 cm−1, observed on the reduced ceria (111) substrate, might be to a CO species bound to 7-fold coordinated, reduced Ce7c3+ surface ions (site 2 in Fig. 28a). The results of the DFT calculations, however, strongly suggest that this stretch frequency is characteristic for CO adsorbed at 6-fold coordinated Ce4+6c sites in the direct vicinity of the O vacancy (site 1 in Fig. 28a). For these species, the calculated frequency is 2157 cm−1 and the DFT binding energy is 0.40 eV. Both values are in agreement with experimental results.86 The increased adsorption energy and blueshifted vibrational frequency of this defect-related adsorbate species was explained in terms of additional electrostatic interactions. These interactions occurred via coupling of the CO dipole with that of the top-surface O–Ce double layer when the CO tilts inside the empty space in the center of the vacancy.
These results demonstrated that, while on TiO2 and many other oxides, the CO vibrational frequency is governed by the charge state of the metal cation, in the case of ceria, the coordination geometry may play an equally important role. Note also that these new results challenge previous assignments, where different vibrational frequencies observed for CO bound to ceria powder particles were assigned to different oxidation states of the corresponding Ce binding sites.479–488


4.2.2 CO adsorption on CeO2(110). 
The stoichiometric, mixed-terminated CeO2(110) surface (Fig. 29a) consists of two oxygen rows (3-fold coordinated O2−3c) and a row of Ce ions (6-fold coordinated Ce4+6c) running along the [10] direction. When a ceria substrate exhibits this ideal, bulk-truncated structure, a well-defined (1 × 1) LEED pattern is observed.79 It is generally expected that this surface exhibits high catalytic redox activity since the oxygen vacancy formation energy for this substrate is the lowest among the three stable low-index ceria surfaces.39,470 However, compared with the nonpolar (111) surface, much less experimental information is available for the very interesting (110) surface orientation.28,507 Recently, Yang et al.79 conducted a systematic surface science study on the atomic structure evolution of CeO2(110) single-crystal surfaces under different reduction conditions using IRRAS in combination with grazing-emission XPS and LEED. The vibrational bands observed for the adsorbed CO IRRAS results provided direct spectroscopic evidence that the structure of the CeO2(110) surface is much more complex than expected. Furthermore, for this surface orientation, massive structural changes were observed upon heating (see Fig. 29a).
 Fig. 29  (a) Structure evolution during reduction of the CeO2(110) surface. (A) The stoichiometric, fully oxidized (1 × 1) phase. (B) (2 × 1) reconstruction. (C) (111) nanofaceting. The oxygen vacancies are indicated by the dashed circles. (b) IRRA spectra of 1 ML CO adsorption on oxidized (blue line) and reduced (red line) ceria (110) at 80 K with p-polarized light incident along the [10] azimuth. The IRRAS data of 1 ML CO adsorption on oxidized and reduced CeO2(111) are also shown for comparison. (c) CeO2(110) surface faceting probed by IRRAS after CO adsorption. Fitting of p- and s-polarized spectra of faceted CeO2(110) exposed to CO at 70 K with light incident along the [10] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.79 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH). 
As illustrated in Fig. 29b, adsorption of CO on the fully oxidized (1 × 1)-CeO2(110) surface leads to a strong IR band at 2170 cm−1, which is assigned to carbon monoxide adsorbed at 6-fold coordinated Ce4+6c sites within ideal, fully stoichiometric parts of the surface. Annealing the sample at 800 K in UHV in the absence of O2 results in surface reconstruction of the CeO2(110) substrate, leading to a well-defined (2 × 1) LEED pattern.79 A quantitative analysis of the results from grazing-emission XPS revealed that the (2 × 1) reconstructed surface contains ∼60% Ce3+ and 33% defect-related O2− species. Note that the removal of one (neutral) oxygen atom leaves two electrons behind, resulting in the conversion of two Ce4+ species into Ce3+. According to the XPS results, 25% of the O atoms are missing in the reconstructed CeO2(110) surface. A tentative model was proposed in which the stoichiometry of the (2 × 1) surface resembles that of a Ce2O3 layer (Fig. 29a). Previous theoretical work pointed out that, upon O vacancy formation, one of the adjacent O atoms moves toward the vacancy until it adopts a bridge site. This lateral displacement effectively yields a split O vacancy.508–510 As shown in Fig. 29b, CO adsorbed on this highly reduced (2 × 1) CeO2(110) surface exhibits a new, strong vibrational band at 2175 cm−1, which must be assigned to defect-related CO species. This band exhibits a slight blueshift of 5 cm−1 relative to CO adsorbed on the oxidized surface, in agreement with the observation for CeO2(111). An analysis of the temperature-dependent IRRAS data allowed the determination of the binding energies of CO on oxidized and reduced CeO2(110) surfaces: 0.28 and 0.32 eV, respectively.79
Importantly, the IRRAS data revealed further substantial structural changes in the CeO2(110) substrate when the samples were subjected to repeated cycles of sputtering and annealing. Fig. 29c displays the corresponding deconvoluted IR spectra recorded with p-polarized light incident along the [10] azimuth after these substrates were exposed to CO. The simultaneous observation of four different CO vibrational bands demonstrates the presence of a massive restructuring. Based on the results obtained for CO adsorbed on the CeO2(111) and CeO2(110) surfaces, it was proposed that, on the restructured surface, partially reduced (110) terraces (CO vibrational bands at 2178 and 2170 cm−1) and {111} nanofacets (2163 and 2154 cm−1) coexist. In contrast to the four bands seen in the p-polarized spectra, the s-polarized spectra show only two (111)-related CO bands (Fig. 29c). This finding is well explained by the fact that the {111} nanofacets are tilted by about 35° with respect to the CeO2(110) surface plane (Fig. 29a). Consequently, the adsorbed CO molecules adopt a tilted adsorption geometry that accounts for the IR bands seen in the s-polarized spectra. In line with this explanation, no (110)-related CO bands were detected with s-polarized light, which is consistent with the fact that CO binds to (110) terraces in an upright orientation.79
The surface faceting of CeO2(110) was also studied by XPS. The corresponding results showed that, upon further annealing of the (2 × 1) CeO2(110) surface, the concentration of O vacancies does not increase. Instead, heating leads to a substantial decrease of both the Ce3+ (35%) and the defect-induced O2− (10%) XPS peaks. These results are consistent with the formation of {111} nanofacets, which are energetically more favorable due to their lower surface free energy.
In summary, the polarization-dependent IRRAS data obtained using CO as a probe molecule enabled the atomic structure evolution of CeO2(110) under different conditions to be monitored. The reduction first leads to the conversion of the oxidized (1 × 1) structure into a more stable (2 × 1) reconstruction, releasing about 25% surface oxygen atoms. Surface {111} faceting then occurs upon further reduction, which consequently decreases the population of O vacancy sites.79


4.2.3 CO adsorption on CeO2 nanorods. 
The shapes and sizes of ceria nanoparticles (NPs) strongly depend on the reaction schemes.26,471–478 Numerous shapes can be obtained by varying the synthesis conditions, and these shapes not only differ in their forms but also exhibit quite different chemical and catalytic properties. For example, rod-shaped ceria NPs were found to have particularly high catalytic activities (e.g., for CO oxidation).26,472–475 A rationalization for this enhanced chemical activity has not been possible to date, since precise information on the structure and corresponding chemical properties of the surfaces exposed by these NPs has not been available. Although one can determine nanoparticle shapes from TEM images and therefore speculate on the surface orientation, the resolution in TEM is typically not sufficient for determining the positions of individual atoms on exposed surfaces. This lack of detailed information has hampered a thorough understanding of the NP chemical properties, which is a prerequisite for a further rational optimization of their properties. A more thorough theoretical analysis is also hampered by this lack of structural information. As a result, the fabrication and engineering of these complex nanostructured materials occurs largely on an empirical basis. Rapid innovation steps in this area would require a detailed atomic-scale understanding. In recent work, Yang et al.79 presented a systematic study on the surface atomic structure of ceria nanorods, again based on adsorbed CO acting as a probe molecule. Since the CO stretch frequencies observed for the NPs could be identified using accurate reference data acquired for CO adsorbates on well-defined, differently oriented ceria single-crystal surfaces, these authors were able to conclude that ceria nanorods actually undergo extensive restructuring and form {111} nanofacets.79

Fig. 30a shows the UHV-FTIRS data recorded after CO adsorption on rod-shaped ceria NPs at 60 K. Prior to the exposure to CO, residual adsorbates on the ceria nanorods were removed by activation at 723 K under UHV conditions. Two predominant CO vibrational bands at 2170 and 2152 cm−1 can be identified. By comparing with the results obtained for CO on a well-defined ceria single-crystal surface (see Fig. 29b), these two major bands could be assigned to CO bound to Ce4+ sites within (110) and (111) surface regions, respectively. Note, however, that the IR bands recorded for CO adsorbed on ceria nanorods are rather broad, indicating the presence of some minority CO species bound to defect sites, such as edges and corners, as well as to residual small CeO2 nanoparticles decorating the nanorods, as seen in the corresponding TEM images (Fig. 30b). Naively, one would expect that ceria nanorods expose (110) surfaces as well as a portion of (100) planes.471,472 Consequently, in addition to the (110)-related CO species, the (100)-related species should also be visible. However, such an additional, (100)-related band could not be resolved, indicating a low concentration of such species.
 Fig. 30  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing the ceria nanorods to different doses of CO at 60 K. (b) High-magnification HRTEM images of CeO2 nanorods showing clearly {111} facets formed on the (110) plane (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.79 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH). 
The assignment of the IR bands observed for CO adsorbed on the ceria nanorods was further supported by temperature-dependent experiments. Altogether, these IR results provided direct spectroscopic evidence that the ceria nanorods expose a large number of (111)-oriented surface regions resulting from a nanofaceting of the (110) planes. This conclusion was corroborated by high-resolution TEM. As illustrated in Fig. 30b, the HR-TEM images reveal that the ceria nanorods have their long axis oriented along the [110] crystallographic direction, as expected. The detailed atomic-scale view of the surface shows the presence of a large number of (111) terminations, mostly in the form of nanofacets formed on the (110) plane.79
These detailed IRRAS studies on the surface structure evolution of various CeO2 single crystals thus provided a number of unexpected insights into rod-shaped ceria NPs, revealing that the (110) planes restructure via {111}-type nanofaceting. These results demonstrate that ceria nanorods expose rather complex and irregular surface structures (sawtooth-like nanofacets, O vacancies, edges, and corners). Further work is needed to show whether these defects are responsible for the higher catalytic performance generally observed with this type of ceria NPs. This correlation between the surface atomic environment of single crystals and powder catalysts bridges the materials gap and has important consequences for the predictive rational design of catalytic materials at nanoscale.

4.3 Methanol adsorption on CeO2
The adsorption of methanol on metal oxide surfaces is an interesting topic because methanol, the simplest alcohol, is involved in many catalytic and photocatalytic reactions.360–366,511 It is also frequently used as a sensitive probe molecule to characterize active sites of oxide surfaces.512,513 IR spectroscopy has been extensively applied in studies of the interaction of methanol with ceria nanoparticles (NPs)489–493 and with ceria thin films.514–518 Typically, for CH3OH adsorbed on CeO2 surfaces, a carbonyl C–O stretching mode in the frequency regime between 1000 and 1200 cm−1 is observed. Previous studies on polycrystalline ceria powders have proposed a simple relation between the redshift of the methoxy-related C–O stretching frequency and the number of coordinated Ce cations.489,490 In accordance with this hypothesis, the IR bands observed at about 1108, 1065, and 1015 cm−1 were assigned to monodentate, bidentate, and tridentate methoxide species, respectively. The recent paper by Yang et al.,78 however, has challenged this assignment scheme by determining the vibrational bands of methanol adsorbed on two well-defined ceria monocrystal surfaces, CeO2(110) and CeO2(111). An extensive set of DFT calculations was conducted to aid in the assignment of the experimentally observed vibrational bands.
The adsorption of CH3OH at the fully oxidized (1 × 1) CeO2(110) surface leads to the appearance of a single intense band at 1108 cm−1 in the IRRAS data, recorded with the IR light incident along both the [001] and [10] azimuths. This band was assigned to methoxy species bound to the surface Ce4+6c ions in a monodentate configuration (Fig. 31a), in accordance with the results from the theoretical analysis.78 This assignment was further supported by isotopic substitution experiments with CD3OD. A redshifted IR band at 1060 cm−1 was observed for this isotopologue. The isotopic shift factor amounts to 0.96, as expected.
 Fig. 31  (a) IRRA spectra of methanol at the fully oxidized CeO2(110) surface with the IR light incident along the [001] azimuthal direction. The sample was exposed to 1.3 × 10−10 mbar methanol vapor for 5 seconds (gray) and 10 seconds (red) at 125 K. (b) IRRA spectra of methanol at the fully oxidized CeO2(111) surface. The sample was exposed to 1.3 × 10−10 mbar methanol vapor for 5 seconds at indicated temperatures (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.78 Copyright 2016, Elsevier). 
For the fully oxidized CeO2(111) surface, the IRRAS results were more complex and three vibrational bands were detected at the substrate temperatures investigated (87 and 120 K). As shown in Fig. 31b, two predominant bands appeared at 1085 and 1060 cm−1. In addition, a weak feature was resolved at 1108 cm−1. This latter feature was attributed to minority methanol species adsorbed at a small amount of (110) facets exposed at step edges within the CeO2(111) surface. The presence of (110) step edges has been confirmed by previous STM, AFM, and DFT calculations.500,519,520 Additional evidence was obtained from IRRAS experiments using CO as another probe molecule. In addition to the major band at 2154 cm−1 originating from CO bound to perfect Ce4+7c ions on the stoichiometric CeO2(111) surface,86 a second weak band was observed at 2170 cm−1 that is characterized for CO bound to the oxidized (110) facet.79 After exposure of the CeO2(111) substrate to CD3OD, the two major bands at 1085 and 1060 cm−1 were shifted to lower frequencies at 1040 and 1020 cm−1, with an expected isotopic shift factor of 0.96 as in the case of the CeO2(110) surface.
The assignment of the two prominent IR bands seen after methanol adsorption on CeO2(111) was not straightforward. Intuitively, one would conclude that two different adsorbate sites must be present. Such two different binding sites, however, appear unlikely based on the conclusions drawn from the CO adsorption data discussed above. To aid this assignment, DFT calculations—including ab initio molecular dynamic (MD) simulations—were conducted for different adsorption structures as a function of coverage.78 The detailed theoretical results revealed that the coordinative environment of the methoxide species depends strongly on the surface orientation and the methanol coverage. The two major bands observed after methanol adsorption on CeO2(111) could be attributed to the formation of H-bonded dimers, comprising a methoxy as well as a methanol species (see Fig. 31b). Whereas dissociation was energetically more favorable for a single methanol molecule, a second methanol species was stabilized by H bonding to the first methoxy species and to the substrate. This dimer formation led to a splitting of the carbonyl vibrations, and the theoretical results were 1075 and 1055 cm−1. Both bands were predicted to have similar intensities, in agreement with experimental observation (Fig. 31b). Altogether, this dimer formation provided a consistent explanation for the experimental data and demonstrated that, on a perfect CeO2(111) surface, dissociated and intact methanol molecules coexist. This finding has important consequences for the correct assignment of the corresponding powder data. These results emphasize again the importance of IRRAS studies on well-defined single-crystal surfaces for a reliable assignment of the vibrational bands observed for oxide NPs.
5. Conclusions and outlook
This review highlights recent results obtained from IR spectroscopy applied to metal oxide catalysts. Substantial progress in understanding microscopic mechanisms could be achieved by studying both single-crystal model systems and the technologically relevant form, powder nanoparticles. This advancement in understanding oxide surface chemistry results from improvements in instrumentation that have overcome the inherent experimental difficulties caused by the low reflectivity of dielectrics in the IR regime. The high-quality polarization- and azimuth-dependent IRRAS data obtained for monocrystal model systems have been shown to provide atomic-level insights into the surface chemistry and photochemistry of numerous probe molecules.
Very importantly, new IRRAS data provided by a number of different groups during the last decade are required to bridge the materials gap for oxides. In the past, the absence of results for well-characterized model systems, interpreted with the help of state-of-the art theoretical work, has made the assignment of IR results reported for oxide powders very difficult. In previous work, due to the lack of precise reference data, many empirically derived guidelines have been presented on how to assign certain bands observed, e.g., for CO or methanol adsorbed on CeO2 powders. Unfortunately, a comparison to the single-crystal data that became recently available has revealed that many of these guidelines are, in fact, not correct. For example, in the case of CO, it has been frequently and tacitly assumed that the strongest shifts are between CO molecules bound to Ce ions of different oxidation states. The results presented here demonstrate instead that the crystallographic orientation of the oxide crystallographic face with embedded corresponding Ce ions plays a much more important role. The same statement applies to methanol adsorbed on oxide single crystals, and in particular on ceria. Here, even on perfect single crystal surfaces, two different carbonyl stretch frequencies can be observed. These two IR bands are not due to different adsorption sites but to the formation of methoxy–methanol mixed dimers on the surface.
The data compiled in this review, in particular for CO adsorbates, demonstrates that this probe molecule is also well suited to the identification of defects and to the semi-quantitative determination of their concentrations on oxide substrates, for both monocrystals and powder particles. Equally important, the reliable reference data acquired via thorough IRRAS studies on various oxide single crystals have enabled an atomic-level understanding of the surface chemistry of more complex nanostructured oxide particles (e.g., rodshaped ceria NPs),79 revealing the power of the IR spectroscopic techniques in bridging the materials gap.
IR spectroscopy is also well suited to determining the photochemical properties of metal oxides; detailed information on photocatalytic activity and the mechanisms of photoinduced reactions has been obtained by static as well as time-resolved (ms timescale) measurements. New data has become available for electron and hole polaronic states in the bulk and at surfaces of ZnO and TiO2. The occupations of these states, which can be populated either by photoexcitation or by chemical doping, are an important intermediate step in photocatalysis and can be monitored by IR spectroscopy in a straightforward fashion.
Although the progress achieved for the three oxides discussed here is impressive, a huge amount of work remains. For example, the majority of IRRAS studies discussed here have been conducted on nonpolar ZnO surfaces. It is expected that IRRAS studies on the very interesting polar O- and Zn-terminated ZnO surfaces will provide important new information on the nature of the stabilization mechanisms for both polar surfaces. This statement also applies to the polar surface of ceria.
For titania, tremendous effort has been dedicated to the prototypical rutile (110) surfaces. More IRRAS studies should be conducted on the model systems of the technologically more relevant anatase polymorph. In contrast to ZnO and TiO2, much less information is available for ceria single-crystal surfaces. The potential of this approach has been demonstrated for settling the discrepancy in the controversial assignments of CO and CH3OH-related IR bands observed in ceria powder particles. Further precise reference data recorded on various ceria monocrystal surfaces are required to obtain a fundamental understanding of the interaction between other probe molecules with nanostructured ceria NPs. As for ZnO, the structural and reactive properties of the polar CeO2(100) surface should be investigated in more detail. In addition, the IRRAS results have shown that the CeO2(110) surface undergoes a massive restructuring forming {111}-type nanofacets, thus exposing a huge amount of different irregular structures. It is very interesting to elucidate the correlation between these defects and the higher catalytic performance generally observed in ceria nanorods.
IRRAS is clearly not limited to the above mentioned oxide materials; it can be utilized in a straightforward fashion to characterize other types of metal oxide single crystals as well. An important example is iron oxide. The first IRRAS study on the well-defined Fe3O4(001) substrates was conducted by Noei et al.,521 who studied the adsorption of formic acid using IRRAS together with STM and XPS. The IR results provided direct spectroscopic evidence for the dissociative adsorption of HCOOH at 300 K on the reconstructed (√2 × √2) R45° Fe3O4(001) surface forming bidentate formate bound to Fe3+–Fe3+ bridge sites. Partial dissociation was identified at 70 K, indicating the presence of two different active sites for HCOOH adsorption. Interestingly, they found that both the formate-related νs(OCO) and νas(OCO) stretch vibrations show typical asymmetric Fano line shapes. This unusual observation was attributed to the fact that Fe3O4 is neither a perfect conductor (metal) nor a perfect dielectric (as are other metal oxides).521 Actually, Fano-like IR peaks have been observed for adsorbates on many different metal surfaces522–528 and for the in-plane optic phonon (G mode) of carbon materials (HOPG, single-walled carbon nanotubes, few-layer graphene).529–533 The appearance of Fano line shapes on metal surfaces could be related to the coupling between a sharp vibrational mode and a continuum or broader IR absorbance associated with substrate electronic transitions. However, the detailed mechanism governing Fano line shapes is still not fully understood. The Fano-like absorbance features are also expected to occur as a general phenomenon534 on other types of metal oxide surfaces. This will open new perspectives for the application of IRRAS to the monitoring of electronic structure changes via, e.g., doping of oxide substrates.
Finally, it is mandatory to extend IR spectroscopic studies to more complex hetero-systems, e.g., oxide-supported metal nanoparticles. In order to achieve fast progress in this area, thorough surface science studies using IRRAS on metal clusters supported on single-crystal oxides are required to derive reliable information about the structural, electronic, and reactive properties of such metal/metal-oxide systems. Only when such reference data become available can the existing experimental data on the powder systems be correctly interpreted. Surface defects, in particular surface nanofacets and oxygen vacancies, are expected to play a crucial role in the strong (electronic) interaction between metal and oxide surfaces.535 It has been proposed that the presence of {111}-type nanofacets on surfaces exposed by ceria NPs dramatically increases the ability to fix gold species on the ceria surface.536 In addition, it has been reported that metal clusters with sub-nm dimensions (Au and Cu with particle sizes smaller than 1 nm)537 and single-atom catalysts (Pt)538,539 can be generated on ceria supports which exhibit unique catalytic properties. These important issues urgently require IR spectroscopic studies on single-crystal reference systems using various probe molecules in order to better understand the microscopic mechanism governing the formation, stabilization, and reactivities of these very technologically relevant systems.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support from the “Science and Technology of Nanosystems” Programme (Project No. 432202), as well as from the Helmholtz Research School “Energy-related catalysis.” We are grateful for comments on the manuscript by Xiaojuan Yu and to Stefanie Sellheim-Ret for assistance in editing the manuscript.
References

          V. E. Henrich and P. A. Cox, The Surface Science of Metal Oxides, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1994 Search PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, Photocatalysis on TiO2 surfaces: principles, mechanisms, and selected results, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Noguera, Physics and Chemistry at Oxide Surfaces, Cambridge University Press, New York,  1996 Search PubMed .
A. Trovarelli, Catalytic properties of ceria and CeO2-containing materials, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1996, 38, 439–520 CAS .
C. T. Campbell, Ultrathin metal films and particles on oxide surfaces: structural, electronic and chemisorptive properties, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1997, 27, 1–111 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Henry, Surface studies of supported model catalysts, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1998, 31, 235–325 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Diebold, The surface science of titanium dioxide, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batzill and U. Diebold, The surface and materials science of tin oxide, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2005, 79, 47–154 CrossRef CAS .

Zinc Oxide-A Material for Micro- and Optoelectronic Applications, ed. N. H. Nickel and E. Terukov, Springer, Berlin,  2005 Search PubMed .
C. Wöll, The chemistry and physics of zinc oxide surfaces, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2007, 82, 55–120 CrossRef .
R. Hoffman, B. J. Norris and J. Wager, ZnO-based transparent thin-film transistors, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 733–735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Surnev, M. G. Ramsey and F. P. Netzer, Vanadium oxide surface studies, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2003, 73, 117–165 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Room-temperature fabrication of transparent flexible thin-film transistors using amorphous oxide semiconductors, Nature, 2004, 432, 488–492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Janotti and C. G. Van de Walle, Fundamentals of zinc oxide as a semiconductor, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2009, 72, 126501 CrossRef .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, Surface science studies of the photoactivation of TiO2-new photochemical processes, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4428–4453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Freund and G. Pacchioni, Oxide ultra-thin films on metals: new materials for the design of supported metal catalysts, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2224–2242 RSC .
A. Fujishima, X. T. Zhang and D. A. Tryk, TiO2 photocatalysis and related surface phenomena, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2008, 63, 515–582 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Pang, R. Lindsay and G. Thornton, Chemical reactions on rutile TiO2(110), Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2328–2353 RSC .
M. A. Henderson, A surface science perspective on TiO2 photocatalysis, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, C. E. Nanayakkara and V. H. Grassian, Titanium dioxide photocatalysis in atmospheric chemistry, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5919–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fortunato, P. Barquinha and R. Martins, Oxide semiconductor thin-film transistors: A review of recent advances, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2945–2986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Recent advances in semiconductors for photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
K. Honkala, Tailoring oxide properties: an impact on adsorption characteristics of molecules and metals, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2014, 69, 366–388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and W. J. Shen, Morphology-dependent nanocatalysts: Rod-shaped oxides, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 1543–1574 RSC .
H. Wang and A. L. Rogach, Hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures: recent advances in design, synthesis, and applications, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 123–133 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Mullins, The surface chemistry of cerium oxide, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2015, 70, 42–85 CrossRef CAS .
E. Comini and G. Sberveglieri, Metal oxide nanowires as chemical sensors, Mater. Today, 2016, 13, 36–44 CrossRef .
T. Montini, M. Melchionna, M. Monai and P. Fornasiero, Fundamentals and catalytic applications of CeO2-based materials, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5987–6041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Metal oxides for optoelectronic applications, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 383–396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H.-J. Freund and D. W. Goodman, in Handbook of Heterogeneous Catalysis, ed. G. Ertl, E. Knözinger, F. Schüth and J. Weitkamp, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008, vol. 3, pp. 1309–1338 Search PubMed .
H.-J. Freund, The surface science of catalysis and more, using ultrathin oxide films as templates: a perspective, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8985–8996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ertl, Reactions at surfaces: From atoms to complexity (Nobel lecture), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3524–3535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ertl and H. J. Freund, Catalysis and surface science, Phys. Today, 1999, 52, 32–38 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Campbell and C. H. F. Peden, Chemistry – Oxygen vacancies and catalysis on ceria surfaces, Science, 2005, 309, 713–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bowker, Automotive catalysis studied by surface science, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2204–2211 RSC .
G. A. Somorjai and J. Y. Park, Molecular surface chemistry by metal single crystals and nanoparticles from vacuum to high pressure, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2155–2162 RSC .
J. Paier, C. Penschke and J. Sauer, Oxygen defects and surface chemistry of ceria: quantum chemical studies compared to experiment, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3949–3985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Norskov, T. Bligaard, B. Hvolbaek, F. Abild-Pedersen, I. Chorkendorff and C. H. Christensen, The nature of the active site in heterogeneous metal catalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2163–2171 RSC .
G. Ertl, Elementary steps in heterogeneous catalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1990, 29, 1219–1227 CrossRef .
G. Ertl, Reactions at well-defined surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1994, 299, 742–754 CrossRef .
R. Imbihl and G. Ertl, Oscillatory kinetics in heterogeneous catalysis, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 697–733 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Goodman, Model catalysts: From extended single crystals to supported particles, Surf. Rev. Lett., 1995, 2, 9–24 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Freund, Clusters and islands on oxides: from catalysis via electronics and magnetism to optics, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 271–299 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Goodman, Model catalysts: from imagining to imaging a working surface, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 213–222 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chen and D. W. Goodman, Ultrathin, ordered oxide films on metal surfaces, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 264013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Harding, V. Habibpour, S. Kunz, A. N. S. Farnbacher, U. Heiz, B. Yoon and U. Landman, Control and manipulation of gold nanocatalysis: effects of metal oxide support thickness and composition, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 538–548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Vaida, T. M. Bernhardt, C. Barth, F. Esch, U. Heiz and U. Landman, Ultrathin magnesia films as support for molecules and metal clusters: Tuning reactivity by thickness and composition, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2010, 247, 1001–1015 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-J. Freund, in Oxide Ultrathin Films: Science and Technology, ed. G. Pacchioni and S. Valeri, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2012, pp. 145–179 Search PubMed .
C. T. Campbell and J. R. V. Sellers, Enthalpies and entropies of adsorption on well-defined oxide surfaces: experimental measurements, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4106–4135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kuhlenbeck, S. Shaikhutdinov and H.-J. Freund, Well-ordered transition metal oxide layers in model catalysis–a series of case studies, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3986–4034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pacchioni, Two-dimensional oxides and their role in electron transfer mechanisms with adsorbed species, Chem. Rec., 2014, 14, 910–922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Liu, J. A. Boscoboinik, Y. Cui, S. Shaikhutdinov and H. J. Freund, Stabilization of ultrathin zinc oxide films on metals: Reconstruction versus hydroxylation, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7842–7847 CAS .
A. Shiotari, B. H. Liu, S. Jaekel, L. Grill, S. Shaikhutdinov, H.-J. Freund, M. Wolf and T. Kumagai, Local characterization of ultrathin ZnO Layers on Ag(111) by scanning tunneling microscopy and atomic force microscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27428–27435 CAS .
Q. Pan, B. H. Liu, M. E. McBriarty, Y. Martynova, I. M. N. Groot, S. Wang, M. J. Bedzyk, S. Shaikhutdinov and H. J. Freund, Reactivity of ultra-thin ZnO films supported by Ag(111) and Cu(111): a comparison to ZnO/Pt(111), Catal. Lett., 2014, 144, 648–655 CrossRef CAS .
F. Stavale, L. Pascua, N. Nilius and H.-J. Freund, Morphology and luminescence of ZnO films grown on a Au(111) support, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10552–10557 CAS .
V. Schott, H. Oberhofer, A. Birkner, M. C. Xu, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler, K. Reuter and C. Wöll, Chemical activity of thin oxide layers: strong interactions with the support yield a new thin-film phase of ZnO, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 11925–11929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Weirum, G. Barcaro, A. Fortunelli, F. Weber, R. Schennach, S. Surnev and F. P. Netzer, Growth and surface structure of zinc oxide layers on a Pd(111) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15432–15439 CAS .
C. Tusche, H. L. Meyerheim and J. Kirschner, Observation of depolarized ZnO(0001) monolayers: Formation of unreconstructed planar sheets, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 026102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Freeman, F. Claeyssens, N. L. Allan and J. H. Harding, Graphitic nanofilms as precursors to wurtzite films: Theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 96, 066102 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Claeyssens, C. L. Freeman, N. L. Allan, Y. Sun, M. N. R. Ashfold and J. H. Harding, Growth of ZnO thin films – experiment and theory, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 139–148 RSC .
F. M. Hoffmann, Infrared reflection-absorption spectroscopy of adsorbed molecules, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1983, 3, 107–192 CrossRef CAS .

          B. E. Hayden, in Vibrational Spectroscopy of Molecules on Surfaces, ed. J. T. Yates and T. E. Madey, John Wiley & Sons, New York,  1987, pp. 267–344 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Chabal, Surface IR spectroscopy, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1988, 8, 211–357 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hirschmugl, Frontiers in infrared spectroscopy at surfaces and interfaces, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 577–604 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rupprechter, Surface vibrational spectroscopy on noble metal catalysts from ultrahigh vacuum to atmospheric pressure, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2004, 100, 237–311 RSC .
K. Hadjiivanov and H. Knözinger, Characterization of vacant coordination sites of cations on the surfaces of oxides and zeolites using infrared spectroscopy of adsorbed probe molecules, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1629–1636 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Chemical reactions on metal oxide surfaces investigated by vibrational spectroscopy, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1589–1599 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamberti, A. Zecchina, E. Groppo and S. Bordiga, Probing the surfaces of heterogeneous catalysts by in situ IR spectroscopy, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4951–5001 RSC .
A. J. Foster and R. F. Lobo, Identifying reaction intermediates and catalytic active sites through in situ characterization techniques, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4783–4793 RSC .
F. Zaera, New advances in the use of infrared absorption spectroscopy for the characterization of heterogeneous catalytic reactions, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7624–7663 RSC .

          J. Kattner and H. Hoffmann, in Handbook of Vibrational Spectroscopy, ed. J. M. Chalmers and P. R. Griffiths, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2002, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, A. Glenz, M. Muhler and C. Wöll, A new dual-purpose ultrahigh vacuum infrared spectroscopy apparatus optimized for grazing-incidence reflection as well as for transmission geometries, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2009, 80, 113108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buchholz, M. C. Xu, H. Noei, P. Weidler, A. Nefedov, K. Fink, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Interaction of carboxylic acids with rutile TiO2(110): IR-investigations of terephthalic and benzoic acid adsorbed on a single crystal substrate, Surf. Sci., 2016, 643, 117–123 CrossRef CAS .
M. Buchholz, X. J. Yu, C. W. Yang, S. Heissler, A. Nefedov, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, IR-spectroscopy of CO adsorption on mixed-terminated ZnO surfaces, Surf. Sci., 2016, 652, 247–252 CrossRef CAS .
D. Silber, P. M. Kowalski, F. Traeger, M. Buchholz, F. Bebensee, B. Meyer and C. Wöll, Adsorbate-induced lifting of substrate relaxation is a general mechanism governing titania surface chemistry, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12888 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Yang, F. Bebensee, A. Nefedov, C. Wöll, T. Kropp, L. Komissarov, C. Penschke, R. Moerer, J. Paier and J. Sauer, Methanol adsorption on monocrystalline ceria surfaces, J. Catal., 2016, 336, 116–125 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Yang, X. Yu, S. Heissler, A. Nefedov, S. Colussi, J. Llorca, A. Trovarelli, Y. Wang and C. Wöll, Surface faceting and reconstruction of ceria nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 56, 375–379 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Yu, Z. R. Zhang, C. W. Yang, F. Bebensee, S. Heissler, A. Nefedov, M. R. Tang, Q. F. Ge, L. Chen, B. D. Kay, Z. Dohnálek, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Interaction of formaldehyde with the rutile TiO2(110) surface: A combined experimental and theoretical study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12626–12636 CAS .
M. Buchholz, Q. Li, H. Noei, A. Nefedov, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler, K. Fink and C. Wöll, The interaction of formic acid with zinc oxide: A combined experimental and theoretical study on single crystal and powder samples, Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 174–183 CrossRef CAS .
M. Setvin, M. Buchholz, W. Y. Hou, C. Zhang, B. Stoger, J. Hulva, T. Simschitz, X. Shi, J. Pavelec, G. S. Parkinson, M. C. Xu, Y. M. Wang, M. Schmid, C. Wöll, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, A multitechnique study of CO adsorption on the TiO2 anatase (101) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21044–21052 CAS .
H. Sezen, H. H. Shang, F. Bebensee, C. W. Yang, M. Buchholz, A. Nefedov, S. Heissler, C. Carbogno, M. Scheffler, P. Rinke and C. Wöll, Evidence for photogenerated intermediate hole polarons in ZnO, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buchholz, P. G. Weidler, F. Bebensee, A. Nefedov and C. Wöll, Carbon dioxide adsorption on a ZnO(10-10) substrate studied by infrared reflection absorption spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 1672–1678 RSC .
H. Sezen, M. Buchholz, A. Nefedov, C. Natzeck, S. Heissler, C. Di Valentin and C. Wöll, Probing electrons in TiO2 polaronic trap states by IR-absorption: Evidence for the existence of hydrogenic states, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3808 Search PubMed .
C. W. Yang, L. L. Yin, F. Bebensee, M. Buchholz, H. Sezen, S. Heissler, J. Chen, A. Nefedov, H. Idriss, X. Q. Gong and C. Wöll, Chemical activity of oxygen vacancies on ceria: a combined experimental and theoretical study on CeO2(111), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 24165–24168 RSC .
H. Noei, H. S. Qiu, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler and C. Wöll, Hydrogen loading of oxide powder particles: A transmission IR study for the case of zinc oxide, ChemPhysChem, 2010, 11, 3604–3607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Schiek, K. Al-Shamery, M. Kunat, F. Traeger and C. Wöll, Water adsorption on the hydroxylated H-(1 × 1) O-ZnO(000-1) surface, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1505–1512 RSC .
H. Noei, H. S. Qiu, Y. M. Wang, E. Löffler, C. Wöll and M. Muhler, The identification of hydroxyl groups on ZnO nanoparticles by infrared spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7092–7097 RSC .
H. Noei, C. Wöll, M. Muhler and Y. M. Wang, Activation of carbon dioxide on ZnO nanoparticles studied by vibrational spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 908–914 CAS .
D. Esken, H. Noei, Y. M. Wang, C. Wiktor, S. Turner, G. Van Tendeloo and R. A. Fischer, ZnO@ZIF-8: stabilization of quantum confined ZnO nanoparticles by a zinc methylimidazolate framework and their surface structural characterization probed by CO2 adsorption, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 5907–5915 RSC .
H. Noei, C. Wöll, M. Muhler and Y. M. Wang, The interaction of carbon monoxide with clean and surface-modified zinc oxide nanoparticles: A UHV-FTIRS study, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 391, 31–35 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Xu, H. Noei, K. Fink, M. Muhler, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, The surface science approach for understanding reactions on oxide powders: the importance of IR spectroscopy, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 4731–4734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Xu, Y. K. Gao, E. M. Moreno, M. Kunst, M. Muhler, Y. M. Wang, H. Idriss and C. Wöll, Photocatalytic activity of bulk TiO2 anatase and rutile single crystals using infrared absorption spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 138302 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Xu, Y. K. Gao, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Monitoring electronic structure changes of TiO2(110) via sign reversal of adsorbate vibrational bands, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 3649–3652 RSC .
M. C. Xu, H. Noei, M. Buchholz, M. Muhler, C. Wöll and Y. M. Wang, Dissociation of formic acid on anatase TiO2(101) probed by vibrational spectroscopy, Catal. Today, 2012, 182, 12–15 CrossRef CAS .
H. Noei, A. Birkner, K. Merz, M. Muhler and Y. M. Wang, Probing the mechanism of low-temperature CO oxidation on Au/ZnO catalysts by vibrational spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11181–11188 CAS .
C. Rohmann, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler, J. Metson, H. Idriss and C. Wöll, Direct monitoring of photo-induced reactions on well-defined metal oxide surfaces using vibrational spectroscopy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2008, 460, 10–12 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stodt, H. Noei, C. Hattig and Y. M. Wang, A combined experimental and computational study on the adsorption and reactions of NO on rutile TiO2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 466–472 RSC .
M. C. Xu, Y. J. Cao, R. B. Xu, S. J. Hu and S. S. Yan, UHV-FTIRS studies on molecular competitive adsorption: (CO)-C-12, (CO)-C-13 and CO2 on reduced TiO2(110) surfaces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 23711–23715 RSC .
N. G. Petrik and G. A. Kimmel, Adsorption geometry of CO versus coverage on TiO2(110) from s- and p-polarized infrared spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3425–3430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Cao, S. J. Hu, M. Yu, T. T. Wang, S. M. Huang, S. S. Yan and M. C. Xu, Manipulating the charge state of Au clusters on rutile TiO2(110) single crystal surfaces through molecular reactions probed by infrared spectroscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 17660–17665 RSC .
X. Lin, Y. Yoon, N. G. Petrik, Z. J. Li, Z. T. Wang, V. A. Glezakou, B. D. Kay, I. Lyubinetsky, G. A. Kimmel, R. Rousseau and Z. Dohnálek, Structure and dynamics of CO2 on rutile TiO2(110)-1 × 1, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26322–26334 CAS .
Y. J. Cao, S. J. Hu, M. Yu, S. S. Yan and M. C. Xu, Adsorption and interaction of CO2 on rutile TiO2(110) surfaces: a combined UHV-FTIRS and theoretical simulation study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 23994–24000 RSC .
M. C. Xu, Y. M. Wang, S. J. Hu, R. B. Xu, Y. J. Cao and S. S. Yan, NO adsorption and reaction on single crystal rutile TiO2(110) surfaces studied using UHV-FTIRS, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14682–14687 RSC .
B. E. Hayden, A. King and M. A. Newton, Fourier transform reflection-absorption IR spectroscopy study of formate adsorption on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mattsson, S. L. Hu, K. Hermansson and L. Österlund, Adsorption of formic acid on rutile TiO2(110) revisited: An infrared reflection-absorption spectroscopy and density functional theory study, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 034705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mattsson, S. L. Hu, K. Hermansson and L. Österlund, Infrared spectroscopy study of adsorption and photodecomposition of formic acid on reduced and defective rutile TiO2(110) surfaces, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., A, 2014, 32, 061402 Search PubMed .
G. A. Kimmel, M. Baer, N. G. Petrik, J. VandeVondele, R. Rousseau and C. J. Mundy, Polarization- and azimuth-resolved infrared spectroscopy of water on TiO2(110): Anisotropy and the hydrogen-bonding network, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 778–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Petrik and G. A. Kimmel, Reaction kinetics of water molecules with oxygen vacancies on rutile TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 23059–23067 CAS .
N. G. Petrik, M. A. Henderson and G. A. Kimmel, Insights into acetone photochemistry on rutile TiO2(110). 1. Off-normal CH3 ejection from acetone diolate, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12262–12272 CAS .
N. G. Petrik, M. A. Henderson and G. A. Kimmel, Insights into acetone photochemistry on rutile TiO2(110). 2. New photodesorption channel with CH3 ejection along the surface normal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 22, 12273–12282 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, High resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy on perfect and defective oxide surfaces, Z. Phys. Chem., 2008, 222, 927–964 CrossRef CAS .
H. Noei, L. Y. Jin, H. S. Qiu, M. C. Xu, Y. K. Gao, J. L. Zhao, M. Kauer, C. Wöll, M. Muhler and Y. M. Wang, Vibrational spectroscopic studies on pure and metal-covered metal oxide surfaces, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2013, 250, 1204–1221 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Lin, P. Jones, J. Guckert and E. I. Solomon, Variable photon energy photoelectron spectroscopic study of CO adsorption to coordinatively unsaturated tetrahedral Cu(I) and Zn(II) sites on CuCl(111) and ZnO(10-10) surfaces: d10 contributions to CO bonding and activation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 8312–8326 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Au, W. Hirsch and W. Hirschwald, Adsorption of carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide on annealed and defect zinc oxide (000-1) surfaces studied by photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS and UPS), Surf. Sci., 1988, 197, 391–401 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mudiyanselage, H. Y. Kim, S. D. Senanayake, A. E. Baber, P. Liu and D. Stacchiola, Probing adsorption sites for CO on ceria, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 15856–15862 RSC .
W. Göpel, Chemisorption and charge transfer at ionic semiconductor surfaces: Implications in designing gas sensors, Prog. Surf. Sci., 1985, 20, 9–103 CrossRef .

          J. M. Thomas and W. J. Thomas, Principles and Practice of Heterogeneous Catalysis, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1997 Search PubMed .

          E. Hosono, S. Fujihara and T. Kimura, in Electroceramics in Japan IV, ed. M. Murata, T. Kimura, S. Fujitsu and K. Shinozaki, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Zurich-Uetikon,  2002, vol. 216, pp. 69–72 Search PubMed .
A. B. Kashyout, M. Soliman, M. El Gamal and M. Fathy, Preparation and characterization of nano particles ZnO films for dye-sensitized solar cells, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2005, 90, 230–233 CrossRef CAS .
J. Strunk, K. Kähler, X. Y. Xia and M. Muhler, The surface chemistry of ZnO nanoparticles applied as heterogeneous catalysts in methanol synthesis, Surf. Sci., 2009, 603, 1776–1783 CrossRef CAS .
M. Behrens, F. Studt, I. Kasatkin, S. Kühl, M. Hävecker, F. Abild-Pedersen, S. Zander, F. Girgsdies, P. Kurr, B. L. Kniep, M. Tovar, R. W. Fischer, J. K. Nørskov and R. Schlögl, The active site of methanol synthesis over Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 industrial catalysts, Science, 2012, 336, 893–897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kuld, M. Thorhauge, H. Falsig, C. F. Elkjaer, S. Helveg, I. Chorkendorff and J. Sehested, Quantifying the promotion of Cu catalysts by ZnO for methanol synthesis, Science, 2016, 352, 969–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. F. Zhang, T. R. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Z. Cao, Aggregation of ZnO nanocrystallites for high conversion efficiency in dye-sensitized solar cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Han, F. R. Fan, C. Xu, S. S. Lin, M. Wei, X. Duan and Z. L. Wang, ZnO nanotube-based dye-sensitized solar cell and its application in self-powered devices, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 405203 CrossRef PubMed .
J. A. Anta, E. Guillen and R. Tena-Zaera, ZnO-based dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11413–11425 CAS .
B. Meyer and D. Marx, Density-functional study of the structure and stability of ZnO surfaces, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 035403 CrossRef .
M. Kunat, S. Gil Girol, T. Becker, U. Burghaus and C. Wöll, Stability of the polar surfaces of ZnO: A reinvestigation using He-atom scattering, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 081402 CrossRef .
M. H. Du, S. B. Zhang, J. E. Northrup and S. C. Erwin, Stabilization mechanisms of polar surfaces: ZnO surfaces, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155424 CrossRef .
J. V. Lauritsen, S. Porsgaard, M. K. Rasmussen, M. C. R. Jensen, R. Bechstein, K. Meinander, B. S. Clausen, S. Helveg, R. Wahl, G. Kresse and F. Besenbacher, Stabilization principles for polar surfaces of ZnO, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5987–5994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wahl, J. V. Lauritsen, F. Besenbacher and G. Kresse, Stabilization mechanism for the polar ZnO(000-1)-O surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 085313 CrossRef .
R. Jacobs, B. Zheng, B. Puchala, P. M. Voyles, A. B. Yankovich and D. Morgan, Counterintuitive reconstruction of the polar O-terminated ZnO surface with zinc vacancies and hydrogen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 4483–4487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Valtiner, M. Todorova, G. Grundmeier and J. Neugebauer, Temperature stabilized surface reconstructions at polar ZnO(0001), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 065502 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Dulub, L. A. Boatner and U. Diebold, STM study of the geometric and electronic structure of ZnO(0001)-Zn, (000-1)-O, (10-10), and (11-20) surfaces, Surf. Sci., 2002, 519, 201–217 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kunat, S. G. Girol, U. Burghaus and C. Wöll, The interaction of water with the oxygen-terminated, polar surface of ZnO, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14350–14356 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer, First-principles study of the polar O-terminated ZnO surface in thermodynamic equilibrium with oxygen and hydrogen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 045416 CrossRef .

          A. A. Davydov, Infrared Spectroscopy of Adsorbed Species on the Surface of Transition Metal Oxides, Wiley, New York,  1990 Search PubMed .
V. Staemmler, K. Fink, B. Meyer, D. Marx, M. Kunat, S. G. Girol, U. Burghaus and C. Wöll, Stabilization of polar ZnO surfaces: Validating microscopic models by using CO as a probe molecule, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 90, 106102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Blyholder, Molecular orbital view of chemisorbed carbon monoxide, J. Phys. Chem., 1964, 68, 2772–2777 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Meyer, X. Yin, M. Kunat, D. Langenberg, F. Traeger, A. Birkner and C. Wöll, Hydrogen induced metallicity on the ZnO(10-10) surface, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 266104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Wang, X. Y. Xia, A. Urban, H. S. Qiu, J. Strunk, B. Meyer, M. Muhler and C. Wöll, Tuning the reactivity of oxide surfaces by charge-accepting adsorbates, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7315–7318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Damico, M. R. McClellan, M. J. Sayers, R. R. Gay, F. R. McFeely and E. I. Solomon, Ultraviolet photoemission studies of the bonding of. CO to the ZnO(10-10) surface and its interaction with atomic hydrogen, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1980, 17, 1080–1084 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Anderson and J. A. Nichols, Relaxation in ZnO(10-10), and (0001) surfaces and the adsorption of CO, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1986, 108, 1385–1388 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zecchina and C. O. Arean, Diatomic molecular probes for mid-IR studies of zeolites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1996, 25, 187–197 RSC .
R. R. Gay, M. H. Nodine, V. E. Henrich, H. J. Zeiger and E. I. Solomon, Photoelectron study of the interaction of CO with ZnO, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1980, 102, 6752–6761 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Tsyganenko, L. A. Denisenko, S. M. Zverev and V. N. Filimonov, Infrared study of lateral interactions between carbon monoxide molecules adsorbed on oxide catalysts, J. Catal., 1985, 94, 10–15 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zecchina, D. Scarano and A. Reller, Infrared spectra of CO adsorbed on prismatic faces of α-Fe2O3, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1988, 84, 2327–2333 RSC .
J. Wang, Y. Wang and K. Jacobi, The molecular adsorption of CO on the Ru(11-20) surface, Surf. Sci., 2001, 482, 153–159 CrossRef .
K. Hadjiivanov, B. M. Reddy and H. Knozinger, FTIR study of low-temperature adsorption and co-adsorption of (CO)-C-12 and (CO)-C-13 on a TiO2–SiO2 mixed oxide, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 355–360 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Mahan and A. A. Lucas, Collective vibrational modes of adsorbed CO, J. Chem. Phys., 1978, 68, 1344–1348 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. J. Persson and R. Ryberg, Vibrational interaction between molecules adsorbed on a metal surface: The dipole–dipole interaction, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1981, 24, 6954–6970 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Hammaker, S. A. Francis and R. P. Eischens, Infrared study of intermolecular interactions for carbon monoxide chemisorbed on platinum, Spectrochim. Acta, 1965, 21, 1295–1309 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Griffin and J. T. Yates, Coadsorption studies of CO and H2 on ZnO, J. Chem. Phys., 1982, 77, 3751–3758 CrossRef CAS .
D. Scarano, G. Spoto, S. Bordiga, A. Zecchina and C. Lamberti, Lateral interactions in CO adlayers on prismatic ZnO faces: a FTIR and HRTEM study, Surf. Sci., 1992, 276, 281–298 CrossRef CAS .
D. Scarano, S. Bertarione, G. Spoto, A. Zecchina and C. O. Arean, FTIR spectroscopy of hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and methane adsorbed and co-adsorbed on zinc oxide, Thin Solid Films, 2001, 400, 50–55 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wilmer, M. Kurtz, K. V. Klementiev, O. P. Tkachenko, W. Grünert, O. Hinrichsen, A. Birkner, S. Rabe, K. Merz, M. Driess, C. Wöll and M. Muhler, Methanol synthesis over ZnO: A structure-sensitive reaction?, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2003, 5, 4736–4742 RSC .
R. Naumann d'Alnoncourt, X. Xia, J. Strunk, E. Loffler, O. Hinrichsen and M. Muhler, The influence of ZnO on the differential heat of adsorption of CO on Cu catalysts: a microcalorimetric study, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 249–253 CrossRef .
R. Naumann d'Alnoncourt, X. Xia, J. Strunk, E. Loffler, O. Hinrichsen and M. Muhler, The influence of strongly reducing conditions on strong metal–support interactions in Cu/ZnO catalysts used for methanol synthesis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1525–1538 RSC .

          W. A. Ayers, Catalytic Activation of Carbon Dioxide, ACS Symp. Ser. 363, Am. Chem. Soc., Washington, 1988.

Carbon Dioxide Chemistry: Environmental Issues, Spec. Publ., ed. J. Paul and C.-M. Pradier, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  1994 Search PubMed .
H. J. Freund and M. W. Roberts, Surface chemistry of carbon dioxide, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1996, 25, 225–273 CrossRef .
K. S. Lackner, A guide to CO2 sequestration, Science, 2003, 300, 1677–1678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Schenk, J. Notni, U. Köhn, K. Wermann and E. Anders, Carbon dioxide and related heterocumulenes at zinc and lithium cations: bioinspired reactions and principles, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4191–4206 RSC .
D. M. D'Alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Carbon dioxide capture: Prospects for new materials, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Taifan, J. F. Boily and J. Baltrusaitis, Surface chemistry of carbon dioxide revisited, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2016, 71, 595–671 CrossRef CAS .
J. Suzanne, V. Panella, D. Ferry and M. Sidoumou, The structure of CO2 monolayers on MgO(100) single crystal surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1993, 293, L912–L916 CrossRef CAS .
O. Seiferth, K. Wolter, B. Dillmann, G. Klivenyi, H. J. Freund, D. Scarano and A. Zecchina, IR investigations of CO2 adsorption on chromia
surfaces: Cr2O3(0001)/Cr(110) versus polycrystalline alpha-Cr2O3, Surf. Sci., 1999, 421, 176–190 CrossRef CAS .
O. Seiferth, K. Wolter, H. Kuhlenbeck and H. J. Freund, CO2 adsorption on Na precovered Cr2O3(0001), Surf. Sci., 2002, 505, 215–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Lafosse and K. Jacobi, Adsorption and reaction of CO2 on the RuO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 5476–5482 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Kovacik, B. Meyer, K. Kotsis, D. Stodt, V. Staemmler, H. Qiu, F. Traeger, D. Langenberg, M. Muhler and C. Wöll, CO2 activation by ZnO through the formation of an unusual tridentate surface carbonate, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 5624–5627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kadossov and U. Burghaus, Adsorption kinetics and dynamics of CO, NO, and CO2 on reduced CaO(100), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7390–7400 CAS .
H. Y. Wang and W. F. Schneider, Nature and role of surface carbonates and bicarbonates in CO oxidation over RuO2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 6367–6374 RSC .
J. A. Hinojosa, A. Antony, C. Hakanoglu, A. Asthagiri and J. F. Weaver, Adsorption of CO2 on a PdO(101) thin film, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 3007–3016 CAS .
J. Kiss, D. Langenberg, D. Silber, F. Traeger, L. Jin, H. Qiu, Y. Wang, B. Meyer and C. Wöll, A combined theoretical and experimental study on the adsorption of methanol on the ZnO(10-10) surface, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 7180–7188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kotsis, D. Stodt, V. Staemmler, R. Kováčik, B. Meyer, F. Traeger, D. Langenberg, T. Strunskus, M. Kunat and C. Wöll, CO2 adlayers on the mixed terminated ZnO(10-10) surface studied by He atom scattering, photoelectron spectroscopy and ab initio electronic structure calculations, Z. Phys. Chem., 2008, 222, 891–915 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kossmann, G. Rossmuller and C. Hattig, Prediction of vibrational frequencies of possible intermediates and side products of the methanol synthesis on ZnO(000-1) by ab initio calculations, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 034706 CrossRef PubMed .
R. G. Greenler, Infrared study of adsorbed molecules on metal surfaces by reflection techniques, J. Chem. Phys., 1966, 44, 310–315 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Greenler, D. R. Snider, D. Witt and R. S. Sorbello, The metal surface selection rule for infrared spectra of adsorbed molecules adsorbed on small metal particles, Surf. Sci., 1982, 118, 415–428 CrossRef CAS .
W. N. Hansen, Electric fields produced by the propagation of plane coherent electromagnetic radiation in a stratified medium, J. Opt. Soc. Am., 1968, 58, 380–390 CrossRef .
W. N. Hansen, Reflection spectroscopy of adsorbed layers, Symp. Faraday Soc., 1970, 4, 27–35 RSC .
J. A. Mielczarski and R. H. Yoon, Fourier transform infrared external reflection study of molecular orientation in spontaneously adsorbed layers on low-absorption substrates, J. Phys. Chem., 1989, 93, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS .
A. Haruta, When gold is not noble: Catalysis by nanoparticles, Chem. Rec., 2003, 3, 75–87 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Haruta, T. Kobayashi, H. Sano and N. Yamada, Novel gold catalysts for the oxidation of carbon-monoxide at a temperature far below 0 °C, Chem. Lett., 1987, 405–408 CrossRef CAS .
M. Valden, X. Lai and D. W. Goodman, Onset of catalytic activity of gold clusters on titania with the appearance of nonmetallic properties, Science, 1998, 281, 1647–1650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Schubert, S. Hackenberg, A. C. van Veen, M. Muhler, V. Plzak and R. J. Behm, CO oxidation over supported gold catalysts-“inert” and “active” support materials and their role for the oxygen supply during reaction, J. Catal., 2001, 197, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meyer, C. Lemire, S. K. Shaikhutdinov and H. Freund, Surface chemistry of catalysis by gold, Gold Bull., 2004, 37, 72–124 CrossRef CAS .
H. Falsig, B. Hvolbaek, I. S. Kristensen, T. Jiang, T. Bligaard, C. H. Christensen and J. K. Norskov, Trends in the catalytic CO oxidation activity of nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4835–4839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lin, B. Yang, H. M. Benia, P. Myrach, M. Yulikov, A. Aumer, M. A. Brown, M. Sterrer, O. Bondarchuk, E. Kieseritzky, J. Rocker, T. Risse, H. J. Gao, N. Nilius and H. J. Freund, Charge-mediated adsorption behavior of CO on MgO-supported Au clusters, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7745–7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Freund, G. Meijer, M. Scheffler, R. Schlögl and M. Wolf, CO oxidation as a prototypical reaction for heterogeneous processes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10064–10094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. X. Green, W. J. Tang, M. Neurock and J. T. Yates, Spectroscopic observation of dual catalytic sites during oxidation of CO on a Au/TiO2 catalyst, Science, 2011, 333, 736–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. P. Liu, X. Q. Gong, J. Kohanoff, C. Sanchez and P. Hu, Catalytic role of metal oxides in gold-based catalysts: A first principles study of CO oxidation on TiO2 supported Au, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 266102 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Abad, P. Concepcion, A. Corma and H. Garcia, A collaborative effect between gold and a support induces the selective oxidation of alcohols, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4066–4069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. N. Remediakis, N. Lopez and J. K. Norskov, CO oxidation on rutile-supported Au nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1824–1826 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yoon, H. Hakkinen, U. Landman, A. S. Worz, J. M. Antonietti, S. Abbet, K. Judai and U. Heiz, Charging effects on bonding and catalyzed oxidation of CO on Au8 clusters on MgO, Science, 2005, 307, 403–407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Hernandez, J. F. Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Unravelling the origin of the high-catalytic activity of supported Au: A density-functional theory-based interpretation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15600–15601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sterrer, M. Yulikov, E. Fischbach, M. Heyde, H. P. Rust, G. Pacchioni, T. Risse and H. J. Freund, Interaction of gold clusters with color centers on MgO(001) films, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2630–2632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Wang and B. Hammer, Role of Au+ in supporting and activating Au7 on TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 136107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Matthey, J. G. Wang, S. Wendt, J. Matthiesen, R. Schaub, E. Laegsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Enhanced bonding of gold nanoparticles on oxidized TiO2(110), Science, 2007, 315, 1692–1696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, S. Ma, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. Evans and M. Pérez, Activity of CeOx and TiOx nanoparticles grown on Au(111) in the water-gas shift reaction, Science, 2007, 318, 1757–1760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Camellone and S. Fabris, Reaction mechanisms for the CO oxidation on Au/CeO2 catalysts: activity of substitutional Au3+/Au+ cations and deactivation of supported Au+ adatoms, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10473–10483 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Widmann and R. J. Behm, Active oxygen on a Au/TiO2 catalyst: Formation, stability and CO oxidation activity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 10241–10245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. J. Jia, J. Yamasaki, O. Terasaki and F. Schüth, Highly active iron oxide supported gold catalysts for CO oxidation: how small must the gold nanoparticles be?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5771–5775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Boccuzzi, A. Chiorino, S. Tsubota and M. Haruta, FTIR study of carbon monoxide oxidation and scrambling at room temperature over gold supported on ZnO and TiO2, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 3625–3631 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mavrikakis, P. Stoltze and J. K. Norskov, Making gold less noble, Catal. Lett., 2000, 64, 101–106 CrossRef CAS .
F. Boccuzzi, A. Chiorino, M. Manzoli, P. Lu, T. Akita, S. Ichikawa and M. Haruta, Au/TiO2 nanosized samples: A catalytic, TEM, and FTIR study of the effect of calcination temperature on the CO oxidation, J. Catal., 2001, 202, 256–267 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, The interaction of water with solid surfaces: fundamental aspects revisited, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2002, 46, 1–308 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Thiel and T. E. Madey, The interaction of water with solid surfaces: Fundamental aspects, Surf. Sci. Rep., 1987, 7, 211–385 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zwicker and K. Jacobi, Site-specific interaction of H2O with ZnO single-crystal surfaces studied by thermal desorption and UV photoelectron spectroscopy, Surf. Sci., 1983, 131, 179–194 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, A. Ludviksson and C. T. Campbell, The chemisorption of H2O and O2 on Cu films on ZnO(0001)-O, Surf. Sci., 1993, 289, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meyer, D. Marx, O. Dulub, U. Diebold, M. Kunat, D. Langenberg and C. Wöll, Partial dissociation of water leads to stable superstructures on the surface of zinc oxide, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 6642–6645 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Meyer, H. Rabaa and D. Marx, Water adsorption on ZnO(1010): from single molecules to partially dissociated monolayers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1513–1520 RSC .
O. Dulub, B. Meyer and U. Diebold, Observation of the dynamical change in a water monolayer adsorbed on a ZnO surface, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 136101 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. Muhler and C. Wöll, Spectroscopic evidence for the partial dissociation of H2O on ZnO(10-10), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 1521–1524 RSC .
Y. Yan and M. M. Al-Jassim, Structure and energetics of water adsorbed on the ZnO(10-10) surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 235406 CrossRef .
H. S. Qiu, B. Meyer, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Ionization energies of shallow donor states in ZnO created by reversible formation and depletion of H interstitials, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 236401 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Valtiner, S. Borodin and G. Grundmeier, Preparation and characterisation of hydroxide stabilised ZnO(0001)-Zn-OH surfaces, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2406–2412 RSC .
H. Hu, H. F. Ji and Y. Sun, The effect of oxygen vacancies on water wettability of a ZnO surface, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16557–16565 RSC .
F. Vines, A. Iglesias-Juez, F. Illas and M. Fernandez-Garcia, Hydroxyl identification on ZnO by infrared spectroscopies: Theory and experiments, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1492–1505 CAS .

          X. Yu, C. Yang, L. Schöttner, S. Heissler, A. Nefedov, Y. Wang and C. Wöll, Insights into water adsorption on ZnO(10-10) surfaces: an IRRAS study, 2017, to be published.

          J. B. Hansen and P. E. Højlund Nielsen, Methanol synthesis, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2008 Search PubMed .
L. C. Grabow and M. Mavrikakis, Mechanism of methanol synthesis on Cu through CO2 and CO hydrogenation, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 365–384 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2003, 4, 145–153 CrossRef .
G. Busca and V. Lorenzelli, Infrared spectroscopic identification of species arising form reactive adsorption of carbon oxides on metal oxide surface, Mater. Chem., 1982, 7, 89–126 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Nakamoto, Infrared and Raman Spectra of Inorganic and Coordination Compounds, Part B: Applications in Coordination, Organometallic, and Bioinorganic Chemistry, Wiley, Hoboken,  2009 Search PubMed .
P. Persson, S. Lunell and L. Ojamäe, Quantum chemical prediction of the adsorption conformations and dynamics at HCOOH-covered ZnO(10-10) surfaces, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2002, 89, 172–180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Persson and L. Ojamäe, Periodic Hartree-Fock study of the adsorption of formic acid on ZnO(10-10), Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 321, 302–308 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Petrie and J. M. Vohs, An HREELS investigation of the adsorption and reaction of formic acid on the (0001)-Zn surface of ZnO, Surf. Sci., 1991, 245, 315–323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Crook, H. Dhariwal and G. Thornton, HREELS study of the interaction of formic acid with ZnO(10-10) and ZnO(000-1)-O, Surf. Sci., 1997, 382, 19–25 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson and J. T. Yates, TiO2-based photocatalysis: Surface defects, oxygen and charge transfer, Top. Catal., 2005, 35, 197–210 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Petrik and G. A. Kimmel, Multiple nonthermal reaction steps for the photooxidation of CO to CO2 on reduced TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 344–349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. G. Petrik and G. A. Kimmel, Probing the photochemistry of chemisorbed oxygen on TiO2(110) with Kr and other co-adsorbates, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 2338–2346 RSC .
V. V. Travnikov, A. Freiberg and S. F. Savikhin, Surface excitons in ZnO crystals, J. Lumin., 1990, 47, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Deinert, D. Wegkamp, M. Meyer, C. Richter, M. Wolf and J. Stähler, Ultrafast exciton formation at the ZnO(10-10) surface, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 057602 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Thomas, The exciton spectrum of zinc oxide, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1960, 15, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
T. Skettrup and I. Balslev, Exchange interaction between excitons in the quasi-cubic model, Phys. Status Solidi, 1970, 40, 93–106 CrossRef CAS .
H. Finkenrath, K. Krug and N. Uhle, Optical absorption by free polarons in ZnO, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1976, 78, K27–K30 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tempere and J. T. Devreese, Optical absorption of an interacting many-polaron gas, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 104504 CrossRef .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, Hybrid functionals based on a screened Coulomb potential, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Varley, A. Janotti, C. Franchini and C. G. Van de Walle, Role of self-trapping in luminescence and p-type conductivity of wide-band-gap oxides, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 081109 CrossRef .
C. G. Van de Walle, Hydrogen as a cause of doping in zinc oxide, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 85, 1012–1015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Hofmann, A. Hofstaetter, F. Leiter, H. J. Zhou, F. Henecker, B. K. Meyer, S. B. Orlinskii, J. Schmidt and P. G. Baranov, Hydrogen: A relevant shallow donor in zinc oxide, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 88, 045504 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Dohnálek, I. Lyubinetsky and R. Rousseau, Thermally-driven processes on rutile TiO2(110)-(1 × 1): A direct view at the atomic scale, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2010, 85, 161–205 CrossRef .
M. A. Henderson and I. Lyubinetsky, Molecular-level insights into photocatalysis from scanning probe microscopy studies on TiO2(110), Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 4428–4455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Yin, L. Wu, H. G. Yang and Y. H. Su, Recent progress in biomedical applications of titanium dioxide, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 4844–4858 RSC .
F. Lopez-Huerta, B. Cervantes, O. Gonzalez, J. Hernandez-Torres, L. Garcia-Gonzalez, R. Vega, A. L. Herrera-May and E. Soto, Biocompatibility and surface properties of TiO2 thin films deposited by DC magnetron sputtering, Materials, 2014, 7, 4105–4117 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Onishi, Review of carboxylic acids on TiO2(110), Springer Ser. Chem. Phys., 2003, 70, 75–90 CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Photodriven heterogeneous charge transfer with transition-metal compounds anchored to TiO2 semiconductor surfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115–164 RSC .
L. M. Liu, P. Crawford and P. Hu, The interaction between adsorbed OH and O2 on TiO2 surfaces, Prog. Surf. Sci., 2009, 84, 155–176 CrossRef CAS .
U. Diebold, J. Lehman, T. Mahmoud, M. Kuhn, G. Leonardelli, W. Hebenstreit, M. Schmid and P. Varga, Intrinsic defects on a TiO2(110)(1 × 1) surface and their reaction with oxygen: a scanning tunneling microscopy study, Surf. Sci., 1998, 411, 137–153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, W. Hebenstreit, L. Gross, U. Diebold, M. A. Henderson, D. R. Jennison, P. A. Schultz and M. P. Sears, Oxygen-induced restructuring of the TiO2(110) surface: a comprehensive study, Surf. Sci., 1999, 437, 173–190 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hebenstreit, N. Ruzycki, G. S. Herman, Y. Gao and U. Diebold, Scanning tunneling microscopy investigation of the TiO2 anatase (101) surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, R16334–R16336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Suzuki, K. Fukui, H. Onishi and Y. Iwasawa, Hydrogen adatoms on TiO2(110)-(1 × 1) characterized by scanning tunneling microscopy and electron stimulated desorption, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2000, 84, 2156–2159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schaub, E. Wahlström, A. Rønnau, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard and F. Besenbacher, Oxygen-mediated diffusion of oxygen vacancies on the TiO2(110) surface, Science, 2003, 299, 377–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Wahlström, E. K. Vestergaard, R. Schaub, A. Rønnau, M. Vestergaard, E. Laegsgaard, I. Stensgaard and F. Besenbacher, Electron transfer-induced dynamics of oxygen molecules on the TiO2(110) surface, Science, 2004, 303, 511–513 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wendt, R. Schaub, J. Matthiesen, E. K. Vestergaard, E. Wahlstrom, M. D. Rasmussen, P. Thostrup, L. M. Molina, E. Laegsgaard, I. Stensgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, Oxygen vacancies on TiO2(110) and their interaction with H2O and O2: A combined high-resolution STM and DFT study, Surf. Sci., 2005, 598, 226–245 CrossRef CAS .
O. Bikondoa, C. L. Pang, R. Ithnin, C. A. Muryn, H. Onishi and G. Thornton, Direct visualization of defect-mediated dissociation of water on TiO2(110), Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 189–192 CrossRef CAS .
D. W. Flaherty, Z. Dohnálek, A. Dohnálková, B. W. Arey, D. E. McCready, N. Ponnusamy, C. B. Mullins and B. D. Kay, Reactive ballistic deposition of porous TiO2 films: Growth and characterization, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4765–4773 CAS .
S. Wendt, P. T. Sprunger, E. Lira, G. K. H. Madsen, Z. S. Li, J. O. Hansen, J. Matthiesen, A. Blekinge-Rasmussen, E. Laegsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, The role of interstitial sites in the Ti3d defect state in the band gap of Titania, Science, 2008, 320, 1755–1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ariga, T. Taniike, H. Morikawa, M. Tada, B. K. Min, K. Watanabe, Y. Matsumoto, S. Ikeda, K. Saiki and Y. Iwasawa, Surface-mediated visible-light photo-oxidation on pure TiO2(001), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 14670–14672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. He, O. Dulub, H. Z. Cheng, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Evidence for the predominance of subsurface defects on reduced anatase TiO2(101), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 106105 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. He, A. Tilocca, O. Dulub, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Local ordering and electronic signatures of submonolayer water on anatase TiO2(101), Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 585–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Minato, Y. Sainoo, Y. Kim, H. S. Kato, K. Aika, M. Kawai, J. Zhao, H. Petek, T. Huang, W. He, B. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, The electronic structure of oxygen atom vacancy and hydroxyl impurity defects on titanium dioxide (110) surface, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 124502 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. R. Zhang, R. Rousseau, J. L. Gong, B. D. Kay and Z. Dohnálek, Imaging hindered rotations of alkoxy species on TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17926–17932 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, Z. Wang, X. F. Cui, T. Huang, B. Wang, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, What are the adsorption sites for CO on the reduced TiO2(110)-1 × 1 surface?, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 7958–7959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Li, L. N. Chu, X. Q. Gong and U. Diebold, Hydrogen bonding controls the dynamics of catechol adsorbed on a TiO2(110) surface, Science, 2010, 328, 882–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Li and U. Diebold, Reactivity of TiO2 rutile and anatase surfaces toward nitroaromatics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 64–66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Papageorgiou, N. S. Beglitis, C. L. Pang, G. Teobaldi, G. Cabailh, Q. Chen, A. J. Fisher, W. A. Hofer and G. Thornton, Electron traps and their effect on the surface chemistry of TiO2(110), Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 2391–2396 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Scheiber, A. Riss, M. Schmid, P. Varga and U. Diebold, Observation and destruction of an elusive adsorbate with STM: O2/TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 216101 CrossRef PubMed .
C. M. Yim, C. L. Pang and G. Thornton, Oxygen vacancy origin of the surface band-gap state of TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 104, 036806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Vannice, Titania-supported metals as CO hydrogenation catalysts, J. Catal., 1982, 74, 199–202 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sato, M. Koizumi, T. Miyao and S. Naito, The CO-H2 and CO-H2O reactions over TiO2 nanotubes filled with Pt metal nanoparticles, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 164–170 CrossRef CAS .
G. Rocker and W. Göpel, Chemisorption of H2 and CO on stoichiometric and defective TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 1986, 175, L675–L680 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kobayashi and M. Yamaguchi, 
            Ab initio MO study of adsorption of CO molecule on TiO2 surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1989, 214, 466–476 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, CO chemisorption on TiO2(110): Oxygen vacancy site influence on CO adsorption, J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 103, 9438–9443 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu and J. T. Yates, First principles calculations of the adsorption properties of CO and NO on the defective TiO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6184–6199 CrossRef CAS .
M. Menetrey, A. Markovits and C. Minot, Reactivity of a reduced metal oxide surface: hydrogen, water and carbon monoxide adsorption on oxygen defective rutile TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 2003, 524, 49–62 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dohnálek, J. Kim, O. Bondarchuk, J. M. White and B. D. Kay, Physisorption of N2, O2, and CO on fully oxidized TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 6229–6235 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Pillay and G. S. Hwang, O2-coverage-dependent CO oxidation on reduced TiO2(110): A first principles study, J. Chem. Phys., 2006, 125, 144706 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Kunat, F. Traeger, D. Silber, H. Qiu, Y. Wang, A. C. van Veen, C. Wöll, P. M. Kowalski, B. Meyer, C. Hattig and D. Marx, Formation of weakly bound, ordered adlayers of CO on rutile TiO2(110): A combined experimental and theoretical study, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 144703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Camellone, P. M. Kowalski and D. Marx, Ideal, defective, and gold-promoted rutile TiO2(110) surfaces interacting with CO, H2, and H2O: Structures, energies, thermodynamics, and dynamics from PBE+U, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 035413 CrossRef .
J. S. Lee, Z. Zhang, X. Y. Deng, D. C. Sorescu, C. Matranga and J. T. Yates, Interaction of CO with oxygen adatoms on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4163–4167 CAS .
S. L. Hu, Z. Wang, A. Mattsson, L. Österlund and K. Hermansson, Simulation of IRRAS spectra for molecules on oxide surfaces: CO on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5403–5411 CAS .
M. Setvin, C. Franchini, X. F. Hao, M. Schmid, A. Janotti, M. Kaltak, C. G. Van de Walle, G. Kresse and U. Diebold, Direct view at excess electrons in TiO2 rutile and anatase, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 86401 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Qiu, H. Idriss, Y. M. Wang and C. Wöll, Carbon-carbon bond formation on model titanium oxide surfaces: Identification of surface reaction intermediates by high-resolution electron energy loss spectroscopy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 9828–9834 CAS .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Grätzel, Structure and energetics of water adsorbed at TiO2 anatase (101) and (001) surfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 2954–2957 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Ranade, A. Navrotsky, H. Z. Zhang, J. F. Banfield, S. H. Elder, A. Zaban, P. H. Borse, S. K. Kulkarni, G. S. Doran and H. J. Whitfield, Energetics of nanocrystalline TiO2, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2002, 99, 6476–6481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Gong, A. Selloni, M. Batzill and U. Diebold, Steps on anatase TiO2(101), Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 665–670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Q. Gong, A. Selloni, O. Dulub, P. Jacobson and U. Diebold, Small au and pt clusters at the anatase TiO2(101) surface: Behavior at terraces, steps, and surface oxygen vacancies, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 370–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Li, O. Dulub and U. Diebold, Scanning tunneling microscopy study of a vicinal anatase TiO2 surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16166–16170 CAS .
U. Aschauer, Y. B. He, H. Z. Cheng, S. C. Li, U. Diebold and A. Selloni, Influence of subsurface defects on the surface reactivity of TiO2: water on anatase (101), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1278–1284 CAS .
S. C. Li, Y. Losovyj and U. Diebold, Adsorption-site-dependent electronic structure of catechol on the anatase TiO2(101) surface, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 8600–8604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Liu, S. C. Li, H. Z. Cheng, U. Diebold and A. Selloni, Growth and organization of an organic molecular monolayer on TiO2: catechol on anatase (101), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7816–7823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Scheiber, M. Fidler, O. Dulub, M. Schmid, U. Diebold, W. Y. Hou, U. Aschauer and A. Selloni, (Sub)Surface mobility of oxygen vacancies at the TiO2 anatase (101) surface, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 136103 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Setvin, U. Aschauer, P. Scheiber, Y. F. Li, W. Y. Hou, M. Schmid, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Reaction of O2 with subsurface oxygen vacancies on TiO2 anatase (101), Science, 2013, 341, 988–991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Sanches, G. Mallia, L. Liborio, U. Diebold and N. M. Harrison, Hybrid exchange density functional study of vicinal anatase TiO2 surfaces, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 245309 CrossRef .
M. Setvin, B. Daniel, U. Aschauer, W. Hou, Y. F. Li, M. Schmid, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Identification of adsorbed molecules via STM tip manipulation: CO, H2O, and O2 on TiO2 anatase (101), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21524–21530 RSC .
M. Setvin, X. F. Hao, B. Daniel, J. Pavelec, Z. Novotny, G. S. Parkinson, M. Schmid, G. Kresse, C. Franchini and U. Diebold, Charge trapping at the step edges of TiO2 anatase (101), Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4714–4716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Q. Lu, A. Linsebigler and J. T. Yates, The photochemical identification of two chemisorption states for molecular oxygen on TiO2(110), J. Chem. Phys., 1995, 102, 3005–3008 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, G. Q. Lu and J. T. Yates, CO photooxidation on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 6631–6636 CrossRef CAS .
A. Linsebigler, C. Rusu and J. T. Yates, Absence of platinum enhancement of a photoreaction on TiO2-CO photooxidation on Pt/TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5284–5289 CrossRef CAS .
N. G. Petrik and G. A. Kimmel, Off-normal CO2 desorption from the photooxidation of CO on reduced TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2508–2513 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Serpone and E. Pelizzetti, Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Applications, Wiley, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .
K. Tanaka, M. F. V. Capule and T. Hisanaga, Effect of crystallinity of TiO2 on its photocatalytic action, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1991, 187, 73–76 CrossRef CAS .
A. SafarzadehAmiri, J. R. Bolton and S. R. Cater, Ferrioxalate-mediated solar degradation of organic contaminants in water, Sol. Energy, 1996, 56, 439–443 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee, J. Gopal, P. Muraleedharan, A. K. Tyagi and B. Rai, Physics and chemistry of photocatalytic titanium dioxide: Visualization of bactericidal activity using atomic force microscopy, Curr. Sci., 2006, 90, 1378–1383 CAS .
I. Mehdaoui and T. Klüner, Understanding surface photochemistry from first principles: The case of CO-NiO(100), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 037601 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Labat, P. Baranek, C. Domain, C. Minot and C. Adamo, Density functional theory analysis of the structural and electronic properties of TiO2 rutile and anatase polytypes: Performances of different exchange-correlation
functionals, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 126, 154703 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Chiodo, J. M. Garcia-Lastra, A. Iacomino, S. Ossicini, J. Zhao, H. Petek and A. Rubio, Self-energy and excitonic effects in the electronic and optical properties of TiO2 crystalline phases, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 045207 CrossRef .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Photoelectrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide in aqueous suspensions of semiconductor powders, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
I. Salam, Recent studies on the catalytic activity of titanium, zirconium, and hafnium oxides, Catal. Rev., 2003, 45, 205–296 Search PubMed .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, Toward solar fuels: photocatalytic conversion of carbon dioxide to hydrocarbons, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, F. Han, B. Shi, S. Farsinezhad, G. P. Dechaine and K. Shankar, Photocatalytic conversion of diluted CO2 into light hydrocarbons using periodically modulated multiwalled nanotube arrays, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 12732–12735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Handoko, K. F. Li and J. W. Tang, Recent progress in artificial photosynthesis: CO2 photoreduction to valuable chemicals in a heterogeneous system, Curr. Opin. Chem. Eng., 2013, 2, 200–206 CrossRef .
I. Ganesh, Conversion of carbon dioxide into methanol – a potential liquid fuel: Fundamental challenges and opportunities (a review), Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 31, 221–257 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Evidence for bicarbonate formation on vacuum annealed TiO2(110) resulting from a precursor-mediated interaction between CO2 and H2O, Surf. Sci., 1998, 400, 203–219 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Thompson, O. Diwald and J. T. Yates, CO2 as a probe for monitoring the surface defects on TiO2(110) – Temperature-programmed desorption, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11700–11704 CrossRef CAS .
H. Onishi and Y. Iwasawa, Atom-resolved observation of Na ensembles activating CO2 adsorption on a TiO2(110)-(1 × 1) surface as the genesis of basic sites, Catal. Lett., 1996, 38, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. Funk and U. Burghaus, Adsorption of CO2 on oxidized, defected, hydrogen and oxygen covered rutile (1 × 1)-TiO2(110), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4805–4813 RSC .
S. Funk, B. Hokkanen, E. Johnson and U. Burghaus, Effect of oxygen vacancy sites on CO2 adsorption dynamics: The case of rutile (1 × 1)-TiO2(110), Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 422, 461–465 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, D. C. Sorescu and X. Y. Deng, Electron-induced dissociation of CO2 on TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 10066–10069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, D. C. Sorescu, X. Y. Deng and K. D. Jordan, Diffusion of CO2 on the rutile TiO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3114–3117 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu, J. Lee, W. A. Al-Saidi and K. D. Jordan, CO2 adsorption on TiO2(110) rutile: Insight from dispersion-corrected density functional theory calculations and scanning tunneling microscopy experiments, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 104707 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Tan, Y. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Wang, C. X. Ma, A. D. Zhao, B. Wang, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, CO2 dissociation activated through electron attachment on the reduced rutile TiO2(110)-1 × 1 surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 155418 CrossRef .
P. Granger and V. I. Parvulescu, Catalytic NOx abatement systems for mobile sources: from three-way to lean burn after-treatment technologies, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3155–3207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Boccuzzi, E. Guglielminotti and A. Chiorino, IR study of gas-sensor materials: NO interaction on ZnO and TiO2, pure or modified by metals, Sens. Actuators, B, 1992, 7, 645–650 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Lu, A. Linsebigler and J. T. Yates, Ti3+ defect sites on TiO2(110): production and chemical detection of active sites, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 11733–11738 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu, C. N. Rusu and J. T. Yates, Adsorption of NO on the TiO2(110) surface: An experimental and theoretical study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4408–4417 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Kung and H. H. Kung, IR studies of NH3, pyridine, CO, and NO adsorbed on transition metal oxides, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1985, 27, 425–460 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, K. Jacobi and G. Ertl, Interaction of NO with the stoichiometric RuO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 13918–13924 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Camellone, J. L. Zhao, L. Y. Jin, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler and D. Marx, Molecular understanding of reactivity and selectivity for methanol oxidation at the Au/TiO2 interface, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 5780–5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Assim, Optical constants of TiO1.7 thin films deposited by electron beam gun, J. Alloys Compd., 2008, 463, 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
G. I. N. Waterhouse, A. K. Wahab, M. Al-Oufi, V. Jovic, D. H. Anjum, D. Sun-Waterhouse, J. Llorca and H. Idriss, Hydrogen production by tuning the photonic band gap with the electronic band gap of TiO2, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2849 CAS .
M. A. Henderson, The influence of oxide surface structure on adsorbate chemistry: desorption of water from the smooth, the microfaceted and the ion sputtered surfaces of TiO2(100), Surf. Sci., 1994, 319, 315–328 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Hugenschmidt, L. Gamble and C. T. Campbell, The interaction of H2O with a rutile TiO2(110) surface, Surf. Sci., 1994, 302, 329–340 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, An HREELS and TPD study of water on TiO2(110): The extent of molecular versus dissociative adsorption, Surf. Sci., 1996, 355, 151–166 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Brookes, C. A. Muryn and G. Thornton, Imaging water dissociation on TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Krischok, O. Hofft, J. Gunster, J. Stultz, D. W. Goodman and V. Kempter, H2O interaction with bare and Li-precovered TiO2: studies with electron spectroscopies (MIES and UPS(HeI and II)), Surf. Sci., 2001, 495, 8–18 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schaub, P. Thostrup, N. Lopez, E. Laegsgaard, I. Stensgaard, J. K. Norskov and F. Besenbacher, Oxygen vacancies as active sites for water dissociation on rutile TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Langel, Car-Parrinello simulation of H2O dissociation on rutile, Surf. Sci., 2002, 496, 141–150 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer, S. Wendt and F. Besenbacher, Water adsorption on TiO2, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Pang, R. Lindsay and G. Thornton, Structure of clean and adsorbate-covered single-crystal rutile TiO2 surfaces, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3887–3948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Harris and A. A. Quong, Molecular chemisorption as the theoretically preferred pathway for water adsorption on ideal rutile TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 086105 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Zhang, O. Bondarchuk, B. D. Kay, J. M. White and Z. Dohnálek, Imaging water dissociation on TiO2(110): Evidence for inequivalent geminate OH groups, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 21840–21845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Li, Z. Zhang, D. Sheppard, B. D. Kay, J. M. White, Y. Du, I. Lyubinetsky, G. Henkelman and Z. Dohnálek, Intrinsic diffusion of hydrogen on rutile TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 9080–9088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. G. Du, N. A. Deskins, Z. R. Zhang, Z. Dohnálek, M. Dupuis and I. Lyubinetsky, Imaging consecutive steps of O-2 reaction with hydroxylated TiO2(110): Identification of HO2 and terminal OH intermediates, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 666–671 CAS .
P. M. Kowalski, B. Meyer and D. Marx, Composition, structure, and stability of the rutile TiO2(110) surface: Oxygen depletion, hydroxylation, hydrogen migration, and water adsorption, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 115410 CrossRef .
J. Matthiesen, J. O. Hansen, S. Wendt, E. Lira, R. Schaub, E. Laegsgaard, F. Besenbacher and B. Hammer, Formation and diffusion of water dimers on rutile TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 226101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Tan, H. Feng, Y. F. Ji, Y. Wang, J. Zhao, A. D. Zhao, B. Wang, Y. Luo, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Observation of photocatalytic dissociation of water on terminal Ti sites of TiO2(110)-1 × 1 surface, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9978–9985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Walle, A. Borg, P. Uvdal and A. Sandell, Probing the influence from residual Ti interstitials on water adsorption on TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 205415 CrossRef .
Y. F. Ji, B. Wang and Y. Luo, GGA plus U study on the mechanism of photodecomposition of water adsorbed on rutile TiO2(110) surface: Free vs. trapped hole, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 1027–1034 CAS .
M. Patel, F. F. Sanches, G. Mallia and N. M. Harrison, A quantum mechanical study of water adsorption on the (110) surfaces of rutile SnO2 and TiO2: investigating the effects of intermolecular interactions using hybrid-exchange density functional theory, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 21002–21015 RSC .
H. Shi, Y. C. Liu, Z. J. Zhao, M. Miao, T. Wu and Q. Wang, Reactivity of the defective rutile TiO2(110) surfaces with two bridging oxygen vacancies: water as a probe molecule, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20257–20263 CAS .
R. S. Smith, Z. J. Li, L. Chen, Z. Dohnálek and B. D. Kay, Adsorption, desorption, and displacement kinetics of H2O and CO2 on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. B, 2014, 118, 8054–8061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Walle, D. Ragazzon, A. Borg, P. Uvdal and A. Sandell, Competing water dissociation channels on rutile TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 2014, 621, 77–81 CrossRef CAS .
N. Osterloh, D. Silber, F. Traeger and C. Wöll, Water adsorption on r-TiO2(110): Presence of a well-defined (1 × 1)-structure as evidenced by He-atom scattering, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2013, 250, 1235–1241 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Schaich and W. Chen, Nonlocal corrections to Fresnel optics: How to extend d-parameter theory beyond jellium models, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 39, 10714–10724 CrossRef .
M. Kurtz, J. Strunk, O. Hinrichsen, M. Muhler, K. Fink, B. Meyer and C. Wöll, Active sites on oxide surfaces: ZnO-catalyzed synthesis of methanol from CO and H2, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2790–2794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Shen and M. A. Henderson, Identification of the active species in photochemical hole scavenging reactions of methanol on TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2707–2710 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, C. B. Xu, Z. F. Ren, W. S. Yang, Z. B. Ma, D. X. Dai, H. J. Fan, T. K. Minton and X. M. Yang, Stepwise photocatalytic dissociation of methanol and water on TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 13366–13373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Jin, W. H. Weng, Z. J. Lin, N. F. Dummer, S. H. Taylor, C. J. Kiely, J. K. Bartley and G. J. Hutchings, Fe2(MoO4)3/MoO3 nano-structured catalysts for the oxidation of methanol to formaldehyde, J. Catal., 2012, 296, 55–64 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kähler, M. C. Holz, M. Rohe, A. C. van Veen and M. Muhler, Methanol oxidation as probe reaction for active sites in Au/ZnO and Au/TiO2 catalysts, J. Catal., 2013, 299, 162–170 CrossRef .
X. C. Mao, Z. Q. Wang, X. F. Lang, Q. Q. Hao, B. Wen, D. X. Dai, C. Y. Zhou, L. M. Liu and X. M. Yang, Effect of surface structure on the photoreactivity of TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 6121–6127 CAS .
D. Wei, X. C. Jin, C. Q. Huang, D. X. Dai, Z. B. Ma, W. X. Li and X. M. Yang, Direct imaging single methanol molecule photocatalysis on titania, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 17748–17754 CAS .
G. T. Whiting, S. A. Kondrat, C. Hammond, N. Dimitratos, Q. He, D. J. Morgan, N. F. Dummer, J. K. Bartley, C. J. Kiely, S. H. Taylor and G. J. Hutchings, Methyl formate formation from methanol oxidation using supported gold-palladium nanoparticles, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 637–644 CrossRef CAS .
P. Biloen and W. M. H. Sachtler, Mechanism of hydrocarbon synthesis over Fischer-Tropsch catalysts, Adv. Catal., 1981, 30, 165–216 CAS .
J. P. Hindermann, G. J. Hutchings and A. Kiennemann, Mechanistic aspects of the formation of hydrocarbons and alcohols from CO hydrogenation, Catal. Rev.: Sci. Eng., 1993, 35, 1–127 CAS .
J. J. Zhu, J. G. van Ommen and L. Lefferts, Reaction scheme of partial oxidation of methane to synthesis gas over yttrium-stabilized zirconia, J. Catal., 2004, 225, 388–397 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kieu, P. Boyd and H. Idriss, Modelling of the adsorption of formic acid and formaldehyde over rutile TiO2(110) and TiO2(011) clusters, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2001, 176, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Li, L. M. Wu and Y. F. Zhang, Theoretical study of adsorbed-decomposition of NO, CO and CH2O on a TiO2(110) (1 × 1) defect surface, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 342, 249–258 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haubrich, E. Kaxiras and C. M. Friend, The role of surface and subsurface point defects for chemical model studies on TiO2: a first-principles theoretical study of formaldehyde bonding on rutile TiO2(110), Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 4496–4506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Z. Liu, X. Wang, C. X. Pan and K. M. Liew, First-principles study of formaldehyde adsorption on TiO2 rutile (110) and anatase (001) surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 8044–8053 CAS .
P. R. McGill and T. Söhnel, A study of gas phase and surface formaldehyde polymerisation from first principles, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 858–868 RSC .
J. M. R. Muir and H. Idriss, Formaldehyde adsorption geometry and energies over TiO2(110) rutile surface, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2013, 572, 125–129 CrossRef .
C. B. Xu, W. S. Yang, Q. Guo, D. X. Dai, T. K. Minton and X. M. Yang, Photoinduced decomposition of formaldehyde on a TiO2(110) surface, assisted by bridge-bonded oxygen atoms, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2668–2673 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuan, Z. F. Wu, Y. K. Jin, F. Xiong and W. X. Huang, Surface chemistry of formaldehyde on rutile TiO2(110) surface: Photocatalysis vs thermal-catalysis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 20420–20428 CAS .
Z. R. Zhang, M. R. Tang, Z. T. Wang, Z. Ke, Y. B. Xia, K. T. Park, I. Lyubinetsky, Z. Dohnálek and Q. F. Ge, Imaging of formaldehyde adsorption and diffusion on TiO2(110), Top. Catal., 2015, 58, 103–113 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhu, Y. B. Xia, M. R. Tang, Z. T. Wang, B. Jan, I. Lyubinetsky, Q. F. Ge, Z. Dohnálek, K. T. Park and Z. R. Zhang, Tracking site-specific C–C coupling of formaldehyde molecules on rutile TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 14267–14272 CAS .
K. Zhu, Y. B. Xia, M. R. Tang, Z. T. Wang, I. Lyubinetsky, Q. F. Ge, Z. Dohnálek, K. T. Park and Z. R. Zhang, Low-temperature reductive coupling of formaldehyde on rutile TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 18452–18457 CAS .
B. Oregan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ushiroda, N. Ruzycki, Y. Lu, M. T. Spitler and B. A. Parkinson, Dye sensitization of the anatase (101) crystal surface by a series of dicarboxylated thiacyanine dyes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5158–5168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Onishi, T. Aruga and Y. Iwasawa, Switchover of reaction paths in the catalytic decomposition of formic acid on TiO2(110) surface, J. Catal., 1994, 146, 557–567 CrossRef CAS .
H. Onishi and Y. Iwasawa, STM-imaging of formate intermediates adsorbed on a TiO2(110) surface, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 226, 111–114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Busca, Infrared studies of the reactive adsorption of organic molecules over metal oxides and of the mechanisms of their heterogeneously-catalyzed oxidation, Catal. Today, 1996, 27, 457–496 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Chambers, S. Thevuthasan, Y. J. Kim, G. S. Herman, Z. Wang, E. Tober, R. Ynzunza, J. Morais, C. H. F. Peden, K. Ferris and C. S. Fadley, Chemisorption geometry of formate on TiO2(110) by photoelectron diffraction, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 267, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Complexity in the decomposition of formic acid on the TiO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 221–229 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Bates, G. Kresse and M. J. Gillan, The adsorption and dissociation of ROH molecules on TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 1998, 409, 336–349 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Chambers, M. A. Henderson, Y. J. Kim and S. Thevuthasan, Chemisorption geometry, vibrational spectra, and thermal desorption of formic acid on TiO2(110), Surf. Rev. Lett., 1998, 5, 381–385 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bowker, P. Stone, R. Bennett and N. Perkins, Formic acid adsorption and decomposition on TiO2(110) and on Pd/TiO2(110) model catalysts, Surf. Sci., 2002, 511, 435–448 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Morikawa, I. Takahashi, M. Aizawa, Y. Namai, T. Sasaki and Y. Iwasawa, First-principles theoretical study and scanning tunneling microscopic observation of dehydration process of formic acid on a TiO2(110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 14446–14451 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Rotzinger, J. M. Kesselman-Truttmann, S. J. Hug, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, Structure and vibrational spectrum of formate and acetate adsorbed from aqueous solution onto the TiO2 rutile (110) surface, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5004–5017 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ojamäe, C. Aulin, H. Pedersen and P. O. Käll, IR and quantum-chemical studies of carboxylic acid and glycine adsorption on rutile TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2006, 296, 71–78 CrossRef PubMed .

          L. Österlund, in Solid State Chemistry and Photocatalysis of Titanium Dioxide, ed. M. K. Nowotny and J. Nowotny, Trans Tech Publications Ltd, Stafa-Zürich, Switzerland,  2010, pp. 203–219 Search PubMed .
L. Kavan, M. Grätzel, S. E. Gilbert, C. Klemenz and H. J. Scheel, Electrochemical and photoelectrochemical investigation of single-crystal anatase, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 6716–6723 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vittadini, A. Selloni, F. P. Rotzinger and M. Grätzel, Formic acid adsorption on dry and hydrated TiO2 anatase (101) surfaces by DFT calculations, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 1300–1306 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Herman, Z. Dohnálek, N. Ruzycki and U. Diebold, Experimental investigation of the interaction of water and methanol with anatase–TiO2(101), J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 2788–2795 CrossRef CAS .
A. Selloni, Crystal growth: Anatase shows its reactive side, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 613–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Dulub and U. Diebold, Preparation of a pristine TiO2 anatase (101) surface by cleaving, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 084014 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Setvín, B. Daniel, V. Mansfeldova, L. Kavan, P. Scheiber, M. Fidler, M. Schmid and U. Diebold, Surface preparation of TiO2 anatase (101): Pitfalls and how to avoid them, Surf. Sci., 2014, 626, 61–67 CrossRef .
M. Setvin, M. Schmid and U. Diebold, Aggregation and electronically induced migration of oxygen vacancies in TiO2 anatase, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 195403 CrossRef .
H. Onishi, T. Aruga, C. Egawa and Y. Iwasawa, Adsorption of CH3OH, HCOOH and SO2 on TiO2(110) and stepped TiO2(441) surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1988, 193, 33–46 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, S. Otero-Tapia and M. E. Castro, The chemistry of methanol on the TiO2(110) surface: the influence of vacancies and coadsorbed species, Faraday Discuss., 1999, 114, 313–329 RSC .
E. Farfan-Arribas and R. J. Madix, Different binding sites for methanol dehydrogenation and deoxygenation on stoichiometric and defective TiO2(110) surfaces, Surf. Sci., 2003, 544, 241–260 CrossRef CAS .
Z. R. Zhang, O. Bondarchuk, J. M. White, B. D. Kay and Z. Dohnálek, Imaging adsorbate O–H bond cleavage: methanol on TiO2(110), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 4198–4199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Zhou, Z. F. Ren, S. J. Tan, Z. B. Ma, X. C. Mao, D. X. Dai, H. J. Fan, X. M. Yang, J. LaRue, R. Cooper, A. M. Wodtke, Z. Wang, Z. Y. Li, B. Wang, J. L. Yang and J. G. Hou, Site-specific photocatalytic splitting of methanol on TiO2(110), Chem. Sci., 2010, 1, 575–580 RSC .
C. Y. Zhou, Z. B. Ma, Z. F. Ren, X. C. Mao, D. X. Dai and X. M. Yang, Effect of defects on photocatalytic dissociation of methanol on TiO2(110), Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1980–1983 RSC .
S. Liu, A. A. Liu, B. Wen, R. Zhang, C. Zhuo, L. M. Liu and Z. Ren, Coverage dependence of methanol dissociation on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3327–3334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Bates, M. J. Gillan and G. Kresse, Adsorption of methanol on TiO2(110): a first-principles investigation, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2017–2026 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. de Armas, J. Oviedo, M. A. San Miguel and J. F. Sanz, Methanol adsorption and dissociation on TiO2(110) from first principles calculations, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 10023–10028 Search PubMed .
J. Oviedo, R. Sanchez-De-Armas, M. A. S. Miguel and J. F. Sanz, Methanol and water dissociation on TiO2(110): The role of surface oxygen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 12, 17737–17740 Search PubMed .
J. Zhao, J. L. Yang and H. Petek, Theoretical study of the molecular and electronic structure of methanol on a TiO2(110) surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235416 CrossRef .
M. A. Henderson, Acetone chemistry on oxidized and reduced TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18932–18941 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Acetone and water on TiO2(110): Competition for sites, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3443–3450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Henderson, Photooxidation of acetone on TiO2(110): Conversion to acetate via methyl radical ejection, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 12062–12070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Henderson, Acetone and water on TiO2(110): H/D exchange, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Henderson, Ethyl radical ejection during photodecomposition of butanone on TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 3188–3193 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Relationship of O2 photodesorption in photooxidation of acetone on TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11433–11440 CAS .
M. A. Henderson, Effect of coadsorbed water on the photodecomposition of acetone on TiO2(110), J. Catal., 2008, 256, 287–292 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Wilson, D. Sporleder and M. G. White, Final state distributions of methyl photoproducts from the photooxidation of acetone on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 16541–16552 CAS .
D. P. Wilson, D. Sporleder and M. G. White, Final state distributions of methyl radical desorption from ketone photooxidation on TiO2(110), Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 13630–13637 RSC .
D. P. Wilson, D. P. Sporleder and M. G. White, Final state distributions of the radical photoproducts from the UV photooxidation of 2-butanone on TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9290–9300 CAS .
M. D. Kershis, D. P. Wilson and M. G. White, Dynamics of acetone photooxidation on TiO2(110): State-resolved measurements of methyl photoproducts, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 204703 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hager and R. Bauer, Heterogeneous photocatalytic oxidation of organics for air purification by near UV irradiated titanium dioxide, Chemosphere, 1999, 38, 1549–1559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. El-Maazawi, A. N. Finken, A. B. Nair and V. H. Grassian, Adsorption and photocatalytic oxidation of acetone on TiO2: an in situ transmission FT-IR study, J. Catal., 2000, 191, 138–146 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, D. Raftery and J. S. Francisco, Effect of irradiation sources and oxygen concentration on the photocatalytic oxidation of 2-propanol and acetone studied by in situ FTIR, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4537–4544 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mattsson, M. Leideborg, L. Persson, G. Westin and L. Österlund, Oxygen diffusion and photodegradation of acetone on Zr and Nb doped TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3810–3818 CAS .
M. A. Henderson, N. A. Deskins, R. T. Zehr and M. Dupuis, Generation of organic radicals during photocatalytic reactions on TiO2, J. Catal., 2011, 279, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, I. Cocks and E. M. Williams, The adsorption of benzoic acid on a TiO2(110) surface studied using STM, ESDIAD and LEED, Surf. Sci., 1997, 393, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo and E. M. Williams, The effect of adsorbate–adsorbate interaction on the structure of chemisorbed overlayers on TiO2(110), Surf. Sci., 1999, 433–435, 322–326 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnadt, J. N. O’Shea, L. Patthey, J. Schiessling, J. Krempaský, M. Shi, N. Mårtensson and P. A. Brühwiler, Structural study of adsorption of isonicotinic acid and related molecules on rutile TiO2(110) II: XPS, Surf. Sci., 2003, 544, 74–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schnadt, J. Schiessling, J. N. O’Shea, S. M. Gray, L. Patthey, M. K. J. Johansson, M. Shi, J. Krempaský, J. Åhlund, P. G. Karlsson, P. Persson, N. Mårtensson and P. A. Brühwiler, Structural study of adsorption of isonicotinic acid and related molecules on rutile TiO2(110) I: XAS and STM, Surf. Sci., 2003, 540, 39–54 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Grinter, T. Woolcot, C.-L. Pang and G. Thornton, Ordered carboxylates on TiO2(110) formed at aqueous interfaces, J. Phys. Lett., 2014, 5, 4265–4269 CAS .
A. Tekiel, J. S. Prauzner-Bechcicki, S. Godlewski, J. Budzioch and M. Szymonski, Self-assembly of terephthalic acid on rutile TiO2(110): toward chemically functionalized metal oxide surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 12606–12609 CAS .
J. S. Prauzner-Bechcicki, S. Godlewski, A. Tekiel, P. Cyganik, J. Budzioch and M. Szymonski, High-resolution STM studies of terephthalic acid molecules on rutile TiO2(110)-(1 × 1) surfaces, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 9309–9315 CAS .
P. Rahe, M. Nimmrich, A. Nefedov, M. Naboka, C. Wöll and A. Kühnle, Transition of molecule orientation during adsorption of terephthalic acid on rutile TiO2(110), J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17471–17478 CAS .
F. Zasada, W. Piskorz, S. Godlewski, J. S. Prauzner-Bechcicki, A. Tekiel, J. Budzioch, P. Cyganik, M. Szymonski and Z. Sojka, Chemical functionalization of the TiO2(110)-(1 × 1) surface by deposition of terephthalic acid molecules. A density functional theory and scanning tunneling microscopy study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 4134–4144 CAS .
A. Yamakata, T.-a. Ishibashi and H. Onishi, Time-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy of photogenerated electrons in platinized TiO2 particles, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 333, 271–277 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Szczepankiewicz, J. A. Moss and M. R. Hoffmann, Slow surface charge trapping kinetics on irradiated TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 2922–2927 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Savory, D. S. Warren and A. J. McQuillan, Shallow electron trap, interfacial water, and outer-sphere adsorbed oxalate IR absorptions correlate during UV irradiation of photocatalytic TiO2 films in aqueous solution, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 902–907 CAS .
T. Berger, J. A. Anta and V. Morales-Flórez, Electrons in the band gap: spectroscopic characterization of anatase TiO2 nanocrystal electrodes under fermi level control, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 11444–11455 CAS .
D. A. Panayotov, S. P. Burrows and J. R. Morris, Infrared spectroscopic studies of conduction band and trapped electrons in UV-photoexcited, H-atom n-doped, and thermally reduced TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 4535–4544 CAS .
A. Yamakata, T. Ishibashi and H. Onishi, Kinetics of the photocatalytic water-splitting reaction on TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 studied by time-resolved infrared absorption spectroscopy, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 199, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Panayotov and J. T. Yates Jr, n-Type doping of TiO2 with atomic hydrogen-observation of the production of conduction band electrons by infrared spectroscopy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2007, 436, 204–208 CrossRef CAS .
C. Di Valentin, G. Pacchioni and A. Selloni, Reduced and n-type doped TiO2: Nature of Ti3+ species, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20543–20552 CAS .
C. Di Valentin and A. Selloni, Bulk and surface polarons in photoexcited anatase TiO2, J. Phys. Lett., 2011, 2, 2223–2228 CAS .
P. Deák, B. Aradi and T. Frauenheim, Quantitative theory of the oxygen vacancy and carrier self-trapping in bulk TiO2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 195206 CrossRef .
A. Janotti, C. Franchini, J. B. Varley, G. Kresse and C. G. Van de Walle, Dual behavior of excess electrons in rutile TiO2, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2013, 7, 199–203 CrossRef CAS .
H. Takahashi, R. Watanabe, Y. Miyauchi and G. Mizutani, Discovery of deep and shallow trap states from step structures of rutile TiO2 vicinal surfaces by second harmonic and sum frequency generation spectroscopy, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 154704 CrossRef PubMed .

          T. Trovarelli and P. Fornasiero, Catalysis by Ceria and Related Materials, Imperial College Press,  2013 Search PubMed .
L. Vivier and D. Duprez, Ceria-based solid catalysts for organic chemistry, ChemSusChem, 2010, 3, 654–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sun, H. Li and L. Chen, Nanostructured ceria-based materials: synthesis, properties, and applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8475–8505 CAS .
N. J. Divins, I. Angurell, C. Escudero, V. Pérez-Dieste and J. Llorca, Influence of the support on surface rearrangements of bimetallic nanoparticles in real catalysts, Science, 2014, 346, 620–623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Huang and Y. Gao, Morphology-dependent surface chemistry and catalysis of CeO2 nanocrystals, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 3772–3784 CAS .

          E. Aneggi, M. Boaro, S. Colussi, C. de Leitenburg and A. Trovarelli, in Handbook on the Physics and Chemistry of Rare Earths, ed. J. C. Bünzli and V. K. Pecharsky, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2016, vol. 50, pp. 209–242 Search PubMed .
D. D. Koelling, A. M. Boring and J. H. Wood, The electronic structure of CeO2 and PrO2, Solid State Commun., 1983, 47, 227–232 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. F. Da Silva, M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, J. Sauer, V. Bayer and G. Kresse, Hybrid functionals applied to rare-earth oxides: The example of ceria, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 045121 CrossRef .
D. R. Mullins, S. H. Overbury and D. R. Huntley, Electron spectroscopy of single crystal and polycrystalline cerium oxide surfaces, Surf. Sci., 1998, 409, 307–319 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Skorodumova, S. I. Simak, B. I. Lundqvist, I. A. Abrikosov and B. Johansson, Quantum origin of the oxygen storage capability of ceria, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 166601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. M. Castleton, J. Kullgren and K. Hermansson, Tuning LDA+U for electron localization and structure at oxygen vacancies in ceria, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 244704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. W. Tasker, The stability of ionic crystal surfaces, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1979, 12, 4977–4984 CrossRef CAS .
M. Baudin, M. Wójcik and K. Hermansson, Dynamics, structure and energetics of the (111), (011) and (001) surfaces of ceria, Surf. Sci., 2000, 468, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
N. V. Skorodumova, M. Baudin and K. Hermansson, Surface properties of CeO2 from first principles, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 075401 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, T. K. Woo, M. Baudin and K. Hermansson, Atomic and electronic structure of unreduced and reduced CeO2 surfaces: A first-principles study, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 7741–7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. B. Adams and M. van Schilfgaarde, Density-functional calculation of CeO2 surfaces and prediction of effects of oxygen partial pressure and temperature on stabilities, J. Chem. Phys., 2005, 123, 064701 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nolan, S. Grigoleit, D. C. Sayle, S. C. Parker and G. W. Watson, Density functional theory studies of the structure and electronic structure of pure and defective low index surfaces of ceria, Surf. Sci., 2005, 576, 217–229 CrossRef CAS .
H.-T. Chen, Y. M. Choi, M. Liu and M. C. Lin, A theoretical study of surface reduction mechanisms of CeO2(111) and (110) by H2, ChemPhysChem, 2007, 8, 849–855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nolan, Hybrid density functional theory description of oxygen vacancies in the CeO2(110) and (100) surfaces, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 499, 126–130 CrossRef CAS .
T. Désaunay, A. Ringuedé, M. Cassir, F. Labat and C. Adamo, Modeling basic components of solid oxide fuel cells using density functional theory: Bulk and surface properties of CeO2, Surf. Sci., 2012, 606, 305–311 CrossRef .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. Hofmann and J. Sauer, Oxygen vacancies in transition metal and rare earth oxides: Current state of understanding and remaining challenges, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2007, 62, 219–270 CrossRef CAS .
H.-X. Mai, L.-D. Sun, Y.-W. Zhang, R. Si, W. Feng, H.-P. Zhang, H.-C. Liu and C.-H. Yan, Shape-selective synthesis and oxygen storage behavior of ceria nanopolyhedra, nanorods, and nanocubes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 24380–24385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhou, X. Wang, X. Sun, Q. Peng and Y. Li, Enhanced catalytic activity of ceria nanorods from well-defined reactive crystal planes, J. Catal., 2005, 229, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
Tana, M. Zhang, J. Li, H. Li, Y. Li and W. Shen, Morphology-dependent redox and catalytic properties of CeO2 nanostructures: Nanowires, nanorods and nanoparticles, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 179–183 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, M. Li and S. H. Overbury, On the structure dependence of CO oxidation over CeO2 nanocrystals with well-defined surface planes, J. Catal., 2012, 285, 61–73 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, X. Liu, D. Meng, Y. Guo, Y. Guo and G. Lu, Effect of ceria crystal plane on the physicochemical and catalytic properties of Pd/ceria for CO and propane oxidation, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2265–2279 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, M. Li, J. Howe, H. M. Meyer and S. H. Overbury, Probing defect sites on CeO2 nanocrystals with well-defined surface planes by Raman spectroscopy and O2 adsorption, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16595–16606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, X. Du, L. Shi and R. Gao, Shape-controlled synthesis and catalytic application of ceria nanomaterials, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 14455–14475 RSC .
K. Zhou and Y. Li, Catalysis based on nanocrystals with well-defined facets, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 602–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. I. Zaki, B. Vielhaber and H. Knoezinger, Low-temperature carbon monoxide adsorption and state of molybdena supported on alumina, titania, ceria, and zirconia. An infrared spectroscopic investigation, J. Phys. Chem., 1986, 90, 3176–3183 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, Y. Sakata, T. Arai, K. Domen, K.-i. Maruya and T. Onishi, Carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide adsorption on cerium oxide studied by Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy. Part 1.-Formation of carbonate species on dehydroxylated CeO2, at room temperature, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans. 1, 1989, 85, 929–943 RSC .
F. Bozon-Verduraz and A. Bensalem, IR studies of cerium dioxide: influence of impurities and defects, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1994, 90, 653–657 RSC .
A. Badri, C. Binet and J.-C. Lavalley, Metal-support interaction in Pd/CeO2 catalysts. Part 2.-Ceria textural effects, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1996, 92, 1603–1608 RSC .
C. Binet, M. Daturi and J.-C. Lavalley, IR study of polycrystalline ceria properties in oxidised and reduced states, Catal. Today, 1999, 50, 207–225 CrossRef CAS .
M. Daturi, C. Binet, J.-C. Lavalley, A. Galtayries and R. Sporken, Surface investigation on CexZr1−xO2 compounds, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 5717–5724 RSC .
T. Tabakova, F. Boccuzzi, M. Manzoli and D. Andreeva, FTIR study of low-temperature water-gas shift reaction on gold/ceria catalyst, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 252, 385–397 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bazin, O. Saur, J. C. Lavalley, M. Daturi and G. Blanchard, FT-IR study of CO adsorption on Pt/CeO2: characterisation and structural rearrangement of small Pt particles, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2005, 7, 187–194 RSC .
R. Farra, S. Wrabetz, M. E. Schuster, E. Stotz, N. G. Hamilton, A. P. Amrute, J. Perez-Ramirez, N. Lopez and D. Teschner, Understanding CeO2 as a Deacon catalyst by probe molecule adsorption and in situ infrared characterisations, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3454–3465 RSC .
S. Agarwal, X. Zhu, E. J. M. Hensen, B. L. Mojet and L. Lefferts, Surface-dependence of defect chemistry of nanostructured ceria, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 12423–12433 CAS .
C. Li, K. Domen, K.-i. Maruya and T. Onishi, Spectroscopic identification of adsorbed species derived from adsorption and decomposition of formic acid, methanol, and formaldehyde on cerium oxide, J. Catal., 1990, 125, 445–455 CrossRef CAS .
A. Badri, C. Binet and J.-C. Lavalley, Use of methanol as an IR molecular probe to study the surface of polycrystalline ceria, J. Chem. Soc., Faraday Trans., 1997, 93, 1159–1168 RSC .
Z. L. Wu, M. J. Li, D. R. Mullins and S. H. Overbury, Probing the surface sites of CeO2 nanocrystals with well-defined surface planes via methanol adsorption and desorption, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2224–2234 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Uhlrich, B. Yang and S. Shaikhutdinov, Methanol reactivity on silica-supported ceria nanoparticles, Top. Catal., 2014, 57, 1229–1235 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Lustemberg, M. V. Bosco, A. Bonivardi, H. F. Busnengo and M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, Insights into the nature of formate species in the decomposition and reaction of methanol over cerium oxide surfaces: A combined infrared spectroscopy and density functional theory study, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 21452–21464 CAS .
H. Nörenberg and G. A. D. Briggs, Defect structure of nonstoichiometric CeO2(111) surfaces studied by scanning tunneling microscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 4222–4225 CrossRef .
H. Nörenberg and G. A. D. Briggs, Defect formation on CeO2(111) surfaces after annealing studied by STM, Surf. Sci., 1999, 424, L352–L355 CrossRef .
Y. Namai, K.-i. Fukui and Y. Iwasawa, Atom-resolved noncontact atomic force microscopic observations of CeO2(111) surfaces with different oxidation states: surface structure and behavior of surface oxygen atoms, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 11666–11673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Namai, K.-I. Fukui and Y. Iwasawa, Atom-resolved noncontact atomic force microscopic and scanning tunneling microscopic observations of the structure and dynamic behavior of CeO2(111) surfaces, Catal. Today, 2003, 85, 79–91 CrossRef CAS .
F. Esch, S. Fabris, L. Zhou, T. Montini, C. Africh, P. Fornasiero, G. Comelli and R. Rosei, Electron localization determines defect formation on ceria substrates, Science, 2005, 309, 752–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Torbrügge, M. Reichling, A. Ishiyama, S. Morita and Ó. Custance, Evidence of subsurface oxygen vacancy ordering on reduced CeO2(111), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 056101 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Torbrügge, M. Cranney and M. Reichling, Morphology of step structures on CeO2(111), Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073112 CrossRef .
M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, J. L. F. Da Silva and J. Sauer, Density-functional calculations of the structure of near-surface oxygen vacancies and electron localization on CeO2(111), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 026101 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Y. Li, H.-F. Wang, X.-Q. Gong, Y.-L. Guo, Y. Guo, G. Lu and P. Hu, Multiple configurations of the two excess 4f electrons on defective CeO2(111): Origin and implications, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 193401 CrossRef .
E. Shoko, M. F. Smith and H. M. Ross, Charge distribution near bulk oxygen vacancies in cerium oxides, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 223201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-F. Jerratsch, X. Shao, N. Nilius, H.-J. Freund, C. Popa, M. V. Ganduglia-Pirovano, A. M. Burow and J. Sauer, Electron localization in defective ceria films: A study with scanning-tunneling microscopy and density-functional theory, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 246801 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Plata, A. M. Márquez and J. F. Sanz, Transport properties in the CeO2−x(111) surface: From charge distribution to ion-electron collaborative migration, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 25497–25503 CAS .
Y.-G. Wang, D. Mei, J. Li and R. Rousseau, DFT+U study on the localized electronic states and their potential role during H2O dissociation and CO oxidation processes on CeO2(111) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 23082–23089 CAS .
H. Nörenberg and G. A. D. Briggs, The surface structure of CeO2(110) single crystals studied by STM and RHEED, Surf. Sci., 1999, 433–435, 127–130 CrossRef .
N. M. Galea, D. O. Scanlon, B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, A GGA+U study of the reduction of ceria surfaces and their partial reoxidation through NO2 adsorption, Mol. Simul., 2009, 35, 577–583 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kullgren, K. Hermansson and C. Castleton, Many competing ceria (110) oxygen vacancy structures: From small to large supercells, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 044705 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Cheng, B. J. Sherman and C. S. Lo, Carbon dioxide activation and dissociation on ceria (110): A density functional theory study, J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 138, 014702 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. K. Gao, F. Traeger, C. Wöll and H. Idriss, Glycine adsorption and photo-reaction over ZnO(000-1) single crystal, Surf. Sci., 2014, 624, 112–117 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tatibouët, Methanol oxidation as a catalytic surface probe, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 148, 213–252 CrossRef .
M. Badlani and I. E. Wachs, Methanol: a “smart” chemical probe molecule, Catal. Lett., 2001, 75, 137–149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Siokou and R. M. Nix, Interaction of methanol with well-defined ceria surfaces: reflection/absorption infrared spectroscopy, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, and temperature-programmed desorption study, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6984–6997 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Namai, K. Fukui and Y. Iwasawa, The dynamic behaviour of CH3OH and NO2 adsorbed on CeO2(111) studied by noncontact atomic force microscopy, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, S49–S54 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Mullins, M. D. Robbins and J. Zhou, Adsorption and reaction of methanol on thin-film cerium oxide, Surf. Sci., 2006, 600, 1547–1558 CrossRef CAS .
P. M. Albrecht and D. R. Mullins, Adsorption and reaction of methanol over CeOX(100) thin films, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 4559–4567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Abbott, A. Uhl, M. Baron, Y. Lei, R. J. Meyer, D. J. Stacchiola, O. Bondarchuk, S. Shaikhutdinov and H. J. Freund, Relating methanol oxidation to the structure of ceria-supported vanadia monolayer catalysts, J. Catal., 2010, 272, 82–91 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Kozlov, F. Viñes, N. Nilius, S. Shaikhutdinov and K. M. Neyman, Absolute surface step energies: accurate theoretical methods applied to ceria nanoislands, J. Phys. Lett., 2012, 3, 1956–1961 CAS .
N. Nilius, S. M. Kozlov, J.-F. Jerratsch, M. Baron, X. Shao, F. Viñes, S. Shaikhutdinov, K. M. Neyman and H.-J. Freund, Formation of one-dimensional electronic states along the step edges of CeO2(111), ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1126–1133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Gamba, H. Noei, J. Pavelec, R. Bliem, M. Schmid, U. Diebold, A. Stierle and G. S. Parkinson, Adsorption of formic acid on the Fe3O4(001) surface, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 20459–20465 CAS .
Y. J. Chabal, Electronic damping of hydrogen vibration on the W(100) surface, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1985, 55, 845–848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. N. J. Persson and R. Ryberg, Vibrational line shapes of low-frequency adsorbate modes: CO on Pt(111), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 10273–10281 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Hirschmugl, G. P. Williams, F. M. Hoffmann and Y. J. Chabal, Adsorbate-substrate resonant interactions observed for CO on Cu(100) in the far infrared, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1990, 65, 480–483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. A. Lamont, B. N. J. Persson and G. P. Williams, Dynamics of atomic adsorbates: hydrogen on Cu(111), Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 243, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kröger, S. Lehwald and H. Ibach, EELS study of the clean and hydrogen-covered Mo(110) surface, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1997, 55, 10895–10904 CrossRef .
K. Mudiyanselage, Y. Yang, F. M. Hoffmann, O. J. Furlong, J. Hrbek, M. G. White, P. Liu and D. J. Stacchiola, Adsorption of hydrogen on the surface and sub-surface of Cu(111), J. Chem. Phys., 2013, 139, 044712 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Koitaya, Y. Shiozawa, K. Mukai, S. Yoshimoto and J. Yoshinobu, Observation of Fano line shapes in infrared vibrational spectra of CO2 adsorbed on Cu(997) and Cu(111), J. Chem. Phys., 2016, 144, 054703 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Kuzmenko, L. Benfatto, E. Cappelluti, I. Crassee, D. van der Marel, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, Gate tunable infrared phonon anomalies in bilayer graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 116804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Direct observation of a widely tunable bandgap in bilayer graphene, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lapointe, É. Gaufrès, I. Tremblay, N. Y. W. Tang, R. Martel and P. Desjardins, Fano resonances in the midinfrared spectra of single-walled carbon nanotubes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 109, 097402 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, C. H. Lui, E. Cappelluti, L. Benfatto, K. F. Mak, G. L. Carr, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Structure-dependent Fano resonances in the infrared spectra of phonons in few-layer graphene, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 156801 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Manzardo, E. Cappelluti, E. van Heumen and A. B. Kuzmenko, Infrared phonon activity in pristine graphite, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 054302 CrossRef .
A. E. Miroshnichenko, S. Flach and Y. S. Kivshar, Fano resonances in nanoscale structures, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2010, 82, 2257–2298 CrossRef CAS .
C. T. Campbell, Catalyst-support interactions: Electronic perturbations, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 597–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tinoco, S. Fernandez-Garcia, M. Lopez-Haro, A. B. Hungria, X. Chen, G. Blanco, J. A. Perez-Omil, S. E. Collins, H. Okuno and J. J. Calvino, Critical influence of nanofaceting on the preparation and performance of supported gold catalysts, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3504–3513 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tamura, T. Kitanaka, Y. Nakagawa and K. Tomishige, Cu sub-nanoparticles on Cu/CeO2 as an effective catalyst for methanol synthesis from organic carbonate by hydrogenation, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 376–380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jones, H. Xiong, A. T. DeLaRiva, E. J. Peterson, H. Pham, S. R. Challa, G. Qi, S. Oh, M. H. Wiebenga, X. I. Pereira Hernández, Y. Wang and A. K. Datye, Thermally stable single-atom platinum-on-ceria catalysts via atom trapping, Science, 2016, 353, 150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dvořák, M. Farnesi Camellone, A. Tovt, N.-D. Tran, F. R. Negreiros, M. Vorokhta, T. Skála, I. Matolínová, J. Mysliveček, V. Matolín and S. Fabris, Creating single-atom Pt-ceria catalysts by surface step decoration, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10801 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Yuemin Wang
	Yuemin Wang is head of the research group “Surface Catalysis” at the Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG) of the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2015). He studied Chemistry at the Nankai University and received his PhD in Physical Chemistry at the Fritz-Haber Institute of the Max-Planck Society in 2002. He joined the Ruhr-University of Bochum as a group leader in 2004. He served as Visiting Professor at the University of Technology Dalian (2008–2010). His research interests are in the area of Surface Chemistry and Catalysis, especially vibrational spectroscopic studies on metal oxides and metal–organic frameworks.

Christof Wöll
	Christof Wöll is Director of the Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG) at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2009). He studied Physics at the University of Göttingen and received his PhD in 1987 at the Max-Planck-Institute of Dynamics and Self-Organization. In 1996 he took over the chair for Physical Chemistry at the University of Bochum (until 2009) and founded the collaborative research center SFB 558. He has received several awards including the van't Hoff Prize of the German Bunsen Association. He is a member of the “Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina” and is the Spokesperson of the German Physical Society (DPG) Surface Physics Division (since 2016). His research activities focus on fundamental processes in Surface Physics and Surface Chemistry, in particular development and advancement of techniques for the characterization of molecular adsorbates and oxide surfaces as well as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs and SURMOFs).

 	Fig. 1  The UHV apparatus “THEO” at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (KIT), Institute of Functional Interfaces (IFG), combining a state-of-the-art FTIR spectrometer (Bruker Vertex 80v) with a multi-chamber UHV system (Prevac). (1) Vacuum FTIR spectrometer. (2) IR chamber. (3) Electron analyzer (VG Scienta R4000). (4) Analysis chamber (XPS, UPS, and Auger). (5) Preparation chamber equipped with LEED, AES, and TDS. (6) Distribution chamber. (7) Load-lock. (8) Magazine.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) IRRAS data recorded after exposing ZnO(100) to CO at 60 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured with p-polarized light incident along the [110] azimuth. (b) IRRAS data recorded after exposing ZnO(110) to different doses of CO at 110 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured with p-polarized light incident along the [0001] azimuth. The upper panel shows the adsorption geometry of CO on both mixed-terminated ZnO surfaces. Color code: oxygen (CO) = red, carbon = green, oxygen (ZnO) = red, zinc = gray (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.76 Copyright 2016, Elsevier).	 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The CO region, and (b) the carbonate region of the UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles (A) to CO2 at 200 K in an UHV chamber (B). The sample was subsequently exposed to CO at 110 K (C) and heated to the indicated temperatures (D–M) (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.92 Copyright 2010, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Left: Comparison of RAIRS results for the adsorption of CO on brass(111) and Cu(111) surfaces (normalized representation of spectra). Right: Model of CO adsorption on the brass(111) surface. The corresponding values for the CO stretch frequency are indicated. (b) Theoretical results for the structure of a ZnO bilayer supported on a Cu(111) substrate; CO binds through its carbon atom to the top Zn cations. This new thin-film phase differs from wurtzite in both geometry and chemical activity (reproduced with permission from Schott et al.58 Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Ball-stick model of the tridentate carbonated formed after CO2 adsorption on ZnO(100) (color code: red = oxygen, gray = zinc, black = carbon). (b) Calculated reflectivity difference between the clean (R0) and CO2-covered ZnO(100) substrate as a function of incidence angle for the p-polarized (n- and t-component: dashed lines, sum: solid line) and s-polarized (bold solid line) light at 1617 cm−1. The insets show the asymmetric and symmetric carboxylate vibrations, which are excited by s- and pn-light for light incident along the [110] direction. (c and d) Expected signals in IRRA spectra based on (left panel) calculations and (right panel) experimental IRRA spectra of CO2 on ZnO(100) at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with s- and p-polarized light at 100 K. The sketch shows the orientation of the tridentate on the surface with the arrows indicating the movement during the vibrations. The big light and dark gray arrows indicate the orientation of the transition dipole moment (TDM) of the vibrations. Together with the experimental data recorded for the ZnO(100) single crystal, we show ZnO powder particle spectra.90 (c) Incident beam along [0001] and (d) [110] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.84 Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
ΔRi(θ) = R0i(θ) − Ri(θ)
Ri(θ) = R0i(θ)/10ΔAi(θ)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
j = nj + ikj

 	Fig. 6  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles (A) to 1 × 10−5 mbar CO2 at 100 K and then heating to (B) 100 K, (C) 180 K, and (D) 200 K. (b) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles to 1 × 10−4 mbar CO2 at room temperature in an UHV chamber and then heating to (A) 300 K, (B) 325 K, (C) 350 K, (D) 375 K, (E) 400 K, (F) 425 K, (G) 450 K, (H) 475 K, (I) 500 K, (J) 525 K, (K) 550 K, and (L) 600 K (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.90 Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing (A) clean O2-pretreated Au/ZnO catalyst to (B) CO (10−4 mbar) at 110 K, and subsequently exposing to O2 (10−4 mbar) at 110 K for (C) 7, (D) 14, (E) 21, (F) 28, (G) 35, (H) 42, and (I) 49 min. The model shows schematically the oxidation of CO with activated O2 at the Au/ZnO interface, yielding CO2 and carbonate species bound to various ZnO facets (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.97 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Side view of the atomic structure of half-dissociated (2 × 1) water monolayer adsorbed on the non-polar ZnO(100) surface (Zn: grey, O: red, O(H2O): blue, H: green). (b) Polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRAS data obtained after D2O adsorption of one monolayer on ZnO(100) at 110 K. The spectra were recorded respectively with p- and s-polarized light incident along the [0001] and [110] directions (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.220). (c) DRIFT spectra recorded at 323 K after (A) heating ZnO nanoparticles to 773 K and then cooling in helium (25 ml min−1) to 323 K; (P) exposing the pretreated ZnO sample to D2O in saturation with a He flow rate of 25 ml min−1 for 10 min at 323 K. During D2O dosing the DRIFT spectra were taken continuously and are shown in curves B–P (indicated by the arrows). (d) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean ZnO nanoparticles to 9000 L H2O at 300 K and subsequent heating to different temperatures in the UHV chamber (reproduced with permission from Noei et al.89 Copyright 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 



3687	2716	1.36	Weak, narrow	3700	2720	H2O on ZnO(100)
3672	2707	1.36	Strong, narrow	3670	2710	OH on ZnO(100) with coadsorbed H2O
3656	2698	1.36	Weak, narrow	3645	
	OH on ZnO(100)
3639	2683	1.36	Weak, narrow	3645	
	OH on ZnO(100)
3620	2669	1.36	Strong, narrow	3621	
	OH on ZnO(000)
3564	2626	1.35	Strong/weak broad	—	
	OH on defect sites
3448	2551	1.36	Middle/weak broad	—	
	OH on defect sites

 	Fig. 9  (a) IRRAS data of HCOOH on ZnO(100), for the incident beam (left) along [0001] and (right) along [110] at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with p- and s-polarized light at 300 K. For comparison, the powder IR data are also shown. Note that the intensity of IR single crystal data is multiplied by a factor of 2000. (b) Expected signals in IRRA spectra based on reflectivity calculations for the bidentate configuration oriented along the [110] direction. The expected carboxylate IR signals for an incidence beam along the (left panel) [0001] and (right panel) [110] azimuth are shown. The dotted lines show the expected spectral features for a bidentate with its molecular axis tilted by 45°. The adsorption geometry is sketched with arrows indicating the vibration movements. The transition dipole moments (TDM) are indicated respectively by a big light and dark gray arrow for the νas(OCO) and νs(OCO) vibrations. (c) Sketch of the possible adsorption geometries, the quasi-bidentate, and the bidentate. Red small arrows show the direction of the νas(OCO) vibration, and the big red arrow indicates the orientation of TDM. Blue small arrows show the direction of the νs(OCO) vibration, and the blue arrow indicates the orientation of TDM (reproduced with permission from Buchholz et al.81 Copyright 2014, Springer).	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Steady state (during ultraviolet light irradiation) IR spectra (p- and s-polarization) of ZnO(100) recorded at 118 K. (b) Time dependence of the intensity of the sharp feature at 1630 cm−1 on starting and terminating ultraviolet (UV) irradiation at 75 K with the time constants (TC) indicated for the rise and decay of the signal. (c) The transients of IR absorbance arise from a ZnO(100) single crystal after initiation of the UV light excitation at 110, 120, and 130 K. (d) Arrhenius plot of the initial rates of IR absorbance increase as a function of substrate temperature (reproduced with permission from Sezen et al.83 Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) RAIRS data for CO adsorbed on perfect and reduced rutile TiO2(110) surfaces at 110 K. (b) The CO species adsorbed on different Ti sites (labeled 0–5) are also sketched in the ball-and-stick model of the rutile TiO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.93 Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Experimental IRRAS spectra for 1.5 ML CO adsorption on TiO2(110) and suggested adsorption structure (reproduced with permission from Petrik and Kimmel.101 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). (b) Simulated IRRAS spectra and the suggested adsorption structure based on DFT calculations of the PBE type. Red (lattice) and green (CO) balls are O, gray are Ti, and black are C atoms (reproduced with permission from Hu et al.284 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Calculated CO adsorption configuration on the anatase (101) surface in the presence of a subsurface oxygen vacancy. (B) STM images of CO adsorbed on anatase (101) as a function of substrate temperature. A full monolayer of CO was dosed at T = 78 K and the surface was annealed to increasing temperatures in ∼5 K steps. (C) IRRAS data of different doses of CO adsorbed at 95 K on (a) stoichiometric and (b) reduced anatase (101) surfaces with non-polarized light. (c) IRRAS data of 1 L CO adsorbed at 70 K on stoichiometric TiO2(101) with p-polarized light incident along [010] and [−101] directions and s-polarized light incident along the [010] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Setvin et al.82 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  Photooxidation of CO on TiO2 monitored by IRRAS. (a) In situ IRRAS data of CO and CO2 during photoinduced CO oxidation reaction on the anatase TiO2(101) single-crystal surface at 100 K. The sample was first exposed to CO (10−7 mbar) and then exposed to O2 (10−7 mbar) and UV light (3.4 eV, 2 × 1014 photons cm−2 s−1) for different times. (b) Comparison of the reaction cross section Q of CO photooxidation on rutile TiO2(110) and anatase TiO2(101). Plotted is the ln(C0/Ct) as a function of the UV irradiation time. C0 is the initial CO coverage before UV irradiation, and Ct is the CO coverage after irradiation at time t. The blue squares are the data for CO on anatase TiO2(101) as shown in (a). The red circles denote data for CO on rutile TiO2(110) (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.94 Copyright 2011, American Physical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) s-Polarized FTIR spectra from CO2 on TiO2(110) as a function of coverage (θ = 0–1 ML) acquired at 25 K. The IR beam is directed (A) along the [10] and (B) along the [001] azimuth of the TiO2(110) surface (see the illustrations). Bold blue and red traces correspond to coverages that saturate the 163 and 139 K peaks in TPD, respectively. (b) The corresponding p-polarized FTIR spectra. (c) Models of the evolution of adsorbed CO2 molecules on TiO2(110) as a function of coverage (reproduced with permission from Lin et al.103 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) IRRAS data of NO adsorbed on the oxidized TiO2(110) surface at 100 K with different NO exposure. The light incidence plane is along the [001] direction. (b) IRRAS data of NO adsorbed on the reduced TiO2(110) surface at 100 K with different NO exposure. The light incidence plane is along the [10] direction. (c and d) Calculated ΔR for the (NO)2 dimer adsorbed (c) on Ti4+5c sites and (d) at VO sites as a function of incidence angle for p-polarized and s-polarized light at 1746 or 1876 cm−1. The following optical constants were used for two adsorption sites: (c) Ti4+5c sites: refractive index n3 = 2.4, extinction coefficient k3 = 0; (b) VO sites: n3 = 1.9, k3 = 0. For the adsorbate layer on both sites, the following parameters were used: thickness d2 = 1.14 Å, n2 = 1.5, k2 = 0.3. θB denotes the Brewster angle of TiO2(110) substrates (reproduced with permission from Xu et al.105 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

NO (Nad)	34.6	
ν
NO
	1873	1893
NO (Oad)	13.6	
ν
NO
	1732	1755
N2O2 (NNad)	62.7	
ν
s,O–NN–O
	1903	1877

ν
a,O–NN–O
	1752	1763
N2O2 (Nad)	77.7	
ν
s,O–NN–O
	1922	1951

ν
a,O–NN–O
	1852	1823
N2O2 (rec.)	59.3	
ν
N–O2
	—	2051

ν
N–O1
	—	1759
N2O (Nad)	32.8	
ν
N–N
	2258	2289

ν
NN–O
	—	1366
N2O (Oad)	29.8	
ν
N–N
	2240	2250

ν
NNO
	1254	1227
NO2 (Oad)	39.1	
ν
N–O2
	1598	1629

ν
N–O1
	1254	1249
NO2 (OOad)	32.2	
ν
a,O–N–O
	1566	1611

ν
s,O–N–O
	1298	1310
NOad + NOad → (NO)2,ad
(NO)2,ad → N2Oad + Oad

 	Fig. 17  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra obtained after exposing the clean rutile TiO2 powder to NO (1 × 10−4 mbar) at 110 K in a UHV chamber and subsequent heating to the indicated temperatures. (b) Equilibrium structures calculated with DFT/B3LYP for different NxOy species adsorbed on the rutile(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Stodt et al.99 Copyright 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 18  Structure and dynamics for θ = 2 ML D2O on TiO2(110). (a) Top view and (b) side view of the calculated structure. (c) Calculated VDOS (solid lines) and d(ω) parameters (dashed lines) versus frequency. The same colors are used for each direction for both the VDOS and d parameters. (d) IRAS spectra for s- and p-polarized light along both azimuths (solid lines) and simulated spectra (dashed lines) using the d(ω) shown in (c) (reproduced with permission from Kimmel et al.109 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic of the reactions of H2O on reduced TiO2(110) (reproduced with permission from Petrik and Kimmel.110 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Ball-and-stick model for the adsorption of CH2O on the TiO2(110) surface: (a) CH2O monomer in η1(O) configuration, (b) paraformaldehyde, (c) dioxymethylene. Color code: oxygen (CH2O) = pink, carbon = green, hydrogen = white, oxygen (TiO2) = red, titanium = gray. (B) STM image taken on a clean reduced TiO2(110) surface after dosing with 0.07 ML formaldehyde at 45 K. (b) Line profile along the dashed green line in (a) (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  Polarization- and azimuth-resolved IRRA spectra obtained after exposing oxidized TiO2(110) to 2 L of CH2O at 110 K and subsequent heating to indicated temperatures. The spectra were measured respectively with p-polarized light incident along the (a) [10] and (b) [001] azimuth and with s-polarized light incident along the (c) [10] and (d) [001] azimuth at 110 K (reproduced with permission from Yu et al.80 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 22  IRRAS spectra of formate adsorbed on sputtered and reduced TiO2(110) single crystal, as measured with (a) and (c) s-polarized light, (b) and (d) p-polarized light, and the IR beam incident in (a) and (b) the [10] direction, and (c) and (d) the [001] direction. For comparison, DRIFT spectra of formate adsorbed on rutile nanoparticles (6–80 nm) acquired in synthetic air at atmospheric pressure is also shown at the bottom of each graph (adapted from Österlund394). The solid lines mark the positions of IRRAS peaks on single-crystal TiO2(110), while the dashed lines mark the positions of the peaks in the deconvoluted DRIFT spectra on the rutile NP at 1358, 1371, 1536, and 1562 cm−1 (reproduced with permission from Mattsson et al.108 Copyright 2014, AIP Publishing LLC).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Energetically most favorable layer of intact methanol molecules at 2/3 ML surface coverage as obtained from the DFT calculations. Ti, O, C, and H atoms are shown in gray, red, black, and cyan, respectively. The L(1 × 3) unit cell is indicated by solid lines. Consecutive [001] rows are shifted by one lattice constant along [001] due to substrate-mediated repulsions between molecules along the [10] direction. (b) Diffraction pattern of a L(1 × 3) unit cell. (c) HAS angular distributions of the clean and methanol-covered surface reveal a L(1 × 3) unit cell. (d) IRRAS spectra of methanol (CH3OH) and deuterated methanol (CD3OD) adsorbate layer on the rutile TiO2(110) surface (reproduced with permission from Silber et al.77 Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) Schematic of a reaction channel for acetone adsorbed on oxidized TiO2(110) that leads to CH3 emission off-normal to the surface via the acetone diolate intermediate. (B) Schematic of a possible reaction pathway for acetone adsorbed on oxidized TiO2(110) that leads to CH3 emission normal to the surface via an acetone enolate intermediate. (a) → (b) UV irradiation leads to nonthermal reactions between acetone and adsorbed oxygen that produce enolate. (b) → (c) η2(C,O)-enolate is photoactive and ejects a CH3 radical normal to the surface leaving ketene. (c) → (d) Ketene converts to acetate, either during irradiation or during postirradiation TPD. Note that a number of chemisorbed oxygen forms are active in the acetone photooxidation, such as O2−, O22−, Oa, etc. However, only Oa is shown (reproduced with permission from Petrik et al.111 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 25  Differential absorbance IRAS spectra in (a) p- and (b) s-polarized modes for 0.17 ML and 0.60 ML of hydrogenated (H6-) and deuterated (D6-) acetone dosed on an oxidized TiO2(110) surface without UV irradiation (red and light blue traces) and after UV irradiation (dark blue and green traces). The IR beam is parallel to the [10] azimuth (s-vector is along the Ti and O rows). The samples were irradiated for 60 s with a photon fluence of ∼6 × 1017 photons per cm2 with energies >3 eV (reproduced with permission from Petrik et al.112 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic electronic structure, the hydrogenic potential, and the electron spin density. Left panel, top: schematics showing the excitation of electrons within shallow trap states by absorption of IR photons. Left panel, bottom: electron spin density at self-trapped polaron Ti3+ site in bulk rutile as obtained from DFT calculations (see text). Axial and equatorial Ti–O distances are given in angstroms. Stoichiometric bulk values are 1.951 (axial) and 1.939 (equatorial). Right panel: Hydrogenic potential at polaron Ti3+ site in bulk rutile showing the different excitations giving rise to absorption bands in the IR data (reproduced with permission from Sezen et al.85 Copyright 2014, Nature Publishing Group).	 

 	Fig. 27  Histogram of number of publications on ceria (blue bars) and publications on ceria associated with catalysis (red bars) from 1994 to 2015 (Source: Web of Science, Jan 9, 2016, reproduced with permission from Montini et al.30 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Ball-and-stick model of the CeO2(111) surface (top view) with (A) top or (B) subsurface oxygen vacancy (VO). The position of the vacancy is indicated by the dashed circle. Color code: red = top surface oxygen, light red = subsurface oxygen, white = Ce4+, blue = Ce3+. (b) and (c) Experimental IRRA spectra of different doses of CO (b) at 68 K on stoichiometric CeO2(111) and (c) at 74 K on reduced CeO2(111) at a grazing incidence angle of 80° with p-polarized light incident along the [−110] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.86 Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Structure evolution during reduction of the CeO2(110) surface. (A) The stoichiometric, fully oxidized (1 × 1) phase. (B) (2 × 1) reconstruction. (C) (111) nanofaceting. The oxygen vacancies are indicated by the dashed circles. (b) IRRA spectra of 1 ML CO adsorption on oxidized (blue line) and reduced (red line) ceria (110) at 80 K with p-polarized light incident along the [10] azimuth. The IRRAS data of 1 ML CO adsorption on oxidized and reduced CeO2(111) are also shown for comparison. (c) CeO2(110) surface faceting probed by IRRAS after CO adsorption. Fitting of p- and s-polarized spectra of faceted CeO2(110) exposed to CO at 70 K with light incident along the [10] azimuth (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.79 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) UHV-FTIR spectra recorded after exposing the ceria nanorods to different doses of CO at 60 K. (b) High-magnification HRTEM images of CeO2 nanorods showing clearly {111} facets formed on the (110) plane (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.79 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) IRRA spectra of methanol at the fully oxidized CeO2(110) surface with the IR light incident along the [001] azimuthal direction. The sample was exposed to 1.3 × 10−10 mbar methanol vapor for 5 seconds (gray) and 10 seconds (red) at 125 K. (b) IRRA spectra of methanol at the fully oxidized CeO2(111) surface. The sample was exposed to 1.3 × 10−10 mbar methanol vapor for 5 seconds at indicated temperatures (reproduced with permission from Yang et al.78 Copyright 2016, Elsevier).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
