Lithium–oxygen batteries: bridging mechanistic understanding and battery performance   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE23966G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE23966G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 750-768Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsLithium–oxygen batteries: bridging mechanistic understanding and battery performance†

        
          
            Yi-Chun 
            Lu‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Betar M. 
            Gallant‡
b, 
      
        
          
            David G. 
            Kwabi
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jonathon R. 
            Harding
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Robert R. 
            Mitchell
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. Stanley 
            Whittingham
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            Yang 
            Shao-Horn
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. E-mail: shaohorn@mit.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, 77 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
dSUNY Binghamton, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA
Received 
      2nd November 2012
    , Accepted 21st January 2013First published on 21st January 2013AbstractRechargeable energy storage systems with high energy density and round-trip efficiency are urgently needed to capture and deliver renewable energy for applications such as electric transportation. Lithium–air/lithium–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries have received extraordinary research attention recently owing to their potential to provide positive electrode gravimetric energies considerably higher (∼3 to 5×) than Li-ion positive electrodes, although the packaged device energy density advantage will be lower (∼2×). In light of the major technological challenges of Li–O2 batteries, we discuss current understanding developed in non-carbonate electrolytes of Li–O2 redox chemistry upon discharge and charge, oxygen reduction reaction product characteristics upon discharge, and the chemical instability of electrolytes and carbon commonly used in the oxygen electrode. We show that the kinetics of oxygen reduction reaction are influenced by catalysts at small discharge capacities (Li2O2 thickness less than ∼1 nm), but not at large Li2O2 thicknesses, yielding insights into the governing processes during discharge. In addition, we discuss the characteristics of discharge products (mainly Li2O2) including morphological, electronic and surface features and parasitic reactivity with carbon. On charge, we examine the reaction mechanism of the oxygen evolution reaction from Li2O2 and the influence of catalysts on bulk Li2O2 decomposition. These analyses provide insights into major discrepancies regarding Li–O2 charge kinetics and the role of catalyst. In light of these findings, we highlight open questions and challenges in the Li–O2 field relevant to developing practical, reversible batteries that achieve the anticipated energy density advantage with a long cycle life.

Broader context
Lithium–O2 batteries have received heightened attention in the last five years owing to an increasing need for high-density energy storage for electric vehicles. Among the available battery chemistries, the Li–O2 system is, in some regards, one of the most promising. This is largely attributed to a significant gravimetric energy enhancement compared to Li-ion, with Li–O2 projected to have at least a factor of two enhancement for a fully packaged battery. However, practical Li–O2 batteries will only be successfully developed once current battery performance challenges are adequately addressed. Critical challenges include low round-trip efficiency resulting from high charging overpotentials, poor cycle life, and low power. These challenges present exciting opportunities for continued fundamental studies that can pave the way for improving electrode performance. Developing deeper mechanistic understanding of oxygen redox reactions in organic electrolytes, morphological and electronic features of reaction products, and improving the chemical stability of electrode and electrolyte would enable more effective rational design of electrodes and Li–O2 batteries to meet high expectations for improved performance.

Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries, since their introduction in the mid-1970s, are now the dominant power sources for portable electronics and without them the immense advances in portable energy storage made over the last decade would not have been possible.1 Lithium-ion batteries have now found application in several large wattage markets for vehicle propulsion, such as in hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) buses, the GM Volt and the Nissan Leaf, as well as for grid frequency smoothing and load leveling of solar facilities. However, their cost is too high and their storage capability, particularly volumetric, is too low for long distance vehicles, such as might be needed for an all-electric vehicle capable of achieving the 400 miles typically achieved by today's internal combustion engines between re-fuelling. Lithium-ion batteries are also expected to find significant applications in newer markets such as renewable energy, where solar or wind supply is not viable beyond about 10% penetration without significant associated storage capabilities. Although the weight and volume constraints of portable energy can be somewhat relaxed for this application, the cost constraints are even more severe for large-scale storage, underscoring the need for storage systems with improved performance and cost metrics.
Lithium storage by intercalation reactions
The present lithium-ion batteries have storage capabilities, calculated using active material weight only, that have not changed significantly from that (480 W h kg−1) of LiTiS2 since the 1970s.2–4Fig. 1 shows the theoretical and practical (commercially attained) gravimetric and volumetric energy of the most common lithium-ion batteries available today. The negative electrode is graphite (C6) unless otherwise noted. The practical gravimetric energies of lithium-ion batteries are roughly only 30–40% of what is theoretically possible, resulting from the significant added mass of inactive components such as packaging used in commercial battery construction. The LiCoO2 system attains one of the highest percentages of the theoretical because it has been engineered and improved over more than 20 years. Thicker electrodes, and reducing the amount of current collector and separator needed could further increase the storage capability.
 Fig. 1  Gravimetric and volumetric energy of lithium batteries: theoretical vs. commercial single cells. LFP#1: LiFePO4 with cell size 54208; LFP#2: LiFePO4 with cell size 26650. The cell size for LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, and Si–LiMO2 (from Panasonic) is 26700, 18650, and 18650, respectively. The theoretical energy was calculated assuming only the weights of the electrochemically active components; lithium, silicon or graphite with no carbon additive was used for the negative electrode. Detailed calculations and assumptions for theoretical energies can be found in the ESI.† The actual energy was obtained from the manufacturers' technical specifications.9,10 
If electric vehicles with extended range and electrical energy storage for grid applications are to become viable, much higher energy storage capabilities must be achieved. All of today's lithium-ion positive electrodes are based on intercalation reactions, in which the crystal structure of the electrode is essentially maintained during discharge and charge. This inherently limits the possible stored energy. The energy stored can potentially be increased by having a two-electron redox center with a wide reversible state of charge such as vanadium (V5+–V3+)5 or nickel (Ni4+–Ni2+)5 phosphates, which have theoretical gravimetric capacities of approximately 300 mA h g−1 at high intercalation potentials above 3 VLi (V3+/V4+: 3.8–3.9 VLi;6 V4+/V5+: 3.8–4.3 VLi;7,8 Ni2+/Ni3+: 5 VLi;5 Ni3+/Ni4+: 5.25 VLi (ref. 5)). Further work is needed to demonstrate stable and reversible utilization of the full state of charge for phosphate compounds, while electrolyte instability at voltages above 4.5 VLi currently limits the use of the higher voltage systems.
Lithium storage by conversion reactions
Attaining much higher energy densities will require moving away from intercalation reactions toward conversion reactions, in which the crystal structure is not maintained. An example is FeF2 + 2Li giving Fe + 2LiF, with a capacity of around 600 A h kg−1 (∼1620 W h kg−1 assuming an equilibrium voltage of 2.7 V).18,19 Two systems that have been of great interest for more than 40 years are metal/oxygen and metal/sulphur;20,21 neither carry around the added weight of a transition metal. Both have received increased attention in the last five years,22–24 with Li/S cells being commercially available but of limited cycle life.9,22,23 The Li/S cell already has a significantly higher gravimetric energy than lithium-ion as indicated in Fig. 1.
Gravimetric energy advantage of Li–O2 batteries
The so-called Li–air or, more accurately, Li–oxygen (Li–O2) batteries have been particularly tantalizing because of their high gravimetric theoretical energy densities resulting in part from omission of the heavy transition metal oxide used in Li-ion positive electrodes. Such cells would be the holy grail of batteries if all the challenges could be overcome. At the positive electrode during discharge, molecular oxygen is reduced by electrons and combines with lithium ions supplied from the negative electrode (metallic Li or graphite) to form Li2O2 with a thermodynamic voltage of 2.96 VLi.25 Detailed reaction pathways during the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are discussed later in the review. Practical discharge voltages of Li–O2 electrodes range from approximately 2.5–2.8 VLi,13–17,26,27 and therefore the gravimetric energy advantage compared to Li-ion batteries arises from the significantly larger gravimetric capacities attainable with the non-intercalation O2 electrodes. Intense research efforts over the past several years have enabled laboratory-scale demonstration of significant gravimetric energy density enhancements of Li–O2 positive electrodes compared to conventional lithium-ion electrodes such as LiCoO2,11 LiFePO4,11 and LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 (ref. 12) (Fig. 2). Demonstrated gravimetric energies of Li–O2 positive electrodes in the discharged state (considering the weight of carbon, catalyst if present, the Li2O2 formed during discharge, and excluding binder; see detailed assumptions and calculations in the ESI†) range between 1800–2800 W h kgpositive−1 for varied electrode materials such as Vulcan carbon,15 carbon nanofibers,16 Super P carbon,14 freestanding hierarchically porous carbon (graphene),17 and NaMnO2 nanowires with Ketjen Black (P-Z-MnO2/KB),13 all tested in non-carbonate electrolytes. This corresponds to ∼55 to 85% of the theoretical upper limit for a Li–O2 electrode, associated with forming monolithic Li2O2 (3212 W h kgLi2O2, assuming a practical discharge voltage of 2.75 V vs. Li and a gravimetric capacity of 1168 mA h gLi2O2−1, with no inactive materials such as carbon; see detailed calculations in the ESI†). These gravimetric energies, which conservatively consider the performance when the electrode is in the discharged (heaviest) state, represent roughly a 3–5× improvement in gravimetric energy compared to lithium-ion batteries with electrode energies of ∼600 W h kgpositive−1 at comparable low power (50 W kgpositive−1, Fig. 2).11 It is noted that the reported capacities and energies of Li–O2 cells in the literature often do not account for the weight and volume of the oxygen or the reaction product (Li2O2), which leads to an apparently much higher and unrealistic projected energy gain (∼20× compared to Li-ion).28,29 Packaged Li–O2 cell prototypes have not been widely developed and the true gravimetric energy advantage of packaged devices is not known, although it is expected to be significantly lower than that in Fig. 2. We therefore attempt to project the packaged cell performance using conservative estimates to compare the potential of Li–O2 with Li-ion batteries.
 Fig. 2  Ragone plot comparing gravimetric energy and power of Li-ion (LiCoO2,11 LiFePO4,11 and LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 (ref. 12)) and Li–O2 positive electrodes13–17 reported to date tested in non-carbonate electrolytes and normalized to the positive active electrode weight only. Li–O2 electrodes include Vulcan Carbon (VC),15 carbon nanofibers (CNF),16 Super P carbon,14 freestanding hierarchically porous carbon (FHPC graphene),17 and pristine Na0.44MnO2 nanowires/Ketjen Black (P-Z-MnO2/KB).13 The Li–O2 values were normalized to the weight of the electrode in the discharged state (C + Li2O2 or C + catalyst + Li2O2, excluding binder) and were calculated based on the reported average discharge voltage and total gravimetric capacity (for energy) or current (power). The upper limit in the gravimetric energy of Li2O2 was calculated assuming a discharge voltage of 2.75 VLi. Detailed calculations can be found in the ESI.† 

Fig. 3 represents two estimates of the theoretical gravimetric energy density of Li–O2 cells with Li2O2 as the final reaction product. A 2× excess of lithium beyond the capacity of the lithiated positive electrode was used in these calculations due to imperfect plating of Li upon cycling. Otherwise, a carbon negative electrode was used, which may be more practically relevant due to safety concerns of Li. Gravimetric energy densities of 691 and 2002 W h kgnegative+positive−1 were found for a full cell using C or Li negative electrodes, respectively, as shown in Fig. 3, which represents roughly a factor of two advantage on a weight basis over today's lithium-ion batteries if Li metal can be used. On a volumetric basis the projected Li–O2 cell has no advantage. These values (691 W h kgnegative+positive−1 and 2002 W h kgnegative+positive−1) will be further reduced in practical cells by the need of the conductive porous matrix into which the Li2O2 must be deposited owing to its very low conductivity, by the electrolyte, separators, current collectors and packaging required, and, at the system level, pumps needed to move the oxygen to the electrodes. Polyplus predicts that it should be possible to construct a rechargeable Li–O2 cell with an energy density of 700–800 W h kg−1 using a protected lithium anode and claims to have achieved this energy density already from a primary cell, which is in reasonably good agreement with our calculations.30,31
 Fig. 3  Estimated gravimetric and volumetric energy density of LiCoO2 and O2 (Li2O2) as the positive electrode with carbon (C6) or Li as the negative electrode. The cell voltages used for C–LiCoO2, C–Li2O2, Li–LiCoO2, and Li–Li2O2 are 3.7 V, 2.45 V, 4.0 V, and 2.75 V, respectively. Neither catalyst, carbon nor electrolyte were included in the calculation for O2 cells. The positive electrode (LiCoO2 or Li2O2) is assumed to be lithiated and an additional two times excess lithium is used as the lithium negative electrode. Detailed calculations and assumptions for theoretical energies can be found in the ESI.† 
Challenges in making practical rechargeable-air batteries
There are many challenges to make rechargeable Li–O2 batteries for practical use, as shown in Fig. 4. Several of these challenges are common to all lithium batteries and if they could be solved would equally improve Li-ion batteries as well. Developing a lithium metal negative electrode that can cycle safely and stably has been a challenge for 40 years owing to the dendrites that form on repeated lithium dissolution and lithium deposition.32,33 There are still no rechargeable lithium batteries on the market; all rechargeable lithium-ion batteries have contained the lithium inside another material such as LiAl,34 LiC6,35,36 and more recently tin37–39 and silicon.38,40,41 Fundamental studies of lithium deposition are needed to see if this challenge can be overcome.
 Fig. 4  Major challenges of rechargeable Li–O2 batteries. 
A major challenge to moving ahead even at the research level is to find a stable electrolyte for the oxygen electrode. The initial results by Abraham and Jiang42 reported discharging and charging of Li–O2 cells with polyacrylonitrile mixed with ethylene carbonate (EC) and propylene carbonate (PC) as the electrolyte. However, the carbonate electrolytes commonly used for lithium-ion batteries have been shown43,44 to be unstable against the oxygen electrode. As noted first by Aurbach et al.,45 the superoxide ion O2−, a reaction intermediate associated with the oxygen reduction reaction in nonaqueous electrolytes, reacts with carbonates to form carbonate-based species such as Li2CO3 and/or lithium alkyl carbonates.43,44 Subsequently the predominant gas evolved on charge was found to be CO2 rather than O2.43 Ether-based electrolytes such as dimethoxyethane (DME) have been shown to be relatively stable against the oxygen electrode on discharge, allowing the formation of Li2O2 as confirmed by X-ray diffraction14–16,43,46 and X-ray absorption spectroscopy.15,46 However, ether-based solvents are not completely stable upon charging and cycling14,26,46 which is discussed in more detail below.
In addition to solvent instability, several recent studies have reported evidence of binder- and electrolyte salt-derived decomposition products in the discharged electrode. Black et al.47 visually observed reactivity between chemically generated LiO2 and PVDF binder in 1 M LiPF6/TEGDME, and proposed a mechanism for PVDF decomposition by hydrogen abstraction in the presence of highly basic species such as LiOH or the O2− anion. This decomposition mechanism is further supported by the detection of (C–H) or (C–F) binder-derived decomposed species detected in the electrolyte by 13C NMR. Younesi et al.48 have separately reported on the instability of PVDF binder using XPS on discharged electrodes with non-fluorinated LiB(CN)4 in PEGDME and tetraglyme electrolyte, where the emergence of a new peak in the F 1s spectrum after cell cycling indicated the chemical modification of the Kynar (PVDF) binder. A further recent XPS study by the authors49 on Li2O2/Kynar/carbon/MnO2 cathodes soaked in electrolyte has shown that Li2O2 degrades in the presence of TEGDME, with significant LiF formation that is proposed to result from attack of the generated ether decomposition products on PVDF. In addition to binder instability, several recent studies49–51 have shown that lithium salts can react with Li2O2 during discharge. Upon investigation of the discharge product in tetraglyme with various salts by XPS, Veith and co-workers50 have detected contamination of Li2O2 by decomposed halide species from the electrolyte anions in LiClO4, LiBF4, LiPF6 and LiTFSI on the surface of Li2O2. As the electrodes were composed of binder-free graphitized carbon foam, the decomposed halide-containing species were found to originate from the electrolyte. Additionally, a recent study by Xu et al.51 observed the presence of LiF in discharged electrodes with LiTFSI and a wide range of organic solvents, which was attributed to salt and/or binder (PTFE) decomposition. Further controlled studies with binder-free electrodes will be critical to unambiguously probe the stability of electrolyte solvents and salts in the presence of Li2O2 and discharge intermediates.
This review focuses on critical challenges of the oxygen electrode that limit the practical use of Li–O2 technology, which include poor round-trip efficiency, rate capability, and cycle life, as shown in Fig. 4. For instance, the round-trip efficiency of Li–O2 cells with uncatalyzed-carbon electrode is below 70%.16,46 This is significantly lower than the round-trip efficiency of conventional Li-ion batteries such as LiCoO2 (>95%).52 In addition, demonstrated current densities of Li–O2 cells are in the range of 0.1–1 mA cm−2,15,53 which is ∼10 to ∼100 times lower than that of Li-ion batteries (∼30 mA cm−2).53 Moreover, the cycle life of Li–O2 batteries shown to date is up to 100 cycles,54,55 which is significantly lower than that of lithium-ion cells (up to 5000 cycles).56 These technological challenges are strongly related to various scientific challenges including the chemical instabilities (e.g., O2−vs. carbonate solvents, Li2O2vs. carbon electrode) and the lack of fundamental understanding of the reaction kinetics (ORR and OER) and the transport kinetics (e.g., ion transport and electron transport), as illustrated in Fig. 4.
To bridge mechanistic understanding and Li–O2 device performance, we first discuss current understanding of the ORR mechanism during discharge, which includes the influence of electrolyte cations and electrocatalysts. Second, we report and summarize the findings of structural and morphological features of Li2O2 formed electrochemically from experimental and computational studies. Third, we highlight recent work that shows the reactivity between carbon and Li2O2 and its implication on cycling performance of Li–O2 batteries. Lastly, we examine current understanding of the OER mechanism upon charging, including the influence of Li2O2 thickness and the role of the electrocatalyst on the charging potential.
Current understanding of the reaction mechanism of nonaqueous oxygen reduction reaction
Understanding the reaction mechanism in nonaqueous media and the chemical/electrochemical stability of the electrolyte/electrode system is imperative to enable development of highly efficient and long cycle-life Li–O2 batteries. However, there is still relatively little fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanism or the origin of reactivity of inactive cell components such as the electrolyte, carbon, and oxygen reduction reaction intermediates/products. In this section, we review previous work on the reaction mechanism for nonaqueous ORR (with and without Li+) to provide insights into governing parameters that influence the discharge performance of Li–O2 batteries.
Nonaqueous ORR in the absence of metal cations or protons
It has been well established that ORR in nonaqueous solvents with large cations such as tetraethylammonium (TEA+) and tetrabutylammonium (TBA+) proceeds by a one-electron transfer to form the superoxide ion (O2−) as an intermediate species (r1 in Fig. 5), followed by its subsequent solvation by TBA+ or TEA+ (ref. 45 and 59–61) (r2 in Fig. 5). The kinetics of the O2/O2− redox couple, with an equilibrium voltage of ∼2.0 VLi, was found to be fast and reversible, and the influence of the electrode surface (Ru and Pt vs. Au and glassy carbon (GC)) on the kinetics is minor, as shown in Fig. 6. In addition, it is interesting to note that the ORR in the presence of large cations is mainly dominated by a one-electron process forming solvated superoxide ions (e.g., O2−–TBA+) while the formation of peroxide (O22−) was not observed.62 A recent study by Lopez et al.63 has shown a novel approach to promote the formation of soluble peroxide ions from superoxide ions by using hexacarboxamide cryptand molecules (Fig. 7, inset). It is proposed that the peroxide (O22−) dianion can be stabilized by strong hydrogen bonds to N–H groups from the hexacarboxamide cryptand. Experimental (black) and simulated (red) cyclic voltammograms (CVs) data of ORR in the presence of the cryptand molecule suggest that rapid encapsulation of O2− by free cryptand enables a second-electron reduction via either a charge-transfer process or a disproportionation mechanism, as shown in Fig. 7 (right).63 The cryptand-encapsulated O22− can be oxidized subsequently during the anodic scan, which is evident from the second oxidation wave at ∼2.8 VLi. These molecules show promise for use in flow redox batteries and opportunities exist in exploring these molecules to promote the kinetics of ORR in the presence of metal cations.
 Fig. 5  Reaction scheme of oxygen reduction reaction in nonaqueous media. Adapted from ref. 57. 
 Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of ORR/OER in 0.5 M TBAClO4 in DME on GC, polycrystalline Au, Pt and Ru electrodes at 20 mV s−1 (black, red, green, and blue, respectively). CV of ORR/OER in 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME on GC electrodes at 20 mV s−1 (grey, 5× increase in current for comparison). Measurements were made in a three-electrode cell with a Ag/Ag+ reference electrode that was calibrated to be −3.6 VLi with respect to 0.1 M LiClO4. The experimental details of the three-electrode measurements were reported previously.58 
 Fig. 7  (Left) Black line: CV measured at a GC electrode in O2-saturated dimethylformamide (DMF) containing 0.1 M TBAClO4 in the presence of 9.6 mM hexacarboxamide cryptand at 10 mV s−1. Red line: simulated CV using the mechanistic steps described on the right. (Right) Proposed reaction mechanism. Potentials with respect to Li/Li+ are added for comparison. The Ag/Ag+ reference redox used equals −3.6 VLi with respect to 0.1 M LiClO4. Adapted from ref. 63. 

Reactivity between superoxide and electrolyte solvents. 
Previous studies have shown that the O2/O2− couple is not reversible in carbonate-based electrolytes such as PC (i.e., r2 in Fig. 5), as indicated by the lack of an oxidation peak on the positive scan following reduction of O2 to O2−.45,64 These results suggest that solvated superoxide is not stable in carbonates, but rather further reacts irreversibly. These experimental findings are consistent with a recent DFT study,65 which investigated the susceptibility of several classes of aprotic solvents to nucleophilic substitution reaction by superoxide. The authors showed that the reactivity of solvent molecule is strongly correlated to the relative stability of the reaction products (e.g., the leaving group in a nucleophilic substitution reaction). The more stable and effective the leaving group, the more reactive the solvent is toward the superoxide ion. For instance, the carbonate-based solvents are more reactive toward the superoxide than ether-based solvents due to the fact that the leaving groups of the carbonate solvents (i.e., R–OCO) are more stable compared to that of ethers (R–O).45,66 It was concluded that simple organic esters of carbonic, carboxylic, and several inorganic acids are intrinsically unstable against the superoxide ion and cannot be used for reversible Li–O2 applications.65
In contrast, the O2/O2− couple was shown experimentally to be reversible in ethers (e.g., DME),45 dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO),59,60 and acetonitrile (MeCN),59,60 which agrees with the DFT study65 showing that nitriles and ethers are stable against nucleophilic substitution by the superoxide ion. However, ethers are experimentally shown to slowly decompose during cycling14 (experimental findings related to solvent decomposition and parasitic products formed during discharge and cycling have been reviewed in detail elsewhere).67–69 The degradation mechanism of ethers in the presence of O2 has been attributed to the autoxidation of ethers by O2.70 It is suggested that the resistance to autoxidation can be improved by substitution of reactive hydrogens on solvent molecules, for example by introducing steric hindrance at the reaction center.70
Ionic liquids (ILs) offer several advantages as electrolytes for Li–O2 batteries including negligible vapor pressure and hydrophobicity. Their stabilities toward superoxide radical have been systematically investigated. Mizuno et al.73 have shown that N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide (PP13-TFSA) is much more stable than carbonate-based solvents (against superoxide radical), owing to its less positive atomic charge compared to that of carbonate-type solvents. Recently, Herranz et al.74 reported that 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide (Pyr14TFSI) exhibits at least three orders of magnitude enhanced stability (i.e., lower reaction rate constant with superoxide radical) compared to PC using rotating ring disk electrode technique. Although these ILs show promising stability toward the superoxide radical, their limited O2 solubility and diffusivity may lead to poor discharge capacity and rate capability of Li–O2 batteries.
Other classes of electrolytes including silane-based and amide-based solvents with various substitutions have been evaluated experimentally and theoretically as alternatives for Li–air batteries. Zhang and co-workers75 have reported that oligoether-functionalized silane solvent exhibits improved stability compared to PC. However, soluble decomposition products of the silane-based electrolyte (tri(ethylene glycol)-substituted trimethylsilane (1NM3)) were recently detected in the electrolyte by attenuated total reflectance (ATR)-FTIR spectroscopy after discharge in Li–O2 cells, and 1NM3 was found to have a low electrolyte decomposition voltage of ∼3.5 V upon charging in the absence of O2.76 Further detailed studies and spectroscopic data will be necessary to resolve this apparent discrepancy and to demonstrate stability of 1NM3 in an O2 environment. Bryantsev et al.70,77 have utilized DFT computation and CV techniques to show that the N,N-methyl-substituted amides exhibit excellent stability against nucleophilic substitution by superoxide owing to the increased steric hindrance at the reaction center. Further studies on the chemical stability (against Li metal) and cycling stability of these electrolytes in Li–O2 batteries are needed to evaluate their practical use in rechargeable systems.

Nonaqueous ORR in the presence of lithium ions
The replacement of large cations (e.g., TBA+) with smaller metal cations (e.g., Li+) results in a positive shift of the thermodynamic equilibrium potential (from ∼2 VLi to ∼3 VLi, Fig. 6) as a result of changing the redox couple from O2/(O2−–TBA+) to O2/(O2−–Li+).45,60,79 This step can be followed by disproportionation to metal peroxide and O2.60 Such significant changes in ORR thermodynamics between large cations and smaller metal cations can be rationalized using hard soft acid base (HSAB) theory.79,80 According to HSAB, TBA+, a soft acid, can effectively stabilize the soft base, O2− (due to its relatively large radius and low charge density), preventing further reactivity. However, alkali metal cations such as Li+, which are hard acids,80 cannot effectively stabilize O2−. Therefore, disproportionation to Li2O2 from the unstable LiO2 is favored in the presence of lithium ions. This reaction mechanism is supported by recent work by Peng et al.,72 which show that O2 is reduced to LiO2 as an intermediate on an Au surface, followed by a disproportionation (i.e., r4 in Fig. 5) or a second electron transfer reaction to Li2O2 (i.e., r5 in Fig. 5) using in situ surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) (Fig. 8). Interestingly, we note that no evidence of O2− formation (i.e., r1 in Fig. 5) nor the further reduction to Li2O was noted (i.e., r6 in Fig. 5). The formation of Li2O2 on the Au surface is consistent with X-ray diffraction results showing that Li2O2 is the major discharge product of porous Au/C electrodes in Li–O2 cells.15
 Fig. 8  
In situ SERS during ORR and re-oxidation on a Au electrode in O2-saturated 0.1 M LiClO4–CH3CN. Spectra collected at open-circuit-voltage (OCV) over a series of times at a reducing potential of 2.2 VLi were recorded followed by oxidative overpotentials at 3.75 and 4.4 VLi. The peaks are assigned as follows: (1) C–C stretch of CH3CN at 918 cm−1, (2) O–O stretch of LiO2 at 1137 cm−1, (3) O–O stretch of Li2O2 at 808 cm−1, (4) Cl–O stretch of ClO4− at 931 cm−1, and the O–O− stretch at 1108 cm−1 is marked with orange dash line. Note that the Raman shift of Li2O is located at 520 cm−1,71 which is not included in the data. Adapted from ref. 72. 
In addition, Allen and co-workers78 have applied HSAB to study the ORR and OER processes with a series of cations with increasing Lewis acidity (i.e., cation hardness): TBA+ < PyR+ < EMI+ < K+ < Na+ < Li+ (Fig. 9). The authors showed that the superoxide ions can be effectively stabilized by TBA+, PyR+, EMI+ and K+ cations without disproportionate to form peroxide, from which enable reversible one-electron reactions. In contrast, hard cations such as Li+ and Na+ promote the disproportionation of metal superoxide to form metal peroxide, yielding an irreversible two-electron (per O2) process.
 Fig. 9  CVs of neat EMITFSI along with various salts at 0.025 M concentration on a GC electrode at 100 mV s−1.78 

Catalyst influence on the ORR kinetics with Li+. 
A number of studies have shown that different electrode materials can greatly influence the discharge potential of Li–O2 batteries.15,81–84 Nanometer-scale catalysts based on precious metals (Au: 2.8 VLi at 100 mA gcarbon−1 or 0.04 mA cmgeo−2;15,81 Pd: 2.87 VLi at 0.12 mA cmgeo−2 (ref. 84)) are reported to have higher discharge voltages than metal oxides (e.g., α-MnO2: 2.75 VLi at 70 mA gC−1;83 Fe2O3: 2.6 VLi at 70 mA gC−1 (ref. 82)). However, it is difficult to accurately correlate the reported performances to the intrinsic ORR activities of the catalysts e.g., true-surface-area-normalized ORR currents, due to the fact that the catalyst particle sizes and catalyst loadings can vary significantly among these studies. Further complication arises from the fact that carbonate-based electrolytes used in these studies81–84 are unstable against the superoxide O2− species.
We have recently examined the influence of different polycrystalline metal surfaces on the intrinsic Li+-ORR catalytic activity using the rotating disk electrode (RDE) technique in a three-electrode cell, which was used to decouple the O2-transport loss and obtain the intrinsic Li+-ORR kinetics.58Fig. 10a shows the real-surface-area-normalized Li+-ORR current densities (μA cmreal−2) of polycrystalline Pd, Pt, Ru, Au and GC surfaces in 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME, where the thicknesses of reaction produces are less than 1 nm.58 In contrast to ORR kinetics in presence of large cations such as TBA+ (Fig. 6), the Li+-ORR kinetics was significantly influenced by the electrode surface (Pd > Pt > Ru > Au > GC). The activity trends developed on the bulk polycrystalline surfaces can be well translated to the discharge voltage trends of Li–O2 cells at relatively low depth of discharge (e.g., less than 1 nm of Li2O2 formed assuming uniform growth of Li2O2 on the electrode surface), as shown in Fig. 10b. However, the enhancement associated with the catalysts diminishes with increasing depth of discharge, which is evident from the fact that the discharge voltages start to converge after 500 mA h gC−1, as shown in Fig. 10c. This observation suggests that further growth of discharge products (Fig. 10b) primarily occurs on the surfaces of solid discharge products (instead of the catalyst surfaces), which leads to similar discharge voltages at the higher depths of discharge46,47 (Fig. 10c). This hypothesis is further supported by recent DFT studies showing ORR kinetics on the Li2O2 surfaces are facile.26,85
 Fig. 10  (a) Specific ORR net current densities, is, on GC, Pd, Pt, Ru and Au in O2-saturated 0.1 M LiClO4 DME at 100 rpm and 20 mV s−1. Initial (b) and full (c) discharge profiles of Pd/C, Pt/C, Ru/C, Au/C and Vulcan carbon (VC) in 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME at 100 mA gC−1 in Li–O2 cells. The average estimated thickness of discharge products was calculated from discharge capacities assuming uniform distribution of Li2O2 on the electrode surfaces. Adapted from ref. 58. 
The Li+-ORR catalytic activity trend found on the metal surfaces at shallow discharge depth exhibit a volcano-type dependence as a function of the oxygen adsorption energy, as shown in Fig. 11 (blue solid).58 The volcano-type dependence implies that the rate-determining step (RDS) of Li+-ORR on weak oxygen binding metals (i.e., Au) can be associated with oxygen adsorption or the first lithiation step (O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2e.g., r1 + r3 in Fig. 5). On the other hand, the RDS of Li+-ORR on strong oxygen binding metals (i.e., Ru) can be related to the desorption steps (Oads + Li+ + e− → LiOadse.g., r8 in Fig. 5) analogous to that established for the ORR on Pt and Pt-based alloys in aqueous electrolytes.89,90 The experimentally observed Li+-ORR activity trends are further supported by a recent DFT study by Dathar et al.,88 showing that the intrinsic activity of the Li+-ORR on the surface of Au, silver (Ag), Pt, Pd, iridium (Ir), and Ru forms a volcano-like trend with respect to the adsorption energy of oxygen, as compared in Fig. 11 (orange circles). An associative mechanism of Li+-ORR was proposed on the surfaces of weak oxygen-binding metals (i.e., Au and Ag). First, molecular oxygen is reduced by one electron and Li+ to form LiO2 (O2 + Li+ + e− → LiO2, e.g., r1 + r3 in Fig. 5), followed by LiO2 + LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2 (r4 in Fig. 5), or LiO2 + Li+ + e− → Li2O2 (r5 in Fig. 5), which can further undergo a disproportionation or an electron-transfer step to form (Lix>0.5O)n (n denotes the number of the clusters).88 In contrast, a dissociative mechanism of Li+-ORR was proposed on the surfaces of strong oxygen-binding metals (i.e., Pt, Pd, Ir and Ru). First, molecular oxygen dissociates on the catalyst surface forming atomic oxygen (O2 → 2O), followed by an electron-transfer reaction to form OLiO species (2O + Li+ + e− → OLiO), which can further undergo disproportionation or electron transfer to form Li–O clusters (Lix>0.5O)n). The model further predicts that catalyst particles with more edges and defects can be more active than single-crystal close-packed surfaces.88 Based on this study and the ORR pathways shown in Fig. 5, the nature of the Li+-ORR products are likely to depend on the electrode surface, with a preference for Li2O2 formation for catalysts that have low oxygen adsorption strength, e.g. C, and a preference for LiO or Li2O for catalysts with high oxygen catalyst bond strength, e.g. Pt, since Oads is energetically favored.58 Note that the adsorbed O-atoms might decompose solvents, as suggested by McCloskey et al.91 Further studies involving in situ techniques such as XRD, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), and SERS are needed to investigate the reaction products and mechanisms on different metal surfaces.
 Fig. 11  Blue solid symbol (Exp.): nonaqueous Li+-ORR potentials at 2 μA cmreal−2 as a function of calculated oxygen adsorption energy, ΔEO (per oxygen atom relative to an atom in the gas phase),86 relative to that of Pt. The oxygen adsorption energy on GC is estimated from the oxygen adsorption energy on graphite;87 orange empty symbol (DFT): Ueq of the first electron-transfer step in the Li+-ORR on the close-packed surfaces of the six metals as a function of the adsorption energy of atomic O relative to that on Pt. Adapted from ref. 88. 

Current understanding of solid Li+-ORR product: Li2O2
Continued ORR to intermediate depths-of-discharge, e.g. beyond the first few monolayers of discharge product, involves the formation of bulk, insoluble Li2O2 within the void space of the electrode. While the initial ORR process is governed by formation of thin Li2O2 deposits on the surface of the electrode substrate (typically carbon or catalyzed carbon), for example in Fig. 10b, discharge to higher capacities involves the growth of thick (hundreds of nanometer or micron-scale)13,15–17,47,92 Li2O2 deposits. The formation and growth mechanisms of bulk Li2O2 and its corresponding electronic structure and morphology have not been extensively characterized in non-carbonate electrolytes. However, better understanding of these processes can provide important insights into the origin of electrode behaviors such as the voltage profile during discharge, the rate capability, the discharge capacity, the charging voltage, and the ability to cycle electrodes reversibly. We here discuss the current understanding of morphological, structural and electronic properties of electrochemically formed discharge products in non-carbonate electrolytes and their relation to different aspects of the discharge, charging and cycling behavior.
Morphology of electrochemically formed Li2O2
Several studies have reported that upon discharge to high (several thousand15,16 to ∼10000 mA h gC−1 (ref. 13, 17, 47 and 92)) gravimetric capacities in non-carbonate electrolytes, Li2O2 forms discrete particles with a characteristic toroid-like shape, which can have very large particle sizes up to ∼1 μm (Fig. 12) as revealed from ex situ SEM.13,15–17,47,92 Toroid-like particles have now been reported in a broad range of non-carbonate electrolyte solvents (ethers and DMSO) and carbon/(catalyst) substrates (Fig. 12),13,15–17,47,92 indicating that the toroid-like structure appears to be broadly characteristic of electrochemically formed Li2O2 rather than being electrolyte- or substrate-specific. Previous work on CNF electrodes16 has shown that the formation of these toroid-like particles begins with the nucleation of small particles on the sides of the CNFs at low capacities (350 mA h gC−1), and that the toroid-like shape emerges upon continued discharge to higher capacities (1880 mA h gC−1). Limited evidence suggests that the shape (e.g. aspect ratio) of the toroid-like particles can be sensitive to the discharge rate,15,16 although it is difficult to decouple the influence of higher rate and the corresponding typically lower discharge capacity in published works. Although the shape evolution of toroid-like particles under different rates and as a function of increasing capacity is currently under more detailed investigation, we observe that the toroidal shape occurs predominantly at low true surface-area currents, which can occur either at low rates or with increasing surface area during discharge to high capacity. The ability to form large, micron-scale deposits of Li2O2 is of great practical significance for developing electrodes with high void volume utilization, which will be critical to realize the full potential of Li–O2 systems requiring dense and monolithic Li2O2 filling with minimal substrate loading. Understanding the nucleation processes of toroid-like Li2O2 and the corresponding electronic properties that enable growth to the micron scale could provide valuable insights into the discharge rate capability and the subsequent oxidation pathways and overpotentials, as well as into design considerations (electrode structure and discharge conditions) for practical devices.
 Fig. 12  (a) Morphology of Li2O2 in CNF electrodes discharged to 2.0 V vs. Li at 46 mA gC−1 (4240 mA h gC−1) and (inset) 100 mA gC−1 (3900 mA h gC−1).16 (b) Li2O2 discs formed in VACNT electrodes upon discharge at 90 mA gC−1 to ∼13400 mA h gC−1.93 The electrolyte in both cases was 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME. (c) Discharge morphology of a Ketjen black electrode in 1 M LiTFSI in DMSO after discharge at 0.05 mA cm−2 to ∼9400 mA h gC−1.92 (d) Discharge morphology of a freestanding hierarchically porous carbon (graphene) electrode after discharge at 0.2 mA cm−2 to 11000 mA h gC−1 in 1 M LiTFSI in DME.17 Adapted from ref. 16, 17, 92 and 93. 
Based on observations of Li2O2 toroids from ex situ SEM, we believe that the large toroid-like particles reported by us15,16 and in other works13,17,47,92 consist of small plates (Fig. 12a inset and b) on the order of ∼10 nm as evident from the surface texture observed in SEM. We have also recently observed the formation of disc-like particles with stacked plates of Li2O2 on CNTs (Fig. 12b),93 which we believe are intermediate to the formation of the large toroid-like particles. The plate thicknesses of ∼10 nm are in reasonable agreement with the average crystallite size of Li2O2 measured from XRD (∼10 to 15 nm) across several studies,13,43,46 which appears to be characteristic of electrochemically formed Li2O2. Further, selected area electron diffraction data indicate that the faces of the plates are composed largely of (0001) Li2O2 facets. This finding agrees with the computations of Radin et al.94 (Fig. 13a) and by Mo et al.95 (Fig. 13b) that predict (0001) as the predominant surface in the equilibrium Wulff construction of Li2O2 crystallites. However, we have not observed the additional crystal facets such as (100) and (110) on the sides of the crystallites also predicted by these studies, and further work is needed to characterize the structure of electrochemically formed Li2O2 plates and their arrangement into toroid-like particles.
 Fig. 13  DFT-calculated Wulff shapes for Li2O2 under (a) equilibrium conditions at 300 K and 1 atm,94 and (b) in the limit of the most oxidizing (oxygen rich, left) and reducing (oxygen poor, right) environments for Li2O2. The scale bar shows surface energies in meV Å−2. Adapted from ref. 94 and 95. 
Electronic properties of Li2O2
The electronic nature of Li2O2 has been the subject of recent research interest owing to its significant implications for the discharge and charge behavior of Li–O2 electrodes, where growth of thick deposits of Li2O2 beyond the first few monolayers of discharge product requires means of conduction through Li2O2. Hummelshoj et al.85 have used density functional theory (DFT) to compute the band structure of Li2O2 and found that stoichiometric Li2O2 is a bulk insulator with a bandgap ≥1.88 eV (Fig. 14a, top). The bandgap has been found to be even higher (4.91 eV) when using a GW calculation with improved accuracy85,95,97 (Fig. 14a, top), which is supported by several other independent calculations.96–98 However, despite the fact that stoichiometric Li2O2 is predicted to be a bulk insulator,85,96–98 the formation of large toroid-like particles with sizes up to ∼1 μm indicates that the electronic conductivity is at least sufficient to sustain the electrochemical reduction of oxygen on the particle surfaces through relatively thick deposits of Li2O2. Interestingly, Hummelshoj et al.85 have also found that Li2O2 can be metallically conductive (Fig. 14a, bottom) when Li vacancies are present, such as at the Li2O2 surface in the presence of LiO2-like species formed as intermediates during discharge. Surface metallic conductivity is further supported by DFT calculations by Radin et al.97 predicting that the most stable equilibrium surface terminations of Li2O2 crystallites in the Wulff construction94,97 (Fig. 13a) contain O-rich (0001) and (100) facets. The calculated density of states97 predicts the presence of conducting states localized on the O2− anions near the surface of O-rich facets, which impart a half-metallic nature to the Li2O2 surfaces. Therefore, these DFT studies suggest a surface pathway that involves reduction of oxygen molecules by electrons from the substrate and lithium ions from the electrolyte, and fast electron transport on the Li2O2 surface. In particular, the growth of toroid-like Li2O2 particles could be mediated by the surface conductivity of relatively bulk-insulating plate-like crystallites. Although there is no direct information available for the surface conductivity of Li2O2, recent X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) data suggest that the surfaces of electrochemically formed Li2O2 can be nonstoichiometric.15
 Fig. 14  (a) Calculated Li2O2 density of states for stoichiometric Li2O2 (top) and Li2O2 with 1/16 Li vacancies (bottom).85 (b) Li2O2 density of states from a free hole polaron showing contributions from Li (blue) and O (red).96 Adapted from ref. 85 and 96. 
In addition to the possibility of surface conductivity of Li2O2, several groups have suggested that the presence of polarons in Li2O2 could mediate electronic conduction. Recent work by Ong et al.96 suggests that the presence of hole polarons (localized lattice distortion from a charged particle and its polarization field) can give rise to non-metallic additional states in the Li2O2 bandgap (Fig. 14b), which could enable bulk conduction to proceed via polaron migration. In particular, hole polarons were found to bond strongly to Li vacancies, which can diffuse with a relatively low energy barrier (360 meV), suggesting a bulk conduction mechanism in nonstoichiometric Li2O2 enabling more facile conductivity than in stoichiometric Li2O2. Additionally, results from Kang et al.99 suggest that excess electrons in the conduction band of Li2O2 can lower their energy by cleaving an O–O bond and forming a localized polaron. These polarons can contribute to electronic conduction via a hopping process between adjacent O–O dipoles, but the energy barrier for polaron migration is large (540–660 meV) leading to a low mobility (10−10 to 10−9 cm2 V−1 s−1) for this conduction pathway. Future experimental work is needed to provide support for these proposed processes.
Voltage losses associated with electrical transport limitations of Li2O2 during discharge
The voltage losses associated with the electrical transport limitations of Li2O2 greatly influence the Li–O2 discharge voltage.26,100 While the cell voltage is influenced both by kinetics losses and transport losses (e.g., mass transport loss, ionic and electrical transport losses), here we only discuss the influence of electrical transport through the Li2O2 deposits/films on the discharge voltage.
A typical Li–O2 discharge profile consists of a sloping region and a rapid drop at the end, as shown in Fig. 10c and many other reports.15,58,100,101 It is proposed that the sloping voltage profile reflects the increase in overpotential associated with the electrical resistance of Li2O2 due to increasing thickness. For instance, Viswanathan et al.100 have reported that the discharge profile on a GC electrode exhibits a sloping region, which was attributed to the increase in Li2O2 thickness-dependent resistance (R = ρt/A, where ρ, t, A are the resistivity, thickness and area of the Li2O2 film, respectively). The authors reported a decrease of 0.1 V in cell voltage with an increase of 1 nm in Li2O2 thickness at 1 μA cmGC−2 up to 3 nm.100 Assuming the sloping feature is only related to the increases in the electrical resistance of Li2O2 film due to increasing thickness, the electronic conductivity of Li2O2 (prior to the rapid drop) can be estimated to be ∼1 × 10−12 S cm−1 (σ = Δti/ΔVA, where Δt = 1 nm, i = 1 μA cmGC−2, ΔV = 0.1 V, A = 1.1 cm2). The estimated Li2O2 conductivity is very low, which suggests that the electrical transport losses will be significant in Li2O2 with increasing thickness and/or at high rates, and are in agreement with recent observations from in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM) revealing significant electronic conductivity limitations at very high rates/overpotentials upon charging of Li2O2.93
Toward the end of the discharge profile, the cell voltage drops exponentially with increasing capacity15,58,100,101 (i.e., increasing Li2O2 thickness). The exponentially decreased cell voltage cannot be explained by the linear increase in the resistance with average Li2O2 thickness. While earlier work102 has proposed that the maximum capacity is limited by pore clogging by the discharge products, reported discharge capacities have often been significantly lower than those expected based on available void volume, indicating that other factors are responsible for the rapid voltage drop. It is proposed that the tunneling current through Li2O2 as an insulator becomes limiting and causes the exponential voltage drop when the Li2O2 thickness exceeds a critical value at a given rate. For instance, the critical Li2O2 thickness at 1 μA cmtrue−2 was predicted to be ∼5 nm, which is in line with their experimentally determined critical Li2O2 thickness (∼5 nm).100 With a voltage drop of 0.1 V, the tunneling conductivity decreases from 0.2 S cm−1 at 2 nm (itunneling = 1 × 1011 μA cmtrue−2) to 5 × 10−12 S cm−1 at 5 nm (itunneling = 1 μA cmtrue−2).100 It should be noted that the sloping voltage profile upon discharge (1 × 10−12 S cm−1, up to 3 nm at 1 μA cmGCE−2) cannot be explained by the tunneling limitation (0.2 S cm−1 at 2 nm and 5 × 10−12 S cm−1 at 5 nm).
While the tunneling model has successfully predicted the maximum obtainable Li2O2 thickness at rates at 1 μA cmGCE−2 (5 nm),100 this model appear to be inadequate to explain large toroid-like Li2O2 particles (∼1 μm, Fig. 12) formed at lower rates (i.e., ∼0.1 μA cmtrue−2). For example, the tunneling model predicts that the maximum obtainable Li2O2 thickness at 0.1 μA cmtrue−2 is ∼6 nm (0.1 V voltage drop) and ∼7 nm (0.6 V voltage drop),100 which are significantly smaller than the toroid-like Li2O2 particles (∼1 μm, Fig. 12). Interestingly, the predicted Li2O2 thickness agrees better with the thicknesses of individual plates observed in the toroidal particles (Fig. 12b) and also with the typical measured Li2O2 crystallite sizes by XRD of ∼10 to 15 nm.46 We therefore propose that formation of bulk Li2O2 can only occur with thicknesses up to ∼10 nm within the plates at ∼0.1 μA cmtrue−2 due to the tunneling limitation,100 and that further growth of Li2O2 into large toroid-like particles involves surface conductivity between plates and soluble intermediate species. Further work is needed to characterize the microstructure of Li2O2 and understand what causes and limits the growth of large toroids upon Li–O2 discharge.
Reactivity of Li2O2 and carbon
While Li2O2 is the major product formed during discharge, recent evidence indicates that Li2CO3 also forms during discharge in ether-based electrolytes.14,26,46 We have recently shown using XANES that Li2CO3 predominately forms at the surface of carbon nanotubes in discharged electrodes as a result of reactivity between carbon and Li2O2 or other discharge intermediates.46 Utilizing both the fluorescence yield (FY; penetration depth of hundreds of nanometers) and the total electron yield (TEY; penetration depth of tens of nanometers) modes, XANES can provide unique information to distinguish between the nature of the surface and bulk of discharge products in Li–O2 electrodes. At high capacities (2000 and 4700 mA h gC−1) on the first discharge, corresponding to relatively high loadings of Li2O2 in the electrodes (2–2.5 μA h cmtrue−2, respectively), the XANES FY spectra of discharged Vulcan carbon (VC)15 and VACNT electrodes46 (Fig. 15a) exhibit spectra comparable to those of commercial Li2O2, while Li2CO3 is not clearly observed. However, at lower loadings for VACNTs (1000 mA h gC−1, corresponding to 0.5 μA h cmtrue−2) where we observed sparse coverage of Li2O2 particles and significantly exposed surfaces of CNTs, we observed the clear presence of Li2CO3 in the TEY spectrum (Fig. 15a). These results indicate that Li2CO3, which forms initially during discharge at the carbon interface due to chemical reactivity with Li2O2 or other discharge intermediates, is covered by Li2O2 upon discharge to higher capacities (Fig. 15b), as no evidence for Li2CO3 on the surface of VACNTs/Li2O2 at high capacity (4700 mA h gC−1) was found. This finding regarding the instability of the Li2O2–carbon interface is in agreement with a differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) study by McCloskey et al.,26 which shows that CO2 containing isotopically labeled 13C from the electrode substrate was detected during charging of the oxygen electrode with a small Li2O2 thicknesses (∼1 nm) on the first cycle (Fig. 16a and b). Interestingly, additional recent work by Thotiyl et al.103 has revealed that in tetraglyme and DMSO electrolytes, the Li2CO3 and other species that form on 13C carbon electrodes during discharge contains primarily 12C and relatively little 13C, indicating that formation of parasitic species is largely related to electrolyte decomposition on discharge in these electrolytes. Interestingly, on charge, continued electrolyte decomposition and concurrent 12CO2 evolution were observed below E < 3.5 VLi, whereas 13CO2 related to carbon oxidation was observed only above 3.5 VLi. These results highlight new complexities related to the interplay between the electrode and electrolyte and involving different mechanisms of instability during discharge and charge, which must be considered for the development of stable cell configurations (both substrate and electrolyte together103). Overall, these recent findings indicate that development of non-carbon electrodes may enhance the stability of Li–O2 electrodes, particularly during cycling (further discussed below).
 Fig. 15  (a) XANES O K-edge FY data of galvanostatically discharged vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) and Vulcan carbon (VC) electrodes.15,46 (b) Proposed morphology of Li2O2 and Li2CO3 on VACNTs at low (∼1000 mA h gC−1) and high (∼4700 mA h gC−1) capacity. Adapted from ref. 46. 
 Fig. 16  (a) Cell voltage versus discharge capacity for Li–O2 galvanostatic discharge and charge at 200 μA on a 13C-electrode. (b) Evolution rates (m′) for O2, 13CO2, and 12CO2 + 13CO2 during the charge in (a) as measured by quantitative DEMS. (c) Charging schematic showing the removal of Li2O2 and Li2CO3 and the influence on the charging voltage. Adapted from ref. 26. 
The presence of parasitic products such as Li2CO3 and lithium (alkyl) carbonates has been shown to significantly influence the overvoltage required on charge and its evolution during cycling.26,46 For example, charging below 4 VLi, which corresponded to the majority of the charging capacity, was found to produce O2 from Li2O2.26 In contrast, CO2 was shown to be generated at potentials greater than 4 V vs. lithium at the very end of charge on carbon electrodes in DME, which can be attributed to oxidation of Li2CO3 and lithium (alkyl) carbonates and potentially to electrolyte decomposition. Little was known about how the morphology and crystallinity of Li2O2 and parasitic products such as Li2CO3 may change and influence subsequent cycling performance. Our recent TEM work reveals significant morphological and chemical changes in discharged VACNT electrodes in a DME-based electrolyte during cycling to limited capacities of 1000 mA h gC−1.46 While crystalline Li2O2 formed upon discharge, subsequent cycling resulted in loss of Li2O2 crystallinity.14,26 XANES data (Fig. S1†) revealed that Li2CO3 accumulated in the electrode with increased cycling,14,26 while TEM imaging and selected area electron diffraction (SAED) revealed that crystalline Li2CO3 became increasingly agglomerated in large isolated particles within the electrode (Fig. 17a). Concurrently, oxidation of the discharge product became increasingly difficult with cycling as evidenced by the evolution of a higher-voltage (>4.0 VLi, eventually contributing to ∼50% or more of the charging capacity after several cycles) plateau with continued cycling.46 We proposed that the increased amounts of Li2CO3 detected in the electrode by XANES, TEM, SAED, and other techniques46 were responsible for the increasing charging voltage with cycling (Fig. 17b). These findings indicate that the chemical instability of Li2O2 in the oxygen electrode can significantly influence the OER kinetics and consequently the charging voltage during cycling.
 Fig. 17  (a) TEM images of VACNT electrodes discharged and charged to the indicated cycle number. The aggregated particles in the 6th to 11th cycles were found by SAED to consist of Li2CO3. Inset scale bars = 200 nm. Adapted from ref. 46. (b) Schematic showing the evolution of the charging voltage with cycling of VACNT electrodes in DME-based electrolyte. The first discharge results predominantly in formation of Li2O2 and small amounts of Li2CO3 at the interface of Li2O2 and VACNTs, and the first charge is governed largely by oxidation of Li2O2 at E < 4.0 VLi. Upon higher cycles, increasingly agglomerated Li2CO3 in the electrode contributes to an increased charge capacity with charging voltages >4.0 VLi. Adapted from ref. 46. 
Nonaqueous oxygen evolution reaction
Reducing the energy loss associated with Li–O2 recharge is one of the most important objectives of Li–O2 research to date.22,67,69 There are two schools of thought for OER kinetics. First, it has been reported that Li–O2 electrode charging can proceed with relatively low overpotentials and the Li–O2 reaction kinetics is insensitive to catalyst. For instance, McCloskey et al.91 have reported that the Li–O2 charge potentials of VC electrodes fall in the range of 3.0 to 4.0 VLi, where no enhanced OER kinetics were found in the presence of catalysts. On the other hand, a number of studies have reported that OER on carbon surfaces requires large overpotential (e.g., >1000 mV)13,16,46,101 and that the application of catalysts can effectively decrease the Li–O2 charge potential compared to the uncatalyzed carbon.13,101 The capacities examined in the latter category of studies are typically much higher than that examined by McCloskey et al.91 (∼100 mA h gC−1), ranging from 1000 to 5000 mA h gC−1.13,16,101 We here consider the true-electrode-surface-area specific capacities (TSAC) upon discharge and true-electrode-surface-area specific charge rates (TSAR) to fairly evaluate these apparent discrepancies and assess whether catalysts can influence the charging behavior.
The influence of the TSAC on the OER kinetics
Here we discuss the OER kinetics of the Li–O2 recharge at relatively low charge capacity to examine the reaction kinetics of oxidizing the first sub-nm layer of the discharge product, i.e., Li2O2. This process is often captured in the sloping charging region of the Li–O2 charging profiles,16,26,46,91,104 and has been experimentally shown to only evolve O2 (no CO2) during charge26,91 (i.e., excluding parasitic reactions associated with carbonate-oxidation). Fig. 18a shows the charge potentials of Li–O2 cells with carbon-based electrodes, which were obtained at a charge capacity of 0.05 μA h cmtrue−2 (an average Li2O2 thickness of ∼0.2 nm on the true electrode surface) as a function of the total discharge capacity (Fig. 18a).26,46,91,104 First, the charge potentials appear to be independent of the overall Li2O2 thickness formed in the Li–O2 cells up to 18 nm at comparable rates. In this region, the Li2O2 electrochemical oxidation kinetics is not limited by hole tunneling in Li2O2 described by Viswanathan et al.100 The highest/limiting current densities of electron tunneling through a 5 nm thick Li2O2 are ∼10−14 μA nmLi2O2−2 or ∼1.0 μA cmLi2O2−2 at an overpotential of 0.1 V, and ∼10−9 μA nmLi2O2−2 or ∼105 μA cmLi2O2−2 at an overpotential of 0.6 V. Clearly, these “limiting currents” predicted for tunneling (1–105 μA cmLi2O2−2) are at least 10 times higher than the rates used in the Li–O2 cells shown in Fig. 18a (5 × 10−3 to 0.1 μA cmtrue−2), which supports that this OER kinetics are not limited by tunneling in Li2O2.100
 Fig. 18  (a) Charge potentials (at the first 0.05 μA h cmtrue−2 = 0.18 nm (∼0.2 nm) of Li2O2 in thickness) of select studies26,46,91,104 as a function of total TSAC (μA h cmtrue−2) formed at the end of discharge. The grey dashed lines denote the estimated Li2O2 thickness estimated from the total TSAC assuming a uniform distribution of Li2O2. The volumetric capacity of Li2O2 is 2699 mA h cm−3 (molecular weight of Li2O2 = 45.88 g mol−1, density of Li2O2 = 2.31 g cm−3).106 The number in the parentheses denotes the TSAR during charging in μA cmtrue−2. (b) Charge potentials (at the first 30% of charge capacity) of select studies. The number in the parentheses denotes the TSAC in μA h cmtrue−2. For blue symbols, the specific surface area of Li2O2 is estimated to be 7.53 m2 gLi2O2−1 assuming spherical particles with ∼345 nm in diameter,105 and the Li2O2 density of 2.31 g cm−3106 using formula 6(1000/(densityLi2O2 × diameterLi2O2).107 
Second, the charge potentials shown in Fig. 18a is about 3.4 VLi, translating to overpotentials of ∼400 mV, which is lower than the charge overpotential observed on carbon surfaces averaged over the entire charge capacity (e.g., >1000 mV).13,16,47,90 This observation suggests that the OER kinetics of oxidizing the first sub-nm of Li2O2 is faster than that of oxidizing the bulk of Li2O2 particles. Third, the charge potentials in the sloping region from discharged electrodes with low capacities and Li2O2 average thicknesses appears to be insensitive to the presence of catalysts (i.e., Au/C and MnO2/C).91 Overall, the characteristics associated with the charge reaction at relatively low charge capacities (e.g., <0.2 μA h cmtrue−2) or oxidizing the first sub-nm layer of the Li2O2 are consistent with the first school of thought discussed earlier that the Li+-OER kinetics is fast and insensitive to catalyst.
The influence of charge rate on the OER kinetics
The OER kinetics from discharged electrodes with large discharge capacities (e.g., ≥0.2 μA h cmtrue−2) exhibits a voltage plateau13,16,101,104 (e.g., Fig. 19) after the initial sloping region upon charge, which can be attributed to electrochemical oxidation of the bulk of Li2O2 particles to evolve O2via a two-phase transition. This is supported by an in situ DEMS study showing that O2 is evolved during the flat charge plateau in DME solvent.43
 Fig. 19  The proposed reaction mechanism of Li–O2 recharge. The OER associated with the initial recharge (sloping and catalyst-insensitive) is attributed to a de-intercalation process via a solid-solution route from the outer part of Li2O2 to form LiO2-like species on the surface (Li2O2 → LiO2 + Li+ + e−), where LiO2-like species disproportionate to evolve O2 (LiO2 + LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2), yielding an overall 2e−/O2 OER process (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−).104 The OER process at the flat potential plateau is attributed to the oxidation of bulk Li2O2 particles to form Li+ ions and O2 (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2) via a two-phase transition.104 Lastly, a rising charge plateau after stage II has been assigned to the decomposition of carbonate-type byproducts and electrolyte.26,46 
The charge plateau potential is very sensitive to the intrinsic charge current density. We compare the charge potentials as a function of TSAR upon charge in Fig. 18b (the green and red symbols), which were estimated at ∼30% of the charge capacity of Li–O2 cells with carbon electrodes (having TSACs in the range of 0.2–1.0 μA h cmtrue−2). The charge potentials at ∼30% charge capacities were selected to have a large enough depth of charge to capture the dominant process responsible for this charge plateau and to minimize the extent of parasitic reactions such as electrolyte decomposition at voltages greater than ∼4 VLi. The charge potential increases sharply with TSAR, forming a Tafel slope of ∼300 mV dec−1. Interestingly, the OER potentials of electrodes that were prefilled with chemically synthesized Li2O2via potentiostatic measurements reported by Harding et al.105 (blue symbols) as a function of rate follow a comparable Tafel slope. Note that the rates were normalized to the true surface area of Li2O2 loaded, instead of the electrode surface area, due to the fact that the Li2O2 used in these experiments were large discrete particles (∼345 nm in diameter).105 This further supports that the Tafel slope of OER kinetics of the Li–O2 charge plateau (∼300 mV dec−1, Fig. 18b) is associated with the oxidation of the bulk of Li2O2 particles.
The two-stage behavior (Fig. 19) can be attributed to the differences in stoichiometry and/or oxygen local environments between the outer part and the bulk part of the Li2O2.46 To support this, we show that the oxygen local environment of the outer part of the Li2O2 is different from that of the bulk part of the Li2O2 using X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) technique with surface sensitive total electron yield (TEY) mode and bulk fluorescence yield (FY) mode15,46 (Fig. S2†).
Proposed reaction mechanism of Li2O2 electrochemical oxidation upon Li–O2 battery recharge on carbon surfaces
The proposed reaction mechanism of Li–O2 recharge on the carbon surface is shown in Fig. 19.104 During the oxidation of the first sub-nm layer of Li2O2, the kinetics in this region exhibits a sloping voltage profile at relatively low overpotentials (∼400 mV, Fig. 18a) and is insensitive to catalyst (Fig. 18a). We hypothesize that a de-intercalation process via a solid-solution route from the outer part of Li2O2 to form LiO2-like species on the surface (Li2O2 → LiO2 + Li+ + e−), where LiO2-like species disproportionate to evolve O2 (LiO2 + LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2), yielding an overall 2e−/O2 OER process (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−).104 This hypothesis is supported by the work of McCloskey et al.43,91 showing that molecular O2 was evolved during the sloping charging step (with DME solvent) with an overall 2e−/O2 OER process. Such a process cannot be catalyzed typically, which is in agreement with the negligible catalyst effect reported.91
The OER kinetics in the potential plateau (Fig. 19) indicates a two-phase transition, which can be attributed to decomposing bulk Li2O2 particles to form Li+ ions and O2 (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2). This reaction is associated with nucleation and growth type processes and requires overcoming a significant reaction barrier, which has been revealed by a potentiostatic intermittent titration technique (PITT).104Fig. 20 shows the PITT charge response (at the plateau region) of an Li–O2 cell that was pre-discharged to 200 mA h gC−1 at 100 mA gC−1 in 1.0 M LiClO4 TEGDME.104 The oxidation current first decays, slowly rises to reach a maximum and then decays gradually. Interestingly, a similar initiation process for the Li2O2 oxidation is also noted in Li2O2-filled VC electrodes reported by Harding et al.,105 as shown in Fig. 21. This initiation process can be shortened, and the maximum Li2O2 oxidation current increases as the charging overpotential increases (Fig. 21). The initial current decay can be attributed to the nucleation of active sites (e.g., Li vacancies) for Li2O2 electro-oxidation and/or the removal of surface contaminant species such as LiOH105 (present in commercial Li2O2). The rising current reflects the increase in electrochemically active area (e.g., each independent nucleus grows in size and/or the number of nuclei also increases).108 The sharp current rise after the initiation can be fitted by a cube of time minus an offset, which suggests a 3D nucleation with a constant rate of site formation for Li2O2 oxidation.105,109 The decrease in current after the maximum can be attributed largely to the decrease in the available Li2O2.104,105
 Fig. 20  (a) Potential steps (blue) and corresponding current response (red) during PITT measurements (10 mV steps, 1.3 mA gC−1 current cut-off or 50 hours durations) on charging of an electrode that was discharged to 200 mA h gC−1 at 100 mA gC−1 in 1.0 M LiClO4 in TEGDME. Adapted from ref. 104. 
 Fig. 21  Net mass-normalized current vs. time for potentiostatic charging of VC + Li2O2 electrodes, on a log–log scale. Solid lines are measured data. Dashed lines are fitted using a least squares best fit to i = a/(t + b) + c(t − to)3.105 
Electrocatalyst influence on the OER kinetics
Applying electrocatalysts to promote the sluggish Li–O2 recharge kinetics has been intensively researched.81,83,101,105 However, the influence of electrocatalysts on the Li+-OER kinetics has been highly debated.69,91,105 Beyond the initial charge reaction, the OER kinetics associated with electro-oxidation of the bulk Li2O2 particles is considerably sluggish and strongly dependent on the true charge rate (Fig. 18b).
Investigating the effects of catalyst on the Li2O2-oxidation can potentially lead to significantly decreased Li–O2 charging overpotential. Researchers25,105,110 have utilized electrodes that consist of commercial Li2O2 and different catalysts to systematically evaluate the effect of catalyst toward Li2O2-oxidation. Such experiments remove ambiguity in the influence of different discharge product structures or chemistries associated with catalysts in Li–O2 cells on the charging overpotential. Harding et al.105 have shown that the electrochemical oxidation kinetics of Li2O2 can be significantly promoted by Pt and Ru catalysts in electrodes pre-loaded with commercial Li2O2. The VC and Au/C were shown to have comparable activities and only become active for Li2O2 oxidation at voltages greater than 4.0 VLi. In contrast, the Pt and Ru nanoparticles supported on VC become active at voltages greater than 3.5 VLi, having activities 100 times higher than VC and Au/C, as shown in Fig. 22.105 SEM images (Fig. S3a†) and XRD spectra (Fig. S3b†) of the pristine and charged electrodes indicate that Li2O2 can be fully removed after 100% charging for all catalysts examined, which confirms that the oxidation currents were largely associated with Li2O2 oxidation. We note that Pt/C was found to also catalyze electrolyte decomposition,105 which is consistent with recent work of McCloskey et al.91 reporting promoted CO2-evolution upon Li–O2 charging in the presence of Pt nanoparticles.
 Fig. 22  Activity vs. potential for VC, Au/C, Pt/C, and Ru/C electrodes. Activity is calculated from the average current measured during the first 20% of discharge.105 
The nucleation and growth processes associated with the oxidation of bulk Li2O2 particles can be influenced greatly by the catalysts,105 as revealed by Fig. S4.† The initiation time prior to the sharp current rise is much shorter for Li2O2 electro-oxidation with Pt/C or Ru/C than VC, even at a significantly lower charging potential (3.6 VLi) compared to VC (4.1 VLi). This observation further supports that catalysts can promote the nucleation of active sites for Li2O2 electro-oxidation and enhance the OER kinetics. Interestingly, the pronounced catalyst effects found with the Li2O2-filled electrodes can be observed with Li–O2 cells, as shown in Fig. S5.† The charge plateau potentials of Pt/C and Ru/C electrodes (∼3.6 VLi) are about 600 mV lower than that of the VC electrode (∼4.2 VLi) (Fig. S5†). However, the physical origin associated with the enhanced OER kinetics by Pt and Ru is not understood and requires further studies to reveal the working mechanisms.
Non-precious metal containing metal oxides are considered promising candidates for effective and viable Li–O2 catalysts. For instance, Oh et al.111 have recently reported the use of metallic mesoporous pyrochlore (Pb2Ru2O6.5) as a catalyst or ‘promoter’ to facilitate the oxidation of Li2O2. The enhanced Li–O2 charging efficiency was attributed to an enhanced mass transport of reaction intermediate species facilitated by the high oxygen vacancies and porosity of the pyrochlore. Further studies are needed to reveal the working principles of the Li-OER catalysts in order to develop rational design strategies for stable and effective catalyst.
Conclusions and perspectives
The lack of fundamental understanding of the oxygen reaction mechanisms during discharge and charge, chemical instability of electrolyte/electrode couples and oxygen reaction products/intermediates, and transport of electron and lithium ions in Li2O2 limits the development of highly efficient, high-rate and long-life Li–O2 batteries. Techniques that can directly probe the electrochemical reactions in the absence of parasitic reactions in situ are critical to gain further insights into the reaction mechanism, and to help identify effective strategies for developing stable and reversible oxygen electrodes. Using in situ techniques such as SERS72 and DEMS26,43,44,55,91 can generate significant insights into the solid, liquid and gas-phase reaction intermediates and products of Li–O2 redox chemistry, as well as elucidate the origins of chemical instability of electrodes/electrolytes in the presence of Li–O2 redox reaction products. In situ XRD developed recently112 has been used to probe the rate of formation and oxidation of crystalline discharge products and the associated coulombic efficiency at different stages during cycling in a glyme electrolyte, offering a direct probe into the solid state structure and chemistry of reaction products. For example, the authors found the early stages of charging to proceed highly inefficiently, requiring >5 e−/O2 as determined by a non-linear rate of decrease of the integrated (101) peak area, which was proposed to result from oxidation of parasitic byproducts generated on discharge. In contrast, bulk oxidation of Li2O2 approached ∼2 e−/O2 and the peak area decreased linearly. In addition, in situ ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (APXPS), established recently,113,114 can be used to probe the surface chemistries of the Li–O2 reaction products and how electrolytes, catalysts and overpotential may influence the reaction products (Li2O2vs. Li2O) using solid-state Li–O2 cells.115 Moreover, in situ TEM techniques, which have revealed remarkable details into lithium insertion reactions such as the lithiation of SnO2116–118 and Si nanowires,119 can provide high spatial and temporal resolution observations of oxygen reduction to form Li2O2 and oxidation of Li2O2 upon charging. This will enable improved understanding of the mechanisms of ORR and OER in the presence of Li ions, and help elucidate the parameters that govern the reaction kinetics and transport of electrons and lithium ions.
To avoid side reactions associated with solvent instability, creating all solid-state Li–O2 batteries42,120–126 is one of the most promising future directions of reversible Li–O2 batteries. Solid-state electrolytes are well suited to preventing electrolyte loss when exposed to air, and allow for complex air cathode structures to be synthesized that enable oxygen diffusion pathways deep within the air electrode. Although the low ionic conductivity of solid-state electrolytes at room temperature represents a significant and continuing challenge to the development of solid state Li–air batteries, opportunities exist to increase the ionic conductivity of both polymer and ceramic electrolytes, while maintaining the stable, non-volatile properties of solid state electrolytes. A number of studies115,121,123,127 have demonstrated that solid-state electrolyte performance can be promising for rechargeable Li–O2 batteries. These advances in solid state electrolytes are a promising direction for future Li–air work, as the combination of non-volatility and high lithium conductivity would much more easily enable practical, long-lived Li–air batteries. Unlike Li–O2 battery research in nonaqueous electrolytes, little information is available about reaction products in cells based on solid electrolytes used to date. In addition, for solid electrolytes to approach the high theoretical energy densities calculated for Li–O2 batteries, the discharge product must be conductive enough to form deposits of Li2O2 much thicker than the 5 nm limit imposed by quantum tunneling. Alternatively, the electrolyte would need to be engineered to be extremely thin, via techniques such as atomic layer deposition,128 which could allow for high capacity discharge despite thin Li2O2 deposits owing to the high surface area of the electrolyte. Future work on Li–air solid-state batteries should include detailed characterization of reaction products upon discharge and charge.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Assistant Secretary for Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of FreedomCAR and Vehicle Technologies of the DOE (DE-AC03-76SF00098 with LBNL) and the Ford-MIT Alliance. This work was also supported in part by the MRSEC Program of the National Science Foundation under award number DMR-0819762, U.S. Department of Energy's U.S.-China Clean Energy Research Center for Clean Vehicles, Grant DE-PI0000012, and Office of Naval Research (ONR) under contract numbers N00014-12-1-0096 (MIT) and N00014-12-WX20818 (NSWCCD). The work at Binghamton was supported by NYSERDA-NYBEST. We thank Dr Jigang Zhou at the Canadian Light Source for collecting XANES data used in the ESI.† B.M.G. acknowledges a National Science Foundation Graduate Research Fellowship, and D.G.K. acknowledges a TOTAL Graduate Student Fellowship.
Notes and references

          S. Fletcher, Bottled Lightning, Hill and Wang,  2011 Search PubMed .
M. S. Whittingham, Science, 1976, 192, 1126–1127 CAS .
M. S. Whittingham, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4271–4301 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Trevey, C. R. Stoldt and S.-H. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1282–A1289 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hautier, A. Jain, S. P. Ong, B. Kang, C. Moore, R. Doe and G. Ceder, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3495–3508 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gaubicher, C. Wurm, G. Goward, C. Masquelier and L. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 3240–3242 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dupre, J. Gaubicher, T. Le Mercier, G. Wallez, J. Angenault and M. Quarton, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 140, 209–221 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Kerr, J. Gaubicher and L. F. Nazar, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2000, 3, 460–462 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.sionpower.com/technology.html
        .
M. S. Whittingham, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100, 1518–1534 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, M. Armand, G. Demailly, F. Dolhem, P. Poizot and J.-M. Tarascon, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Kang, Y. S. Meng, J. Breger, C. P. Grey and G. Ceder, Science, 2006, 311, 977–980 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, R. Black, G. Popov, E. Pomerantseva, F. Nan, G. A. Botton and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9558–9565 CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen, N. E. Drewett, L. J. Hardwick, F. Bardé and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 8609–8613 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, D. G. Kwabi, K. P. C. Yao, J. R. Harding, J. Zhou, L. Zuin and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2999–3007 CAS .
R. R. Mitchell, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2952–2958 CAS .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Amatucci and N. Pereira, J. Fluorine Chem., 2007, 128, 243–262 CrossRef CAS .
F. Badway, F. Cosandey, N. Pereira and G. G. Amatucci, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1318–A1327 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamin and E. Peled, J. Power Sources, 1983, 9, 281–287 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yamin and E. Peled, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1983, 130, C307 Search PubMed .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ji and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 9821–9826 RSC .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, M. C. Parent, V. Chiloyan and Y. Shao-Horn, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A69–A72 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, A. Speidel, R. Scheffler, D. C. Miller, V. Viswanathan, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. K. Nørskov and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 997–1001 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Mei, X. Li, W. Xu, D. Wang, G. L. Graff, W. D. Bennett, Z. Nie, L. V. Saraf, I. A. Aksay, J. Liu and J.-G. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5071–5078 CrossRef CAS .
G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, A. C. Luntz, S. Swanson and W. Wilcke, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2193–2203 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, S. T. Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .

          http://gigaom.com/cleantech/10-companies-to-watch-for-outta-arpa-e/
        .

          http://www.polyplus.com/liair.html
        .
R. Selim and P. Bro, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1974, 121, 1457–1459 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yoshimatsu, T. Hirai and J. Yamaki, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2422–2427 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. L. Rao, R. W. Francis and H. A. Christopher, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1490–1492 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Dahn, T. Zheng, Y. Liu and J. S. Xue, Science, 1995, 270, 590–593 CAS .
N. Kambe, M. S. Dresselhaus, G. Dresselhaus, S. Basu, A. R. McGhie and J. E. Fischer, Mater. Sci. Eng., 1979, 40, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.sony.net/SonyInfo/News/Press/200502/05-006E/
        .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1181–1187 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Boukamp, G. C. Lesh and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 725–729 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wen and R. A. Huggins, J. Solid State Chem., 1981, 37, 271–278 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Abraham and Z. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 1–5 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. McCloskey, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby, G. Girishkumar and A. C. Luntz, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1161–1166 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Freunberger, Y. H. Chen, Z. Q. Peng, J. M. Griffin, L. J. Hardwick, F. Barde, P. Novak and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8040–8047 CrossRef CAS .
D. Aurbach, M. L. Daroux, P. Faguy and E. Yeager, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 297, 225–244 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Gallant, R. R. Mitchell, D. G. Kwabi, J. Zhou, L. Zuin, C. V. Thompson and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20800–20805 CAS .
R. Black, S. H. Oh, J. H. Lee, T. Yim, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2902–2905 CrossRef CAS .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin, M. Treskow, J. Scheers, P. Johansson and K. Edstrom, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 18597–18604 CAS .
R. Younesi, M. Hahlin, F. Bjorefors, P. Johansson and K. Edstrom, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 77–84 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Veith, J. Nanda, L. H. Delmau and N. J. Dudney, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1242–1247 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, J. Z. Hu, M. H. Engelhard, S. A. Towne, J. S. Hardy, J. Xiao, J. Feng, M. Y. Hu, J. Zhang, F. Ding, M. E. Gross and J. G. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 240–247 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mizushima, P. C. Jones, P. J. Wiseman and J. B. Goodenough, Mater. Res. Bull., 1980, 15, 783–789 CrossRef CAS .
F. T. Wagner, B. Lakshmanan and M. F. Mathias, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2204–2219 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Jung, J. Hassoun, J.-B. Park, Y.-K. Sun and B. Scrosati, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, Y. Chen and P. G. Bruce, Science, 2012, 337, 563–566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Zhang and C. Y. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, A527–A535 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger, E. Crumlin, J. R. McGuire and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A1016–A1025 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, H. A. Gasteiger and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19048–19051 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Sawyer and J. L. Roberts Jr, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1966, 12, 90–101 CAS .
D. T. Sawyer, G. Chiericato, C. T. Angelis, E. J. Nanni and T. Tsuchiya, Anal. Chem., 1982, 54, 1720–1724 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Maricle and W. G. Hodgson, Anal. Chem., 1965, 37, 1562–1565 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herranz, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19084–19094 CAS .
N. Lopez, D. J. Graham, R. McGuire, G. E. Alliger, Y. Shao-Horn, C. C. Cummins and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2012, 335, 450–453 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Gibian, D. T. Sawyer, T. Ungermann, R. Tangpoonpholvivat and M. M. Morrison, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1979, 101, 640–644 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev and M. Blanco, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 379–383 CrossRef CAS .

          J. March, Advanced Organic Chemistry: Reactions, Mechanisms, and Structure, Wiley-Interscience,  1992 Search PubMed .
R. Black, B. Adams and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 801–815 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Hardwick and P. G. Bruce, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 16, 178–185 CrossRef .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Park, J. Xiao, J. G. Zhang, Y. Wang and J. Liu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 844–857 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev and F. Faglioni, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2012, 116, 7128–7138 CrossRef CAS .
T. Osaka and I. Shindo, Solid State Commun., 1984, 51, 421–424 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Chen, V. Giordani, F. Barde, P. Novak, D. Graham, J.-M. Tarascon and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6351–6355 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mizuno, S. Nakanishi, A. Shirasawa, K. Takechi, T. Shiga, H. Nishikoori and H. Iba, Electrochemistry, 2011, 79, 876–881 CrossRef CAS .
J. Herranz, A. Garsuch and H. A. Gasteiger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19084–19094 CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Lu, R. S. Assary, P. Du, H.-H. Wang, Y.-K. Sun, Y. Qin, K. C. Lau, J. Greeley, P. C. Redfern, H. Iddir, L. A. Curtiss and K. Amine, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25535–25542 CAS .
K. R. Ryan, L. Trahey, B. J. Ingram and A. K. Burrell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19724–19728 CAS .
V. S. Bryantsev, J. Uddin, V. Giordani, W. Walker, D. Addison and G. V. Chase, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A160–A171 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Allen, J. Hwang, R. Kautz, S. Mukerjee, E. J. Plichta, M. A. Hendrickson and K. M. Abraham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 20755–20764 CAS .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20127–20134 CAS .
C. O. Laoire, S. Mukerjee, K. M. Abraham, E. J. Plichta and M. A. Hendrickson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9178–9186 CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, Z. C. Xu, H. A. Gasteiger, S. Chen, K. Hamad-Schifferli and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 12170–12171 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, J. Bao, G. Armstrong and P. G. Bruce, J. Power Sources, 2007, 174, 1177–1182 CrossRef CAS .
A. Debart, A. J. Paterson, J. Bao and P. G. Bruce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4521–4524 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Thapa and T. Ishihara, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7016–7020 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Hummelshoj, J. Blomqvist, S. Datta, T. Vegge, J. Rossmeisl, K. S. Thygesen, A. C. Luntz, K. W. Jacobsen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 071101 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hammer and J. K. Nørskov, Adv. Catal., 2000, 45, 71–129 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Sorescu, K. D. Jordan and P. Avouris, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11227–11232 CrossRef CAS .
G. K. P. Dathar, W. A. Shelton and Y. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 891–895 CrossRef CAS .
J. Greeley, I. E. L. Stephens, A. S. Bondarenko, T. P. Johansson, H. A. Hansen, T. F. Jaramillo, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2009, 1, 552–556 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jonsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
B. D. McCloskey, R. Scheffler, A. Speidel, D. S. Bethune, R. M. Shelby and A. C. Luntz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18038–18041 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Z.-l. Wang, J.-j. Xu, L.-l. Zhang and X.-b. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6948–6950 RSC .

          Y. Liu, R. R. Mitchell, L. Zhong, B. M. Gallant, C. V. Thompson, J. Y. Huang and Y. Shao-Horn,  2012, manuscript in preparation.
M. Radin, F. Tian and D. Siegel, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 7564–7570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mo, S. P. Ong and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 205446 CrossRef .
S. P. Ong, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 081105 CrossRef .
M. D. Radin, J. F. Rodriguez, F. Tian and D. J. Siegel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1093–1103 CrossRef CAS .
P. Albertus, G. Girishkumar, B. McCloskey, R. S. Sanchez-Carrera, B. Kozinsky, J. Christensen and A. C. Luntz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A343–A351 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kang, Y. S. Jung, S.-H. Wei and A. C. Dillon, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 035210 CrossRef .
V. Viswanathan, K. S. Thygesen, J. S. Hummelshoj, J. K. Norskov, G. Girishkumar, B. D. McCloskey and A. C. Luntz, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 214704 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Oh and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 903–910 CrossRef CAS .
J. Read, K. Mutolo, M. Ervin, W. Behl, J. Wolfenstine, A. Driedger and D. Foster, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2003, 150, A1351–A1356 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. Ottakam Thotiyl, S. A. Freunberger, Z. Peng and P. G. Bruce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 135, 494–500 CrossRef .
Y.-C. Lu and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 93–99 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Harding, Y.-C. Lu, Y. Tsukada and Y. Shao-Horn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 10540–10546 RSC .

          W. M. Haynes, Physical Constants of Inorganic Compounds, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics,  2011, pp. 4–72 Search PubMed .
S. Chen, W. Sheng, N. Yabuuchi, P. J. Ferreira, L. F. Allard and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 113, 1109–1125 Search PubMed .
B. Scharifker and G. Hills, Electrochim. Acta, 1983, 28, 879–889 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Armstrong, M. Fleischmann and H. R. Thirsk, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1966, 11, 208–223 CAS .
V. Giordani, S. A. Freunberger, P. G. Bruce, J. M. Tarascon and D. Larcher, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2010, 13, A180–A183 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Oh, R. Black, E. Pomerantseva, J. H. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lim, E. Yilmaz and H. R. Byon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3210–3215 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Crumlin, E. Mutoro, Z. Liu, M. E. Grass, M. D. Biegalski, Y.-L. Lee, D. Morgan, H. M. Christen, H. Bluhm and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6081–6088 CAS .
F. Tao, S. Dag, L.-W. Wang, Z. Liu, D. R. Butcher, H. Bluhm, M. Salmeron and G. A. Somorjai, Science, 2010, 327, 850–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Lu, E. J. Crumlin, G. M. Veith, J. R. Harding, E. Mutoro, L. Baggetto, N. J. Dudney, Z. Liu and Y. Shao-Horn, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 715 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Huang, L. Zhong, C. M. Wang, J. P. Sullivan, W. Xu, L. Q. Zhang, S. X. Mao, N. S. Hudak, X. H. Liu, A. Subramanian, H. Y. Fan, L. A. Qi, A. Kushima and J. Li, Science, 2010, 330, 1515–1520 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Wang, W. Xu, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang, L. V. Saraf, B. W. Arey, D. W. Choi, Z. G. Yang, J. Xiao, S. Thevuthasan and D. R. Baer, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1874–1880 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhong, X. H. Liu, G. F. Wang, S. X. Mao and J. Y. Huang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 248302 CrossRef .
X. H. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Zhong, S. Huan, K. Karki, L. Q. Zhang, Y. Liu, A. Kushima, W. T. Liang, J. W. Wang, J. H. Cho, E. Epstein, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, T. Zhu, J. Li, J. P. Sullivan, J. Cumings, C. S. Wang, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye, S. L. Zhang and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3312–3318 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kichambare, S. Rodrigues and J. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 4, 49–52 Search PubMed .
H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9077–9084 CAS .
H. Kitaura and H. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 889–894 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kumar and J. Kumar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, A611–A616 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Mohamed, N. A. Johari, A. M. M. Ali, M. K. Harun and M. Z. A. Yahya, J. Power Sources, 2008, 183, 351–354 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Liao, Q. Jiang, X. Yang, Y. He and Z. Ma, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2012, 57, 1959–1963 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, R. Li, T. Huang and A. Yu, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 1202–1206 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. J. Hassoun, F. Croce, M. Armand and B. Scrosati, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2999–3002 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Park, Y. B. Kim, J. H. Shim, S. Kang, T. M. Gur and F. B. Prinz, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5366–5370 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed calculations for Fig. 1–3. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23966g‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Broader context
Lithium–O2 batteries have received heightened attention in the last five years owing to an increasing need for high-density energy storage for electric vehicles. Among the available battery chemistries, the Li–O2 system is, in some regards, one of the most promising. This is largely attributed to a significant gravimetric energy enhancement compared to Li-ion, with Li–O2 projected to have at least a factor of two enhancement for a fully packaged battery. However, practical Li–O2 batteries will only be successfully developed once current battery performance challenges are adequately addressed. Critical challenges include low round-trip efficiency resulting from high charging overpotentials, poor cycle life, and low power. These challenges present exciting opportunities for continued fundamental studies that can pave the way for improving electrode performance. Developing deeper mechanistic understanding of oxygen redox reactions in organic electrolytes, morphological and electronic features of reaction products, and improving the chemical stability of electrode and electrolyte would enable more effective rational design of electrodes and Li–O2 batteries to meet high expectations for improved performance.


 	Fig. 1  Gravimetric and volumetric energy of lithium batteries: theoretical vs. commercial single cells. LFP#1: LiFePO4 with cell size 54208; LFP#2: LiFePO4 with cell size 26650. The cell size for LiMn2O4, LiCoO2, and Si–LiMO2 (from Panasonic) is 26700, 18650, and 18650, respectively. The theoretical energy was calculated assuming only the weights of the electrochemically active components; lithium, silicon or graphite with no carbon additive was used for the negative electrode. Detailed calculations and assumptions for theoretical energies can be found in the ESI.† The actual energy was obtained from the manufacturers' technical specifications.9,10	 

 	Fig. 2  Ragone plot comparing gravimetric energy and power of Li-ion (LiCoO2,11 LiFePO4,11 and LiNi0.5Mn0.5O2 (ref. 12)) and Li–O2 positive electrodes13–17 reported to date tested in non-carbonate electrolytes and normalized to the positive active electrode weight only. Li–O2 electrodes include Vulcan Carbon (VC),15 carbon nanofibers (CNF),16 Super P carbon,14 freestanding hierarchically porous carbon (FHPC graphene),17 and pristine Na0.44MnO2 nanowires/Ketjen Black (P-Z-MnO2/KB).13 The Li–O2 values were normalized to the weight of the electrode in the discharged state (C + Li2O2 or C + catalyst + Li2O2, excluding binder) and were calculated based on the reported average discharge voltage and total gravimetric capacity (for energy) or current (power). The upper limit in the gravimetric energy of Li2O2 was calculated assuming a discharge voltage of 2.75 VLi. Detailed calculations can be found in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 3  Estimated gravimetric and volumetric energy density of LiCoO2 and O2 (Li2O2) as the positive electrode with carbon (C6) or Li as the negative electrode. The cell voltages used for C–LiCoO2, C–Li2O2, Li–LiCoO2, and Li–Li2O2 are 3.7 V, 2.45 V, 4.0 V, and 2.75 V, respectively. Neither catalyst, carbon nor electrolyte were included in the calculation for O2 cells. The positive electrode (LiCoO2 or Li2O2) is assumed to be lithiated and an additional two times excess lithium is used as the lithium negative electrode. Detailed calculations and assumptions for theoretical energies can be found in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 4  Major challenges of rechargeable Li–O2 batteries.	 

 	Fig. 5  Reaction scheme of oxygen reduction reaction in nonaqueous media. Adapted from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 6  Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) of ORR/OER in 0.5 M TBAClO4 in DME on GC, polycrystalline Au, Pt and Ru electrodes at 20 mV s−1 (black, red, green, and blue, respectively). CV of ORR/OER in 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME on GC electrodes at 20 mV s−1 (grey, 5× increase in current for comparison). Measurements were made in a three-electrode cell with a Ag/Ag+ reference electrode that was calibrated to be −3.6 VLi with respect to 0.1 M LiClO4. The experimental details of the three-electrode measurements were reported previously.58	 

 	Fig. 7  (Left) Black line: CV measured at a GC electrode in O2-saturated dimethylformamide (DMF) containing 0.1 M TBAClO4 in the presence of 9.6 mM hexacarboxamide cryptand at 10 mV s−1. Red line: simulated CV using the mechanistic steps described on the right. (Right) Proposed reaction mechanism. Potentials with respect to Li/Li+ are added for comparison. The Ag/Ag+ reference redox used equals −3.6 VLi with respect to 0.1 M LiClO4. Adapted from ref. 63.	 

 	Fig. 8  
In situ SERS during ORR and re-oxidation on a Au electrode in O2-saturated 0.1 M LiClO4–CH3CN. Spectra collected at open-circuit-voltage (OCV) over a series of times at a reducing potential of 2.2 VLi were recorded followed by oxidative overpotentials at 3.75 and 4.4 VLi. The peaks are assigned as follows: (1) C–C stretch of CH3CN at 918 cm−1, (2) O–O stretch of LiO2 at 1137 cm−1, (3) O–O stretch of Li2O2 at 808 cm−1, (4) Cl–O stretch of ClO4− at 931 cm−1, and the O–O− stretch at 1108 cm−1 is marked with orange dash line. Note that the Raman shift of Li2O is located at 520 cm−1,71 which is not included in the data. Adapted from ref. 72.	 

 	Fig. 9  CVs of neat EMITFSI along with various salts at 0.025 M concentration on a GC electrode at 100 mV s−1.78	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Specific ORR net current densities, is, on GC, Pd, Pt, Ru and Au in O2-saturated 0.1 M LiClO4 DME at 100 rpm and 20 mV s−1. Initial (b) and full (c) discharge profiles of Pd/C, Pt/C, Ru/C, Au/C and Vulcan carbon (VC) in 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME at 100 mA gC−1 in Li–O2 cells. The average estimated thickness of discharge products was calculated from discharge capacities assuming uniform distribution of Li2O2 on the electrode surfaces. Adapted from ref. 58.	 

 	Fig. 11  Blue solid symbol (Exp.): nonaqueous Li+-ORR potentials at 2 μA cmreal−2 as a function of calculated oxygen adsorption energy, ΔEO (per oxygen atom relative to an atom in the gas phase),86 relative to that of Pt. The oxygen adsorption energy on GC is estimated from the oxygen adsorption energy on graphite;87 orange empty symbol (DFT): Ueq of the first electron-transfer step in the Li+-ORR on the close-packed surfaces of the six metals as a function of the adsorption energy of atomic O relative to that on Pt. Adapted from ref. 88.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Morphology of Li2O2 in CNF electrodes discharged to 2.0 V vs. Li at 46 mA gC−1 (4240 mA h gC−1) and (inset) 100 mA gC−1 (3900 mA h gC−1).16 (b) Li2O2 discs formed in VACNT electrodes upon discharge at 90 mA gC−1 to ∼13400 mA h gC−1.93 The electrolyte in both cases was 0.1 M LiClO4 in DME. (c) Discharge morphology of a Ketjen black electrode in 1 M LiTFSI in DMSO after discharge at 0.05 mA cm−2 to ∼9400 mA h gC−1.92 (d) Discharge morphology of a freestanding hierarchically porous carbon (graphene) electrode after discharge at 0.2 mA cm−2 to 11000 mA h gC−1 in 1 M LiTFSI in DME.17 Adapted from ref. 16, 17, 92 and 93.	 

 	Fig. 13  DFT-calculated Wulff shapes for Li2O2 under (a) equilibrium conditions at 300 K and 1 atm,94 and (b) in the limit of the most oxidizing (oxygen rich, left) and reducing (oxygen poor, right) environments for Li2O2. The scale bar shows surface energies in meV Å−2. Adapted from ref. 94 and 95.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Calculated Li2O2 density of states for stoichiometric Li2O2 (top) and Li2O2 with 1/16 Li vacancies (bottom).85 (b) Li2O2 density of states from a free hole polaron showing contributions from Li (blue) and O (red).96 Adapted from ref. 85 and 96.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) XANES O K-edge FY data of galvanostatically discharged vertically aligned carbon nanotube (VACNT) and Vulcan carbon (VC) electrodes.15,46 (b) Proposed morphology of Li2O2 and Li2CO3 on VACNTs at low (∼1000 mA h gC−1) and high (∼4700 mA h gC−1) capacity. Adapted from ref. 46.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Cell voltage versus discharge capacity for Li–O2 galvanostatic discharge and charge at 200 μA on a 13C-electrode. (b) Evolution rates (m′) for O2, 13CO2, and 12CO2 + 13CO2 during the charge in (a) as measured by quantitative DEMS. (c) Charging schematic showing the removal of Li2O2 and Li2CO3 and the influence on the charging voltage. Adapted from ref. 26.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) TEM images of VACNT electrodes discharged and charged to the indicated cycle number. The aggregated particles in the 6th to 11th cycles were found by SAED to consist of Li2CO3. Inset scale bars = 200 nm. Adapted from ref. 46. (b) Schematic showing the evolution of the charging voltage with cycling of VACNT electrodes in DME-based electrolyte. The first discharge results predominantly in formation of Li2O2 and small amounts of Li2CO3 at the interface of Li2O2 and VACNTs, and the first charge is governed largely by oxidation of Li2O2 at E < 4.0 VLi. Upon higher cycles, increasingly agglomerated Li2CO3 in the electrode contributes to an increased charge capacity with charging voltages >4.0 VLi. Adapted from ref. 46.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Charge potentials (at the first 0.05 μA h cmtrue−2 = 0.18 nm (∼0.2 nm) of Li2O2 in thickness) of select studies26,46,91,104 as a function of total TSAC (μA h cmtrue−2) formed at the end of discharge. The grey dashed lines denote the estimated Li2O2 thickness estimated from the total TSAC assuming a uniform distribution of Li2O2. The volumetric capacity of Li2O2 is 2699 mA h cm−3 (molecular weight of Li2O2 = 45.88 g mol−1, density of Li2O2 = 2.31 g cm−3).106 The number in the parentheses denotes the TSAR during charging in μA cmtrue−2. (b) Charge potentials (at the first 30% of charge capacity) of select studies. The number in the parentheses denotes the TSAC in μA h cmtrue−2. For blue symbols, the specific surface area of Li2O2 is estimated to be 7.53 m2 gLi2O2−1 assuming spherical particles with ∼345 nm in diameter,105 and the Li2O2 density of 2.31 g cm−3106 using formula 6(1000/(densityLi2O2 × diameterLi2O2).107	 

 	Fig. 19  The proposed reaction mechanism of Li–O2 recharge. The OER associated with the initial recharge (sloping and catalyst-insensitive) is attributed to a de-intercalation process via a solid-solution route from the outer part of Li2O2 to form LiO2-like species on the surface (Li2O2 → LiO2 + Li+ + e−), where LiO2-like species disproportionate to evolve O2 (LiO2 + LiO2 → Li2O2 + O2), yielding an overall 2e−/O2 OER process (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + O2 + 2e−).104 The OER process at the flat potential plateau is attributed to the oxidation of bulk Li2O2 particles to form Li+ ions and O2 (Li2O2 → 2Li+ + 2e− + O2) via a two-phase transition.104 Lastly, a rising charge plateau after stage II has been assigned to the decomposition of carbonate-type byproducts and electrolyte.26,46	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Potential steps (blue) and corresponding current response (red) during PITT measurements (10 mV steps, 1.3 mA gC−1 current cut-off or 50 hours durations) on charging of an electrode that was discharged to 200 mA h gC−1 at 100 mA gC−1 in 1.0 M LiClO4 in TEGDME. Adapted from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 21  Net mass-normalized current vs. time for potentiostatic charging of VC + Li2O2 electrodes, on a log–log scale. Solid lines are measured data. Dashed lines are fitted using a least squares best fit to i = a/(t + b) + c(t − to)3.105	 

 	Fig. 22  Activity vs. potential for VC, Au/C, Pt/C, and Ru/C electrodes. Activity is calculated from the average current measured during the first 20% of discharge.105	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Detailed calculations for Fig. 1–3. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ee23966g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
