Deeply understanding the Zn anode behaviour and corresponding improvement strategies in different aqueous Zn-based batteries  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE02162H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE02162H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 3917-3949Deeply understanding the Zn anode behaviour and corresponding improvement strategies in different aqueous Zn-based batteries

        
          
            Junnan 
            Hao†
a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaolong 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohui 
            Zeng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Dan 
            Li
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jianfeng 
            Mao
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zaiping 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *a
aInstitute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, Australian Institute for Innovative Materials, School of Mechanical, Materials, Mechatronic, and Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering & Information Sciences, University of Wollongong, Wollongong, NSW 2500, Australia. E-mail: jmao@uow.edu.au; zguo@uow.edu.au
bMIIT Key Laboratory of Critical Materials Technology for New Energy Conversion and Storage, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Harbin Institute of Technology, Harbin 150001, P. R. China
cCollege of Chemistry, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
Received 
      8th July 2020
    , Accepted 4th September 2020First published on 5th September 2020AbstractOwing to the high capacity of the metallic Zn anode and intrinsically safe aqueous electrolyte, aqueous Zn-based batteries are advanced energy storage technology alternatives beyond lithium-ion batteries, providing a cost benefit, high safety, and competitive energy density. There has been a new wave of research interest across the family of Zn batteries, but fundamental understanding of the Zn electrode and its performance improvement still remain inconclusive. Based on the pH value of the electrolyte, Zn-based batteries can be divided into two types, with one adopting alkaline electrolyte and the other mild (including slightly acidic) electrolyte. As the behavior of the Zn electrode in these two distinctive systems is different, their requirements to yield excellent performance are different. In this Review, we present a comprehensive overview of the Zn electrode and its fundamentals in both systems. First, the differences and similarities of the Zn electrode in both systems are outlined. Specific attention is paid to the working principles and technical challenges. Then, Zn electrode issues and recently proposed strategies for each system are summarized and compared. Finally, a perspective on future research directions towards practical applications of aqueous Zn batteries is included.
Junnan Hao
Junnan Hao received his master's degree in 2016 from South China Normal University, China. He has just received his PhD degree at the University of Wollongong, Australia, and now he works as a casual research fellow in Prof. Zaiping Guo's group. His research interests are focused on energy storage and conversion, including aqueous Zn-ion batteries, Li-ion batteries, dual ion batteries, and flexible energy storage devices.
Xiaolong Li
Xiaolong Li received his master's degree in 2016 from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), China, and then he pursued his PhD at HIT. Currently, he is an exchange student at the University of Wollongong, Australia. His research interests are focused on energy storage and conversion, including supercapacitors, and aqueous rechargeable batteries.
Xiaohui Zeng
Xiaohui Zeng received her master's degree in 2017 from Central South University, China. She currently is a second-year PhD student in Prof. Zaiping Guo's research group at the University of Wollongong, Australia. Her research interests are in the field of energy storage and conversion, focusing on Li-ion batteries and aqueous rechargeable Zn-ion batteries.
Jianfeng Mao
Jianfeng Mao received his PhD in materials science from the University of Wollongong, Australia, in 2012. After working at the Max-Planck-Institute für Kohlenforschung, University of Glasgow and University of Maryland, he moved back to the University of Wollongong in 2015. His research interests are in inorganic materials for rechargeable batteries, catalysis, and hydrogen storage.
Zaiping Guo
Zaiping Guo received her PhD in materials engineering from the University of Wollongong in December 2003. After her Australian Postdoctoral (APD) Fellowship at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, she joined the Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences, University of Wollongong, as a lecturer in 2008. She was promoted to professor in 2012, senior professor in 2013, and then to distinguished professor in 2018. Her current research interests are focused on the design and application of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion, including rechargeable batteries, hydrogen storage, and fuel cells.

Broader context
As alternatives to Li-ion batteries in large-scale application, aqueous Zn-based batteries have sparked tremendous interest due to their cost effectiveness, intrinsic safety, environmental friendliness, and facile manufacturing. Nevertheless, the metallic Zn anode still suffers from poor coulombic efficiency in both mild and alkaline electrolytes, which largely prevents its practical development. The Zn anode has been fully studied in alkaline electrolyte for a long time, while its study in mild media is still in its infancy. Notably, the Zn electrode in both types of electrolyte inherently faces distinct working conditions, reaction mechanisms, and redox potentials, so that it suffers from different problems and requires different solutions in the two media, but clarity on the fundamental aspects of the Zn anode in both media is yet to be achieved. In this Review, we have thoroughly analyzed the differences and similarities of the Zn anode in alkaline and mild media, and compared the underlying mechanisms of the corresponding strategies to address problematic Zn issues in both systems. Perspectives on studies of Zn corrosion, the depth of discharge, the capacity ratio of the anode and cathode, lean electrolytes, etc. have also been proposed to promote the practical application of Zn-ion batteries in the near future.

1. Introduction
1.1 Advantage of aqueous electrolyte
The intensive use of traditional resources, such as oil and coal, has seriously polluted our environment and increased the carbon dioxide gas levels in the atmosphere.1–3 Our ever-increasing environmental concerns and demands to reduce greenhouse gas emissions have triggered the development and use of renewable energy resources such as solar and wind.4 These renewable energy resources are only intermittently available, however.5,6 Thus, rechargeable batteries have been regarded as the preferred energy storage solution for next-generation sustainable energy suppliers by storing the energy harnessed from these intermittent energy sources.7–9
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), as the most widely studied rechargeable batteries, have undoubtedly dominated the energy storage market for decades due to their high energy density, long cycling stability, and high energy efficiency.10 Nevertheless, some intrinsic characteristics render the current LIB technology less feasible for large-scale energy storage, in which the requirements of safety, cost, and environmental friendliness are relatively more critical than that of energy density.11,12 First, although the flammable organic electrolyte adopted in commercial LIBs offers an inherently high voltage window and energy density,13 it brings huge potential safety hazards, since it easily catches fires or even explodes, which has been documented in smart phone and electric vehicles.14,15 Furthermore, LIBs suffer from their relatively high economic cost.16,17 Apart from the high cost of the raw transition metal materials, organic solvents, and lithium salts, the battery assembly is also complicated and tedious, which needs to be conducted under extremely strict environmental conditions. This is because the organic electrolyte is highly sensitive to oxygen (O2) and moisture during the manufacturing processes, which makes the assembly technology quite costly. In addition, the limited ionic conductivity of organic electrolytes also brings challenges for improving the rate capability and power density of LIBs. Last but not least, the large number of worn-out LIBs with organic electrolyte and heavy metal ions are giving rise to another big environmental concern.18 Therefore, it is now generally accepted that designing water-based battery systems with low cost and high safety is in great demand to address many of these concerns, especially for grid-scale energy storage.19
Aqueous rechargeable batteries have been regarded as promising alternatives to conventional LIBs due to their underlying advantage of suitability for water-based electrolytes.20 Compared to flammable organic solvents, water solvent is a flame retardant, which enables water-based batteries to effectively avoid the dangers of catching fire or explosion.21–23 In addition, water and water-soluble electrolyte salts are relatively cost-efficient, so that they help to reduce the overall cost of aqueous batteries.24 Furthermore, instead of the strict manufacturing conditions, aqueous batteries can be assembled in air, benefiting from the insensitivity of the water-based electrolyte. Another significant advantage of water-based electrolytes is their ionic conductivity (∼0.1 S cm−1), which is much higher than that of organic electrolytes (∼1–10 mS cm−1), resulting in outstanding rate capability and high power density.25 Furthermore, water, as an ideal electrolyte solvent, is totally non-toxic and environmentally benign, which brings huge superiority in terms of the ability to recycle discarded aqueous batteries.26
1.2 Why choose a Zn anode?
To date, a variety of aqueous rechargeable batteries based on mono-valent charge carriers (e.g. Li+, Na+, and K+) and multivalent cations (e.g. Mg2+, Ca2+, Zn2+, and Al3+) have been widely reported because of their abundant resources, environmental friendliness, intrinsic safety, and even their comparable capacities to those of organic rechargeable batteries.26–28 Among the anode candidates, metallic Zn offers good tolerance to O2 and a humid atmosphere compared to other active metals.29 It thus can be directly adopted as a stable anode due to its intrinsic features, which significantly simplifies the battery configuration and lowers the processing and assembly costs.21,30–35 Apart from Zn metal, however, other metals cannot directly serve as anodes in aqueous electrolytes, since their electrochemical redox voltages are beyond the stable potential window of water solvent.36–38 Meanwhile, metallic Zn shows a low redox potential and high over-potential for hydrogen (H2) evolution, which enables the wide working voltage window of Zn batteries (∼1.8 V).39 Furthermore, its theoretical capacity (gravimetric capacity of 820 mA h g−1 and volumetric capacity of 5855 mA h cm−3) is also much higher than those of the intercalation type anode materials that could be used in aqueous electrolyte.40,41
Current aqueous Zn-based batteries could be classified into two major categories based on their electrolytes (Fig. 1). One is the class of Zn-based batteries using alkaline electrolyte (e.g., KOH solution), typically Zn–air, Zn–Ag, and Zn–Ni batteries.42–45 In recent decades, rechargeable Zn–air batteries have undergone rapid development due to their relatively high specific energy (1218 W h kg−1) and volumetric energy density (6136 W h L−1), which is even comparable to that of Li–air batteries.46,47 The other category is the class of Zn-ion batteries (ZIBs) using mild electrolytes (including slightly acidic electrolytes, e.g., ZnSO4 solution), such as Zn–MnO2 and Zn–V2O5 batteries.48,49 This kind of battery could be traced back to as early as 1986, when Yamamoto et al. first developed the Zn/ZnSO4/MnO2 system by replacing the KOH electrolyte with a ZnSO4 electrolyte.50 In the last five years, ZIBs with mild electrolyte have sparked tremendous research interest again. Intensive efforts have also been spent on the exploration of high-performance cathode candidates and optimization of Zn metal anodes as well as electrolyte components, which have laid the foundation for the practical development of ZIBs.51
 Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the development of Zn metal electrodes used in various alkaline and mild batteries.30–34,49,50 
At present, the state-of-the-art aqueous Zn-based batteries are still far from satisfactory, no matter whether they contain an alkaline or a mild electrolyte.52,53 One important reason is that the Zn anode still suffers from low coulombic efficiency (CE) due to its poor irreversibility in aqueous electrolyte, which is greatly hampering the further development of Zn-based batteries.54 Recently, several good review papers have been published that were focused on the Zn electrode in aqueous electrolyte; however, most of them failed to distinguish the differences in Zn behavior in alkaline and mild media.55–59 Notably, the Zn electrode inherently faces distinct reaction mechanisms, conditions, and redox potentials in both types of electrolyte. It also faces different challenges, such as shape change, passivation, dendrite growth, and H2 evolution in alkaline electrolyte, while there are different side reactions in mild electrolyte.60,61 Indeed, it also shares some similarities in both electrolytes, including dendrite growth, electrode corrosion, and H2 evolution. In this case, different strategies should be proposed to address the Zn issues in alkaline and mild electrolytes, respectively. Therefore, to deeply compare the differences and similarities of Zn electrodes in both electrolytes and separately summarize the Zn electrode issues, as well as the corresponding strategies for solving them in alkaline and mild aqueous electrolytes, is highly desirable. In this review, the differences and similarities in the working mechanisms, redox potentials, electrode problems, and electrode forms of the Zn anode in both alkaline and mild media are thoroughly discussed. Meanwhile, various corresponding strategies to address the Zn issues in both systems are also summarized, which provides a comprehensive reference and perspective for researchers to better understand this research field. Finally, the future direction of Zn anode development in practical application is proposed. We also hope that this review will inspire research interest in Zn electrodes and boost the practical application of aqueous Zn-based batteries in grid energy storage in the near future.
2. Differences and similarities of Zn electrodes in both systems
2.1 Differences
Due to the different working environments in alkaline and mild systems, the Zn electrode experiences different reaction mechanisms. In alkaline systems, the Zn electrode is oxidized into zincate ions (Zn(OH)42−) first and then converted into the ZnO product during discharge, and vice versa during the next charging process (Fig. 2a).62 Only Zn plating and stripping are conducted in mild systems, however, without ZnO or any insoluble product formation during the charging and discharging processes (Fig. 2b).63 Due to the different reaction mechanisms, the redox potentials of the Zn anode in both systems are different, which greatly affects the output voltage and energy density of both battery systems. It also leads to different issues for the Zn electrodes in the two types of electrolyte. The differences in the two systems have been summarized in Fig. 2c and comprehensively discussed in the following sections.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the two typical alkaline and mild Zn-based battery configurations as well as their differences. (a) A typical alkaline Zn–air battery, in which the metallic Zn is converted into Zn(OH)42−, and then ZnO during discharging. (b) A typical mild ZIB, where the metallic Zn is converted into Zn2+ during discharging. (c) The differences between the alkaline and mild battery systems. The different working environments of both systems not only lead to different reaction mechanisms and redox potentials for the Zn electrode, but also cause different Zn electrode issues. 

2.1.1 Working environment. 
For alkaline Zn systems, typical rechargeable Zn–air batteries mainly consist of a Zn anode, an alkaline electrolyte, a separator, and an air electrode, in which the commonly used electrolytes are alkaline solutions containing one or more of the LiOH, NaOH, and KOH compounds.64 Among them, KOH solution has been the most commonly used alkaline electrolyte, resulting from its fast electrochemical kinetics, the high solubility of Zn salts, and the high ionic conductivity of K+ (73.50 Ω−1 cm2 equiv.−1), which is higher than those of Li+ (38.7 Ω−1 cm2 equiv.−1) and Na+ (50.11 Ω−1 cm2 equiv.−1).65 From the previous reports, the general concentration of KOH electrolyte is in the range of 26% to 30%, which corresponds to the maximum ionic conductivity at room temperature.66
For mild Zn systems, a typical mild ZIB consists of a cathode for hosting Zn ions (or other ions), a Zn metal anode, a mild electrolyte, and a cathode, which is quite similar to the structure of a LIB.67,68 For ZIBs, most of the electrolytes contain one or more soluble Zn salts, such as ZnCl2, Zn(NO3)2, Zn(CH3COO)2, ZnSO4, zinc trifluoromethanesulfonate (Zn(CF3SO3)2), and zinc di[bis(fluoromethylsulfonyl)imide] (Zn(TFSI)2).55 Among them, the mild electrolytes containing ZnCl2 or Zn(NO3)2 salt cause poor CE of the battery due to the instability of Cl− and NO3−. In contrast, electrolytes containing ZnSO4 or Zn(CF3SO3)2 salt exhibit a wide electrochemical window and good reversibility of the Zn electrode, so that they have been widely used in aqueous ZIBs.69


2.1.2 Reaction mechanism. 
During battery discharge, the metallic Zn anode in alkaline Zn–air batteries loses electrons and reacts with OH− from the electrolyte by yielding the soluble Zn(OH)42−. These Zn(OH)42− ions undergo spontaneous decomposition to form an insoluble ZnO product when they become supersaturated in alkaline electrolyte.70 These reaction pathways could be reversed during the next charging process with the reduction of Zn(OH)42− ions back to metallic Zn. Overall, the specific electrochemical reactions of the Zn electrode that occur in alkaline electrolyte can be expressed as follows:
(1) Discharge process Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−(1) Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + 2OH− + H2O(2)
(2) Charge process ZnO + 2OH− + H2O → Zn(OH)42−(3) Zn(OH)42− + 2e− → Zn + 4OH−(4)In mild aqueous systems, the Zn metal electrode is in contact with a nearly neutral electrolyte that contains Zn2+ ions as the charge carrier. Unlike alkaline systems, there is no insoluble ZnO formed during discharge. Only Zn2+ ions are reversibly stripped from/plated on the surface of the Zn metal electrode during battery operation, which is similar to the working mechanism of the Li metal electrode in LIBs. Therefore, the reactions of the Zn electrode in mild aqueous systems can be formulated as follows:
(1) Discharge process Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−(5)
(2) Charge process Zn2+ + 2e− → Zn(6)Obviously, Zn electrodes in alkaline and mild electrolytes have different reaction mechanisms, which, in turn, leads to different reaction potentials and electrode issues during battery operation.71 For example, in alkaline media, the insulating ZnO product would be generated during the discharging process and cover the surface of the Zn electrode to form an insulating layer, which blocks the surface of the Zn electrode and affects its further reaction. The different reaction of the Zn electrode in mild media, however, helps to avoid the insulating ZnO product. Nevertheless, the Zn electrode is thermodynamically active in mild electrolyte, which triggers serious side reactions with the electrolyte, leading to limited CE and cycle life of the Zn electrode. Thus, to improve the Zn electrode performance in different systems, researchers need to determine the differences in the Zn electrode issues in alkaline and mild electrolytes before designing the solutions.


2.1.3 Redox potential. 
As discussed above, the Zn electrode experiences different electrode reactions in alkaline and mild systems. The Zn/ZnO standard reduction potential is −1.22 V vs. standard hydrogen electrode (SHE) in alkaline electrolyte.72,73 Whereas, the standard reduction potential of Zn/Zn2+ is −0.76 V vs. SHE in mild electrolyte, which is higher (less negative) than that of the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte, indicating that alkaline Zn-based batteries are more likely to deliver a high output voltage.74 This high output voltage in alkaline batteries has also been confirmed by recent reports.54,75 It is well known that a traditional Zn–air battery with alkaline electrolyte displays a high average discharge voltage of ∼1.3 V (theoretical voltage of ∼1.66 V).76 When the alkaline electrolyte in this working system was replaced by a mild electrolyte consisting of 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 M lithium bis(fluoromethanesulfonyl)imide (LiTFSI), the output voltage was reduced to ∼0.9 V even under a small current density of 50 mA g−1.54 Therefore, the different electrode reactions of the Zn electrode in both electrolytes display different working potentials, which further affects the output voltage as well as the energy density of the battery.
Very recently, an electrolyte-decoupling strategy has been proposed to maximize the full potential of the aqueous Zn–MnO2 battery by providing alkaline and acidic chambers for the Zn anode and the MnO2 cathode, respectively, separated by a neutral chamber, as shown in Fig. 3a.75 In this decoupled battery MnO2 was applied as the active material for the cathode due to its ultrahigh specific capacity of 616 mA h g−1 and its high redox potential of 1.22 V vs. SHE of the MnO2 ↔ Mn2+ dissolution/deposition reaction in acid solution. Meanwhile, Zn metal was directly employed as the anode owing to its low potential (−1.22 V vs. SHE in alkaline electrolyte) and large specific capacity. Based on the Nernst equation, this low-cost decoupled Zn–MnO2 chemistry could display a high voltage of 2.44 V (Fig. 3b),77 which is approximately 0.5 V higher than the Zn–MnO2 battery in slightly acidic electrolyte (with MnO2 ↔ Mn2+ chemistry) due to the lower Zn redox potential in alkaline electrolyte.78 Consequently, a high theoretical energy density of 1503 W h kg−1 (calculated based on the weight of MnO2) was achieved for the decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery. This value is also the highest one among all the mild ZIBs reported so far (Fig. 3c).77
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery and the chemical reactions of the MnO2 cathode in acidic electrolyte and the Zn anode in alkaline electrolyte. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2020, Macmillan Publishers.) (b) Voltage profiles and the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve (inset) of the decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery. (c) Comparison of the specific capacities and average discharge voltages of the reported aqueous ZIBs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.) 


2.1.4 Zn electrode issues. 
Although Zn metal is considered as the most promising anode for aqueous batteries owing to its intrinsic safety, low toxicity, and high theoretical capacity, it persistently suffers from low CE due to its severe irreversibility in both alkaline and mild electrolytes. In general, five main problematic issues for the Zn electrode exist in alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 4a).79–81 First, Zn electrode corrosion. The Zn electrode is thermodynamically unstable in strong alkaline media because it gradually generates Zn(OH)42− or ZnO due to the corrosion reaction, seriously affecting the shelf life of the battery. Second, Zn electrode passivation. Once a thick insulating ZnO film is formed on the Zn electrode, the ion/ionic transition at the electrode/electrolyte interphase would be terminated, which not only reduces the utilization of the Zn electrode but also degrades the rechargeability of the battery. Third, the shape change of the Zn electrode. During discharge, metallic Zn is reduced to Zn(OH)42−, which diffuses into the electrolyte and is then deposited as ZnO at a different location on the Zn electrode. Over long-term cycling, the redistribution of Zn material leads to the densification of the electrode in specific regions and causes the loss of reversible capacity. Fourth, Zn dendrite growth. Dendrites are defined as sharp, needle-like metallic protrusions, which are well known to form under certain conditions. During cycling, Zn dendrites may fracture and disconnect from the electrode by forming “dead” Zn, resulting in capacity losses. More critically, they could puncture the separator and make contact with the cathode, leading to a battery short circuit. Fifth, H2 evolution. In a strong alkaline system (pH ∼ 14), the standard reduction potential of Zn/ZnO (−1.22 V vs. SHE) is below that of the H2 evolution reaction (−0.83 V vs. SHE, EH2 = 0.059 × pH). Therefore, the H2 evolution reaction is a thermodynamically favored competing reaction during battery cycling, influencing the CE and cycling stability of the battery. The underlying reasons and factors affecting these five issues in alkaline media are thoroughly discussed in the following section (3. Issues for the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte).
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of Zn electrode issues. (a) In an alkaline system (KOH electrolyte), the issues include corrosion, passivation, shape change, dendrite growth, and H2 evolution. (b) In a mild system, the issues include dendrites, H2 evolution, and electrode corrosion. The inset shows the layered Zn4(OH)6SO4·xH2O by-product in ZnSO4 electrolyte. 
Compared to alkaline systems, some issues such as Zn passivation and shape change could be avoided in mild electrolyte due to the different Zn electrode reaction mechanisms. Although the reversibility of the Zn electrode could be enhanced in near neutral electrolytes to some extent, the plating/stripping CE is still unsatisfactory due to Zn dendrites and side reactions (including H2 evolution and Zn corrosion), as shown in Fig. 4b.58,61 It is believed that the formation of Zn dendrites is mainly due to the uneven Zn2+ distribution on metallic Zn foil. The protrusions on the Zn electrode surface act as charge centres in an electric field, supporting the formation of nuclei and further dendrite growth. Although the H2 evolution phenomenon in mild electrolyte could be alleviated thanks to the high standard reduction potential of Zn/Zn2+ (−0.76 V vs. SHE) and the high H2 evolution over-potential of Zn metal, it still can be observed during battery rest and battery operation, which is different from the H2 evolution in alkaline systems (mainly during battery cycling). Moreover, the corrosion of the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte is also different from that in alkaline electrolyte. It can continuously consume water and irreversibly produce H2 gas as well as insoluble by-products (e.g., Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O in ZnSO4 electrolyte) during cycling, leading to poor CE, low reversible capacity, and limited cycle life. These detailed differences of H2 evolution and Zn corrosion in both mild and alkaline media are thoroughly analysed in the following section (5. Issues for the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte).


2.1.5 Zn electrode forms. 
One should keep in mind that the selection of the proper components and forms of the Zn electrode is critical for achieving high reversibility and long lifespan of aqueous rechargeable Zn-based batteries. To date, various forms of Zn electrode have been studied in alkaline systems, including Zn foil, Zn powder (including ZnO powder), and three-dimensional (3D) Zn/ZnO porous architectures.82 From previous reports, direct use of Zn foil or Zn plates in alkaline media is still a challenge, because they have a low surface area, which easily leads to poor performance due to Zn passivation and dendrite growth.83–85 In order to increase the surface area of the Zn electrode, some strategies have been adopted to optimize the Zn electrode to further enhance the cycling stability of batteries.86 Among the solutions, employing nano- and micro-structured Zn/ZnO powder is effective, which is also preferable for achieving a technology with an industrial application.
To date, several types of Zn powder morphology in alkaline systems have been reported, including atomized, flake, prismatic, ribbon, rod, spongy, plate, acicular, etc.87 Nevertheless, only employing metallic Zn powder as an electrode in alkaline systems is still far from satisfactory, since advanced rechargeable Zn–air technology may require the incorporation of large quantities of ZnO powder. Introducing some ZnO into the Zn electrode provides adequate reserves of discharge product because it could suppress the dissolved Zn active material in alkaline electrolyte, facilitating enhanced reversibility of the Zn electrode.85,88 Furthermore, ZnO also helps to alleviate other critical issues in secondary Zn–air technology, such as controlling the Zn electrode volume expansion during discharge/charge cycles. When a secondary Zn–air battery initially has only metallic Zn powder as the anode, the discharge product ZnO would display ∼1.6 times volume expansion since ZnO has a lower volume density than that of metallic Zn (9.15 cm3 mol−1 for Zn vs. 14.5 cm3 mol−1 for ZnO). The initial addition of ZnO to the Zn electrode can accommodate some of this expected volume change. The optimized ratio of Zn to ZnO in the electrode was found to be in the range of 1.5 to 2.0.89
On the other hand, designing 3D porous Zn architectures is another effective strategy to enhance the battery performance because a Zn electrode with a 3D porous structure provides a high discharge capacity due to its high effective surface area.90,91 Specifically, the design of a porous and periodic architecture allows an inner core of electron-conductive metallic Zn to undergo deep levels of discharge. Moreover, benefiting from its high specific surface area, the 3D porous Zn electrode reduces the current density of the anodic material, inhibiting the formation of Zn dendrites. Therefore, the battery could be cycled hundreds to thousands of times without obvious dendrite growth.
In contrast, Zn foil is the most commonly used Zn electrode form in mild systems, as the direct application of commercial Zn foil in ZIBs helps to simplify the manufacturing process and reduce the production cost.92,93 Nevertheless, for some special purposes, other forms, such as Zn powder and Zn deposited on carbon cloth, have been employed as Zn electrodes in mild systems.94,95 For instance, deposited Zn on carbon cloth has been commonly used in gel batteries for achieving the advantage of high flexibility. This is because the carbon cloth substrate features superior flexibility compared to metallic Zn foil, which gives these specially designed batteries a unique style niche. Remarkably, only metallic Zn could be adopted as the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte due to the Zn2+ plating/stripping working mechanism, and thus no form of ZnO can be used, which is different from alkaline systems.

2.2 Similarities
Indeed, the Zn electrode in both alkaline and mild systems also shares some similarities. Apart from the aforementioned Zn electrode forms (Zn foil and Zn powder), the Zn metal electrode is thermodynamically active in both alkaline and mild electrolytes, especially when the purity of the Zn electrode is not high.96 In this case, the Zn electrode would incur a self-corrosion reaction by forming countless microscale primary batteries once it makes contact with the electrolyte. In the single Zn electrode, metallic Zn functions as the anode, and the impurities (mainly carbon) work as the cathode, which induces the rapid electrochemical corrosion of the Zn electrode in both alkaline and mild electrolytes. Zn electrode corrosion occurring during battery rest continually consumes the active material and electrolyte, which severely restricts the industrial application of aqueous Zn-based batteries. Therefore, eliminating Zn electrode corrosion is of great importance to achieve the goal of actual application of Zn-based batteries within both alkaline and mild electrolytes. Moreover, the H2 evolution reaction is another common issue that limits the Zn electrode reversibility in both electrolyte systems, since it is a competitive reaction with Zn deposition (ZnO reduction in alkaline electrolyte and Zn2+ plating in mild electrolyte) during battery charging. The H2 evolution not only fades the battery performance by inevitably consuming the electrolyte, but also causes the sealed battery to swell by increasing the internal pressure. In addition, Zn dendrite formation and growth can be found in both electrolyte media. Although Zn dendrite growth in aqueous batteries does not lead to the same hazardous situations as in organic LIBs or sodium-ion batteries, such as fire or even explosion, it has a serious impact on the CE and further ruins the electrochemical performance of the battery. Studies on the mechanism of Zn dendrite formation and strategies to inhibit the dendrite growth have been conducted for a long time in alkaline electrolyte, and rich experience has been accumulated, which also could provide guidance for study of dendrites in mild electrolyte.
3. Issues for the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte
The Zn electrode has been used and studied in alkaline electrolyte for a long time. Different issues for the Zn electrode have been found to seriously limit the development of high-performance alkaline Zn-based batteries. According to previous studies, the Zn electrode issues in alkaline electrolyte can be classified into five types, namely Zn electrode corrosion, passivation, shape change, dendrite growth, and H2 evolution, as illustrated in Fig. 4a. Each of them has been thoroughly analysed as follows.
3.1 Zn electrode corrosion
Currently, the real energy density of the reported alkaline Zn–air batteries is only approximately 250 W h kg−1, which is far below the theoretical value (1086 W h kg−1).97,98 Self-corrosion of the Zn electrode caused by its high solubility in strong alkaline media (pH ∼ 14) is one of the important reasons for the difference between the actual and theoretical energy density. Zn corrosion in alkaline electrolyte leads to the formation of saturated or supersaturated Zn(OH)42− solution, which not only causes gradual loss of active material but also triggers a shape change of the Zn electrode and Zn dendrite growth.99 Different Zn corrosion mechanisms as well as their factors have been studied.100–104 To date, the most accepted mechanism of Zn dissolution in alkaline electrolyte involves two steps. The first step is the oxidation of metallic Zn to Zn(OH)42− (reaction (7)). The other one is the precipitation of ZnO on the Zn surface once the dissolved Zn(OH)42− saturates the solution (reaction (8)). Thus, the overall Zn corrosion should be expressed as follows (reaction (9)). To the best of our knowledge, the H2 evolution reaction is unlikely to occur during the Zn corrosion process, as the concentration of H+ ions near the Zn electrode is very low (∼10−14 mol L−1). In this case, the O2 absorption reaction (corrosion) is more likely to occur in alkaline electrolyte, especially in the open Zn–air battery system. Zn − 2e− + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42 −(7) Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−(8) Zn − 2e− + 4OH− → ZnO + H2O(9)Zn corrosion in alkaline electrolyte has also been regarded as Zn electrode dissolution, as the metallic Zn is oxidized by generating Zn(OH)42− or ZnO by-products with the reduction of the active material.66 Similarly, Zn corrosion in mild electrolyte would inevitably occur due to its thermodynamic instability in such electrolytes. Unlike the by-products Zn(OH)42− or ZnO in alkaline media, the precipitates during Zn corrosion in mild electrolyte are mainly formed as a result of zincates in the electrolyte, such as the Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O by-product in ZnSO4 electrolyte.105 In a sealed system with mild electrolyte, Zn corrosion is probably accompanied by the H2 evolution reaction due to the high concentration of H+ and limited O2 content, which also differs from the Zn corrosion in an open Zn–air system.
3.2 Zn passivation
Passivation of the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte, which leads to a low utilization rate of Zn, is one of the main challenges for the development of high-performance rechargeable Zn–air batteries.106 Zn passivation is the formation of a thick insulating ZnO layer on its surface, which inactivates the metallic Zn surface by blocking the migration of electrons/ions at the interphase.107 Concretely, when a Zn electrode is discharged and the Zn(OH)42− discharge product has reached its solubility limit, the ZnO product is precipitated and generates a dense film that covers the Zn electrode surface. This passivating ZnO film serves as a diffusion barrier against the electrons and OH− ions, with the result that the discharge capacity and power capability of the Zn anode are seriously decreased.
Over the years, several investigations have been conducted to analyze the properties of the passive film and the passivation mechanism in alkaline electrolyte.106,108 According to Powers and Breiter,100 there are two different types of layers generated on the surface of the Zn electrode: A loose and porous layer (the so-called type I layer) forms first on the electrode surface in the absence of convection. When the conditions for supersaturation are removed, a compact film (denoted as type II) appears to form directly on the surface of the Zn electrode rather than by precipitation. Interestingly, the formation of a type I film could be effectively avoided in flowing electrolyte, but not that of a type II film. With the help of optical microscopy, Marina Bockelmann et al.109 observed the appearance of both kinds of passive films (type II and type II) in situ on a Zn electrode (Fig. 5). After 40 min of discharge at a current density of 70 mA cm−2, the type I passive film becomes visible above the Zn surface. With further discharging, the rupture of the type I passive film can be seen.
 Fig. 5  
In situ microscopic observation of Zn electrode passivation under a current density of 70 mA cm−2. After 40 min, a loose and porous type I layer was generated on the surface. After 100 min, rupturing of this dark passive layer can be recognized. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2018, Electrochemical Society, Inc.) 
Overall, the passivation of the Zn electrode in alkaline systems that is caused by the insulating ZnO discharge product is an important reason for the fast capacity degradation and battery failure. This negative phenomenon would not exist in mild systems, however, due to the different Zn plating/stripping mechanism without ZnO formation. In addition, different strategies have been proposed to diminish the effects of passivation in alkaline media, which are discussed in Section 4 (4. Strategies in alkaline electrolyte).
3.3 Shape change
Shape change in alkaline systems refers to the reduction of the electrochemically active surface area of the Zn electrode during battery operation.110 To be specific, the active material moves away from the edges of the Zn electrode and piles up towards the plate bottom and centre during cycling. The transport of Zn material severely reduces the reversible capacity and shortens the battery's lifespan. Usually, densification and loss of electrode porosity, as well as passivation of the Zn electrode, are often observed where the electrode has undergone such a shape change.
Studies on the shape change of the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte have been conducted for decades, and the results revealed that the battery and electrode geometry, type of separator, additives, and battery electrolyte are probably the most important factors that influence the extent and rate of shape change.111 Investigations of the shape change could only be established in an actual battery configuration, and hence the design of the battery is of crucial importance. Two classical models for the shape change of the Zn electrode have been proposed: the concentration-cell model and the membrane-pumping model.112 As the shape change of the Zn electrode proceeds dynamically during cycling, it causes electrode composition changes.113 To visually investigate the change in the Zn electrode morphology during cycling, synchrotron X–ray diffraction (XRD) mapping analysis of the Zn/ZnO electrode has been conducted.114 During cycling, the dissolved Zn(OH)42− species would diffuse from the edge to the ZnO hill (the center of the electrode) due to their concentration gradient, and thus the transportation of dissolved Zn(OH)42− species plays an important role in the shape change of the Zn electrode.
It is widely accepted that the shape change of the Zn electrode during cycling seriously affects the CE and cycle life of alkaline Zn-based batteries. At present, however, there are no relevant reports about the shape change of metallic Zn electrodes in ZIBs with mild electrolyte. In the future, this fundamental research should be conducted to deeply understand the behaviour of the metallic Zn electrode in mild electrolyte.
3.4 Zn dendrite growth
Another major problem in developing alkaline rechargeable batteries is the formation and growth of Zn dendrites during battery operation. It is well known that Zn dendrites form and grow under certain conditions during cycling (Fig. 6a and b), which severely affects the performance and lifetime of Zn-based batteries.115,116 “Dead” Zn easily forms due to Zn dendrites that are shed from the electrodes in alkaline media, causing rapid decay of the CE and reversible capacity of batteries. Also, the continuous growth of Zn dendrites finally leads to direct contact between the anode and cathode, causing a short circuit and the eventual failure of the battery. The formation and growth of Zn dendrites is especially serious in alkaline electrolytes compared to mild electrolyte. This is mainly because Zn metal has high electrochemical activity in alkaline media.
 Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Zn dendrites. (b) Reconstructed 3D image of Zn dendrites obtained using focused ion beam (FIB)-SEM tomography. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.) (c) Radiographic images of Zn dendritic growth under a current density of 15 mA cm−2 after 180 s, 720 s, 860 s, and 1020 s, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.) 
The formation mechanism of Zn dendrites has been extensively studied in alkaline systems.117 The charging–discharging process of the Zn electrode is mainly influenced by the “liquid-phase mass transfer”, in which concentration polarization appears near the surface of the Zn electrode due to the concentration gradient of the active Zn(OH)42− charge carriers. Zn(OH)42− ions in the electrolyte are more likely to diffuse to protrusions on the surface of the Zn electrode where the local current density is higher than in other places, leading to an uneven current distribution on the electrode. Ultimately, Zn deposition speeds up on the tip of the Zn electrode, which further attracts more Zn(OH)42− ions to accumulate and gradually form dendrites during repeated charge/discharge. According to Diggle et al.,118 Zn dendrite growth shows a pyramid-like form, because the effective radius of curvature of the protrusion decreases until it reaches a critical radius, which is the condition for dendrite initiation. Diggel et al. suggested that dendrites may be formed at the tips of pyramids. Mansfeld and Gilman,119 however, who worked on single crystals using in situ light microscopy and scanning electron microscopy (SEM), found that dendrites were more frequently initiated at the feet of the pyramids. They further suggest that it is unlikely that a dendrite will form at the tip if a pyramid has reached the necessary small radius and that the pyramids and dendrites grow independently, with the dendrites being nucleated at macroscopic defects or impurity centers.
Nowadays, it has become widely accepted that the morphology of Zn dendrites is affected by the over-potential and surface roughness. To date, various morphologies of Zn deposits: mossy, boulder, layered, dendrite, and leaf-like, have also been reported.120 Electrodeposition at a lower over-potential tends to produce epitaxial, boulder, or sponge morphologies of Zn dendrites. It is important to note, however, given a relatively long time for initiation, that dendrites can also form and grow at an even lower deposition over-potential (Fig. 6c).121 Thus, long-term dissolution and deposition cycles can trigger the progressive amplification of surface heterogeneities on Zn electrodes, eventually resulting in dendrite growth, even under relatively low over-potentials.
3.5 H2 evolution
The H2 evolution reaction is a competitive reaction with ZnO reduction during Zn deposition in alkaline electrolyte, which causes CE loss during both the charging and discharging processes by promoting water electrolysis.122 In alkaline electrolyte, the H2 evolution reaction is affected by both thermodynamic and kinetic factors.
Based on the thermodynamic principle, the standard reduction potential of Zn/ZnO is −1.22 V vs. SHE when the pH value of the electrolyte is 14, lower than that of the H2 evolution reaction (−0.83 V vs. SHE) under the same conditions,122 indicating thermodynamic favourability for the HER rather than Zn deposition. Nevertheless, the actual H2 evolution reaction in an alkaline system during battery operation is also suppressed due to the kinetic over-potential, and it can be defined by the over-potential of the Zn electrode. The H2 evolution over-potential (η) on the Zn electrode can be expressed as follows: (10)where α denotes the activity, I is the current density, and the other symbols have their usual meaning. At constant temperature and a definite KOH concentration, the above equation is reduced to the Tafel equation η = A + BlogI(11)where A and B are constants. Thus, the current density has a significant impact on the actual H2 evolution reaction. In addition, according to Lee,123 for the same KOH concentration, the numerical values of the over-potential are higher (less negative) at a higher temperature. This also shows that, at the same temperature, the numerical values of the over-potential are higher (less negative) at a lower KOH concentration. Moreover, the exchange current density and Tafel slope on a Zn electrode surface in 6 M KOH electrolyte were measured to be 8.5 × 10−10 A cm−2 and 0.124 V, respectively. The H2 evolution over-potential in the case of the pure Zn electrode is −1.76 V vs. Hg/HgO.124 However, the H2 evolution over-potential of ZnO is only −1.399 V vs. Hg/HgO, which is significantly reduced on a ZnO surface. In other words, the H2 evolution reaction will be enhanced when the Zn electrode is covered by the ZnO product.
4. Strategies in alkaline electrolyte
Considerable research efforts have been spent on eliminating, or at least minimizing, the effects of Zn electrode issues in alkaline electrolytes, and some effective strategies have been proposed to enhance the performance of the Zn electrode, in terms of cycling stability, reversible capacity, and lifespan. Accordingly, these strategies could be divided into four distinct categories: (i) Zn electrode modification; (ii) electrolyte optimization; (iii) separator selection; and (vi) other methods. This section represents an attempt to summarize these methods and discuss the electrochemistry and theory behind certain methods.
4.1 Zn electrode modification

4.1.1 Electrode additive. 
The incorporation of an additive into the active material of the Zn electrode during its fabrication is an extensively used method to improve the performance of the Zn electrode in alkaline systems. Different types of electrode additives have been reported in the previous literature, including heavy metals/metal oxides, alkaline-earth-metal oxides/hydroxides, and organic additives.125,126 Heavy metal/metal oxide additives are the most commonly used additives due to their high H2 evolution over-potential and high stability in alkaline electrolyte.126 For inhibiting the H2 evolution and mitigating the corrosion of the Zn electrode, mercury has been reported to be extremely effective. It has been found, however, that the Zn electrode is more likely to incur the above-mentioned shape change with the incorporation of this additive, which is detrimental to the cycling stability of the Zn electrode. Other different heavy metal/metal oxide additives in a pasted Zn electrode have been investigated by McBreen et al.,127 and the results show that Pb, Cd, Tl, and In-containing additives have positive effects towards diminishing shape change. This is because these additives can increase the polarization of the Zn electrode, which, in turn, enhances the current distribution. Subsequently, the impacts of additive combinations were also studied, indicating that the shape change of the Zn electrode was considerably decreased by using such mixtures of additives, due to the synergistic relationship occurring with these binary compounds.128 In addition, other metals such as Bi, Sr, and Ni have been used as additives in alkaline systems as well.129 These metals can serve as substrates for Zn deposition during battery operation. This kind of substrate can improve the conductivity of the electrodes and result in a substrate effect or matrix effect, promoting the even deposition of Zn on the current collector and suppressing Zn dendrite formation by optimizing the current distribution.
Another class of commonly used additives is the alkaline-earth-metal oxides/hydroxides, in which the most promising candidate is calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2).130,131 Ca(OH)2 forms an insoluble solid compound with Zn(OH)42−, the formula of which can be written as Ca(OH)2·2Zn(OH)2·2H2O.132 In KOH electrolyte, the solubility of this insoluble solid is lower than that of ZnO by a factor of 1.5 to 2.5, depending on the KOH concentration. In this case, the migration of Zn(OH)42− in the electrolyte would be minimized. Therefore, the capacity losses due to shape change would be minimized through the addition of Ca(OH)2 to the Zn electrode. Moreover, this also minimizes the concentration gradient of Zn(OH)42− ions that would normally be established during charging, and hence can create another benefit, a reduced likelihood of dendrite formation. According to Gagnon et al.,133 the effective molar ratio of Ca(OH)2 to ZnO must be greater than 0.5 to 1.0. In addition, magnesium and aluminum hydroxides have been also reported to function in a similar manner by forming an insoluble species that prevents the migration of the Zn(OH)42− species.128
Organic additives have also received considerable attention in recent years due to their main advantages of low cost and environmental benignity. The most extensively used organic additive is polytetrafluoroethylene binder due to its relatively low cost, ease of dispersion, and good chemical compatibility with alkaline electrolytes.134 Small additions of this polymer have been shown to engender a high degree of mechanical stability whilst still maintaining an open network, contributing to reducing the deformation and prolonging the cycling stability of the Zn electrode. Furthermore, other similar organic additives, such as carboxymethyl cellulose, agar, poly(ethylene) and poly(vinylidene fluoride), have also been employed in alkaline systems to increase the mechanical strength of the Zn electrode.81 In addition, these polymer binders can also improve the dispersion of Zn/ZnO powders in the electrode, which increases the effective surface area and reduces the shape change during cycling.
In general, introducing electrode additives is an easy option for enhancing the performance of the Zn electrode in an alkaline system by inhibiting H2 evolution, preventing Zn corrosion, reducing Zn passivation, and mitigating shape change. Various types of electrode additive have been claimed to effectively address certain issues for the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte. Nevertheless, each kind of additive suffers from its own limitations and disadvantages. Although most heavy metal/metal oxide additives feature high chemical stability and high H2 evolution over-potential, they not only enhance the price of electrode fabrication, but also introduce big environmental concerns due to their high cost, high toxicity, and environmental unfriendliness. Despite the advantages of organic additives, they usually act as insulators and impurities in the modified Zn electrode, which increases the internal resistance of the Zn electrode and may affect the battery performance.


4.1.2 Anion-exchange film coating. 
According to our foregoing discussion, the Zn(OH)42− product is produced near the Zn surface and is likely to move into the bulk electrolyte during discharging. This does not always happen at the same position during battery cycling, however, and probably leads to shape change and loss of the active Zn material (Fig. 7a).135 Thus, keeping Zn(OH)42− near the Zn electrode surface during battery operation will be a promising approach to overcome the Zn electrode issues. One effective strategy to keep Zn(OH)42− near the surface of the Zn electrode is coating an anion-exchange ionomer layer on the Zn electrode surface (Fig. 7b). Ionomers are ion-containing polymers that typically contain hydrocarbon backbones and a relatively small number of acid groups.136 These acid groups are incorporated into the main chain or present as pendant groups, giving the ionomers the selective capability to conduct typical ions such as OH− but not Zn(OH)42−. The strategy of coating an ionomer film on Zn electrode in an alkaline system was first introduced in 1998.137 The ionomer coatings allow the smaller ions related to the reactions of the Zn electrode to pass through, but prevent the migration of the larger Zn(OH)42− ions during battery operation. Therefore, the reduced Zn(OH)42− migration helps to alleviate the shape change of the Zn electrode and reduce concentration gradients during cycling, which further reduces the driving force for Zn dendrite formation and growth. Soon afterwards, Miyazaki et al.138 incorporated an OH− conductive binder consisting of a polymer backbone and positively charged head groups into a slurry-based Zn electrode, which resulted in high cycling stability with suppressed dendrite growth in the battery.
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the working principle of the Zn electrode in an alkaline electrolyte. (a) Bare Zn electrode. Each Zn atom might not be deposited at the same location on the Zn electrode during cycling, leading to severe changes in the electrode shape/structure and even dendrite growth. (b) Zn electrode homogeneously coated with an anion-exchange ionomer (AEI). The shape change and dendrite growth are suppressed by keeping the [Zn(OH)4]2− ion near its place of origin. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic illustration of the ion-sieving nano-shell design for the Zn electrode. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.) 
Apart from ionomer films, the carbon-based coating technique has also been widely applied to enhance the Zn electrode performance by solving the problems of Zn passivation, corrosion, and shape change simultaneously.139–141 Yan and co-workers reported a lasagna-inspired Zn anode,142 where ZnO nanoparticles are encapsulated by graphene oxide to form a free-standing electrode. Similar to the anion-exchange ionomers, this graphene oxide layer allows the permeation of water and smaller OH− ions, and prevents the loss of Zn active material through blocking transport of the bigger Zn(OH)42− ions (Fig. 7c). The graphene oxide layer can also be partially reduced after soaking in alkaline electrolyte, which facilitates electron transfer inside the Zn electrode. Moreover, the fabrication of the ZnO lasagna electrode, starting from commercially available ZnO nanoparticles ∼100 nm in size (smaller than the critical size of passivation), is compatible with the roll-to-roll process, which is ideal for large-scale manufacturing. In addition to graphene oxide, a variety of carbon-based membranes with a controllable pore size and permeability have been demonstrated as well due to their ion-sieving capabilities.143,144 According to Wu and co-workers, carbon shells with controllable thickness were obtained on ZnO nanoparticles through carbonization of a uniform polydopamine coating.145 The scalable synthesized carbon shell with controllable shell thickness was an effective strategy to solve the problems of passivation and corrosion simultaneously. The nanosized ZnO prevents passivation, while the microporous carbon shell slows down the corrosion of Zn species. Under extremely harsh testing conditions (closed cell, lean electrolyte, no ZnO saturation), this Zn anode shows significantly improved performance compared to Zn foil and bare ZnO nanoparticles. In addition, other similar functional coating layers, such as graphene,146 TiO2,147 and TiNxOy,143 have been also proposed to improve the Zn electrode performance in alkaline systems.
Overall, these anion-exchange coating films enable fast OH− ion and water diffusion, as well as preventing the large Zn(OH)42− ion from escaping during cycling, thus effectively also preventing Zn corrosion and shape change. Additionally, the limited Zn(OH)42− migration also reduces the concentration gradient near the Zn electrode during battery operation, which decreases the driving force to form Zn dendrites. Although the Zn electrode performance was effectively enhanced under the assistance of the anion-exchange coatings, inert components were incorporated into the Zn electrode. In this case, the capacity based on the overall Zn electrode as well as the volumetric energy density based on the whole battery would likely be affected; however, these negative effects might be mitigated in future coating designs.


4.1.3 Developing 3D electrodes. 
Designing a 3D porous architecture to enhance the surface area of the Zn electrode is another generally adopted method to mitigate the Zn electrode issues in alkaline systems.148–150 Obviously, the high surface area decreases the local current density on a 3D Zn architecture electrode, resulting in a low over-potential and slow Zn deposition process. As a result, even and compact Zn deposition without Zn dendrites could be realized, which obviously enhances the durability of the battery (Fig. 8a).151 In addition, other advantages could be achieved when the Zn electrode was transformed into a 3D architecture. First, the metallic 3D Zn electrode features interconnected pathways, which maintains good electronic conductivity during the charge and discharge process. Second, the 3D structure of the Zn electrode makes the current distribution more uniform throughout the electrode structure. Third, the 3D design also helps to restrain the shape change of the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolytes. This is because the porous structure accelerates the saturation/dehydration of Zn(OH)42− to ZnO within confined void-volume elements in the interior of the porous electrode. Based on these valuable features, a Zn electrode with a porous, monolithic, 3D aperiodic architecture was capable of up to ∼90% Zn utilization and over 80 charge–discharge cycles at high currents without visible dendrite growth.152 Subsequently, a Ca(OH)2-infused Zn sponge electrode in the Zn–Ni alkaline system was studied, in which the Ca(OH)2 worked as an additive, the function of which has been discussed above.151 This Ni–Zn battery maintained 100% of the required discharge capacity for 85 and 65 cycles, respectively, with an average energy efficiency of 84% before capacity fading, which is comparable to the 85% energy efficiency found in Li-ion batteries. Nevertheless, the 3D Zn sponge may affect the volumetric capacity and energy density of the battery due to its porous structure. By increasing the solid volume fraction of the Zn sponge from ∼20% (Zn20) to 30% (Zn30), the alkaline Zn30–Ag battery demonstrated superior performance with a 50% improvement in its Zn-normalized volumetric capacity (up to ∼1.6 A h LZn−1) as well as supercapacitor-like specific power (up to ∼6 kW kgZn−1) (Fig. 8b).153
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of recharging a Ni–Zn (using a commercial Zn powder electrode) vs. a Ni–3D Zn cell, where the anode is redesigned as a monolithic aperiodic sponge, ensuring persistent 3D wiring of the metallic Zn core. Zn dendrites would pierce the separator after a certain number of cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2017, AAAS.) (b) Three-dimensional volume-rendered X-ray tomograms of Zn20 and Zn30 sponges. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.) 
In addition to the above advantages, one should keep in mind that a 3D porous Zn electrode has a higher active surface area compared to a commonly-used Zn electrode. This indicates that more active material of the electrode is in contact with the alkaline electrolyte in 3D Zn electrodes. As mentioned above, the Zn electrode is thermodynamically unstable in strong alkaline electrolyte. In this case, Zn corrosion in the 3D Zn electrode likely causes deterioration, which gravely consumes the active Zn electrode and electrolyte, and degrades the performance. Therefore, this negative effect brought by the 3D Zn design should be considered in later work.

4.2 Electrolyte optimization
The performance of Zn-based batteries is not only dependent on the performance of the Zn electrode, but also strongly depends on the interaction between the electrode and electrolyte. Therefore, the composition and concentration as well as the format of the electrolyte seriously affect the solubility of Zn(OH)42− and the formation process of ZnO, which has further impacts on the reversible capacity as well as the battery rechargeability.66 To improve the performance of Zn-based batteries, great efforts have been spent on electrolyte optimization, including introducing electrolyte additives and developing different electrolyte forms. To date, numerous electrolyte additives and gel electrolytes have been proposed to optimize the Zn electrochemical performance by suppressing Zn corrosion, mitigating Zn passivation, reducing shape change, and inhibiting Zn dendrite growth, which has been summarized below. The underlying reasons are discussed in the following section.

4.2.1 Electrolyte additives. 
Incorporating additives into the electrolyte is an alternative way of improving the reversibility and cycling stability of the Zn electrode in alkaline media. Based on their chemical constitution, the frequently used electrolyte additives in alkaline batteries can be divided into two main categories: inorganic and organic additives.154–156 Among the inorganic additives, ZnO powder has been continuously used to prepare ZnO-saturated KOH solution, which functions as a high-performance electrolyte in alkaline systems.157 This electrolyte is pre-saturated with Zn(OH)42− ions, which helps to suppress the corrosion and mitigate the shape change of the Zn electrode, further enhancing the Zn reversibility and lifespan. The addition of lead ions into the electrolyte has long been used to improve the electrochemical behavior of Zn. According to Mansfield et al.,158 lead ions could block the sites that should be active for Zn corrosion and deposition, and hence inhibit the formation and growth of Zn dendrites. The morphology of the Zn deposition with the lead additive was found to be smooth, as opposed to the classical side-branched monocrystal dendrites obtained in the lead-free electrolyte. Moreover, tin salts as additives have been also been studied in a similar way and have been found to exhibit properties favorable for enhancement of the Zn deposition morphology.159 Investigations revealed that the tin salts function in a similar way to lead, so as to block the active sites. In addition, various other inorganic electrolyte additives, including silicate, ferricyanide, phosphate, arsenate, borate, and fluoride, have been proposed for addition to alkaline electrolytes to overcome the Zn electrode limitations.128
Besides inorganic electrolyte additives, numerous organic additives have also been investigated, in which surfactants have frequently been reported to significantly suppress Zn passivation and Zn corrosion, and influence the Zn deposition morphology.155,160–162 Based on their structures, surfactants can be divided into three types: (i) anionic surfactants such as sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS),163 dodecyl benzenesulfonate (SDBS),163 and natrium 1,4-bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulphosuccinate (AOT);164 (ii) cationic surfactants such as dodecyltrimethylammonium bromide (DTAB),165 trimethyloctadecylammonium chloride (STAC),166 and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB);167 and (iii) nonionic surfactants, such as Pluronic F-127 (P127)168 and polyoxyethylene nonylphenyl ether.169 On the one hand, these surfactants could effectively mitigate Zn corrosion and passivation, as the surfactant molecules are adsorbed on the Zn electrode surface, which prevents contact between the electrolyte and the Zn electrode. On the other hand, surfactant additives also help to inhibit continuous Zn dendrite formation and growth. This is because the adsorption of surfactants on the Zn electrode could regulate the local current distribution more uniformly, resulting in even and smooth Zn deposition.59 To visually observe the effects of surfactant on the Zn dendrite growth, in situ optical microscopy was employed to monitor the Zn deposit morphology in an electrolyte with a polyethylenimine (PEI) additive (Fig. 9a and b).154 The results show that the PEI additive suppresses Zn dendrite growth by lowering the plating exchange current density. A higher PEI concentration leads to a lower exchange current density, and thus the dendrite suppression efficacy will be higher (Fig. 9c and d). The effects of Zn dendrite inhibition were also confirmed by the high-resolution SEM images of Zn deposition (Fig. 9e and f). Furthermore, the impacts of different surfactants on the Zn electrode performance were also compared, suggesting that Zn electrodes with anionic surfactants (e.g., SDBS) as electrolyte additives displayed an enhanced cycle life compared to those using cationic surfactants (e.g., CTAB).170 The main reason could be that the negatively charged polar group of SDBS coordinates to Zn2+ ions at the Zn electrode surface, leading to the generation of small ZnO particles. The positively charged polar groups of CTAB show weak interactions with Zn2+ ions, however, leading to the generation of larger ZnO particles.
 Fig. 9  
In situ optical microscope images of the Zn electrode after Zn deposition for 30 min. The electrolyte contains 0.1 M ZnO + 4.0 M KOH with various concentrations of PEI: (a) 0 ppm, (b) 10 ppm, (c) 50 ppm, and (d) 100 ppm. SEM images of the Zn deposition morphology: (e) in the additive-free electrolyte, and (f) in the electrolyte containing 10 ppm PEI additive. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.) 
Although various electrolyte additives have been proposed to solve the Zn electrode issues to enhance the battery performance, one should keep in mind that, similar to the electrode additives, the use of electrolyte additives may increase the cost of battery fabrication, reduce the initial content of Zn active material, and lower the specific or volume energy density of the battery. Thus, in order to optimize the battery performance to satisfy market demands, it is necessary to use a combination of different strategies to effectively mitigate any of these detrimental problems for Zn.


4.2.2 Gel electrolytes. 
As previously mentioned, aqueous electrolytes feature low cost, high ionic conductivity, and environmental benignity. Achieving high reversibility and long cycle life for the Zn electrode, however, still faces huge challenges in alkaline electrolyte due to the inevitable Zn corrosion and shape change as well as dendrite growth. Developing solid state electrolytes, without liquid solvents, provides a promising opportunity to address these Zn issues.171 Furthermore, they also serve as not only electrolytes, but also separators in the battery, which contributes to the simplification of battery assembly. The reported solid state electrolytes mostly suffer, however, from low ionic conductivity and high interfacial resistance between the Zn electrode and the solid electrolyte, leading to poor reversibility and deterioration in the lifespan of the battery.172 To this end, by combining the advantages of both liquid and solid electrolytes, Zn-based gel polymer electrolytes have attracted increasing attention for alkaline systems.150 Due to the workability of polymers, gel polymer electrolytes can endow energy storage devices with adjustable shapes and high flexibility, which is promising for the burgeoning portable and wearable electronics market. In addition, the flexibility and elasticity of a gel electrolyte also enable it to tolerate the volume changes and dendrites of Zn metal during the charge and discharge processes. Many studies on polymer-based electrolytes in Zn–air batteries have been conducted, and electrolytes such as hydroponics gel,173 epichlorohydrin-ethylene oxide [P(ECHco-EO)],174 and a polyvinyl alcohol-polyethylene oxide-glass-fibre-mat doped with KOH solution175 have been used as the electrolyte component in a Zn–air battery.
The effects of the gel electrolyte on the Zn electrode have been investigated in a Zn–air battery,176 in which the gel electrolyte was prepared by mixing a hydroponics gel with a 6 M KOH aqueous solution. The surface of the Zn metal was transformed to a rough surface by the formation of white ZnO after discharge. The shape of the circular Zn plate did not show any change after discharge, suggesting that the gel electrolyte did not cause any change in the shape of the Zn electrode. Furthermore, the impacts of a gel electrolyte on Zn dendrite growth were also studied in a Zn–air battery,177 where the gel electrolyte comprises a sodium polyacrylate (PANa) hydrogel (Fig. 10a). As confirmed by the SEM and TEM images, the authors claimed that a quasi-solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer is formed on the Zn electrode surface thanks to the electrostatic interaction between the negatively charged acrylate groups along the sodium polyacrylate hydrogel gel electrolyte chain and the positively charged Zn2+ ions. This homogeneous quasi-SEI layer facilitates ion transport throughout the whole Zn electrode surface and prevents localized Zn metal nucleation and growth, thus further eliminating Zn dendrite formation (Fig. 10b). Nonetheless, most gel electrolytes still suffer from limited ionic conductivity and poor electrolyte retention, which impacts the cycling stability of the battery. Very recently, a porous-structured poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)-based nanocomposite gel polymer electrolyte with a silica (SiO2) additive was synthesized in a bendable Zn–air battery (Fig. 10c).178 Due to the superior water retention of the SiO2 additive and its porous structure, this PVA-based gel electrolyte exhibited excellent water retention capability, high ionic conductivity (57.3 mS cm−1), and improved mechanical properties, which enabled the battery to display excellent cycling stability.
 Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of the PANa gel electrolyte, which consists of an acrylic acid (AA) monomer, NaOH, ammonium persulfate, Zn(CH3COO)2, and KOH (water and ion content regulator). (b) Schematic illustration of the quasi-SEI formation between the Zn anode and PANa electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.) (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the porous PVA-based gel electrolyte along with its inner structure for the Zn–air battery. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.) 
Although the interest in developing flexible Zn-based batteries has been increasing in recent years, further improvements in the ionic conductivity, interfacial properties, and mechanical robustness of gel polymer electrolytes are still highly desirable for wide-scale integration of high-performance rechargeable batteries.


4.2.3 Flowing electrolyte. 
The electrolyte plays an essential role in alkaline Zn-based batteries by affecting the transport properties of the active species between the Zn anode and the cathode. An enormous research effort has been made to enhance the battery performance by developing advanced electrolytes, since this approach is very simple, effective, and cost-efficient. Designing a flowing electrolyte is an effective approach for Zn-based batteries to extend their cycle life by minimizing dendritic growth, shape change, and passivation of the Zn electrodes.179,180 For static Zn–air batteries, when the concentration of Zn(OH)42− is high or even saturated, the formation rate of ZnO increases sharply during the discharge process, easily leading to Zn passivation. In addition, the sluggish reaction kinetics of the O2 reduction reaction on the cathode accompanied by the high species transport resistance has a great impact on the electrochemical performance of the Zn–air battery. For a flow system, however, the generated Zn(OH)42− ions could be brought to the outside of the battery by the flowing electrolyte, together with the ZnO product (if any). In this case, Zn passivation could be effectively suppressed.181 Moreover, the species transport is accelerated, which helps to reduce the concentration polarization. During the charge process, driven by the pump, the electrolyte containing Zn(OH)42− ions would be sent back to the battery to participate in the reaction. Unlike the situation in static Zn–air batteries where the formation of Zn dendrites may occur, the flow of the electrolyte could affect the morphology of the deposited Zn to inhibit dendrite formation.182 Nevertheless, under prolonged charging, Zn dendrite growth may still take place eventually and may not be completely suppressed by the flowing electrolyte, especially if high current densities and random cycling conditions are applied.

4.3 Separator
A separator is used in virtually all Zn-based batteries, where it acts as a physical barrier to keep the Zn electrode and the counter electrode physically apart, but allows the ions to flow between both electrodes. In these systems with alkaline electrolytes, the separator should be easily wettable in aqueous media, stable in strong alkaline solution, electrochemically unreactive within a wide operating voltage window, and preferably relatively inexpensive. More importantly, it also should feature high ionic conductivity and low electrical resistance. Currently, polypropylene membranes, such as Celgard films with a porosity of 10–20 mm (e.g., Celgard 5550 and Celgard 4560) for commercial LIBs, are typically employed as separators in most studies of Zn–air batteries, resulting from their superior mechanical strength, which can hinder Zn dendritic penetration, and their broad electrochemical stability window.183 Nevertheless, their pore size is too large to limit the crossover of Zn(OH)42− ions, thus leading to increased polarization and decreased long-term durability of the battery. Therefore, selecting a suitable separator is of great importance for the successful operation of Zn-based systems with alkaline electrolyte.184 Ideally, an ideal separator should have a specific porous structure allowing smaller OH− ions to pass while blocking the larger Zn(OH)42− ions, which could help to prevent common Zn problems. For instance, an ion selective cationic polysulfonium membrane was developed as a separator for Zn–air batteries.185 This separator with high anion selectivity due to the high diffusion coefficient of the anion displayed a similar function to the anion-exchange coating layer discussed above. Under basic conditions, the self-discharging of the Zn electrode through the permeation of the Zn(OH)42− ions was effectively prevented by the polysulfonium separator, which enabled the battery to have an increased capacity almost six-fold higher than that of a battery using the commercial Celgard separator. In addition, this polysulfonium has a thickness almost 75% less than those of commercial separators, possibly helping to reduce the thickness and further enhance the volumetric energy density of the battery.
Other functional separators have also been developed to suppress Zn dendrite growth in alkaline systems. For example, a self-made, cost-effective polybenzimidazole (PBI) membrane (Fig. 11a) was proposed to alter the morphology of Zn deposition.186 In order to better understand the role of a PBI separator, the performance of a battery assembled with a Nafion 115 membrane was measured for comparison. The results showed that the battery assembled with a Nafion 115 membrane delivered a CE of 99.20% at 80 mA cm−2, much lower than that (nearly 100%) delivered by the battery with a home-made PBI membrane. Furthermore, the PBI membrane could also deliver high OH− ion conductivity (Fig. 11b), which reduces the concentration polarization and suppresses Zn dendrite growth. A similar separator was also studied in alkaline electrolyte to inhibit Zn dendrite formation and improve the battery stability.187 A 900 mm elastomer porous polyolefin membrane coated with a 4 mm carbon layer was employed (Fig. 11c). The battery with this functional separator exhibited very stable performance without the formation of Zn dendrites even after hundreds of cycles. Benefiting from the porous structure of the membrane, which eliminates Zn dendrite formation, the battery can self-heal, even if micro-short circuiting occurs after overcharging (Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the charging behaviour of a PBI membrane with ultra-high mechanical stability and a 3D porous carbon felt coating for an alkaline Zn battery. (b) The transportation mechanism of OH− ions in a PBI membrane. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.) (c) Operating principle of the porous polyolefin membrane for an alkaline Zn battery. (d) Schematic illustration of the self-healing process. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.) (e) Schematic diagram of a cell with the conventional frontside-plating configuration. (f) Schematic representation of a cell with the backside-plating configuration for avoiding internal short circuits. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.) 
Even though the separator is of vital importance to enhance battery durability, investigations of advanced separators still have not received their deserved attention compared to research on other components, such as with electrode modification and electrolyte optimization. At present, only some functional membranes have been studied as high-performance separators in alkaline batteries and some promising results have been achieved. More attention should be paid to developing advanced separators to solve the Zn electrode issues. One has to keep in mind, however, that new functional separators would likely introduce higher costs for battery manufacturing, so it is necessary to find the right balance between achieving low cost and advanced electrochemical performance.
4.4 Other methods
Besides the above methods, there are still some other types of methods that have been explored. One of them is modifying the charging current profile, which has received increasing attention in recent years. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, there were several studies on mitigating the shape change and dendrite growth of Zn electrodes by applying direct current (DC) pulses or alternating current (AC) charging protocols.188 The working mechanisms behind the DC or AC charging strategies for enhancing the Zn performance have been summarized and discussed by Bennion.189 Overall, these methods aim to introduce a relaxation time after a short Zn(OH)42− reduction period to re-establish the concentration of Zn(OH)42− at the surface of the Zn electrode. By doing this, the neighboring sites do not compete for the limited amount of Zn(OH)42− under diffusional mass transport and hence enable homogeneous growth over the entire Zn electrode surface without dendrite formation. Recently, the influence of pulsed electroplating protocols on the formation of Zn dendrites was systematically studied by Grecia et al.190 The study demonstrated that the introduction of a nucleation pulse appears to be more important than the length of the plating and resting pulses for achieving a high initial coverage of Zn nuclei. Furthermore, the combination of an optimal nucleation step and the pulsed DC charging protocol results in smooth Zn films and complete prevention of dendrites.
In addition to modifying the charging current profile, introducing a magnetic field also impacts Zn dendrite growth. According to Chiba et al.,191 the growth of Zn dendrites in alkaline electrolyte was inhibited by an external magnetic field to a remarkable extent at high KOH concentrations. There was only a weak dependence on the type of cathode metal and the direction of the lines of magnetic force. The inhibition effect was greatly promoted by magnetic flux densities above 0.11 T.
Recently, the concept of a backside metal plating technique to address the issue of Zn dendrite-induced shorting was proposed by Higashi et al.192 Cu foil directly serves as the working electrode for Zn plating. In the conventional configuration, Zn plating with subsequent dendrite growth was performed on the “front” surface of the Cu substrate, causing battery shorting when the dendrites reached the counter electrode (Fig. 11e). In this work, however, the edges and the front surface of the Cu foil facing the counter electrode were coated with an insulating layer to prevent Zn from plating on these sites (Fig. 11f). In this case, the Zn cations in the electrolyte travel over the edge and front, and are deposited on the open back surface of the Cu foil. Thus, even if Zn dendrites form, they grow away from the counter electrode and do not short the battery. Therefore, this backside-plating configuration could enable long-term cycling of Zn metal batteries without short circuits. Nevertheless, this backside metal plating technique does not fundamentally solve the problem of Zn dendrite formation and growth in alkaline systems. Although no battery shorting occurs when using the strategy of Zn backside plating, the issues of poor Zn reversibility as well as low CE caused by the dendrite growth would decrease the capacity and cycle life of the battery.
4.5 Discussion
Overall, various effective strategies have been proposed to enhance the performance of alkaline Zn-based batteries by dealing with the Zn anode, which mainly include Zn electrode modification, electrolyte optimization, and separator selection as well as other methods, as summarized in Fig. 12. These methods were only claimed, however, to mainly address two or three issues of corrosion, H2 evolution, shape change or dendrite growth, as discussed above. For example, the problems of Zn corrosion and H2 evolution were effectively solved by adding Zn electrode additives, whereas the problems of Zn dendrite growth and Zn electrode passivation could still exist. Another example is the 3D Zn electrode design, which inhibits dendrite formation and growth to some extent, but this design inevitably aggravates Zn electrode corrosion due to the increase in the contact area of the Zn electrode with the electrolyte. Although it is a huge challenge to completely solve all the issues for the Zn electrode through a single approach, engineering an electrode with a combination of different strategies might create synergy in mitigating these detrimental problems for Zn, and lead to competitive performance in terms of capacity, reversibility, and cycling stability for commercial success. In addition, the knowledge accumulated in the long history of research on Zn electrodes in alkaline systems could provide guidance for the study of fresh Zn metal in mild systems.
 Fig. 12  Summary of the strategies for addressing the problematic issues for the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte. 
5. Issues for the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte
ZIBs with mild electrolytes have been the subject of aggressive research efforts in the past five years, with most of them spent on the exploration of cathode candidates as well as their Zn2+ storage mechanisms. In contrast, the Zn metal anode has so far attracted much less attention than the cathode. This situation may be changed, since the Zn anode is also critical to achieve high performance ZIBs. Compared to alkaline systems, the Zn electrode could minimize those issues to some extent in nearly neutral media, but it still suffers from low plating/stripping CE due to the Zn dendrite growth and side reactions (including H2 evolution and Zn electrode corrosion). Unlike alkaline media, the main issues for Zn metal in mild electrolyte are Zn dendrites, H2 evolution, and Zn metal corrosion, which are analysed in more detail as follows.
5.1 Zn dendrite growth
Zn dendrite growth has been regarded as the main challenge for developing high-performance Zn electrodes in mild electrolyte, and, accordingly, most research efforts on the optimization of Zn metal in mild electrolytes have been spent on suppressing Zn dendrite growth.193 Similar to alkaline systems, Zn dendrite formation in neutral electrolytes is also triggered by the concentration gradient of Zn2+ ions near the electrode surface. Concretely, the Zn electrode normally features an uneven surface morphology, which leads to the inhomogeneous distribution of Zn2+ ions. During the plating process, the Zn2+ ions near the surface of the Zn electrode are initially reduced to metallic Zn, resulting in striking Zn2+ concentration polarization in the electrolyte. Furthermore, the protrusions on the Zn electrode surface have higher curvature than other places, leading to a considerably higher electric field at the tips. As a result, more Zn2+ ions are accumulated on the tips, leading to further growth of the protrusions by forming Zn nuclei, which eventually evolve into Zn dendrites during long-term cycling.
Based on its formation mechanism described above, Zn dendrite growth is a complex process and would be affected by numerous factors, such as over-potential (η), Zn2+ concentration, temperature, the surface roughness of the Zn electrode, the pH value, etc. These parameters are discussed in detail as follows, which might be beneficial for the design of controllable strategies to diminish or avoid Zn dendrite growth. It is well known that a higher over-potential tends to augment the Zn2+ concentration polarization and aggravate inhomogeneous Zn deposition, resulting in serious Zn dendrite growth. In addition, the concentration of Zn2+ ions in the bulk electrolyte is another important factor for Zn dendrite growth. According to Pavlovic et al.,194 the minimum over-potential (ηi) that induces dendritic growth can be expressed as: (12)in which k ≥ 1 and the value of ηi only depends on the ηL/η0 ratio. It is well known that, in general, under the same hydrodynamic regime, ηL ∝ C0 (where C0 is the bulk concentration of Zn2+), and η0 ∝ C0n (where 0 < n < 1). Therefore, ηi has a positive dependence on C0. In other words, a higher bulk concentration of Zn2+ has a positive impact on Zn dendrite growth, which also has been proved by the experimental results. Recently, different high concentration electrolytes have been studied, where the CE of the Zn electrode was effectively enhanced by suppressing dendrite growth.
The operating temperature also affects the morphology of Zn deposition.195 A higher working temperature facilitates rapid Zn2+ diffusion in the electrolyte, thus inducing reduced Zn2+ concentration polarization near the Zn electrode surface, which mitigates Zn dendrite formation. Furthermore, the surface roughness of the Zn electrode has a severe impact on the formation of nuclei in Zn plating.195,196 In the case of a rough Zn electrode, more protrusions exist on its uneven surface. During Zn plating, a mass of Zn2+ ions would likely be attracted near to these protrusions. When the reduction of Zn2+ is conducted, plenty of nuclei would be formed on the protrusions and ultimately be converted into Zn dendrites. Thus, a rough surface on the Zn electrode is more likely to trigger dendrite formation and growth. In addition to the factors summarized above, the pH value in mild electrolyte was also found to influence the formation and growth of Zn dendrites.197 A relevant investigation was conducted in ZnSO4 solution by adding H2SO4 to vary the pH value. At low pH, the Zn plating is more homogeneous with a morphology that reflects the hexagonal structure of the metallic Zn. In contrast, Zn dendrites are easily formed from the inclined crystals (pyramidal) at high pH values.
5.2 H2 evolution
Side reactions between the Zn electrode and mild electrolytes have seriously hindered the practical application of ZIBs, because they not only constantly consume the Zn electrode and electrolyte, leading to a limited shelf life of the battery, but also produce H2 gas, resulting in poor CE and internal swelling of the battery. Compared to Zn dendrite research, study of this topic is still in its infancy. Only a few studies have been conducted to understand these side reactions of the Zn electrode with mild electrolytes.
The H2 evolution reaction is a crucial part of the side reactions in sealed systems with mild electrolyte. On the one hand, it reduces the reversibility of the Zn electrode and results in poor CE and shortened cycle life. On the other hand, the generated H2 gas in the sealed batteries severely increases the internal pressure, easily leading to battery swelling or even battery explosion.198 Based on the Pourbaix diagram for water, the H2 evolution potential in neutral electrolyte is about −0.41 V vs. SHE (EH2 = 0.059 × pH), higher than the standard reduction potential of Zn/Zn2+ (−0.76 V vs. SHE), indicating that H2 evolution is thermodynamically preferred in mild electrolyte (similar to alkaline systems).199 As discussed above, however, Zn metal features a high H2 evolution over-potential according to the Tafel equation, theoretically inhibiting the H2 evolution reaction, as confirmed by the Pourbaix diagram for Zn in aqueous solution. The actual H2 evolution reaction in ZIBs is a complicated process, however, affected by many factors, such as the roughness of the Zn electrode surface, electrolyte concentration, operating temperature, etc. To detect H2 evolution in ZIBs in situ, differential electrochemical mass spectrometry (DEMS) was employed.200 It is worth noting that chemical H2 evolution spontaneously occurs once the metallic Zn is in contact with mild aqueous electrolyte, indicating that H2 evolution occurs during battery rest (Fig. 13a). The amount of H2 gas generated during battery rest was investigated using a Zn symmetric cell with a pouch cell configuration,201 indicating that ∼6.7 mL of H2 gas was produced with a Zn metal size of 4 × 4 cm2 after a dwell time of 4 weeks. Accordingly, ∼19.8 μL of aqueous electrolyte was consumed and ∼15.9 mA h of active Zn metal was oxidized/deactivated (Fig. 13b). As a result, the battery performance would be degraded, or it would even fail, after a long rest time. The main reason for H2 evolution during battery rest has been thoroughly discussed in the following section (5.3 Zn metal corrosion). In addition, H2 evolution during Zn plating was also observed by in situ optical microscopy in a home-made cell, suggesting that Zn deposition is ineluctably impacted by the competitive H2 evolution (Fig. 13c), which seriously reduces the CE of Zn stripping and plating. In summary, H2 evolution in mild ZIBs probably occurs in different battery states, during both battery rest and battery cycling.
 Fig. 13  (a) DEMS tests on symmetrical Zn cells to monitor the electrochemical H2 evolution. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.) (b) H2 gas evolution accompanied by the chemical corrosion of the Zn electrode in 3 M ZnSO4 electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.) (c) In situ optical microscope images of H2 gas evolution during the Zn electrodeposition process at 0.2 mA cm−2. (d) Zn foil soaked in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte and photographic comparison of Zn foil before/after soaking in electrolyte for 7 days. (e) SEM image of the Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O by-product on Zn foil and its crystal structure. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.) 
5.3 Zn metal corrosion
It should be noted that the H2 evolution during battery rest was simultaneously accompanied by electrochemical corrosion of the Zn metal. The corrosion of the Zn metal electrode continually destroys the electrode surface and consumes the Zn electrode after soaking in mild electrolyte (Fig. 13d), causing enhanced interphase resistance and limited cycle life.198,202 Less attention has been paid, however, to thoroughly understanding the fundamental Zn corrosion mechanisms in ZIBs. To the best of our knowledge, Zn metal is thermodynamically unstable in mild electrolyte, especially when the Zn metal contains some impurities. Zn metal corrosion is mainly attributed to electrochemical corrosion by H2 evolution because of the limited O2 content in sealed ZIBs, which is likely to differ from the situation in the Zn–air battery with an open working system. To be specific, numerous microscale primary batteries would be formed in a single Zn electrode when it makes contact with the electrolyte, in which the metallic Zn works as the anode and the impurities (mainly carbon) work as the cathode. The electrochemical corrosion reaction could be expressed as: Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2↑ + 2OH−(13) Anode: Zn ↔ Zn2+ + 2e−(14)Thus, H2 evolution corrosion is involved in Zn corrosion in ZIBs, which leads to local pH fluctuations due to the enhancement of the OH− concentration. Insoluble by-products will be generated on the surface of the Zn electrode as the local OH− concentration increases. Currently, the by-products formed during Zn corrosion in a mild system are still inconclusive. On the one hand, Zn(OH)2 and ZnO were claimed to be the by-products generated during Zn corrosion due to increases in the local OH− concentration.203,204 On the other hand, some new reports showed that the zinc salt would be involved in the Zn corrosion reaction by generating Zn-based basic salts.205–207 According to our recent studies, a hexagonal Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O by-product layer is generated on the Zn metal surface without obvious ZnO or Zn(OH)2 in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte (Fig. 13e),208,209 which can be expressed as follows. 4Zn2+ + 6OH− + SO42 − + xH2O ↔ Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O(15)Unlike the tight SEI layer on Li metal, this interphase layer on Zn metal is loose and cannot effectively block the electrolyte from reaching the fresh Zn surface (Fig. 13e), so it cannot terminate the corrosion reactions by passivating the Zn electrode.201,210,211 The unceasing reaction between the electrolyte and Zn metal severely decreases the performance of Zn batteries. Similarly, a loose by-product layer due to Zn corrosion was also found in other mild electrolytes after reaction with zinc salts. In the case of Zn(TFSI)2 electrolyte, TFSI− ions were involved in Zn corrosion, leading to a loose by-product of TFSI-based complexes.200 Similar to the Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O by-product layer, this loose layer of TFSI-based complexes cannot stop Zn corrosion by blocking the electrolyte either, which makes Zn corrosion a huge issue for the real application of ZIBs. The Zn anode will react with ZnSO4 or Zn(TFSI)2 electrolyte during both transport and shelf time after the battery assembly but before customer use. Hence, deeply understanding the mechanisms as well as solving the Zn corrosion problem may be the first step towards achieving the goal of the industrial application of ZIBs.
6. Strategies in mild electrolyte
6.1 Electrolyte optimization
As a component in direct contact with the Zn anode and controlling the plating/stripping process of Zn, the electrolyte plays a vital role in the electrochemical reversibility and stability of the Zn metal anode in mild systems. Similar to alkaline systems, great efforts have been spent on optimizing the mild electrolyte to further enhance the battery performance by solving the Zn metal issues. Current methods of electrolyte optimization mainly include electrolyte additives, developing different electrolyte salts, and designing super-concentrated electrolytes and hydrogel electrolytes.

6.1.1 Electrolyte additives. 
Introducing some additives into electrolytes can regulate the local current distribution, guide uniform Zn deposition, and suppress dendrite growth.212 Similar to alkaline electrolytes, the additives applied in a mild aqueous electrolyte can also be classified into organic additives and inorganic additives. The effects of a variety of organic additives on the Zn deposition behaviour, such as polymers, organic molecules, and surfactants, have been thoroughly investigated. The surface texture and crystallographic orientation of the deposited Zn can be manipulated by using different additives, including sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), thiourea (TU), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), and polyethylene-glycol (PEG-8000).213 The prepared Zn anode with these additives exhibits a 6–30 times lower corrosion rate than that of the commercial Zn electrode (Fig. 14a), and the float current in hybrid aqueous batteries assembled from the Zn–SDS anode is weakened by as much as 2.5 times. Moreover, the dominant Zn(002) and (103) surface facets of Zn that have been electroplated with SDS and PEG are more likely to restrain dendrite formation compared with the (100) and (110) planes. The tip effect during the Zn deposition process is the main dendrite growth mechanism, where the higher electric field strength at the tips attracts more Zn2+ ion deposition. This effect can be impaired through the adsorption of some highly polarized organic molecules on the tips. Diethyl ether (Et2O), a highly polarized organic additive, is prone to adsorb on the high-potential surfaces of Zn tips and obstruct further Zn deposition on the tips, thus reducing the dendrite growth rate and significantly improving the battery performance.214 It is worth noting that the concentration of organic additives in electrolytes is a significant parameter. Chen et al. have proved that the corrosion current density decreases with an increase in the PEG-200 concentration from 0.1 to 1 vol%.215 A further increase of the PEG-200 concentration up to 2 vol%, however, leads to excessive surface polarization on the Zn anode, and consequently the corrosion current density shows a remarkable enhancement. On the other hand, excessive organic additives in the electrolyte would induce large electrode polarization and impede the diffusion kinetics and reduction rate of Zn2+, limiting the high-rate performance of ZIBs. In addition to organic additives, inorganic additives in the electrolyte have also been shown to generate distinct crystallographic orientations and morphology. The use of indium sulfate, tin oxide, or boric acid for Zn deposition, in each case, presents an 11 times smaller corrosion current for the electroplated Zn than for the commercial Zn. In particular, the Zn deposited with the aid of boric acid changes the preferred Zn orientation to the (002) plane to constrain the formation of dendrites.216 Based on the electrostatic shield mechanism, the addition of the low-cost NaSO4 electrolyte additive has been proved to produce uniform Zn deposition, because the reduction potential of Na+ is lower than that of Zn2+.217
 Fig. 14  (a) Linear polarization curves of the synthesized zinc with and without organic additives and commercial zinc foil when in contact with the battery's electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.) Cyclic voltammograms of the Zn electrode in aqueous electrolyte containing (b) 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and (c) 1 M ZnSO4 at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 between –0.2 and 2.0 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.) (d) Snapshot of the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation cell for highly-concentrated electrolyte (HCZE) (1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI) at 363 K. (e) Representative Zn2+-solvation structures in the electrolytes with 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and three concentrations of LiTFSI (5 m, 10 m and 20 M). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.) (f) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the cross-linked polyacrylamide (PAM)-based electrolyte. (g) SEM image of the free-standing PAM. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.) 


6.1.2 Electrolyte salts. 
The electrochemical performance of the Zn electrode strongly depends on the species of salt in the electrolyte. In mild ZIB systems, the choice of electrolyte salts has a direct influence on the pH, ionic conductivity, and (electro-)chemical stability of the electrolyte, as well as the reaction kinetics and reversibility of the Zn anode.218 Therefore, manipulating the electrolyte salt chemistry, especially the anion chemistry, is a effective way to address the issues of inferior stability and reversibility of the Zn anode. To date, various electrolyte salts have been systematic investigated, such as ZnSO4, ZnCl2, ZnNO3, ZnF2, Zn(CH3COO)2, Zn(TFSI)2, and Zn(CF3SO3)2, which show different electrochemical properties in mild ZIBs.105
At the early stage of using mild aqueous electrolytes, Zn(NO3)2 and Zn(ClO4)2 were introduced into the electrolyte, which led to serious corrosion and degradation of the Zn anode, due to the strong oxidizing property of NO3− and ClO4− anions.63,219 Compared with these oxidative salts, the electrolytes containing ZnF2 and ZnCl2 showed satisfactory compatibility with the Zn anode and could alleviate side reactions.220 The low solubility of ZnF2 (∼88 mmol in water) and the narrow anodic potential window (∼0.75 V) of dilute ZnCl2, however, limit their application in high-performance ZIBs. In contrast, ZnSO4 and Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolytes have been widely used for ZIBs recently, because of their good compatibility, excellent stability and wide electrochemical windows.24,63 The price of ZnSO4 is much cheaper than that of the latter, which improves the feasibility of the ZnSO4 electrolyte for practical application. As mentioned above, however, the formation of the Zn4(OH)6SO4·xH2O by-product reduces the utilization of Zn2+ in the ZnSO4 electrolyte. Similarly, in the Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, the formation of a zincate by-product, Zn(CF3SO3)a(OH)b·xH2O, after long-term cycling, has also been proved recently, due to the competitive parasitic reaction of H2 evolution.221 In addition, as shown in Fig. 14b, the Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte has a much smaller potential separation between Zn deposition and dissolution, and a higher current response than those in ZnSO4 (Fig. 14c), indicating faster reaction kinetics and better reversibility of Zn plating/stripping. The bulky CF3SO3− anions can moderate the solvation effect and facilitate Zn2+ migration by reducing the number of H2O molecules surrounding a Zn2+ ion. As a result, the CE of Zn plating/stripping in the Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte reaches as high as 100% after the initial cycles. Zn(TFSI)2, another Zn salt with bulky anions, has also been developed in mild ZIBs, which relieves the solvation effect and enables high reversibility of Zn, which is attributed to a similar mechanism to that in Zn(CF3SO3)2.222 In consideration of the high price of bulky anion salts, more attention should be paid to exploring low-cost and compatible electrolyte salts for the development of ZIBs as they approach the requirements for grid-scale energy storage.


6.1.3 Super-concentrated electrolytes. 
The low cycling reversibility of the Zn anode is closely related to the solvation-sheath structure of Zn2+ ions. In mild electrolyte, Zn2+ interacts strongly with water molecules to form hydrated Zn2+, which leads to a high energy barrier for desolvation of hydrated Zn2+ during Zn plating.223 Increasing the salt concentration of the electrolyte is an essential way to alleviate the solvation effect by reducing the number of H2O molecules around Zn2+. In addition, the primary reason behind the side reactions at the Zn anode is the presence of free water molecules in the electrolyte. As discussed above, the decomposition of water molecules during the Zn plating process is an inevitable parasitic reaction, and the generated H2 and OH− would bring safety risks and induce an electrochemically inactive by-product layer, respectively. In this case, the concept of “water-in-salt” or super-concentrated electrolytes has been introduced into mild ZIBs to improve the CE and the utilization of the Zn anode, following similar developments in the field of LIBs.224,225
The breakthrough in super-concentrated electrolytes for mild ZIBs was first achieved in an electrolyte consisting of 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and 20 M LiTFSI.54 Molecular dynamics (MD) studies have proved that such a highly concentrated electrolyte can change the solvation sheath structure of Zn2+, as shown in Fig. 14d. Zn2+ is coordinated with six water molecules and has no interaction with TFSI− in the dilute electrolyte with only 5 M LiTFSI. With increasing LiTFSI concentration, the solvation sheath has more contribution from TFSI− ions, which occupy the whole solvation sheath structure of Zn2+ in the electrolyte with 20 M LiTFSI (Fig. 14e). The unique solvation structure, where Zn2+ interacts with TFSI− instead of H2O, effectively avoids water-induced side reactions and ensures a dendrite-free Zn anode with nearly 100% plating/stripping CE. Benefiting from these properties, the highly concentrated electrolyte (pH ≈ 7) results in excellent cycling performance in different battery systems, which has accelerated the development of mild ZIBs for commercial applications. Moreover, a “water-in-salt” electrolyte with 30 M ZnCl2 has been investigated for mild ZIBs, due to the intrinsically high solubility of ZnCl2.225 The highly concentrated ZnCl2 electrolyte gives rise to a stable Zn anode with an average CE as high as 95.4%, as well as improved capacity retention with the existence of [ZnCl4]2−.226,227
Although the high concentration of the electrolyte effectively improves the reversibility of the Zn electrode by reducing the free water, it would inevitably raise the cost and viscosity of the electrolyte and reduce the ionic conductivity, so it is suggested that a balance must be found between the salt concentration, manufacturing cost, and battery performance. In addition, the number of super-concentrated electrolyte systems is restricted by the relatively low solubility of most salts. To expand the possible selection, the introduction of inert anions/cations or other possible salt mixtures into electrolytes for mild ZIBs may offer a promising way to improve the salt concentration, as investigated in other aqueous battery systems.228,229


6.1.4 Gel electrolytes. 
Although neutral electrolytes are widely used due to their high ionic conductivity, low cost, and mild nature, the problematic issues for the Zn metal electrode, including Zn dendrites, H2 evolution, and Zn electrode corrosion, cannot be completely eliminated in ZIBs. Moreover, problems also exist of possible leakage of the electrolyte and undesireable dislocation under strain of ZIBs with aqueous electrolytes.230,231 To aviod these issues, different gel electrolytes have been employed, which were created by adding some hydrophilic polymers or inorganic components into aqueous solutions of Zn salts.206 Gel electrolytes may solve the intrinsic problems of ZIBs arising from mild electrolytes, because they stabilize the electrolyte/electrode interface with less active water, minimize water-induced side reactions, and inhibit dendrite growth.232 In addition, gel electrolytes feature desirable electrochemical properties and excellent mechanical integrity for flexible ZIBs, which have shown great potential for application in portable and wearable electronics.233,234
Gel electrolytes with chemical cross-linking possess better thermal stability and mechanical properties compared with those electrolytes without cross-linking and with only physical cross-linking.235 As one of the most promising electrolytes, a polyacrylamide (PAM)-based electrolyte contains strong covalent cross-links and hydrogen bonds among the chain segments, as shown in Fig. 14f, where hydrophilic groups such as –CONH2 can trap water molecules through hydrogen bonds. Freeze-dried PAM presents a highly porous framework structure, as shown in Fig. 14g, which is favourable for the solution diffusion and fast transport of Zn2+.236 Therefore, the PAM-based gel electrolyte with a neutral solution of ZnSO4 and MnSO4 rendered a tensile strength as high as 273 kPa, an ability to withstand stretching strain of 3000%, and high Zn2+ conductivity (17.3 mS cm−1). To further improve the electrochemical performance of gel electrolytes, some functional groups could be modified by polymer additives. For instance, nanofibrillated cellulose (NFC), a typical reinforcing agent, has been introduced into a PAM-based gel electrolyte, which involves abundant hydroxyl groups and could stabilize the channels for ionic transportation and enhance the water content. The designed NFC/PAM gel possessed a high ionic conductivity of 22.8 mS cm−1, high stretchability, so as to tolerate 1400% strain, and high adhesion for Zn–MnO2 batteries.237 In addition, a hierarchical 3D architecture gelatin and PAM-based electrolyte showed significantly enhanced mechanical strength, flexibility, and ionic conductivity. More importantly, the ZIBs with the hierarchical electrolyte demonstrated outstanding electrochemical performance even under various severe conditions, such as being greatly cut, bent, hammered, punctured, sewed, washed in water, or even put on fire.238
Similar to alkaline systems, a gel electrolyte in a mild system significantly increases the reversibility of the Zn metal electrode by suppressing Zn dendrite growth as well as water-induced Zn electrode corrosion and H2 evolution. One of the main challenges for a gel electrolyte, however, is its relatively low Zn2+ conductivity, since enhancement of the mechanical capacity of a gel electrolyte always sacrifices ionic conductivity, resulting in an inferior rate performance and an unsatisfactory power density. In addition, similar to conventional aqueous electrolytes, the operating potential for gel electrolytes is also limited by a narrow electrochemically stable window. Thus, the selection of a polymer component with novel functional groups and Zn salts with high compatibility could be further studied for gel electrolytes, as well as the development of flexible and wearable ZIBs.

6.2 Artificial SEI layer
Motivated by the quest to suppress Li dendrite growth via membranes or interfacial engineering, constructing stable artificial SEI layers on the Zn anode in mild electrolyte serves to prevent direct contact between the Zn metal and the electrolyte, constraining the growth of dendrites and alleviating side reactions.239 Generally, an effective SEI layer as such a coating should not only feature fine (electro-)chemical compatibility with Zn metal and aqueous electrolytes and sufficiently good mechanical properties to inhibit dendrite growth, but also realize fast Zn2+ diffusion at the interface. According to the different protective mechanisms, artificial SEI-coating strategies on the Zn anode include carbon-based coatings, inorganic passivation layers, and polymer membranes.240
Carbon-based materials, such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO) and carbon nanotubes, have been employed as protective layers on the surface of the Zn metal anode, which provide a flexible matrix to reduce the volume changes during Zn plating/stripping and a large specific surface area to regulate uniform Zn deposition.241,242 Due to its large electroactive area and even surface current distribution, a layer-by-layer rGO film on Zn foil could significantly mitigate Zn dendritic growth and demonstrated superior cycling reversibility.243 Additionally, an inorganic passivation layer with high porosity could usually act as a buffer layer to guide a homogeneous electrolyte flux as well as accelerating the kinetics of Zn diffusion and deposition.244 Notably, density functional theory (DFT) calculations on the 3D nanoporous ZnO layer have proven that the geometrically optimized oxygen element facilitates extra charge density distribution on the surface (Fig. 15a), and the Zn2+ insertion energy barrier for Zn with the ZnO coating layer is eight times lower than that for bare Zn.245 As a consequence, the ZnO layer contributes to electrostatic attraction towards Zn2+ rather than the solvated Zn2+ in the compact layer of the electric double layers, and thus ensures faster kinetics of Zn2+ deposition and effectively prevents H2 evolution, as illustrated in Fig. 15b. This new class of Zn anode modified with 3D nanoporous ZnO exhibited 99.55% Zn utilization and long-term cycling stability. In addition, atomic layer deposition of a TiO2 coating and a ZrO2 protection layer was intended to achieve uniform Zn plating and suppression of Zn dendrites through controlling the nucleation sites and enhancing Zn2+ transportation.246,247 Moreover, a polymer membrane coating is also an attractive and rational alternative, given its inherent water/O2 resistant capabilities, decent flexibility, and high viscoelasticity.248 With intrinsic amide groups to coordinate with Zn2+, polyamide (PA) has been designed as a interfacial layer to refine the nucleation grains through overcoming the nucleation barrier and restricting the two-dimensional (2D) diffusion of Zn2+, leading to a dense and dendrite-free Zn anode.198 As shown in Fig. 15c, some obvious protuberances of deposited Zn appear from 15 minutes on the bare Zn plate in the in situ optical microscope image, and the coated Zn shows a dense and smooth morphology during the whole deposition process (Fig. 15d). Benefiting from the regulated Zn deposition behaviour and suppressed corrosion in the PA-modified Zn anode, the cycling performance of the Zn–MnO2 battery was remarkably improved from 450 cycles with a low capacity of 30 mA h g−1 to 1000 cycles with a high capacity of 155.4 mA h g−1. Most recently, a coating layer of metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) has offered a super-saturated front surface and realized ultralong lifespan for Zn electrodes, through blocking large-size solvated ion-complexes in the MOF channels.
 Fig. 15  (a) Differential charge density distribution of Zn@ZnO-3D from first-principles calculations. (b) Electric double layer structure in the vicinity of the anode and the corresponding energy barriers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.) In situ optical microscope images of the cross-sectional Zn deposition morphology on the (c) bare Zn plate and (d) PA-coated Zn plate in a symmetrical Zn cell at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) SEM images of Zn deposits on the ZIF-8-500 electrode at a current density of 1.0 mA cm−2 for different capacities. Scale bars, 2 mm. (f) Schematic illustration of the Zn plating. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.) 
As discussed in relation to alkaline systems, the working mechanism of anion-exchange films built on Zn metal surface is different from that of the artificial SEI layers in mild systems. Various artificial SEI layers have been applied to restrain Zn dendrites, restrain gas evolution and its by-products, and eventually improve the lifespan of ZIBs because of their ability to block the electrolyte from reaching the Zn electrode and to provide high conductivity of Zn2+. Given the complex synthesis and limited scalability, however, few methods are consistent with the original nature of ZIBs, including low cost, interior safety, and large-scale application prospects. Namely, the evaluation criteria for interfacial engineering of the Zn electrode should rely more on practical applications. Compared with artificial interface protection, reports on in situ SEI engineering in ZIBs are almost non-existent, but it deserves more attention.
6.3 Modification of current collectors
Although commercial Zn foil with excess Zn has been widely adopted as an anode and directly adopted as a current collector in most ZIBs, some deposited Zn electrodes have been reported in certain mild ZIBs. The selection of the current collector is of great significance for the deposited Zn electrode, given the importance of the gravimetric energy density in practical application of ZIBs. Carbon-based, copper-based, and MOF-based current collectors have been widely used to support Zn, due to their great chemical and electrochemical stability in various electrolytes, robust mechanical strength to accommodate deposition, high electrical conductivity, and fine affinity for Zn.204
3D porous substrates with high surface area and an even electrical distribution, such as carbon fibre,249 carbon cloth,250 and copper foam,251 could inhibit the growth of dendrites in continuous Zn plating/stripping processes. Lu et al.252 designed a flexible 3D carbon nanotube (CNT) architecture for Zn deposition, and the dendrite-free Zn/CNT anode afforded low voltage hysteresis (27 mV) and outstanding cycling stability with a high average CE of 97.9%, which was attributable to the low Zn nucleation over-potential and the homogeneously distributed electric field. Notably, the metal–organic framework zeolitic imidazolate framework-8 (ZIF-8) with large cages has been demonstrated as a host material for highly reversible and highly stable Zn deposition and dissolution.253 The trace amount of Zn0 in the annealed ZIF-8 provides uniform nuclei for Zn plating, and the high over-potential for H2 evolution constrains the consumption of water during cycling. Even at a high areal capacity, the Zn deposition morphology on the host is consistently smooth and dense, as shown in Fig. 15e. The Zn plating mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 15f, where initial Zn deposition occurs in and/or on the particles of the host and the homogeneous Zn-nuclei lead to subsequent dendrite-free plating. Moreover, based on an epitaxial electrodeposition mechanism to regulate the nucleation and growth of Zn, graphene, with a low lattice mismatch for Zn, can work as a substrate, achieving the electrodeposition of Zn with a locked and correlated crystallographic orientation, and exceptional reversibility and rate capability.254 Recently, a Zn–Al lamellar alloy with eutectic structure was proposed to guide uniform Zn deposition.255 Compared to the Zn2+/Zn, the Al3+/Al couple features a much lower redox potential (−1.66 V vs. SHE), which causes the initial formation of an insulating Al2O3 shell on Al lamellae. Thus, a positive electrostatic shield forms around the Al lamellae due to the insulating shell, which guides dendite-free Zn deposition that avoids the Al surface.
It should be noted that high-cost 3D substrates are likely to be impaired under external stress, and the complex synthesis method for some substrates may reduce the manufacturing productivity. Considering that a substrate with high surface area may accelerate gas evolution, combining a modified current collector with an optimized electrolyte should be a promising strategy for superior stability and reversibility of the Zn anode.
6.4 Discussion
Compared to alkaline electrolytes, nearly neutral electrolytes provide a mild working environment for the Zn electrode, which helps to alleviate the Zn issues to some extent. Nevertheless, Zn dendrite growth, gas evolution, and Zn metal corrosion still limit the reversibility of the Zn electrode in mild systems. With the aim of addressing these issues, various strategies, including electrolyte optimization, building an artificial SEI, and current collector modification have been proposed in recent decades, as summarized in Fig. 16. Manipulating the anion salt chemistry (normally bulky anion salts) and constructing “water-in-salt” electrolytes are effective methods to relieve the solvation effect, enhancing the stability and reversibility of the Zn electrode. The high cost of these electrolytes, however, may restrict their practical application on a large scale. To keep the low-cost nature of ZIBs, more attention should be paid to exploring economical and compatible electrolyte salts. Considering that water molecules in electrolytes are the essential reason for corrosion and H2 evolution, gel electrolytes have been introduced into flexible and wearable ZIBs. Poor Zn-ion migration and unsatisfactory power density are the main bottlenecks for gel electrolytes. In addition, artificial SEI layers on the surfaces of Zn electrodes include carbon-based materials, inorganic passivation layers, and polymer films, which block direct contact of the Zn metal with the electrolyte and restrain Zn dendrites and side reactions. Based on the industrial principle of ZIBs, in situ SEI engineering is much more attractive than a complex artificial coating. Reports on in situ SEI layers in ZIBs, however, are almost non-existent. Carbon-based, copper-based and MOF-based current collectors have been utilized in ZIBs for uniform nucleation and growth of Zn deposits. Simplified synthesis methods and affordable raw materials for those substrates, especially 3D substrates, should be exploited to improve their scalability and manufacturing productivity.
 Fig. 16  Summary of the strategies for addressing the problematic issues for the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte. 
7. Conclusion and outlook for practical application
Aqueous Zn-based batteries have been regarded as a promising alternative to LIBs for large-scale application due to their advantages of low cost, high performance, inherent safety, and environmental benignity. Nevertheless, the state-of-the-art aqueous Zn battery is still far from meeting our ever-increasing large-scale energy demands. One main challenge is the poor reversibility of the Zn anode in aqueous electrolyte. Numerous strategies have been proposed to further improve the battery performance by optimising the Zn electrode. Although considerable achievements towards stabilizing the Zn electrode have been achieved, our fundamental understanding of the Zn electrode behaviour in alkaline electrolyte and mild electrolyte remains inconclusive. The behaviour of the Zn electrode has been studied for a long time in alkaline battery systems, including Zn–Ag, Zn–Ni, and Zn–air batteries. In contrast, the fundamental study of the Zn electrode in mild battery systems is still in its infancy, as mild aqueous ZIBs have only appeared in recent years. Although the Zn electrode behaviour in alkaline electrolyte shares some similarities with that in mild electrolyte, providing some guidance for the study of Zn metal in mild-electrolyte batteries, there are still significant differences in its behaviour in alkaline and mild electrolytes. To promote a deeper understanding of the distinct behaviour of the Zn electrode in both systems and provide insights for designing the corresponding strategies to address the different Zn electrode issues, in this Review, the different problems for the Zn electrode in alkaline and mild electrolytes have been thoroughly analysed. Notably, the different reaction mechanisms of the Zn electrode lead to different Zn electrode redox potentials and Zn electrode issues. Meanwhile, the similarities in Zn electrode issues have also been discussed, providing a comprehensive reference for researchers to better understand this research field.
Due to the long history of research and use of the Zn metal electrode in alkaline systems, various effective strategies have been proposed to enhance the performance of alkaline Zn-based batteries. Some strategies, such as using additives to the electrolyte to guide homogenous Zn deposition, can be directly extended to inhibit Zn dendrite growth in mild systems. In alkaline systems, the strategy of developing gel electrolytes has been designed to improve the Zn electrode reversibility by restraining Zn electrode corrosion, shape change, and dendrite growth. Similarly, developing gel electrolytes in mild systems is also effective to suppress Zn dendrite growth and water-induced Zn electrode corrosion and H2 evolution due to the limited amount of free water in the electrolyte. Meanwhile, coating an artificial layer on the Zn electrode has been reported to prevent Zn dendrite growth in both alkaline and mild electrolytes, but the working mechanisms of the artificial layers are different in both systems. In alkaline Zn-based batteries, the functional layer coated on the Zn electrode surface effectively alleviates the shape change and Zn dendrite growth by allowing the permeation of water and smaller OH− ions as well as blocking the bigger Zn(OH)42− ion transport. Whereas, the artificial SEI layer coated on Zn metal features high Zn2+ conductivity and poor electronic conductivity, which guides dendrite-free Zn plating underneath the protective layer rather than on the layer surface. In particular, the artificial SEI layer can also block the electrolyte from reaching the Zn electrode, which helps to avoid electrolyte-induced side reactions. In addition, functional separators have been developed to stabilize the Zn electrode in alkaline systems, which also provides inspiration for improving the Zn electrode performance in mild batteries, since separator study in mild ZIBs is still blank.
Benefiting from the massive efforts towards optimizing the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte, some rechargeable alkaline Zn-based batteries have been used in commercial energy markets, such as secondary Zn–Ag batteries, which serve as important power sources in defence, aerospace, high-end TV cameras, and professional interphones, while rechargeable Zn–Ni batteries have been applied in scooters, lawnmowers, and electronic toys. Although numerous strategies have also been proposed to enhance the reversibility of the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte, most of them only focus on suppressing Zn dendrite growth. Nevertheless, the Zn electrode persistently suffers from limited CE and cycling lifespan due to side reactions, which makes mild ZIBs unsatisfactory for industrial application. To pursue the goal of actual application, apart from developing high-performance cathodes, the following aspects should be further considered, which are summarized in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Summary of future efforts towards the industrial application of aqueous Zn-based batteries in four parts: fundamental studies on Zn electrode corrosion, CEs with different depth of discharge (DOD) measurements, energy density enhancement, and large cells tests. 
Deep fundamental studies on Zn corrosion
In alkaline systems, a ZnO by-product layer is generated on the Zn electrode surface due to electrode corrosion during battery rest. As the corrosion reaction goes on, the ZnO layer tends to be even and dense, which is likely to terminate corrosion by blocking the electrolyte from reaching the Zn electrode. In addition, some electrode additives (such as Hg) have been used in commercial alkaline Zn-based batteries to suppress Zn electrode corrosion. No dense by-product layer is generated on the Zn electrode surface in mild electrolyte, however, indicating that Zn corrosion cannot be stopped by itself. To date, no electrode additive has been proposed to alleviate Zn electrode corrosion in ZIBs, as Zn foil is the most commonly used electrode form. Overall, compared to alkaline systems, the effects of Zn electrode corrosion in mild systems are more serious, since it continually consumes electrolyte and active material and even damages the battery during the shelf time and transportation. Furthermore, it also increases the battery internal pressure by producing gas evolution, gravely affecting the battery performance. Thus, restraining Zn electrode corrosion is the first step to achieving the actual application of ZIBs on a large scale. Fewer efforts in proportion to the problem have been spent, however, on studying the Zn corrosion behaviour and its by-products. Hence, more fundamental research should be conducted to deeply understand Zn corrosion in mild electrolyte, as well as the factors that affect it, such as the pH value of the electrolyte, the electrolyte salt types, the purity of the Zn electrode, Zn electrode forms, and the O2 content in the electrolyte.
Depth of discharge (DOD) and CE measurements
The DOD of the Zn electrode indicates the percentage of the Zn electrode that has been involved in the electrode reactions relative to the overall capacity of the electrode. Hence, the DOD can be regarded as a measure of the utilization of the Zn electrode. The Zn electrode's DOD is correlated with the capacity fade and energy density of the actual battery. Thus, it is an extremely important parameter for the battery and needs to be studied. Moreover, the CE is a critical indicator to evaluate the viability of the Zn electrode in practical application. One has to keep in mind that the testing protocols can significantly impact the results of CE measurements. High current densities are likely to produce high CEs in Zn–Cu or Zn–Ti cells, although testing under high current density may make the CE results misleading. Some reports claimed very high CEs of Zn stripping and plating at a high current density. Unfortunately, the values of these CEs may be unreliable. This is because the fast testing would mask the issues induced by the side reactions occurring at low rates, such as H2 evolution. Apart from the current density, the testing time also affects the CEs of the Zn electrode. Even under the same current density, the CE values are also different with different testing times. For example, even under the same current density of 1 mA cm−2, the CEs with a testing time of 0.5 h are different from those with a testing time of 1 h. Therefore, there is no comparability between the CEs with different testing times, even under the same capacity. For instance, the CEs obtained at 1 mA cm−2 for 5 h are not comparable with these tested at 5 mA cm−2 for 1 h. Thus, choosing a suitable and reasonable testing protocol to evaluate the CE of a Zn electrode is of great importance. Overall, the CEs and DODs are of great importance for evaluating the performance of the Zn electrode. Currently, the CEs in most reports still were measured with low DODs, although the DOD effects have been neglected. What about CEs under a high DOD? What if CEs are measured under a high DOD but at different current densities? These problems should be understood before designing an actual Zn full cell with high energy density.
Study of the capacity ratio of the anode and cathode (N:P)
For practical operation, the optimal capacity ratio of the Zn anode to the cathode should be explored. Ideally, the N:P ratio in the battery should be 1:1. In practice, this condition cannot be achieved, especially for metal-based batteries. We note that the current ZIBs reported in the majority of papers have a capacity ratio higher than 15:1, since commercial Zn foil is very thick (≥10 μm). This indicates that most of the Zn metal anode was not involved in the battery reaction, leading to a low DOD for the Zn electrode, which seriously reduces the energy density of the battery and overestimates the electrochemical performance. Exploring the N:P ratio is of vital importance for developing industrial Zn-based batteries. In current ZIBs, commercial Zn foil is the most commonly used Zn electrode form, and its thickness is usually greater than 10 μm. Therefore, developing a special battery assembly technique to fully use the Zn foil is highly desirable. In addition to the technique of using both sides of the Zn foil, other forms of Zn metal electrode may be developed.
Lean electrolyte study
A lean electrolyte design can be achieved by adding the minimum amount of electrolyte that makes the battery work normally to pursue high energy density. Adding a lean electrolyte is a critical step for the battery to achieve the goal of industrial application, which has not been achieved yet in Zn based batteries such as rechargeable alkaline Zn–air batteries and mild ZIBs. Currently, most of the rechargeable alkaline Zn–air batteries in past reports were tested in a beaker cell or other specially designed cells, in which an excessive amount of electrolyte was added to pursue long cycle life. Although most ZIBs were assembled in small coin cells, the amount of added electrolyte (usually ≥100 μg) was still several times greater than for a lean electrolyte. The excess electrolyte (>150 mg A h−1) not only seriously reduces the energy density of the battery, but also masks the problem of electrolyte-induced side reactions that constantly consume the electrolyte. Thus, lean electrolyte design in aqueous Zn-based batteries is significantly important to reveal if there are more battery issues before their large-scale application.
New separator exploration
Separators used in mild ZIBs are always composed of thick glass fibres (0.2–1.0 mm), which consume more electrolyte and reduce the volumetric and gravimetric energy density of the battery. Exploring ultrathin hydrophilic films/separators with enough mechanical strength to suppress Zn dendritic penetration would be a potential strategy for the practical application of mild ZIBs.
Configuration
Currently, a majority of studies on ZIBs were conducted on coin cells (2023 type), in which the size and mass of the cathode are limited (0.5–1.7 cm2, and 0.5–2 mg for the cathode). In this case, it is imprecise to evaluate the energy density of the battery only based on the active materials. For practical application, the electrode materials need to be demonstrated on a large scale. It is still unknown, however, whether high-performance aqueous electrode materials suitable for small coin cells will work well in large-scale cells, especially when the electrode thickness is increased. Therefore, to meet the demands of the future energy market, different commercially available battery types, such as pouch cells, prismatic cells, and cylindrical cells (18650), should be assembled to evaluate the battery performance, including their reversible capacity, CE, cycle life, and energy density. On the other hand, developing flexible devices with gel electrolytes is also promising for the industrial application of aqueous Zn-based batteries. This is because a gel electrolyte has been claimed to inhibit Zn dendrite growth and water-induced side reactions, which contributes to enhancing the battery performance. Moreover, flexible aqueous Zn-based devices are a good choice for practical wearable applications, providing more options for the actual application of aqueous Zn-based batteries. Nevertheless, to the best of our knowledge, the relevant data about the thickness and weight of the gel electrolyte used in flexible Zn-based batteries were not provided in past reports, However, the thickness and weight seriously affect the volumetric and gravimetric energy density of a battery, which should be considered in future flexible battery design.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Financial support provided by the Australian Research Council (ARC) (FT150100109, LP160101629, and DP200101862) is gratefully acknowledged. X. L. and X. Z. acknowledge the China Scholarship Council (CSC) for their scholarship support (Grant No. 201806120317 and 201706370084). The authors would also like to thank Dr Tania Silver for performing critical revisions of the manuscript.
References
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3243–3262 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, O. Ayyad, V. Ruiz and P. Gomez-Romero, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1777–1790 RSC .
X. Zheng, P. Cui, Y. Qian, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu, S. X. Dou and W. Sun, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132, 14641–14648 CrossRef .
M. Li, J. Lu, Z. Chen and K. Amine, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800561 CrossRef .
W. Chen, Y. Jin, J. Zhao, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 11694–11699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Deng, R. Liang, G. Jiang, Y. Jiang, A. Yu and Z. Chen, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1665–1675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, T. Wu and K. Amine, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 1–13 Search PubMed .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Xi, X. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Hao, W. K. Pang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, C. Wu, L. Shen, C. Zhu, Y. Huang, K. Xi, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700431 CrossRef .
F. Wu, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1569–1614 RSC .
H. Kim, J. Hong, K. Y. Park, H. Kim, S. W. Kim and K. Kang, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11788–11827 CrossRef CAS .
G. Liang, Z. Wu, C. Didier, W. Zhang, J. Cuan, B. Li, K. Y. Ko, P. Y. Hung, C. Z. Lu, Y. Chen, G. Leniec, S. M. Kaczmarek, B. Johannessen, L. Thomsen, V. K. Peterson, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 29, 10594–10602 CrossRef .
N. Byrne, P. C. Howlett, D. R. MacFarlane and M. Forsyth, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2497–2501 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, Y. Liu, D. Lin, A. Pei and Y. Cui, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9820 CrossRef .
B. Liu, Y. Jia, C. Yuan, L. Wang, X. Gao, S. Yin and J. Xu, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 24, 85–112 CrossRef .
J. Hao, F. Yang, S. Zhang, H. He, G. Xia, Y. Liu, C. Didier, T. Liu, W. K. Pang and V. K. Peterson, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 2815–2823 CrossRef CAS .
T. Meng, B. Li, Q. Wang, J. Hao, B. Huang, F. Gu, H. Xu, P. Liu and Y. X. Tong, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7066–7067 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ordoñez, E. Gago and A. Girard, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 60, 195–205 CrossRef .
J. Hao, Y. Liao, Y. Zhong, D. Shu, C. He, S. Guo, Y. Huang, J. Zhong and L. Hu, Carbon, 2015, 94, 879–887 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Fu, N. Zhao, L. Yang, Y. Wu and H. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 295–297 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Hu and K. Xu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 3205–3206 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, F. Xie, C. Ye, H. Li, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaba4098 CrossRef .
J. Zhou, L. Shan, Z. Wu, X. Guo, G. Fang and S. Liang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4457–4460 RSC .
N. Alias and A. A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 237–251 CrossRef CAS .
F. Beck and P. Rüetschi, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2467–2482 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, J. Hao, Z. Wang, J. Mao and Z. Guo, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 20, 410–437 CrossRef .
X. Ji, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3203–3224 RSC .
C. Xia, J. Guo, P. Li, X. Zhang and H. N. Alshareef, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3943–3948 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li and H. Dai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5257–5275 RSC .

          R. S. Balog and A. Davoudi, Encyclopedia of Sustainability Science and Technology, Springer,  2012, pp. 671–706 Search PubMed .
J. Phillips, S. Mohanta, M. Geng, J. Barton, B. McKinney and J. Wu, ECS Trans., 2009, 16, 11 CrossRef CAS .

          F. von Sturm, Comprehensive Treatise of Electrochemistry, Springer,  1981, pp. 407–419 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Zhou, H. E. Karahan, Q. Shao, L. Wei and Y. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1801929 CrossRef .
T. Shoji, M. Hishinuma and T. Yamamoto, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1988, 18, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muldoon, C. B. Bucur and T. Gregory, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11683–11720 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, L. Chen, X. Zhou and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400930 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Y. Hou, Y. Zhu, Y. Wu and R. Holze, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1401 CrossRef .
D. Chao and S. Z. Qiao, Joule, 2020, 4, 1846–1851 CrossRef .
S. Higashi, S. W. Lee, J. S. Lee, K. Takechi and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–6 Search PubMed .
L. E. Blanc, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Joule, 2020, 4, 771–799 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen, J. Power Sources, 1994, 51, 37–44 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He, H. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. Shao and M. Ni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36873–36881 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Li, C. C. Hu, T. H. You and P. Y. Chen, Carbon, 2017, 111, 813–821 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, D. Zhu, J. He, J. Li, H. Chen, Y. Chen and D. Chao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020 10.1039/d0ee01221a .
J. S. Lee, S. Tai Kim, R. Cao, N. S. Choi, M. Liu, K. T. Lee and J. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 34–50 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kraytsberg and Y. Ein-Eli, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 468–480 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Han, R. Hu and M. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9775–9778 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Dong, M. Jia, X. Bian, Y. Wang, M. Qiu, J. Xu, Y. Liu, L. Jiao and F. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1366–1372 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto and T. Shoji, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1986, 117, L27–L28 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Q. An and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900387 CrossRef .
J. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Chen, S. Ni and Z. X. Shen, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 20–41 CrossRef .
D. Yang, H. Tan, X. Rui and Y. Yu, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 22, 1–33 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, J. Zhou, A. Pan and S. Liang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2480–2501 CrossRef CAS .
M. Song, H. Tan, D. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802564 CrossRef .
P. Yu, Y. Zeng, H. Zhang, M. Yu, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804760 CrossRef .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, B. Tawiah, Y. Wang, C. Y. Chan, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104523 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, C. Xie, H. Zhang and X. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3996–4006 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. McLarnon and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 645–664 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Xie, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Mater., 2020, 0, 1–14 Search PubMed .
B. Hwang, E.-S. Oh and K. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 216, 484–489 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 933–935 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, D. Ivey, Z. Xie and W. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 358–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 752–757 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Mainar, O. Leonet, M. Bengoechea, I. Boyano, I. de Meatza, A. Kvasha, A. Guerfi and J. Alberto Blázquez, Int. J. Energy Res., 2016, 40, 1032–1049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Q. Yang, F. Mo, G. Liang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, L. Ma, J. Liu, Z. Shi and C. Zhi, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 19, 94–101 CrossRef .
H. Gao, F. Yang, Y. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. Hao, S. Zhang, H. Zheng, J. Chen, H. Liu and Z. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5373–5379 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, K. Lei, C. Chen, X. Liu and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12894–12901 CrossRef CAS .
G. Toussaint, P. Stevens, L. Akrour, R. Rouget and F. Fourgeot, ECS Trans., 2010, 28, 25–34 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, E. Hu, W. Sun, T. Gao, X. Ji, X. Fan, F. Han, X. Q. Yang, K. Xu and C. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3168–3175 RSC .
A. Nazarov, E. Diler, D. Persson and D. Thierry, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2015, 737, 129–140 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, C. Ye, F. Xie, W. Zhou, Q. Zhang, Q. Gu, K. Davey, L. Gu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001894 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, B. Kohn, U. Scheler, F. Wang, S. Oswald, M. Löffler, D. Tan, P. Zhang, J. Zhang and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905681 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhong, B. Liu, J. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Zhong, Y. Li, C. Sun, X. Han, Y. Deng, N. Zhao and W. Hu, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 440–449 CrossRef CAS .
J. Stamm, A. Varzi, A. Latz and B. Horstmann, J. Power Sources, 2017, 360, 136–149 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, X. Chi, Q. Han and Y. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1903589 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Gu, K. Davey and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7823–7828 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, X. Fan, J. Ding, W. Hu, C. Zhong and J. Lu, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2259–2270 CrossRef CAS .
L. Binder, W. Odar and K. Kordesch, J. Power Sources, 1981, 6, 271–289 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Fu, Z. P. Cano, M. G. Park, A. Yu, M. Fowler and Z. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700610 Search PubMed .
P. Pei, K. Wang and Z. Ma, Appl. Energy, 2014, 128, 315–324 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, Y. Y. Xu, H. Yang, Z. Dong, H. Liu and B. Y. Xia, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700691 CrossRef .
V. Jiricny, S. Siu, A. Roy and J. Evans, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2000, 30, 647–656 CrossRef CAS .
S. Müller, F. Holzer and O. Haas, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1998, 28, 895–898 CrossRef .
P. Liu, X. Ling, C. Zhong, Y. Deng, X. Han and W. Hu, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 656 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Mainar, L. C. Colmenares, J. A. Blázquez and I. Urdampilleta, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 903–918 CrossRef .
A. R. Mainar, L. C. Colmenares, H. J. Grande and J. A. Blázquez, Batteries, 2018, 4, 46 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Kainthla and D. Manko, US Pat., 0113630A1,  2003 Search PubMed.
D. Stock, S. Dongmo, K. Miyazaki, T. Abe, J. Janek and D. Schröder, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 195–204 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, C. Wu, L. Dong, W. Liu, J. Mou, J. Zhang, Z. Chang, B. Jiang, G. Wang and F. Kang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 3364–3371 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Wang, S. Bi, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804975 CrossRef .
L. Ma, N. Li, C. Long, B. Dong, D. Fang, Z. Liu, Y. Zhao, X. Li, J. Fan and S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906142 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 14–21 CrossRef .
L. P. Wang, N. W. Li, T. S. Wang, Y. X. Yin, Y. G. Guo and C. R. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 244, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
T. Graedel, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 193C–203C CrossRef CAS .
P. Tan, B. Chen, H. Xu, W. Cai, W. He and M. Ni, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 104–112 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Zu and H. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2614–2624 RSC .
S. Siahrostami, V. Tripković, K. T. Lundgaard, K. E. Jensen, H. A. Hansen, J. S. Hummelshøj, J. S. Mýrdal, T. Vegge, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 6416–6421 RSC .
R. W. Powers and M. W. Breiter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 719–729 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cachet, B. Saidani and R. Wiart, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1992, 139, 644–654 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cachet, U. Ströder and R. Wiart, Electrochim. Acta, 1982, 27, 903–908 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hendrikx, A. van der Putten, W. Visscher and E. Barendrecht, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 81–89 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Chang and G. Prentice, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 1465 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, J. Zhu, J. Tian and Z. Niu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2019, 25, 14480–14494 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Liu, G. Cook and N. Yao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1981, 128, 1663–1668 CrossRef CAS .
M. Breiter, Electrochim. Acta, 1970, 15, 1297–1304 CrossRef CAS .
L. Baugh and A. Higginson, Electrochim. Acta, 1985, 30, 1163–1172 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bockelmann, M. Becker, L. Reining, U. Kunz and T. Turek, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A3048–A3055 CrossRef CAS .
V. Caldeira, R. Rouget, F. Fourgeot, J. Thiel, F. Lacoste, L. Dubau and M. Chatenet, J. Power Sources, 2017, 350, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1972, 119, 1620 CrossRef CAS .
R. Einerhand, W. Visscher, J. De Goeij and E. Barendrecht, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 7 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yi, P. Liang, X. Liu, K. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3075–3095 RSC .
H. A. Akiyoshi Nakata, H. Murayama, K. Fukuda, T. Yamane, T. Hirai, Y. Uchimoto, J. Yamaki and Z. Ogumi, APL Mater., 2018, 6, 047703 CrossRef .
M. Liu, X. Pu, Z. Cong, Z. Liu, T. Liu, Y. Chen, J. Fu, W. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5095–5106 CrossRef CAS .
M. Biton, F. Tariq, V. Yufit, Z. Chen and N. Brandon, Acta Mater., 2017, 141, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. Diggle, A. Despic and J. M. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1969, 116, 1503–1514 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. D. A. Damjanovic, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 65 CrossRef .
F. Mansfeld and S. Gilman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
M. Audero and H. Biloni, J. Cryst. Growth, 1972, 12, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
V. Yufit, F. Tariq, D. S. Eastwood, M. Biton, B. Wu, P. D. Lee and N. P. Brandon, Joule, 2019, 3, 485–502 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, Y. J. Kim, S. W. Eom, N. S. Choi, K. W. Kim and S. B. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2013, 227, 177–184 CrossRef CAS .
T. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1971, 118, 1278–1282 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lee, S. W. Eom, K. Sathiyanarayanan and M. S. Yun, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1588–1591 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shivkumar, G. P. Kalaignan and T. Vasudevan, J. Power Sources, 1995, 55, 53–62 CrossRef CAS .
R. Shivkumar, G. P. Kalaignan and T. Vasudevan, J. Power Sources, 1998, 75, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
J. McBreen and E. Gannon, Electrochim. Acta, 1981, 26, 1439–1446 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Mitchell, G. D. Wilcox and K. Bass, J. Power Sources, 1991, 35, 333–351 CrossRef .
R. Renuka, L. Srinivasan, S. Ramamurthy, A. Veluchamy and N. Venkatakrishnan, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2001, 31, 655–661 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hosseini, A. Abbasi, L. O. Uginet, N. Haustraete, S. Praserthdam, T. Yonezawa and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yuan, J. Tu, H. Wu, Y. Li, D. Shi and X. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 357–360 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Turney, J. W. Gallaway, G. G. Yadav, R. Ramirez, M. Nyce, S. Banerjee, Y. K. Chen-Wiegart, J. Wang, M. J. D’Ambrose and S. Kolhekar, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4819–4832 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Gagnon and Y. M. Wang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 2091–2096 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kavitha, P. Santhosh, M. Renukadevi, A. Kalpana, P. Shakkthivel and T. Vasudevan, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2006, 201, 3438–3442 CrossRef CAS .
D. Stock, S. Dongmo, F. Walther, J. Sann, J. Janek and D. Schroder, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 8640–8648 CrossRef CAS .
W. MacKnight and T. R. Earnest Jr, J. Polym. Sci., Part D: Macromol. Rev., 1981, 16, 41–122 CAS .
Y. Zhou and J. Zhu, J. Power Sources, 1998, 73, 266–270 CrossRef .
K. Miyazaki, Y. S. Lee, T. Fukutsuka and T. Abe, Electrochemistry, 2012, 80, 725–727 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Z. Yang, X. Xie, Z. Feng and Z. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 289, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. Long, L. Chen, H. Qin and M. Fan, Ionics, 2019, 25, 1223–1233 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, P. Chen, Y. Wu, H. Yang, H. Ding, Y. Zhang, Z. Wang, X. Du and N. Liu, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2019, 194, 142–147 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, Z. Wang, A. Mathur, H. Yang, P. Chen, S. Nair and N. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6345–6351 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. Ding, Y. Yan, Z. Zhou, Y. Ding and N. Liu, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 666–674 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, T.-H. Wu, Y. Ma, C. Pelkowski, H. Yang, Y. Zhang, X. Hu and N. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 21933–21940 RSC .
Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, J. D. Howe, H. Yang, P. Chen, S. Aluri and N. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802470 CrossRef .
L. Sun, Z. Yi, J. Lin, F. Liang, Y. Wu, Z. Cao and L. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 12337–12343 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, C.-W. Yi and K. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 2572–2577 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, E. S. Nelson, M. D. Wattendorf, C. N. Chervin, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19471–19476 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, X. Ling, C. Zhong, Y. Deng, X. Han and W. Hu, Front. Chem., 2019, 7, 656 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, C. Guan, C. Zhou, Z. Fan, Q. Ke, G. Zhang, C. Liu and J. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8732–8739 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, I. R. Pala, M. Machler, M. F. Burz, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Science, 2017, 356, 415–418 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Parker, C. N. Chervin, E. S. Nelson, D. R. Rolison and J. W. Long, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1117–1124 RSC .
J. S. Ko, A. B. Geltmacher, B. J. Hopkins, D. R. Rolison, J. W. Long and J. F. Parker, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 2, 212–216 CrossRef .
S. J. Banik and R. Akolkar, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 179, 475–481 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Hashemi, G. Kasiri and F. La Mantia, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 703–708 CrossRef .
S. Hosseini, S. J. Han, A. Arponwichanop, T. Yonezawa and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–11 CrossRef .
H. I. Kim, E. J. Kim, S. J. Kim and H. C. Shin, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2015, 45, 335–342 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mansfeld and S. Gilman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 588–592 CrossRef CAS .
F. Mansfeld and S. Gilman, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1970, 117, 1154–1155 CrossRef CAS .
B. Szcześniak, M. Cyrankowska and A. Nowacki, J. Power Sources, 1998, 75, 130–138 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Y. Zhou and C. Gao, J. Power Sources, 1998, 72, 231–235 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dobryszycki and S. Biallozor, Corros. Sci., 2001, 43, 1309–1319 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Ghavami and Z. Rafiei, J. Power Sources, 2006, 162, 893–899 CrossRef CAS .
V. Branzoi, A. Pruna and F. Branzoi, Rev. Roum. Chim., 2007, 52, 587–595 CAS .
K. Liu, P. He, H. Bai, J. Chen, F. Dong, S. Wang, M. He and S. Yuan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2017, 199, 73–78 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shimizu, K. Hirahara and S. Arai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 7045–7052 RSC .
D. P. Trudgeon, K. Qiu, X. Li, T. Mallick, O. O. Taiwo, B. Chakrabarti, V. Yufit, N. P. Brandon, D. Crevillen-Garcia and A. Shah, J. Power Sources, 2019, 412, 44–54 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hosseini, W. Lao-Atiman, S. J. Han, A. Arpornwichanop, T. Yonezawa and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 14909 CrossRef .
M. Deyab, J. Power Sources, 2015, 292, 66–71 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Ghavami, Z. Rafiei and S. M. Tabatabaei, J. Power Sources, 2007, 164, 934–946 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sumboja, M. Lübke, Y. Wang, T. An, Y. Zong and Z. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700927 CrossRef .
S. Clark, A. R. Mainar, E. Iruin, L. C. Colmenares, J. A. Blázquez, J. R. Tolchard, A. Latz and B. Horstmann, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11387–11399 RSC .
R. Othman, W. Basirun, A. Yahaya and A. Arof, J. Power Sources, 2001, 103, 34–41 CrossRef CAS .
N. Vassal, E. Salmon and J. F. Fauvarque, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 1527–1532 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yang and S. J. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2002, 112, 497–503 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Mohamad, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159, 752–757 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Z. Li, Z. Pei, Z. Liu, H. Li, M. Zhu, J. Fan, Q. Dai, M. Zhang, L. Dai and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1802288 CrossRef .
X. Fan, J. Liu, Z. Song, X. Han, Y. Deng, C. Zhong and W. Hu, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 454–462 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lai, H. Zhang, X. Li, L. Zhang and Y. Cheng, J. Power Sources, 2013, 235, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Y. Yin, C. Xie, H. Zhang, Y. Yao and X. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902025 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gavrilović-Wohlmuther, A. Laskos, C. Zelger, B. Gollas and A. H. Whitehead, J. Energy Power Eng., 2015, 9, 1019–1028 Search PubMed .
J. Jorne, Y. J. Lii and K. E. Yee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 1399 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, D. Chen, C. Lu, C. Zhang, F. Qiu, S. Han and X. Zhuang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 266, 17–26 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Wu, N. Bramnik and S. Mitra, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 970–976 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Dewi, K. Oyaizu, H. Nishide and E. Tsuchida, J. Power Sources, 2003, 115, 149–152 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, Y. Duan, T. Liu, H. Zhang and X. Li, iScience, 2018, 3, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, H. Zhang, W. Xu, W. Wang and X. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11171–11176 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bass, P. Mitchell, G. Wilcox and J. Smith, J. Power Sources, 1991, 35, 333–351 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bennion, Brigham Young Univ., Provo, UT (USA). Dept. of Chemical Engineering, 1980, D.E. 83011663.
G. Garcia, E. Ventosa and W. Schuhmann, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18691–18698 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. A. Chiba, H. Kitayama and T. Ogawa, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1986, 29, 347–355 CrossRef .
S. Higashi, S. W. Lee, J. S. Lee, K. Takechi and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11801 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, T. Cui, G. Pulletikurthi, A. Lahiri, T. Carstens, M. Olschewski and F. Endres, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pavlović, Š. Kindlova and I. Roušar, Electrochim. Acta, 1992, 37, 23–27 CrossRef .
L. N. Bengoa, S. Bruno, H. A. Lazzarino, P. R. Seré and W. A. Egli, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2014, 44, 1261–1269 CrossRef CAS .
K. Popov, M. Pavlović and M. Maksimović, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1982, 12, 525–531 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Bengoa, P. Pary, P. R. Seré, M. S. Conconi and W. A. Egli, J. Mater. Eng. Perform., 2018, 27, 1103–1108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
R. Woods, R. Yoon and C. Young, Int. J. Miner. Process., 1987, 20, 109–120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Yang, B. Chen, Z. Zhao, H. Qiu, S. Dong, X. Zhou, G. Cui and L. Chen, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 625–634 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Cai, Y. Ou, J. Wang, R. Xiao, L. Fu, Z. Yuan, R. Zhan and Y. Sun, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 205–211 CrossRef .
P. Liang, J. Yi, X. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908528 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, B. Tawiah, Y. Wang, C. Y. Chan, B. Fei and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104523 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Deng, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9377–9381 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hong, Z. Ahmad and V. Viswanathan, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2466–2474 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tang, C. Liu, H. Zhu, X. Xie, J. Gao, C. Deng, M. Han, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 27, 109–116 CrossRef .
C. Deng, X. Xie, J. Han, Y. Tang, J. Gao, C. Liu, X. Shi, J. Zhou and S. Liang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, B. Li, X. Li, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, F. Yang, S. Liu, D. Li, C. Wu and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003021 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, S. Zhang, G. Bo, C. Wang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001263 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, L. Ma, C. Han, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang and C. Zhi, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 550–587 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, J. Zhang, G. Xia, Y. Liu, Y. Zheng, W. Zhang, Y. Tang, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10430–10438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hao, J. Long, B. Li, X. Li, S. Zhang, F. Yang, X. Zeng, Z. Yang, W. K. Pang and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903605 CrossRef .
K. E. Sun, T. K. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu, X. Zhu, Y. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9681–9687 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, K. Zhao, W. Huo, Y. Wang, G. Yao, X. Gu, H. Cheng, L. Mai, C. Hu and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 275–281 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mitha, A. Z. Yazdi, M. Ahmed and P. Chen, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 2409–2418 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Sun, T. K. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu and P. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1667–1673 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–11 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Zhang, H. Hu, H. Y. Shi, Y. Song, D. Guo, X. X. Liu and X. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42000–42005 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chae, J. W. Heo, H. H. Kwak, H. Lee and S. T. Hong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kasiri, R. Trócoli, A. B. Hashemi and F. La Mantia, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, J. Liu, J. Mao, J. Hao, Z. Wang, S. Zhou, C. D. Ling and Z. Guo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904163 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, Q. Wei, S. Tan, P. He, W. Luo, Q. An and L. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4041–4044 RSC .
Z. Hou, M. Dong, Y. Xiong, X. Zhang, H. Ao, M. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Small, 2020, 16, 2001228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, T. Gao, M. Olguin, J. Ho, X. Fan, C. Luo, C. Wang and K. Xu, Science, 2015, 350, 938–943 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, A. Markir, J. Lu and X. Ji, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 6338–6344 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J. X. Jiang and C. Fang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
L. Zhang, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, H. Jiang, C. Zhang, D. P. Leonard, Q. Guo, W. Wang, S. Han, L. Wang and X. Ji, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902653 CrossRef .
L. Jiang, L. Liu, J. Yue, Q. Zhang, A. Zhou, O. Borodin, L. Suo, H. Li, L. Chen and K. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 32, 1904427 CrossRef .
L. Suo, O. Borodin, W. Sun, X. Fan, C. Yang, F. Wang, T. Gao, Z. Ma, M. Schroeder and A. von Cresce, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7136–7141 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, S. Chen, D. Wang, Q. Yang, F. Mo, G. Liang, N. Li, H. Zhang, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803046 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Tang, H. Lv, W. Wang, F. Mo, G. Liang, C. Zhi and H. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 17992–18008 RSC .
X. Li, J. Hao, R. Liu, H. He, Y. Wang, G. Liang, Y. Liu, G. Yuan and Z. Guo, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 33, 62–70 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Y. He, M. L. Sushko, J. Liu, L. Luo, J. J. De Yoreo, S. X. Mao, C. Wang and K. M. Rosso, Science, 2017, 356, 434–437 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, M. Song, P. Liang, X. Zhang, N. H. Tiep, H. Zhao, J. Wang, R. Wang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803181 CrossRef .
C. Liu, A. Gao, F. Yi, D. Shu, H. Yi, X. Zhou, J. Hao, C. He and Z. Zhu, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 326, 134965 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Z. Liu, G. Liang, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Tang and Y. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3140–3148 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Li, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, G. Liang, F. Mo, Q. Yang, L. Ma and C. Zhi, Small, 2018, 14, 1803978 CrossRef .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu and Z. Tang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941–951 RSC .
F. Liu, R. Xu, Z. Hu, S. Ye, S. Zeng, Y. Yao, S. Li and Y. Yu, Small, 2019, 15, 1803734 CrossRef .
P. He, Q. Chen, M. Yan, X. Xu, L. Zhou, L. Mai and C.-W. Nan, EnergyChem, 2019, 1, 100022 CrossRef .
C. Shen, X. Li, N. Li, K. Xie, J.-g. Wang, X. Liu and B. Wei, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 25446–25453 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, K. Wang, M. Zhou, H. Zhan, S. Cheng and K. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22059–22066 CrossRef CAS .
A. Xia, X. Pu, Y. Tao, H. Liu and Y. Wang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 481, 852–859 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kang, M. Cui, F. Jiang, Y. Gao, H. Luo, J. Liu, W. Liang and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801090 CrossRef .
X. Xie, S. Liang, J. Gao, S. Guo, J. Guo, C. Wang, G. Xu, X. Wu, G. Chen and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 503–510 RSC .
K. Zhao, C. Wang, Y. Yu, M. Yan, Q. Wei, P. He, Y. Dong, Z. Zhang, X. Wang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800848 CrossRef .
P. Liang, J. Yi, X. Liu, K. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Cui, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Xia and J. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908528 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Lee, S. Cui, X. Xing, H. Liu, X. Yue, V. Petrova, H.-D. Lim, R. Chen and P. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 38928–38935 CrossRef CAS .
W. Dong, J. L. Shi, T. S. Wang, Y. X. Yin, C. R. Wang and Y. G. Guo, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 19157–19163 RSC .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, Y. Meng, M. Yu, J. Yi, Y. Wu, X. Lu and Y. Tong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700274 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Shi, S. Liang, X. Ma, M. Han, X. Wu and J. Zhou, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 379, 122248 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, R. Qin, X. Liu, P. Fang, D. Zheng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903675 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, J. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Joule, 2019, 3, 1289–1300 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang and D. C. Bock, Science, 2019, 366, 645–648 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Wang, Q. Ran, R. Q. Yao, H. Shi, Z. Wen, M. Zhao, X. Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1634 CrossRef .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Junnan Hao
	Junnan Hao received his master's degree in 2016 from South China Normal University, China. He has just received his PhD degree at the University of Wollongong, Australia, and now he works as a casual research fellow in Prof. Zaiping Guo's group. His research interests are focused on energy storage and conversion, including aqueous Zn-ion batteries, Li-ion batteries, dual ion batteries, and flexible energy storage devices.

Xiaolong Li
	Xiaolong Li received his master's degree in 2016 from Harbin Institute of Technology (HIT), China, and then he pursued his PhD at HIT. Currently, he is an exchange student at the University of Wollongong, Australia. His research interests are focused on energy storage and conversion, including supercapacitors, and aqueous rechargeable batteries.

Xiaohui Zeng
	Xiaohui Zeng received her master's degree in 2017 from Central South University, China. She currently is a second-year PhD student in Prof. Zaiping Guo's research group at the University of Wollongong, Australia. Her research interests are in the field of energy storage and conversion, focusing on Li-ion batteries and aqueous rechargeable Zn-ion batteries.

Jianfeng Mao
	Jianfeng Mao received his PhD in materials science from the University of Wollongong, Australia, in 2012. After working at the Max-Planck-Institute für Kohlenforschung, University of Glasgow and University of Maryland, he moved back to the University of Wollongong in 2015. His research interests are in inorganic materials for rechargeable batteries, catalysis, and hydrogen storage.

Zaiping Guo
	Zaiping Guo received her PhD in materials engineering from the University of Wollongong in December 2003. After her Australian Postdoctoral (APD) Fellowship at the Institute for Superconducting and Electronic Materials, she joined the Faculty of Engineering and Information Sciences, University of Wollongong, as a lecturer in 2008. She was promoted to professor in 2012, senior professor in 2013, and then to distinguished professor in 2018. Her current research interests are focused on the design and application of nanomaterials for energy storage and conversion, including rechargeable batteries, hydrogen storage, and fuel cells.

Broader context
As alternatives to Li-ion batteries in large-scale application, aqueous Zn-based batteries have sparked tremendous interest due to their cost effectiveness, intrinsic safety, environmental friendliness, and facile manufacturing. Nevertheless, the metallic Zn anode still suffers from poor coulombic efficiency in both mild and alkaline electrolytes, which largely prevents its practical development. The Zn anode has been fully studied in alkaline electrolyte for a long time, while its study in mild media is still in its infancy. Notably, the Zn electrode in both types of electrolyte inherently faces distinct working conditions, reaction mechanisms, and redox potentials, so that it suffers from different problems and requires different solutions in the two media, but clarity on the fundamental aspects of the Zn anode in both media is yet to be achieved. In this Review, we have thoroughly analyzed the differences and similarities of the Zn anode in alkaline and mild media, and compared the underlying mechanisms of the corresponding strategies to address problematic Zn issues in both systems. Perspectives on studies of Zn corrosion, the depth of discharge, the capacity ratio of the anode and cathode, lean electrolytes, etc. have also been proposed to promote the practical application of Zn-ion batteries in the near future.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic illustration of the development of Zn metal electrodes used in various alkaline and mild batteries.30–34,49,50	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the two typical alkaline and mild Zn-based battery configurations as well as their differences. (a) A typical alkaline Zn–air battery, in which the metallic Zn is converted into Zn(OH)42−, and then ZnO during discharging. (b) A typical mild ZIB, where the metallic Zn is converted into Zn2+ during discharging. (c) The differences between the alkaline and mild battery systems. The different working environments of both systems not only lead to different reaction mechanisms and redox potentials for the Zn electrode, but also cause different Zn electrode issues.	 
Zn + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42− + 2e−	(1)
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + 2OH− + H2O	(2)
ZnO + 2OH− + H2O → Zn(OH)42−	(3)
Zn(OH)42− + 2e− → Zn + 4OH−	(4)
Zn → Zn2+ + 2e−	(5)
Zn2+ + 2e− → Zn	(6)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery and the chemical reactions of the MnO2 cathode in acidic electrolyte and the Zn anode in alkaline electrolyte. (Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2020, Macmillan Publishers.) (b) Voltage profiles and the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve (inset) of the decoupled Zn–MnO2 battery. (c) Comparison of the specific capacities and average discharge voltages of the reported aqueous ZIBs. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of Zn electrode issues. (a) In an alkaline system (KOH electrolyte), the issues include corrosion, passivation, shape change, dendrite growth, and H2 evolution. (b) In a mild system, the issues include dendrites, H2 evolution, and electrode corrosion. The inset shows the layered Zn4(OH)6SO4·xH2O by-product in ZnSO4 electrolyte.	 
Zn − 2e− + 4OH− → Zn(OH)42 −	(7)
Zn(OH)42− → ZnO + H2O + 2OH−	(8)
Zn − 2e− + 4OH− → ZnO + H2O	(9)

 	Fig. 5  
In situ microscopic observation of Zn electrode passivation under a current density of 70 mA cm−2. After 40 min, a loose and porous type I layer was generated on the surface. After 100 min, rupturing of this dark passive layer can be recognized. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2018, Electrochemical Society, Inc.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) SEM image of Zn dendrites. (b) Reconstructed 3D image of Zn dendrites obtained using focused ion beam (FIB)-SEM tomography. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.) (c) Radiographic images of Zn dendritic growth under a current density of 15 mA cm−2 after 180 s, 720 s, 860 s, and 1020 s, respectively. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.)	 
	(10)
η = A + BlogI	(11)

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the working principle of the Zn electrode in an alkaline electrolyte. (a) Bare Zn electrode. Each Zn atom might not be deposited at the same location on the Zn electrode during cycling, leading to severe changes in the electrode shape/structure and even dendrite growth. (b) Zn electrode homogeneously coated with an anion-exchange ionomer (AEI). The shape change and dendrite growth are suppressed by keeping the [Zn(OH)4]2− ion near its place of origin. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.) (c) Schematic illustration of the ion-sieving nano-shell design for the Zn electrode. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the effect of recharging a Ni–Zn (using a commercial Zn powder electrode) vs. a Ni–3D Zn cell, where the anode is redesigned as a monolithic aperiodic sponge, ensuring persistent 3D wiring of the metallic Zn core. Zn dendrites would pierce the separator after a certain number of cycles. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2017, AAAS.) (b) Three-dimensional volume-rendered X-ray tomograms of Zn20 and Zn30 sponges. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 153. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 9  
In situ optical microscope images of the Zn electrode after Zn deposition for 30 min. The electrolyte contains 0.1 M ZnO + 4.0 M KOH with various concentrations of PEI: (a) 0 ppm, (b) 10 ppm, (c) 50 ppm, and (d) 100 ppm. SEM images of the Zn deposition morphology: (e) in the additive-free electrolyte, and (f) in the electrolyte containing 10 ppm PEI additive. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2015, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Synthesis of the PANa gel electrolyte, which consists of an acrylic acid (AA) monomer, NaOH, ammonium persulfate, Zn(CH3COO)2, and KOH (water and ion content regulator). (b) Schematic illustration of the quasi-SEI formation between the Zn anode and PANa electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.) (c) Schematic illustration of the preparation process for the porous PVA-based gel electrolyte along with its inner structure for the Zn–air battery. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic diagram of the charging behaviour of a PBI membrane with ultra-high mechanical stability and a 3D porous carbon felt coating for an alkaline Zn battery. (b) The transportation mechanism of OH− ions in a PBI membrane. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.) (c) Operating principle of the porous polyolefin membrane for an alkaline Zn battery. (d) Schematic illustration of the self-healing process. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2018, John Wiley and Sons.) (e) Schematic diagram of a cell with the conventional frontside-plating configuration. (f) Schematic representation of a cell with the backside-plating configuration for avoiding internal short circuits. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.)	 

 	Fig. 12  Summary of the strategies for addressing the problematic issues for the Zn electrode in alkaline electrolyte.	 
	(12)

 	Fig. 13  (a) DEMS tests on symmetrical Zn cells to monitor the electrochemical H2 evolution. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.) (b) H2 gas evolution accompanied by the chemical corrosion of the Zn electrode in 3 M ZnSO4 electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 201. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.) (c) In situ optical microscope images of H2 gas evolution during the Zn electrodeposition process at 0.2 mA cm−2. (d) Zn foil soaked in 1 M ZnSO4 electrolyte and photographic comparison of Zn foil before/after soaking in electrolyte for 7 days. (e) SEM image of the Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O by-product on Zn foil and its crystal structure. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons.)	 
Cathode: 2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2↑ + 2OH−	(13)
Anode: Zn ↔ Zn2+ + 2e−	(14)
4Zn2+ + 6OH− + SO42 − + xH2O ↔ Zn4SO4(OH)6·xH2O	(15)

 	Fig. 14  (a) Linear polarization curves of the synthesized zinc with and without organic additives and commercial zinc foil when in contact with the battery's electrolyte. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 213. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.) Cyclic voltammograms of the Zn electrode in aqueous electrolyte containing (b) 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 and (c) 1 M ZnSO4 at a scan rate of 0.5 mV s−1 between –0.2 and 2.0 V. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.) (d) Snapshot of the molecular dynamics (MD) simulation cell for highly-concentrated electrolyte (HCZE) (1 M Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI) at 363 K. (e) Representative Zn2+-solvation structures in the electrolytes with 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 and three concentrations of LiTFSI (5 m, 10 m and 20 M). (Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.) (f) Schematic diagram of the fabrication of the cross-linked polyacrylamide (PAM)-based electrolyte. (g) SEM image of the free-standing PAM. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Differential charge density distribution of Zn@ZnO-3D from first-principles calculations. (b) Electric double layer structure in the vicinity of the anode and the corresponding energy barriers. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 245. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.) In situ optical microscope images of the cross-sectional Zn deposition morphology on the (c) bare Zn plate and (d) PA-coated Zn plate in a symmetrical Zn cell at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.) (e) SEM images of Zn deposits on the ZIF-8-500 electrode at a current density of 1.0 mA cm−2 for different capacities. Scale bars, 2 mm. (f) Schematic illustration of the Zn plating. (Reprinted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Summary of the strategies for addressing the problematic issues for the Zn electrode in mild electrolyte.	 

 	Fig. 17  Summary of future efforts towards the industrial application of aqueous Zn-based batteries in four parts: fundamental studies on Zn electrode corrosion, CEs with different depth of discharge (DOD) measurements, energy density enhancement, and large cells tests.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
