Photocapacitor integrating voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor and silicon solar cell generating a Joule efficiency of 86%   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE01744J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE01744J
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 4247-4258Photocapacitor integrating voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor and silicon solar cell generating a Joule efficiency of 86%†

        
          
            Zeyu 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jihuai 
            Wu
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Yongguang 
            Tu
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Liuxue 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tingting 
            Zhu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guodong 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaobing 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yitian 
            Du
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chunyan 
            Deng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Qi 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weihai 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Miaoliang 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Leqing 
            Fan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunfang 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuelin 
            Wei
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yiming 
            Xie
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongwei 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jianming 
            Lin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lan 
            Zhan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gao
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Khaja 
            Nazeeruddin
          
        
      *d and 

        
          
            Wei 
            Huang
          
        
      *be
aEngineering Research Center of Environment-Friendly Functional Materials, Ministry of Education, Institute of Materials Physical Chemistry, Huaqiao University, Xiamen, 361021, P. R. China. E-mail: jhwu@hqu.edu.cn
bFrontiers Science Center for Flexible Electronics, Northwestern Polytechnical University, Xi’an 710072, Shaanxi, P. R. China. E-mail: iamwhuang@nwpu.edu.cn
cChinese Academy of Science, Xiamen Institute Rare Earth Materials, Xiamen 361021, P. R. China
dInstitute of Chemical Sciences and Engineering, École Polytechnique Fedérale de Lausanne, CH-1951 Sion, Switzerland. E-mail: mdkhaja.nazeeruddin@epfl.ch
eKey Laboratory of Flexible Electronics (KLoFE) and Institute of Advanced Materials (IAM), Nanjing Tech University, Nanjing 211816, Jiangsu, P. R. China
Received 
      1st June 2022
    , Accepted 22nd August 2022First published on 1st September 2022AbstractPhotocapacitor integrating both energy harvest and storage functions into a single device is a frontier research orientation, which facilitates the efficient and sustainable utilization of green energy. However, the multi-functions in one device and structural complexity of the integrated device, particularly the mismatch between energy harvest and storage units, lead to a relatively large energy loss in the energy storage and output processes. Here, we design a voltage adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) as an energy storage unit of a three-terminal photocapacitor. The VAHSC effectively harmonizes the energy harvest and storage units, resulting in the current, voltage, power, and energy match between both units. The optimal photocapacitor achieves a storage efficiency as high as 98.28% and Joule efficiency of 86.01%, along with excellent charge/discharge cycle stability. The great leap in this efficiency marks a substantial step towards the practical application of solar-charging energy storage integrated devices.

Broader context
Solar energy is clean, open, and infinite, but sunlight on the earth is fluctuating, intermittent, and unstable. In this sense, the practical utilization of solar energy requires the complementary combination of high-efficient energy conversion and low-loss energy storage technologies. The consequent photocapacitor integrating both functions of energy harvest and storage into a single device is very promising. Despite its bright potential, the energy harvest unit and storage unit of photocapacitor cannot effectively cooperate, resulting in a relatively low efficiency in the solar energy conversion process and a relatively large energy loss in the energy storage phase. The reported highest conversion storage efficiency of single device is less than 13%, which seriously hinders the development of this significant energy device. In this work, we clarify the photo-electric-chemical conversion process of photocapacitor, and reasonably define the Joule efficiency (ηJoule) as the energy ratio of discharge/charge. We creatively design a window voltage adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) with different intrinsic capacity electrodes. Using the VAHSC as energy storage unit and Si solar cell as PV harvest unit, a three-terminal photocapacitor is integrated. By setting an appropriate intrinsic capacity ratio of cathode to anode, and pre-charging to the cathode, the working voltage of the VAHSC is adjusted to 1.0 V, which is just close to the voltage at the maximum power point of the PV unit. Consequently, the VAHSC harmonizes the PV unit and ES unit, resulting in the voltage, current, power and energy match between the both units during whole photo-charging stage. The integrated photocapacitor achieves an overall efficiency of 15.49%, a Joule efficiency of 86.01% and a storage efficiency as high as 98.28%, along with excellent charge/discharge cycle stability. The great leap of this efficiency marks a substantial step towards the practical application of photocapacitors.

Introduction
Affordable, reliable, sustainable, and modern energy is a coveted development goal that the United Nations officially adopted in 2015,1 and solar energy is considered the most promising strategy to realize this goal.2–4 Solar energy is clean, open, and infinite but solar radiation on the earth is fluctuating, intermittent, and unstable. Hence, the sustainable utilization of solar energy requires the complementary combination of high-efficient energy conversion and low-loss energy storage technologies. In this sense, photocapacitors and other similar devices such as solar charging batteries, photorechargeable capacitor, self-charging power unit, and integrated solar capacitor, which integrate solar harvest and storage functions in a single device, is a frontier research orientation since it facilitates the sustainable operation of renewable energy, enhances energy utilization efficiency, and agrees with the current trend of multi-function and miniaturization of electronic equipment.5–10
The development of solar harvest and storage integrator (SHSI) is facing the severe challenge of improving its efficiency and stability. Aiming at the issues, various photovoltaic (PV) conversion units such as perovskite, dye-sensitized, organic, quantum dot, silicon, III–V, and tandem solar cells were investigated and different energy storage (ES) units involving supercapacitors, lithium–ion cells (capacitors), lithium–metal cells, redox flow battery, and so on were tested.10–19 Despite numerous efforts, owing to the multi-function in one device and structural complexity of the integrated device, particularly the mismatch between PV unit and ES unit, SHSI has relatively low efficiency in the solar harvest process and a relatively large energy loss in the energy storage phase, and the overall efficiency of SHSI is much lower than the pristine photovoltaic device. The overall efficiency of the monolithically SHSI (excluding the solar flow battery and tandem solar cell units) rarely exceeds 10% (Table S1, ESI†),10–19 and the maximum is 12.43%,19 which seriously hinders the development of this significant energy device.
In this study, on the basis of clarifying the photo-electro-chemical energy conversion process in the integrated system, we design a window voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) with different intrinsic capacity electrodes as the ES unit and Si solar cell (SSC) as PV unit, and a three-terminal integrated photocapacitor (IPC) is fabricated. The VAHSC effectively improves the voltage–current–power coupling and matching between the PV and ES units of devices. As a result, the IPC achieves an overall efficiency of 15.49%, along with a milestone storage efficiency of 98.28%. Moreover, IPC possesses excellent charge/discharge cycle stability. These studies should promote the development of high-effective solar conversion and storage integrated systems.
Results and discussion
Ni-Based electrode with core–shell structure
As energy storage units, supercapacitors show fast charge–discharge, long cycle life, and a wide range of electrode material sources.20,21 The electrode plays a crucial role in the performance of the supercapacitor. Frequently used electrode materials include carbon materials, conductive polymers, and metal oxides. Metal oxides are considered to be one of the most promising electrode materials for the next generation supercapacitors because of their large specific capacitance and high energy density.22–26 Transition metal carbonates grown on foam nickel with core–shell structure (Ni(HCO3)2@Ni) are promising anode materials due to their advantages of facile synthesis, large theoretical capacities, large specific area, and high electrochemical activities27 and the integrated energy storage unit has the potential to greatly increase the energy density of photocapacitors, but it is more challenging.

Fig. 1A shows the XRD patterns of the synthesized electrode materials Ni(HCO3)2@Ni (NHC@N) for different reaction times. The 2θ diffraction peaks at 14.95°, 26.03°, and 43.15° correspond to the (110), (211), and (400) crystal planes of Ni(HCO3)2, respectively. The 2θ diffraction peaks at 44.51° and 51.85° belong to the Ni foam. With the increase in reaction time, the intensities of the Ni(HCO3)2 peaks increase, and the intensities of the Ni peaks decrease, demonstrating that Ni is gradually transformed into Ni(HCO3)2. When the reaction reaches 4–5 h, the two kinds of diffraction peaks are obvious, indicating that crystalline Ni(HCO3)2 and Ni co-exist in the composite.

Fig. 1B–F shows the SEM images of the NHC@N materials synthesized for 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6 h; the inserts are partial enlargements. In these images, the porous material is Ni(HCO3)2, and the solid material is Ni. In the beginning, Ni(HCO3)2 is formed on the surface of Ni foam, but the Ni(HCO3)2 layer is thinner. With the increase in reaction time, the surface of Ni is eroded gradually to form Ni(HCO3)2, the thickness of the Ni(HCO3)2 layer increases, and the thickness of the Ni layer decreases. When the reaction reaches 4 h, Ni(HCO3)2@Ni with a core–shell structure is formed. When the reaction time is extended to 6 h, the Ni foam is completely transformed to Ni(HCO3)2, which is very fragile and cannot effectively support the outer layer Ni(HCO3)2, and the stability of the electrode is very poor. Obviously, the reaction time of 6 h is too long.
Fig. S1 (ESI†) shows the XRD pattern of the electrode materials before and after the electrochemical test. Compared with the electrode before the test, the position and intensity of the diffraction peak of the electrode have not changed after the electrochemical test, demonstrating that the synthesized Ni(HCO3)2@Ni has excellent electrochemical stability. Based on Fig. 1 and Fig. S1 (ESI†), we optimized the synthesis time of the Ni(HCO3)2@Ni electrode as 4 h. The porous shell of Ni(HCO3)2 possesses excellent electrochemical activity and a large specific area to accommodate the diffusion and adsorption of electrolyte ions. The core of Ni not only has enough strength to support the outer layer Ni(HCO3)2, but also has high conductivity to construct the electron transport channel. In situ grown Ni(HCO3)2 on Ni reduces the resistance at the interface of the core/shell and effectively prevents the detachment of Ni(HCO3)2.27–29
 Fig. 1  The crystalline state and morphology of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni. (A) XRD patterns of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni at different synthesized times. (B–F) SEM images of synthesized Ni(HCO3)2@Ni with reaction times of 2 h, 3 h, 4 h, 5 h, and 6 h, respectively. 
Electrochemical performance of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni (NHC@N) electrode materials was evaluated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) method in a three-electrode system using 6 M KOH electrolyte with Hg/HgO and Pt foil as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. To reflect the actual and stable data, the electrodes were subjected to GCD for 50 cycles before measurement. Fig. 2A shows the CV curves of NHC@N electrodes with different synthesis times at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. Among the electrodes, the electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h has the maximum capacitance; thus, this electrode is chosen as the optimal electrode. During the shorter reaction time of less than 4 h, the less active materials of Ni(HCO3)2 are formed, while with longer reaction times than 4 h, the conductive Ni foam is destroyed. At the reaction time of 4 h, the conductive Ni and mesoporous Ni(HCO3)2 co-exist, and the electrode has the best performance.
 Fig. 2  Electrochemical measurement of NHC@N electrode. (A) CV curves of the NHC@N electrodes with different synthesis times at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (B) CV curves of NHC@N electrodes with a synthesis time of 4 h in different scan rates. (C) GCD curves of NHC@N electrodes with varying synthesis times. (D) GCD curves of the NHC@N electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h in different current densities. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Nyquist) diagram of the NHC@N electrode at different synthesis times. 

Fig. 2B displays the CV curves of NHC@N electrodes (reaction time of 4 h) at different scanning speeds. At the low scanning speed of 5 mV s−1, in the charging stage, the current increases rapidly at about 0.35 V, the peak current appears at the oxidation potential of 0.4 V, and the electrode then undergoes oxidation reaction; in the discharge stage, the peak current appears at the reduction potential of 0.3 V, and then decreases rapidly. With the increase in scanning speed, the curve shows a similar shape, but the oxidation potential moves to a higher voltage, the reduction potential moves to a lower voltage, and the peak current increases with the increase in scanning speed, indicating that the electrode redox reaction is slightly affected by electrolyte diffusion.

Fig. 2C shows the GCD curves of NHC@N electrodes synthesized with different reaction times. Obviously, the NHC@N electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h (NHC@N-4 h) shows a much longer GCD time than others. The electrode with a shorter reaction time produces less active material of NHC and lower capacity; during a longer reaction time, the conductive material Ni foam is corroded, and the electrode has reduced conductivity and poor performance. Under our experimental conditions, the synthesis time of 4 h was the optimal choice. Fig. 2D shows the GCD curves of the electrode under different current densities. With the increase in current density, the charge/discharge time decreases proportionally, and the electrode capacity remains basically unchanged. At a current of 1 A g−1, the NHC/@N electrode has a Coulombic efficiency of 98% and a specific capacity of 412.1 C g−1, which verifies the excellent redox activity of NHC@N.

Fig. 2E shows the electrochemical impedance (Nyquist) measurement of the electrode at different synthesis times, and the insert is the equivalent circuit diagram.30 Based on the Nyquist curves, the series resistance (Rs) and the charge–transfer resistance (RCT) values are summarized in Table S2 (ESI†). The Rs values first decrease and then increase with the increase in reaction time, and the RCT values linearly increase with the extension of reaction time, owing to the increase of Ni(HCO3)2 amount. Comprehensively considering Rs and RCT values, the electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h is preferred, which is consistent with the morphology and CV analysis. NHC@N electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h has the RCT of 7.63 Ω at the interface of the electrode/electrolyte and Rs of 0.73 Ω. Such a low resistance is very beneficial to the carrier transportation of supercapacitors.
Voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC)
The potential window (ΔE, working voltage) has a vital impact on the efficiency and energy density of the energy storage devices and thus on the SHSI. Traditionally, the adjustment of ΔE is realized by changing the electrolytes or electrode materials under the equal-capacity matching of anode and cathode.31–33 Moreover, during the charge/discharge process, the circulating capacities of the two electrodes must be equal. Nevertheless, in principle, it is not required that the intrinsic capacities of the two electrodes of the device are exactly identical, which leaves room for our design.
Different from the traditional methods,33–36 we conceive a novel hybrid supercapacitor with different intrinsic capacity electrodes. By designing the intrinsic charge ratio of the anode to cathode, the potential window and performance of the energy storage device can be adjusted. We name the device as a voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC). Here, the reason why it is named a hybrid supercapacitor instead of the traditional asymmetric supercapacitor is that “asymmetric” requires two electrodes to have the same intrinsic capacity, while “hybrid” allows two electrodes to have different intrinsic capacities.
To investigate the effect of the intrinsic capacity of the anode/cathode on the potential window and performance of the energy storage device using Ni(HCO3)2@Ni as an anode, activated carbon (AC) as cathode, and potassium hydroxide (KOH) as the electrolyte, a hybrid supercapacitor (HSC) of NHC@N//KOH//AC was fabricated. The intrinsic capacity (Q) of the electrode can be determined by the following equation: Q+ = m+ × C+ × ΔE+; Q− = m− × C− × ΔE−(1)where m+ and m− are the mass (g) and C+ and C− are the specific capacitances (F g−1) of the anode and cathode, respectively. ΔE+ and ΔE− are the potential difference of anode and cathode relative to the reference electrode (such as Hg/HgO), respectively.
For the anode of NHC@N, ΔE+ = 0.5 V (vs. Hg/HgO) according to the GCD curve of the electrode at a charging/discharging current of 10 mA, as shown in Fig. S2 (ESI†), and the capacity of the anode (Q+) can be calculated as 6C (the NHC@N electrode with a capacity of 6C is written as NHC@N-6,14.6 mg of active mass). For the cathode of AC, ΔE− = 0.9 V (vs. Hg/HgO), C− = 250 F g−1, and we prepared three AC electrodes with Q− = 4 C, 6 C, and 9 C and named the electrodes as AC-4 (17 mg), AC-6 (28 mg), and AC-9 (45 mg), respectively. Consequently, we could assemble three hybrid supercapacitors with intrinsic capacity ratios of 3/2, 1/1, and 2/3 to investigate the effect of electrode intrinsic capacity ratio on the performance of energy storage devices. Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows the CV curves of VAHSCs with different intrinsic capacity ratios at different scan rates. From the area contained in the CV curves, it can be seen that the devices with intrinsic capacity ratios of 1:1 and 2:3 have a larger capacity. Fig. 3 exhibits the galvanostatic charge/discharge profile of anode, cathode, and the VAHSC devices with different intrinsic capacity ratios (Q+/Q−) in a three-electrode system with the reference electrode of Hg/HgO at a current of 5 mA.
 Fig. 3  GCD performances of VAHSCs. (A–D) Anode (red line), cathode (green line), and VAHSC device (blue line) potential profiles of the hybrid supercapacitors with capacity ratios of NHC@N/AC electrodes at 3/2, 1/1, 2/3, and 2/3 (pre-charge) at the charging/discharging current of 5 mA. (E) The charge/discharge capacity and Coulomb efficiency of the VAHSCs with different Q+/Q− ratios. (F) The charge/discharge energy and Joule efficiency of the VAHSCs with different Q+/Q− ratios. 
When Q+/Q− = 3/2 (Fig. 3A), the real charged capacity of the device NHC@N-6//KOH//AC-4 is 3.62 C (specific capacity of 114.56 C g−1), which is slightly smaller than the intrinsic capacity of the AC-4 electrode, indicating that the intrinsic capacity of cathode AC-4 limits the charged capacity of the device. Relative to the initial potential (E0 = 0), the anode (NHC@N-6) has a potential difference (ΔE+) of 0.463 V, and the negative (AC-4) electrode has a potential difference (ΔE−) of −0.937 V, respectively. Therefore, the HSC has a real working window (Vwork = ΔE+ − ΔE−) of 1.40 V, which is equal to the value when Q+/Q− = 1/1. By integrating the GCD curve, the HSC has a power density (P) of 280 W kg−1 and an energy density (E) of 32.44 W h kg−1.
When Q+/Q− = 1/1 (Fig. 3B), it is a typical asymmetric supercapacitor. The NHC@N 6//KOH//AC-6 has an equal-capacity matching. The real charged capacity of this HSC is 5.715 C (specific capacity of 134.15 C g−1), which is close to the intrinsic capacity of the anode and cathode. The HSC has an anode potential difference (ΔE+) of 0.495 V, and a cathode potential difference (ΔE−) of −0.905 V; thus, the HSC has a real Vwork of 1.40 V. The device has a power density of 205.88 W kg−1 when Q+/Q− = 2/3 (Fig. 3C). The device of NHC@N-6//KOH//AC-9 has a real charged capacity of 5.816 C (specific capacity of 97.58 C g−1), which is the highest charged capacity among the three devices. The HSC has ΔE+ of 0.487 V and ΔE− of −0.713 V, leading to a lower Vwork of 1.20 V than the value in the case Q+/Q− = 1:1. This is due to the fact that the intrinsic capacity of the AC-9 cathode is larger than that of the NHC@N-6 anode, and when the device is charged, and the NHC@N-6 electrode reaches full capacity, the working voltage of the AC-9 electrode is 0.673 V, far less than the possible 0.9 V. However, the capacity of the NHC@N-6 electrode has saturated. Further charging puts the anode in an over-charged state, resulting in the deterioration of the performance of the device. The device has a power density of 125 W kg−1 and energy density of 23.05 W h kg−1, respectively; both are lower than those in the case Q+/Q− = 1/1. The much lower energy density, power density, and Vwork for Q+/Q− = 2/3 than Q+/Q− = 1/1 is mainly due to the intrinsic capacity mismatch between the anode and cathode, especially the cathode that cannot be completely charged.
To overcome the incomplete charging of the cathode, we pre-charged (0.75–0.8 C) the cathode (AC-9) of the HSC device with Q+/Q− = 2/3. After that, the conventional galvanostatic charge–discharge was implemented, and the results are shown in Fig. 3D. In this way, the initial potential of the anode and cathode relative to the Hg/HgO reference electrode is −0.153 V (instead of 0 V). The anode potential difference (ΔE+) relative to the reference electrode is 0.645 V and relative to the initial potential (E0) is 0.492 V. Correspondingly, the cathode potential difference (ΔE−) relative to the initial potential (E0) is −0.808 V. Therefore, the HSC has a Vwork of 1.30 V. Compared to the device without pre-charging, the charged capacity (6.30 C) of the device increases more and the discharged capacity (5.55 C) increases slightly, resulting in a decrease in Coulombic efficiency. The pre-charged device has a specific capacity of 105.70 C g−1, and an energy density of 27.20 W h kg−1 at a power density of 135 W kg−1. Compared to the device without pre-charging, the Vwork, power density, and energy density of the device have been improved.

Fig. 3E and Table S3 (ESI†) summarize the charge/discharge capacity and Coulombic efficiency of NHC@N//KOH//ACs devices with different Q+/Q− values. As mentioned above, the electrode with the smaller capacity limits the storage capacity of the device, but the Coulombic efficiency of the device remains at a higher value. Fig. 3F and Table S3 (ESI†) show the charge/discharge energy and Joule efficiency of the devices. The discharged energy accounts for about 80% of the charged energy, and Joule efficiency is lower than Coulombic efficiency. The different Joule efficiency of the devices may be due to the difference between the anode with pseudocapacitance and the cathode with double-layer capacitance.
Based on results from the devices with different cathodes (with different Q−), although the anode potential difference relative to Hg/HgO reference electrode is always maintained at about 0.49 V, we can design ΔE+ by adjusting E0via pre-charging the cathode since the potential difference of the anode (ΔE+) is related to the initial potential (E0). Similarly, we can design ΔE− by pre-charging the anode. On the other hand, when the capacity of the cathode is smaller than that of the anode, the storage energy capacity of the device will be limited; When the capacity of the cathode is larger than that of the anode, ΔE− is reduced and vice versa. In other words, we can regulate ΔE+, ΔE−, and Vwork (Vwork = ΔE+ − ΔE−) by designing the intrinsic capacity and pre-charge of electrodes. Based on these, we can design a voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC). The VAHSC can meet the stringent requirements of high-efficiency SHSI for energy storage units, which provides favorable conditions for the development of highly efficient photocapacitors.
Integrated photocapacitor
The photocapacitor was fabricated by integrating the ES unit and PV unit, and the integrated photocapacitor schematic diagram is shown in Fig. 4. To match the current, voltage, and power between units, we assembled two Si wafers in series as the PV unit with an effective area of 5 × 5 mm2. The J–V curves of two Si wafers are shown in Fig. S4A (ESI†), and they have power conversion efficiencies of 18.52% and 18.32%, respectively. The PV unit composed of Si wafers in series has an open circuit voltage (VOC) of 1.19 V, short circuit current (JSC) of 10.50 mA cm−2, and power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.33%. From the power–voltage (P–V) curves shown in Fig. S4B (ESI†), the PV unit has more than 90% maximum power in the voltage range of 0.8–1.07 V, which requires the ES unit to provide a matching voltage window.
 Fig. 4  The schematic diagram of the integrated photocapacitor (IPC). (A) The structure of the IPC composed of Si solar cell (SSC) and voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC). (B) The real photos of the IPC. 
To improve the voltage matching between the PV unit and ES unit, we designed a VAHSC with a cathode intrinsic capacity 6 times that of the anode, and the active mass of the NHC@N electrode and AC electrode was 4.5 and 50 mg, respectively, so as the ΔE− was reduced to about 0.12 V. By pre-charging the cathode, the ΔE+ was adjusted to 0.678 V, 0.738 V, 0.793 V, 0.835 V, and 0.870 V, respectively. Therefore, Vwork values of IPCs were controlled at 0.80 V, 0.85 V, 0.90 V, 0.95 V, and 1.0 V, respectively. Fig. 5 shows the photo-charge and dark-discharge curves of IPCs. In fact, except for the equal-voltage match, the capacity match, equal-current match, and power match are also necessarily taken into consideration for SHSI. In addition to the traditional voltage–time (V–t) and current–time (I–t) profiles,37,38 we especially draw power–time (P–t) profiles to provide more intuitive data for analyzing the performance of IPCs and the internal matching between PV and ES units.
 Fig. 5  Photo-charge/dark-discharge performance of IPCs. (A–E) Voltage–time (V–t), current–time (I–t), and power–time (P–t) profiles of the IPCs during photo-charge and dark-discharge at Vwork values of 0.80 V, 0.85 V, 0.90 V, 0.95 V, and 1.0 V, respectively. (F) Dependence of energy loss and efficiency on the Vwork of IPCs during photo-charge and dark-discharge. 
From Fig. 5A–E, during photo-charging, with the increase in ΔE+, the V–t curves show no obvious change, which is consistent with the aforementioned discussion. The I–t curves from steadily maintaining at 10 mA to slightly decreasing from 10 mA, and then the photocurrent (Iphoto) decreases rapidly when it reaches the maximum power point. Benefitting from the increase in ΔE+, under illumination, the output power of IPCs always remains at a high level and increases with the increase in ΔE+. When the ΔE+ is 0.870 V and Vwork is 1.0 V, the PV unit works near the maximum power point voltage, and the IPC achieves a storage efficiency (ηstorage) as high as 98.28% in the whole photo-charging period, which is the highest value among the reported SHSI. During the dark-discharge, the PV unit is disconnected from the IPC (connecting T2 and T3), and the output current is 10 mA. The discharge curve of IPC is consistent with that of the single ES unit, indicating that the integrated IPC has little effect on the performance of the ES unit (VAHSC). The IPCs stably output energy in the high voltage phase, and the power drops rapidly at the end of the platform voltage. Compared with different photo-charging and dark-discharge curves, with the increase in Vwork, the energy storage and power output of the IPCs increase linearly.

Fig. 5F and Table S4 (ESI†) show the dependence of efficiency and energy loss on the Vwork of IPCs during photo-charge and dark-discharge. With the increase in Vwork, the energy losses caused by the mismatch between PV and ES units (storage loss) decrease gradually, meanwhile the energy losses mainly caused by the ES unit (Joule loss) also decrease gradually; thus the overall efficiency (ηoverall) and conversion storage efficiency (ηCS) of IPC are improved. When Vwork is 1.0 V, IPC has the highest ηoverall of 15.49% and ηCS of 18.01%. Normalized by the maximum power conversion efficiency, the energy loss caused by the mismatch between PV and ES units is only 1.72%, showing the outstanding coupling function of VAHSC. During IPC's charge/discharge process, the maximum energy loss comes from the Joule loss, only accounting for 13.99%. Such a low energy loss results in a final discharge energy ratio of up to 86.01%. So, the high Joule efficiency of the VAHSC unit benefits from its adjustable ΔE+ and ΔE−, which greatly reduces the energy loss caused by the mismatch between functional units and energy storage units.
The IPC fabricated with VAHSC not only has excellent performance of photo-charging and dark-discharge and can be competent to harvest solar energy and efficiently store and release electric energy but also can stably output power under the light. Fig. 6A shows the V–t, I–t, and P–t profiles of IPCs when the device is charged to 1 V (stage I), discharged with a current of 5 mA under light (stage II), and then discharged under dark (stage III), respectively. In stage I, IPC follows the photo-charging rule, and the curve is consistent with that in Fig. 5. During the photo-discharge with the current of 5 mA in stage II, since the photo-charge current density from the SSC is greater than the photo-discharge current of 5 mA, the VAHSC continues to be charged, the IPC voltage (VIPC) increases slightly, and photocurrent (IPhoto) gradually decreases until the photo-charging ends (800 s). From the P–t profile, the IPC stably outputs a power of about 5 mW s−1. Since the power generated from the SSC is larger than that of outputs from the IPC, the VAHSC converts the surplus energy into chemical energy for storage. In stage III, the illumination light is turned off, and no power is generated from the SSC. The IPC releases the energy stored in the VAHSC with a current of 5 mA under dark. With the progress of discharge, the output power of the IPC decreases slightly on the discharge platform and is stably output with an average power of 4.5 mW s−1.
 Fig. 6  Charge/discharge cycle stability of IPCs. (A and B) Voltage–time (V–t), current–time (I–t), and power–time (P–t) profiles of the IPCs during photo-charge at Vwork of 1.0 V, photo-discharge, and dark-discharge with a current of 5 mA and 10 mA, respectively. (C) The capacity retention and efficiency change curves of the IPC for charge/discharge 800 cycles. 

Fig. 6B shows the V–t, I–t, and P–t profiles of the IPCs photo-charged, then photo-discharged with a current of 10 mA and dark-discharged, respectively. During photo-charging in stage I, the PV energy from the SSC is stored in the VAHSC, and the IPC has almost the same profiles as Fig. 6A, showing the excellent stability of IPC. In the initial phase of photo-discharge, owing to the energy and capacity from the SSC being less than the output of IPC with the current of 10 mA, the voltage of the IPC slowly descends to 0.89 V and then remains constant (in the later phase), and the current gradually increases to 10 mA. The P–t curve more intuitively shows the performance of IPC. In the initial stage of photo-discharge, the generated power of the SSC is less than the output power of the IPC; thus, the VAHSC releases a small amount of stored energy to meet the output requirements of the IPC. When the dynamical energy balance between the SSC generated and the IPC output is reached, the voltage is stabilized at 0.89 V (in the later phase). During the IPC discharge with the current of 10 mA under dark in stage III, the SSC no longer provides energy input, the VAHSC releases the stored energy, and the power output is stable at 90% of photo-charging for 70 s. Due to the stable output of the IPC under photo-discharging and dark-discharging, it is inferred that the IPC can still maintain extraordinary output performance under intermittent and unstable illumination.
To examine the cycle stability of IPC assembled with VAHSC, we measured V–t curves of the IPC in photo-charging/dark-discharge for 800 cycles. Fig. 6C shows the capacity retention rate and efficiency change curve normalized by the first cycle capacity of the IPC. The capacity retention rate is 104.3% after 800 cycles. The capacity increases in the first 50 cycles and then decreases gradually, which may be caused by the electrode activation. Fig. S5 (ESI†) shows the GCD curve of the first five and last five cycles. The curve shape remains unchanged, showing excellent cycle stability. ηJoule values decreased from 84.75% to 81.43% in the first 50 cycles and then stabilized at about 82.5%, which is also attributed to electrode activation. Benefitting from the excellent feature of VAHSC, the perfect couple and match between the PV unit and ES unit are realized, and η storage values are always maintained as high as 96% in the whole cycle, which is far exceeding previous relevant reports. ηoverall of the IPC is hardly affected by the charger/discharge cycle time and remains at 14.5% in 800 cycles, showing impeccable cycle stability. The IPC has a high ηoverall/ηPV rate of 84.51%, which indicates a prominent coupling and matching level between PV and ES units and the energy conversion storage level of IPC.
Conclusions
In summary, we have successfully synthesized anode materials of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni with core–shell structure and creatively developed a window voltage adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) with different intrinsic capacity electrodes. Using the VAHSC as an energy storage unit and Si solar cell as a PV harvest unit, a three-terminal photocapacitor is integrated. By setting the intrinsic capacity of the cathode to be 6 times that of the anode and pre-charging the cathode, the working voltage of the VAHSC is adjusted to 1.0 V, which is just close to the voltage at the maximum power point of the PV unit. Consequently, the VAHSC harmonizes the PV unit and ES unit, resulting in the voltage, current, power, and energy match between both units during the whole photo-charging stage. The integrated photocapacitor achieves an overall efficiency of 15.49%, a Joule efficiency of 86.01%, and a storage efficiency as high as 98.28%, along with excellent charge/discharge cycle stability. In addition, we clarify the photo-electric-chemical conversion process of SHSI and define the Joule efficiency (ηJoule) as the energy ratio of discharge/charge. The research on bifunctional photocapacitors for simultaneous light harvest and energy storage is an energetic field. Further research should focus on the efficiency enhancement, stability improvement, and energy density increase of the device, as well as the harmonization of the light harvest unit and energy storage unit.
Experimental and method
Materials
Acetylene black (99.9%) was purchased from Alfa Aesar. Ethanol (ACS, 99.7%), potassium hydroxide (95%), and polytetrafluoroethylene (60 wt%) were purchased from Aladdin. Acetone (ACS, 99.5%), nickel nitrate hexahydrate (99.0%), and activated charcoal powder (99.0%) were purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. Phenolic epoxy resin (3 M) was purchased from DuPont de Nemours, USA. All materials were used as received without further processing.
Synthesis of the Ni-based electrode
Transition metal oxides and hydroxides have been extensively reported as anode materials of supercapacitors. Ni(HCO3)2 is widely used as electrode material owing to its considerable specific capacity and moderate cost.27–29 Here, Ni(HCO3)2 was in situ grown on Ni foam to form an electrode material with a core–shell structure. The detailed synthesis procedure is as follows. The Ni foam (150 mesh) was sequentially immersed in acetone, 0.5 M HCl, and deionized water ultrasonically for 10 min to clean the surface and remove organic residues and oxides. The cleaned Ni foam was placed in a vacuum drying box at 70 °C and dried until the quality remained constant. 1 mmol Ni(NO3)2·6H2O and 50 mmol urea were dissolved in 50 ml deionized water and transferred to 100 ml Teflon reactor. The dry Ni foam was immersed in the reactor and was heated at 180 °C in an oven for 2–6 h. After cooling to room temperature, the Ni(HCO3)2@Ni product was rinsed three times with anhydrous alcohol and deionized water and then vacuum dried at 70 °C until the quality remained constant. Thus, Ni(HCO3)2@Ni (NHC@N) electrode material was synthesized. The activated carbon (AC) electrode was prepared by the conventional method, referring to our previous report.22,27 To activate and stabilize the materials, the electrodes were galvanostatically charged/discharged for 50 cycles.
Fabrication of voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC)
Ni(HCO3)2@Ni was used as anode and AC as cathode, and their masses were determined according to the capacity (Q) requirement and the formula: Q = m × C × ΔE. Q is the intrinsic capacity (Coulomb, C), m is the mass (g) of the electrode, C is the specific capacitance (F g−1) of the electrode, and ΔE is the potential difference (V) of the electrode relative to the reference electrode (Hg/HgO).22,27 The Ni(HCO3)2@Ni anode and AC cathode were separated face to face with a gap of 1 mm and fixed in a homemade mold of epoxy resin. After curing, a 6 M KOH aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte to fill the gap, and then the device was sealed with a hot-melt adhesive. Thus, a voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) with the architecture of AC//KOH (6M)//Ni(HCO3)2@Ni was fabricated.
Fabrication of integrated photocapacitors

Fig. 4A shows the schematic diagram of the integrated photocapacitor (IPC) composed of a PV unit and an ES unit. Fig. 4B shows the photos of the real IPCs. The volume of the device was 30 × 30 × 4 mm3 (excluding the external line). The PV unit is derived from a commercially purchased silicon cell (156 × 156 mm2). To meet the voltage and current matching with ES unit, the silicon cell was cut into Si wafers (8 × 8 mm2) by a laser dicing machine, the PV units were fabricated by connecting Si wafers in a series of Cu foils, and the active area of the PV unit (SSC) was controlled by the hole (5 × 5 mm2) of Cu foil. The common electrode consisted of the synthesized Ni(HCO3)2@Ni (NHC@N) and Ti foil. The Ti foil was directly welded to the anode of the PV unit; the NHC@N electrode was connected with the ES units and in contact with the electrolyte (KOH). The active carbon (AC) cathode of the ES unit was made by pressing the AC electrode on the stainless-steel net.22,27 Then, the SSC and VAHSC were placed in a homemade epoxy resin mold, which was filled and cured at 75 °C for 30 min to obtain a three-terminal IPC device.
Characterization and measurements
The morphology observation of samples was performed using field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM, JSM-7610F Plus, JEOL). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the sample were obtained using a SmartLab X-ray diffractometer (Rigaku) equipped with Cu-Kα radiation (λ = 1.5418 Å). The photocurrent density–voltage (J–V) characteristic curves of SSCs and IPCs were recorded with a Keithley 2420 source-measure unit under 100 mW cm−2 (AM 1.5G) illumination provided by a solar light simulator (Newport Oriel Sol 3A class, USA, calibrated by a Newport reference cell). The steady-state output performance of SSCs was measured using an electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, Chenhua Co. Ltd. Shanghai).
The equivalent circuit in Fig. S6A (ESI†) illustrates the charging/discharging mode of the IPCs.39,40 Under solar illumination, the light-electric conversion of the PV unit is realized via connecting T1 and T2; photo-charging of the IPC is implemented, and the harvested energy is stored in the ES unit via connecting T1 and T3 under sunlight; Under dark conditions, the stored energy in the ER and the IPC can be applied to the external load (dark-discharging) via connecting T2–T3 and T1–T3, respectively. The electrochemical workstation (CHI660E, Chenghua Co. Ltd Shanghai) was used to simulate the load and measure the electrochemical performance of the devices. Fig. S6B (ESI†) is the schematic diagram of IPC's performance measurement. The 3-terminal photocapacitor effectively connects the PV and ES units, guarantees charge carriers’ smooth transportation, and facilitates the measurement of various photoelectrical parameters. Fig. S7 (ESI†) is a digital photo of IPC under photocharging. In the figure, the test instruments used are marked, and the specific line connections are shown.
Calculations
At present, there are various insights and expressions on the photo-electro-chemical conversion process for SHSI.7–11 In fact, the energy conversion and storage of the SHSIs undergo three processes. Accordingly, there are three kinds of efficiencies for a single process [ηL–E(ηPV), ηE–C(ηstorage), and ηC–E(ηJoule)].
The first single process is light-to-electric solar energy conversion, or photovoltaic conversion, or solar energy harvest into the IPCs. Correspondingly, light-to-electric solar energy conversion (ηL–E) or PV conversion efficiency (ηPV) is the efficiency of converting solar energy into electric energy in the IPCs during photo-charging, and ηPV can be calculated by the following formula: ηPV = Eelect/Ein × 100%(2) Ein = Pin × SSSC × (t2 − t1)(3) (4)where Ein and Eelect are the incident light energy (mW s−1) and the converted electrical energy (mW s−1) in the IPCs during photo-charging from t1 (s) to t2 (s), respectively. Pin and SSSC are the incident light power density (mW cm−2 s−1) and effective light area (cm2) of IPCs. Ielect (mA) and Velect (V) can be measured by connecting T1 and T2 during photo-charging.
The second single process is electric-to-chemical energy storage in IPCs. Accordingly, electric-to-chemical efficiency (ηE–C) or storage efficiency (ηstorage) is the efficiency of converting electrical energy into chemical energy and being stored in the VAHSCs or IPCs during photo-charging, and ηstorage can be calculated by the following formula: ηstorage = Echem/Eelect × 100%(5) (6)where Echem is the stored chemical energy (mW s) during photo-charging from t1 (s) to t2 (s). Ichem (mA) and Vchem (V) can be measured by connecting T2 and T3.
The third single process is the chemical-to-electric energy output (discharging) from the IPCs. We can define Joule efficiency (ηJoule) as the ratio of the discharge energy to the charge energy of the device since Coulomb efficiency is the ratio of the discharge capacity to the charge capacity of the device (Coulomb is the unit of capacity, and Joule is the unit of energy).41,42 In this article, Joule efficiency (ηJoule) of IPCs is the ratio of output electric energy during discharging to input electric energy or chemical energy during charging, which can be calculated as follows: ηJoule = Ed/Echem × 100%(7) (8)where Ed is the discharge energy (mW s) of IPCs from t3 (s) to t4 (s); Id (mA) and Vd (V) can be measured by connecting T1 and T3 during discharging.
Besides the three kinds of single processes and efficiencies, there are two significant complex processes and efficiencies. One is the light–electric–chemical conversion–storage process, which is the combination of solar conversion and energy storage processes. The conversion–storage efficiency (ηCS) can be calculated by the following formula: ηCS= ηL–E–C = ηL–E × ηE–C = Echem/Ein × 100%(9)
The whole process of light–electric–chemical–electric conversion is an important complex process. The overall efficiency (ηoverall) is one of the most important parameters reflecting device performance, which can be calculated by the following formula: ηoverall = ηL–E–C–E = ηPV × ηstorage × ηJoule = Ed/(Pin × SSSC × Δt) × 100%(10)
In fact, the overall efficiency (ηoverall) of SHSI depends on the photovoltaic conversion efficiency (ηPV), the storage efficiency (ηstorage), and Joule efficiency (ηJoule). The ηPV mainly depends on the virtue of the PV units, and the ηJoule mainly relies on the merits of the ES units. The ηstorage substantially affects the overall efficiency of SHSI and is determined by the coupling and matching between PV and ES units and in detail, the coupling and matching of current, voltage, and energy between the PV and ES units.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51972123, U1705256, 61804058, 21771066, 21703072, 62004165).
References
General Assembly. Transforming our world: the 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development https://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/post2015/transformingourworld, accessed 21 October 2015.
N. Lewis, Science, 2016, 351, aad1920 Search PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 Search PubMed .
J. Montoya, L. Seitz, P. Chakthranont, A. Vojvodic, T. Jaramillo and J. Norskov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 70–81 Search PubMed .
G. Hodes, J. Manassen and D. Cahen, Nature, 1976, 261, 403–404 Search PubMed .
T. Miyasaka and T. Murakami, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 3932–3934 Search PubMed .
A. Gurung and Q. Qiao, Joule, 2018, 2, 1217–1230 Search PubMed .
V. Vega-Garita, L. Ramirez-Elizondo, N. Narayan and P. Bauer, Prog. Photovolt. Res. Appl., 2019, 27, 346–370 Search PubMed .
M. Sygletou, C. Petridis, E. Kymakis and E. Stratakis, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700335 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang, L. Li, Y. Luo, R. He, L. Qiu, H. Lin and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 954–958 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, S. Li, H. Zhang, Y. Shen, S. Zakeeruddin, M. Graetzel, Y. Cheng and M. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1782–1787 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, Y. Chen and L. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8103 Search PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Wang, T. Sun, M. Wang, C. Wu, H. Zou, T. Song, X. Zhang, S. Lee, Z. Wang and B. Sun, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4240–4247 Search PubMed .
J. Kim, S. Lee, Y. Hwang, S. Lee, B. Park, J. Jang and K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 1906–1912 Search PubMed .
A. Gurung, K. Chen, R. Khan, S. Abdulkarim, G. Varnekar, R. Pathak, R. Naderi and Q. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602105 Search PubMed .
J. Liang, G. Zhu, C. Wang, P. Zhao, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Ma, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 239–245 Search PubMed .
C. Li, S. Cong, Z. Tian, Y. Song, L. Yu, C. Lu, Y. Shao, J. Li, G. Zou, M. Rummeli, S. Dou, J. Sun and Z. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 247–256 Search PubMed .
A. Gurung, K. Reza, S. Mabrouk, B. Bahrami, R. Pathak, B. Lamsal, S. Rahman, N. Ghimire, R. Bobba, K. Chen, J. Pokharel, A. Baniya, M. Laskar, M. Liang, W. Zhang, W. Zhang, S. Yang, K. Xu and Q. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001865 Search PubMed .
T. Zhu, Y. Yang, Y. Liu, R. Lopez-Hallman, Z. Ma, L. Liu and X. Gong, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105397 Search PubMed .
Y. Shao, M. El-Kady, J. Sun, Y. Li, Q. Zhang, M. Zhu, H. Wang, B. Dunn and R. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 9233–9280 Search PubMed .
N. Choudhary, C. Li, J. Moore, N. Nagaiah, L. Zhai, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605336 Search PubMed .
Z. Song, J. Wu, L. Sun, T. Zhu, C. Deng, X. Wang, G. Li, Y. Du, Q. Chen, W. Sun, L. Fan, H. Chen, J. Lin and Z. Lan, Nano Energy, 2022, 100, 107501 Search PubMed .
L. Bai, H. Huang, S. Zhang, L. Hao, H. Li, L. Sun, H. Huang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 2001939 Search PubMed .
W. Dong, W. Cho and J. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 22676–22683 Search PubMed .
Y. Ren, T. Zhu, Y. Liu, Q. Liu and Q. Yan, Small, 2021, 17(21), 2008047 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, N. Li, S. Zhang, C. Liu, L. Chen, M. Xi, Y. Song, S. Ali, O. Iqbal, M. Han, C. Jiang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3382–3392 Search PubMed .
Z. Song, J. Wu, G. Li, X. Wang, T. Zhu, C. Geng, N. Liu, L. Fan and J. Lin, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 863, 114040 Search PubMed .
X. Zang, Z. Dai, J. Guo, Q. Dong, J. Yang, W. Huang and X. Dong, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 1358–1365 Search PubMed .
Y. Mao, T. Li, C. Guo, F. Zhu, C. Zhang, Y. Wei and L. Hou, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 211, 44–51 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang, L. Fan, G. Luo, Y. Lin, Y. Xie and Y. Wei, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5975–6023 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Song and Y. Xia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5925–5950 Search PubMed .
M. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4924–4933 Search PubMed .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 Search PubMed .
P. Simon and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 845–854 Search PubMed .
R. Kötz and M. Carlen, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2483–2498 Search PubMed .
T. Hiramatsu, X. Huang, M. Kato and Y. Hori, Electrical Eng. Jpn., 2016, 197, 58–66 Search PubMed .
S. Agbo, T. Merdzhanova, S. Yu, H. Tempel, H. Kungl, R. Eichel, U. Rau and O. Astakhov, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 340–344 Search PubMed .
F. Sandbaumhüter, S. Agbo, C. Tsai, O. Astakhov, S. Uhlenbruck, U. Rau and T. Merdzhanova, J. Power Sources, 2017, 365, 303–307 Search PubMed .
S. Intermite, C. Arbizzani, F. Soavi, S. Gholipour, S. Turren-Cruz, J. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, N. Vlachopoulos, A. Ali, A. Hagfeldt and M. Gratzel, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 258, 825–833 Search PubMed .
A. Roy, P. Majumdar, P. Sengupta, S. Kundu, S. Shinde, A. Jha, K. Pramanik and H. Saha, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 329, 135170 Search PubMed .
X. Zhang, X. Sun, X. Li, X. Hu, S. Cai and C. Zheng, J. Energy Chem., 2021, 59, 343–363 Search PubMed .
X. Lai, C. Jin, W. Yi, X. Han, X. Feng, Y. Zheng and M. Ouyang, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 470–499 Search PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01744jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Broader context
Solar energy is clean, open, and infinite, but sunlight on the earth is fluctuating, intermittent, and unstable. In this sense, the practical utilization of solar energy requires the complementary combination of high-efficient energy conversion and low-loss energy storage technologies. The consequent photocapacitor integrating both functions of energy harvest and storage into a single device is very promising. Despite its bright potential, the energy harvest unit and storage unit of photocapacitor cannot effectively cooperate, resulting in a relatively low efficiency in the solar energy conversion process and a relatively large energy loss in the energy storage phase. The reported highest conversion storage efficiency of single device is less than 13%, which seriously hinders the development of this significant energy device. In this work, we clarify the photo-electric-chemical conversion process of photocapacitor, and reasonably define the Joule efficiency (ηJoule) as the energy ratio of discharge/charge. We creatively design a window voltage adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC) with different intrinsic capacity electrodes. Using the VAHSC as energy storage unit and Si solar cell as PV harvest unit, a three-terminal photocapacitor is integrated. By setting an appropriate intrinsic capacity ratio of cathode to anode, and pre-charging to the cathode, the working voltage of the VAHSC is adjusted to 1.0 V, which is just close to the voltage at the maximum power point of the PV unit. Consequently, the VAHSC harmonizes the PV unit and ES unit, resulting in the voltage, current, power and energy match between the both units during whole photo-charging stage. The integrated photocapacitor achieves an overall efficiency of 15.49%, a Joule efficiency of 86.01% and a storage efficiency as high as 98.28%, along with excellent charge/discharge cycle stability. The great leap of this efficiency marks a substantial step towards the practical application of photocapacitors.


 	Fig. 1  The crystalline state and morphology of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni. (A) XRD patterns of Ni(HCO3)2@Ni at different synthesized times. (B–F) SEM images of synthesized Ni(HCO3)2@Ni with reaction times of 2 h, 3 h, 4 h, 5 h, and 6 h, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrochemical measurement of NHC@N electrode. (A) CV curves of the NHC@N electrodes with different synthesis times at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1. (B) CV curves of NHC@N electrodes with a synthesis time of 4 h in different scan rates. (C) GCD curves of NHC@N electrodes with varying synthesis times. (D) GCD curves of the NHC@N electrode with a synthesis time of 4 h in different current densities. (E) Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS, Nyquist) diagram of the NHC@N electrode at different synthesis times.	 
Q+ = m+ × C+ × ΔE+; Q− = m− × C− × ΔE−	(1)

 	Fig. 3  GCD performances of VAHSCs. (A–D) Anode (red line), cathode (green line), and VAHSC device (blue line) potential profiles of the hybrid supercapacitors with capacity ratios of NHC@N/AC electrodes at 3/2, 1/1, 2/3, and 2/3 (pre-charge) at the charging/discharging current of 5 mA. (E) The charge/discharge capacity and Coulomb efficiency of the VAHSCs with different Q+/Q− ratios. (F) The charge/discharge energy and Joule efficiency of the VAHSCs with different Q+/Q− ratios.	 

 	Fig. 4  The schematic diagram of the integrated photocapacitor (IPC). (A) The structure of the IPC composed of Si solar cell (SSC) and voltage-adjustable hybrid supercapacitor (VAHSC). (B) The real photos of the IPC.	 

 	Fig. 5  Photo-charge/dark-discharge performance of IPCs. (A–E) Voltage–time (V–t), current–time (I–t), and power–time (P–t) profiles of the IPCs during photo-charge and dark-discharge at Vwork values of 0.80 V, 0.85 V, 0.90 V, 0.95 V, and 1.0 V, respectively. (F) Dependence of energy loss and efficiency on the Vwork of IPCs during photo-charge and dark-discharge.	 

 	Fig. 6  Charge/discharge cycle stability of IPCs. (A and B) Voltage–time (V–t), current–time (I–t), and power–time (P–t) profiles of the IPCs during photo-charge at Vwork of 1.0 V, photo-discharge, and dark-discharge with a current of 5 mA and 10 mA, respectively. (C) The capacity retention and efficiency change curves of the IPC for charge/discharge 800 cycles.	 
ηPV = Eelect/Ein × 100%	(2)
Ein = Pin × SSSC × (t2 − t1)	(3)
	(4)
ηstorage = Echem/Eelect × 100%	(5)
	(6)
ηJoule = Ed/Echem × 100%	(7)
	(8)
ηCS= ηL–E–C = ηL–E × ηE–C = Echem/Ein × 100%	(9)
ηoverall = ηL–E–C–E = ηPV × ηstorage × ηJoule = Ed/(Pin × SSSC × Δt) × 100%	(10)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2ee01744j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
