Investigation of the photocorrosion of n-GaP photoanodes in acid with in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9TA10106C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9TA10106C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25377-25388Investigation of the photocorrosion of n-GaP photoanodes in acid with in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy†

        
          
            Sahar 
            Pishgar
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jacob M. 
            Strain
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Saumya 
            Gulati
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Gamini 
            Sumanasekera
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gautam 
            Gupta
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Joshua M. 
            Spurgeon
          
        
      *a
aConn Center for Renewable Energy Research, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA. E-mail: joshua.spurgeon@louisville.edu
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA
cDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40292, USA
Received 
      12th September 2019
    , Accepted 21st October 2019First published on 21st October 2019AbstractSemiconductors of the III–V class are among the most promising materials for high efficiency solar fuels applications, particularly in tandem devices. Unfortunately, these materials are known to undergo oxidative corrosion as photoanodes in strongly acidic or alkaline electrolyte. In striving to overcome this challenge, researchers need to understand the fundamental degradation behavior during photoelectrochemical operation. Studying the in situ photocorrosion process has largely been limited thus far to expensive and labor-intensive techniques that are not widely available in most labs. Herein, the corrosion of n-GaP, a promising III–V material for tandem top subcells, was investigated in strongly acidic electrolyte using an in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy technique to monitor dissolved Ga and P species as a function of applied bias and time. The changing faradaic efficiency of the electrochemical GaP oxidation reaction was calculated from this data and used to interpret the corrosion process in conjunction with SEM and XPS characterization. Most notably, p+-GaP and n-GaP displayed strikingly different corrosion behavior, with p+-GaP dissolving uniformly across the active area and the corrosion faradaic efficiency increasing to a steady value. Illuminated n-GaP, in contrast, showed initially high corrosion faradaic efficiency which decreased during operation and was attributed to the phenomena of anisotropic surface etching and micropore formation during the beginning stages of photoanodic operation. In addition, corrosion measurements were made with thin conformal coatings of TiO2 as a protective barrier layer on the GaP surface. Although the protective coating slowed the rate of GaP dissolution, the TiO2 layers produced herein contributed significant charge-transfer resistance and still showed similar trends in the corrosion faradaic efficiency vs. time as the bare n-GaP.
Introduction
Photoelectrolysis of water to oxygen and hydrogen fuel is a promising large-scale solution to store intermittent solar energy in a dense and portable form.1 Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water-splitting, or artificial photosynthesis, research strives to develop a semiconductor photoelectrode with both high efficiency and long-term stability. For high efficiency, room-temperature water-splitting requires ∼1.6 V or more (1.23 V plus anodic and cathodic activation overpotentials) of photovoltage at the highest possible photocurrent, which has led to most designs featuring a two-semiconductor tandem approach.2,3 For the wider bandgap top subcell material, III–V semiconductors have been produced with exceptional light absorption and charge-transport properties and are among the few types of materials that can meet the photovoltage and photocurrent requirements. The highest efficiency PEC systems to date have thus leveraged III–V photoactive materials.3–5
Gallium phosphide, GaP, is one such material that has been successfully made into efficient photoanodes,6–10 although its indirect bandgap of 2.26 eV is slightly higher than the ideal top cell for a two-cell tandem combination.2 Ternary alloys, however, can tune the bandgap by varying the composition, with materials such as GaSbxP1−x recently showing promise as a photoanode material.11,12 Unfortunately however, III–V semiconductors including GaP are not stable in aqueous electrolyte at the anodic potentials necessary for water oxidation. Instead, the redox potential for the thermodynamically favored semiconductor anodic oxidation reaction (i.e., the self-oxidation potential) is negative of the oxygen evolution reaction potential, and thus these materials anodically photocorrode or photopassivate.13,14 In recent years researchers have successfully employed thin protective layers to stabilize corrosion-prone semiconductors, with a method like atomic layer deposition (ALD) enabling uniform conformal coverage of a surface with a chemically robust material at thicknesses that still permit efficient interfacial charge-transfer.15–20 ALD TiO2 on n-GaP significantly improved the stability for water oxidation in alkaline media for many hours.6,7 However, even a single pinhole can lead to corrosion, undercutting of the protective layer, and eventual device failure. Thus, there remains a significant need in the solar fuels field to investigate semiconductor degradation and mitigation strategies.
Several sophisticated research techniques exist for the in situ investigation of electrochemical corrosion. In situ electrochemical scanning tunnelling microscopy (ECSTM) can provide information on morphological and chemical changes at the interface under bias.21–23 Other scanning probe methods such as in situ electrochemical atomic force microscopy (AFM) can provide similar morphology data.24 The evolution of the microstructure and physicochemical processes at the interface during corrosion can be observed with in situ electrochemical TEM.25 Ambient pressure X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (AP-XPS) can also monitor the interfacial chemical changes in solution under applied bias.26,27 These are powerful techniques for investigating material degradation processes, however, the expense and sophistication of the instruments as well as the degree of expertise required for their effective implementation serve as significant barriers to entry for new researchers.
Herein, we report the in situ investigation of the photocorrosion of GaP photoanodes in acidic media using a simple and widely applicable method to monitor semiconductor dissolution during the reaction via UV-Vis spectroscopy. Spectroelectrochemical methods are well-known for studying redox species and have seen some applications with semiconductors, including measurements of electrochromic behavior, but reports are slim on applying such techniques to in situ photocorrosion quantification.28–31 Likewise, while there has been significant work reported on controlling the anodic surface etching of microporous GaP to influence the interfacial optical properties,32–37 we are not aware of any in situ studies of the photocorrosion process. By designing an electrochemical cell for operation within the spectrometer, and introducing white light illumination orthogonal to the monochromatic UV-Vis signal (Fig. 1), PEC performance was monitored herein while simultaneously observing the time-dependent evolution of dissolved semiconductor elements. Coupled with electron microscopy and ex situ XPS measurements, this is an informative technique for studying semiconductor corrosion with commonly available laboratory facilities. Within the detection limits, the dissolved Ga and P concentration and faradaic efficiency of the electrochemical oxidation of GaP in acid is reported as a function of time and applied potential and interpreted in conjunction with SEM and XPS data.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of the quartz cuvette cell for PEC measurements with in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy, with a GaP working electrode (WE), Pt mesh counter electrode (CE), and Ag/AgCl micro-reference electrode (RE). 
Experimental
Electrode fabrication
Working electrodes used semiconductor wafers of either n-GaP ((111), S-doped to 4 × 1017 cm−3, 0.14 Ω cm resistivity, University Wafer, Inc.) or p+-GaP ((100), Zn-doped to 5.4 × 1018 cm−3, 0.028 Ω cm resistivity, University Wafer, Inc.). Back contact was made by scribing Ga/In eutectic onto the back of the wafer followed by connecting to Cu tape. Some GaP electrodes also had a protective coating of TiO2 grown by atomic layer deposition (ALD). Immediately prior to ALD, the GaP surface was etched by 9 M HCl for 30 s and then thoroughly rinsed with deionized water. TiO2 films were deposited at 150 °C using a Cambridge Nanotech S200 ALD system. Each ALD cycle consisted of a 0.015 s pulse of H2O, followed by a 0.10 s pulse of tetrakisdimethylamidotitanium (TDMAT, Sigma-Aldrich, 99.999%, used as received). A 20 s purge under a constant 0.02 L min−1 flow of research-grade N2 was performed between each precursor pulse. TiO2 films on the GaP electrodes reported herein were the result of 400 ALD cycles, corresponding to a thickness of ∼20 nm from calibration measurements. Some of the GaP/TiO2 wafers, when specified, were further annealed for 30 min at 500 °C in 1 atm N2. Some electrodes were further decorated with an IrOx oxygen evolution reaction co-catalyst by spin-coating (500 rpm for 20 s) a 40 mM iridium acetylacetonate solution in isopropyl alcohol and allowing to dry. This was repeated three times before annealing for 20 min at 480 °C in 1 atm N2.
Photoelectrochemical measurements
A custom cell was developed for simultaneous photoelectrochemical measurements and UV-Vis spectroscopy (Fig. 1). A quartz cuvette with 4 clear polished sides had a 5 mm-diameter holed drilled on one vertical side to permit contact between the electrolyte and the semiconductor working electrode. The quartz cell was mounted in a 3D-printed plastic holder in front of the UV-Vis detector, with the working electrode pressed to the outside of the cell against the drilled hole with a Teflon tape gasket to prevent electrolyte leakage. Aqueous 1.0 M H2SO4 (99.99%, VWR) was used as the electrolyte for all measurements. A minimal electrolyte volume of 1.25 mL was used to maximize dissolved species concentration for UV-Vis sensitivity while still fully submerging the exposed working electrode. A leak-free, 1 mm-diameter Ag/AgCl micro reference electrode (Innovative Instruments, Inc.) was placed in solution out of the illumination path. A Pt mesh counter electrode was immersed in a small secondary electrolyte container and connected to the main quartz cell electrolyte with an electrolyte-filled 2 mm-diameter bridging tube with a glass frit (KZT-2 tube, Innovative Instruments, Inc.). This approach kept the counter electrode and corresponding hydrogen bubbles out of the illumination path and prevented any dissolved species from redepositing on the Pt.
The UV-Vis input illumination signal passed through the electrolyte parallel to the GaP working electrode surface. White light illumination entered the electrolyte through the cell window opposite the hole and orthogonal to the UV-Vis beam. This simulated sunlight at normal incidence to the working electrode was generated with a 300 W Xe lamp (Newport 6258) coupled with an AM1.5 global filter (Newport 81094) and calibrated for intensity with a Si photodiode (Thorlabs FDS100-CAL). A 2.0 Sun intensity was used for illuminated n-GaP experiments to increase the current density and subsequent dissolved species concentrations and corresponding UV-Vis sensitivity. A shroud around the quartz cell prevented the AM1.5 light from impinging on most of the cell or the UV-Vis detector, while a small hole in the shroud permitted light to pass through to the working electrode. An Autolab PGSTAT 128N (Metrohm) potentiostat was used for all electrochemical measurements. The results are reported versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) scale according to VRHE = VAg/AgCl + 0.197 + 0.059pH, where the electrolyte pH was 0.

In situ UV-Vis spectroscopy
All absorbance measurements were performed with an Agilent Cary 60 UV-Vis spectrophotometer in background correction mode, using blank 1.0 M H2SO4 as the background. In situ UV-Vis absorbance data was calibrated to dissolved Ga and P concentrations using inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS, Agilent 7900). Separate calibration curves of Ga and P concentration vs. absorbance were measured for n-GaP and p+-GaP (Fig. S2†), with a ∼1:1 ratio of Ga:P measured in each case. The dissolved Ga concentration was used to calculate the estimated faradaic efficiency of the GaP corrosion reaction by determining the charge required to oxidize the GaP to produce the observed quantity of dissolved Ga (assuming either 3 or 6 e− per molecule of GaP)14,37 and dividing this by the total charge passed during the potentiostatic measurement at the time of the absorbance measurement.
Materials characterization
The electrode surfaces were characterized with scanning electron microscopy (SEM) using a NOVA FEI microscope at an accelerating voltage of ∼10–15 kV. Surface elemental analysis was performed using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) with a VG Scientific Multilab 3000 custom-built ultra-high vacuum system with Al-Kα radiation. XPSPEAK 4.1 software was used for peak deconvolution and the XPS data analysis.
Results and discussion
Photoelectrochemical energy-conversion behavior
The photoelectrochemical current density vs. potential (J–E) behavior for n-GaP photoanodes is shown in Fig. 2. Under 1 Sun, the polished n-GaP wafer initially reached a light-limited current density of ∼4.1 mA cm−2, increasing to ∼8.3 mA cm−2 at 2 Suns. Under continued photoanodic operation in acid, the n-GaP surface transitioned from a mirror-like polished surface to a more matte appearance, which was indicative of the shift from specular to diffuse reflectance as the surface roughness increased with etching. The 2 Suns light-limited current density increased as a result of the etching-induced anti-reflection effect, eventually reaching ∼12.5 mA cm−2 (Fig. S1†). Large increases in the current density of GaP photoanodes have been reported previously due to the etching of triangular pores at the surface, with the increase attributed to enhanced separation of photogenerated charge-carriers in addition to the reduced surface reflectance.10,33
 Fig. 2  Current density vs. potential (J–E) behavior for GaP photoanodes in the dark and under AM1.5 illumination in 1 M H2SO4. The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is marked at 1.23 V vs. RHE. 
The 2-Sun-illuminated n-GaP photoanodes displayed an onset potential near −0.5 V vs. RHE with a maximum power point at ∼0.06 V vs. RHE. Relative to the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at 1.23 V vs. RHE, this would be a very high photovoltage for water oxidation considering the GaP bandgap and the fact that the photovoltage must overcome the OER activation overpotential as well. In the dark, the semiconductor/liquid junction diode inhibits oxidative charge flow, which prevents a direct measurement of the dark electrocatalytic Butler–Volmer behavior. However, a degenerately doped p-type electrode with high conductivity allows the unimpeded transfer of majority-carrier holes to measure the dark catalytic behavior. Degenerate p+-GaP electrode J–E behavior is shown in Fig. 2, with no noticeable change in the presence of illumination as expected for a material of metallic character. For p+-GaP, the exponential increase in oxidative current happened with an early onset, reaching 10 mA cm−2 at 1.0 V vs. RHE, below the standard OER potential. Previous modelling indicates that the GaP self-oxidation potential occurs at a significantly lower potential than OER,14 and we thus ascribe this current to electrochemical corrosion processes. For the n-GaP photoanodes, the early onset potential is similarly attributed to corrosion and the semiconductor photo-oxidation is expected to occur in kinetic competition with water oxidation.

In situ UV-Vis spectroscopy method
Continuous UV-Vis absorbance measurements of the electrolyte with simultaneous potentiostatic photoanodic operation of the GaP was used to monitor the semiconductor corrosion and dissolution. Fig. 3 shows some of the data used to calibrate the absorbance measurements to dissolved Ga and P. For illuminated n-GaP photoanodes, we measured the absorbance spectra from 5 to 60 min, and analyzed the corresponding electrolyte aliquots with ICP-MS to establish definitive concentrations of elemental Ga and P atoms. ICP-MS, however, does not provide information on the chemical state of these atoms. Across all time periods measured, the dissolved Ga to P ratio was observed to be 1:1 within experimental error (Fig. 3c). Thus, while only Ga concentration trends are reported herein, P concentrations are predicted to display the same behavior. Absorbance values vs. Ga concentration at wavelengths near the absorbance peak displayed linear behavior in the measured concentration range (Fig. 3d). Subsequent ICP-MS measurements indicated that an average of the 200 and 205 nm wavelength absorbance data provided the most accurate calibration curve, and thus all reported UV-Vis-measured Ga concentrations herein used that approach.
 Fig. 3  Calibration for n-GaP in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy. (a) Current density vs. time for n-GaP photoanodes at 1.4 V vs. RHE at 2 Suns in 1 M H2SO4 and corresponding (b) absorbance vs. wavelength data. (c) Concentration of dissolved Ga and P in the electrolyte as measured by ICP-MS. (d) Resulting absorbance vs. Ga concentration calibration data. 
Interestingly, the absorbance values for p+-GaP operation displayed a different trend with concentration and required a second calibration (Fig. S2†). Dissolved Ga and P concentrations for p+-GaP were still measured to be 1:1. Thus, we attributed the different trend in absorbance with concentration relative to n-GaP to a change in the species and/or complexation which affects the UV-Vis absorbance. Indeed, the absorbance peaks displayed a shoulder at ∼217 nm which was more prominent relative to the main peak for the p+-GaP data. The exact nature of the species resulting in absorbance in this shoulder region is unclear at present. A theoretically calculated Pourbaix diagram for GaP indicates that the stable phases at pH 0 for potentials of interest in this work are Ga3+ and H3PO4 (Fig. S3†). Control measurements of UV-Vis absorbance for Ga2SO4 and H3PO4 in 1 M H2SO4, however, did not indicate strong absorbance in this shoulder region. We speculate that the observed absorbance at ∼217 nm may correspond to a dissolved partially oxidized state of GaP which is not fully decomposed or to small amounts of dissolved PH3, which has previously been observed for the acidic corrosion of GaP.37 The strongly different electrical properties and different wafer surface crystal orientation relative to the n-GaP (due to limited options for quality commercial p+-GaP) may affect the exact degradation mechanism and result in this discrepancy in the two calibration curves.
Additional control experiments were performed to establish the validity and limits of the in situ UV-Vis spectroscopic technique (Fig. S4†). At open-circuit for the GaP, the absorbance spectra in the presence of 2 Suns AM1.5 illumination was indistinguishable from the spectra in the dark, indicating that the white light did not appreciably affect the UV-Vis detector. Similarly, the absorbance spectra for n-GaP at 1.8 V vs. RHE in the dark did not change over time from its initial value, clearly indicating that the observed absorbance peaks in photoelectrochemical measurements were correlated to the photocurrent. Finally, the absorbance spectra vs. time for the cell under illumination without GaP was monitored, resulting in a variability in the absorbance at 200 nm of ∼0.18. We attribute this small absorbance drift to heating effects and changes to the 1 M H2SO4 baseline. Thus for low Ga concentrations (<4 mM) resulting in absorbance values in this range, the error is expected to be higher. Values below this threshold, which also correspond to low total charge passed, were therefore excluded from subsequent calculations of corrosion faradaic efficiency due to their unreliable accuracy.
With the calibration established, additional ICP-MS measurements were made and compared to the concentrations determined by in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy to gauge the accuracy and reproducibility of the technique. Three equivalent n-GaP experiments showed good reproducibility in Ga concentration over equivalent time periods and agreed well with the corresponding ICP-MS values (Fig. 4a). For p+-GaP, the agreement in concentration values was high between UV-Vis and ICP-MS methods for different amounts of charge passed (Fig. 4b). While ICP-MS is a destructive batch method, the in situ absorbance measurement can provide similar data throughout the experiment without perturbing the electrolyte.
 Fig. 4  Comparing Ga concentration vs. time measured with calibrated in situ UV-Vis absorbance and ICP-MS. (a) n-GaP under 2 Sun illumination at 1.8 V vs. RHE in three different runs. (b) p+-GaP measured without illumination, listed voltages are the applied bias vs. RHE. 
Corrosion of n-GaP photoanodes
The GaP photocorrosion and dissolution behavior as a function of time and applied bias was explored by employing in situ UV-Vis spectroscopic analysis. Fig. 5 shows the resulting trends in the dissolved Ga concentration with time, the corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency, and the related bias-dependent behavior after 30 min. Corresponding time-dependent absorbance data for n-GaP is reported in Fig. S5.† Interestingly, p+-GaP and n-GaP displayed a different initial time dependence for the Ga concentration. For p+-GaP the dissolved Ga concentration was initially slow to rise but then increased to a steady-state dissolution rate after ∼20 min (Fig. 5a). In contrast, at each applied bias for n-GaP, the initial increase in Ga concentration was steep at short times (<10 min) before gradually reaching a steady, linear concentration increase with time (Fig. 5b). This difference in electrochemical corrosion behavior is consistent with the observed morphology changes to the p+-GaP and n-GaP after anodic operation.
 Fig. 5  
In situ UV-Vis spectroscopic measurements of (a–c) Ga concentration and (d–f) corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency. (a and d) The behavior of p+-GaP in the dark vs. time. The behavior of n-GaP at 2 Suns AM1.5 illumination (b and e) at various applied potentials vs. time, and (c and f) at 30 min vs. applied potential. All listed potentials are vs. RHE. 
Photoelectrochemical operation of n-GaP in acid results in the electrochemical etching of porous triangular arrays at the surface of GaP (111).35 GaP etches anisotropically, with the (111) surface breaking down and dissolving preferentially to expose the (110) surface planes and leading to the triangular pores.10 For GaP's zinc blende crystal structure, the (100) and (111) surface consists of only one species, either Ga or P. Due to the ionic character of binary GaP, this arrangement creates a dipole moment perpendicular to the surface which makes this orientation less energetically favorable and thus less stable. The (110) surface, by contrast, is occupied by both atom types and thus has no perpendicular surface dipole moment, leading to higher stability.36 Although the initial n-GaP surface was smooth and relatively featureless, triangular pores of ∼0.5–3 µm appeared after operation in acid, with the smaller pores eventually growing together into 3–5 µm pores (Fig. 6a–c). The Ga concentration thus rises rapidly at first as the (111) surface decomposes before reaching a lower, pseudo-steady-state rate when the more slowly etching (110) orientation dominates the exposed surface. The etching of pores in n-GaP is in contrast to the uniform dissolution which is usually observed with p-type material.34 Indeed, the etched p+-GaP surface remained very flat and highly reflective without the microscopic triangular surface roughening of the n-GaP (Fig. 6d). The initially slow rate of observable dissolved Ga is consistent with a delay as the p+-GaP surface layer is fully oxidized, dissolved, and diffused throughout the electrolyte.
 Fig. 6  SEM images of the photoanode surface for (a) unetched n-GaP, (b) n-GaP after 30 min etch, (c) n-GaP after 60 min etch, and (d) p+-GaP after 60 min etch. The scale bar is 50 µm in (a, c and d) and 5 µm in (b). 
The difference in the etch process with doping type can be understood by considering the effect of the band energetics on the anodic oxidation of the semiconductor.32 GaP oxidation is driven by hole-transfer across the semiconductor/electrolyte interface. For p-type material at oxidative potentials, there is an abundance of majority-carrier holes to transfer, resulting in relatively uniform etching across the surface. For n-GaP, light absorption is necessary to generate minority-carrier holes in the valence band and permit appreciable oxidative current in reverse bias. Interfacial defect sites introduce energy states within the band gap (i.e., surface trap states) which are more likely to be populated with a hole. These defect sites can thus selectively promote semiconductor oxidation, leading to pits and subsequent pore formation.32,36
With data for the dissolved Ga concentration vs. time and corresponding cumulative charge passed, the faradaic efficiency for the GaP oxidation reaction can be calculated. However, the calculation assumes a known and constant number of electrons transferred, n, to fully decompose one molecule of GaP. Several studies for GaP in acid have assumed a value of 6 charge-carriers required to oxidize one GaP unit.33,34 This value appears to have been derived from a colorimetric measurement which assumed no side reactions, in a batch-method approach which would not capture transient behavior.37 The proposed anodic half-reaction is: GaP + 3H2O → Ga3+ + H3PO3 + 3H+ + 6e−(1)
However, the same study reported that only 3 charge-carriers were required to oxidize GaP in alkaline conditions.37 Similarly, a more recent computational study proposed that the most energetically favorable route to GaP oxidation in acid would require 3 charge-carriers per GaP unit, in which the anodic half-reaction would be:14 2GaP + 3H2O → Ga2O3 + 2P + 6H+ + 6e−(2)
For GaP in the zinc blende lattice, the dissolution mechanism is understood to occur through step edges at the surface where both Ga and P atoms are in contact with solution.37 In acid, H3O+ is proposed to bridge to the unpaired electron of the surface P atom. In this case, three bonds have to be split for the dissolution of one GaP molecule. If both atoms are electrochemically dissolved, then six charges are required, following reaction (1). Alternatively, if three charges per GaP molecule are passed electrochemically, one electron of each bond remains at the P atom, leaving neutral phosphorous which subsequently dissolves by a non-electrochemical step as in reaction (2).
Thus, the calculated GaP oxidation faradaic efficiency is plotted in Fig. 5 using either n = 3 or n = 6, and assuming the Ga2O3 fully dissolves. For the p+-GaP, the corrosion faradaic efficiency increased with time and approached a limiting value of ∼90% or higher for n = 6 (Fig. 5d). These potentials are at or below the thermodynamic potential for OER, and thus in the dark none of the charge is expected to be directed to water oxidation. The n = 6 reaction is therefore likely the dominant corrosion route for p+-GaP, with the balance attributable to surface oxides that have yet to dissolve.
The observed corrosion faradaic efficiency behavior was quite different for illuminated n-GaP. As the rise in Ga concentration slowed, the n-GaP photocurrent density typically increased as a result of the surface-etched anti-reflection effect discussed above (Fig. S1†). Therefore, at longer times, more charge passed resulted in proportionally less total Ga and P in solution. As a consequence, the calculated electrochemical GaP oxidation faradaic efficiency decreased with time (Fig. 5e). Moreover, a value of n = 6 for the corrosion reaction resulted in faradaic efficiencies greater than 100% at shorter times, and therefore this cannot be the dominant reaction pathway for the initial stage of etching on illuminated n-GaP. Instead, we attribute the initial behavior to the n = 3 route being dominant in the early stages of etching, though a combination of reaction mechanisms is possible. At longer times, the n-GaP oxidation faradaic efficiency approached a value of ∼40% for n = 3, ∼80% for n = 6 (Fig. S6†). Measuring O2 in the gaseous headspace by GC for illuminated n-GaP resulted in faradaic efficiency values for OER of 5–20%, averaged over 2 h (Fig. S7†). If the n = 6 corrosion route is dominant at longer times, this value for OER represents most of the balance of charge. Some portion of the charge may also be assigned to undissolved or incomplete oxidation of the semiconductor surface. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy indicated a significant surface oxide phase developing over time under applied bias (see surface characterization, Fig. 10). While the evolution of the n-GaP corrosion process appears convoluted and could benefit from further study, the existing data could be interpreted as the reaction branching ratio changing over time as the surface and crystal orientation change, from the n = 3 route during initial pore formation and selective (111) etching, to n = 6 at longer times.
Although the dissolved Ga concentration and resulting n-GaP photocorrosion faradaic efficiency were time-dependent, Fig. 5c and f highlight the role of applied bias by analyzing the electrolyte after 30 min of potentiostatic operation. At <0.4 V vs. RHE, the dissolved Ga concentration was low because J–E energy-conversion behavior had not yet reached the light-limited photocurrent density (Fig. S1†). Below 2 V vs. RHE, the dissolved Ga concentration was fairly steady at the 30 min point, resulting in a consistent n-GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency (n = 3, ∼65–70%) (Fig. 5f). Above 2 V vs. RHE, the dissolved Ga concentration was less steady but resulted in a noticeable drop in the corrosion faradaic efficiency (n = 3, 35–50%). We partially attribute this drop in corrosion faradaic efficiency to a shift in the oxidation pathway. After extended operation above 2 V, a yellow film developed on the GaP surface, indicating significant charge was directed to form this layer which did not dissolve and was therefore not quantified by UV-Vis absorbance (see surface characterization, Fig. 10). For electrodes above 2 V vs. RHE, XPS indicated significantly more intense peaks corresponding to a GaP oxide phase as well as the formation of a peak assigned to a sulfur oxide phase, which we attribute to an oxidative breakdown of the H2SO4 acid anion. In H2SO4 solution, the HSO4− anion is known to oxidize via a hole-transfer process to S2O82− at a standard redox potential of 2.12 V vs. NHE, which can be kinetically competitive with water oxidation in the absence of effective OER catalysis.38,39
Effect of TiO2 protective layer
The solar fuels research community has had success in recent years employing thin, conformal surface protection layers to mitigate semiconductor corrosion, including increasing the lifetime of GaP photoanodes in alkaline conditions.6,7,15,17 The in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy method was therefore extended to investigate the effect of thin ALD-grown TiO2 protective layers on n-GaP in acid. In previous work, thick TiO2 layers (up to >100 nm) provided robust corrosion resistance, and when this layer was unannealed it had a high density of electronic defect states which made it a leaky dielectric and permitted low charge-transfer resistance at a photoanode surface.6 Reproducing this effect with pinhole-free, conformal TiO2 proved highly challenging, and n-GaP with an unannealed TiO2 layer via ALD in our own labs as well as via ALD from an outside university lab both showed strongly reduced photocurrent behavior indicative of a strong interfacial tunnelling barrier inhibiting charge transfer. Fig. S8† shows some of the resulting data for different thicknesses of TiO2. At 4 nm, the light-limited current density for the J–E behavior was significantly reduced at first, but rapidly increased with each successive cycling of potential. This behavior indicated a high density of pinholes permitting a fast degradation of the interface and failure of the TiO2 protective layer. A thicker 20 nm TiO2 layer was therefore chosen for more robust protection on a longer time scale amenable to study by the in situ UV-Vis spectroscopic method.
With an unannealed 20 nm layer of ALD-grown TiO2, the initial light-limited current density at 2 Suns was reduced to ∼0.1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7a) relative to ∼8.3 mA cm−2 for bare n-GaP (Fig. 2). When held at 0.2 V vs. RHE, the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) photocurrent density gradually increased over 90 min to reach a steady light-limited current density of ∼8.2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 7b). Unannealed ALD-grown TiO2 is known to be largely nonstoichiometric and amorphous with significant structural disorder.6 While the ALD film in this case did slow corrosion over a few hours, it did not provide longer term stability and the structure presented a significant impediment to charge transfer. It was thus an imperfect electronically leaky dielectric in which the acid was still able to penetrate the layer via pinholes and/or a hydrous amorphous phase. Thermal annealing of the TiO2 layer was performed to reduce the defect states and produce stoichiometric crystalline films.6 As expected, the annealing step led to a more insulating interfacial barrier with even lower initial photocurrent, but it did provide more robust protection by resulting in a slower drift in the current density vs. time under potentiostatic operation (Fig. 7c). An IrOx co-catalyst layer was added as well to see if the kinetic promotion of OER would affect the stability. The n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed) photocurrent was increased relative to the uncatalyzed annealed electrode, but its photocurrent was no more stable over time than the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) electrode (Fig. 7). The oscillations in the Fig. 7c current density vs. time curves corresponded to bubble formation and release on the GaP active area.
 Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical energy-conversion behavior for n-GaP photoanodes with different surface protection layers. Current density vs. potential (J–E) under 2 Suns illumination (a) before and (b) after extended operation at 0.2 V vs. RHE. (c) Current density vs. time at 0.2 V vs. RHE for each type of electrode. TiO2 was grown by ALD to 20 nm thickness. 

Fig. 8 shows the dissolved Ga concentration and corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency vs. time for the n-GaP photoanodes with different surface protection layers. Corresponding absorbance data is presented in Fig. S9.† Each electrode was operated potentiostatically at 0.2 V vs. RHE, a potential chosen to be near the least oxidative potential that still reached the light-limited current density. The unannealed TiO2 succeeded in reducing the rate of semiconductor dissolution, with the annealed TiO2 layer leading to even lower Ga concentration. After four hours of operation, each TiO2-protected photoanode displayed less GaP dissolution than the bare n-GaP after two hours. However, this was attributed primarily to the low initial current density of the TiO2-coated electrodes as a result of interfacial charge-transfer resistance. A comparison of the calculated electrochemical corrosion faradaic efficiency, which accounts for the amount of charge passed, showed that the electrodes exhibited similar trends in faradaic efficiency but offset by a period of time. Again, we have omitted calculated faradaic efficiency values corresponding to Ga concentrations below 4 mM, where the absorbance error over time leads to insufficient accuracy (Fig. S4†). Moreover, the low charge passed at these early times further contributes to higher error in the faradaic efficiency calculation. In each case, the faradaic efficiency again starts out high and gradually decreases toward a pseudo-steady-state value, consistent with the behavior discussed above for bare n-GaP (111) photoanodes etching the (111) surface at a high rate to expose more slowly etching (110) surfaces (Fig. 5e). The TiO2-protected electrodes took longer for the faradaic efficiency to decrease to similar values, consistent with an initially slower etch confined to areas of exposed GaP (111) (i.e., pinholes). Although the TiO2-coated photoanodes took longer to decompose, the initially high calculated corrosion faradaic efficiency indicates that most of the early charge transfer across the interface is likely passing through pinholes rather than the contiguous regions of TiO2. With the TiO2 layer presenting a significant interfacial barrier to charge transport leading to initially low current density, pinholes and weak spots in the protective layer represent low-resistance shunt pathways that would be favored for interfacial hole transport. This behavior would lead to selective etching at pinholes, high corrosion faradaic efficiency at low current density, undercutting of the TiO2, and accelerated corrosion across the electrode surface, which is consistent with the morphology observed by SEM after operation in acid (Fig. 9). Increased hole conductivity through the TiO2 and decreased pinhole density are needed to enhance the electrode performance and stability, through improving the ALD process and optimizing the surface roughness.
 Fig. 8  
In situ UV-Vis spectroscopic measurements of (a) Ga concentration and (b) corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency for n-GaP photoanodes with different surface protection layers under 2 Suns at 0.2 V vs. RHE. TiO2 was grown by ALD to 20 nm thickness. 
 Fig. 9  SEM images of the photoanode surface after the extended measurement at 0.2 V vs. RHE in Fig. 7 for (a) n-GaP, (b) n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed), (c) n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed), and (d) n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed). The scale bar is 500 µm in each image and 5 µm for the inset in (a). 
GaP electrode surface characterization
In addition to in situ UV-Vis spectroscopic analysis, SEM and XPS characterization of the semiconductor surface was performed before and after operation in acid to provide further insight into the GaP corrosion process. Fig. 9 shows the electrode surfaces after the potentiostatic operation at 0.2 V vs. RHE as presented in Fig. 7c. The n-GaP surface before electrochemical measurements was flat and unremarkable other than occasional dust particles (Fig. 6a). After photoanodic operation in acid, the bare n-GaP surface was microscopically roughened but fairly uniform at the 500 µm scale (Fig. 9a). Zooming in to the 5 µm scale, however, the etched triangles corresponding to pores with (110) side walls were readily apparent (Fig. 6). This surface is consistent with previously reported n-GaP photoanode etching behavior in which nucleation sites lead to the simultaneous etching of parallel pores across the entire wafer surface.10 In contrast, the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) surface was noticeably macroscopically roughened with pyramidal features at the 500 µm scale (Fig. 9b). The change in post-etching surface morphology from bare n-GaP is consistent with the TiO2 layer reducing the density of etching nucleation sites, with variable size pinholes leading to faster and slower triangular pit growth which undercut the TiO2. As these etch pits expand, they grow into each other, resulting in pyramidal surface structures after sufficient etch time. The n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed) surface supports this interpretation of the etch process. With an annealed TiO2-coating, the large triangular etch pits are visible in different stages of growth, including some growing together and beginning to form the pyramidal surface (Fig. 9c). Large sections of the n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed) surface appear intact and etch-free, which is evidence that the crystalline TiO2 layer was robust with a lower pinhole density than the unannealed layer. Fig. S10† shows the n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed) surface at a higher magnification along with energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps. The n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed) surface displayed more advanced etching and pyramidal structures similar to the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) electrode (Fig. 9d), which is consistent with these two electrodes passing a similar amount of charge and resulting in a comparable dissolved Ga concentration (Fig. 8).
XPS characterization provided information on the chemical structure of the interface before and after etching. Fig. 10 shows optical images of pristine n-GaP, n-GaP after etching at <2 V vs. RHE and n-GaP after etching at >2 V vs. RHE along with corresponding XPS spectra for the Ga 2p and P 2p regions. Peak assignments were made according to the NIST binding energy database and previous literature reports.40,41 After etching n-GaP for a few hours at <2 V vs. RHE, a corroded ring of less reflective roughened material was visible to the eye where the GaP wafer was exposed to the electrolyte. By XPS, a shoulder peak appeared at 134 eV next to the GaP P 2p peak, which is attributable to a gallium orthophosphate, GaPO4.40 Similarly, the GaP Ga 2p3/2 developed a shoulder at 1118 eV. This peak was also attributed to GaPO4 but could also include Ga2O3. These undissolved oxide phases at the interface represent additional charge directed towards GaP corrosion and highlight that the calculated faradaic efficiencies above are a lower limit only representative of the dissolved Ga and P species. The observed oxide phase is consistent with a previous etching study which found that n-GaP undergoes a surface passivation effect which slows the etch rate in acid.42 At potentials >2 V vs. RHE, a yellow film became visible on the GaP wafer in the exposed area. XPS spectra show that this film corresponds to sharp increases in the relative intensity of the GaPO4 (and/or Ga2O3) peaks. In addition, a new peak arose prominently at 169 eV, which is not readily attributable to any Ga or P phases. Instead, we attribute this to a sulfate state (e.g., Ga2SO4), with similar metal sulfates giving S 2p binding energy peaks in the same region.43,44 Oxidation of the H2SO4 electrolyte becomes feasible beyond 2 V vs. RHE,38 and we attribute the rise of this surface sulfur oxide peak and the formation of the yellow film to such a route.
 Fig. 10  Photographs (left) and corresponding XPS spectra (right) of n-GaP. Samples are (a) pristine n-GaP, (b) n-GaP after 2 h at <2 V vs. RHE, and (c) n-GaP after 2 h at >2 V vs. RHE. 
XPS spectra for the n-GaP photoanodes with different protective layers were also measured before and after extended potentiostatic operation. Fig. 11 shows the resulting binding energy peaks for the Ti 2p and P 2p regions, with the Ga 2p and O 1s given in Fig. S11.† The Ti 2p peak intensity decreased significantly for the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) and n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed) electrodes, consistent with their steadied photocurrent density (Fig. 7c) and etched surface across nearly all the electrode area (Fig. 9) indicating that there was little of the TiO2 barrier layer remaining. Less change in the Ti 2p peak intensity was measured for the n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed) electrode, which was attributed to the ALD-grown TiO2 layer remaining intact on significant portions of the electrode area which were unetched (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 11  XPS spectra for the n-GaP with and without protective layers before (black) and after (red) extended potentiostatic operation at 0.2 V vs. RHE under 2 Suns for the Ti 2p (left) and P 2p (right) regions. 
The behavior of peaks in the P 2p binding energy region was more complex. For bare n-GaP, the GaP P 2p peak at 129 eV and P 2s peak at 187 eV were strongly reduced in intensity after extended photoanodic operation, consistent with the result from Fig. 10. Relative to the GaP peaks, the GaPOx peaks at 134 eV and 192 eV were more significant after electrochemical operation. Likewise, the Ga 3s peak at 160 eV was also reduced in intensity. The bare n-GaP spectra thus indicate a surface oxide layer formed during photoanodic measurements which reduced the signal from the underlying pure GaP. For the unetched TiO2-coated electrodes, little to no signal was observed at the binding energies corresponding to pure GaP. Instead, the observable P signal was restricted to the prominent peaks at the binding energies for GaPOx. With 20 nm of ALD-grown TiO2, the minimal XPS excitation occurring in the GaP through the TiO2 must still be in the interfacial region where it was in a chemically oxidized form. In addition, pinholes of GaP that may be exposed through the TiO2 layer were still exposed to the ALD growth conditions, including water vapor at elevated temperature, so these regions may have a strong GaPOx surface layer as well. Even after 4 h of photoanodic operation, the most extensively etched electrodes, the n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed) and the n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed), displayed only a weak signal for the pure GaP P 2p and P 2s. The lack of pure GaP signal indicates that the undercutting and removal of the TiO2 was accompanied by surface GaPOx layer growth which was thick enough to minimize XPS detection of the underlying pure GaP. Lastly, it is interesting to note that the binding energy peak at 169 eV attributed to a sulfate state was prominently observed for all TiO2-coated electrodes. The before data was actually collected from a region of the sample just outside the active etch area, but on a wafer surface that had been exposed to the 1 M H2SO4 electrolyte. We thus speculate that the TiO2 phase absorbed some sulfate counterions even in the absence of applied bias.
Conclusions
The evolution of the photocorrosion on GaP anodes in acid was studied with a novel spectroelectrochemical in situ UV-Vis absorption technique to monitor the dissolved Ga and P concentration in solution as a function of time and applied bias. Degenerate p+-GaP electrodes dissolved uniformly, leading to a steady rise in electrolyte Ga concentration and a semiconductor oxidation faradaic efficiency rising to more than 90%, assuming the n = 6 corrosion half-reaction. In contrast, illuminated n-GaP photoanodes displayed a decreasing rate of dissolution with declining semiconductor corrosion faradaic efficiency values, which possibly depend on a changing combination of n = 3 and n = 6 GaP oxidation half-reactions. The difference between n- and p+-GaP corrosion mechanisms was attributed to anisotropic crystal etching and the semiconductor band energetics which lead to the etching of triangular micropores on the n-GaP surface. Moreover, the tested ALD-grown TiO2 protective coatings failed to achieve low interfacial charge-transfer resistance, and consequently led to steady but slower GaP dissolution via shunts through pinholes in the TiO2 layer. The in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy confirmed a consistent mechanism for the n-GaP corrosion with varying protective layers by displaying a similar evolution to the GaP oxidation faradaic efficiency, just offset by a period of time. The protective layers did, however, lead to variations in the surface etch morphology, as pinhole nucleation sites led to (111) pyramidal etch sites that undercut the TiO2 layer and eventually grew into one another. The results demonstrate the capability and versatility of the in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy technique to investigate semiconductor photocorrosion, enabling researchers to learn about transient corrosion phenomena in operando without the requirement for sophisticated, expensive, low-throughput, and training-intensive facilities.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge support from the Conn Center for Renewable Energy Research at the University of Louisville. S. P. also acknowledges support from a University of Louisville Graduate Student Council research grant. We also acknowledge assistance from McAlister Council-Troche at the Virginia Tech Analytical Research Laboratory for ICP-MS measurements.
Notes and references
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, C. X. Xiang, S. Haussener, A. D. Berger and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2984–2993 RSC .
J. W. Ager, M. R. Shaner, K. A. Walczak, I. D. Sharp and S. Ardo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2811–2824 RSC .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Science, 1998, 280, 425–427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Verlage, S. Hu, R. Liu, R. J. R. Jones, K. Sun, C. X. Xiang, N. S. Lewis and H. A. Atwater, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3166–3172 RSC .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kargar, S. Sukrittanon, C. Zhou, Y. G. Ro, X. Q. Pan, S. A. Dayeh, C. W. Tu and S. Jin, Small, 2017, 13, 1603574 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Price and S. Maldonado, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 11988–11994 CrossRef CAS .
M. Alqahtani, S. Ben-Jabar, M. Ebaid, S. Sathasivam, P. Jurczak, X. Xia, A. Alromaeh, C. Blackman, Y. Qin, B. Zhang, B. S. Ooi, H. Liu, P. Parkin and J. Wu, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, A364–A371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, M. Zheng, Z. Xiong, H. Li and W. Shen, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 10861–10869 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinez-Garcia, H. B. Russell, W. Paxton, S. Ravipati, S. Calero-Barney, M. Menon, E. Richter, J. Young, T. Deutsch and M. Sunkara, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 1073247 Search PubMed .
H. B. Russell, A. N. Andriotis, M. Menon, J. B. Jasinski, A. Martinez-Garcia and M. K. Sunkara, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solution, Pergamon Press, Oxford,  1966 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Chen and L. W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 RSC .
M. F. Lichterman, M. R. Shaner, S. G. Handler, B. S. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray, N. S. Lewis and J. M. Spurgeon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4188–4191 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, N. S. Lewis, J. W. Ager, J. H. Yang, J. R. McKone and N. C. Strandwitz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24201–24228 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Britto, J. D. Benck, J. L. Young, C. Hahn, T. G. Deutsch and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Duehnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. L. Hendricks, R. Tang-Kong, A. S. Babadi, P. C. McIntyre and C. E. D. Chidsey, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 90–100 CrossRef CAS .
K. Itaya and E. Tomita, Surf. Sci., 1988, 201, L507–L512 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. Zamborini and R. M. Crooks, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-G. Kim, J. H. Baricuatro, A. Javier, J. M. Gregoire and M. P. Soriaga, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 15053–15056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Bearinger, C. A. Orme and J. L. Gilbert, Surf. Sci., 2001, 491, 370–387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song and Z.-H. Xie, Micron, 2018, 112, 69–83 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, M. H. Richter, S. Hu, E. J. Crumlin, S. Axnanda, M. Favaro, W. Drisdell, Z. Hussain, B. S. Brunschwig, N. S. Lewis, Z. Liu and H.-J. Lewerenz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H139–H146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamamoto, H. Bluhm, K. Andersson, G. Ketteler, H. Ogasawara, M. Salmeron and A. Nilsson, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2008, 20, 184025 CrossRef .
Y. Zhai, Z. Zhu, S. Zhou, C. Zhu and S. Dong, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 3089–3111 RSC .
L. Dunsch, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2011, 15, 1631–1646 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nayak, P. U. Biedermann, M. Stratmann and A. Erbe, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 106, 472–482 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Su, Q. Dai and Z. H. Lu, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 1999, 55, 2179–2185 CrossRef .
F. J. P. Schuurmans, D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. van de Lagemaat and A. Lagendijk, Science, 1999, 284, 141–143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. H. Erne, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 305–314 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. Tjerkstra, J. G. Rivas, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2002, 5, G32–G35 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Tiginyanu, I. V. Kravetsky, J. Monecke, W. Cordts, G. Marowsky and H. L. Hartnagel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 77, 2415–2417 CrossRef CAS .
K. Muller, J. Wloka and P. Schmuki, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2009, 13, 807–812 CrossRef .
R. Memming and G. Schwandt, Electrochim. Acta, 1968, 13, 1299–1310 CrossRef CAS .
Q. X. Mi, A. Zhanaidarova, B. S. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5694–5700 RSC .
J. M. Spurgeon, J. M. Velazquez and M. T. McDowell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3623–3631 RSC .
R. Franke, T. Chasse, P. Streubel and A. Meisel, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1991, 56, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Nefedov, Y. V. Salyn, E. P. Domashevskaya, Y. A. Ugai and V. A. Terekhov, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1975, 6, 231–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, J. H. Lai, W. Wang, P. C. Huang, J. C. Jia, L. H. Han, Z. W. Tian, Z. Q. Tian and D. P. Zhan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 9944–9952 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Yu, F. Liu, Z. Y. Wang and Y. Chen, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 1990, 50, 159–166 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Shalvoy and P. J. Reucroft, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1979, 16, 567–569 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10106cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of the quartz cuvette cell for PEC measurements with in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy, with a GaP working electrode (WE), Pt mesh counter electrode (CE), and Ag/AgCl micro-reference electrode (RE).	 

 	Fig. 2  Current density vs. potential (J–E) behavior for GaP photoanodes in the dark and under AM1.5 illumination in 1 M H2SO4. The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is marked at 1.23 V vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 3  Calibration for n-GaP in situ UV-Vis spectroscopy. (a) Current density vs. time for n-GaP photoanodes at 1.4 V vs. RHE at 2 Suns in 1 M H2SO4 and corresponding (b) absorbance vs. wavelength data. (c) Concentration of dissolved Ga and P in the electrolyte as measured by ICP-MS. (d) Resulting absorbance vs. Ga concentration calibration data.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparing Ga concentration vs. time measured with calibrated in situ UV-Vis absorbance and ICP-MS. (a) n-GaP under 2 Sun illumination at 1.8 V vs. RHE in three different runs. (b) p+-GaP measured without illumination, listed voltages are the applied bias vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 5  
In situ UV-Vis spectroscopic measurements of (a–c) Ga concentration and (d–f) corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency. (a and d) The behavior of p+-GaP in the dark vs. time. The behavior of n-GaP at 2 Suns AM1.5 illumination (b and e) at various applied potentials vs. time, and (c and f) at 30 min vs. applied potential. All listed potentials are vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM images of the photoanode surface for (a) unetched n-GaP, (b) n-GaP after 30 min etch, (c) n-GaP after 60 min etch, and (d) p+-GaP after 60 min etch. The scale bar is 50 µm in (a, c and d) and 5 µm in (b).	 
GaP + 3H2O → Ga3+ + H3PO3 + 3H+ + 6e−	(1)
2GaP + 3H2O → Ga2O3 + 2P + 6H+ + 6e−	(2)

 	Fig. 7  Photoelectrochemical energy-conversion behavior for n-GaP photoanodes with different surface protection layers. Current density vs. potential (J–E) under 2 Suns illumination (a) before and (b) after extended operation at 0.2 V vs. RHE. (c) Current density vs. time at 0.2 V vs. RHE for each type of electrode. TiO2 was grown by ALD to 20 nm thickness.	 

 	Fig. 8  
In situ UV-Vis spectroscopic measurements of (a) Ga concentration and (b) corresponding GaP corrosion faradaic efficiency for n-GaP photoanodes with different surface protection layers under 2 Suns at 0.2 V vs. RHE. TiO2 was grown by ALD to 20 nm thickness.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of the photoanode surface after the extended measurement at 0.2 V vs. RHE in Fig. 7 for (a) n-GaP, (b) n-GaP/TiO2 (unannealed), (c) n-GaP/TiO2 (annealed), and (d) n-GaP/TiO2/IrOx (annealed). The scale bar is 500 µm in each image and 5 µm for the inset in (a).	 

 	Fig. 10  Photographs (left) and corresponding XPS spectra (right) of n-GaP. Samples are (a) pristine n-GaP, (b) n-GaP after 2 h at <2 V vs. RHE, and (c) n-GaP after 2 h at >2 V vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 11  XPS spectra for the n-GaP with and without protective layers before (black) and after (red) extended potentiostatic operation at 0.2 V vs. RHE under 2 Suns for the Ti 2p (left) and P 2p (right) regions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9ta10106c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
