Transition-metal phosphors with cyclometalating ligands: fundamentals and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B916237B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B916237B
(Critical Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 638-655Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsTransition-metal phosphors with cyclometalating ligands: fundamentals and applications

        
          
            Yun 
            Chi
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Pi-Tai 
            Chou
          
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemistry, National Tsing Hua University, Hsinchu 30013, Taiwan. E-mail: ychi@mx.nthu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886 3 5720864;   Tel: +886 3 5712956
bDepartment of Chemistry, National Taiwan University, Taipei 10617, Taiwan. E-mail: chop@ntu.edu.tw;  Fax: +886 2 23695208;   Tel: +886 2 33663894
Received 
      6th August 2009
    First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      7th December 2009
    AbstractOne goal of this critical review is to provide advanced methodologies for systematic preparation of transition-metal based phosphors that show latent applications in the field of organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs). We are therefore reviewing various types of cyclometalating chelates for which the favorable metal–chelate bonding interaction, on the one hand, makes the resulting phosphorescent complexes highly emissive in both fluid and solid states at room temperature. On the other hand, fine adjustment of ligand-centered π–π* electronic transitions allows tuning of emission wavelength across the whole visible spectrum. The cyclometalating chelates are then classified according to types of cyclometalating groups, i.e. either aromatic C–H or azolic N–H fragment, and the adjacent donor fragment involved in the formation of metallacycles; the latter is an N-containing heterocycle, N-heterocyclic (NHC) carbene fragment or even diphenylphosphino group. These cyclometalating ligands are capable to react with heavy transition-metal elements, namely: Ru(II), Os(II), Ir(III) and Pt(II), to afford a variety of highly emissive phosphors, for which the photophysical properties as a function of chelate or metal characteristics are systematically discussed. Using Ir(III) complexes as examples, the C^N chelates possessing both C–H site and N-heterocyclic donor group are essential for obtaining phosphors with emission ranging from sky-blue to saturated red, while the N^N chelates such as 2-pyridyl-C-linked azolates are found useful for serving as true-blue chromophores due to their increased ligand-centered π–π* energy gap. Lastly, the remaining NHC carbene and benzyl phosphine chelates are highly desirable to serve as ancillary chelates in localizing the electronic transition between the metal and remaining lower energy chromophoric chelates. As for the potential opto-electronic applications, many of them exhibit remarkable performance data, which are convincing to pave a broad avenue for further development of all types of phosphorescent displays and illumination devices (94 references).
Yun Chi
Yun Chi obtained his PhD degree from University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1986, and pursued a one-year postdoctoral study at MIT. He is currently a Chair Professor of Chemistry and Associated Dean of College of Science, National Tsing Hua University. His earlier academic endeavors cover transition-metal cluster chemistry and design of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) precursors suitable for making metal-containing thin films and nanomaterials. His current researches are focused on subjects involving the design and testing of transition-metal based materials for organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic applications.
Pi-Tai Chou
Pi-Tai Chou received his PhD degree from Florida State University, Tallahassee, in 1985, and is currently a Chairman of Chemistry Department and Chair Professor at National Taiwan University (NTU). Prior to joining NTU, he was a DOE postdoctoral fellow at University of California, Berkeley (1985–1987), an assistant professor at University of South Carolina, Columbia (1987–1994) and a professor of National Chung Cheng University (1994–2000). His research interests are in the area of ultrafast phenomena on excited-state proton/charge and energy transfer reactions; syntheses, photophysics, and applications of materials suited for OLEDs, solar energy cells, and nanotechnology.
1. Introduction and scope
Chelating ligands play an important role in the development of both classical coordination chemistry and modern material chemistry employing transition-metal based compounds. Such coordinative compounds have been attracting wide spread interest because of the efficient luminescent properties and potential applications in organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs)1 and other electroluminescent technologies.2 For the purpose of design and synthesis of luminescent complexes, it is important to select chelates with appropriate frontier molecular orbitals, which can be accessed from computational approach, and thus allow efficient electronic transitions occurring between different energy states associated with both central metal atom and chelating ligands. Cyclometalated aromatics have been commonly used for assembling such luminescent compounds,3 the success of which is attributed to the following factors. (a) Compared with other organic ligands, aromatic cyclometalates tend to form the strongest bonding interaction with transition-metal elements. (b) The stronger metal–ligand bonding would increase the d–d energy gap and afford less radiationless quenching due to the suppressed population to the higher lying, repulsive d–d excited state. This is particular true for the third-row transition-metal elements. (c) The occurrence of close-lying, ligand-centered π–π* electronic transitions allows facile tuning of emission wavelength.
Moreover, the rapid growth of the chemistry of cyclometalated complexes stimulates the fundamental investigations aimed, in particular, at elucidation of the basic synthetic pathway. One of the most well-known examples should be ascribed to those involving the direct metalation of the aromatic C–H bond that is connected to an adjacent donor group of aromatic heterocycles and analogues. Here, symbol D is used to represent such an ancillary donor that could form an initial dative bonding with the transition-metal element, holding this adjacent C–H bond close to the electron rich metal center. Then, intra-molecular cleavage of the C–H bond takes place, forming both the metal-containing cyclic framework along with a metal–hydride fragment; the latter then undergoes hydride abstraction leaving only the more stable metallacyclic fragment. The schematic pathway of this cyclometalation reaction is depicted as shown below: (1)
Over the past three decades, several reviews have been devoted to study such cyclometalation reactions;4 and interested readers should consult these articles for obtaining in-depth mechanistic discussions and information on how to select suitable cyclometalating ligands and transition-metal reagents.
1.1 C^N cyclometalates
Typical cyclometalation reaction refers to the coordination of a heteroaromatic chelate to a metal element via a covalent metal–carbon bond; the remaining dative bonds are normally derived from heteroatoms such as nitrogen in the ligand. For example, 2-phenylpyridine (ppyH) has been classified as a C^N ligand and can bind to a variety of second- and third-row transition-metal ions, forming a five-membered metallacycle through activation of the ortho C–H bond of the phenyl ring that is adjacent to the 2-pyridyl fragment. Since this transformation involves removal of a proton from the aromatic heterocycle, all cyclometalates are anionic, so that these ligands offer very strong M–C covalent interactions as well as highly stabilized ligand-field strength toward the metal ion. One important consequence regarding the photophysics is that the energy of the higher lying metal-centered d–d excited states in these complexes, which generally serves as a major nonradiative deactivating channel, is raised substantially relative to those of charge-neutral diimine ligands such as bipyridine (bpy); the latter tends to yield relatively less luminous, non-cationic metal complexes at room temperature. As a result, cyclometalation offers a good synthetic protocol, yielding efficient luminescent metal complexes.  
Moreover, the π–π* energy gap of the C^N ligand plays an important role in fine-tuning the emission wavelength of the metal complexes. Generally speaking, reduction of the energy gap, i.e. the spectral red-shift, can be achieved by (i) incorporation of electron donating sulfur-containing heterocycles,5 (ii) extending the π-conjugation,6 or (iii) addition of an electron withdrawing (or donating) substituent or atom at the pyridyl (or phenyl) fragment.7 The latter two manipulations can be exemplified by changing the C^N chelate from ppy to 2-phenylisoquinoline (piqH) or 2-phenylquinazoline (nazoH), which possess one additional, fully conjugated hexagonal ring plus one extra nitrogen atom at the original pyridyl fragment. As for an opposite process aimed at the increase of the π–π* energy gap, one method is to introduce electron withdrawing substituents such as 2,4-difluoro groups at the phenyl site, giving the C^N chelate 2,4-difluorophenylpyridine (dfppyH).8 Since the electron withdrawing fluoro substituents are located at meta-positions with respect to the metal center, stabilization of both occupied molecular orbitals on the phenyl group and at the metal dπ orbitals is expected. Conversely, the fluoro substituents are located at ortho and para positions with respect to the 2-pyridyl group, such that the resonance (mesomeric) effects would exert an opposite influence to the aforementioned inductive effect,9 which leads to a much reduced stabilization of the pyridyl π* orbital. The overall consequence is to produce a π–π* gap that is substantially higher in energy than that of their parent ppy ligand. As a result, the dfppy chelate has been successfully utilized for preparation of many blue to sky-blue phosphorescent complexes, among which the most studied example is known as FIrpic.10 Functionalization of dfppy chelates was also executed in attempts to blue shift the phosphorescence as well as to improve the emission efficiency.11  
In the search for cyclometalated ligands with a π–π* energy gap greater than that of dfppy, Thompson and co-workers came up with an ingenious design involving 2,4-difluorophenyl-N-pyrazole (dfppzH), for which the lowest lying energy gap was experimentally determined via low-temperature luminescence measurement.12 However, it still suffers from a somewhat smaller π–π* energy gap than required for true blue irradiation. One main obstacle lies in the direct electronic crosstalk, i.e. π-conjugation, between e.g. difluorophenyl (HOMO) and pyrazole (LUMO) moieties in dfppz. As such, the conjugation leads to an increase (decrease) of HOMO (LUMO) energies, affording an upper limit for the π–π* energy gap. To overcome this intrinsic restriction, one strategy is to design a non-conjugated chelate. One representative example is 2,4-difluorobenzyl-N-pyrazole, (dfb-pzH), for which the ligands are assembled by linking two aromatic fragments with a saturated methylene spacer.13 It is believed that the methylene group in the dfb-pz chelate would effectively interrupt the π-conjugation. The net result is to stabilize and destabilize the ligand-centered π and π* orbitals, respectively. Accordingly, chelating ligands with a much larger energy gap (cf. both dfppy and dfppz) can be routinely obtained.
1.2 N^N cyclometalates
The second type of cyclometalated ligand consists of 2-pyridyl-C-linked azoles such as pyrazole, triazole and tetrazole, denoted as N^N chelates, which are akin to the aforementioned 2-phenylpyridine and are capable of using two of their nitrogen atoms to implement the required metal–chelate bonding interaction.14 As the 2-pyridyl azole tends to lose its proton, resulting in the anionic chelate, its bond strength to the metal atom should be notably greater than that of the neutral bipyridine; the latter possesses only neutral dative interaction. In addition, comparing the phenyl or 4,6-difluorophenyl segments, the azole fragment possesses at least two highly electronegative nitrogen atoms, so that the ligand-centered π–π* energy gap of such N^N chelates, in theory, should be significantly larger than that of the C^N chelates such as the dfppy cyclometalate. This enlarged π–π* energy gap provides many practical advantages in assembling luminescent transition-metal complexes (vide infra). Finally, due to the higher reactivity of azolic N–H bonding, these 2-pyridyl azoles are expected to be more reactive than the typical C^N chelates, giving a greater possibility to prepare designated e.g. Ru(II) and Os(II) based metal complexes, for which the 2+ charged central metal atoms are generally less reactive than the isoelectronic Ir(III) system.15 Selective examples of pyridyl azolate chelates are showed below:  
Among these, the chelates with R = CF3, tert-butyl and phenyl proved to exhibit excellent chemical reactivity to all types of main group and transition-metal reagents, affording the designated product with high yield. Moreover, for the case of 1,2,4-triazole, both N-1 and N-4 atoms of the triazolate moiety with R = H were equally accessible during cyclometalation, forming two possible metal–ligand chelating modes. Such studies, being pioneered by Vos and co-workers, also confirmed that introduction of a bulky group at the C-3 position would effectively inhibit coordination of its neighboring N-4 atom, giving better control of stereochemistry.16
1.3 C^C cyclometalates
Recently, N-heterocyclic carbenes (NHC) were considered as a new variation for the cyclometalating chelates.17,18 Two most studied NHC ligands are 1-phenyl-3-methylimidazolin-2-ylidene (pmiH) and 1-phenyl-3-methyl benzimidazolin-2-ylidene (pmbH). In principle, the carbene moiety stands for a neutral, two electron donor, which makes these cyclometalated ligands classical bidentate monoanionic ligands (denoted as C^C in a way similar to aforementioned C^N chelates). Such ligands are capable of reacting with Ir(III) metal reagents to afford homoleptic carbene complexes with formula Ir(pmb)3 and Ir(pmi)3; the former uniquely exhibits a electrophosphorescent transition in the near-UV region (ca. 389–395 nm) at room temperature, and demonstrates an efficient, violet-to-near UV phosphorescent OLED.19 The success of this approach is credited to the fact that employment of the NHC carbene donor leads to a significant increase in the LUMO energy, and consequently increases the relative emission energy for the corresponding Ir(III) complexes.  
It is also notable that the average metal–carbon distance of the carbene is shorter than the respective M–N distances associated with the neutral nitrogen donor. The shorter metal–carbene distance confirms that the carbene moiety affords a much stronger ligand-to-metal dative interaction. The resulting larger ligand field strength would further destabilize the metal-centered d–d excited states, which could become thermally inaccessible from the typical emissive triplet excited state, making the carbene complexes suitable to serve as efficient phosphors. Near-UV phosphorescence is observable at room temperature from both mer- and fac-Ir(pmb)3 and Ir(pmi)3. Their emission, which is contributed by admixture of ligand centered π–π* and MLCT, showed a significantly hypsochromic shift vs. that of the best blue-emitting C^N and N^N chelates, except for tris(1-cyanophenyl-3-methylimidazolin-2-ylidene-C,C2′)iridium, which exhibited deep-blue phosphorescence with a quantum yield Φ = 78% measured at room temperature using an integrating sphere.20 In the case that an even greater π–π* energy gap is required for the NHC carbene ligand, a tactic is to utilize a non-conjugated NHC carbene such as 1-(2,4-difluorobenzyl)-3-methylbenzimidazolium (dfb-mbH), which is assembled via employing both 2,4-difluorobenzyl bromide and N-methylbenzimidazole, followed by treatment with halide scavenger AgBF4.21 Again, the methylene group in dfb-mb would effectively interrupt the π-conjugation on the carbene chelate. The net result is to provide the as-synthesized luminescent complexes with ancillary chelates having an excessively large ligand-centered π–π* gap, so that their electronic interference to the other chromophoric chelates is effectively suppressed.
1.4 C^P cyclometalates
Similar to both classes of C^N and C^C chelates, the phosphino fragment also can undergo pre-coordination to the metal and then induce subsequent C–H activation of adjacent aromatic C–H bonds under mild conditions.22 In the case of triphenylphosphine, the subsequent C–H activation would result in formation of highly unstable, four-membered metallacycles due to the bond strain created, which is undesirable for constructing luminescent complexes. Conversely, for benzyldiphenylphosphine and its functionalized derivatives, selective formation of five-membered metallacycles occurs at the benzyl site, hence, provides a much more stable five-membered metal–chelate bonding interaction, and consequently an easy access to the emissive metal complexes. In general, these C^P chelates also represent a class of “innocent” and “non-conjugated” ancillary chelates, for which the π-accepting character of the PPh2 group is expected to increase the MLCT transition energy. Suffice it to say that the associated benzyl cyclometalate also shows substantial increase of the ligand field strength and is capable of destabilizing the metal-centered d–d excited states concurrently. As anticipated, after incorporating suitable chromophores with large enough ligand-centered π–π* energy gap, decent blue to true-blue phosphorescent metal complexes can be realized via routine synthetic protocols.  
2. Classification according to the central metal atom
These cyclometalated chelates are capable of reacting with various second- and third-row transition-metal elements, forming stable derivative complexes. The majority of them exhibit bright luminescence and appear to be attractive candidates in various opto-electronic applications such as sensors and electroluminescent devices. The following subsections are divided in a sequence according to the classification of transition-metal atoms that dominate both the physical and chemical properties of the corresponding complexes.
2.1 Ru(II) and Os(II) complexes

2.1.1 With C^N chelates. 
Generally speaking, C^N chelates are known to be not too reactive towards Ru(II) and Os(II) reagents. One exception is the direct treatment of benzo[h]quinoline and Ru3(CO)12 in refluxing octane solution, affording the Ru(II) complex 1 with two C^N cyclometalates.23 Upon treatment of 1 with Me3NO, followed by addition of phosphine, or even employing photochemical means,24 it was found that one benzo[h]quinolinate ligand underwent a 180° rotation around the Ru(II) center, giving the corresponding phosphine-substituted derivatives 2 and 3, respectively.25  
As depicted in Table 1, complex 1 was nearly non-emissive in room temperature, degassed CH2Cl2 solution, but revealed decent emission along with well-resolved vibronic progression in a 77 K CH2Cl2 matrix. In sharp contrast, phosphine complexes 2 and 3 showed a broad and structureless phosphorescence recorded at both RT and 77 K. In light of the DFT calculation, it has been concluded that the lowest lying T1 state of 1 is dominated by the ligand centered π–π* transition, while those of 2 and 3 possess appreciable proportion of MLCT character. The differences can be rationalized by the greater π-accepting properties of CO than that of PPh2Me and PPhMe2 ligands, such that complex 1 with dual CO ligands renders a much reduced electron density in the dπ orbital, and hence a lesser amount of the MLCT contribution. Moreover, greater MLCT contribution in both 2 and 3 should accordingly enhance the spin–orbit coupling, resulting in shortening of the phosphorescence radiative lifetime. In contrast, the greater proportion of π–π* contribution in the T1 state of 1 suppresses the spin–orbital coupling and alternatively exhibits a much longer radiative lifetime. Accordingly, the phosphorescence of 1 may be subject to radiationless deactivation, accounting for its lack of luminescence in the fluid state at room temperature.  
Table 1 Photophysical data for Os(II) complexes 1–7 in degassed CH2Cl2 at RT






PL λmaxa/nm

Φ


τ
obs

/μs

k
r

/s−1

k
nr/s−1
ref.





a Data in square brackets are measured in CH2Cl2 matrix at 77 K.
b 
k
r and knr were calculated according to the equations, kr = Φ/τobs and knr = (1/τobs) − kr.






1

[485, 521, 563, 617 (sh)]
—
[2440]
—
—

25




2

571, [553]
0.24
7.1 [263]
3.3 × 104
1.1 × 105

25




3

575, [556]
0.18
8.3 [182]
2.1 × 104
9.9 × 104

25




4a

466, 499
0.0008
0.014
5.7 × 104
7.1 × 107

26




4b

500
0.0005
0.006
8.3 × 104
1.7 × 108

26




5a

447, 476
0.0006
0.012
5.0 × 104
8.3 × 107

26




5b

450, 472
0.0006
0.007
8.6 × 104
1.4 × 108

26




6

553
0.15
0.32
4.7 × 105
2.7 × 106

26




7

557
∼1
2.50
4.0 × 105
<4.0 × 103

26





Attempts were also made to prepare the respective Os(II) congeners. This can be done by treatment of Os3(CO)12 and 2-phenylpyridine or 4,6-difluorophenylpyridine in refluxing diethylene glycol monomethyl ether (DGME) solution.26 For this synthetic transformation, two isomers a and b were obtained with a nearly equal molar ratio and have been assigned to the kinetic and thermodynamic products, respectively. Evidence to support such delineation is from the control experiments, in which heating of a DGME solution of 4a (or 5a) at 180 °C for 24 h afforded a mixture of both 4a (or 5a) and 4b (or 5b), while heating of a solution of the second isomers b under identical condition afforded no back conversion to isomers a. Furthermore, the ppy complexes 4a and 4b failed to afford any ligand substitution product under any attempts. This could be rationalized by the better electron donating power of ppy ligands and the strengthened Os–CO interaction via back π-bonding, as evidenced by its relatively lower ν(CO) stretching bands shown in the solution IR spectra. On the other hand, isomer 5b, for which the C^N ligands are in asymmetrical orientation and the Os(II) metal center possesses relatively lower electron density, would labilize one CO ligands, giving rise to the phosphine substitution products with formula [Os(dfppy)2(CO)(PPh2Me)] (6) and [Os(dfppy)2(CO)(PPhMe2)] (7).
With respect to the photophysical properties, due to an increase of separation between metal-centered d–d and the lowest lying excited states, these dicarbonyl complexes 4 and 5 are notably more emissive than those of the second-row Ru(II) congeners. For the PPh2Me substituted complexes 6 and 7, a bathochromic shift of emission vs. their dicarbonyl counterparts was again observed; cf.5a and 5b (∼472 nm) and 6 (553 nm) as depicted in Fig. 1. This is caused by decreasing the π-accepting strength of PPh2Me (cf. CO in 5b), which in turn pushes up the metal dπ level. Moreover, upon incorporating less π-accepting PPhMe2, 7 was then obtained, which exhibited a slightly bathochromic emission at 557 nm and a remarkable increase in emission quantum yield to near unity (cf. 0.15 for 6) in fluid state. Because the radiative decay rate constant between 6 (4.8 × 105 s−1) and 7 (4.0 × 105 s−1) is about equal, the major difference in emission yield seems to be attributed to the significantly different non-radiative decay rate constants between 6 and 7 (Table 1). Though pending further study, this difference has been attributed to more vibrational degrees of freedom in 6, such that the accessible deactivation channels are expected to be much greater.26
 Fig. 1  UV-Vis absorption and normalized emission spectra of Os(II) complexes 5–7 in CH2Cl2 at RT. 


2.1.2 With N^N chelates. 
Luminescent Os(II) complexes containing N^N cyclometalates have been extensively investigated in recent years. It was reported that treatment of Os3(CO)12 with 3-tert-butyl-5-(2-pyridyl)triazole has afforded two isomeric complexes 8 and 9 in moderate yield,27 while a similar reaction with 3-trifluoromethyl-5-(2-pyridyl)pyrazole (fppzH) gave only one major product 10.15 Complexes 8 and 10 are isostructural, for which both pyridyl fragments of the N^N chelate are located at the mutual trans position, while the pyridyl groups in 9 are both located trans to the cis-oriented carbonyl ligands. Parallel to these synthetic approaches, combination of [Os(CO)3(tfa)2] (tfa = trifluoroacetate)28 and fppzH in refluxing toluene led to formation of the similar blue-emitting complex [Os(CO)3(fppz)(tfa)] (11) with three orthogonal CO ligands and only one N^N chromophore.29 As shown in Fig. 2, the emission spectra of all these complexes exhibit distinct vibronic fine structure in solution, so that the excited state of this class of complexes is dominated by the ligand-centered 3π–π* transition. This delineation also agrees with the long radiative lifetime deduced. The strong π-accepting properties of the carbonyl groups are expected to reduce the electron density at the Os(II) center, making the MLCT transition far less favorable, even compared with the isoelectronic Ir(III) system.  
 Fig. 2  UV-Vis absorption and normalized emission spectra of Os(II) complexes 8–11 in room temperature acetonitrile. 
Furthermore, the above mentioned N^N chelating dicarbonyl complexes can be used as precursors for a series of diphosphine substituted Os(II) complexes.30 Later on, an optimized reaction was developed, which employed a direct combination of Os3(CO)12 and pyridyl azole ligand in anhydrous diethylene glycol monoethyl ether (DGME) at 180–190 °C, followed by the addition of decarbonylation reagent Me3NO and phosphine ligand in sequence.31 This one-pot synthetic strategy gives the designated Os(II) complexes in good yields, and hence has an advantage for the scaled-up operation. Structural drawings of selected Os(II) complexes are shown below:  
Complexes with a trans-diphosphine structure such as 12 and 13 tend to show a bathochromic shift of emission and highly efficient phosphorescence ranging from orange, red and even to near infrared; the last approach requires the replacement of pyridine with more conjugated isoquinoline substituents.32 Unfortunately, some of these Os(II) complexes appear to suffer from reduced chemical stability upon staying on dry silica gel for an extended period of time. This is particularly notable for complexes possessing less electron withdrawing azolates such as 3-tert-butyl-5-(2-pyridyl)pyrazolate or even triazole. Moreover, part of such instability could be traced to the monodentate phosphines, which are more susceptible to spontaneous dissociation. To overcome such a potential problem of instability, synthesis of cis-diphosphine complexes such as 14 was realized by employing the bidentate phosphine under same conditions.33 Indeed, their improved chemical stabilities make them ideal candidates for fabrication of OLEDs, except that their emission profiles have undergone a hypsochromic shift vs. that of the trans-diphosphine counterparts, a result of the better π-accepting phosphine chelates selected for such investigations. Finally, the closely related Ru(II) complexes were also synthesized employing identical synthetic protocols and tested as dopants for OLEDs;34 however, both of their emission efficiencies and stabilities are lower than their Os(II) counterparts due to the reduced ligand field strength for the second-row transition-metal elements.
Fabrication of red-emitting PhOLEDs incorporating osmium phosphor 12, together with tailor-made host materials, particularly those with bipolar characteristics, was recently achieved.35 These OLEDs exhibited very low driving voltages and attained EL efficiencies as high as 19.9% and 34.5 lm W−1—the highest performance of any red-emitting OLED reported to date—with a color chromaticity CIEx,y = 0.64, 0.36. In addition, white-emitting OLEDs employing a dual EML configuration have showed excellent efficiencies (18.4% and 43.9 lm W−1) and good stability, with the CIE coordinates shifted slightly from (0.40, 0.34) at a luminance of 1057 cd m−2 to (0.38, 0.34) at 15170 cd m−2.36 Parallel to this finding, the solution processed white-emitting polymer OLEDs employing both FIrpic and Os(II) dopant 13 showed a maximum forward viewing luminous efficiency of 36.1 cd A−1 (61.4 cd A−1 for total viewing) and a forward viewing power efficiency of 23.4 lm W−1 (39.8 lm W−1 for total viewing),36 which are comparable to those reported from the state-of-the-art vacuum deposited small-molecule OLEDs. All together, these performance data make Os(II) phosphors very attractive for future applications.

2.2 Ir(III) complexes

2.2.1 Sky-blue, green to saturated red phosphors. 
2.2.1.1 Homoleptic complexes. 
A significant amount of work has been done on Ir(III) metal complexes possessing a full range of cyclometalated chelates. The majority of them, for which the lower lying transitions are derived from a mixed excited states involving both ligand-centered π–π* and MLCT transitions, showed bright luminescence ranging from sky-blue, green to saturated red.37 The earliest and best known example is the green-emitting, tris-cyclometalated complex fac-[Ir(ppy)3] (15), which was synthesized and reported by Watts and co-workers in 1991.38 Preparation was first achieved by heating a mixture of Ir(acac)3, acac = acetylacetonate, and an excess of ppyH in high boiling glycerol solution for an extended period of time. This procedure has been applied with great success in preparation of other fac-substituted C^N cyclometalates.  
The second pathway to prepare the tris-cyclometalated complexes is based on the use of chloride-bridged Ir(III) dimers [(C^N)2Ir(μ-Cl)]2, which are obtained from IrCl3·nH2O and two equiv. of C^N ligand. Then, the homoleptic tris-cyclometalated complexes are synthesized from the dimer [(C^N)2Ir(μ-Cl)]2 and an excess of C^N ligand in the presence of a base or chloride scavenger at higher temperature,39 or directly from the reaction of IrCl3·nH2O with excess of C^N ligand in the presence of silver promoter.40 The latter method is recommended as it employs IrCl3·nH2O as starting material, which is far less expensive than Ir(acac)3. The mer isomers (such as 16) can be obtained as kinetic products at lower temperature, and can be subsequently converted, either thermally or photochemically, into the more stable fac isomer. Because of differing trans influence between phenyl and pyridyl ligands, the mer and fac isomers exhibit distinctive structural properties. This is exemplified by the fact that all of the Ir–C and Ir–N bonds are nearly identical in the fac-isomer. In contrast, due to the asymmetrical environment for the mer-isomer, the metal–ligand bonds residing trans to the Ir–C bond are always longer than those trans to the Ir–N dative bond. A practical consequence lies in that differences in properties have been documented in the fac and mer isomers, showing their importance upon controlling the isomerism.
One particular important tris-cyclometalated compound is the red-emitting fac-[Ir(piq)3] (17), which was prepared in high yield from a one-pot treatment of [(piq)2Ir(μ-Cl)]2 with 1-phenylisoquinoline (piqH) in the presence of both acetylacetone and triethylamine in glycol under reflux.41 For the heteroleptic tris-cyclometalated Ir(III) analogues, Huo and co-workers synthesized complexes mer-[Ir(piq)2(ppy)] (18) and [Ir(ppy)2(piq)] (19), making use of transmetalation between bromide-bridged dimers [Ir(piq)2(μ-Br)]2 or [Ir(ppy)2(μ-Br)]2 and in situ prepared organozinc reagents [ZnCl(piq)] and [ZnCl(ppy)].42 The effectiveness of the latter approach is demonstrated by isolation of a single isomer, showing no scrambled products as revealed by HPLC analysis of the product mixture.  
For preparing complexes encapsulated by sterically congested C^N chelates, Che and co-workers explored the potential of Ir(III) phosphorescent molecules such as fac-[Ir(mppy)3] (20) with the pinene segment introduced into the framework of 2-phenylpyridine.43 It is anticipated that pinene permits a complete energy transfer between the host and dopant in OLED devices, while it causes only little or no self-quenching even at high doping concentrations. Thus, the reduction in concentration quenching can be minimized, giving OLEDs with luminance as high as 25500 cd m−2 at 16 V with a 26% doping level, while the external quantum efficiency remained at 10.5 cd A−1 at 6 V. More recently, Lee and co-workers extended a similar modification to give the blue–green emitting phosphor fac-[Ir(F2-mppy)3] (21), F2-mppyH = 5-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-10,10-dimethyl-4-azatricycloundeca-2,4,6-triene, which showed peak wavelength λmax = 475 nm and high PL quantum yield Φ = 0.72 in degassed toluene.44 An OLED device with a structure consisting of (ITO)|NPB (40 nm)|21 (10%) CBP (30 nm)|BCP (6 nm)|Alq3 (20 nm)|Mg : Ag (10 : 1) was fabricated, affording a peak luminous efficiency of 9.58 lm W−1, CIEx,y = 0.18, 0.36, and a peak luminance of 9000 cd m−2 at 12.5 V. In this context, such performance data are better than other state-of-the-art CBP-based blue-emitting OLEDs, confirming the reduced aggregation quenching attributed to the sterically encumbered pinene units.
2.2.1.2 Heteroleptic complexes. 
Heteroleptic Ir(III) metal complexes with two C^N cyclometalate chelates were also prepared. A typical procedure involves a prior preparation of the chloride-bridged dimers with formula [(C^N)2Ir(μ-Cl)]2, followed by conversion to the anticipated heteroleptic complexes by replacing the chlorides with other easily accessible L^X ancillary chelates (L^X is a bidentate chelate constructed from a neutral L and an anionic X entity), such as acetylacetonate (acac), functionalized β-diketonate, N-methylsalicylimine (sal) or picolinate (pic).10,45  
Many of the heteroleptic complexes [Ir(C^N)2(L^X)] are known to exhibit room-temperature phosphorescence similar to those of the tris-cyclometalated complexes, leading to the conclusion that the luminescence is mainly controlled by the common [Ir(C^N)2] fragment, while the emission wavelength is strongly dependent on the choice of C^N cyclometalating ligands; that is, a more extended electron delocalization would exhibit red-shifting of emission wavelengths. Such a generalized observation then provides a practical advantage, since the related homoleptic (i.e. tris-substituted) complexes sometimes cannot be synthesized by the established synthetic methods upon taking account of the trade-off between stability and reactivity. This is particularly true for the specialized multifunctional ligands,46 or even for the preparation of metal-containing dendrimers, oligomers and polymers.47 Naturally, the heteroleptic molecular design would serve as an ideal synthetic approach under such circumstance. Moreover, certain heteroleptic dopants, such as e.g. [Ir(ppy)2(acac)], are also capable to produce electrophosphorescent efficiencies comparable to those fabricated using tris-cyclometalated analogues.48  
Similar to that of the C^N cyclometalates, the ancillary L^X chelates are also capable to modulate the photophysical properties of heteroleptic complexes as a consequence of their intrinsic ligand field strength and electronic influences towards the central metal atoms. This can be illustrated using the heteroleptic complexes [Ir(C^N)2(L^X)], where LX = acac, sal or pic. For those with ppy or even smaller π–π* energy gap C^N chelates, the emissions retain the pattern of their homoleptic parent complexes [Ir(C^N)3], and are subject to a minor dependence on the L^X ligand employed. For instance, the observed emission λmax increases, i.e. a reduction of the energy gap, according to an order of pic < sal ≈ acac,10 which is proportional to their donor strengths. Parallel to such investigations, chelating N^N ligands such as fppz and bppz pyrazolates and analogous triazolates such as fptz and fptz were also utilized to serve as the ancillary L^X ligands.7,49 As their donor strengths are expected to increase following a qualitative trend of acac ≈ bppz > bptz ≫ fppz > fptz, it is not surprising to observe that the Ir(III) metal complexes with CF3 substituted pyrazolate or triazolate ligands indeed displayed more blue-shifted luminescence, while those with stronger electron donating tert-butyl substituted counterparts gave rise to an unaltered or slightly red shifted emission relative to their parent complexes [Ir(C^N)3].  
The dithiolate chelates, such as N,N′-diethyldithiocarbamate (Et2dtc) and O,O′-diethyldithiophosphate (Et2dtp), showing ligand field strengths comparable to those of the tert-butyl substituted azolates, were also utilized for preparation of the heteroleptic, red-emitting Ir(III) complexes.50 Most recently, Hou and co-workers have prepared a novel [Ir(ppy)2] based green phosphorescent complex with N,N′-diisopropylbenzamidinate (dipba) as ancillary L^X ligand.51 Electroluminescence behaviors have been investigated, showing that the amidinate group imposed a significant reduction in self-quenching and hence led to the success in fabrication of high efficiency, low driving-voltage phosphorescent OLEDs in a wide range of doping concentrations, or even in fabrication of OLEDs without the host matrix. Additional L^X ancillaries are presently under intense investigation. Two recent examples are picolinate N-oxide52 and 2-(diphenylphosphino)phenolate,53 showing prolonged device lifetime, suitable RGB color chromaticity and improved current–voltage characteristics. These experiments could offer control over the nature of emission properties via the molecular organization, and promise to yield more stable and efficient phosphors.
In sharp contrast, when the ligand-centered energy gap of C^N chelates is greater than that of the L^X cyclometalate, longer wavelength emissions have been seen for a series of complexes with such L^X chelates. Two of the best known examples are the heteroleptic complexes [Ir(dfppz)2(L^X)] and [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)],54,55 both of which are capable to display a broad range of emission spanning the 440 to 666 nm region. According to Park and co-workers,55 the series of Ir(III) complexes [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)] with L^X = quinaldinate, isoquinolinate and pyrazinate, upon excitation, underwent fast singlet–triplet intersystem crossing, followed by a much slower, 6–7 nanosecond inter-ligand energy transfer (ILEnT) among orbitals that were localized on the C^N and L^X chelates, before giving the observed phosphorescence. This proposed ILEnT mechanism is depicted in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Using heteroleptic [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)] complexes as prototypes, in which the L^X energy gap is smaller than that of dfppy cyclometalates, a previously proposed relaxation mechanism incorporating nanosecond inter-ligand energy transfer (ILEnT) is depicted (ISC = intersystem crossing). 
However, as all frontier orbitals of Ir(III) cyclometalated complexes are effectively “cross-talk” via the central metal atom, such a “nanosecond time scale” for the rate of internal energy transfer among triplet manifolds is contradictory to the typical time scale of internal conversion for polyatomic molecules in the condensed phase (≤10 ps). To clarify this mechanistic issue, time-resolved emission and femto–picosecond transient absorption spectroscopy were conducted using two prototypical complexes; namely iridium(III) bis[2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridinato-N,C2′] quinaldinate (22) and iridium(III) bis[2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridinato-N,C2′][2-(6-methylbenzoxazol-2-yl)phenolate] (23).56
Accordingly, the nanosecond ILEnT process in the triplet manifold is ruled out, as the time scale required to populate the lowest triplet state is less than 10 ps following the Franck–Condon excitation. Thus, a revised mechanism is proposed and depicted in Fig. 4, which incorporates firstly an ultrafast S1 → Tn intersystem crossing with rate constant being >1012 s−1 after an initial S0 → S1 Franck–Condon excitation.56 Once populated at the triplet manifold, the Tn → T1 internal conversion and subsequent vibrational relaxation to populate at the T1 zero vibrational level must be fast (<10 ps in the case of 22 and 23) due to its spin allowed nature and state congestion. In addition, according to DFT calculation, the exceedingly large π–π* energy gap of the dfppy ligands makes the LUMO located predominately at the L^X ligand, which accounts for the origin of the red-shifted phosphorescence. Thus, there is no need of using the ILEnT mechanism to account for the excitation properties of these [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)] complexes.
 Fig. 4  A more appropriate deactivation mechanism recently proposed for Ir(III) metal complexes 22 and 23 (IC = internal conversion; ISC = intersystem crossing; VR = vibrational relaxation). Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society. 


2.2.2 True-blue phosphors. 
2.2.2.1 Homoleptic complexes. 
Preparation of highly efficient, true-blue phosphorescent complexes has been long considered as a formidable challenge.57 This task is far more difficult than those for preparing longer wavelength emission deriving from green, orange and red phosphors. The key lies in the selection of suitable chromophores that possess both large intra-ligand 3π–π* and 3MLCT transition energies. In addition, all ancillary ligands must also have strong metal–ligand bonding interaction so that the d–d excited states or other unspecified quenching states are strongly destabilized to prevent thermal population to these higher-lying deactivating states.17,58  
It has been reported that, the fac-tris(phenylpyrazolyl)iridium(III) (24) and its difluorinated derivative at 77 K showed true blue phosphorescence with 0–0 peak onset at 414 and 390 nm, respectively.12 Such structural modification was inspired by the fact that N-pyrazole has a considerably higher LUMO energy than that of pyridine; therefore, replacing the phenyl pyridine chelate in the typical homoleptic Ir(III) complexes with a N-phenyl pyrazole should give complexes with bluer emission than the corresponding [Ir(ppy)3] based materials. However, despite of this initial success in predicting the color, 24 still suffered from unacceptably low emission quantum yield in both fluid and solid states at RT. Recently, such an obstacle was elegantly resolved using phenyltriazole ligands as the C^N cyclometalates.58 The resulting fac-tris(1-methyl-5-phenyl-3-propyl-[1,2,4]triazolyl)iridium(III) complex [Ir(mpptz)3] (25) exhibits two phosphorescent maxima at 449 and 479 nm and Φ = 66% in toluene, for which the blue chromaticity is notably superior to those of FIrpic. The emission can be further blue shifted by the attachment of one or two fluorine atoms to the phenyltriazolyl ligand, together with a steady decrease of emission quantum yields with increasing blue shift. In this case, it is postulated that quenching of phosphorescence is mainly attributed to a thermally populated nonradiative decay.58 The other process that involves thermal population of the metal-centered d–d states is disfavored according to DFT calculations, which show that there are no lower-lying unoccupied molecular orbitals with substantial d-orbital character and with an energy difference close to the estimated quenching activation energies. Moreover, dendrimers bearing 1,2-diphenylethylene dendrons with higher triplet energy and relevant Ir(III) based coordinative core were also developed, which could be suitable for use with deep blue emissive phosphorescent polymer-based OLEDs.59
More recently, an emissive Ir(III) complex with fluorine substituted 2,3′-bipyridine cyclometalates, fac-[Ir(dfpypy)3] (26), was synthesized and found to exhibit true-blue RT phosphorescence with vibronic peak wavelengths at 438 and 463 nm. Moreover, complex 26 also exhibited a remarkably high quantum yield of 77% in degassed CH2Cl2 solution at RT.60 The higher luminescent efficiency may be attributed to (i) the facial arrangement of dfpypy chelates that improves the overall orbital degeneracy,61 and (ii) the inhibition of a thermally activated, nonradiative decay channel, which involves temporal formation of a five-coordinate species by rupture of one Ir–N bond at the excited state.62  
Further examples involve the homoleptic complexes mer-[Ir(fppz)3] (27) and mer-[Ir(fptz)3] (28).61 Although both pyridyl azolate ligands are believed to possess stronger field strength and a larger π–π* energy gap vs. that of dfppy and dfpypy chelates, this class of complexes failed to exhibit the expected blue phosphorescence at RT; instead, they afforded a temperature-dependent dual phosphorescence originating from both blue intra-ligand charge transfer (ILCT) and green-emitting ligand-to-ligand charge transfer transitions (LLCT), respectively. It is believed that the ILCT state is preferentially populated after vertical (Franck–Condon) excitation at RT. Subsequently, population from ILCT to LLCT is thermally accessible at RT, which then couples with solvent relaxation to achieve polarization equilibrium, giving rise to a longer wavelength LLCT emission in solution. Evidence is also provided by the fast decay rate of the blue ILCT phosphorescence, which is well correlated with the rise dynamics of a green LLCT emission. Apparently, the meridional geometry reduces the overall molecular symmetry and orbital degeneracy vs. that of the facial configuration, making LLCT a more favorable process.
2.2.2.2 Heteroleptic complexes. 
More recently, heteroleptic, blue-emitting Ir(III) complexes with formula [(dfppy)2Ir(L^X)], dfppy = 2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyridine and L^X = picolinate, pyrazolylborate and their derivatives, and various pyridyl azolate chelates, have been synthesized in a systematic manner.63 These results demonstrate the most popular alternative design to date for obtaining blue phosphorescence.  
Subsequently, the pyridyl azolate based ligands are found to be equally useful for the above designated complexes, among which the first reported example was FIrptz (29).64 It showed blue phosphorescence with the 0–0 peak maximum located at 461 nm, which is comparable to that of FIr6 (30) reported by Thompson and co-workers,65 and exhibits a hypsochromic shift of ∼10 nm vs. that of the best known FIrpic.10 Such a blue shift is consistent with the greater electron accepting properties of typical 2-pyridyl triazolate vs. that of the pic ligand in FIrpic, resulting in the decrease of the electron density at the Ir(III) dπ orbitals, and consequently the reduction of MLCT contribution in the lower lying excited states. In the case of FIrtaz (31), although the CF3 group may exert an even greater electron withdrawing effect, it showed only a slight blue-shift (0–0 λmax = 459 nm) vs. 29. Replacing the triazolate with tetrazolate affords FIrN4 (32), which also exhibits a nearly identical emission profile to that of 31.66 It is notable that all complexes reveal similar vibronic progressions and the spectra are barely shifted when recorded at 77 K. Based on these observations, their lowest excited states must possess a substantial amount of 3π–π* character, for which the electron density is localized at both the cyclometalated dfppy ligands and, to a lesser extent, Ir(III) metal dπ-orbitals, and are thus less affected by the ancillary L^X chelates. A recent DFT calculation on FIrpic and related blue-emitting derivatives firmly supported this delineation.67 In yet another example, two isomeric Ir(III) complexes 33 and 34 with one coordinated C^N (i.e. dfppy) and two N^N (i.e. fppz) chelates were also synthesized in moderate yields via treatment of IrCl3·nH2O with one and two equivalents of dfppyH and fppzH in sequence.68 Both of their spectral profiles are reminiscent of complexes 31 and 32 having two dfppy chelates, together with an additional 10 nm shift to the higher energy region. This result indicates that the unique dfppy group is still acting as the main emitting chromophore, while fppz ligands serve as the higher energy blockers, so that the lowest lying transition is confined only at the single dfppy chelate and central Ir(III) atom.  
Alternatively, as a last example of work on the dfppy chelate, localization of the electronic excitation between the orbitals on blue-emitting dfppy chelates and on the Ir(III) metal center can also be achieved by employing 4,6-difluorobenzyldiphenylphosphine, a C^P chelate. The conversion to the highly emissive complex was initiated by addition of this ligand to the dimer complex [Ir(dfppy)2(μ-Cl)]2.69 This reaction first produced a nearly non-emissive complex trans-(Npy,Npy)-[Ir(dfppz)2(dfbdp)Cl] (35) by simple cleavage of the Ir(III) dimer and retention of the ligand stereochemistry. At higher temperatures, thermal isomerization then takes place, leading to isolation of the cis-(Npy,Npy) derivative 36 in high yield, the result of which could reasonably be explained by shortening of the P–Ir distance from 2.391 Å in the kinetically produced 35 to 2.288 Å in the thermodynamic product 36; a consequence of the removal of the strong trans-effect of one dfppy ligand on the coordinated PPh2 group. Finally, thermolysis of 36 in presence of sodium acetate, which serves as an activator, gives isolation of a third, fully cyclometalated complex [Ir(dfppy)2(dfbdp)] (37). For a comparative purpose, this last derivative (37) showed a remarkable increase in phosphorescence efficiency with respect to their chloride substituted precursors, as well as two notably blue-shifted emission maxima at 457 and 480 nm vs. those of the standard FIrpic (470 and 497 nm).  
In search for other color tuning strategies and distinctive molecular designs, heteroleptic Ir(III) complexes with formula [Ir(dfppz)2(L^X)], dfppzH = 1-(2,4-difluorophenyl)pyrazole, were also synthesized. The goal is to attain true-blue phosphorescence with the best color chromaticity.70 In contrast to the aforementioned [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)] system, the even larger π–π* energy gap of the dfppz ligands in these Ir(III) complexes allows π–π* transition on the third L^X ligand to dominate the lowest lying excited state, for which a conceptual relationship involving their HOMO and LUMO energy levels is depicted in Fig. 5. Consequently, in the present system, the L^X ligand no longer acts as an ancillary grouping, but is directly involved in the luminescent transitions. Tuning emission to true-blue can thus be achieved by selecting L^X ligands with correct energy gap and conformational rigidity.54
 Fig. 5  Conceptual orbital energy levels of a blue-emitting heteroleptic Ir(III) complex. 
Structural drawings of relevant complexes with fptz serving as the chromophoric L^X ligand are shown below:  
While their absorption and emission spectra are shown in Fig. 6 pertinent numerical data are summarized in Table 2. The first complex, namely [(dfppz)2Ir(fptz)] (38), is characterized by intense UV absorption, which is consistent with the expected higher energy gap for all chromophores, i.e. both cyclometalated dfppz and the chromophoric fptz ligands. Although the emission occurred in the anticipated true-blue region (440–478 nm), the lowered quantum yield (Φ = 0.0046 measured in degassed CH2Cl2 at RT) prevented practical applications in OLEDs.70 Such a result can be attributed to the coexistence of several chromophores with nearly degenerate energy levels contributed to the frontier orbitals. Thus, the electron density population of lowest triplet manifold may spread out over the entire molecular framework, resulting in a mixing of various types of ILCT and LLCT transitions.70,71 The net result is to reduce the transition dipole moment as well as to increase the vibronically induced radiationless pathways, and consequently gives rise to a diminished radiative process.
 Fig. 6  Normalized emission spectra of complexes 38–40 recorded in CH2Cl2 solution. 
Table 2 Selected photophysical data of true-blue Ir(III) complexes recorded in CH2Cl2 at RTa






UV/vis λmax/nm
PL λmax/nm

Φ


τ
obs/ns

k
r/s−1

K
nr (s−1)
Ref.





a 
k
r and knr were calculated according to the equations, kr = Φ/τobs and knr = (1/τobs) − kr.






38

300, 349
457
0.0046
8.6
5.4 × 105
1.15 × 108

70




39

261, 368
437, 460
0.1
100
1.0 × 106
9.0 × 106

13




40

293, 316, 363
458
0.73
378
1.9 × 106
7.0 × 105

21





In order to search an effective way of increasing the emission quantum yield at RT, efforts were undertaken to design and synthesize the so-called non-conjugated cyclometalated ligand (dfb-pzH) as well as the corresponding Ir(III) metal complexes such as [Ir(dfb-pz)2(fptz)] (39).13 Its emission signal appears in the true-blue region with one obvious maximum located at 460 nm, together with notable reduction of the vibronic progression (Fig. 6). The phosphorescence quantum efficiency now increases to 0.1 in degassed CH2Cl2 solution at RT, which is approximately 20 times better than the previously discussed analogue 38. The corresponding photophysical data clearly demonstrate that the methylene spacer introduced in 39 has effectively interrupted the π-conjugation and widened the π–π* energy gap of the cyclometalating dfb-pz chelates. Accordingly, the occurrence of mixed inter-ligand π–π* electronic transitions is suppressed, resulting in a greatly improved true-blue emission intensity at RT. The fabrication of PhOLEDs using 39 as blue emitter was achieved with good color chromaticity. Unfortunately, the as-fabricated device had inferior performance simply due to the nevertheless relatively low emission quantum yield.
Continuing this endeavor, the research gear was then switched to the non-conjugated benzyl carbene chelate, affording the respective Ir(III) complex [Ir(dfb-mb)2(fptz)] (40), in which dfb-mb chelate was generated from 1-(2,4-difluorobenzyl)-3-methylbenzimidazolium bromide (dfb-mbH2Br).21 In theory, the synergism among three key factors should lead to the successful detection of true-blue phosphorescence with a decent quantum efficiency at room temperature: (i) non-conjugated nature of dfb-mb chelate that enlarges the ligand-centered π–π* energy gap, (ii) better electron donating character that enhances the MLCT contribution in the lowest lying excited state, and (iii) improved bond strength for the carbene-to-iridium dative bonds as well as the optimal bite angle that should yield a highly stable and rigid coordination framework. As depicted in Table 2, 40 displays an emission quantum yield of 0.73, which is the highest ever observed among all true-blue phosphors recorded in fluid states at RT.
Due to its superior emission quantum yield, 40 was then applied as the dopant for fabrication of PhOLEDs. The as-prepared device exhibits a low turn-on voltage of ≤4 V, a peak external quantum efficiency of up to 6.0% photon/electron, a peak luminance efficiency of 6.3 cd A−1, and a peak power efficiency of 4.0 lm W−1. The 1931 Commission Internationale de L′Eclairage (x, y) coordinates (CIEx,y) are calculated to be 0.158, 0.128. As a result, its chromaticity CIEx+y of ≤0.3 and superior efficiency demonstrate a conceptual breakthrough for true-blue PhOLEDs. Further design of better and more efficient true-blue phosphors is envisioned; however, longevity and life cycles remain as key obstacles on the technology roadmap of OLEDs.
Further examples of heteroleptic complexes, [Ir(dfppy)2(P^N)] (41) and [Ir(dfppz)2(P^N)] (42) with blue and true-blue emission are obtained from a tailor-made L^X ancillary chelate, namely, 5-(diphenylphosphinomethyl)-3-(trifluoromethyl)pyrazolate, together with the employment of well-known dfppy or fppz ligands in acting as key chromophores.72 The fppz ligands in 42 exhibit cis-arranged pyridyl groups, while their pyrazolate groups are located at the trans disposition, ensuring the unique PPh2 group resides trans to one pyridyl group. Such an arrangement is in sharp contrast to that of 41, where both pyridyl and phenyl groups of dfppy chelates are located at the mutual trans and cis positions, respectively, showing typical coordination geometry observed in Ir(III) C^N cyclometalates. Moreover, the P^N chelate also fits well to the definition of “non-conjugated” chelates,13 whereas the π-accepting character of the PPh2 group is expected to increase the MLCT energy gap as well as to destabilize the metal-centered d–d excited states. As anticipated, blue to true-blue phosphorescences were realized with high efficiency. True-blue OLEDs were also fabricated, exhibiting peak efficiencies of 6.9%, 8.1 cd A−1 and 4.9 lm W−1, together with a remarkable chromaticity CIEx,y = 0.163, 0.145 at a practical current density of 100 cd m−2.  
Recently, upon further extending the concept of non-conjugated ancillary chelate, 4,6-difluorobenzyldiphenylphosphine (dfbdpH) was utilized to replace the P^N chelate and consequently a new class of Ir(III) complexes, best represented by [Ir(fppz)2(dfbdp)] (43), were synthesized.73 Its preparation was made possible by a prior combination of [Ir(tht)3Cl3] (tht = tetrahydrothiophene) with a stoichiometric amount of bdpH in decahydronaphthalene, followed by addition of two equiv. of fppzH in the presence of Na2CO3. Although 43 showed inferior luminescence with Φ = 0.01 in solution at RT, the doped thin film in p-bis(triphenylsilyl)benzene (UGH2) and 9-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-3,6-bis(triphenylsilyl)-9H-carbazole (CzSi) exhibited markedly higher quantum yields of 0.58 and 0.73, respectively. This enhancement plausibly results from the restriction of twisting and/or torsional motions of the chelating phosphine and/or of other vibronic progresses involving the fppz ligands in the solid state. Despite of showing poor efficiency roll-off at the higher current density, the relevant OLED devices exhibited true-blue CIEx,y coordinates of 0.155, 0.106 at 100 cd m−2, and a peak external quantum efficiency of up to 11.7% photons per electron, which are markedly better than all of the reported blue phosphors.

2.3 Pt(II) complexes

2.3.1 With C^N chelates. 
Homoleptic Pt(II) complexes with dual C^N chelates, such as 2-phenylpyridine and 2-(2′-thienyl)pyridine, emit strongly in fluid solution. The strong ligand field strength of the C^N chelates makes these complexes highly robust. In addition, it also beneficially increases the energy gap of the metal-centered d–d transition. Note that if the emitting state (either π–π* or MLCT) and the higher lying d–d states lie too close in energy, they can thermally equilibrate, thereby quenching the emission through fast radiationless decay along the metal-center d–d states that have repulsive energy surface. Additionally, open coordination sites of the square-planar complexes can allow for other deactivating pathways via metal interactions with the environment such as solvent induced collision and reversible coordination, etc.  
The first preparation of cis-[Pt(ppy)2] (44) was in low yield by simple treatment of trans-[PtCl2(SEt2)2] with 2-(o-phenylpyridine)lithium.74 It is noteworthy that the phenyl groups of the ppy chelate are located with cis-disposition and the stereospecificity is apparently attributed to the stronger trans-directing effect imposed by the phenyl groups. Extension of this synthetic method using other C^N ligands (2-(2′-thienyl)pyridine and N-(2-thienyl)pyrazole) was also reported. For all these complexes examined, the phosphorescence was only observed at 77 K with lifetimes in the μs range.75 Attempts to synthesize the related homoleptic complexes by treatment of various 2-arylpyridines and K2PtCl4 led to isolation of distinctive cyclometalated platinum complexes with general formula [Pt(C^N)(HC^N)(Cl)] in high yield.76 Their molecular structures incorporate one cyclometalated C^N chelate, a terminal chloride and one HC^N ligand, the latter serving as a simple N-donor with a non-coordinating ortho-substituted aryl appendage, as shown by the representative drawing of [Pt(ppy)(ppyH)(Cl)] (45).
After finding that the homoleptic complexes gave poor emission efficiency, chemists then turned attention to heteroleptic analogues for acquiring better emissive Pt(II) complexes. One approach is to conduct the reaction of K2PtCl4 with excess C^N ligands, giving the proposed dimer with general formula [Pt(C^N)(μ-Cl)]2 or the aforementioned mononuclear [Pt(C^N)(HC^N)(Cl)]. The dimers were next reacted with β-diketones such as acetylacetone (acacH) or dipivaloylmethane (dpmH) in the presence of acid scavenger.77 The resulting complexes with general formula [Pt(C^N)(O^O)] are thermally and air stable, and most importantly, show bright phosphorescence covering the majority of the visible spectra. Meanwhile, altering the ancillary β-diketonate ligand from acac to dpm does not seriously affect the photophysics of these Pt(II) complexes, but increases their solubility and volatility by introducing better lipophilic groups and blocking the possible intermolecular π–π stacking interaction.
These heteroleptic Pt(II) molecules retain a square-planar structure, allowing them to form facially packing in lattices with short intermolecular separation, thereby facilitating excimer formation between adjacent molecules. The most well studied example is platinum(II) (2-(4′,6′-difluorophenyl)pyridinato-N,C2) acetylacetonate, FPt1 (46), for which formation of triplet excimers (3E0*) from the triplet dimer (3D*) in both solution and amorphous films was observed, giving bluish and orange emission peaks with calculated energy gaps of 2.07 and 1.83 eV, respectively. The doping level of 46 in the host materials then determines the degree of aggregation and relative ratio of excimer-to-monomer emission; hence, the phosphorescent emission can be tuned over the entire visible spectra with comparable PL efficiencies.78  
For practical application, decent white-emitting OLEDs were fabricated upon employment of 46 doped in CBP or mCP emitting layers (CBP = N,N′-dicarbazolyl-4,4′-biphenyl, mCP = N,N′-dicarbazolyl-3,5-benzene). The ratio of orange (excimer) vs. bluish (monomer) emission was then controlled by the doping concentration, the steric bulk of β-diketonate ligand of the Pt(II) dopant and by the choice of the host material. Saturated white emission was obtained once the ratio for monomer vs. excimer bands is optimized to near unity. The best efficiencies and color stabilities are recorded when an electron/exciton blocking layer (EBL) is inserted, e.g. fac-[Ir(ppz)3] (24), which can prevent electrons and excitons from passing through the emitting layer into the hole transporting layer, giving a peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 3.3% in CBP and 6.4% in mCP, respectively.79
Further improvement of the device efficiencies was achieved by utilizing stacked OLED architecture: ITO|PEDOT-PSS|PVK|26mCPy, 46 (12%)|BCP|LiF|Al, where 26mCPy = 2,6-bis(N-carbazolyl)pyridine, showing the optimal efficiencies of 15.9%, 12.6 lm W−1 and 37.8 cd A−1 at 500 cd m−2, while the respective data were improved to 18%, 29 lm W−1 and 42.5 cd A−1 at low brightness of 1 cd m−2.80 It is believed that the modified host material 26mCPy shows the lowered HOMO by 0.2 eV in the oxidation potential vs. its parent compound mCP. This modification improved charge transfer from host to dopant as well as affording a more balanced ratio for holes vs. electrons, resulting in a wider and more efficient recombination zone. The increased device efficiency was attributed to the lower surface roughness, which, in turn, lowers the leakage current, while the enhanced current at low voltages was imposed from reduced hole injection barrier provided by the planarized PEDOT-PSS layer.
Related single-dopant, white-emitting OLEDs with a peak EQE of ca. 9.3% ph/el and CIEx,y coordinates of 0.33, 0.36 were also fabricated with a terdentate Pt(II) complex Pt4 (47), which showed a similar emission gap but higher PL efficiency (0.46) than that of 46 (<0.02) in solution. Moreover, blue-emitting OLEDs with peak external quantum efficiency of ca. 16% ph/el and CIEx,y coordinates of 0.15, 0.26 were also accomplished by taking advantage of the narrow emission linewidth observed for 47.81  
In contrast to the above investigation, Che and co-workers have synthesized another type of Pt(II) complexes with a terdentate cyclometalate [(C^N^N)PtL]+ (or [(C^N^N)PtCCR]), for which the cyclometalating aromatics are not located at the middle, but at a terminal position.82 The tunable electrophosphorescence resembles that recorded in fluid solutions for these emitters, and the corresponding OLED devices exhibit high luminance and efficiencies. One remarkable case is the chloride complex (48), for which routine synthetic operations conducted in glacial acetic acid gave yields of up to 92%. Moreover, the yellow OLED (EL λmax = 536 nm) fabricated employing phosphor 48 exhibits a maximum luminance of 63000 cd m−2 and a current efficiency of 12.5 cd A−1 at a current density of 1.8 mA cm−2, which can be related to the high emission quantum yield of 0.68.83 Owing to the high feasibility of modifying the cyclometalating chelate by adjusting the degree of extended π-conjugation, these complexes represent a class of Pt(II) phosphors that are most promising for practical applicability.  
Syntheses of heteroleptic Pt(II) complexes [Pt(C^N)(L^X)] have been extended to the related system, for which the ancillary diketonates were judiciously replaced by other chelating L^X anions, so that related heteroleptic complexes can be prepared with enhanced photophysical properties. These ancillary ligands include the folded bis(pyrazolyl)borate anions (bpb),84 hexafluoro-2-pyrazol-1-ylmethylpropan-2-ol (pzF6OH),85 and hexafluoro-2-pyridyl-propan-2-ol, (pyF6OH),86 among which the last two examples show large steric encumbrance exerted by the geminal CF3 fragments. X-Ray diffraction studies on these derivatives were examined, showing bowl-shaped C^N cyclometalates, extensive π–π stacking interaction between the C^N chelate of neighboring molecules, as well as the absence of Pt⋯Pt interactions in crystal lattice. Consequently, a plenitude of studies on fundamental issues can be realized utilizing these materials.
Finally, binuclear complexes [Pt(dfppy)(μ-pz)]2, where pz = pyrazole, 3-methyl-5-tert-butylpyrazole or 3,5-bis(tert-butyl)pyrazole, were also selected as phosphors for fabrication of efficient RGB OLEDs. The respective white-emitting OLEDs were fabricated using a combination of blue- and red orange-emitting dopants in three-device architectures, either with one or two dopants in dual emissive layers or both dopants in a single emissive layer.87


2.3.2 With N^N chelates. 
The 2-pyridyl azolates, i.e. N^N chelates, showed much improved reactivity with the Pt(II) complexes to afford the homoleptic complexes with generalized structural formula of [Pt(N^N)2], and photophysical properties complementary to the Pt(II) complexes with C^N cyclometalates. Reactions of N^N chelates with the Pt(II) source reagents have therefore been extensively explored. Typical synthetic methods involve the metathesis of azolate anion with [PtCl2(DMSO)2] in THF88,89 or the direct combination of the respective azole chelates with K2PtCl4 in methoxyethanol–water.90 Both methods gave the anticipated, square-planar complexes in good yields. The molecular drawings of three representative Pt(II) complexes are depicted below (N^N chelates 1-iqdz, 3-iqdz and 1-iqbpz stand for 1- or 3-isoquinolinylindazolate and 3-tert-butyl-5-(1-isoquinolinyl)pyrazolate, respectively).  
Their luminescence spectra in CH2Cl2 solution are depicted in Fig. 7, while pertinent photophysical data are listed in Table 3. Some remarks can be summarized from these spectroscopic data. The S0 → S1 absorption for [Pt(1-iqdz)2] (49, 502 nm) shows a bathochromic shift by 40 nm (or 1730 cm−1) compared to that of [Pt(3-iqdz)2] (50, 462 nm). The result can be tentatively rationalized by the more facile π-electron delocalization in the case of 1-iqdz, lowering the π* energy, rendering a smaller energy gap, for which the transition is attributed to mixed MLCT and ligand-centered π–π* character. In good agreement with this observation, the emission of 49 (624 nm) also revealed a better emission quantum yield as well as a red shift with respect to that of 50 (567 nm). With emission quantum yield and observed lifetime provided, both the radiative and nonradiative decay rate constants can be deduced for 49 and 50. While the deduced kr values are nearly identical (Table 3), the main difference in emission yield lies in an approximately one order of magnitude difference in the nonradiative decay rate knr, namely 3.7 × 104 and 4.7 × 105 s−1, for 49 and 50, respectively. The results can be rationalized by the fully extended π-delocalization in 49, such that the electronic excitation is equally spread among various degenerate states of the associated chromophore. The net result not only stabilizes the molecular framework but also reduces the radiationless deactivation processes plausibly due to the resulting steeper potential energy surfaces (PES).27,68 It is noteworthy that the reduction of deactivation pathways is due to the π-delocalization and associated stiffness of PES of a single chromophore such as 1-iqdz. This is obviously different from the previously discussed quenching mechanism via the coexistence of several chromophores with nearly degenerate energy levels contributed to the frontier orbitals. In the latter case, the electron density population of the lowest triplet manifold is delocalized over the entire molecular framework, resulting in a mixing of various types of ILCT and LLCT transitions that instead diminish the emission yield (see section 2.2.2.2).
 Fig. 7  Normalized emission spectra of complexes 49–51 recorded in CH2Cl2 solution at RT. 
Table 3 Photophysical properties of selective Pt(II) complexes in CH2Cl2 at RTa






UV/vis λmax/nm
PL λmax/nm

Φ


τ
obs/μs

k
r/s−1

K
nr (s−1)
Ref.





a 
k
r and knr were calculated according to the equations, kr = Φ/τobs and knr = (1/τobs) − kr.






49

326, 353, 384, 400, 502,
624
0.81
5.34
1.5 × 105
3.7 × 104

90




50

327, 374, 462
567
0.24
1.65
1.4 × 105
4.7 × 105

90




51

283, 206, 351, 371
584, 632, 685
0.74
13.0
5.7 × 104
2.0 × 104

89





An OLED using 49 as a dopant was fabricated, giving a 610–630 nm emission with a turn-on voltage of as low as ∼4.0 V, as well as maintaining optimal performances at higher dopant concentrations or even in a pure emission layer.88 Moreover, the tert-butyl functionalized pyrazolate complex [Pt(1-iqbpz)2] (51) exhibited a vibronic coupled emission signal with a much longer lifetime τobs of 13 μs, showing the dominance of the ligand-centered π–π* transition character. Apparently, the inferior electron donating capability for pyrazolate vs. that of indazolate reduced the overall electron density at the Pt(II) center and, in turn, lowered the involvement of MLCT in the lowest energy electronic transition. Interest in these platinum azolate complexes has been extended toward the 2-pyridyl pyrrolide chelates. However, employment of 3,5-di(trifluoromethyl)-2-(2′-pyridyl)pyrrole for construction of relevant Pt(II) complexes gave formation of a highly distorted square-planar geometry attributed to the unfavorable steric congestion, which in turn caused a serious quenching of emission even at cryogenic temperatures.91
Heteroleptic complexes containing two distinct N^N chelates were also synthesized by taking advantage of the relevant dichloride Pt(II) intermediates such as 52, which can be isolated in high yields by treatment of equal amount of 2-pyridylindazole (or pyrazole) with K2PtCl4 in the presence of HCl to suppress both the deprotonation from azole and chloride dissociation from the Pt(II) center.90 This type of intermediate is non-luminescent in solution at room temperature; however, after replacing the chlorides with other heterocyclic compounds such as picolinate or even another chelating azolate, high emission quantum yields can be seen for the corresponding heteroleptic complexes. Two prototype products, 53 and 54 are now given in this article.  
The charge neutral characteristics of these product complexes make them potentially attractive for OLED applications and pave an alternative avenue for the development of novel Pt(II) based optoelectronic materials. Moreover, in somewhat closely related systems, non-chelating organic anions ranging from pyrazole, 3,5-dimethylpyrazole and 3,5-di-tert-butylpyrazole, were employed for halide substitutions,92 forming single or double substitution products, and even the diplatinum complexes with dual pyrazolate bridges, shown below:  
Their difference in reactivity was attributed to (i) the steric effects of incoming pyrazoles, (ii) the capability in forming either intra-molecular or inter-molecular hydrogen-bonding, and (iii) the reaction stoichiometry and temperatures. This contention was supported by the structures of the products isolated, 55–60. However, these Pt(II) compounds showed only weak phosphorescence at RT, so that utilization in OLED fabrication has not yet been explored.

3. Concluding remarks
The design and preparation of luminescent transition-metal complexes has been reviewed and discussed in relation to the associated chromophoric and non-chromophoric chelating cyclometalates. Based on the summary of literature reports, it is concluded that cyclometalating chelates, mainly due to stronger metal–chelate bonding and great versatility in tuning the emission wavelengths, are highly useful for assembling the anticipated luminescent metal complexes. In order to assist future development, we have classified these ligands according to their constituents: (i) C^N chelates with both reactive C–H site and neutral N-donor, (ii) N^N chelates by replacing C–H functional aromatics with more active azolic N–H group, (iii) C^C chelates comprising both C–H site and neutral NHC carbene fragment, (iv) C^P chelates with both benzylic C–H site and neutral phosphine donor, and (v) N^P chelates with the azolic N–H group instead. Preparation of luminescent transition-metal complexes can thus be accomplished, for example, based on the judicious choice of the aforementioned cyclometalates and accessible experimental precedence. These cyclometalating chelates, in theory, may afford a series of transition-metal phosphors with photophysical properties tuned specifically for optimal technological applications such as phosphorescent OLEDs.
Accordingly, the C^N chelates, which are best exemplified by 2-phenylpyridine and 2-phenylisoquinoline, are essential for obtaining phosphors showing bright green to saturated red emission. For phosphors with emission covering sky blue and the true-blue region, C^N chelates such as dfppy or N^N chelates, such as fppz, bptz and fptz, were found most suitable due to their increased ligand-centered π–π* energy gap.68 In order to achieve more efficient blue phosphorescence, over and above the employment of blue-emitting C^N or N^N chromophores, it is recommended to include one or two ancillary chelates with π–π* energy gap greater than the emitting chelate, particularly for situations where facial tris-cyclometalated coordination geometry cannot be attended.21 Representative examples of such non-chromophoric chelates include C^N ligands such as dfppz and dfb-pz pyrazolates, the majority of N^N chelates that adopt higher π–π* energy gaps, as well as the recently reported C^C and C^P chelates with a 4,6-difluorobenzyl group or relevant functionalized pendants. It is notable that the methylene group of benzyl substituents could effectively interrupt the π-conjugation, for which the net result is to stabilize and destabilize the ligand-centered π and π* frontier orbitals, respectively. Thus, both the C^C and C^P chelating ligands with a much larger, ligand-centered energy gap can be routinely obtained and serve as the non-chromophoric chelates. Lastly, their remaining NHC carbene and phosphine units are also highly desirable in assembling these high-performance blue-emitting complexes, mainly due to their increased ligand field strength, which increases the gap between the emitting and the higher lying metal-centered d–d quenching states. Of course, any other ingenious ways to inhibit bond-weakening or rupturing in their excited-state potential energy surface should be exercised in an aim to continuously improve the emission efficiency, color chromaticity and long-term chemical and electrochemical stability of this class of luminescent materials.
Last but not least, in recent reports, both a C^N cyclometalate93 and a related N^N pseudo-cyclometalate94 were also found useful for design and synthesis of next-generation sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) applications. In sharp contrast to the aforementioned applications in OLEDs, for which their key role is to set up a rigid molecular environment where electroluminescence can be obtained with minimized interference from quenching, the tailor-made cyclometalate ligands for DSSC sensitizers rest on their distinctive versatility to red-shift their visible absorption, increasing their molar extinction coefficient, and to provide suitable redox potentials for further boosting their light harvesting and charge generation ability. We thus hope that the contemporary subjects reviewed throughout this context can assist a broad spectrum of readers who are interested in the exploitation of transition-metal complexes toward any organic electronic applications.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Council and Ministry of Economic Affairs of Taiwan, and partially from Mitsubishi Chemical Corporation of Japan.
References

  (a) P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 380 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Chi and P.-T. Chou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 1421 RSC ; 
  (c) J. A. G. Williams, A. J. Wilkinson and V. L. Whittle, Dalton Trans., 2008, 2081 RSC .
M. S. Lowry and S. Bernhard, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 7970 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P.-T. Chou and Y. Chi, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2006, 3319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. You and S. Y. Park, Dalton Trans., 2009, 1267 RSC ; 
  (c) W.-Y. Wong and C.-L. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4457 RSC .

  (a) A. D. Ryabov, Chem. Rev., 1990, 90, 403 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. E. Shilov and G. B. Shul'pin, Chem. Rev., 1997, 97, 2879 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) H. Werner, Dalton Trans., 2003, 3829 RSC ; 
  (d) I. Omae, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 995 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, H.-E. Lee, C. Adach, P. E. Burrows, S. R Forrest and M. E Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 4304 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. Okada, K. Okinaka, H. Iwawaki, M. Furugori, M. Hashimoto, T. Mukaide, J. Kamatani, S. Igawa, A. Tsuboyama, T. Takiguchi and K. Ueno, Dalton Trans., 2005, 1583 RSC ; 
  (b) B. X. Mi, P. F. Wang, Z. Q. Gao, C. S. Lee, S. T. Lee, H. L. Hong, X. M. Chen, M. S. Wong, P. F. Xia, K. W. Cheah, C. H. Chen and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 339 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) F.-M. Hwang, H.-Y. Chen, P.-S. Chen, C.-S. Liu, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu, F.-I. Wu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 1344 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Zhou, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang, Z. Lin, T. B. Marder and A. Beeby, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 499 CrossRef ; 
  (c) G. Zhou, Q. Wang, C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, D. Ma, L. Wang and Z. Lin, Chem.–Asian J., 2008, 3, 1830 CrossRef CAS .
F. De Angelis, S. Fantacci, N. Evans, C. Klein, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, K. Kalyanasundaram, H. J. Bolink, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 5989 CrossRef .

          M. Klessinger and J. Michl, Excited States, Photochemistry of Organic Molecules, VCH, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
S. Lamansky, P. Djurovich, D. Murphy, F. Abdel-Razzaq, R. Kwong, I. Tsyba, M. Bortz, B. Mui, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2001, 40, 1704 CrossRef CAS .
L.-L. Wu, C.-H. Yang, I.-W. Sun, S.-Y. Chu, P.-C. Kao and H.-H. Huang, Organometallics, 2007, 26, 2017 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Tamayo, B. D. Alleyne, P. I. Djurovich, S. Lamansky, I. Tsyba, N. N. Ho, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 7377 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Song, Y.-C. Chiu, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, C.-H. Lai, P.-T. Chou, K.-T. Wong, M.-H. Tsai and C.-C. Wu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2008, 14, 5423 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Cheng, W.-S. Yu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng, G.-H. Lee, P.-C. Wu, Y.-H. Song and Y. Chi, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2628 RSC .
P.-C. Wu, J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Song, Y. Chi, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 4938 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. Di Pietro, S. Serroni, S. Campagna, T. Gandolfi, R. Ballardini, S. Fanni, W. R. Browne and J. G. Vos, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 2871 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. G. Vos and J. M. Kelly, Dalton Trans., 2006, 4869 RSC .
T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. Tamayo, M. Yousufuddin, R. Bau, M. E. Thompson, R. J. Holmes and S. R. Forrest, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7992 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chien, S. Fujita, S. Yamoto, T. Hara, T. Yamagata, M. Watanabe and K. Mashima, Dalton Trans., 2008, 916 RSC .
R. J. Holmes, S. R. Forrest, T. Sajoto, A. Tamayo, P. I. Djurovich, M. E. Thompson, J. Brooks, Y.-J. Tung, B. W. D'Andrade, M. S. Weaver, R. C. Kwong and J. J. Brown, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 243507 CrossRef .
S. Haneder, E. Da Como, J. Feldmann, J. M. Lupton, C. Lennartz, P. Erk, E. Fuchs, O. Molt, I. Muenster, C. Schildknecht and G. Wagenblast, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3325 CrossRef CAS .
C.-F. Chang, Y.-M. Cheng, Y. Chi, Y.-C. Chiu, C.-C. Lin, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Chen, C.-H. Chang and C.-C. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 4542 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Hiraki, Y. Fuchita and T. Uchiyama, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1983, 69, 187 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Müller, H.-P. Abicht, M. Waldkircher, J. Lachmann, M. Lutz and M. Winkler, J. Organomet. Chem., 2001, 622, 121 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. B. Bedford, S. L. Hazelwood, P. N. Horton and M. B. Hursthouse, Dalton Trans., 2003, 4164 RSC .
J. M. Patrick, A. White, H. M. I. Bruce, M. J. Beatson, D. S. C. Black, G. B. Deacon and N. C. Thomas, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1983, 2121 RSC .
Q.-F. Zhang, K.-M. Cheung, I. D. Williams and W.-H. Leung, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2005, 4780 CrossRef CAS .
E. Y. Li, Y.-M. Cheng, C.-C. Hsu, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, I.-H. Lin, Y. Chi and C.-S. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 8041 CrossRef CAS .
K.-C. Hwang, J.-L. Chen, Y. Chi, C.-W. Lin, Y.-M. Cheng, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, S.-Y. Lin and C.-F. Shu, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 3307 CrossRef CAS .
J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Hu, Y.-M. Cheng, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng, G.-H. Lee, A. J. Carty, Y.-L. Tung, S.-W. Lee, Y. Chi and C.-S. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 6255 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Deeming, M. N. Meah, N. P. Randle and K. I. Hardcastle, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 1989, 2211 RSC .
Y.-M. Cheng, E. Y. Li, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, S.-Y. Lin, C.-F. Shu, K.-C. Hwang, Y.-L. Chen, Y.-H. Song and Y. Chi, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 10276 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Tung, P.-C. Wu, C.-S. Liu, Y. Chi, J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Hu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng, G.-H. Lee, Y. Tao, A. J. Carty, C.-F. Shu and F.-I. Wu, Organometallics, 2004, 23, 3745 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Tung, S.-W. Lee, Y. Chi, Y.-T. Tao, C.-H. Chien, Y.-M. Cheng, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and C.-S. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 460 RSC .
T.-C. Lee, J.-Y. Hung, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Chen, C.-H. Chang and C.-C. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2639 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Cheng, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, L.-S. Chen, Y. Chi, C.-H. Yang, Y.-H. Song, S.-Y. Chang, P.-I. Shih and C.-F. Shu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 183 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y.-L. Tung, S.-W. Lee, Y. Chi, L.-S. Chen, C.-F. Shu, F.-I. Wu, A. J. Carty, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1059 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-L. Tung, L.-S. Chen, Y. Chi, P.-T. Chou, Y.-M. Cheng, E. Y. Li, G.-H. Lee, C.-F. Shu, F.-I. Wu and A. J. Carty, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1615 CrossRef CAS .
C.-H. Chien, F.-M. Hsu, C.-F. Shu and Y. Chi, Org. Electron., 2009, 10, 871 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Zhang, F. Huang, A. K.-Y. Jen and Y. Chi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 063303 CrossRef ; 
  (b) F. Huang, P.-I. Shih, C.-F. Shu, Y. Chi and A. K.-Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 361 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) P. J. Hay, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2002, 106, 1634 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) I. Avilov, P. Minoofar, J. Cornil and L. De Cola, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8247 CrossRef CAS .
K. Dedeian, P. I. Djurovich, F. O. Garces, G. Carlson and R. J. Watts, Inorg. Chem., 1991, 30, 1685 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Colombo, T. C. Brunold, T. Riedener, H. U. Güdel, M. Förtsch and H.-B. Bürgi, Inorg. Chem., 1994, 33, 545 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Grushin, N. Herron, D. D. LeCloux, W. J. Marshall, V. A. Petrov and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2001, 1494 RSC .
B. Liang, C. Jiang, Z. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Shi and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 1281 RSC .
S. Huo, J. C. Deaton, M. Rajeswaran and W. C. Lenhart, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 3155 CrossRef CAS .
H. Z. Xie, M. W. Liu, O. Y. Wang, X. H. Zhang, C. S. Lee, L. S. Hung, S. T. Lee, P. F. Teng, H. L. Kwong, H. Zheng and C. M. Che, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1245 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chew, C. S. Lee, S.-T. Lee, P. Wang, J. He, W. Li, J. Pan, X. Zhang and H. Kwong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 093510 CrossRef .
Y. Byun, W. S. Jeon, T.-W. Lee, Y.-Y. Lyu, S. Chang, O. Kwon, E. Han, H. Kim, M. Kim, H.-J. Lee and R. R. Das, Dalton Trans., 2008, 4732 RSC .

  (a) C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Z.-Q. Gao, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah, B. Yao, Z. Xie, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang, X.-M. Yu, H.-S. Kwok and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 319 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C.-L. Ho, Q. Wang, C.-S. Lam, W.-Y. Wong, D. Ma, L. Wang, Z.-Q. Gao, C.-H. Chen, K.-W. Cheah and Z. Lin, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) R. Ragni, E. Orselli, G. S. Kottas, O. H. Omar, F. Babudri, A. Pedone, F. Naso, G. M. Farinola and L. De Cola, Chem.–Eur. J., 2009, 15, 136 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T.-H. Kwon, M. K. Kim, J. Kwon, D.-Y. Shin, S. J. Park, C.-L. Lee, J.-J. Kim and J.-I. Hong, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 3673 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Zhang, Y. Tao, C. Yang, H. You, Y. Zou, J. Qin and D. Ma, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 7324 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) B. Ma, B. J. Kim, D. A. Poulsen, S. J. Pastine and J. M. J. Frechet, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1024 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lamansky, P. I. Djurovich, F. Abdel-Razzaq, S. Garon, D. L. Murphy and M. E. Thompson, J. Appl. Phys., 2002, 92, 1570 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Song, S.-J. Yeh, C.-T. Chen, Y. Chi, C.-S. Liu, J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Hu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng and G.-H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, H. You, C. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Qin and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3332 RSC .
Y. Liu, K. Ye, Y. Fan, W. Song, Y. Wang and Z. Hou, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3699 RSC .
S.-J. Lee, J.-S. Park, M. Song, I. A. Shin, Y.-I. Kim, J. W. Lee, J.-W. Kang, Y.-S. Gal, S. Kang, J. Y. Lee, S.-H. Jung, H.-S. Kim, M.-Y. Chae and S.-H. Jin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 2205 CrossRef CAS .
T.-C. Lee, C.-F. Chang, Y.-C. Chiu, Y. Chi, T.-Y. Chan, Y.-M. Cheng, C.-H. Lai, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Chien, C.-F. Shu and J. Leonhardt, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 742 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Chang, C.-H. Yang, K. Chen, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu, M.-L. Ho, Y.-S. Yeh and P.-T. Chou, Dalton Trans., 2007, 1881 RSC .

  (a) Y. You, K. S. Kim, T. K. Ahn, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4052 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. You, J. Seo, S. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, T. K. Ahn, D. Kim and S. Y. Park, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 1476 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Duan, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Hsu, J.-Y. Hung and Y. Chi, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 6501 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, J. Li, R. J. Holmes, P. I. Djurovich, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4743 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Lo, C. P. Shipley, R. N. Bera, R. E. Harding, A. R. Cowley, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 5119 CrossRef CAS .
S.-C. Lo, R. E. Harding, E. Brightman, P. L. Burn and I. D. W. Samuel, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3213 RSC .
S. J. Lee, K.-M. Park, K. Yang and Y. Kang, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 1030 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yeh, Y.-M. Cheng, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Yang, Y. Chi, C.-F. Shu and C.-H. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 2294 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) T. Sajoto, P. I. Djurovich, A. B. Tamayo, J. Oxgaard, W. A. Goddard and M. E. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9813 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Treboux, J. Mizukami, M. Yabe and S. Nakamura, Chem. Lett., 2007, 36, 1344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. I. Djurovich, B. D. Alleyne, I. Tsyba, N. N. Ho, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Polyhedron, 2004, 23, 419 CrossRef CAS .
P. Coppo, E. A. Plummer and L. De Cola, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1774 RSC .
R. J. Holmes, B. W. D'Andrade, S. R. Forrest, X. Ren, J. Li and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3818 CrossRef CAS .
S.-J. Yeh, W.-C. Wu, C.-T. Chen, Y.-H. Song, Y. Chi, M.-H. Ho, S.-F. Hsu and C.-H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 285 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Di Censo, S. Fantacci, F. De Angelis, C. Klein, N. Evans, K. Kalyanasundaram, H. J. Bolink, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 980 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. Orselli, R. Q. Albuquerque, P. M. Fransen, R. Froehlich, H. M. Janssen and L. De Cola, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 4579 RSC .
C.-H. Yang, Y.-M. Cheng, Y. Chi, C.-J. Hsu, F.-C. Fang, K.-T. Wong, P.-T. Chou, C.-H. Chang, M.-H. Tsai and C.-C. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 2418 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Hung, Y. Chi, I.-H. Pai, Y.-C. Yu, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, K.-T. Wong, C.-C. Chen and C.-C. Wu, Dalton Trans., 2009, 6472 RSC .
C.-H. Yang, S.-W. Li, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, Y.-S. Yeh, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, C.-H. Wang and C.-F. Shu, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 7770 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vogler and H. Kunkely, Top. Curr. Chem., 2001, 213, 143 CAS .
Y.-C. Chiu, Y. Chi, J.-Y. Hung, Y.-M. Cheng, Y.-C. Yu, M.-W. Chung, G.-H. Lee, P.-T. Chou, C.-C. Chen, C.-C. Wu and H.-Y. Hsieh, ACS Appl. Mater. Int., 2009, 1, 433 Search PubMed .
Y.-C. Chiu, J.-Y. Hung, Y. Chi, C.-C. Chen, C.-H. Chang, C.-C. Wu, Y.-M. Cheng, Y.-C. Yu, G.-H. Lee and P.-T. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2221 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chassot and A. von Zelewsky, Inorg. Chem., 1987, 26, 2814 CrossRef CAS .
M. Maestri, D. Sandrini, V. Balzani, L. Chassot, P. Jolliet and A. von Zelewsky, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 122, 375 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Cho, K. Y. Suponitsky, J. Li, T. V. Timofeeva, S. Barlow and S. R. Marder, J. Organomet. Chem., 2005, 690, 4090 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brooks, Y. Babayan, S. Lamansky, P. I. Djurovich, I. Tsyba, R. Bau and M. E. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2002, 41, 3055 CrossRef CAS .
B. D'Andrade and S. R. Forrest, Chem. Phys., 2003, 286, 321 CrossRef CAS .
V. Adamovich, J. Brooks, A. Tamayo, A. M. Alexander, P. I. Djurovich, B. W. D'Andrade, C. Adachi, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 1171 RSC .
E. L. Williams, K. Haavisto, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 197 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Z. Wang, S. Madakuni, J. Li and G. E. Jabbour, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 2405 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S.-W. Lai and C.-M. Che, Top. Curr. Chem., 2004, 241, 27 CAS ; 
  (b) W. Lu, B.-X. Mi, M. C. W. Chan, Z. Hui, C.-M. Che, N. Zhu and S.-T. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 4958 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. F. Kui, I. H. T. Sham, C. C. C. Cheung, H.-W. Ma, B. Yan, N. Zhu, C.-M. Che and W.-F. Fu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2007, 13, 417 CrossRef CAS .
F. Niedermair, K. Waich, S. Kappaun, T. Mayr, G. Trimmel, K. Mereiter and C. Slugovc, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2007, 360, 2767 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Ionkin, W. J. Marshall and Y. Wang, Organometallics, 2005, 24, 619 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chang, Y.-M. Cheng, Y. Chi, Y.-C. Lin, C.-M. Jiang, G.-H. Lee and P.-T. Chou, Dalton Trans., 2008, 6901 RSC .
B. Ma, P. I. Djurovich, S. Garon, B. Alleyne and M. E. Thompson, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2438 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kavitha, S.-Y. Chang, Y. Chi, J.-K. Yu, Y.-H. Hu, P.-T. Chou, S.-M. Peng, G.-H. Lee, Y.-T. Tao, C.-H. Chien and A. J. Carty, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 223 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chang, J. Kavitha, S.-W. Li, C.-S. Hsu, Y. Chi, Y.-S. Yeh, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee, A. J. Carty, Y.-T. Tao and C.-H. Chien, Inorg. Chem., 2006, 45, 137 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chang, J. Kavitha, J.-Y. Hung, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, E. Y. Li, P.-T. Chou, G.-H. Lee and A. J. Carty, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7064 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Chen, C.-H. Lin, J.-H. Chen, Y. Chi, Y.-C. Chiu, P.-T. Chou, C.-H. Lai, G.-H. Lee and A. J. Carty, Inorg. Chem., 2008, 47, 5154 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Chang, J.-L. Chen, Y. Chi, Y.-M. Cheng, G.-H. Lee, C.-M. Jiang and P.-T. Chou, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 11202 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bessho, E. Yoneda, J.-H. Yum, M. Guglielmi, I. Tavernelli, H. Imai, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5930 CrossRef CAS .
B.-S. Chen, K. Chen, Y.-H. Hong, W.-H. Liu, T.-H. Li, C.-H. Lai, P.-T. Chou, Y. Chi and G.-H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2009, 5844 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

Yun Chi
	Yun Chi obtained his PhD degree from University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign in 1986, and pursued a one-year postdoctoral study at MIT. He is currently a Chair Professor of Chemistry and Associated Dean of College of Science, National Tsing Hua University. His earlier academic endeavors cover transition-metal cluster chemistry and design of chemical vapor deposition (CVD) precursors suitable for making metal-containing thin films and nanomaterials. His current researches are focused on subjects involving the design and testing of transition-metal based materials for organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs) and photovoltaic applications.

Pi-Tai Chou
	Pi-Tai Chou received his PhD degree from Florida State University, Tallahassee, in 1985, and is currently a Chairman of Chemistry Department and Chair Professor at National Taiwan University (NTU). Prior to joining NTU, he was a DOE postdoctoral fellow at University of California, Berkeley (1985–1987), an assistant professor at University of South Carolina, Columbia (1987–1994) and a professor of National Chung Cheng University (1994–2000). His research interests are in the area of ultrafast phenomena on excited-state proton/charge and energy transfer reactions; syntheses, photophysics, and applications of materials suited for OLEDs, solar energy cells, and nanotechnology.
	(1)

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 



1
	[485, 521, 563, 617 (sh)]	—	[2440]	—	—	
25


2
	571, [553]	0.24	7.1 [263]	3.3 × 104	1.1 × 105	
25


3
	575, [556]	0.18	8.3 [182]	2.1 × 104	9.9 × 104	
25


4a
	466, 499	0.0008	0.014	5.7 × 104	7.1 × 107	
26


4b
	500	0.0005	0.006	8.3 × 104	1.7 × 108	
26


5a
	447, 476	0.0006	0.012	5.0 × 104	8.3 × 107	
26


5b
	450, 472	0.0006	0.007	8.6 × 104	1.4 × 108	
26


6
	553	0.15	0.32	4.7 × 105	2.7 × 106	
26


7
	557	∼1	2.50	4.0 × 105	<4.0 × 103	
26


 	Fig. 1  UV-Vis absorption and normalized emission spectra of Os(II) complexes 5–7 in CH2Cl2 at RT.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  UV-Vis absorption and normalized emission spectra of Os(II) complexes 8–11 in room temperature acetonitrile.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 3  Using heteroleptic [Ir(dfppy)2(L^X)] complexes as prototypes, in which the L^X energy gap is smaller than that of dfppy cyclometalates, a previously proposed relaxation mechanism incorporating nanosecond inter-ligand energy transfer (ILEnT) is depicted (ISC = intersystem crossing).	 

 	Fig. 4  A more appropriate deactivation mechanism recently proposed for Ir(III) metal complexes 22 and 23 (IC = internal conversion; ISC = intersystem crossing; VR = vibrational relaxation). Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society.	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 5  Conceptual orbital energy levels of a blue-emitting heteroleptic Ir(III) complex.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Normalized emission spectra of complexes 38–40 recorded in CH2Cl2 solution.	 



38
	300, 349	457	0.0046	8.6	5.4 × 105	1.15 × 108	
70


39
	261, 368	437, 460	0.1	100	1.0 × 106	9.0 × 106	
13


40
	293, 316, 363	458	0.73	378	1.9 × 106	7.0 × 105	
21


 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 7  Normalized emission spectra of complexes 49–51 recorded in CH2Cl2 solution at RT.	 



49
	326, 353, 384, 400, 502,	624	0.81	5.34	1.5 × 105	3.7 × 104	
90


50
	327, 374, 462	567	0.24	1.65	1.4 × 105	4.7 × 105	
90


51
	283, 206, 351, 371	584, 632, 685	0.74	13.0	5.7 × 104	2.0 × 104	
89


 		 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
