Synthesis, properties and applications of colloidal germanium and germanium-based nanomaterials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CS35364D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CS35364D
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2861-2879Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsSynthesis, properties and applications of colloidal germanium and germanium-based nanomaterials†

        
          
            Dimitri D. 
            Vaughn II
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Raymond E. 
            Schaak
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Materials Research Institute, The Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA. E-mail: schaak@chem.psu.edu;   Tel: +1 814-865-8600
Received 
      31st August 2012
    First published on 5th November 2012AbstractGermanium nanoparticles have excited scientists and engineers because of their size-dependent optical properties and their potential applications in optoelectronics, biological imaging and therapeutics, flash memories, and lithium-ion batteries. In order to further develop these applications and to gain deeper insights into their size-dependent properties, robust and facile synthetic methods are needed to controllably synthesize Ge nanoparticles. However, when compared to other II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductor systems, colloidal routes to Ge NPs with uniform sizes and shapes are much less mature. In this Review Article, we highlight the progress that has been made in this field and provide insights into the strategies used for the colloidal synthesis of size and shape-controlled germanium nanomaterials. We also survey some of the potential applications of these materials in optoelectronics, biological imaging, and energy conversion and storage. Finally, we discuss the colloidal synthesis of other germanium-containing compounds, emphasizing technologically relevant germanium chalcogenides that include GeS, GeSe, and GeTe.
Dimitri D. Vaughn II
Dimitri Vaughn grew up in Syracuse, NY (USA) and discovered his love for Chemistry as an undergraduate student at the University at Albany – SUNY. He received his BS degree in Chemistry from SUNY Albany in 2008 and then went on to pursue graduate studies at Penn State University under the supervision of Prof. Raymond Schaak. He was awarded an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship in 2010 and his current interests are working towards an understanding of the underlying molecular principles governing nanoparticle nucleation and growth in addition to applied materials in renewable energy and water treatment.
Raymond E. Schaak
Raymond Schaak grew up in Palmyra, PA (USA) and received a Bachelor's degree in chemistry from Lebanon Valley College in 1998. He earned his PhD in chemistry in 2001, working with Prof. Thomas Mallouk at Penn State University. After postdoctoral research in Prof. Robert Cava's lab at Princeton University, he began as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Texas A&M University in 2003. He moved to Penn State University in 2007, where he is currently a Professor of Chemistry. His research emphasizes the development of new approaches to the synthesis of inorganic solids and nanostructures.
1. Introduction
For more than a decade, nanoparticles of elemental germanium have been of interest for a wide range of applications in areas that include optoelectronics, bio-imaging, and energy conversion and storage. The small bandgap of bulk Ge (0.67 eV at 300 K),1 coupled with its large Bohr radius (∼24 nm) that renders quantum confinement effects observable at relatively large particle sizes2 and its favorable electronic properties,1,3 makes Ge nanoparticles attractive for solar cells,4,5 field-effect transistors,1,3 flash memory devices,6,7 photodetectors,8,9 and labels for biological imaging at wavelengths that are transparent to tissue.10 Ge nanoparticles potentially offer a lower-toxicity and more environmentally friendly alternative to related narrow band gap II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductor nanoparticles that contain Pb, Cd, or Hg.10 The ability of colloidal Ge nanoparticles to be dispersed in solution is also attractive for biological and medical applications, as well as for low-cost solution-based device processing.7
An important prerequisite for these applications is the ability to controllably synthesize colloidal Ge nanoparticles. For other important semiconductor systems, including the narrow band gap Cd and Pb chalcogenides, much is known about how to control shape, size, and uniformity, both from empirical and mechanistic perspectives.7 However, similar capabilities for colloidal Ge nanoparticles do not yet exist, although significant progress has been made toward this goal.11–54 Several chemical factors are responsible for the synthetic challenges in this system. First, Ge is strongly covalent, which necessitates a high crystallization temperature,20,21,41 and strong reducing agents are typically required to produce crystalline Ge nanoparticles.29–33,38–40 Second, the most common Ge salt reagents require harsh reaction conditions and chemicals – including sodium metal,16–19n-butyllithium,38,39 sodium naphthenalide,11–14 or metal hydrides29–33 – to convert them to elemental Ge. Because rigorous synthetic control has not yet been achieved for Ge nanoparticles, their size- and shape-dependent properties have not fully been investigated, and their behavior has not yet been fully elucidated or understood. Indeed, the visible-wavelength photoluminescence (PL) that is frequently observed for colloidal Ge nanoparticles has also been attributed to surface oxide impurities, which underscores the complexity of this system.23,39
In addition to elemental Ge, Ge-based nanomaterials are also important and have similar synthetic challenges.55–64 GeTe is of interest as a material for non-volatile memory applications because of its reversible amorphous-to-crystalline phase transition,59–61,63,65 which can be triggered thermally or electrically, and also as a model ferroelectric system for understanding nanoscale polar ordering phenomena.60,64 However, only recently have researchers begun to understand how to synthesize crystalline and amorphous colloidal GeTe nanocrystals.59–63 Likewise, GeS and GeSe are narrow band gap p-type semiconductors of interest as possible light absorbing layers in solar cells,55,56,66 among other applications,57,58 and only a few reports describe their synthesis as colloidal nanostructures.55–57 Similar to elemental Ge, the synthesis of colloidal Ge-based nanostructures also provides unique chemical challenges and is in its infancy.
Here, we review the progress made in the colloidal synthesis of germanium and germanium-based nanomaterials over the last decade, focusing on the key synthetic processes and developments that have emerged. While many reports of Ge nanoparticles produced using non-colloidal methods exist,67–76 we restrict the examples in this review to those that emphasize solution methods. We also highlight the current and anticipated applications of these exciting nanomaterials, including in optoelectronics, solar cells, non-volatile memories, batteries, and biological imaging.
2. Colloidal synthesis of germanium nanoparticles
In this section, we provide an overview of the primary methods that have been reported for the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles.
Reduction of GeCl4 using organoalkali and alkali metal reagents
Early reports of solution-phase routes to Ge nanoparticles focused on the use of strongly reducing alkali metal or organoalkali reagents to convert GeCl4 to Ge.11–15 For example, Weller and co-workers reacted GeCl4 with lithium napthalide in THF at room temperature to produce amorphous particles with a broad size distribution.11 (CH3)3SiCl was added to terminate the dangling bonds on the Ge nanoparticle surface. After evaporation, vacuum drying, re-dispersion in hexane, and filtration, the larger particles were removed and a colloidal dispersion of approx. 2 nm amorphous Ge nanoparticles was obtained (Fig. 1a). Upon illumination with a ruby laser, the particles progressively coalesced and crystallized, yielding a broader size distribution (Fig. 1b). Broad ultraviolet (UV) and visible-wavelength absorption was observed for the laser-annealed colloidal Ge nanoparticles.
 Fig. 1  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeCl4 with alkali metal naphthalide solutions at room temperature. TEM images of (a) amorphous Ge nanoparticles produced from GeCl4 and Li naphthalide, (b) partially-crystallized Ge nanoparticles after five flashes with a ruby laser, (c) crystalline Ge nanoparticles produced from GeCl4 and Na naphthalide, and (d) amorphous Ge nanoparticles after heating to 300 °C under vacuum. Panels (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 11 (Copyright 1993, Wiley-VCH) and panels (c, d) reprinted with permission from ref. 12 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society). 
Similarly, Kauzlarich and co-workers reacted GeCl4 with sodium naphthalide in dimethoxyethane (glyme) at room temperature, followed by the addition of n-butylmagnesium chloride (butyl Grignard).12 After drying, hexane extraction, rinsing, and vacuum drying under mild heat to remove an organic polymeric side product, alkyl-terminated crystalline Ge nanoparticles with an average diameter of 4 nm were produced (Fig. 1c). While the as-synthesized Ge nanoparticles appeared to be crystalline by electron diffraction, they became amorphous upon heating as a powder under vacuum at 300 °C (Fig. 1d). This suggests that surface termination plays an important role in the stabilization of crystalline Ge nanoparticles. Recrystallization and concomitant growth occurred around 600 °C, but these particles were not redispersible in solvents. In a follow-up report, the same group studied the influence of various reaction parameters – reductant, stirring time, concentration, temperature, and procedural details – on the formation of crystalline, monodisperse colloidal Ge nanoparticles.13 They found that the highest quality particles, with an average diameter of 4 nm and a size dispersity of approx. 20%, were produced within 10 min using sodium naphthalide at 0 °C under dilute conditions. Cho and co-workers used similar chemistry – reduction of GeCl4 with sodium naphthalide in diglyme at room temperature, followed by the addition of n-butyllithium – to produce amorphous butyl-capped Ge particles with average diameters of approx. 10 nm.14
Instead of using organoalkali reagents, Heath et al. reacted GeCl4 and phenyl-GeCl3 with an ultrafine dispersion of NaK alloy in heptane with ultrasonication under rigorously air-free conditions in order to nucleate amorphous Ge nanoparticles.15 Crystallization of the amorphous product occurred upon placing the reaction mixture in a sealed pressure vessel and heating it to 270 °C for 24–48 h. Using different reagent mixtures and amounts, Ge nanoparticles with average sizes of 6, 11, and >20 nm were produced. The authors also observed that the successful synthesis of crystalline Ge nanoparticles was dependent upon the surface capping ligands, with alkylsilanes being preferable for producing the smallest Ge nanoparticles. Polydispersity, along with a range of morphologies that included platelets and spherical particles, was observed, as was evidence of oxidation after exposure to air. Interrogation of colloidal suspensions by UV-Visible and near-infrared (NIR) spectroscopy showed evidence of quantum confinement effects, as well as absorption characteristics of the direct and indirect band gaps.
Metathesis reactions of germanium Zintl salts
As an alternative route to crystalline Ge nanoparticles, Kauzlarich and co-workers exploited the metathesis reaction that occurs between germanium chloride, GeCl4, and Zintl salts such as sodium germanide (NaGe), potassium germanide (KGe), and magnesium germanide (Mg2Ge) (Fig. 2).16–19 Upon refluxing NaGe and GeCl4 in glyme or diglyme (diethylene glycol dimethyl ether) for 8–120 h, crystalline Ge nanoparticles with diameters between 2 and 5 nm were produced, and no evidence of surface oxide was found (Fig. 2a).16,17 Size-dependent absorption and emission behavior, including a monotonic shift of the emission wavelength with the excitation wavelength, were attributed to quantum confinement effects (Fig. 2c). Reacting the putative chloride-terminated particles with methyllithium, methylmagnesium bromide, or octylmagnesium results in methyl- or octyl-terminated surfaces, which minimizes surface oxidation and demonstrates that the colloidal Ge nanoparticles are amenable to facile ligand replacement chemistry. Indeed, a diverse range of surface functionalities was accessible, including acetals, alcohols, esters, and polymers.18 Hydride-terminated Ge nanoparticles could also be produced from the metathesis reaction of NaGe and NH4Br, with alkyl-terminated particles accessible via surface hydrogermylation reactions with alkenes or alkynes (Fig. 2b).19 Importantly, the PL properties were observed to remain largely unchanged in emission wavelength and quantum efficiency despite the modification of ligands terminating the nanoparticle surfaces.
 Fig. 2  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles via a metathesis reaction between Ge Zintl salts and GeCl4, followed by surface modification to produce different exposed functional groups. (a) HRTEM image of a Ge nanoparticle with a diameter of 15 nm, (b) TEM image and size distribution histogram for Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reacting NaGe and NH4Br, and (c) photoluminescence (right) and photoluminescence excitation (left) spectra for butyl-terminated Ge nanoparticles with an average diameter of 6.2 nm. Panels (a, c) reprinted with permission from ref. 17 (Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society) and panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 19 (Copyright 2008, Elsevier Inc.). 
Thermal decomposition of organogermane precursors in high-boiling solvents
Recognizing that strongly covalent solids such as Ge typically require high temperatures to crystallize, organic solvents with high boiling points have been used for the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles.20–22 Such reactions occur by thermally decomposing zero-valent organogermane precursors in the heated solvent. For example, Gerion et al. showed that tetraethylgermane (with or without the solvents hexane or toluene) decomposed in a high-pressure reactor at 430 °C to produce crystalline Ge nanoparticles that were embedded in a hydrocarbon matrix, which was removed by dissolution.20 The reaction is not clean, as it produces organic byproducts and generates a range of particle morphologies and sizes that can vary from batch to batch. While nearly gram-scale quantities of the Ge NP embedded in a hydrocarbon matrix were produced, only a few percent of free colloidal Ge nanocrystals remained after matrix dissolution. However, the particles that are produced are air stable, presumably due to putative Ge–C capping of the surface.
Higher quality Ge nanoparticles were produced in a subsequent study by Zaitseva et al., which used high-boiling organic solvents to facilitate the decomposition of several organogermane precursors (Fig. 3).21 Decomposition or organogermane precursors in solvents such as trioctylphosphine (TOP) and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO), which have boiling points in the range of 300–360 °C, yielded only amorphous Ge particles that were oxidatively unstable. Decomposition of trichlorogermane in trioctylamine, with a higher boiling point of 380 °C, produced some crystalline Ge nanoparticles with improved oxidative stability. Higher-boiling solvents were required to generate the highest quality crystalline Ge nanoparticles. In squalene (∼410 °C), decomposition of tetrachlorogermane produced 2–7 nm particles and decomposition of tetrabutylgermane produced 4–15 nm particles. In octacosane (429 °C), decomposition of tetraethylgermane produced nanowires. This study nicely correlated the crystallinity of the Ge nanoparticle product with a solvent reflux temperature that is above the decomposition temperature of the organogermane precursor.
 Fig. 3  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by refluxing various organogermane precursors in solvents with different boiling points, where the solvent boiling point influences the crystallinity of the Ge nanoparticles that are produced. TEM images of Ge nanoparticles synthesized by decomposing trichlorogermane in squalene at 410 °C for (a) 1 min and (b) 20 min. (c) Size distribution histograms for Ge nanoparticles synthesized from (A) trichorogermane, squalene, 410 °C, 1 min, (B) trichlorogermane, squalene, 410 °C, 20 min, (C) tetraethylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min, (D) tetraethylgermane, octacosane, 425 °C, 10 min, (E) tetrabutylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min, and (F) tetrabutylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min with added dichlorobenzene. (d) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns showing the time- and temperature-dependent evolution of crystallization upon decomposition of trichlorogermane: (1) 380 °C, 1 min, (2) 380 °C, 30 min, (3) 395 °C, (4) 410 °C. (e) Photoluminescence spectra for the sample shown in panel (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society). 
Related work by Jiang and co-workers showed that a novel organogermane precursor, tetra-cis-9-octadecenoic germanium (TOG), decomposes at 311 °C to form crystalline Ge nanoparticles upon refluxing in a mixture of oleylamine, oleic acid, and trioctylamine at 360 °C.22 TEM and SAED analysis revealed that heating times of 15, 30 and 60 min resulted in the production of crystalline Ge particles with average sizes of approx. 5, 10, and 20 nm, respectively. The observed blue photoluminescence emission peaks upon excitation at 340 nm was suggested to be attributable to surface features, including absorbed ligands, amorphous oxide, or defects.
Thermal reduction of organogermanium precursors
Veinot and co-workers showed that organogermanes, such as phenyl trichlorogermane (C6H5GeCl3), can be hydrolyzed and condensed to form sol–gel polymers, e.g. (C6H5GeO1.5)n.23 Upon heating at 500 °C in 5% He/95% Ar or at 600 °C in 100% Ar, the polymer decomposes via disproportionation and reduction pathways to form crystalline Ge nanoparticles embedded in a GeO2 matrix. The size of the Ge nanoparticles, which ranged from ∼6–12 nm, could be tuned by varying the processing temperature and time, and they could be liberated by dissolving the GeO2 matrix in water at 60 °C (Fig. 4). FTIR spectra indicated that the Ge nanoparticles were terminated by oxide and hydroxide surfaces, and PL measurements acquired as a function of increasing processing temperature and time showed a successive red-shift in emission wavelength that is consistent with the quantum confinement effect and the growing crystallite size. Interestingly, the phenyl group of phenyltrichlorogermane could be replaced with other substituents in order to minimize the amount of carbon impurities and to lower the decomposition temperature of the polymeric precursor.24 For example, n-butyltrichlorogermane produces a sol–gel polymer that converts to GeO2-embedded Ge nanoparticles at only 300 °C. This strategy effectively shuts down the thermal H2-mediated reduction pathway and produces Ge nanoparticles exclusively from disproportionation of the (RGeO1.5)n polymer. The authors showed that the diameters of the Ge nanoparticles depend upon the identity of the substituent and their decomposition temperatures.
 Fig. 4  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by thermally decomposing a sol–gel-derived (PhGeO1.5)n polymer. TEM images and SAED pattern for Ge nanoparticles isolated from a GeO2 matrix upon dissolution in water at 60 °C for (a, b) 30 min and (c) 2.5 h. Scale bars are 100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society). 
Similar to this, Ozin and co-workers generated SiO2-embedded Ge nanoparticles upon thermal treatment of a GeO2/SiO2 copolymer obtained via the acid-catalyzed hydrolysis and co-condensation of tetraethoxyorthosilicate (TEOS) and tetraethoxyorthogermanate (TEOG).25 Heating to 700 °C in 5% H2/95% Ar caused the GeO2/SiO2 copolymer to reduce and form Ge nanoparticles embedded in a solid SiO2 matrix, which could be dissolved (along with bulk unencapsulated Ge) in a mixture of ethanol and aqueous HF. The resulting oxide/hydroxide/alkoxide-terminated Ge particles could be dispersed as colloidal nanocrystals in polar solvents such as ethanol and methanol. Replacing TEOS with the mild reducing agent (CH3CH2O)3SiH facilitates the slow, room-temperature reduction of Ge(IV) to Ge(0), coupled with hydrolysis and condensation, to form amorphous Ge nanoparticles embedded in a SiO2 matrix.26 Annealing at 600–700 °C under N2 crystallizes the Ge nanoparticles, which can be removed from the SiO2 matrix by HF etching and colloidally dispersed in ethanol.
Boyle and co-workers, recognizing that the reduction potential of Ge(II) to Ge(0) (+0.247 V vs. SHE) is more positive than that of Ge(IV) to Ge(0) (+0.124 V vs. SHE), designed a series of Ge(II) precursors that could thermally convert to Ge(0) more readily and under milder conditions than Ge(IV) precursors.27,28 Initially, Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 was chosen, since it could be made under ambient conditions and has labile ligands.27 Upon injection of an oleylamine solution of Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 into octadecene at 300 °C, holding at 285 °C for 5 min, and cooling to room temperature, crystalline Ge nanoparticles with an average diameter of 7 ± 4 nm could be isolated (Fig. 5a–c). FTIR studies indicate that intact oleylamine ligands terminate the Ge nanoparticles, and that surface oxidation is minimal. The PL emission peaks at 375 and 500 nm, corresponding to excitation wavelengths of 325 and 442 nm, respectively, were attributed to quantum confinement effects for two distinct sizes of particles within a polydisperse sample (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  Upper left: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by decomposing Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 in oleylamine and octadecene at 300 °C. (a) TEM image, (b) SAED pattern, and (c) HRTEM image of 7 ± 4 nm Ge nanoparticles. (d) Photoluminescence and UV-Visible absorption spectra for Ge nanoparticles in toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27 (Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Expanding on this work, Boyle et al. synthesized and crystallographically characterized a series of Ge(II) precursors with a variety of ligand sets and coordination geometries, and explored their decomposition as oleylamine solutions injected into octadecene at 315 °C.28 The authors found that diamide ligands produced largely amorphous and agglomerated Ge particles with diameters of approx. 5 nm, while siloxide and silanethiolate ligands produced irregular nanowires of crystalline Ge. Interestingly, a “precursor structure effect” was proposed to rationalize the influence of the ligand set on the morphology of the Ge nanostructures, although other synthetic parameters were also found to play a role.
Hydride reduction of germanium salts
One of the most common approaches for generating colloidal Ge nanoparticles is to reduce soluble Ge(II) and Ge(IV) salts to Ge(0), in the presence of appropriate surface stabilizing ligands, using strong hydride reducing agents.29–37 Wilcoxon et al. used lithium aluminum hydride (LiAlH4, “LAH”) to reduce GeCl4 at room temperature in THF in the presence of surfactant–solvent systems known to form inverse micelles.29 This was carried out under rigorously air-free conditions, although an erratum clarifies and corrects both the chemistry and its associated safety issues, including the production of highly toxic and pyrophoric germane (GeH4) gas.29 This strategy produced crystalline Ge particles with diameters of 2–10 nm, which were separated into more uniform fractions using high-pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC). Ge nanocrystals with diameters of 2–5 nm showed PL in the range of 350–700 nm, but the larger particles (8–10 nm) showed only weak emission. The authors claim strong quantum confinement effects in this system. Related chemistry reported by Jiang and co-workers produced crystalline Ge particles at room temperature in THF by reducing GeCl4 with NaBH4, LAH, or N2H4·H2O (Fig. 6a).30
 Fig. 6  Upper left: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing Ge(IV) halides with lithium aluminum hydride (LAH). (a) TEM image, SAED pattern, and size distribution histogram for Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 with LAH in THF at room temperature and in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min. (b) TEM image and SAED pattern for n-undecyl functionalized Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeI4 with LAH at room temperature, followed by refluxing in n-undecene. (c) TEM image and size distribution histogram for 4.0 ± 0.5 nm Ge particles synthesized by reducing a toluene solution of GeCl4 with LAH/THF at room temperature in the presence of tetraoctylammonium bromide. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 30 (Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V.), panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 31 (Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry), and panel (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). 
Building on this, Veinot and co-workers chose GeI4 as a Ge(IV) precursor, because unlike GeCl4 which is a volatile liquid, it is a solid and its color can allow in situ monitoring of the reaction.31 Upon LAH reduction of a toluene solution of GeI4 with cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) as a surfactant, crystalline hydride-terminated Ge particles with an average diameter of 5 nm were produced (Fig. 6b). Refluxing with n-alkenes facilitated a surface hydrogermylation reaction to generate n-alkyl terminated surfaces, with no Ge–O stretches detected by FTIR. The particles were reported to be air stable, water stable, and solution processable. PL spectra of n-undecyl-terminated Ge nanoparticles showed a broad peak at 390 nm.
Korgel, Johnston, and co-workers reported the first use of trioctylphosphine (TOP), a widely used coordinating solvent in the synthesis of colloidal quantum dots, for the synthesis of Ge nanocrystals.32 The authors chose GeI2 as a highly reactive precursor because it forms highly soluble adducts with organophosphines and it disproportionates into Ge and GeI4, ultimately generating Ge nanoparticles in high yield. A TOP solution of LAH was injected into a TOP solution of GeI2 at 120 °C, followed by heating to 300 °C for 60 min. After work-up and purification, crystalline Ge particles with average diameters of 3.0 ± 0.5 nm, 8.1 ± 1.4 nm, and 11.6 ± 2.2 nm were produced, with increasing precursor concentrations correlating to larger average particle sizes (Fig. 7a–f). Tributylphosphine (TBP) could also be used as a coordinating solvent, although the resulting Ge nanoparticles were larger and had a broader size distribution. FTIR and XPS spectra indicated that hydrocarbons were present on the nanoparticle surfaces and that oxidation was minimal.
 Fig. 7  (a–c) TEM images and (d–f) corresponding size distribution histograms of Ge nanoparticles synthesized in the presence of TOP by reducing GeI2 with LAH at 120 °C and heating to 300 °C for 60 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society). 
Warner and Tilley were able to generate Ge nanoparticles with an average diameter of 5 nm by reducing a toluene solution of GeCl4 and tetraoctylammonium bromide (TOAB) using LAH in THF.33 The particles had a uniform size distribution and were found by HRTEM to be crystalline. The surfaces of the Ge nanoparticles were made hydrophilic by adding allylamine in the presence of an H2PtCl6 catalyst. The water-dispersibile Ge nanoparticles exhibited strong blue/green PL.
Instead of the highly reactive and strong reducing agent LAH, Chou and co-workers studied a milder polyol-inspired synthesis involving the room-temperature reduction of an ethylene glycol solution of GeCl4 and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) with a solution of NaBH4 in triglyme using a syringe pump.34 The resulting Ge nanoparticles were amorphous with average diameters of 5 ± 1 nm, but crystallized during TEM imaging (Fig. 8a). The particles are dispersible in water, ethanol, and acetonitrile, but they are oxidatively unstable. Other particle sizes and shapes were accessible by changing the precursor concentration, solvent, and reduction rate.
 Fig. 8  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeCl4 with NaBH4 at room temperature. (a) TEM image and SAED pattern of 5 ± 1 nm Ge particles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 in ethylene glycol with NaBH4 in triglyme, in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone). (b) TEM image and size distribution histogram of Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 in hexane with NaBH4 in triglyme, in the presence of pentaethylene glycol monododecyl ether. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 34 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society) and panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). 
Tilley and co-workers explored the formation of Ge nanoparticles using a series of metal hydrides to reduce GeCl4 in hexane and pentaethyleneglycol monododecyl ether at room temperature.35 The authors found that stronger reducing agents produced smaller particles, while weaker reducing agents produced larger particles: LiAlH4 [4.0 ± 0.5 nm] (Fig. 6c), Li(C2H5)3 [4.5 ± 0.5 nm], LiBH4 [5.5 ± 0.5 nm], and NaBH4 [25.0 ± 15.0 nm] (Fig. 8b). All of the Ge nanoparticles were reported to be crystalline. As in their previous report, the as-synthesized Ge nanoparticles were hydride-terminated and could be rendered water soluble with an allylamine-functionalized surface. Narrow PL emission was observed over the range of 420–480 nm (at an excitation wavelength of 400 nm), with a monotonic blue shift with decreasing particle size and a reported quantum yield of 11%.
Moving away from organogermane and germanium halide precursors, Jing et al. showed that Ge nanostructures could be obtained from the room-temperature reduction of aqueous germanate ions (from dissolved GeO2) using NaBH4.36 However, the resulting nanopowders were not readily solvent-dispersible. Hu and co-workers subsequently demonstrated that reducing aqueous dissolved GeO2 with ice-cold aqueous NaBH4 at 60 °C could produce colloidal Ge nanoparticles.37
Reduction of germanium salts with butyllithium
Like metal hydrides, butyllithium can also serve as a strong reducing agent for converting Ge salts to Ge(0) nanoparticles.38–40 Klimov and co-workers produced crystalline Ge nanoparticles by injecting an octadecene solution of n-butyllithium into a solution of GeI2 in hexadecylamine at 200 °C, then heating to 300 °C for 1 h and performing purification procedures at 100 °C (Fig. 9a).38 The particles were ∼3.5 nm as-synthesized, but could be tuned from 3.2 ± 0.4 nm to 6.4 ± 1.9 nm by increasing precursor concentration up to five-fold (larger, 6.4 ± 1.9 nm) or applying a controlled oxidation strategy (smaller, 3.2 ± 0.4 nm). In addition, several reaction variables were studied, including solvents, reducing agents, and capping ligands, and reagents with the highest solubility – GeI2 in hexadecylamine vs. trioctylamine, dioxane, or TOP, and n-butyllithium vs. LAH – were the optimal choices and produced the highest quality particles. Octadecene was best used as a ligand rather than as a solvent, and octadecene-capped Ge nanoparticles were stable for weeks relative to oxidation and etching in water. The octadecene-capped Ge nanoparticles also exhibited enhanced PL efficiency due to the presence of covalent Ge–C bonds on the surface, which was confirmed by FTIR spectra. Importantly, these Ge nanoparticles showed PL at infrared (IR) wavelengths, with the PL and absorption onset energies blue shifting as a function of decreasing particle size (Fig. 9b). This is consistent with the behavior expected for quantum confinement effects, and represents the first example of IR-emitting colloidal Ge nanoparticles. The authors also observed weak visible- and UV-wavelength PL in some samples and suggested that this behavior (including related observations of UV-Vis PL in previous reports) was attributable to the presence of germanium oxide.
 Fig. 9  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeI2 with n-butyllithium. (a) TEM image of 4.0 ± 1.7 nm Ge nanoparticles, and (b) normalized room-temperature photoluminescence spectra for three different sizes of octadecene-capped Ge nanoparticles, as well as TOP-capped Ge nanoparticles (green). The excitation wavelength is 808 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society). 
Using related chemistry, Neale and co-workers produced crystalline Ge nanoparticles by reducing mixtures of GeI2 and GeI4 in hexadecylamine or oleylamine with n-butyllithium at 200 °C, followed by heating at 300 °C for 1 h (Fig. 10).39 Interestingly, the authors found that, at a constant total Ge concentration, the size of the Ge nanoparticles was dependent upon the ratio of GeI2 to GeI4. Ge(IV):Ge(II) ratios of 100:0fast, 0:100, 50:50, 72:25, and 100:0slow produced crystalline Ge nanoparticles with average diameters of 2.3 ± 0.4, 3.8 ± 0.8, 4.7 ± 1.0, 6.6 ± 1.5, and 11.3 ± 2.4 nm, respectively (Fig. 10a–d). (A fast or slow ramp rate is indicated by the subscript “fast” or “slow” appended to the corresponding ratios). The absorption onset increased monotonically with increasing particle size, from 780 to 1800 nm (Fig. 10e), and the PL peak maxima decreased from 1.44 to 1.24 to 1.01 eV for particle sizes of 2.3, 3.8, and 4.7 nm, respectively (Fig. 10f). The authors propose that this mixed-valence synthesis proceeds by first nucleating Ge(0) seeds from the lower-temperature reduction of Ge(II), consistent with prior reports describing the reactivity of GeI2vs. GeI4 precursors, followed by growth from the reduction of Ge(IV) at higher temperatures.
 Fig. 10  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles using mixtures of GeI2 and GeI4, where the relative amounts of Ge(II) vs. Ge(IV) define the average particle size. (a–d) TEM images showing four distinct average sizes of Ge nanoparticles produced from (a) 100/0, (b) 0/100, (c) 50/50, and (d) 75/25 ratios of Ge(IV)/Ge(II). (e) Tauc plots and (f) photoluminescence spectra (with quantum yields) for Ge nanoparticles of different sizes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
Hanrath and co-workers systematically studied the nucleation and growth of colloidal Ge nanoparticles using tert-butyllithium (an extremely pyrophoric chemical requiring rigorously air-free conditions) to reduce GeI2 to Ge in the presence of a variety of solvent systems and capping ligands including TOP, hexadecylamine, and octadecene.40 The authors also varied the injection temperature, final heating temperature, ratio of reducing agent to germanium precursor, and reaction time. From these studies, it was determined that a temperature above 270 °C was needed to produce crystalline Ge nanoparticles, while amorphous products were formed below this temperature. The concentration of the Ge precursor did not significantly impact the nucleation rate of the Ge nanoparticles, but excess reducing agent played a critical role in controlling the particle size. The authors also suggested that growth in this system occurs via Ge nanoparticle coalescence, which can be mitigated through strong surface passivation with alkyl ligands.
One-pot heat-up methods
One-pot heat-up methods provide an alternative and straightforward pathway for the synthesis of crystalline Ge nanoparticles that minimizes the use of highly reactive reducing agents and that emphasizes the use of readily available, air-stable reagents.41,42 For example, Vaughn II et al. showed that multi-faceted, quasi-spherical Ge nanoparticles could be produced by heating a mixture of GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, and hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) to 260 °C and holding for 30 min.41 The Ge particles were highly crystalline, and their size could be tuned from 6 ± 1 nm to 12 ± 2 nm and 22 ± 4 nm by increasing the concentration of GeI4 by factors of 2 and 4, respectively (Fig. 11). The particles were stable in air for more than six months, and this was attributed to the presence of a thin germanium oxide shell that is capped by oleic acid, based on XPS and FTIR spectra. The use of HMDS was inspired by the earlier work of Boyle and co-workers,27 who produced Ge nanoparticles by thermally decomposing a Ge–HMDS complex (Fig. 5). While the specific role of HMDS in the one-pot heat-up synthesis remains unknown, its presence plays an important empirical role in generating crystalline Ge nanoparticles.
 Fig. 11  Top: Schematic highlighting one-pot heat-up methods for the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles. (a–c) TEM images showing crystalline Ge nanoparticles produced by heating a mixture of GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, and HMDS to 260 °C for 30 min. Nanoparticles with three different average sizes were produced using different concentrations of GeI4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
Using similar chemistry, Guo, Wan, and co-workers42 were able to produce Ge nanoparticles by replacing GeI4 with the more reactive Ge(II) precursor GeBr2. The authors heated GeBr2 in oleylamine to 260 °C for 2 h, and the resulting Ge particles were crystalline and multifaceted with average diameters of approx. 10 nm. Oleylamine was claimed to serve as the reducing agent, solvent, and stabilizer, and the use of HMDS was likely unnecessary for producing crystalline Ge nanoparticles because of the known lower-temperature reactivity of the Ge(II) precursor relative to GeI4.
Other synthetic methodologies
Several other synthetic routes have been used to produce colloidal Ge nanoparticles.43–46 Warner used sulfur to aid in the formation of crystalline Ge particles.43 The author injected a solution of sulfur in hexadecylamine into a hexadecylamine solution of triphenylgermanium at 280 °C, and crystalline Ge particles with an average diameter of 8 nm were produced upon heating to 300 °C. The particles assembled into aggregates with diameters of approx. 50 nm upon purification. Holman and Kortshagen synthesized non-colloidal hydride- and chloride-terminated Ge nanocrystals by decomposing GeCl4 and H2 in a flow-through plasma reactor, then carrying out a hydrogermylation reaction with 1-dodecene to produce alkane-terminated surfaces that rendered the particles colloidally dispersible in organic solvents.44 In a separate report, the “bare” (hydride- and chloride-terminated) Ge nanocrystals were directly dispersed in 1,2-dichlorobenzene to form a colloidally stable and optically transparent solution, which was then spin-coated to give a uniform nanocrystal thin film on a Au/Si/SiO2 substrate.45 Sato and co-workers synthesized Ge nanocrystals by photo-etching larger Ge particles (18 nm, prepared by bead milling) in a 50% by volume ethanol–water mixture using monochromatic light at various wavelengths.46 Depending on the wavelength of illumination from a mercury lamp (365 nm) or LED illuminators (470–940 nm), Ge nanocrystals could be synthesized in the size range of 3–6 nm with a smaller average diameter resulting from irradiation with higher photon energies. The mechanism of this etching process was attributed to photooxidation due to the presence of H2O.
3. Synthesis of non-spherical colloidal germanium nanoparticles
While the previous section focused on spherical, quasi-spherical, or multi-faceted Ge nanoparticles, colloidal synthesis methods can also produce Ge nanoparticles with non-spherical shapes.21,28,33,34,41,47–54 However, unlike the precise morphology control that is routinely achieved for a number of compound II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductor systems, shape control of Ge nanocrystals has remained a significant challenge. This is due, in part, to the strong reducing agents,29–33,38–40 highly reactive precursors,11–19 and harsh high-temperature reaction conditions20–22 that are often necessary to nucleate the strongly covalent diamond-type Ge phase. As researchers continue to learn more about the nucleation and growth of colloidal Ge nanoparticles, more advanced capabilities for morphology control are beginning to emerge. Among the accessible non-spherical shapes are colloidal Ge tetrahedra,47 triangles,33 cubes,34,41,48 and nanowires.28,41,49–54 Other morphologies that are gaining attention are hierarchical and branched nanostructures,77 as well as two-dimensional nanosheets that include germanene,78,79 a germanium analogue of graphene.
Colloidal germanium tetrahedra and triangles
For a cubic material such as diamond-type Ge, the body-diagonal (111) facets are frequently exposed on the surfaces of nanocrystal tetrahedra and triangles, facilitated by chemical species and reaction conditions that favor growth along the {111} crystallographic directions while disfavoring growth along other crystal planes.80 Upon reducing GeCl4 with sodium naphthalide in diglyme at room temperature, followed by the addition of n-butyllithium, Hope-Weeks observed that a 10 minute reaction time yielded spherical particles, while a 45 minute reaction time yielded tetrahedral particles, although only a few particles were shown and distinguishing between tetrahedra and triangles is difficult.47 Tilley and co-workers produced spherical particles with an average diameter of 5 nm upon reducing GeCl4 with tetraoctylammonium bromide in anhydrous toluene at room temperature by the dropwise addition of superhydride (lithium triethylborohydride) in THF.33 The same reaction, with superhydride injected rapidly instead of dropwise, produced ∼50 nm triangular-shaped Ge nanoparticles. These demonstrations provide initial empirical evidence that (111)-terminated Ge nanoparticles are accessible and motivate additional studies to elucidate the effects that surface stabilizers and reaction conditions have on nucleation, growth, and facet passivation.
Colloidal germanium nanocubes
Colloidal cube-shaped Ge nanocrystals, which expose the {100} facets of the diamond-type crystal structure, were first reported by Ren and co-workers.48 The authors used sodium metal in toluene to reduce a hexane solution of GeCl4 and phenyl-GeCl3 with heptaethylene glycol monododecyl ether (C12E7), followed by heating to 280 °C for 72 h in a Parr reactor. The resulting Ge cubes had an average edge length of 100 ± 20 nm and were comprised of smaller Ge nanocubes, which had presumably formed from the initial room-temperature reduction and coalesced upon heating under pressure (Fig. 12a and b). Chou et al. observed similar Ge nanocubes from the room-temperature reduction of GeCl4 in ethylene glycol with NaBH4 in triglyme, which was added slowly and continuously using a syringe pump.34 PVP was used as the surface-stabilizing agent. Here, cubes with an edge length of 160 ± 30 nm were produced when the initial rate of addition of NaBH4 was 2.5 mL min−1, in contrast to the initial rate of 1.5 mL min−1 that produced smaller spherical particles (Fig. 12c). Interestingly, TEM analysis of aliquots taken during the reaction revealed that the cubes formed from the coalescence of 5–8 nm particles (Fig. 12d), similar to that observed by Ren and co-workers using a stronger reducing agent, higher temperatures, and a high-pressure reactor. Vaughn II et al. produced Ge nanocubes by adding TOP to the one-pot mixture of GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, and HMDS.41 Upon heating to 260 °C for 30 min without TOP, multi-faceted quasi-spherical particles were produced, but with TOP, cube-shaped particles formed instead. The crystalline Ge nanocubes, which were produced in 60% morphological yield, had an average edge length of 73 ± 16 nm (Fig. 12e). Analogous to other Ge nanocube systems, they appeared to be comprised of smaller cube-shaped particles that had coalesced.
 Fig. 12  (a, b) TEM images of Ge nanocubes synthesized by reducing GeCl4 and phenyl-GeCl3 with sodium metal in the presence of heptaethylene glycol monododecyl ether, followed by heating to 280 °C for 72 h in a Parr reactor. (c, d) TEM images of Ge nanocubes formed from the room-temperature borohydride reduction of GeCl4 in ethylene glycol/triglyme, in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone). (e) TEM image of Ge nanocubes formed upon heating GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, TOP, and HMDS to 260 °C and holding for 30 min. Panels (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 48 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society), panels (c, d) reprinted with permission from ref. 34 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), and panels (e) reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
Colloidal germanium nanorods and nanowires
One-dimensional (1D) nanorods and nanowires are the most common non-spherical Ge particles that have been synthesized as colloidal nanostructures, and this is likely attributable to their potential applications as field-effect transistors,81 spintronic devices,82 chemical sensors,83 and photodetectors.84 Many of the synthetic methods that produce spherical, quasi-spherical, multi-faceted, and other zero-dimensional nanoparticles can also be modified to promote 1D growth. For example, Veinot and co-workers infiltrated a tetraethoxygermane-derived gel into the vertical channels of anodic aluminum oxide (AAO) membranes, followed by heating to 600 °C in 5% H2/95% Ar to produce Ge nanowires, which were liberated by dissolving the AAO membrane with phosphoric acid.49 A related approach had been used previously, without the AAO membrane, to produce GeO2-embedded Ge nanoparticles.23
Heath and LeGoues used a minor modification of an earlier protocol for the synthesis of silicon nanocrystals by reducing RSiCl3/SiCl4 with sodium metal in hexane, followed by heating in a sealed pressure vessel.50 Here, a similar approach was used to make Ge nanostructures, whereby a phenyl-GeCl3–GeCl4 mixture was reduced by sodium metal in toluene upon heating to 275 °C in a Parr reactor for 2–8 days.50 TEM analysis of the final products revealed the formation of colloidal Ge quantum wires with diameters of 7–30 nm and lengths up to 10 μm, along with amorphous Ge and crystalline Ge particles with other morphologies.
Boyle and co-workers found that thermal decomposition of certain Ge(II) precursors yielded 1D Ge nanostructures while others yielded zero-dimensional (0D) particles, depending on the particular alkoxide or siloxide ligand that was used.28 By using the Ge(II) precursor Ge(DBP)2 [DBP = 2,6-OC6H3(C(CH3)3)2],51 irregularly-kinked Ge nanowires were produced, with diameters and lengths in the range of 15–25 nm and 0.1–10 μm, respectively. The authors speculate that the steric hindrance of the bulky ligand, coupled with the strong Ge–ligand bond, helps to limit the extent of nucleation and facilitate nanowire growth.
Zaitseva and co-workers observed that nanowires were produced from the decomposition of tetraethylgermane in octacosane at 429 °C (Fig. 13a),21 while decomposition of other organogermane precursors in lower-boiling solvents produced quasi-spherical and irregularly faceted nanoparticles. Jiang and co-workers showed that a tetra-cis-9-octadecenoic germanium (TOG) precursor, which they had previously decomposed at 360 °C in oleylamine, oleic acid, and trioctylamine to form size-tunable crystalline Ge nanoparticles, instead produced Ge nanowires when decomposed at 360 °C in only trioctylamine (Fig. 13b and c).52 The diameters and lengths of these Ge nanowires could be tuned from 10–115 nm and 10–20 μm, respectively, by varying the TOG concentration. Vaughn II et al. modified the one-pot heat-up reaction that generated size-tunable multi-faceted Ge particles and Ge nanocubes.41 Here, the authors produced kinked 1D nanostructures of crystalline Ge, coated with an amorphous germanium oxide shell, when they used octadecene as a solvent instead of oleylamine (Fig. 13d and e). These reports underscore the impact that subtle synthetic differences can have on the morphologies that are observed for colloidal Ge nanostructures, and point to the need for greater understanding of fundamental nucleation, growth, and surface passivation phenomena for this system.
 Fig. 13  (a) TEM image and SAED pattern of a Ge nanowire formed by decomposing tetraethylgermane in squalane at 410 °C, (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ge nanowires formed by decomposing tetra-cis-9-octadecenoic germanium at 360 °C, (d, e) TEM images of kinked 1D Ge nanostructures formed by heating GeI4, oleylamine, and HMDS to 315 °C in 1-octadecene, and TEM images of (f) straight and (g) branched Ge nanorods formed by decomposing diphenylgermane in squalene at 350 °C in the presence of Bi nanocrystal seeds. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 21 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society), panels (b, c) reprinted with permission from ref. 52 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society), panels (d, e) reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society), and panels (f, g) reprinted with permission from ref. 54 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society). 
Holmes and co-workers produced crystalline Ge nanowires with diameters as small as 4 nm and aspect ratios of greater than 1000 by decomposing hexakis(trimethylsilyl)digermane [Ge2(TMS)6] above 700 K in supercritical toluene.53 The nanowires grew from liquid Ge droplets and were coated by an amorphous matrix that contained Si, Ge, C, and O. Increasing the temperature was found to increase the average nanowire diameter.
Korgel and co-workers used Bi nanocrystals as seeds for the synthesis of Ge nanorods via a solution–liquid–solid (SLS) pathway (Fig. 13f and g).54 The authors added a squalene solution of diphenylgermane to a sample containing Bi nanocrystals in squalene at 350 °C, in order to decompose the diphenylgermane and promote 1D growth. Increasing the amount of poly(vinylpyrrolidone)-hexadecane co-polymer used in the synthesis of the Bi nanocrystal seeds led to nanorod branching (Fig. 13g), and using TOPO as a capping ligand produced the highest quality crystalline Ge nanorods with colloidal dispersibility. The Ge nanorods had diameters of 10–15 nm and their length could be tuned between 60–170 nm by decreasing the Bi:Ge ratio.
4. Applications of colloidal germanium nanoparticles
Driving the interest in developing reliable routes to high quality colloidal Ge nanoparticles are several application areas that are at the forefront of modern science and technology. These applications, which are highlighted below, include biological imaging and therapeutics, optoelectronics, and energy storage.
Biological imaging and therapeutics
One of the mainstream applications of colloidal semiconductor quantum dots, such as CdSe, is in biological imaging, since their surfaces can be rendered biocompatible and they emit visible-wavelength light, which can be tuned by particle size. However, despite attractive features that include size-tunable photoluminescence, a broad excitation spectrum, and high quantum yield, their toxicity presents serious concerns.10 Group IV quantum dots, including Si and Ge, offer an alternative to the II–VI, IV–VI, and III–V semiconductor systems that contain toxic elements such as Cd, Hg, and Pb.10,33,35 Such particles possess the favorable optical properties of traditional quantum dots but without the incorporation of highly toxic elements, and they also offer improvements over molecular dyes in areas such as stability, signal strength, and lifetime.35 Colloidal Ge nanoparticles, therefore, have attracted interest for potential biological applications, including imaging and photothermal therapy.33,35,85,86
Boyle and co-workers used the colloidal Ge nanoparticles that they produced from the decomposition of Ge[N(SiMe2)2]2 in hexadecylamine at 300 °C, which were isolated in 80–90% yield and had diameters of 3–5 nm, to facilitate cell imaging and photothermal therapy.85 The nanoparticles, which were natively capped by hexadecylamine, could be rendered water-soluble by encapsulating them in carboxy-polyethylene glycol (PEG) phospholipids. The nanocrystals were ultimately functionalized with carboxyfluorescein-PEG and dinitrophenyl-substituted PEG for fluorescent marking and binding to anti-DNP immunoglobulin E (IgE)–cell surface receptor (FceRI) complexes on the outer surface of rat basophilic leukemia (RBL-2H3) cells, respectively (Fig. 14a). The authors found that the Ge nanoparticles were able to function as biomarkers for cell signaling, were sufficiently nontoxic, and were active for photothermal behavior upon excitation with NIR radiation at low laser powers.
 Fig. 14  (a) Fluorescence microscope image showing Ge nanoparticles functionalized with carboxyfluorescein-labeled dinitrophenyl groups crosslinking with dinitrophenol-specific IgE antibodies on the surface of mast cells. (b) Overlay of transmission and fluorescence images of HepG2 cells with hydrophilic allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles transfected into the cytosol. (c) Survival fraction of cells treated for 24 h with different concentrations of hydrophilic allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 85 (Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH, panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), and panel (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 86 (Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ireland Ltd.). 
Tilley and co-workers used the allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles that they produced from the reduction of GeCl4 with various metal hydrides in order to study their application as optical probes for imaging HepG2 cells.35 The Ge nanoparticles transfected into the cytosol and, upon excitation with a mercury lamp, exhibited blue fluorescence (Fig. 14b). The authors also studied the effect of the Ge nanoparticles on mitochondrial activity, and determined that the 50%-inhibitory toxicity concentration (TC50) was 100 μg mL−1. This indicated that at nanoparticle concentrations of 100 μg mL−1, toxicity was relatively low, although this TC50 value is lower than that for UV exposure of CdSe quantum dots in HeLa cells.
Lin and co-workers also studied the effect on cell toxicity of allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles synthesized using the method of Warner and Tilley, and found that the water soluble Ge nanoparticles were toxic to cells at concentrations greater than 3 μM (Fig. 14c).86 The authors found differences in how nanoparticles produced by different methods impacted cell toxicity, and they also suggested a pathway by which the Ge nanoparticles induced cell death and a possible antagonist to counteract the toxic effects of nanoparticle exposure.
Optoelectronic devices
Germanium is an attractive material for optoelectronic applications. Bulk Ge has a band gap of 0.67 eV at 300 K, a high carrier mobility (μe = 3900 cm2 V−1 S−1, μh = 1900 cm2 V−1 S−1), and a large absorption coefficient (∼2 × 105 cm−1 at 2 eV), and with a large exciton Bohr radius (∼24 nm), it exhibits strong quantum confinement effects and a size-tunable band gap.1–3 Colloidal processing of Ge-based optoelectronic devices would provide a low-cost alternative for fabrication, processing, and device assembly.7 Capitalizing on the recent advances in the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles, several groups have begun fabricating optoelectronic devices and interrogating their performance characteristics.
For example, Kortshagen and co-workers produce colloidal Ge nanoparticles by a two-step process: gas-phase synthesis in a flow-through plasma reactor, followed by hydrogermylation that yields alkane-terminated surfaces that facilitate colloidal dispersibility.45 The authors have used these particles for the solution-mediated fabrication of optoelectronic devices. Field-effect transistors (FETs) were generated by spin-coating dispersions of colloidal Ge nanoparticles onto Au/Si/SiO2 substrates, followed by evaporation of source and drain contacts (Fig. 15a and b).45 The Ge nanoparticle FETs had conductivities of 10−8 S cm−1 in the dark, and the conductivity increased by an order of magnitude when illuminated. Upon annealing, however, the off-current increased by two orders of magnitude, mobilities of 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 were observed, and on-to-off ratios greater than 103 were achieved. Various annealing profiles were used to generate n-type, ambipolar, or p-type behavior (Fig. 15c–f).
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing a field-effect transistor (FET) device fabricated by solution-deposition of Ge nanoparticles that were synthesized in a gas-phase flow-through plasma reactor then rendered colloidally dispersible by hydrogermylation-based surface modification. A cross-section SEM image is shown in (b). Plots of drain current (Id) vs. gate voltage (Vg) and drain voltage (Vd) are shown for FETs fabricated from (c, d) 6 nm Ge particles annealed at 400 °C and (e, f) 6 nm Ge particles annealed at 600 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
Guo, Wan, and co-workers produced colloidal Ge nanoparticles by heating GeBr2 and oleylamine to 260 °C and used these particles to fabricate a hybrid organic–inorganic device that demonstrates its promise for large-area photodetector applications.42 The authors mixed the as-synthesized colloidal Ge nanoparticles with the conjugated polymer poly(3-hexylthiophene), P3HT, which has a high electrical conductivity and a strong absorption at visible wavelengths. The device was highly photoresponsive: the dark current was 0.05 pA, while the current increased to 7.8 pA upon illumination with an iodine-tungsten white light source with incident light density of 8.03 mW cm−2 and a bias voltage of 10 V (Fig. 16). This represents an on-to-off ratio of greater than 100.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic showing a device used to measure the photocurrent behavior of a dropcast film containing Ge nanoparticles and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), along with the (b) on/off switching data (8.03 mW cm−2 incident light density, 10 V bias voltage), (c) dark currents and photocurrents at different incident light densities, and (d) photocurrent vs. incident light density (20 V bias voltage). Reprinted with permission from ref. 42 (Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH). 
Lithium ion batteries
Germanium is attractive as an anode material for lithium ion batteries because it has a high theoretical capacity of 1600 mAh g−1, based on the formation of Li4.4Ge, as well as high lithium diffusivity and electrical conductivity.87 Anode materials comprised of nanoparticles are often observed to maintain higher charge/discharge capacities upon cycling than bulk materials, and this is attributed, in part, to the ability of nanoparticle-based solids to mitigate some of the detrimental effects associated with repetitive volume expansion and contraction, including cracking and pulverization.88 Recent advances in the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles have led to the exploration of novel Ge nanoparticle architectures for lithium ion battery electrodes.
Cho and co-workers produced colloidal butyl-capped nanoparticles of amorphous Ge by reacting a glyme solution of GeCl4 with sodium naphthalide and n-butyllithium.14 The authors then fabricated cathodes for battery test cells by mixing the ∼10 nm amorphous Ge particles with Super P carbon black and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) binder. Using coin-type half cells with Li metal anodes, microporous polyethylene separators, and electrolyte solutions of 1 M LiPF6 in ethylene carbonate/dimethyl carbonate, voltage profiles taken between 0 and 1.2 V at 0.2 C after 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 cycles showed an initial charge capacity of 1470 mAh g−1, an irreversible capacity loss of 12%, and stability (98% capacity retention) over 30 cycles (Fig. 17a).
 Fig. 17  (a) Charge/discharge profiles (after 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 cycles at 0.2 C and cycled between 0 and 12 V) for lithium ion battery anodes prepared from butyl-capped Ge nanoparticles. The inset shows the cycle number vs. capacity. (b) Discharge–charge profiles (cycled between 0 and 1 V at a current density of 50 mA g−1), (c) cycle number vs. specific capacity, and (d) cycling performance at different current densities for a nanocomposite of carbon-coated Ge nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide (Ge@C/RGO). A TEM image of the Ge@C/RGO nanocomposite is shown in (e). Panel (a) is reprinted with permission from ref. 14 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society) and panels (b–e) are reprinted with permission from ref. 90 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society). 
Cho and co-workers also explored the use of hollow Ge particles for Li battery cathodes using a similar testing setup.89 The authors produced the hollow Ge particles, which had diameters of approx. 200 nm and wall thicknesses of approx. 20 nm, by reducing GeCl4 in glyme with sodium naphthalide, adding ethyl lithium, mixing the resulting Ge nanoparticle gel with spherical SiO2 particles, annealing at 800 °C under Ar, then removing the SiO2 with HF. Depending on the periodicity with which the hollow particles were assembled, the initial discharge capacity ranged from 1380 to 1428 mAh g−1, with coulombic efficiencies of 85–90%. Interestingly, after 100 cycles, the capacity of the hollow particles organized into a regular periodic array was 1415 mAh g−1 (98% charge capacity retention), while that of the irregularly arranged assembly was only 1162 mAh g−1. This suggests that the periodic arrangement may minimize volume changes during cycling.
Guo, Wan, and co-workers used nanocomposites of Ge@C core–shell particles and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) as anode materials for lithium ion batteries (Fig. 17b–e).90 The authors produced the Ge@C/RGO composite by heating GeBr2 and oleylamine to 260 °C to form colloidal Ge nanoparticles, carbonized the organic capping groups by heating to 500 °C under 5% H2/95% Ar to form Ge@C core–shell particles, mixed the Ge@C particles with RGO in ethanol to form a dispersion, then evaporated the solvent at 50 °C. The initial discharge capacity, at a current density of 50 mA g−1 and a voltage range of 0–1 V, was 1803 mAh g−1. This high value, which is larger than that of pure Ge, was attributed to the formation of a solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) film on the electrode surface. While a large irreversible capacity loss occurred after the first cycle, it stabilized after the second cycle to yield an average coulombic efficiency above 99% over 50 cycles with a specific discharge capacity greater than 900 mAh g−1.
5. Synthesis and applications of colloidal germanium-based nanostructures
Germanium forms compounds or alloys with many elements,91 including alkali and alkaline earth metals (NaGe, KGe, Mg2Ge, etc.), transition metals (CoGe, MnGe, NiGe, FeGe, etc.), lanthanides and actanides (CeGe, EuGe, GdGe, etc.), and metalloids (SiGe, GeAs, etc.), as well as nitrogen (Ge3N4), phosphorus (GeP), oxygen (GeO2), chalcogens (GeS, GeSe, GeTe), and halides (GeF2, GeCl2, GeBr2, GeI2, GeI4, etc.). As bulk materials, some of these – such as the salts of germanium with alkali metals, alkaline earth metals, and halides – serve as highly reactive reagents (NaGe, KGe, GeBr2). Others exhibit a wide range of interesting magnetic (FeGe, CoGe), electronic (SiGe, MnGe, NiGe), and optical (SiGe, Ge3N4, GeS, GeSe) properties, with applications in solar cells (GeS, GeSe), photocatalysis (Ge3N4), non-volatile phase change memories (GeTe), and thermoelectrics (SiGe). For some of the same reasons outlined for elemental Ge, as well as additional chemical challenges that are unique to each specific system, there are only a relatively small number of reported colloidal Ge-based nanostructures,55–63 and our understanding of how to control both phase formation and morphology in these systems is far from mature. Indeed, reports of controlled syntheses have only recently begun to emerge, and only for a limited number of systems, of which most involve the Ge chalcogenides GeS, GeSe, and GeTe. Below, we highlight the Ge chalcogenide systems for which colloidal nanostructures have been reported, as well as other important systems for which such capabilities do not yet exist.
Germanium sulfide
Crystalline germanium monosulfide, GeS, adopts an orthorhombic crystal structure that can be described as a distortion of the common rocksalt structure type. The GeS crystal structure consists of double-layer slabs of Ge–S in a zig-zag configuration, separated from one another by a van der Waals gap. Bulk GeS is a p-type semiconductor that has a complicated band structure with indirect and direct band gaps that are close in energy, ranging from 1.55–1.65 eV, as well as c-axis hole mobilities of 90 cm2 V−1 s−1. These properties, including a band gap that overlaps well with the incident solar spectrum, make GeS attractive as a material for photovoltaic applications.55,66
To date, only one report describing the synthesis and properties of colloidal GeS nanostructures has appeared in the literature. Vaughn II et al. produced single-crystal colloidal nanosheets of GeS by slowly heating a mixture of GeI4, HMDS, oleylamine, oleic acid, and dodecanethiol to 320 °C for approx. 24 h (Fig. 18a).55 The synthesis is similar to that used to produce crystalline Ge nanoparticles, except that dodecanethiol is added as a sulfur source. While alkanethiols are often used as surface stabilizing ligands, they are known in some cases to be non-innocent, decomposing at high temperatures in solution to produce sulfide products. The colloidal GeS nanosheets can be described as elongated hexagons with well-defined facets, average widths of 0.5–1 μm, average lengths of 2–4 μm, and thicknesses of 3–20 nm (Fig. 18a). Diffuse reflectance measurements indicated indirect (Fig. 18b) and direct band gaps of 1.58 and 1.61 eV, respectively, and these are within the range expected for bulk GeS.
 Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of GeS (main panel) and GeSe (inset) nanosheets synthesized by heating GeI4, HMDS, oleylamine, oleic acid, and dodecanethiol (GeS) or TOP–Se (GeSe) to 320 °C for 24 h. (b,c) Plots of [F(R)hν]1/2vs. energy, indicating indirect band gaps of 1.58 and 1.14 eV for the GeS and GeSe nanosheets, respectively. (d) 4-point I–V curve for a drop-cast film of GeSe nanosheets yielding a conductivity of 4.7 × 10−6 S cm−1, and (e) 2-point I–V curve showing turn-on potentials that indicate p-type character. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
Germanium selenide
Crystalline germanium monoselenide, GeSe, is isostructural to GeS and is also a p-type semiconductor, with direct and indirect band gaps in the range of 1.1–1.2 eV. In addition to photovoltaics, GeSe is of interest for photodetector, thermoelectric, and resistive switching applications.55–58,66 Vaughn II et al. produced single-crystal colloidal GeSe nanosheets using the same synthetic protocol used to generate GeS nanosheets, except that dodecanethiol was replaced with a trioctylphosphine–selenium (TOP–Se) complex.55 Morphologically, the GeSe nanosheets appear similar to those of GeS, although they are generally thicker (5–100 nm) (Fig. 18a, inset). Diffuse reflectance measurements indicated indirect (Fig. 18c) and direct band gaps of 1.14 and 1.21 eV, respectively. Electrical transport measurements of a drop-cast GeSe nanosheet film revealed that it was p-type with a conductivity of 4.7 × 10−6 S cm−1 (Fig. 18d and e), which compares favorably with films prepared from other colloidal semiconductor nanocrystals.
In a follow-up study, Vaughn II et al. synthesized colloidal GeSe nanobelts by using the same reaction conditions used to make GeSe nanosheets, but adding additional TOP–Se at 320 °C and heating for several additional hours.56 The resulting nanobelts showed high aspect ratios (>200:1) with lengths in the range of 1–25 μm, an average diameter of 77 ± 18 nm, and thicknesses as low as 35 nm. Crystallographic analysis of the GeSe nanobelt revealed a preferred [010] growth direction, which was postulated to result from increased stabilization of the (002) vs. (020) facets by the additional TOP–Se. Individual nanobelts were aligned between Ti/Au electrodes and 4-point electrical measurements revealed a resistivity of 360 Ω cm, which is within the range observed for similar measurements acquired on bulk GeSe single crystals.
Guo, Wan, and co-workers also reported on colloidal GeSe nanosheets, which were synthesized by heating a one-pot mixture of GeI4, diphenyldiselenide, and hexadecylamine to 268 °C for 30 min.57 The nanosheets exhibited an elongated hexagon morphology with well-defined facets, although they were larger than those produced by Vaughn II et al.,55 with lengths of 9–10 μm, widths of 4–5 μm, and thickness of 290–300 nm (Fig. 19a). Top-contact (Fig. 19b–d) and bottom–top-contact devices were fabricated to probe the photoresponse of the GeSe nanosheet in the directions parallel and perpendicular to the GeSe layers, respectively. A clear photoswitching phenomenon was observed in both devices when illuminated with white light from an iodine-tungsten lamp source at a light intensity of 5.51 mW cm−2 and a bias of 0.5 V (Fig. 19c).57 An anisotropic on/off switch ratio of approx. 3.5 was observed, where the on/off ratio for the device perpendicular to the layers was ∼5.5 and the ratio parallel to the layers was only ∼1.6.
 Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of hexagonally-faceted GeSe nanosheets synthesized by heating GeI4, diphenyl diselenide, and hexadecylamine to 268 °C for 30 min. (b) Schematic showing a device used to measure photocurrents and I–V curves for single GeSe nanosheets. (c) Photocurrent response (5.51 mW cm−2 incident light density, 0.5 V bias voltage). (d) I–V curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 (Copyright 2012, Wiley-VHC). 
Germanium telluride
Germanium telluride, GeTe, crystallizes in a rhombohedral crystal structure that is also distorted from the cubic rocksalt structure. GeTe undergoes a reversible amorphous-to-crystalline phase transition, which can be triggered thermally or electrically, and this makes it attractive as a prototype phase change material, along with the related Ge2Sb2Te5, for non-volatile memory applications.59–63,65 Furthermore, reducing the size of GeTe particles to nanoscale dimensions has been shown to decrease the melting temperature, which can lead to improved device performance.59 GeTe is also ferroelectric and has been used as a model system for understanding nanoscale polar ordering phenomena.60,64 Therefore, studies focusing on the colloidal synthesis and morphological control of GeTe nanocrystals have begun to appear in the literature.59–64
Milliron and co-workers produced amorphous GeTe nanoparticles by heating GeI2 in TOP and TOPO to 250 °C, separately injecting dodecanethiol and then TOP–Te, then holding at 250 °C for 8 min.59 The resulting particles, which were amorphous by XRD, had average diameters of 3.5 nm and were inferred to be GeTe based on EDS and annealing studies (Fig. 20a). Surprisingly, in the absence of dodecanethiol, nanoparticles with a controlled morphology could not be synthesized. It was only determined by subsequent 1H and 31P NMR measurements that thiol activation of a GeI2–TOP complex led to the formation of a Ge precursor that was more reactive towards TOP–Te, ultimately facilitating the production of GeTe nanoparticles. After a size selection process via solvent-mediated precipitation and centrifugation (Fig. 20b), the authors were able to correlate an increase in crystallization temperature with a decrease in particle size, suggesting that the amorphous phase is more stable than the crystalline phase in small particles.
 Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of GeTe nanoparticles synthesized by reacting GeI2 with TOP–Te at 250 °C in the presence of dodecanethiol. Scale bar is 10 nm. (b) Dynamic light scattering data showing the presence of four distinct average sizes of GeTe nanoparticles, which were separated by size-selective precipitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59 (Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Ramesh, Alivisatos, and co-workers produced multi-faceted crystalline GeTe nanoparticles with an average diameter of 8.5 ± 1.2 nm by reacting Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 (Ge–HMDS) with TOP–Te, along with 1-dodecanethiol and excess TOP, at 250 °C (Fig. 21a–c).60 Larger nanocrystals with average diameters of 17.4 ± 3.3 nm were produced at 250 °C in the presence of oleylamine (Fig. 21d–f). Even larger GeTe nanocrystals with average diameters of 102 ± 11 nm were produced at 180 °C upon using a GeCl2–dioxane complex as the Ge precursor, along with TOP–Te and 1-dodecanethiol (Fig. 21g–i). Access to three distinct sizes of crystalline GeTe nanoparticles was facilitate by using Ge(II) precursors with different reactivities. Interestingly, the authors observed that below 30 nm, the particles largely contained a single domain while above 30 nm, multidomain particles were predominant. This indicates a critical size above which multiple polarization domains are present.
 Fig. 21  (a, d, g) TEM images, (b, e, h) HRTEM images, and (c, f, i) size distribution histograms for colloidal GeTe nanocrystals with three different average sizes. The nanocrystals were synthesized by reacting various Ge(II) precursors with TOP–Te at temperatures of 180–250 °C. (j–l) TEM images and SAED patterns for GeTe nanocrystals with three different sizes synthesized by reacting Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 with TOP–Te in the presence of dodecanethiol. Panels (a–i) reprinted with permission from ref. 60 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society) and panels (j–l) reprinted with permission from ref. 61 (Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH). 
Kanatzidis and co-workers synthesized both crystalline and amorphous colloidal GeTe nanoparticles by using different reaction temperatures (Fig. 21j–l).61 The authors produced crystalline GeTe particles by injecting a 1-octadecene solution of Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 into a mixture of oleylamine, TOP–Te, and dodecanethiol at 200 °C. The highest quality particles were held at 200 °C for only 1 min, and yielded an average diameter of 4.3 ± 0.4 nm. Dodecanethiol was proposed to slow the growth rate, as longer reaction times (2–3 min) yielded polydisperse samples with larger particle diameters (9.0–27.8 nm), although a large excess appeared to prevent nucleation. The authors produced amorphous GeTe particles using a similar strategy, except that no dodecanethiol was used, and the temperatures of injection (170 °C) and growth (150–160 °C) were lower. The amorphous GeTe particles were spherical and also exhibited sizes that were tunable with reaction time: average diameters of 8.7 ± 0.5 nm, 10.6 ± 0.5 nm, and 18.5 ± 0.7 nm for reaction times of 1, 2, and 3 min, respectively. The authors observed that the absorption band onset energy decreased as the size increased, for both the crystalline and amorphous particles, although the amorphous particles (0.8–1.1 eV) were found to exhibit overall higher band energies than the crystalline particles (0.76–0.85 eV). This was attributed to confinement and local ordering effects, and all values were greater than that of bulk GeTe (0.67 eV), although a precise composition analysis was not provided.
Tuan and Korgel produced larger micron-sized octahedra of crystalline GeTe with putative terminal {111} facets by reacting diphenylgermane and TOP–Te in supercritical hexane at 460 °C and 13.6 MPa (Fig. 22a–c).62 Buck et al. produced similarly sized cube-shaped crystalline GeTe particles with edge lengths of 1.0 ± 0.2 μm by reducing GeI2 with tert-butylamine borane complex in the presence of TOP–Te at 180 °C (Fig. 22d).63 The particles were bound by {002} facets and produced highly oriented textured films by drop casting onto a planar substrate.
 Fig. 22  SEM images of (a–c) GeTe octahedra synthesized by reacting diphenylgermane and TOP–Te in supercritical hexane (460 °C, 13.6 MPa) and (d) GeTe cubes synthesized by reacting GeI2, TOP–Te, and tert-butylamine borane complex (180 °C). Panels (a–c) reprinted with permission from ref. 62 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society) and panel (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 63 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society). 
6. Conclusions and future outlook
Over the past decade, great advances have been made in synthesizing colloidal Ge nanoparticles. The early reports emphasized strong and highly reactive reducing agents, such as organoalkali and alkali metal reagents, as required to reduce the common GeCl4 precursor to elemental Ge using appropriate solvents. Such chemistry makes it difficult to predictably and rigorously control size and morphology, and polydisperse samples with multiple co-existing morphologies are common. Such methods – because of the reactivity of the reagents, the harshness of the reaction conditions, and the possible reactive byproducts – are prohibitive for implementation beyond highly trained chemists who are skilled in rigorously air-sensitive manipulations.
Alternative synthetic approaches emerged, which aimed to generate Ge nanoparticles under milder conditions, such as the metathesis reactions that occur between GeCl4 and germanide Zintl salts. Solution-mediated thermal decomposition reactions involving germanium precursors are particularly attractive for generating colloidal Ge nanoparticles. Chemists realized that more synthetic control, predictability, and tunability could be achieved if reactions were carried out under milder conditions. Toward this goal, two pathways emerged: increasing the reactivity of the precursor so that it decomposes at lower temperatures – e.g. Ge(IV) vs. Ge(II) precursors, Cl−vs. Br−vs. I− counter ions, ligands with different dissociation capabilities – and increasing the boiling points of the solvents used so that higher decomposition temperatures are accessible – e.g. trioctylamine (380 °C) vs. squalene (410 °C) vs. octacosane (429 °C). The simultaneous use of both Ge(II) and Ge(IV) precursors is a particularly elegant manifestation of this approach, since Ge(II) is more reactive and decomposes initially at lower temperature, facilitating nucleation, while Ge(IV) requires higher temperatures to decompose, facilitating growth in a separate step. Even milder reactions are possible, however, including simple one-pot heat-up methods that generate colloidal Ge nanoparticles without highly reactive and strong reducing agents, as well as thermal reduction methods that generate Ge nanoparticles confined within a sol–gel-derived GeO2 or SiO2 matrix, which can be removed by dissolution. Among the highest quality colloidal Ge nanoparticles, which have excellent uniformity and stability and exhibit IR emission, are those produced by reducing Ge precursors with n-butyllithium at elevated temperatures.
With applications in mind, the observation of photoluminescence in germanium nanoparticles at visible wavelengths is attractive for possible non-toxic and environmentally benign optoelectronic and biological applications, but this is controversial due to its inconsistency with the quantum confinement effects expected for colloidal Ge nanocrystals. The prevalence of germanium oxide species, as well as fluorescent molecules that form when organic solvents are heated to high temperatures, may be implicit in these observations, since colloidal Ge particles with surfaces that are considered highly passivated (e.g. with Ge–C bonds) are stable and IR emitting, with weak or only negligible visible-wavelength quantum yields.
The surface chemistry of colloidal Ge nanoparticles is therefore critically important, and much effort has gone into modifying it. The organometallic chemistry of Ge surfaces is rich, and some of these reactions, including hydrogermylation, have been applied to colloidal Ge nanoparticles to convert native hydride-terminated surfaces into alkyl-terminated surfaces. Surface functionalization is particularly important for potential biological applications, and ligand exchange with surface functional groups that render the particles water soluble, such as hydrophilic polymers or phospholipids, as well as those able to bind to cells for imaging studies, has been achieved.
These synthetic capabilities are beginning to provide fundamental new insights into the properties of Ge nanoparticles as a function of size, size distribution, shape, and surface chemistry. Indeed, shape control is quite challenging and rare for colloidal Ge nanoparticles, and the chemistry that is successful in generating non-spherical shapes often differs only subtly from the chemistry used to make spheres. There is still much to be learned. However, current capabilities are sufficient for exploring application areas for which colloidal Ge nanoparticles are well suited. Water-dispersible Ge nanoparticles have been explored for applications in biological imaging, and while Ge is clearly less toxic than Cd, Hg, and Pb, which comprise alternative quantum dot semiconductors, there are still concerns about the toxicity of Ge nanoparticles to cells. Solution-processed Ge films are attractive for optoelectronic applications, both for the ease of fabrication and for their electrical properties that can be modified by illumination. Finally, Ge nanoparticles, particularly when coated with carbon, are emerging as powerful anode materials for lithium ion batteries. As synthetic capabilities continue to expand and become both more rigorous and more mainstream, additional applications may be on the horizon.
As we continue to learn more about the synthesis and properties of colloidal Ge nanoparticles, new opportunities in Ge-based systems emerge as well. Germanium chalcogenides provide a particularly rich family of systems: GeTe is a prototype phase change material and a model system for understanding nanoscale ferroelectric behavior, GeSe exhibits photoswitching behavior and is also of interest for solar, thermoelectric, and non-volatile memory applications, and GeS is a potentially useful material for photovoltaic applications. With these motivating applications, as well as the rich properties exhibited by these and related materials, advances in synthesis are urgently needed, as are high quality samples that permit fundamental studies of size- and morphology-dependent properties for future applications in spintronics, photocatalysis, thermoelectrics, and photovoltaics.
Acknowledgements
D.D.V. acknowledges support from an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship. The authors' work that was included in this review (Ge, GeS, GeSe) was funded primarily by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Materials Sciences and Engineering, under award #DE-FG02-08ER46483.
Notes and references
Y. Kamata, Mater. Today, 2008, 11, 30–38 CrossRef .
Y. Maeda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1995, 51, 1658–1670 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pillarisetty, Nature, 2011, 479, 324–328 CrossRef CAS .
B. Hekmatshoar, D. Shahrjerdi, M. Hopstaken, K. Fogel and D. K. Sadana, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 032102 CrossRef .
W. Guter, J. Schone, S. P. Philipps, M. Steiner, G. Siefer, A. Wekkeli, E. Welser, E. Oliva, A. W. Bett and F. Dimroth, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 223504 CrossRef .
G. Chakraborty, A. Sengupta, F. G. Requejo and C. K. Sarkar, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109, 064504 CrossRef .
D. V. Talapin, J. S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko and E. V. Shevchenko, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 389–458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Assefa, F. N. A. Xia and Y. A. Vlasov, Nature, 2010, 464, U80–U91 CrossRef .
J. Michel, J. F. Liu and L. C. Kimerling, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 527–534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Fan and P. K. Chu, Small, 2010, 6, 2080–2098 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kornowski, M. Giersig, R. Vogel, A. Chemseddine and H. Weller, Adv. Mater., 1993, 5, 634–636 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Chiu, C. N. Chervin and S. M. Kauzlarich, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4858–4864 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Chiu and S. M. Kauzlarich, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1023–1028 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, M. G. Kim, C. H. Choi, Y. K. Sun, C. S. Yoon and J. Cho, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20719–20723 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Heath, J. J. Shiang and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Chem. Phys., 1994, 101, 1607–1615 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Taylor, S. M. Kauzlarich, H. W. H. Lee and G. R. Delgado, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 22–24 CrossRef CAS .
B. R. Taylor, S. M. Kauzlarich, G. R. Delgado and H. W. H. Lee, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2493–2500 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Tanke, S. M. Kauzlarich, T. E. Patten, K. A. Pettigrew, D. L. Murphy, M. E. Thompson and H. W. H. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 1682–1689 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Ma, F. Y. Wu and S. M. Kauzlarich, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 1628–1633 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gerion, N. Zaitseva, C. Saw, M. F. Casula, S. Fakra, T. Van Buuren and G. Galli, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 597–602 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zaitseva, Z. R. Dai, C. D. Grant, J. Harper and C. Saw, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 5174–5178 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Wu, M. Y. Ge, C. W. Yao, Y. W. Wang, Y. W. Zeng, L. N. Wang, G. Q. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Henderson, C. M. Hessel and J. G. C. Veinot, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 3624–3632 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hoffman and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1283–1291 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. Henderson, M. Seino, D. P. Puzzo and G. A. Ozin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7683–7691 CrossRef CAS .
O. Dag, E. J. Henderson and G. A. Ozin, Small, 2012, 8, 921–929 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerung, S. D. Bunge, T. J. Boyle, C. J. Brinker and S. M. Han, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1914–1916 RSC .
T. J. Boyle, L. J. Tribby, L. A. M. Ottley and S. M. Han, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2009, 5550–5560 CAS .
J. P. Wilcoxon, P. P. Provencio and G. A. Samara, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 035417 CrossRef ; P. Wilcoxon, P. P. Provencio and G. A. Samara, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76, 199904(E) Search PubMed .
H. P. Wu, J. F. Liu, Y. W. Wang, Y. W. Zeng and J. Z. Jiang, Mater. Lett., 2006, 60, 986–989 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fok, M. L. Shih, A. Meldrum and J. G. C. Veinot, Chem. Commun., 2004, 386–387 RSC .
X. M. Lu, B. A. Korgel and K. P. Johnston, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 6479–6485 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner and R. D. Tilley, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 3745–3749 CrossRef CAS .
N. H. Chou, K. D. Oyler, N. E. Motl and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4105–4107 CrossRef CAS .
S. Prabakar, A. Shiohara, S. Hanada, K. Fujioka, K. Yamamoto and R. D. Tilley, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 482–486 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Jing, X. D. Zang, W. Bai, J. H. Chu and A. Y. Liu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 505607 CrossRef .
J. H. Wu, Y. G. Sun, R. J. Zou, G. S. Song, Z. G. Chen, C. R. Wang and J. Q. Hu, CrystEngComm, 2011, 13, 3674–3677 RSC .
D. C. Lee, J. M. Pietryga, I. Robel, D. J. Werder, R. D. Schaller and V. I. Klimov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3436–3437 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Ruddy, J. C. Johnson, E. R. Smith and N. R. Neale, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7459–7466 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Codoluto, W. J. Baumgardner and T. Hanrath, CrystEngComm, 2010, 12, 2903–2909 RSC .
D. D. Vaughn II, J. F. Bondi and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 6103–6108 CrossRef .
D. J. Xue, J. J. Wang, Y. Q. Wang, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3704–3707 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Warner, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5613–5619 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Holman and U. R. Kortshagen, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 11883–11889 CrossRef CAS .
Z. C. Holman, C. Y. Liu and U. R. Kortshagen, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2661–2666 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato, T. Ikeda, K. Hamada and K. Kimura, Solid State Commun., 2009, 149, 862–865 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Hope-Weeks, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2980–2981 RSC .
W. Z. Wang, J. Y. Huang and Z. F. Ren, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 751–754 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Yang and J. G. C. Veinot, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 16505–16509 RSC .
J. R. Heath and F. K. Legoues, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1993, 208, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gerung, T. J. Boyle, L. J. Tribby, S. D. Bunge, C. J. Brinker and S. M. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 5244–5250 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ge, J. F. Liu, H. Wu, C. Yao, Y. Zeng, Z. D. Fu, S. L. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 11157–11160 CAS .
R. G. Hobbs, S. Barth, N. Petkov, M. Zirngast, C. Marschner, M. A. Morris and J. D. Holmes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13742–13749 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris and B. A. Korgel, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1964–1970 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Vaughn II, R. J. Patel, M. A. Hickner and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15170–15172 CrossRef .
D. D. Vaughn II, D. Sun, S. M. Levin, A. J. Biacchi, T. S. Mayer and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3643–3649 CrossRef .
D. J. Xue, J. Tan, J. S. Hu, W. Hu, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4528–4533 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Yoon, H. J. Song and H. C. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2164–2167 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Caldwell, S. Raoux, R. Y. Wang, H. S. P. Wong and D. J. Milliron, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1285–1291 RSC .
M. J. Polking, H. M. Zheng, R. Ramesh and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2044–2047 CrossRef CAS .
I. U. Arachchige, R. Soriano, C. D. Malliakas, S. A. Ivanov and M. C. Kanatzidis, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2737–2743 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Tuan and B. A. Korgel, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 8, 2555–2561 CAS .
M. R. Buck, I. T. Sines and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 3236–3240 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Polking, M. G. Han, A. Yourdkhani, V. Petkov, C. F. Kisielowski, V. V. Volkov, Y. M. Zhu, G. Caruntu, A. P. Alivisatos and R. Ramesh, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 700–709 CrossRef CAS .
S. Raoux, W. Welnic and D. Ielmini, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 240–267 CrossRef CAS .
P. D. Antunez, J. J. Buckley and R. L. Brutchey, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2399–2411 RSC .
S. Takeoka, M. Fujii, S. Hayashi and K. Yamamoto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1998, 58, 7921–7925 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nakamura, K. Watanabe, Y. Fukuzawa and M. Ichikawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 133119 CrossRef .
A. El Hdiy, K. Gacem, M. Troyon, A. Ronda, F. Bassani and I. Berbezier, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 063716 CrossRef .
K. A. Dutta, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 1189–1191 CrossRef .
K. S. Min, K. V. Scheglov, C. M. Yang, H. A. Atwater, M. L. Brongersma and A. Polman, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 68, 2511–2513 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zacharias, J. Blasing, M. Lohmann and J. Christen, Thin Solid Films, 1996, 276, 32–36 CrossRef .
Y. Maeda, N. Tsukamoto, Y. Yazawa, Y. Kanemitsu and Y. Masumoto, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 59, 3168–3170 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miguez, V. Fornes, F. Meseguer, F. Marquez and C. Lopez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 2347–2349 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ngiam, K. F. Jensen and K. D. Kolenbrander, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 8201–8203 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Carpenter, C. M. Lukeheart, D. O. Henderson, R. Mu, B. D. Jones, R. Glosser, S. R. Stock, J. E. Wittig and J. G. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 1268–1274 CrossRef CAS .
X. D. Li, G. W. Meng, Q. L. Xu, M. G. Kong, X. G. Zhu, Z. Q. Chu and A. P. Li, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1704–1709 CrossRef CAS .
A. O'hare, F. V. Kusmartsev and K. I. Kugel, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1045–1052 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Ni, Q. H. Liu, K. C. Tang, J. X. Zheng, J. Zhou, R. Qin, Z. X. Gao, D. P. Yu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 113–118 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Xia, Y. J. Xiong, B. Lim and S. E. Skrabalak, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 60–103 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Wu, J. S. Kulkarni, G. Collins, N. Petkov, D. Almecija, J. J. Boland, D. Erts and J. D. Holmes, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 5954–5967 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Liu, J. Nah, K. M. Varahramyan and E. Tutuc, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3297–3301 CrossRef CAS .
G. Collins and J. D. Holmes, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11052–11069 RSC .
L. Y. Cao, J. S. White, J. S. Park, J. A. Schuller, B. M. Clemens and M. L. Brongersma, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 643–647 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Lambert, N. L. Andrews, H. Gerung, T. J. Boyle, J. M. Oliver, B. S. Wilson and S. M. Han, Small, 2007, 3, 691–699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Ma, C. P. Huang, J. S. Tsai, M. Y. Shen, Y. K. Li and L. Y. Lin, Toxicol. Lett., 2011, 207, 258–269 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Park, K. Kim, J. Kim and J. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 415–418 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Xue, S. Xin, Y. Yan, K. C. Jiang, Y. X. Yin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2512–2515 CrossRef CAS .
O. H. Johnson, Chem. Rev., 1952, 51, 431–469 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

Dimitri D. Vaughn II
	Dimitri Vaughn grew up in Syracuse, NY (USA) and discovered his love for Chemistry as an undergraduate student at the University at Albany – SUNY. He received his BS degree in Chemistry from SUNY Albany in 2008 and then went on to pursue graduate studies at Penn State University under the supervision of Prof. Raymond Schaak. He was awarded an NSF Graduate Research Fellowship in 2010 and his current interests are working towards an understanding of the underlying molecular principles governing nanoparticle nucleation and growth in addition to applied materials in renewable energy and water treatment.

Raymond E. Schaak
	Raymond Schaak grew up in Palmyra, PA (USA) and received a Bachelor's degree in chemistry from Lebanon Valley College in 1998. He earned his PhD in chemistry in 2001, working with Prof. Thomas Mallouk at Penn State University. After postdoctoral research in Prof. Robert Cava's lab at Princeton University, he began as an Assistant Professor of Chemistry at Texas A&M University in 2003. He moved to Penn State University in 2007, where he is currently a Professor of Chemistry. His research emphasizes the development of new approaches to the synthesis of inorganic solids and nanostructures.

 	Fig. 1  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeCl4 with alkali metal naphthalide solutions at room temperature. TEM images of (a) amorphous Ge nanoparticles produced from GeCl4 and Li naphthalide, (b) partially-crystallized Ge nanoparticles after five flashes with a ruby laser, (c) crystalline Ge nanoparticles produced from GeCl4 and Na naphthalide, and (d) amorphous Ge nanoparticles after heating to 300 °C under vacuum. Panels (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 11 (Copyright 1993, Wiley-VCH) and panels (c, d) reprinted with permission from ref. 12 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 2  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles via a metathesis reaction between Ge Zintl salts and GeCl4, followed by surface modification to produce different exposed functional groups. (a) HRTEM image of a Ge nanoparticle with a diameter of 15 nm, (b) TEM image and size distribution histogram for Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reacting NaGe and NH4Br, and (c) photoluminescence (right) and photoluminescence excitation (left) spectra for butyl-terminated Ge nanoparticles with an average diameter of 6.2 nm. Panels (a, c) reprinted with permission from ref. 17 (Copyright 1999, American Chemical Society) and panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 19 (Copyright 2008, Elsevier Inc.).	 

 	Fig. 3  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by refluxing various organogermane precursors in solvents with different boiling points, where the solvent boiling point influences the crystallinity of the Ge nanoparticles that are produced. TEM images of Ge nanoparticles synthesized by decomposing trichlorogermane in squalene at 410 °C for (a) 1 min and (b) 20 min. (c) Size distribution histograms for Ge nanoparticles synthesized from (A) trichorogermane, squalene, 410 °C, 1 min, (B) trichlorogermane, squalene, 410 °C, 20 min, (C) tetraethylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min, (D) tetraethylgermane, octacosane, 425 °C, 10 min, (E) tetrabutylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min, and (F) tetrabutylgermane, squalene, 410 °C, 35 min with added dichlorobenzene. (d) Powder X-ray diffraction patterns showing the time- and temperature-dependent evolution of crystallization upon decomposition of trichlorogermane: (1) 380 °C, 1 min, (2) 380 °C, 30 min, (3) 395 °C, (4) 410 °C. (e) Photoluminescence spectra for the sample shown in panel (a). Reprinted with permission from ref. 21 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 4  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of Ge nanoparticles by thermally decomposing a sol–gel-derived (PhGeO1.5)n polymer. TEM images and SAED pattern for Ge nanoparticles isolated from a GeO2 matrix upon dissolution in water at 60 °C for (a, b) 30 min and (c) 2.5 h. Scale bars are 100 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 5  Upper left: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by decomposing Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 in oleylamine and octadecene at 300 °C. (a) TEM image, (b) SAED pattern, and (c) HRTEM image of 7 ± 4 nm Ge nanoparticles. (d) Photoluminescence and UV-Visible absorption spectra for Ge nanoparticles in toluene. Reprinted with permission from ref. 27 (Copyright 2005, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 6  Upper left: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing Ge(IV) halides with lithium aluminum hydride (LAH). (a) TEM image, SAED pattern, and size distribution histogram for Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 with LAH in THF at room temperature and in an ultrasonic bath for 30 min. (b) TEM image and SAED pattern for n-undecyl functionalized Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeI4 with LAH at room temperature, followed by refluxing in n-undecene. (c) TEM image and size distribution histogram for 4.0 ± 0.5 nm Ge particles synthesized by reducing a toluene solution of GeCl4 with LAH/THF at room temperature in the presence of tetraoctylammonium bromide. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 30 (Copyright 2005, Elsevier B.V.), panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 31 (Copyright 2004, The Royal Society of Chemistry), and panel (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 7  (a–c) TEM images and (d–f) corresponding size distribution histograms of Ge nanoparticles synthesized in the presence of TOP by reducing GeI2 with LAH at 120 °C and heating to 300 °C for 60 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 8  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeCl4 with NaBH4 at room temperature. (a) TEM image and SAED pattern of 5 ± 1 nm Ge particles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 in ethylene glycol with NaBH4 in triglyme, in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone). (b) TEM image and size distribution histogram of Ge nanoparticles synthesized by reducing GeCl4 in hexane with NaBH4 in triglyme, in the presence of pentaethylene glycol monododecyl ether. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 34 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society) and panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles by reducing GeI2 with n-butyllithium. (a) TEM image of 4.0 ± 1.7 nm Ge nanoparticles, and (b) normalized room-temperature photoluminescence spectra for three different sizes of octadecene-capped Ge nanoparticles, as well as TOP-capped Ge nanoparticles (green). The excitation wavelength is 808 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 38 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 10  Top: Schematic highlighting the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles using mixtures of GeI2 and GeI4, where the relative amounts of Ge(II) vs. Ge(IV) define the average particle size. (a–d) TEM images showing four distinct average sizes of Ge nanoparticles produced from (a) 100/0, (b) 0/100, (c) 50/50, and (d) 75/25 ratios of Ge(IV)/Ge(II). (e) Tauc plots and (f) photoluminescence spectra (with quantum yields) for Ge nanoparticles of different sizes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 39 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 11  Top: Schematic highlighting one-pot heat-up methods for the synthesis of colloidal Ge nanoparticles. (a–c) TEM images showing crystalline Ge nanoparticles produced by heating a mixture of GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, and HMDS to 260 °C for 30 min. Nanoparticles with three different average sizes were produced using different concentrations of GeI4. Reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a, b) TEM images of Ge nanocubes synthesized by reducing GeCl4 and phenyl-GeCl3 with sodium metal in the presence of heptaethylene glycol monododecyl ether, followed by heating to 280 °C for 72 h in a Parr reactor. (c, d) TEM images of Ge nanocubes formed from the room-temperature borohydride reduction of GeCl4 in ethylene glycol/triglyme, in the presence of poly(vinylpyrrolidone). (e) TEM image of Ge nanocubes formed upon heating GeI4, oleylamine, oleic acid, TOP, and HMDS to 260 °C and holding for 30 min. Panels (a, b) reprinted with permission from ref. 48 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society), panels (c, d) reprinted with permission from ref. 34 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), and panels (e) reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) TEM image and SAED pattern of a Ge nanowire formed by decomposing tetraethylgermane in squalane at 410 °C, (b) SEM and (c) HRTEM images of Ge nanowires formed by decomposing tetra-cis-9-octadecenoic germanium at 360 °C, (d, e) TEM images of kinked 1D Ge nanostructures formed by heating GeI4, oleylamine, and HMDS to 315 °C in 1-octadecene, and TEM images of (f) straight and (g) branched Ge nanorods formed by decomposing diphenylgermane in squalene at 350 °C in the presence of Bi nanocrystal seeds. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 21 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society), panels (b, c) reprinted with permission from ref. 52 (Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society), panels (d, e) reprinted with permission from ref. 41 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society), and panels (f, g) reprinted with permission from ref. 54 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Fluorescence microscope image showing Ge nanoparticles functionalized with carboxyfluorescein-labeled dinitrophenyl groups crosslinking with dinitrophenol-specific IgE antibodies on the surface of mast cells. (b) Overlay of transmission and fluorescence images of HepG2 cells with hydrophilic allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles transfected into the cytosol. (c) Survival fraction of cells treated for 24 h with different concentrations of hydrophilic allylamine-capped Ge nanoparticles. Panel (a) reprinted with permission from ref. 85 (Copyright 2007, Wiley-VCH, panel (b) reprinted with permission from ref. 35 (Copyright 2009, American Chemical Society), and panel (c) reprinted with permission from ref. 86 (Copyright 2011, Elsevier Ireland Ltd.).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic showing a field-effect transistor (FET) device fabricated by solution-deposition of Ge nanoparticles that were synthesized in a gas-phase flow-through plasma reactor then rendered colloidally dispersible by hydrogermylation-based surface modification. A cross-section SEM image is shown in (b). Plots of drain current (Id) vs. gate voltage (Vg) and drain voltage (Vd) are shown for FETs fabricated from (c, d) 6 nm Ge particles annealed at 400 °C and (e, f) 6 nm Ge particles annealed at 600 °C. Reprinted with permission from ref. 45 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic showing a device used to measure the photocurrent behavior of a dropcast film containing Ge nanoparticles and poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT), along with the (b) on/off switching data (8.03 mW cm−2 incident light density, 10 V bias voltage), (c) dark currents and photocurrents at different incident light densities, and (d) photocurrent vs. incident light density (20 V bias voltage). Reprinted with permission from ref. 42 (Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Charge/discharge profiles (after 1, 5, 10, 20, and 30 cycles at 0.2 C and cycled between 0 and 12 V) for lithium ion battery anodes prepared from butyl-capped Ge nanoparticles. The inset shows the cycle number vs. capacity. (b) Discharge–charge profiles (cycled between 0 and 1 V at a current density of 50 mA g−1), (c) cycle number vs. specific capacity, and (d) cycling performance at different current densities for a nanocomposite of carbon-coated Ge nanoparticles and reduced graphene oxide (Ge@C/RGO). A TEM image of the Ge@C/RGO nanocomposite is shown in (e). Panel (a) is reprinted with permission from ref. 14 (Copyright 2005, American Chemical Society) and panels (b–e) are reprinted with permission from ref. 90 (Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) TEM image of GeS (main panel) and GeSe (inset) nanosheets synthesized by heating GeI4, HMDS, oleylamine, oleic acid, and dodecanethiol (GeS) or TOP–Se (GeSe) to 320 °C for 24 h. (b,c) Plots of [F(R)hν]1/2vs. energy, indicating indirect band gaps of 1.58 and 1.14 eV for the GeS and GeSe nanosheets, respectively. (d) 4-point I–V curve for a drop-cast film of GeSe nanosheets yielding a conductivity of 4.7 × 10−6 S cm−1, and (e) 2-point I–V curve showing turn-on potentials that indicate p-type character. Reprinted with permission from ref. 55 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) SEM image of hexagonally-faceted GeSe nanosheets synthesized by heating GeI4, diphenyl diselenide, and hexadecylamine to 268 °C for 30 min. (b) Schematic showing a device used to measure photocurrents and I–V curves for single GeSe nanosheets. (c) Photocurrent response (5.51 mW cm−2 incident light density, 0.5 V bias voltage). (d) I–V curves. Reprinted with permission from ref. 57 (Copyright 2012, Wiley-VHC).	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) TEM image of GeTe nanoparticles synthesized by reacting GeI2 with TOP–Te at 250 °C in the presence of dodecanethiol. Scale bar is 10 nm. (b) Dynamic light scattering data showing the presence of four distinct average sizes of GeTe nanoparticles, which were separated by size-selective precipitation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 59 (Copyright 2010, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a, d, g) TEM images, (b, e, h) HRTEM images, and (c, f, i) size distribution histograms for colloidal GeTe nanocrystals with three different average sizes. The nanocrystals were synthesized by reacting various Ge(II) precursors with TOP–Te at temperatures of 180–250 °C. (j–l) TEM images and SAED patterns for GeTe nanocrystals with three different sizes synthesized by reacting Ge[N(SiMe3)2]2 with TOP–Te in the presence of dodecanethiol. Panels (a–i) reprinted with permission from ref. 60 (Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society) and panels (j–l) reprinted with permission from ref. 61 (Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 22  SEM images of (a–c) GeTe octahedra synthesized by reacting diphenylgermane and TOP–Te in supercritical hexane (460 °C, 13.6 MPa) and (d) GeTe cubes synthesized by reacting GeI2, TOP–Te, and tert-butylamine borane complex (180 °C). Panels (a–c) reprinted with permission from ref. 62 (Copyright 2008, American Chemical Society) and panel (d) reprinted with permission from ref. 63 (Copyright 2010, American Chemical Society).	 
Footnote
† Part of the chemistry of functional nanomaterials themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
