Defect chemistry and defect engineering of TiO 2 -based semiconductors for solar energy conversion   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00469H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00469H
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8424-8442Defect chemistry and defect engineering of TiO2-based semiconductors for solar energy conversion†

        
          
            Janusz 
            Nowotny
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Abdul 
            Alim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tadeusz 
            Bak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Asri 
            Idris
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Mihail 
            Ionescu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Kathryn 
            Prince
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Mohd Zainizan 
            Sahdan
          
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Kamaruzzaman 
            Sopian
          
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Mohd Asri 
            Mat Teridi
          
          
        
      e and 

        
          
            Wolfgang 
            Sigmund
          
        
      f
aSolar Energy Technologies, School of Computing, Engineering and Mathematics, Western Sydney University, Penrith, NSW 2571, Australia. E-mail: J.Nowotny@westernsydney.edu.au;   Tel: +61 (02) 4620 3807
bUniversity of Malaysia Perlis, Jalan Bukit Lagi, 01000 Kangar, Perlis, Malaysia
cAustralian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation, Locked Bag 2001, Kirawee DC, NSW 2232, Australia
dUniversiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia, 86400 Parit Raja, Batu Pahat, Jahor, Malaysia
eSolar Energy Research Institute, Universiti Kebangsaan Malaysia, Kebangsaan Malaysia, 43600 UKM Bangi, Selangor, Malaysia
fDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611-6400, USA
Received 
      10th December 2014
    First published on 8th October 2015AbstractThis tutorial review considers defect chemistry of TiO2 and its solid solutions as well as defect-related properties associated with solar-to-chemical energy conversion, such as Fermi level, bandgap, charge transport and surface active sites. Defect disorder is discussed in terms of defect reactions and the related charge compensation. Defect equilibria are used in derivation of defect diagrams showing the effect of oxygen activity and temperature on the concentration of both ionic and electronic defects. These defect diagrams may be used for imposition of desired semiconducting properties that are needed to maximize the performance of TiO2-based photoelectrodes for the generation of solar hydrogen fuel using photo electrochemical cells (PECs) and photocatalysts for water purification. The performance of the TiO2-based semiconductors is considered in terms of the key performance-related properties (KPPs) that are defect related. It is shown that defect engineering may be applied for optimization of the KPPs in order to achieve optimum performance.
Janusz Nowotny
Janusz Nowotny, PhD, DSc, is the Professor of Solar Energy Technologies, Western Sydney University and Conjoint Professor of Engineering, University of Newcastle. His research includes oxide semiconductors for solar energy conversion. He is recipient of the ECS award for outstanding contribution in high-temperature materials, the Pfeil award of the Institute of Materials, UK, and the IAHE Sir William Grove Award. He published 450 refereed papers and 19 books. He was the founder and organiser of two series of international workshops, Nonstoichiometric Compounds and Ceramic Interfaces and was the Director of NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Structural Defects.
Mohammad Asri Idris
Muhammad Asri Idris is currently a Senior Lecturer at School of Materials Engineering, University of Malaysia Perlis. He received his Bachelor's degree (2001) and Master's degree (2003) in Materials Science and Engineering from Ehime University, Japan. Then, he received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from The University of New South Wales in 2011 under the supervision of Prof. Janusz Nowotny and Prof. Sean Li. His current scientific interests are focused on materials for energy generation and storage including fuel cell, solar hydrogen and Li+ batteries.
Mihail Ionescu
Mihail is a senior researcher within the Centre for Accelerator Science at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation since 2004. His research interests are in the application of accelerator-based nuclear techniques for characterization and modification of materials. He has a BSc (Hons) and MSc in Physics of Materials, and a PhD in Materials/Physics from the University of Wollongong. Has 17 years research experience in ion beam analysis, ion beam instrumentation, accelerator physics, thin film deposition techniques and characterizations of thin films, magnetic properties and electron transport properties of materials, superconductors, optical properties, and hard condensed matter physics.
Mohd Zainizan Sahdan
Mohd Zainizan Sahdan is the head of Microelectronic and Nanotechnology Research Center (MiNT-SRC) and a senior lecturer at Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia. He received his PhD in Nanomaterials Processing from Universiti Teknologi MARA Malaysia in collaboration with Nagoya Institute of Technology Japan. He is actively doing research in oxide semiconductor thin films for solar cells, bio-sensors and photocatalyst.
Kamaruzzaman Sopian
Professor Dato' Dr Kamaruzzaman Sopian received his PhD at University of Miami, in 1997. He is presently the Professor of Renewable Energy in the Department of Mechanical and Material Engineering, at the National University of Malaysia and currently is the Director of the Solar Energy Research Institute in the same university. His main contributions are in solar radiation modeling and resource assessment, advanced solar photovoltaic systems (grid-connected photovoltaic, solar powered regenerative fuel cell, solar hydrogen production, thin film silicon solar cell) and advanced solar thermal systems (solar cooling, solar heat pump, solar assisted drying, combined photovoltaic thermal or hybrid collector).
Mohd Asri Mat Teridi
Mohd Asri Mat Teridi received his PhD in 2012 at Loughborough University on cathodic sensitisation solar cells. He joined the Solar Energy Research Institute, National University of Malaysia as Junior Research Fellow/Lecturer in 2007. After he received his PhD, he has been appointed as Research Fellow/Senior Lecturer in 2013 at the same university. Recent research activity is focused on nanostructure metal oxide for solar hydrogen water splitting, perovskite solar cell, polymer solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells.

Key learning points
• The lattice of nonstoichiometric oxides, such as TiO2, includes point defects, which are thermodynamically reversible.
• The defects in nonstoichiometric oxides are mainly formed at the surface as a result of chemical reactions with the gas phase involving oxygen.
• Defect disorder of TiO2 may be represented in terms of defect diagrams plotting the concentrations of both ionic and electronic defects as a function of oxygen activity as well as temperature.
• Defect diagrams may be applied for the selection of optimal processing conditions of TiO2 with desired properties.
• The research strategy in the development of TiO2-based photosensitive oxide semiconductors, such as photocatalysts and photoelectrodes with maximized performance, is based on optimization of the key performance-related properties by defect engineering.

1. Introduction
Titanium dioxide, TiO2, is a promising oxide material that can be applied in the conversion of solar energy into chemical energy through water oxidation.1 The commonly used device for total water oxidation is a photoelectrochemical cell (PEC) that allows water splitting into its elemental components, hydrogen and oxygen.
The discovery of water splitting using TiO2-based photoanodes2 resulted in intensive research aiming at processing the TiO2-based systems with maximized performance in solar energy conversion. To date, the main strategy in the search for high-performance photo-electrodes is based on the incorporation of a range of ions into the TiO2 lattice resulting in the modification of its semiconducting properties. Alternative approaches include application of nanotechnology and the formation of composites.3–12 These studies aim at identification of the key performance-related properties (KPPs) and derivation of a general theory on the effect of the KPPs on the performance. Such theory may help to maximize the PEC performance in a controlled manner. The main hurdles in derivation of such theory include (i) lack of reproducibility of the reported experimental data, and (ii) poor understanding of the effect of surface properties on the performance.
It has been documented that the properties of TiO2 are closely related to defect disorder,13 rather than structure and composition. Therefore, defect engineering seems to be the most promising approach in processing of TiO2 with enhanced performance in solar energy conversion and alternative applications.
There have been accumulations of data indicating that a range of properties of oxide materials are determined by point defects, such as electrical conductivity, thermoelectric power and diffusion kinetics.14 It has been shown that the reactivity of oxides, such as TiO2, is determined by point defects.15 It has been documented that oxygen vacancies are the active surface sites for water dissociation on rutile TiO2(110).16 Recently, Kong et al.17 claimed that the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 nano-crystals may be enhanced by tuning the relative bulk-to-surface concentration ratio of defects. While this work did not specify the defects responsible for the performance, the authors claimed that an increased surface-to-bulk concentration ratio of the defects results in an enhanced charge separation and improved photocatalytic activity.
Extensive overview papers on the properties of TiO2 were reported by Diebold18 and Henderson.19 These reports confirm the importance of defects in the reactivity of TiO2 and the related applied aspects. Analysis of these reports indicates, however, that the physical meaning of the structural defects at the surface is entirely different than that in the bulk phase. The effect of the surface on properties of oxides was considered by Henderson19 mainly in terms of extrinsic macro-defects, such as islets of alternative oxide phases, for example WO3, SnO2 and Fe2O3 as well as clusters of noble metals.
Wendt et al.20 proposed that surface reactivity of reduced TiO2(110) with oxygen, and the related charge transfer, is determined by titanium interstitials, rather than oxygen vacancies. This finding suggests that the mobility of titanium interstitials is larger than that of oxygen vacancies.
Setvín et al.21 has shown that molecular oxygen may react with oxygen vacancy leading to the formation of singly ionized (O2−) or doubly ionized species (O22−) on the anatase phase of TiO2(101). According to Bielański and Haber,22 the stability of this species at the surface is weak (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  The stability of different oxygen species in the gas phase, in the crystal field and at the surface.22 
This species, which are considered by Setvín et al.21 as interstitial oxygen species, are formed in the electric field induced by the tip of scanning tunneling microscope. This effect indicates that local imposition of an electric field can be used to create defects that are not stable.21
Wang et al.23 claim that titanium-rich defects, which are the most reactive with water and oxygen, are trivalent titanium ions.
It is important to note that defect disorder of the surface layer, which has been reported so far, include both oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials.18,21,23 These defects are charged positively. The related defect disorder is in conflict with the lattice charge neutrality, which requires that defects are internally compensated. Consequently, stable defect disorder requires that defect disorder involves both positively and negatively charged defects. The apparent conflict has been explained by introduction of negatively charged titanium vacancies TiO2,24 which are formed along oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials. Titanium vacancies exhibit an extremely slow diffusion rate and have been commonly considered as extrinsic defects.
The objective of the present work is to consider the progress of research on defect chemistry of TiO2 and the effect of oxygen activity and temperature on defect disorder and defect-related properties, such as semiconducting properties. While the present work concentrates on bulk properties, it is shown that the bulk phase and the surface layer are well-defined when equilibrated with the gas phase of controlled oxygen activity and subsequently cooled down in a controlled fashion. It is shown that defect chemistry may be used in processing TiO2-based semiconductors with controlled properties using defect engineering. The present work considers application of TiO2 in solar-to-chemical energy conversion systems, such as photoelectrodes of photoelectrochemical cell (PEC). It appears that the performance-related properties of TiO2 are closely related to defect disorder. Therefore, defect chemistry may be used in the formation of TiO2-based photo-electrochemical cells for the generation of solar hydrogen fuel with enhanced performance. While both rutile and anatase are promising materials for solar energy conversion, the present work is limited to the rutile phase of TiO2 mainly because this phase is thermodynamically stable at elevated temperatures. Therefore, this phase is suitable for considering defect reactions in terms of defect equilibria. This work discusses application of defect engineering in processing TiO2 with controlled properties that are needed for enhanced performance of TiO2 in solar energy conversion.
The present work commences with definition of basic terms concerning point defects in nonstoichiometric compounds in general and defect chemistry of TiO2 in particular. It is shown that the mass action law can be applied to defects in the TiO2 lattice. The related functions may be used to establish a relationship between the concentration of electrons and oxygen activity. These relationships, which are valid for systems in the gas/solid equilibrium, may be used to derive defect disorder diagrams plotting the concentration of both ionic and electronic defects as a function of oxygen activity and temperature. Equilibrium has been considered in terms of the equilibration kinetics of all defects. The solar-to-chemical energy conversion is considered for both total and partial water oxidation leading to the generation of solar hydrogen fuel and water purification, respectively. The related performance is discussed in terms of the key performance-related properties (KPPs).
The accumulation of an enormous amount of reports on TiO2 promotes the following questions:
• What is the reason that TiO2 is considered a promising material for solar-to-chemical energy conversion?
• Why the experimental data reported for TiO2 are not reproducible?
• What is the best approach in the search for TiO2-based semiconductors with maximized performance?
First, TiO2 exhibits an exceptionally high chemical stability while immersed in water. Therefore, its performance is stable over a prolonged period of time. Moreover, TiO2 exhibits very high reactivity and photoreactivity with water leading to its oxidation. An additional advantage of TiO2 is an exceptional ability to change its semiconducting properties and the associated reactivity with water and its decomposition products, oxygen and hydrogen. Recent studies indicate that the reactivity and photoreactivity of TiO2 with water can be modified in a controlled manner using defect engineering.13
2. Definition of terms
This section provides a definition of the basic terms used in this work, such as defect disorder, segregation, Fermi level, light-induced reactivity and electrical conductivity. This section also considers a range of defect-related properties.
Defect disorder
All crystalline solids are defected. The most common defects in the lattice of nonstoichiometric compounds are point defects that have atomic size. The point defects in nonstoichiometric oxides mainly include oxygen vacancies, cation vacancies and cation interstitials, which are formed as a result of interactions between the oxide lattice and gaseous oxygen. These defects, which lead to the formation of either donor- or acceptor-type centres within the band gap, can be ionized leading to the generation of electronic defects (quasi-free electrons and electron holes). Interactions between the defects, which are substantial at high concentrations, result in the formation of larger defect aggregates.25 The spatial distribution of the defects and the associated interactions is considered as defect disorder.
Segregation
Point defects in the bulk phase of periodic crystals are randomly distributed. However, the excess of surface energy results in adsorption and segregation leading to reduction of the surface energy as it is schematically represented in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of adsorption and segregation and associated change of surface energy. 
The phenomenon of segregation may also be considered as adsorption where the adsorbed species are derived from the solid phase. The driving forces of segregation include (i) the strain energy related to the size of specific lattice species and (ii) the electrostatic interactions between the surface charge and the charge of specific defect. The key term related to segregation is the enthalpy of segregation, ΔHseg, that can be determined using a regular solution approximation:26 (1)where c denotes concentration, ΔHseg is the enthalpy term and subscripts s and b are related to the surface and the bulk phase, respectively. The enthalpy term involves the components related to strain energy, electrostatic energy and surface energy.26
Fermi level and work function
The Fermi level, EF, which is the parameter of the Fermi–Dirac statistics of electrons, may also be considered as the chemical potential of electrons that may be expressed as: μn = μ0 + RTlnn(2)where μ0 is the chemical potential of electrons in standard conditions and n is the concentration of electrons. Work function is the amount of energy required for removal of an electron from the Fermi level at the surface to the level outside the surface where the electron is free of an electric field. Both Fermi level, EF, and work function, Φ, are defined in Fig. 3 showing the band model of an n-type semiconductor involving a negatively charged surface layer that is compensated by positive space charge layer (represented by upwards band bending).
 Fig. 3  Schematic representation of an n-type semiconductor in terms of the flat band model (left) and involving a negatively charged surface layer (right), where EC and EV denote the conduction band and valence band, EF is the Fermi level, Φ is work function, which is referenced to the level where E = 0, χ is external work function, ΔΦs is the work function component related to the surface charge, and εV is the internal work function. 
As seen, the Fermi level in the bulk is generally considered relative to either conduction or valence bands. However, the Fermi level at the surface is determined by work function, which involves the following components:
• The component related to external work function, χ, that is determined by the structure of the outermost surface layer,
• The component related to the surface charge, Φs,
• The internal work function, εv.
Imposition of a surface charge leads to a change of both work function and the Fermi level at the surface as it is represented in Fig. 3.
Fermi level, which is related to the chemical potential of electrons, is the key collective quantity of solids. The position of the Fermi level has a profound influence on the reactivity of solids with adsorbed molecules, and the related charge transfer. Therefore, the reactivity of semiconducting solids may be modified by a change of the Fermi level. This can be achieved by incorporation of either donor- or acceptor-type ions. The effect of the position of the Fermi level on the reactivity of anodic sites with water and cathodic sites with protons is represented in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the effect of oxygen activity as well as donors and acceptors on the Fermi level and the associated charge transfer. 
Light-induced reactivity
Light-induced ionization results in a change in the concentration of electronic charge carriers within the valence and conduction bands. Since semiconductors under light are no longer in thermal equilibrium, the meaning of the Fermi level becomes ambiguous. Instead, the electronic structure may be considered in terms of two quasi-Fermi level components, which for electrons and electron holes may be represented by the following respective relations: (3) (4)where EC and EV denote the energy of the edges of the conduction and valence bands, respectively, n and p denote the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively, n0 and p0 denote the equilibrium concentrations of electrons and electron holes, respectively, Δn and Δp denote the light-induced changes of the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively, and Nn and Np denote the density of states in conduction and valence bands, respectively, k is the Boltzmann constant and T is the absolute temperature. The light-induced split of the Fermi level into the two quasi-Fermi levels is shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Schematic representation of n-type semiconductor showing the effect of light-induced ionisation on the split of the Fermi level into two quasi-Fermi levels related to electrons and electron holes. 
Electrical conductivity
Electrical conductivity is the product of both concentration and mobility terms. Since pure TiO2 is an amphoteric semiconductor,27 the charge transport must be considered in terms of both electronic charge carriers. Therefore, the electrical conductivity should be expressed as: σ = e(nμn + pμp)(5)where e is the elementary charge, μn and μp denote the mobility of electrons and holes, respectively. The above equation ignores the ionic conductivity component, which assumes substantial values only at elevated temperatures
Electrical conductivity is the most commonly applied defect-related property in studies of oxide semiconductors, in monitoring its changes during isothermal oxidation and reduction. It is frequently assumed that the mobility terms during the isothermal change of the electrical conductivity as a function of oxygen activity remain constant. Consequently, the associated changes in the electrical conductivity are determined by the change in the concentration term.
3. Defect chemistry of TiO2
3.1. Defect equilibria
For a long time defect disorder of TiO2 has been considered in terms of oxygen vacancies. While oxygen vacancies are the predominant defect species, it appears that the effect of minor-type defects, such as titanium interstitials also have a profound influence on properties and cannot be ignored. The first defect disorder, representing the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of both oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials, has been derived by Kofstad.14
The defect disorder of TiO2 involving oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials explains only the properties of specimens contaminated with acceptor-type impurities. This approach, however, does not explain the properties of high purity materials.
The studies of Bak et al.13 and Nowotny et al.24,28,29 have shown that the intrinsic defect disorder of TiO2 includes titanium vacancies as well. It has been documented that properties of pure TiO2 may only be explained assuming the presence of three types of ionic defects (oxygen vacancies, titanium interstitials and titanium vacancies) and both types of electronic charge carriers.
The commonly used notation of defects in nonstoichiometric compounds is the notation proposed by Kröger and Vink,30 which is shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Ionic and electronic defects in TiO2 according to the Kröger–Vink30 notations




Description
Kröger–Vink notation




Ti4+ ion in the titanium lattice site





Ti3+ ion in the titanium lattice site (quasi-free electron)
e′


Titanium vacancy





Ti3+ in the interstitial site





Ti4+ in the interstitial site





O2− ion in the oxygen lattice site





Oxygen vacancy





OO− ion in oxygen lattice site (quasi-free hole)
h˙




The Kröger–Vink notation, which is a relative notation, shows only the electric charge of defects compared to the lattice that is defect free. Therefore, this notation is convenient to simply express the lattice charge neutrality condition.

Fig. 6–8 represent schematically the formation of point defects during the interaction of the TiO2 surface with oxygen and the associated defect reaction.
 Fig. 6  Representation of the formation of doubly ionized oxygen vacancy (large and small circles represent lattice oxygen and titanium ions, respectively, black circles denote electrons, and the square represents an empty lattice site). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.) 
 Fig. 7  Representation of the formation of titanium interstitial (notations are the same as in Fig. 6). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.) 
 Fig. 8  Representation of the formation of fully ionized titanium vacancy (the circles denote electron holes – the remaining symbols are the same as in Fig. 6). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.) 
As seen in Fig. 6, removal of an oxygen ion from the surface leads to the formation of oxygen vacancy, which at elevated temperatures is fully ionized. Fig. 7 represents removal of two lattice oxygen ions leading to the formation of either a tetra- or tri-ionized titanium interstitial.
The formation of oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials is favoured in reducing conditions. Alternatively, titanium interstitials may also be generated as a result of a jump of a titanium ion from its lattice site into an interstitial site leading to the creation of Frenkel-type defects.

Fig. 8 represents oxygen adsorption building-up new oxide layer involving titanium vacancies.
As seen, the titanium vacancies are formed in oxidising conditions when oxygen is adsorbed and is involved in building-up new lattice elements.
At elevated temperatures, the reactions between the oxide lattice and oxygen may be represented by defect equilibria, which are shown in Table 2 along with the related equilibrium constants and the associated thermodynamic data.
Table 2 Basic defect equilibria in TiO2 (n and p denote the concentration of electrons and electron holes, respectively)13




 
Defect reaction
Equilibrium constant
ΔH0 [kJ mol−1]
ΔS0 [J (mol K)−1]




1






493.1
106.5


2






879.2
190.8


3






1025.8
238.3


4






354.5
−202.1


5
nil ⇔ e′ + h˙

K

i
 = np
222.1
44.6









Oxygen activity and the concentration of electrons are involved as parameters in the reactions (1)–(4) in Table 2. The relationship between the concentration of both electrons and holes is described by the intrinsic electronic equilibrium expressed by eqn (5) in Table 2. Therefore, the data in Table 2 may be used in derivation of the relationship between the concentration of electronic charge carriers and oxygen activity.
The following sections consider the established defect equilibria in terms of the effect of oxygen activity and temperature on the concentration of both ionic and electronic defects.
3.2. Effect of oxygen on defect disorder
The key relationship of any defect disorder is the expression for charge neutrality. For TiO2 and its solid solutions with donors and acceptors, charge neutrality is represented in the following form: (6)where [D˙] and [A′] denote the concentrations of singly ionised extrinsic donors and acceptors, respectively. For pure TiO2 the relation (6) may be expressed in the following form: (7) The combination of condition (6) with equilibrium constants shown in Table 213 results in the relationship between the concentration of electronic charge carriers and oxygen activity: 4K4Ki−4Pn8 + n5 − ([D˙] − [A′])n4 − Kin3 − 2K1P−1/2n2 − 3K2P−1n − 4K3P−1 = 0(8)where:P = p(O2)The constants K1, K2, K3, K4 and Ki are defined in Table 2. Eqn (8) may be used for derivation of the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of all defects in pure TiO2. The defect disorder of pure TiO2 at 1073 K is shown in the upper part of Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Defect disorder diagram representing the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of ionic and electronic defects for pure TiO2 at 1073 K. 
As seen, the diagram in Fig. 9 represents the isothermal effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of all ionic defects and the resulting concentration of electronic defects. The intersection of the dependences associated with the concentration of electrons and electron holes demarcates the oxygen activity that is related to the n–p transition point. As seen, TiO2 equilibrated at 1073 K in reducing conditions, at p(O2) < 102 Pa, is an n-type semiconductor. However, imposition of oxygen activity at p(O2) > 102 Pa results in the transition to a p-type semiconductor.
The defect concentrations represented in the diagram in Fig. 9 are reflective of the charge neutrality condition expressed by eqn (6). Yet, at higher oxygen activity, in the range 102 Pa < p(O2) < 106 Pa, when the minority defects can be ignored, the charge neutrality may also be expressed in a simple form: (9) It is important to note that, the charge neutrality for reduced and strongly reduced TiO2 must be considered in terms of the condition expressed by eqn (6) involving all defects.
The defect reactions shown in Table 2 may be used in the simplified determination of the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of the defects within the specific regimes, which are shown in Table 3. The resulting oxygen activity exponents related to the concentration of electrons and electron holes could be applied in the verification of specific defect disorder models by using measurements of the electrical conductivity (shown in the lower part of Fig. 9).
Table 3 Effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of both electronic and ionic defects in pure TiO2




Regime
Strongly reducing
Reducing
Oxidizing


Charge neutrality











Defects
Function





n

(2K1)1/3p(O2)−1/6









p






































































The defect disorder represented by eqn (8) may be used to predict the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of electrons and holes and the related chemical potential of electrons, which is expressed by eqn (2). The effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of electronic and ionic defects may also be determined from Table 3.
The oxygen activity dependence of the chemical potential of electrons within the band gap of pure TiO2 is shown in Fig. 10.13
 Fig. 10  Effect of oxygen activity on the Fermi level within the band gap of pure TiO2 at 1273 K. 
As seen, the increase of oxygen activity in the range 10−12–105 Pa at 1273 K results in a change of the Fermi level by 1.1 eV leading to the transition of n-type into a p-type semiconductor. More extensive change of the Fermi level may be achieved by the incorporation of donor- and acceptor-type extrinsic defects.
The defect disorder expressed by eqn (8), which is derived from the full charge neutrality expressed by eqn (6), is complex. Taking into account that in most cases the reported experimental data are related to TiO2 specimens for which the concentration of titanium vacancies is quenched, the concentration of both the extrinsic defects and titanium vacancies, may be considered jointly in terms of the following expression: (10)where the term A is the effective concentration of acceptors. Then the charge neutrality (6) assumes the following form: (11) In this case eqn (8) assumes the following form: n5 + An4 − Kin3 − 2K1p(O2)−1/2n2 − 3K2p(O2)−1n − 4K3p(O2)−1 = 0(12)Eqn (12) may be applied for derivation of defect disorder diagrams when the concentration of titanium vacancies is independent of oxygen activity. This is the case when the specimens are not annealed for a prolonged period of time.24
3.3. Effect of temperature on defect disorder

Eqn (8) may be used for derivation of the effect of temperature on the concentration of defects. Solid lines in Fig. 11 represent the effect of temperature on the concentration of electrons and electron holes as well as the predominant ionic defects at elevated temperatures corresponding to the gas/solid equilibrium at p(O2) = 10−10 Pa in the range 1073–1273 K.
 Fig. 11  The effect of temperature on the predominant ionic defects in reduced TiO2, where n and p denote the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively (dotted lines are derived by extrapolation of the equilibrium lines in the range 1073–1273 K). 
The linear dependencies for the concentration of electronic charge carriers in Fig. 11 have been extrapolated from 1073 K to room temperature in order to see the effect of cooling on the n/p concentration ratio. While the gas/solid equilibrium cannot be achieved in the bulk phase during fast cooling, the lines related to the concentration terms n and p indicate that cooling results in the conversion of n-type at high temperatures into a p-type semiconductor at lower temperatures. The conversion temperature in this case may be applicable only for the surface layer that can be considered as equilibrated. This effect indicates that cooling results in the conversion of even strongly reduced TiO2 from n-type at high temperatures to p-type at lower temperatures.
3.4. Effect of oxygen activity on band gap
The commonly applied procedure to reduce the band gap of oxide semiconductors, including TiO2, is by incorporation of aliovalent ions, such as chromium,31 molibdenum31 and niobium.32 Recent studies have shown that the band gap of TiO2 may also be reduced by a change of oxygen activity and the associated defect disorder (Fig. 12).33
 Fig. 12  Effect of oxygen activity on the band gap of pure TiO2.33 
As seen, imposition of a strongly reducing environment during processing results in reduction of the optical band gap of TiO2 to the level of 2.9 eV or 2.4 eV for direct and indirect transitions, respectively. This effect seems to be related to structural relaxations that are induced by oxygen vacancies and the associated formation of larger defect aggregates.25
3.5. Ionization degree of defects
The intrinsic defects shown in Table 2 are fully ionized. This is the case at elevated temperatures corresponding to the equilibrium state. However, at moderate temperatures the ionization degree of defects may vary as it is represented in Fig. 13.34
 Fig. 13  The energy levels of intrinsic defects of different ionization degree34 as well as of niobium35 in TiO2. 
As seen, both titanium interstitials and oxygen vacancies form donor-type centers, while titanium vacancies exhibit acceptor-type properties. Their activation energy increases with the degree of ionization. As seen in Fig. 10, annealing of TiO2 in reducing conditions at 1273 K shifts the Fermi level towards the upper part of the band gap. This effect should be considered in terms of both the concentration and ionization terms. On the other hand, annealing in oxidizing conditions, resulting in the increase in the concentration of acceptors and the decrease in the concentration of donors, leads to lowering the Fermi level towards the lower part of the band gap. In the latter case TiO2 becomes a p-type semiconductor.
As also seen, ionization of niobium ions located in titanium sites induces a strong donor-type properties as their activation energy is very low.
4. Approaches in derivation defect disorders
A range of approaches has been made in the determination of the equilibrium constants in Table 2. The constant Ki was determined by iterative adjustment of both Ki and A until the calculated defect diagram, using eqn (12), fitted the experimental data. Then the parameter A is expected to be consistent with the concentration of both donor- and acceptor-type impurities.
The equilibrium constant K1 was determined from nonstoichiometry data37–43 as a function of oxygen activity assuming that only oxygen vacancies are responsible for the deviation from stoichiometry. The equilibrium constant K4 was determined under the assumption that the effective concentration of acceptors in pure TiO2 is: (13) Then eqn (10) and (12) were used for the calculation of K4.
5. Transport kinetics of defects in TiO2
Defect disorder is reflective of materials properties only when the studied specimen is in the gas/solid equilibrium. This is the case when the concentrations of all lattice species, including point defects, correspond to equilibrium.
At this stage it is essential to note that the mobility of different defects differ substantially. Electronic defects are very fast, even at room temperature. However, the mobility of titanium vacancies is much slower than that of oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials.24,29 The electrical conductivity changes as a function of time during isothermal oxidation of TiO2 at 75 kPa at 1323 K, shown in Fig. 14, and are reflective of equilibration kinetics involving both fast defects (the time scale up to 3 h) and slow defects (the time scale up to 2000 h).24Fig. 14 also shows the associated changes of thermoelectric power, S. Oxidation within the fast regime results in a change of S from −315 μV K−1 to −250 μV K−1. As seen from the insert in Fig. 14, oxidation within the slow kinetics regime leads to the decrease of the negative value of S to −150 μV K−1.
 Fig. 14  Changes of electrical conductivity associated with the isothermal oxidation of pure polycrystalline TiO2 at 1323 K during equilibration associated with fast regime (scale 0–3 h) and the slow regime (scale 0–2000 h) as well as the related changes of thermoelectric power, S.29 (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, T. Bak, T. Burg, Electrical Properties of Polycrystalline TiO2. Prolonged Oxidation, Int. J. Ionics, 2007, 13, 79, Copyright Springer 2007.) 
The equilibration time of the fast defects (oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials) at 1323 K is limited to 10–20 min, however, the equilibrium of the electrical conductivity determined by slow defects (titanium vacancies) may be reached after approximately 1000 h. The difference between the equilibration times of fast and slow defects, which is substantial, is reflective of the difference between the mobility terms of these defects. Owing to the low mobility of titanium vacancies in the rutile structure, these defects have been frequently considered as acceptor-type impurities.
6. Defect engineering
The derived defect diagrams and the equilibration kinetics data for specific defects may be used for selection of appropriate processing conditions that are needed for imposition of desired properties, using defect engineering. In other words, the concept of defect engineering is based on imposition of specific defect disorder, and the related semiconducting properties, using the following processing procedures:
• Modification of oxygen activity
• Incorporation of aliovalent ions
• Inducing segregation
• Cooling/heating
Modification of oxygen activity
Defect disorder and the related semiconducting properties are profoundly influenced by oxygen activity. However, the effect of oxygen activity on properties depends on whether the system is in a kinetic regime or in thermodynamic equilibrium:
– Kinetics Regime. In most cases the reported data on defect-related properties correspond to a quasi-equilibrium state with respect to fast defects (oxygen vacancies and titanium interstitials), while the concentration of slow defects (titanium vacancies) remains quasi-quenched. The related properties are determined by the applied processing procedure rather than specific materials properties.
– Thermodynamic Equilibrium. This regime corresponds to the gas/solid equilibrium with respect to all defects. Then the related experimental data are reflective of the specific materials properties.
Incorporation of aliovalent ions
The incorporation of foreign ions, leading to the formation of donors and acceptors, results in a substantial change of defect disorder. It is important to note, however, that the incorporation mechanism of the aliovalent ions and the resulting defect disorder depend on oxygen activity.
Defect disorder may be modified in a controlled manner by imposition of either variable oxygen activity or incorporation of aliovalent ions leading to the formation of donors and acceptors. These two approaches result in a change of defect disorder and defect-related properties in the bulk phase. The combined effect of oxygen activity and aliovalent ions (donors and acceptors) is represented in Fig. 15.
 Fig. 15  Combined effect of oxygen activity and aliovalent extrinsic ions on the concentration of electrons. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
As seen, the effect of the extrinsic defects (donors and acceptors) on the concentration of electrons depends on the oxygen activity in the oxide lattice. The observed independence of the concentration of electrons on the amount of donors at low oxygen activity indicates that the effect of the intrinsic defects in this case is the predominant one. Also the effect of extrinsic acceptors, compensated by the intrinsic donors, is relatively weak. On the other hand, the effect of donors is much stronger at high oxygen activity when the concentration of intrinsic donors is lower. As also seen, the much stronger effect of acceptors in this case is the results of an imposition of both intrinsic and extrinsic defects.
Segregation
The properties of interfaces, such as external surfaces and grain boundaries, differ from that in the bulk phase as a result of segregation. The effect of segregation should be considered in terms of both extrinsic and intrinsic defects. Therefore, the phenomenon of segregation may be used as a technology in the modification of interface composition in a controlled manner.
Cooling/heating
Cooling and heating result in a change of the gas/solid equilibria. The resulting shifts in defect concentrations, as well as adsorption and chemisorption equilibria, lead to changes in defect disorder and the structure of the interface layer in terms of the surface charge and the related space charge. Therefore, reproducible changes may be achieved only when cooling and heating take place in the gas phase of controlled oxygen activity. However cooling results in a decrease in the mobility of all lattice species. Therefore, gas/solid equilibrium during cooling may be achieved only within a thin surface layer. Its thickness is dependent on the cooling rate.
Concept of defect engineering in generation of solar hydrogen fuel
The concept of defect engineering in processing the photoelectrodes for hydrogen generation using PEC with enhanced performance, and the use of hydrogen fuel for cars powered by electricity generated by fuel cell, is represented schematically in Fig. 16 in the form of a recycling system.
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the concept of defect engineering for processing TiO2-based semiconductors used for solar hydrogen generation by water photolysis. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
In this representation water reacts with TiO2 leading to the formation of hydrogen and oxygen. The light-induced reactivity of TiO2 may be modified by a change of defect disorder lowering EF and resulting in an enhanced affinity of TiO2 to electrons. The fuel cell is used for conversion the hydrogen fuel into electricity powering the vehicle. The final product of the process is water that is a harmless exhaust and also the initial starting product, thus completing the renewable cycle. Consequently, the system is environmentally friendly within the stages of hydrogen generation (from water) and combustion leading ultimately to the formation of water.
7. Verification of theoretical model
The present section aims at the verification of the theoretical model – expressed by eqn (8) – for pure TiO2. For the sake of simplicity the consideration is based on the assumption that the concentration of external donors and acceptors, expressed by [D*] and [A′], respectively, is zero.

Fig. 17 represents the experimental data on the effect of isothermal changes of oxygen activity on the electrical conductivity at 1123 K according to the data reported by Balachandran and Eror.36
 Fig. 17  Lower part shows the experimental data of isothermal changes of the electrical conductivity of pure TiO2 at 1123 K as a function of oxygen activity according to Balachandran and Eror36 (data points) along the theoretical line obtained by best fitting in respect to the mobility terms and the concentration of titanium vacancies. The upper part represents the associated concentration of both electrons and holes as a function of oxygen activity determined at two concentrations of titanium vacancies: the equilibrium concentration (thick line) and the concentration that is consistent with the experimental position of the n–p transition point. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
As seen, the concentration of titanium vacancies in equilibrium (1.2 × 10−4) is much larger than that in the studied specimen (6 × 10−5). The difference between the two indicates that the concentration of titanium vacancies in the case of commonly studied specimens can be set at an arbitrary level that is associated with specific processing conditions.
8. Reactivity
The reactivity of oxide semiconductors with adsorbed molecules, and the related charge transfer, is determined by the Fermi level position and the electron affinity or ionization potential of the molecules. The associated energy diagrams are represented schematically in Fig. 18 and 19.
 Fig. 18  Schematic representation of the charge transfer between n-type semiconductor and acceptor-type molecule, where μA is the electron affinity of the acceptor-type adsorbed molecule. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
 Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the charge transfer between p-type semiconductor and donor-type molecule, where μD is the ionization potential of the donor-type adsorbed molecule. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
The related activation energy is determined by the Fermi level position and ionization potential for the donor and acceptor, respectively. In the case of water oxidation, the reactivity of a semiconductor in the absence of the surface charge is determined by the Fermi level position.
The picture is entirely different when the reacting molecule is adsorbed at the surface site associated with specific point defects. Then the charge transfer is affected by the local electric field of these defects as it is shown in Fig. 20 and 21, representing the effect of titanium vacancies on the charge transfer during total and partial water oxidation.
 Fig. 20  Schematic representation of the reaction between the TiO2 surface and adsorbed water molecule leading to the formation of an active complex and its subsequent decomposition into gaseous oxygen and protons.44 (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, et al., TiO2 Surface Active Sites for Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18492–18495, Copyright American Chemical Society, 2006.) 
 Fig. 21  Schematic representation of the reaction between the TiO2 surface and water leading to the formation of hydroxyl radicals and protons.45 (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., Photocatalytic Water Disinfection on Oxide Semiconductors. 1. Basic Concepts of TiO2 Photocatalysis, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2011, 111, 4–15, Copyright Maney Publishing, 2011.) 
As seen, the titanium vacancy reacts with water molecule and forms an active complex, which is subsequently decomposed into oxygen and protons. The formation of an intermediate active complex allows for lowering the activation energy of the process. Similar mechanism may be considered for partial water oxidation, which is represented in Fig. 21.
In the case shown in Fig. 21, the products of water oxidation (partial) include hydroxyl radicals and protons.
9. Key performance-related properties
The solar-to-chemical energy conversion efficiency (ECE) of the PECs and photocatalysts is determined by several performance-related properties (KPPs).49 Therefore, maximized performance may be achieved when all KPPs are optimized.
The typical KPPs include electronic structure, surface properties and charge transport.
Electronic structure
The light-induced reactivity of oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2, is closely related to the electronic structure, mainly in terms of the band gap and the energy level of dopants.

Band gap. 
The key parameter of the electronic structure is the band gap. Light is absorbed by a semiconductor when the photon energy is equal or larger than the band gap. The theoretical minimal photon energy required for water splitting is 1.23 eV. However, taking into account the energy losses, the absorbed energy needed for total water oxidation is approximately 2 eV.
The band gap of commercial TiO2, which is 3 eV, allows utilisation of only a tiny fraction of the solar spectrum. However, the band gap may be reduced by doping with aliovalent ions31,32,49–51 and imposition of lower oxygen activity.33


Position of band edges. 
Spontaneous charge transfer between the photoelectrodes and the electrolyte requires that (i) the bottom of the conduction band, EC, is above the energy of the electrochemical couple, (H+/H2), and (ii) the energy of the top of the valence band, EV, is below the energy level of the electrochemical couple, (O2/H2O). Therefore, the charge transfer may be modified by shifting the positions of EC and EV relative to the levels of both E(H+/H2) and E(O2/H2O).

Surface properties
Surface properties may be considered in terms of local active sites, which are limited to the size of individual lattice elements and collective properties, such as the Fermi level, which are reflective of the surface as a continuum.

Concentration of surface active sites. 
Titanium vacancies have been identified as surface active sites for water adsorption and the formation of active complexes leading to water splitting.50 Therefore, research aims to impose an optimised population of titanium vacancies needed to achieve maximised performance in water splitting.


Surface Fermi level. 
The Fermi level of the surface layer, and the related work function, are the key quantities that are associated with the affinity of the surface to the adsorbed molecules and the related charge transfer. The performance of photoanodes in water splitting, which involves removal of electrons from the water molecule, requires the Fermi level to be relatively low in order to facilitate the charge transfer.

Near-surface electric field
Light-induced charge carriers have a tendency to recombine leading to undesired energy losses. This can be limited when an electric field is imposed. The electric field, which is formed spontaneously at the solid/liquid interface at the contact between the photoelectrode and the electrolyte, is induced by the charge transfer at the interface leading to the formation of a space charge layer. This electric field may be modified by imposition of a chemically-induced electric field by segregation and diffusion.
Charge transport
Charge carriers, which are formed within the surface layer as a result of light-induced ionisation, may be involved in photoreaction after they are transported to the surface. Therefore, the transport of the electronic charge carriers must be maximised in order to achieve efficient performance.
10. Applied aspects
10.1. TiO2-based photo-electrochemical cell
TiO2 is a promising material for solar-to-chemical energy conversion. The concept of the photoelectrochemical cell allowing water oxidation, is represented in Fig. 22.
 Fig. 22  Schematic representation of photoelectrochemical cell for water oxidation. (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, et al., Titanium Dioxide for Solar Hydrogen, 1. Functional Properties, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2609–2629. Copyright Elsevier 2007.) 
Intensive studies aim at the construction of high-performance photo-electrochemical cell (PEC) for the production of solar hydrogen from water.1–4,46–48 Research is focused on the formation of a photoanode, which is based on TiO2 semiconductors. The research strategy involves identification of the key performance-related properties (KPPs) and their optimization in order to achieve maximized performance. It appears that the KPPs are closely related to defect disorder.49 Therefore, defect engineering may be applied in processing photoanodes with enhanced performance.
The PEC performance may be considered in terms of the reactions at the electrodes and the accompanied charge transfer:
(1) Light-induced ionization over the band gap leading to the formation of electron–hole pairs.
(2) Separation of the light-induced charge carriers in the electric field at the TiO2/liquid interface. Charge separation results in the transport of electron holes to the reaction sites at the solid/liquid interface and electrons move towards the bulk phase and ultimately to the cathode.
(3) Adsorption of water molecules at the photoanode. Adsorption of water molecule at the active site leads to the formation of an active complex that subsequently is decomposed into oxygen and protons.
(4) Desorption of gaseous oxygen from the photoanode.
(5) Transport of protons from photoanode to the cathode.
(6) Reduction of protons at the cathode leading to the formation of gaseous hydrogen.
Research aims at enhancing hydrogen production. This can be achieved through optimization of the KPPs and, consequently, maximization of the efficiency of solar-to-chemical energy conversion.
10.2. Photocatalysts for water disinfection
TiO2 is commonly applied as a photocatalyst for water purification using solar energy as the only driving force of the process.1 The concept of this process is based on partial water oxidation and the generation of active radicals, which have the capacity to oxidise toxic organic compounds and microbial cells in water. This idea is represented in Fig. 23.
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the reactivity of water with TiO2-based photocatalysts resulting in the formation of a range of radical species in water. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.) 
Studies aim at processing photocatalysts with maximum energy conversion efficiency towards partial water oxidation. This requires optimization of the KPPs, however, the specific performance-related properties must be related to partial water oxidation.
10.3. Doping
The most commonly applied processing procedure in the modification of the performance of compounds, including TiO2, is based on doping with aliovalent ions. Doping involves the incorporation of foreign ions into the basic oxide matrix. The doping procedure aimed at the formation of well-defined solid solutions, should address the following requirements:
(1) The temperature, the time and the gas phase composition of processing must be consistent with the mass transport requirement associated with the doping process.
(2) The best approach in the selection of the optimal processing conditions is the determination of the diffusion coefficients of the dopant in the oxide matrix as well as the chemical diffusion coefficient that is needed to remove the oxygen concentration gradients (in the case of oxides).
(3) It is important to realize that the doping process results in the modification of the surface layer in an entirely different way than is the case of the bulk phase. Specifically, the chemical composition of the surface layer and the bulk phase are totally different as a result of segregation. Therefore, correct assessment of the effect of the doping requires independent analysis using the tools reflective of bulk phase and surface layer. It is important to note that the effect of segregation on the surface composition of metal oxides is profoundly influenced by the composition of the gas phase, especially its oxygen activity.
(4) When the processing procedure is not adequate for the formation of solid solution, the process may lead to the establishement of a heterogeneous system. Its properties are determined by the phase composition and the properties of the phases involved.
10.4. Applied aspects of the n–p transition
The discovery of p-type TiO2 paves the way for a range of practical devices that are based on pure TiO2. The evidence of p-type TiO2 is represented in Fig. 9–11. As seen in Fig. 9, the n and p lines intersect at approximately p(O2) = 102 Pa. The intersection, corresponding to the n–p transition point, indicates that the TiO2 specimen equilibrated at 1073 K at an oxygen activity larger than 102 Pa exhibits p-type charge transport. A similar effect is observed in Fig. 10. As seen, the specimen equilibrated at 1273 K exhibits the n–p transition point at p(O2) of approximately 104 Pa. Fig. 11 represents the Arrhenius plot of the concentrations of electrons and holes in strongly reducing atmosphere. In this case the specimen at 1273 K is n-type, however, cooling below 515 K results in the n–p transition.
The strongest evidence of the conductivity type can be obtained through the measurements of thermoelectric power. The effect of prolonged annealing of pure TiO2 single crystal at 1123 K on thermoelectric power is shown in Fig. 24.
 Fig. 24  The effect of prolonged annealing of pure TiO2 single crystal at 1123 K. 
As seen in Fig. 24, TiO2 single crystal at 1123 K in oxygen exhibits positive value of thermoelectric power that corresponds to p-type regime. Prolonged annealing results in an increase of the positive value of the thermoelectric power. This effect is related to the formation of titanium vacancies, which are strong acceptor-type defects.
Pure TiO2 may be used for fabrication of n–p junctions, diodes, thin film transistors as well as photoanodes and photocathodes.52 Most importantly, the formation of the n–p junction is the critical step towards the development of solar cells based on oxide semiconductors, such as TiO2. Research aiming at the development of such devices requires, however, processing of pure TiO2 with enhanced concentration of highly mobile electronic charge carriers in order to lower their resistance below the level that is required to achieve high efficiency solar cells.
11. Problems to be addressed
While the modern surface sensitive tools may be used for examination of a wide range of properties, such as structure and chemical composition of the surface layer of solids, specific approaches are needed for the characterization of the surface properties of metal oxides.53 The main difficulty in the determination of surface properties of metal oxides concerns sensitivity of the surface composition to the applied experimental procedures. Therefore, the application of standardized procedures is needed for the determination of reproducible surface properties that can be compared. Another complication is the tendency of impurities to segregate to the surface.
The properties of metal oxides are well defined when in equilibrium with the gas phase. However, the experimental approaches for the determination of surface properties in equilibrium (at elevated temperatures) are rather complex. The most reliable path for processing metal oxides with well-defined surface layer is through equilibration of the oxide specimen with the gas phase of controlled oxygen activity and subsequent cooling in the gas phase of the same composition.
Recently Pagnan-Okimoto et al.54 and Gorai et al.55 reported a model for injection of oxygen interstitials from the surface layer into the bulk of the TiO2 (rutile) phase. The strong electric fields associated with the segregation-induced concentration gradients as well as the interruption of crystalline periodicity and the related rupture of crystals bonds may lead to the formation of a range of point defects and defect complexes that are not stable in the bulk phase. However, the claimed injection of oxygen interstitials into the bulk phase, which is inconsistent with the present knowledge of defect disorder of the bulk phase of TiO2, requires experimental verification.
12. Conclusions
The crystalline solids, especially the nonstoichiometric compounds, such as TiO2, contain a wide range of point defects. The present work considers defect disorder of TiO2 involving both intrinsic and extrinsic defects. It has been documented that the properties of oxide semiconductors, including TiO2, are closely related to the concentration of defects and their ionisation degree. Therefore, defect engineering may be applied in the modification of defect-related properties, such as electronic structure and diffusion, in a controlled manner.
It has been documented that defect engineering may be used for optimisation of KPPs, including band gap, Fermi level, concentration of surface active sites and charge transport. The concept of defect engineering is based on a controlled imposition of oxygen activity and the incorporation of aliovalent ions, including donors and acceptors. Since the defect-related properties are inter-dependent, the related approach requires the modification of all KPPs at the same time.
The defect disorder of TiO2 is considered in terms of three types of ionic defects and electronic defects. It is shown that the properties of defected oxides, such as TiO2, are well defined only when the concentration of all defects corresponds to equilibrium. It has been demonstrated that oxide semiconductors with desired properties may be processed by the modification of defect disorder. The derived defect diagram can be applied for processing the TiO2-based oxide semiconductors with controlled properties that are needed for specific applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge proofreading of this manuscript and helpful comments by Elias Mollah and Kazi Rahman.
References
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Photoinduced reactivity of titanium dioxide, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Photolysis-decomposition of water at the surface of an irradiated semiconductor, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Morikawa, R. Asahi, T. Ohwaki, K. Aoki and Y. Taga, Band-gap narrowing of titanium dioxide by nitrogen doping, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 40, L561 CAS .
I. S. Cho, Z. Chen, A. J. Forman, D. R. Kim, P. M. Rao, T. F. Jaramillo and X. Zheng, Branched TiO2 nanorods for photoelectrochemical hydrogen production, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4978–4984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Idris, Z. Jamal, S. Jamaludin, N. Nafarizal, A. Othman, M. Sahdan, M. Zakaria, M. Ionescu and J. Nowotny, Oxide semiconductors for solar to chemical energy conversion: nanotechnology approach, Ionics, 2014, 20, 581–592 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kawde, A. Vats, R. Shende and J. Puszynski, Synthesis of TiO2 nanotube arrays for hydrogen production from photo-assisted water splitting reaction, Nanotechnology, 2011, 1, 747–750 CAS .
S. K. Mohapatra, M. Misra, V. K. Mahajan and K. S. Raja, Design of a highly efficient photoelectrolytic cell for hydrogen generation by water splitting: application of TiO2−xCx nanotubes as a photoanode and Pt/TiO2 nanotubes as a cathode, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 8677–8685 CAS .
D. Eder, M. Motta and A. Windle, Iron-doped Pt–TiO2 nanotubes for photo-catalytic water splitting, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 055602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Lin, Y.-T. Lu, C.-H. Hsieh and S.-H. Chien, Surface modification of highly ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays for efficient photoelectrocatalytic water splitting, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 113102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li and J. Z. Zhang, Hydrogen generation from photoelectrochemical water splitting based on nanomaterials, Laser Photonics Rev., 2010, 4, 517–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Macak, M. Zlamal, J. Krysa and P. Schmuki, Self-organized TiO2 nanotube layers as highly efficient photocatalysts, Small, 2007, 3, 300–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, M. F. Hossain and T. Takahashi, Photoelectrochemical water splitting on highly smooth and ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays for hydrogen generation, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8528–8535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, N. J. Sucher and E. Wachsman, Effect of crystal imperfections on reactivity and photoreactivity of TiO2 (rutile) with oxygen, water, and bacteria, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738 CAS .

          P. Kofstad, Nonstoichiometry, diffusion, and electrical conductivity in binary metal oxides,  1972 Search PubMed .
L. Sheppard, J. Nowotny and T. Bak, Reactivity of TiO2 with water and oxygen: surface science perspective, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2007, 106, 49–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Schaub, P. Thostrup, N. Lopez, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Besenbacher, Oxygen vacancies as active sites for water dissociation on rutile TiO2(110), Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266104 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kong, Y. Li, X. Chen, T. Tian, P. Fang, F. Zheng and X. Zhao, Tuning the relative concentration ratio of bulk defects to surface defects in TiO2 nanocrystals leads to high photocatalytic efficiency, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16414–16417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Diebold, The surface science of titanium dioxide, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2003, 48, 53–229 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Henderson, A surface science perspective on photocatalysis, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 185–297 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wendt, P. T. Sprunger, E. Lira, G. K. H. Madsen, Z. Li, J. Ø. Hansen, J. Matthiesen, A. Blekinge-Rasmussen, E. Lægsgaard, B. Hammer and F. Besenbacher, The Role of Interstitial Sites in the Ti3d Defect State in the Band Gap of Titania, Science, 2008, 320, 1755–1759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Setvín, U. Aschauer, P. Scheiber, Y.-F. Li, W. Hou, M. Schmid, A. Selloni and U. Diebold, Reaction of O2 with Subsurface Oxygen Vacancies on TiO2 Anatase(101), Science, 2013, 341, 988–991 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bielański and J. Haber, Oxygen in Catalysis on Transition Metal Oxides, Catal. Rev., 1979, 19, 1–41 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Sun, S. Tan, H. Feng, Z. Cheng, J. Zhao, A. Zhao, B. Wang, Y. Luo, J. Yang and J. G. Hou, Role of point defects on the reactivity of reconstructed anatase titanium dioxide (001) surface, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2214 Search PubMed .
M. Nowotny, T. Bak and J. Nowotny, Electrical properties and defect chemistry of TiO2 single crystal. IV. Prolonged oxidation kinetics and chemical diffusion, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 16302–16308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. M. Stoneham, Theory of defect processes,  1980, vol. 33, pp. 34–42 Search PubMed .

          P. Wynblatt, R. McCune, J. Nowotny and L. Dufour, Surface and near-surface chemistry of oxide materials, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1988, pp. 247–279 Search PubMed .
K. Singh, J. Nowotny and V. Thangadurai, Amphoteric oxide semiconductors for energy conversion devices: a tutorial review, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 1961–1972 RSC .
J. Nowotny, Titanium dioxide-based semiconductors for solar-driven environmentally friendly applications: impact of point defects on performance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 565–572 CAS .
J. Nowotny, T. Bak and T. Burg, Electrical properties of polycrystalline TiO2. Prolonged oxidation kinetics, Ionics, 2007, 13, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .

          F. A. Kröger, The chemistry of imperfect crystals, North-Holland, Amsterdam,  1973 Search PubMed .
K. Wilke and H. D. Breuer, The influence of transition metal doping on the physical and photocatalytic properties of titania, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1999, 121, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, X. Zhang, C. Wang, P. Sun, L. Wang, B. Xia and Y. Liu, Solar photocatalytic activities of porous Nb-doped TiO2 microspheres prepared by ultrasonic spray pyrolysis, Solid State Sci., 2012, 14, 139–144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nowotny, W. Li and T. Bak, Effect of oxygen activity on semiconducting properties of TiO2 (rutile), Ionics, 2014, 1–8 Search PubMed .
J. He, R. Behera, M. Finnis, X. Li, E. Dickey, S. Phillpot and S. Sinnott, Prediction of high-temperature point defect formation in TiO2 from combined ab initio and thermodynamic calculations, Acta Mater., 2007, 55, 4325–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Morris, Y. Dou, J. Rebane, C. E. J. Mitchell, R. G. Egdell, D. S. L. Law, A. Vittadini and M. Casarin, Photoemission and STM study of the electronic structure of Nb-doped TiO2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 13445–13457 CrossRef CAS .
U. Balachandran and N. G. Eror, Electrical conductivity in non-stoichiometric titanium dioxide at elevated temperatures, J. Mater. Sci., 1988, 23, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kofstad, Note on the defect structure of rutile (TiO2), J. Less-Common Met., 1967, 13, 635–638 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kofstad, Thermogravimetric studies of the defect structure of rutile (TiO2), J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1962, 23, 1579–1586 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Førland, The defect structure of rutile, Acta Chem. Scand., 1964, 18, 1267–1275 CrossRef .
J. B. Moser, R. N. Blumenthal and D. H. Whitmore, Thermodynamic Study of Nonstoichiometric Rutile (TiO2−x), J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1965, 48, 384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Atlas and G. Schlehman, Katharometric and resistivity studies of PuO2−x equilibria, Argonne National Lab., Ill.,  1965 Search PubMed .
C. B. Alcock, S. Zador and B. C. H. Steele, A thermodynamic study of dilute solutions of defects in the rutile structure TiO2−x, NbO2−x, and Ti0.5Nb0.5O2±x, Proc. Br. Ceram. Soc., 1967, 8, 231 CAS .
D. K. Lee, J. I. Jeon, M. H. Kim, W. Choi and H. I. Yoo, Oxygen nonstoichiometry (δ) of TiO2–δ-revisited, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 185–193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Nowotny, T. Bak, M. Nowotny and L. Sheppard, TiO2 surface active sites for water splitting, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18492–18495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bak, J. Nowotny, N. Sucher and E. Wachsman, Photocatalytic water disinfection on oxide semiconductors: Part 1-basic concepts of TiO2 photocatalysis, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2012, 111, 4–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, W. Luo, M. Zhang, J. Feng and Z. Zou, Photoelectrochemical cells for solar hydrogen production: current state of promising photoelectrodes, methods to improve their properties, and outlook, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 347–370 CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Plasmonic solar water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
J. Nowotny, A. Atanacio, T. Bak, I. Belova, S. Fiechter, Y. Ikuma, M. Ionescu, B. Kennedy, P. Majewski and G. Murch, Photosensitive oxide semiconductors for solar hydrogen fuel and water disinfection, Int. Mater. Rev., 2014, 59, 449–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Kurtoglu, T. Longenbach, K. Sohlberg and Y. Gogotsi, Strong coupling of Cr and N in Cr–N-doped TiO2 and its effect on photocatalytic activity, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17392–17399 CAS .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates Jr, Photocatalysis on TiO2 surfaces: principles, mechanisms, and selected results, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yang, C. Hume, S. Lee, Y.-H. Son and J.-K. Lee, Correlation between photocatalytic efficacy and electronic band structure in hydrothermally grown TiO2 nanoparticles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15292–15297 CAS .
A. T. Inacu, M. Logar, J. Park and F. B. Prinz, Atomic Layer Deposition of Undoped TiO2 Exhibiting p-Type Conductivity, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5134–5140 Search PubMed .

          W. Hirschwald, Surface and near-surface chemistry of oxide materials, Elsevier,  1988, pp. 185–193 Search PubMed .
K. M. Pagnan-Okimoto, P. Gorai, A. G. Hollister and E. G. Seebauer, Model for Oxygen Interstitial Injection from the Rutile TiO2(110) Surface into the Bulk, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9955–9965 Search PubMed .
P. Gorai, K. M. Pagnan-Okimoto, A. G. Hollister and E. G. Seebauer, Kinetics of Oxygen Interstitial Injection and Lattice Exchange in Rutile TiO2, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 191602 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† This paper is dedicated to Dr. Jumiati Ismail with appreciation for her contribution towards the Malaysia–Australia Partnership in Education and Research.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Janusz Nowotny
	Janusz Nowotny, PhD, DSc, is the Professor of Solar Energy Technologies, Western Sydney University and Conjoint Professor of Engineering, University of Newcastle. His research includes oxide semiconductors for solar energy conversion. He is recipient of the ECS award for outstanding contribution in high-temperature materials, the Pfeil award of the Institute of Materials, UK, and the IAHE Sir William Grove Award. He published 450 refereed papers and 19 books. He was the founder and organiser of two series of international workshops, Nonstoichiometric Compounds and Ceramic Interfaces and was the Director of NATO Advanced Research Workshop on Structural Defects.

Mohammad Asri Idris
	Muhammad Asri Idris is currently a Senior Lecturer at School of Materials Engineering, University of Malaysia Perlis. He received his Bachelor's degree (2001) and Master's degree (2003) in Materials Science and Engineering from Ehime University, Japan. Then, he received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering from The University of New South Wales in 2011 under the supervision of Prof. Janusz Nowotny and Prof. Sean Li. His current scientific interests are focused on materials for energy generation and storage including fuel cell, solar hydrogen and Li+ batteries.

Mihail Ionescu
	Mihail is a senior researcher within the Centre for Accelerator Science at the Australian Nuclear Science and Technology Organisation since 2004. His research interests are in the application of accelerator-based nuclear techniques for characterization and modification of materials. He has a BSc (Hons) and MSc in Physics of Materials, and a PhD in Materials/Physics from the University of Wollongong. Has 17 years research experience in ion beam analysis, ion beam instrumentation, accelerator physics, thin film deposition techniques and characterizations of thin films, magnetic properties and electron transport properties of materials, superconductors, optical properties, and hard condensed matter physics.

Mohd Zainizan Sahdan
	Mohd Zainizan Sahdan is the head of Microelectronic and Nanotechnology Research Center (MiNT-SRC) and a senior lecturer at Faculty of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Universiti Tun Hussein Onn Malaysia. He received his PhD in Nanomaterials Processing from Universiti Teknologi MARA Malaysia in collaboration with Nagoya Institute of Technology Japan. He is actively doing research in oxide semiconductor thin films for solar cells, bio-sensors and photocatalyst.

Kamaruzzaman Sopian
	Professor Dato' Dr Kamaruzzaman Sopian received his PhD at University of Miami, in 1997. He is presently the Professor of Renewable Energy in the Department of Mechanical and Material Engineering, at the National University of Malaysia and currently is the Director of the Solar Energy Research Institute in the same university. His main contributions are in solar radiation modeling and resource assessment, advanced solar photovoltaic systems (grid-connected photovoltaic, solar powered regenerative fuel cell, solar hydrogen production, thin film silicon solar cell) and advanced solar thermal systems (solar cooling, solar heat pump, solar assisted drying, combined photovoltaic thermal or hybrid collector).

Mohd Asri Mat Teridi
	Mohd Asri Mat Teridi received his PhD in 2012 at Loughborough University on cathodic sensitisation solar cells. He joined the Solar Energy Research Institute, National University of Malaysia as Junior Research Fellow/Lecturer in 2007. After he received his PhD, he has been appointed as Research Fellow/Senior Lecturer in 2013 at the same university. Recent research activity is focused on nanostructure metal oxide for solar hydrogen water splitting, perovskite solar cell, polymer solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells.

Key learning points
• The lattice of nonstoichiometric oxides, such as TiO2, includes point defects, which are thermodynamically reversible.
• The defects in nonstoichiometric oxides are mainly formed at the surface as a result of chemical reactions with the gas phase involving oxygen.
• Defect disorder of TiO2 may be represented in terms of defect diagrams plotting the concentrations of both ionic and electronic defects as a function of oxygen activity as well as temperature.
• Defect diagrams may be applied for the selection of optimal processing conditions of TiO2 with desired properties.
• The research strategy in the development of TiO2-based photosensitive oxide semiconductors, such as photocatalysts and photoelectrodes with maximized performance, is based on optimization of the key performance-related properties by defect engineering.


 	Fig. 1  The stability of different oxygen species in the gas phase, in the crystal field and at the surface.22	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of adsorption and segregation and associated change of surface energy.	 
	(1)
μn = μ0 + RTlnn	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Schematic representation of an n-type semiconductor in terms of the flat band model (left) and involving a negatively charged surface layer (right), where EC and EV denote the conduction band and valence band, EF is the Fermi level, Φ is work function, which is referenced to the level where E = 0, χ is external work function, ΔΦs is the work function component related to the surface charge, and εV is the internal work function.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic representation of the effect of oxygen activity as well as donors and acceptors on the Fermi level and the associated charge transfer.	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  Schematic representation of n-type semiconductor showing the effect of light-induced ionisation on the split of the Fermi level into two quasi-Fermi levels related to electrons and electron holes.	 
σ = e(nμn + pμp)	(5)

Ti4+ ion in the titanium lattice site	


Ti3+ ion in the titanium lattice site (quasi-free electron)	e′
Titanium vacancy	


Ti3+ in the interstitial site	


Ti4+ in the interstitial site	


O2− ion in the oxygen lattice site	


Oxygen vacancy	


OO− ion in oxygen lattice site (quasi-free hole)	h˙

 	Fig. 6  Representation of the formation of doubly ionized oxygen vacancy (large and small circles represent lattice oxygen and titanium ions, respectively, black circles denote electrons, and the square represents an empty lattice site). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Representation of the formation of titanium interstitial (notations are the same as in Fig. 6). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Representation of the formation of fully ionized titanium vacancy (the circles denote electron holes – the remaining symbols are the same as in Fig. 6). (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15711–15738. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society, Published by John Wiley & Sons.)	 

1	

	

	493.1	106.5
2	

	

	879.2	190.8
3	

	

	1025.8	238.3
4	

	

	354.5	−202.1
5	nil ⇔ e′ + h˙	
K

i
 = np	222.1	44.6



	(6)
	(7)
4K4Ki−4Pn8 + n5 − ([D˙] − [A′])n4 − Kin3 − 2K1P−1/2n2 − 3K2P−1n − 4K3P−1 = 0	(8)
P = p(O2)

 	Fig. 9  Defect disorder diagram representing the effect of oxygen activity on the concentration of ionic and electronic defects for pure TiO2 at 1073 K.	 
	(9)




n
	(2K1)1/3p(O2)−1/6	

	



p
	

	

	




	

	

	




	

	

	




	

	

	




	

	

	



 	Fig. 10  Effect of oxygen activity on the Fermi level within the band gap of pure TiO2 at 1273 K.	 
	(10)
	(11)
n5 + An4 − Kin3 − 2K1p(O2)−1/2n2 − 3K2p(O2)−1n − 4K3p(O2)−1 = 0	(12)

 	Fig. 11  The effect of temperature on the predominant ionic defects in reduced TiO2, where n and p denote the concentration of electrons and holes, respectively (dotted lines are derived by extrapolation of the equilibrium lines in the range 1073–1273 K).	 

 	Fig. 12  Effect of oxygen activity on the band gap of pure TiO2.33	 

 	Fig. 13  The energy levels of intrinsic defects of different ionization degree34 as well as of niobium35 in TiO2.	 
	(13)

 	Fig. 14  Changes of electrical conductivity associated with the isothermal oxidation of pure polycrystalline TiO2 at 1323 K during equilibration associated with fast regime (scale 0–3 h) and the slow regime (scale 0–2000 h) as well as the related changes of thermoelectric power, S.29 (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, T. Bak, T. Burg, Electrical Properties of Polycrystalline TiO2. Prolonged Oxidation, Int. J. Ionics, 2007, 13, 79, Copyright Springer 2007.)	 

 	Fig. 15  Combined effect of oxygen activity and aliovalent extrinsic ions on the concentration of electrons. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of the concept of defect engineering for processing TiO2-based semiconductors used for solar hydrogen generation by water photolysis. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 17  Lower part shows the experimental data of isothermal changes of the electrical conductivity of pure TiO2 at 1123 K as a function of oxygen activity according to Balachandran and Eror36 (data points) along the theoretical line obtained by best fitting in respect to the mobility terms and the concentration of titanium vacancies. The upper part represents the associated concentration of both electrons and holes as a function of oxygen activity determined at two concentrations of titanium vacancies: the equilibrium concentration (thick line) and the concentration that is consistent with the experimental position of the n–p transition point. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic representation of the charge transfer between n-type semiconductor and acceptor-type molecule, where μA is the electron affinity of the acceptor-type adsorbed molecule. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic representation of the charge transfer between p-type semiconductor and donor-type molecule, where μD is the ionization potential of the donor-type adsorbed molecule. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic representation of the reaction between the TiO2 surface and adsorbed water molecule leading to the formation of an active complex and its subsequent decomposition into gaseous oxygen and protons.44 (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, et al., TiO2 Surface Active Sites for Water Splitting, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18492–18495, Copyright American Chemical Society, 2006.)	 

 	Fig. 21  Schematic representation of the reaction between the TiO2 surface and water leading to the formation of hydroxyl radicals and protons.45 (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, et al., Photocatalytic Water Disinfection on Oxide Semiconductors. 1. Basic Concepts of TiO2 Photocatalysis, Adv. Appl. Ceram., 2011, 111, 4–15, Copyright Maney Publishing, 2011.)	 

 	Fig. 22  Schematic representation of photoelectrochemical cell for water oxidation. (Reprinted with permission from J. Nowotny, et al., Titanium Dioxide for Solar Hydrogen, 1. Functional Properties, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32, 2609–2629. Copyright Elsevier 2007.)	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of the reactivity of water with TiO2-based photocatalysts resulting in the formation of a range of radical species in water. (Reprinted with permission from T. Bak, Oxide Semiconductors, Res. Rep., 2010. Copyright T. Bak, 2010.)	 

 	Fig. 24  The effect of prolonged annealing of pure TiO2 single crystal at 1123 K.	 
Footnote
† This paper is dedicated to Dr. Jumiati Ismail with appreciation for her contribution towards the Malaysia–Australia Partnership in Education and Research.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
