Carbon-encapsulated CdSe quantum dot inorganic hybrid nanobelts for high performance photoelectronic devices based on the efficient separation and tra ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4TC02776K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4TC02776K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2471-2478Carbon-encapsulated CdSe quantum dot inorganic hybrid nanobelts for high performance photoelectronic devices based on the efficient separation and transfer of photoinduced holes

        
          
            Jie 
            Zhao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minghui 
            Cao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Baochang 
            Cheng
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Guohong 
            Wu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Huijun 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yilong 
            Ai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaohui 
            Su
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Yanhe 
            Xiao
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Shuijin 
            Lei
          
        
      a
aSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 330031, P. R. China. E-mail: bcheng@vip.sina.com
bNanoscale Science and Technology Laboratory, Institute for Advanced Study, Nanchang University, Jiangxi 330031, P. R. China
Received 
      3rd December 2014
    , Accepted 14th January 2015First published on 16th January 2015AbstractWe developed a facile method of combustion synthesis followed by a selenylation process to synthesize carbon-encapsulated CdSe hybrid nanobelts. In the nanohybrids, hexagonal-wurtzite-structured CdSe quantum dots (QDs) are formed in situ and embedded uniformly in the carbon nanobelt (CNB) matrix, resulting in the formation of an analogous p–i–n junction along the radius of the QDs due to the appearance of an inversion layer on the QD surfaces, which favors the separation of photoexcited electron–hole pairs by built-in electric field. Electrons accumulate in the QD core, while holes migrate to the QD surface and then quickly transfer to the CNB matrix. Additionally, the nanohybrids can enhance significantly the absorption of the whole energy range of visible light. The nanohybrids can show p-type conductivity with hole mobility as high as 1.4 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1, and, furthermore, the single nanohybrid-based devices not only show excellent photodetection performance at a certain bias, but also show photovoltaic-based self-powered photodetection performance at zero bias upon illuminating one end electrode of the devices, pointing a way to the development of novel photoelectronic materials and devices for energy applications.
Introduction
CdSe is a vital member of II–VI group compounds and has attracted more and more attention for its advantage of suitable direct band gap (Eg = 1.74 eV), which gives it good response to visible light and makes it a promising candidate for application in photovoltaic and photoelectronic devices.1–4 In recent decades, a lot of in-depth researches have been done on CdSe semiconductor quantum dots (QDs) due to their size-tunable band gap, photo-stability, relatively long excited state lifetime and unique shape-dependent properties.5–15 In particular, multiple exciton generation makes it possible for the conversion efficiency of a QD-based single gap photovoltaic device to reach 44.4%.16 Therefore, it is highly desirable for CdSe QDs to serve as light harvesting materials in energy conversion devices. In spite of these promising properties, large quantities of grain boundaries produce surface states, which can trap photogenerated charges, and therefore increase the probability of electron–hole recombination before the charges can be extracted by the electrodes.17 As a result, the biggest challenge is still how to achieve effective separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and get them quickly transferred in CdSe QD-based optoelectronic devices. To enhance photoinduced charge separation and transfer, the formation of nanohybrids of QDs with one-dimensional (1D) nanostructure would be beneficial, for their small sizes and being ideal building blocks for these nanohybrid materials.18
Low-dimensional carbon allotropes such as carbon nanotube and graphene can show high field-effect mobility and superior thermal conductivity. These fascinating properties hold promising potential for electronic devices, and chemical sensors.19 As a zero-bandgap semiconductor, perfect graphene by itself does not show evident advantages in light-energy conversion application owing to the relatively short lifetime of its excited states and small absorptivity throughout the visible spectral region.20,21 However, low-dimensional carbon materials can act as supports to QDs and transform the photoexcited states of light-harvesting QDs into charge-separated states, which have been widely used for combination with QDs to achieve efficient photovoltaic and sensitive photoconductive devices. Owing to large surface area and excellent carrier mobility, carbon allotropes are able to provide fast carrier transfer paths and prolong electron lifetime, which makes them suitable for applications in conductive networks.22 Some QD/carbon hybrids have been successfully used to collect and transport photoinduced charge carriers in photodetectors23–27 and photovoltaic devices.28–30 To date, among various approaches reported for the synthesis of QD/carbon hybrids, it is not rarely seen for QDs to be attached onto the surfaces of carbon materials by in situ growth,31–34 or by direct combination via covalent or noncovalent bonds.35–40 The in situ growth, however, usually gives rise to the generation of nanoparticles that are highly polydispersed and inhomogeneous in shape and size. Moreover, if carbon nanomaterials are pretreated by chemical modification, the intrinsic structure of carbon might be damaged to an extent, and its electric properties would be influenced. For the direct combination via a covalent bond, additionally, it is necessary to dispose the surfaces of either carbon materials or QDs to ensure their interconnection with each other, which might destroy the intrinsic properties and structure of carbon nanomaterials. In particular, some surfactant capping layers on the surface of QDs will block carrier transfer between QDs and carbon nanomaterials.41 Therefore, it is still a huge challenge to develop low-dimensional carbon materials with novel structure and at low cost, to serve as a carrier transport matrix for QD-based devices, in which photogenerated charges by the QDs have the advantage of being easily and quickly transferred to the carbon nanomaterials.42–45
Herein, we propose a new strategy to effectively control the photoresponse of CdSe semiconductors by deliberately designing a 1D nanohybrid structure, for which CdSe QDs are formed in situ, and, moreover, are dispersed uniformly inside a carbon nanobelt (CNB) matrix via a simple but effective technique of low-temperature combustion, followed by a selenylation process. In this way, QDs couple directly with carbon without any linker molecule or chemical modification of the CNBs, so that the intrinsic properties of QDs and 1D nanostructure carbon can be preserved as much as possible. As revealed by measurements of electric and optical properties, the nanohybrids showed an excellent performance with a high hole mobility and an effective energy transfer, thus contributing to a high photoelectronic conversion efficiency. The approach mentioned above is not only very beneficial for the creation of highly efficient nano-electronic and nano-optoelectronic devices, but also opens the way for the application of 1D carbon materials.
Experimental section
Synthesis of carbon-encapsulated CdSe hybrid nanobelts
CdSe/carbon hybrid nanobelts were synthesized via a facile method of low-temperature combustion synthesis, followed by post-selenization. Typically, 0.03 mol Cd(NO3)2 was dissolved in 15 ml deionized water, and then 60 ml triethanolamine was added to the cadmium nitrate aqueous solution. After mixing, the solution was placed in an oven at 150 °C for 6 h to remove the water. During this process, the mixture changes gradually from transparent to scarlet. Subsequently, the mixture was heated to about 280 °C, at which an auto-combustion reaction took place, and a black fluffy precursor was obtained. Finally, the precursor was placed at the middle of a ceramic tube in a furnace and then Se powder was located at about 5 cm upstream from the precursor. The selenylation reaction was carried out at 550 °C, and held for 3 h in a weak reductive atmosphere of flowing 5% H2 and 95% N2 gas.
Structural characterization of the as-synthesized hybrid nanobelts
The as-synthesized samples were characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD, Rigaku D/max-3b), field-emission environmental scanning electron microscopy (FE-ESEM, FEI Quanta 200F), and high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM, JEOL 2100).
Measurement of photoelectronic properties
The excitation density dependence of photoluminescence (PL) spectra was determined by a micro-PL system of a confocal laser micro-Raman spectrometer (LABRAM-HR, France JY Company) using the 514.5 nm line of an Ar+ laser as an excitation source. The output power of the laser is about 5 mW and the incident light is focused on a spot of about 5 μm in diameter by a microscopic objective. For the fluorescence image measurement of individual CdSe/carbon hybrid nanobelts, the nanobelts were dispersed on a thin quartz substrate and then observed by laser scanning confocal microscopy (LSCM, Zeiss LSM710) using a diode laser with a wavelength of 405 nm as an excitation source. The light emitted from the hybrid structures was collected by an objective lens. For the fabrication of the field effect transistor (FET), an individual hybrid nanobelt was transferred onto the surface of a degenerately doped silicon wafer with 300 nm dielectric of silicon dioxide. For the photocurrent and photovoltage detection experiments, an individual hybrid nanobelt was transferred onto an Al2O3 substrate. The electrical contact was made by semi-dried silver paste at the two ends of the individual nanobelt. And then, a post-annealing under N2 atmosphere at 400 °C for 10 min was applied to minimize the contact resistance. The micro-beam excitation light was given out by a microscope objective. The electric measurements were carried out with a sourcemeter (Keithley 2400), synthesized function generator (Stanford Research System Model DS345), low-noise preamplifier (Stanford Research System Model SR560) and low-noise current preamplifier (Stanford Research System Model SR570). For the photodetection experiment of the spectral photoresponse vs. wavelength, a continuous wavelength light source was provided by a fluorescence spectrophotometer (Hitachi F4600) with a 150 W Xe lamp.
Results and discussion
Morphology and microstructure of as-synthesized nanohybrids
The XRD pattern of as-synthesized nanohybrid is presented in Fig. 1a. All diffraction peaks whose values correspond to those reported (JCPDS file: 8-0459) can be indexed to hexagonal-wurtzite-structured CdSe. No peaks of other phases are observed, indicating that carbon exists in amorphous form. FE-ESEM images reveal the typical distribution of the morphology for nanostructures, as shown in Fig. 1b and c. As can be seen, the samples mainly represent a belt-like shape with a thickness of about 100 nm. Shown in Fig. 1d is a typical low-magnification bright-field TEM image of a single nanobelt. It can be clearly seen that CdSe nanoparticles with an average diameter of about 5 nm are uniformly dispersed in the carbon matrix. Fig. 1f displays a lattice-resolved TEM image of an individual QD, and the observed highly ordered interplanar spacings with d-values of about 0.33 and 0.22 nm correspond to (01) and (10) planes of the wurtzite crystalline CdSe, respectively. The corresponding fast Fourier transform (FFT) analysis (Fig. 1g) can be indexed to hexagonal-wurtzite-structured CdSe with [122] zone axis.
 Fig. 1  Structural characterization of as-synthesized CdSe/CNB hybrids. (a) XRD pattern. (b) FE-SEM image. (c) High-magnification FE-SEM image of a single nanobelt, showing a thickness of about 70 nm. (d) TEM bright-field image of a single nanobelt, showing that QDs are uniformly dispersed in the carbon matrix. (e) HRTEM image. (f) HRTEM image of a single QD. (g) The corresponding FTT analysis of (f). 
Properties of field effect transistor based on individual hybrid nanobelts
The field effect transistor (FET) device was constructed from a single hybrid nanobelt, and electrical transport measurements were performed. The inset in Fig. 2b illustrates the structure of the FET device with the heavily doped p+-Si substrate and the SiO2 layer (300 nm) serving as the back gate and the gate dielectric, respectively. The inset in Fig. 2a shows the I–V curve measured between the source and drain electrodes. It shows a linear behavior, confirming the ohmic contacts between the electrodes and the hybrid nanobelt. As shown in Fig. 2a, the typical curves of source–drain current versus voltage (Ids–Vds) are obtained at varied gate voltages (Vg) from −2 V to −5 V in steps of 1 V. It can be observed that the channel conductance of the hybrid nanobelt monotonically increases with applied negative Vg, and therefore such gate voltage-dependent Ids–Vds characteristics demonstrate the p-type conductivity of hybrids. Fig. 2b shows the corresponding transfer characteristics (Ids–Vg), which depicts Ids–Vg curve at Vds = 2 V. The hole concentration and mobility in hybrids can be estimated to be approximately 1.15 × 1014 cm−3 and 1.4 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, based on the experimental data.46 The extremely large hole mobility implies a great potential for application in high-speed and high-frequency optoelectronic devices.
 Fig. 2  (a) Ids–Vds curves of the CdSe/CNB hybrid FET recorded at different gate voltages; the inset corresponds to I–V characteristic between source and drain. (b) Ids–Vg curve of the hybrid nanobelt FET under Vds = 2 V; the inset corresponds to a schematic configuration of the FET device. 
Excitation intensity dependence of photoluminescence
Photoluminescence (PL) measurements have been extensively used to survey the separation efficiency of photogenerated charge carriers in a semiconductor because the recombination of an excited electron–hole gives rise to the PL emission signal.47 The smaller the PL intensity is, the lower the recombination rate will be. In order to research the energy transfer properties of the nanohybrids, therefore, the excitation intensity dependence of the PL properties was measured at room temperature using the 514.5 nm line of an Ar+ laser as an excitation source, and the results are presented in Fig. 3. The fluorescence image of a single hybrid nanobelt, taken using LSCM and shown in the inset in Fig. 3a, further demonstrates that it can emit red light, which originates from the band-edge emission of CdSe. From Fig. 3a, it can be seen that PL spectra are composed of some relatively weak peaks in the range of 520–650 nm, related to the Raman scattering peaks of carbon, and a stronger band in the range of 650–850 nm, associated with the band-edge emission of CdSe. In the enlargement, shown in Fig. 3b, the peaks located at around 1350, 1590, and 2800 cm−1 can be ascribed to D, G (E2g), and 2D band of carbon-related Raman scattering, respectively. With increasing excitation intensity, their intensities increase while their positions are independent of excitation intensity and remain unchanged. For the red emission bands associated with the CdSe band-edge emission, which are magnified further and illustrated in Fig. 3c–f respectively, their intensities go up initially, reach a maximum at 0.5I0 excitation intensity, and then drop as the excitation density increases further. For the emission bands, however, their positions redshift gradually, and furthermore, their spectral widths increase. More interestingly, the emission bands asymmetrically broaden on their high-energy sides, forming a typical Fano-like lineshape.48–50 Moreover, the asymmetry enhances with an increase in excitation intensity.
 Fig. 3  PL spectra. (a) The excitation density dependence of room temperature PL spectra excited by an Ar+ laser with a wavelength of 514 nm; the inset is a fluorescent image of an individual CdSe/CNB hybrid measured by LSCM. (b) The enlargement of the blue dotted frame in (a), corresponding to carbon-related Raman scattering. (c)–(f) The enlargement of the brown dotted frame in (a), corresponding to the band-edge emissions of CdSe at different excitation intensities and their asymmetric fitting curves by Fano interference effects (black curves). 
Generally, the energy redshift and intensity reduction of band-edge emission are referred to as local heating effect as intense excitation laser illumination raises the sample temperature. In our case, the Raman scattering peaks, associated with carbon, do not show any measurable shift as the excitation power density varies. Therefore, the redshift and quenching of band-edge emission, related to CdSe, cannot be simply ascribed to the temperature increase due to the intense local heating induced by the Ar+ laser.
Photoconductivity and self-powered photoconductivity
In order to understand the energy transduction pathway in more detail and detect potential application in photoelectronic fields, we have performed further experiments of photoconductivity at 1 V dc bias and self-powered photoconductivity based on photovoltaic effect at zero bias, respectively, as shown in Fig. 4 and 5. As seen from Fig. 4a, the photocurrent increases at an applied dc bias voltage of 1 V. Moreover, the photoresponse is prompt, steady, and reproducible during repeated on/off cycles of visible light illumination. More importantly, the nanohybrid-based device shows a very broad photoresponse range from 300 to 800 nm, as shown in Fig. 4b, and therefore the nanohybrid can harvest the whole energy range of visible light. Based on the above analysis of FET characteristics, the majority charge carriers are holes in the CdSe/CNB hybrid system. Upon light excitation, the photoconductivity effect originates from the increase of hole concentration in the carbon matrix, donated by hole transfer from QDs by photovoltaic separation effect. At zero bias, one end of the Ag–CdSe/C–Ag device is illuminated with a micro-beam of visible light from an optical microscopy objective, as shown in Fig. 5. It can be clearly seen that the device shows a potential of 0.13 mV between the two electrodes at both ends, and additionally the voltage of the end subjected to the light illumination is negative while that of the other is positive. This result not only confirms further that the hole concentration increases significantly in the CNB matrix upon visible light illumination, but also indicates the reduction of the recombination of electron–hole pairs in QDs. The photogenerated holes can transfer and transport to the other end along 1D CNB, resulting in a higher potential at the end without illumination. The appearance of potential difference between both ends generates self-powered photoconductivity effect. This result also demonstrates embedded QDs can efficiently harvest visible light, and moreover photoexcited electron–hole pairs can be effectively separated by the built-in electric field of p–i–n junction formed in QDs. In addition, the CNB matrix can serve as a good conducting scaffold to collect and transport hole carriers transferred from QDs. The single hybrid nanobelts can yield a notable photovoltaic effect by itself, indicating that the carbon-based nanohybrids have promising potential applications in solar-energy conversion for photovoltaic cells and self-powered photodetectors.
 Fig. 4  Photoresponse of CdSe/CNB hybrid-based photodetector at 1 V dc bias voltage. (a) The output signal of photocurrent under alternating light on and light off, where the entire device was illuminated by visible light. (b) The spectral photoresponse vs. wavelength, showing a broad photoresponse range from 300 to 800 nm, that is, the absorption spectrum of the nanohybrid covers the whole energy range of visible light. The inset in (b) corresponds to the schematic drawing of the photodetector. 
 Fig. 5  Self-powered photodetector of CdSe/CNB hybrid based on photovoltaic effect at zero bias voltage. (a) The output signal of photovoltage under alternating light on and light off. The end which is connected to the cathode of a voltmeter is illuminated by a micro-beam of visible light. (b) The corresponding schematic diagram of the test device. 
Mechanism of photoinduced energy transfer and asymmetric PL
It is generally accepted that excited state QDs are deactivated (quenched) by carbon allotropes via energy transfer. At higher excitation intensity, the quenching of PL indicates a notably lower recombination rate or a more efficient separation and transfer of photogenerated charge pairs between QDs and carbon matrix, and the lifetime of charge carriers was efficiently lengthened. For the energy transfer, two mechanisms of Förster-type dipole–dipole interaction (Förster resonance energy transfer, FRET) and photoinduced charge transfer (CT) have been proposed.13–15,51 For the CT process, electrons directly transfer from QDs to carbon matrix, leading to a decrease of hole concentration in the carbon matrix.52–55 Although the majority of charge carriers would be electrons donated from CdSe QDs,56,57 the FET characteristics of nanohybrid-based devices demonstrate a p-type semiconductor property where the positively charged holes are the majority charge carriers, and, moreover, the photoconductive experiment results demonstrate an increase of hole concentration in nanohybrids upon visible light illumination. The photoinduced energy transfer in carbon-encapsulated CdSe hybrid nanobelts, therefore, cannot be simply attributed to a photoinduced electron transfer mechanism.
The energy level diagram of the device is presented in Fig. 6. The conduction band (CB) edge of the CdSe QDs can be estimated to be approximately −4.0 eV from the electron affinity and ionization potential of bulk CdSe,58,59 with a correction for the quantum size effect.60 The reported work function of carbon is about 5 eV,61 placing its Fermi level (Ef) between the valence band (VB) and CB of CdSe QDs, as shown in Fig. 6a. CdSe is a typical n-type semiconductor,56,57 and therefore its Ef is higher than that of carbon. When CdSe QDs come into contact with CNB matrix, electrons will diffuse from CdSe QDs to CNB, then their energy bands bend near their interface, and finally their Ef will reach the same level. For CNBs, the shift of Ef is negligible due to high density of carriers and relatively large volume as compared with QDs. For a single CdSe QD, the total number of free electrons is limited, and the shift of free electrons from QD to CNB results in a drastic reduction of electron concentration. Therefore, the Ef will be away from the CB, and the region close to the core will be almost completely depleted, and moreover electron trap states will also be emptied. In particular, the Ef of surface layer will be lower than the intermediate level (Ei), that is, the surface layer will form an inversion layer and transform into p-type, as shown in Fig. 6b. As a result, an analogous p–i–n junction will be formed along the radius of individual QDs. When the nanohybrids are illuminated by visible light with energy above the band gap energy of CdSe, quantities of electron–hole pairs will be generated, which can be separated effectively by the built-in electric field of the p–i–n junction. Electrons will migrate and accumulate into the QD core, resulting in a charged state. Moreover, electron trap states will also be filled up. Correspondingly, Ef will be close to CB, and the width of the intermediate depletion layer will become narrow. However, photogenerated holes will migrate to the surface p-type inversion layer and then will quickly transfer to the CNB matrix, resulting in the generation of photocurrent. When an end of the hybrid nanobelt is illuminated by visible light, the potential of other end will rise, namely the generation of photovoltage. The corresponding schematic diagram of energy level and charge transfer is illustrated in Fig. 6c.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of energy level and photoinduced charge transfer between CdSe QD and CNB matrix. (a) CdSe QD and CNB matrix are not in contact, showing independent energy levels. (b) QD is embedded into CNB matrix without light illumination. The diffusion of electrons into carbon results in the formation of an inversion layer near the QD surface and an almost complete depletion region close to the QD core, namely, the formation of analogous p–i–n junction along the radius of the QD. (c) QD is embedded into CNB matrix with light illumination. Photoexcited electron–hole pairs can be effectively separated by the built-in electric field of the p–i–n junction in QD. Thus, electrons accumulate in QD core, while holes migrate to QD surface and then transfer to CNB matrix. 
The asymmetric lineshape implies the presence of a Fano-like interference between discrete and continuum states in PL spectra.17 Without or with low excitation intensity, the intermediate depletion layer is relatively wide, and therefore the excitations should be discrete interband excitons, mainly originating from the depletion region. With increasing excitation intensity, the width of the depletion region decreases, and quantities of electrons will accumulate in QD core region, resulting in charged state, and furthermore electron trap states are also filled up. High density of free electrons induces Ef to rise above the CB level, resulting in the formation of degenerate state. Incident light with energy above the QD band gap energy can be efficiently absorbed. Moreover, PL emission will change from exciton annihilation into electron transition between trap levels and VB,62,63 and therefore the position of emission peak exhibits a distinct redshift with increasing excitation intensity. Additionally, the accumulation of quantities of free electrons results in the formation of plasmons. The coupling between the continuum plasmons and the discrete excitations can lead to a nonlinear Fano effect,48–50,64 which makes the PL emission peak asymmetrically broaden on its high-energy side. With increasing excitation intensity, moreover, the depletion region width decreases, and the plasmon concentration increases dramatically in QD core due to a more efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Therefore, the stronger coupling results in a more striking asymmetry of the PL emission band. In order to quantitatively analyze the above-mentioned effects, the experimental data of hybrid exciton emission are theoretically fitted with Fano line-shape given by:50  where E0 is the renormalized or “dressed” photon energy in the presence of the coupled emission, Γ is the line-width parameter, and q is the asymmetry parameter (1/q is referred to as the coupling strength). The interaction between discrete excitations and continuum plasmons is determined by q. A small value of q implies a much stronger interference effect. The fitting results show that q is respectively 5.52, 9.44, 11.34, and 23.5 at an excitation intensity of I0, 0.5I0, 0.25I0, and 0.1I0. It can be obviously seen that 1/q increases as the power density of the incident laser increases, indicating that there is constructive interference between the discrete photon and continuum plasmons on the high-energy side and destructive interference on the low-energy side, and moreover the coupling strength increases with increasing excitation density.
Conclusions
In summary, we have developed a simple but effective method of combustion synthesis followed by a selenylation process to synthesize carbon-encapsulated CdSe hybrid nanobelts, in which CdSe QDs are formed in situ and dispersed uniformly in the CNB matrix. There is a significant interaction between the CdSe QDs and the CNB interface. The 1D carbon nano-encapsulation works in multiple ways, providing protection of the QD surface, enhancing light absorption range and efficiency, and facilitating energy transport from QDs to CNBs. The synergistic effect between CdSe QDs and CNB nano-encapsulation was systematically investigated by measurement of the electric transport and the excitation power dependence of PL. The resultant 1D nanohybrids show an excellent p-type electric property with hole mobility as high as 1.412 × 104 cm2 V−1 s−1. In the hybrid structure, additionally, the formation of an analogous p–i–n junction along the radius of the QDs provides an efficient pathway for the separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Therefore, in the nanohybrids, QDs serve as light harvester, can absorb the whole energy range of visible light, and then efficiently transfer photoinduced holes to CNB matrix by the built-in electric field separation of the p–i–n junction. On the basis of photovoltaic separation effect, the individual nanohybrid-based devices not only show an excellent photodetection performance at a certain bias upon illuminating the entire nanobelt between both end electrodes, but also show a self-powered photodetection performance at zero bias upon illuminating one end of individual hybrid nanobelts. It is believed that this synthesis method can be extended to prepare a wide variety of functional nanohybrids for different applications. In addition, the nanohybrids that we have shown here not only are useful for the creation of highly efficient optoelectronic devices, but also provide an alternative route for the application of 1D carbon materials.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21263013, 51162023, 51462023), the Project for Young Scientist Training of Jiangxi Province (20133BCB23002), the Natural Science Foundation of Jiangxi Province (20132BAB206005, 20114BAB206027) and the Foundation of Jiangxi Educational Committee (GJJ13058).
Notes and references
L. H. Zhang, Y. Jia, S. S. Wang, Z. Li, C. Y. Ji, J. Q. Wei, H. W. Zhu, K. L. Wang, D. H. Wu, E. Z. Shi, Y. Fang and A. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bruchez, M. Moronne, P. Gin, S. Weiss and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 1998, 281, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Bang and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. F. Feng, Q. B. Zhang, L. L. Lin, H. H. Guo, J. Z. Zhou and Z. H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2705 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nature, 2006, 442, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, J. Clifford, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 531 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sukhovatkin, S. Hinds, L. Brzozowski and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2009, 324, 1542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Clifford, G. Konstantatos, K. W. Johnston, S. Hoogland, L. Levina and L. E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 40 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Wang, Y. H. Liu, Y. Zhang, F. D. Wang, P. J. Kowalski, H. W. Rohrs, R. A. Loomis, M. L. Gross and W. E. Buhro, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jun and E. Jang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 679 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Chen, S. Berciaud, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz and L. E. Brus, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2964 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, E. Oh, W. R. Algar, J. R. Deschamps, K. Susumu, V. Jain, D. E. Prasuhn, J. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Guo, D. D. Bao, S. Upadhyayula, W. Wang, A. B. Guvenc, J. R. Kyle, H. Hosseinibay, K. N. Bozhilov, V. I. Vullev, C. S. Ozkan and M. Ozkan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5199 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Hanna and A. J. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 074510 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Wang, J. K. Baral, H. Zhao, B. A. Gonfa, V. V. Truong, M. A. El Khakani, R. Izquierdo and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4010 CrossRef CAS .
V. Georgakilas, D. Gournis, V. Tzitzios, L. Pasquato, D. M. Guldi and M. J. Prato, Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2679 RSC .
K. I. Bolotin, K. J. Sikes, Z. Jiang, M. Klima, G. Fudenberg, J. Hone, P. Kim and H. L. Stormer, Solid State Commun., 2008, 146, 351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, M. Y. Sfeir, Y. Wu, C. H. Lui, J. A. Misewich and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 196405 CrossRef .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sun, L. Gao, Y. Liu and J. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 093112 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Cho, K. Roy Choudhury, R. B. Thapa, Y. Sahoo, T. Ohulchanskyy, A. N. Cartwright, K. S. Lee and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 232 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zebli, H. A. Vieyra, I. Carmeli, A. Hartschuh, J. P. Kotthaus and A. W. Holleitner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 205402 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Jia and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Shim, S. Jeong and C. S. Han, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 165201 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Ka, V. Le Borgne, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, B. A. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kongkanand, R. Martínez Domínguez and P. V. Kamat, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Jia, J. Wei, H. Zhu, K. Wang, D. Wu and A. Cao, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robel, A. B. Bunker and P. V. Kamat, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2458 CrossRef CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1866 RSC .
B. H. Juarez, C. Klinke, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3564 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Na, H. S. Kim and J. Park, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 11218 CAS .
S. Banerjee and S. S. Wong, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sheeney-Haj-Ichia, B. Basnar and I. Willner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, A. Akey, W. Wang and I. P. Herman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Olek, T. B€usgen, M. Hilgendorff and M. Giersig, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Peng and S. S. Wong, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 682 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Weaver, M. R. Dasari, A. Datar, S. Talapatra and P. Kohli, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Shi, C. S. Liu, W. H. Lv, H. B. Shen, D. Wang, L. W. Chen, L. S. Li and J. Jin, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4515 RSC .
P. Avouris, Z. Chen and V. Perebeinos, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. N. Cao, Z. Liu, S. S. Chu, M. H. Wu, Z. M. Ye, Z. W. Cai, Y. L. Chang, S. F. Wang, Q. H. Gong and Y. F. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Farrow and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Brown and P. V. Kamat, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 8890 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Martel, T. Schmidt, H. R. Shea, T. Hertel and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 2447 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Itskos, A. Othonos, T. Rauch, S. F. Tedde, O. Hayden, M. V. Kovalenko, W. Heiss and S. A. Choulis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 802 CrossRef CAS .
U. Fano, Phys. Rev., 1961, 124, 1866 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gupta, Q. Xiong, C. K. Adu, U. J. Kim and P. C. Eklund, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 627 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cerdeira, T. A. Fjeldly and M. Cardona, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1973, 8, 4734 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Stewart, A. L. Huston, A. M. Scott, E. Oh, W. R. Algar, J. R. Deschamps, K. Susumu, V. Jain, D. E. Prasuhn, J. Blanco-Canosa, P. E. Dawson and I. L. Medintz, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Hu, Y. L. Zhao, K. Ryu, C. Zhou, J. F. Stoddart and G. Gruner, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 939 CrossRef CAS .
B. H. Juaraz, C. Klinke, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3564 CrossRef .
G. Mountrichas, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, S. P. Economopoulos, S. Pispas, O. Ito, T. Hasobe and N. Tagmatarchis, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 8990 RSC .
S. Leubner, G. Katsukis and D. M. Guldi, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 253 RSC .
S. Y. Jeong, S. C. Lim, D. J. Bae, Y. H. Lee, H. J. Shin, S. M. Yoon, J. Y. Choi, O. H. Cha, M. S. Jeong, D. Perello and M. Yun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 243103 CrossRef PubMed .
Rajesh, T. Sarkar and A. Mulchandani, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 173110 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Kim, G. Markovich, S. Rezvani, S. H. Choi, K. L. Wang and J. R. Heath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 74, 317 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. C. Chiang and F. J. Himpsel, Landolt-Börnstein, New Series III/23a, 1989, 95.
L. E. Brus, J. Chem. Phys., 1996, 79, 2745 Search PubMed .

          D. R. Lide, CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics version, CRC Press,  2008 Search PubMed .
X. F. Han, Y. X. Weng, A. L. Pan, B. S. Zou and J. Y. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 032102 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yamaguchi, H. Kurusu, Y. Kawakami and S. Fujita, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 61, 10303 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, A. O. Govorov and G. W. Bryant, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 146804 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structural characterization of as-synthesized CdSe/CNB hybrids. (a) XRD pattern. (b) FE-SEM image. (c) High-magnification FE-SEM image of a single nanobelt, showing a thickness of about 70 nm. (d) TEM bright-field image of a single nanobelt, showing that QDs are uniformly dispersed in the carbon matrix. (e) HRTEM image. (f) HRTEM image of a single QD. (g) The corresponding FTT analysis of (f).	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Ids–Vds curves of the CdSe/CNB hybrid FET recorded at different gate voltages; the inset corresponds to I–V characteristic between source and drain. (b) Ids–Vg curve of the hybrid nanobelt FET under Vds = 2 V; the inset corresponds to a schematic configuration of the FET device.	 

 	Fig. 3  PL spectra. (a) The excitation density dependence of room temperature PL spectra excited by an Ar+ laser with a wavelength of 514 nm; the inset is a fluorescent image of an individual CdSe/CNB hybrid measured by LSCM. (b) The enlargement of the blue dotted frame in (a), corresponding to carbon-related Raman scattering. (c)–(f) The enlargement of the brown dotted frame in (a), corresponding to the band-edge emissions of CdSe at different excitation intensities and their asymmetric fitting curves by Fano interference effects (black curves).	 

 	Fig. 4  Photoresponse of CdSe/CNB hybrid-based photodetector at 1 V dc bias voltage. (a) The output signal of photocurrent under alternating light on and light off, where the entire device was illuminated by visible light. (b) The spectral photoresponse vs. wavelength, showing a broad photoresponse range from 300 to 800 nm, that is, the absorption spectrum of the nanohybrid covers the whole energy range of visible light. The inset in (b) corresponds to the schematic drawing of the photodetector.	 

 	Fig. 5  Self-powered photodetector of CdSe/CNB hybrid based on photovoltaic effect at zero bias voltage. (a) The output signal of photovoltage under alternating light on and light off. The end which is connected to the cathode of a voltmeter is illuminated by a micro-beam of visible light. (b) The corresponding schematic diagram of the test device.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagrams of energy level and photoinduced charge transfer between CdSe QD and CNB matrix. (a) CdSe QD and CNB matrix are not in contact, showing independent energy levels. (b) QD is embedded into CNB matrix without light illumination. The diffusion of electrons into carbon results in the formation of an inversion layer near the QD surface and an almost complete depletion region close to the QD core, namely, the formation of analogous p–i–n junction along the radius of the QD. (c) QD is embedded into CNB matrix with light illumination. Photoexcited electron–hole pairs can be effectively separated by the built-in electric field of the p–i–n junction in QD. Thus, electrons accumulate in QD core, while holes migrate to QD surface and then transfer to CNB matrix.	 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
