Recent advances in persistent luminescence based on molecular hybrid materials   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01463J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01463J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 5564-5589Recent advances in persistent luminescence based on molecular hybrid materials†

        
          
            Rui 
            Gao
          
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Mohamad S. 
            Kodaimati
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Dongpeng 
            Yan
          
          
        
      *ab
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Energy Conversion and Storage Materials, College of Chemistry, and Key Laboratory of Radiopharmaceuticals, Ministry of Education, Beijing Normal University, Beijing 100875, People's Republic of China. E-mail: yandp@bnu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Chemical Resource Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, People's Republic of China
cDepartment of Chemistry and Chemical Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02138, USA
Received 
      31st December 2020
    First published on 10th March 2021AbstractMolecular persistently luminescent materials have received recent attention due to their promising applications in optical displays, biological imaging, chemical sensing, and security systems. In this review, we systematically summarize recent advances in establishing persistently luminescent materials—specifically focusing on materials composed of molecular hybrids for the first time. We describe the main strategies for synthesizing these hybrid materials, namely: (i) inorganics/organics, (ii) organics/organics, and (iii) organics/polymer systems and demonstrate how molecular hybrids provide synergistic effects, while improving luminescence lifetimes and efficiencies. These hybrid materials promote new methods for tuning key physical properties such as singlet–triplet excited state energies by controlling the chemical interactions and molecular orientations in the solid state. We review new advances in these materials from the perspective of examining experimental and theoretical approaches to room-temperature phosphorescence and thermally-activated delayed fluorescence. Finally, this review concludes by summarizing the current challenges and future opportunities for these hybrid materials.
Rui Gao
Rui Gao received her PhD in chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2019. In 2017, she studied at Case Western Reserve University. She is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the Whitesides Lab at Harvard University. Her research interests are the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for luminescence and electrochemistry.
Mohamad S. Kodaimati
Mohamad Kodaimati graduated with BS degrees in chemistry, biochemistry, and mathematics from the University of Chicago in 2014 and received his PhD in chemistry from Northwestern University. During his PhD, he was co-advised by Prof. Emily Weiss and Prof. George Schatz and studied the photophysics of self-assembled quantum dot systems and transport in electron ratchets. He is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the Whitesides Lab at Harvard University.
Dongpeng Yan
Dongpeng Yan obtained his PhD degree at BUCT in 2012 (under Prof. Acad. Xue Duan). Then, he became an associate professor at BUCT. In 2011 and 2013, he studied at the Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge and School of Pharmacy, University College London. In 2014, he moved to Beijing Normal University as a full professor. As the corresponding author, he has published more than 120 scientific papers (including in Angew. Chem., JACS, Adv. Mater. and Nat. Commun.). He was awarded the Newton Advanced Fellowship of the Royal Society and is a Royal Society of Chemistry Fellow (FRSC).
1. Introduction
Processes involving the storage and transfer of energy are critical in nature,1,2 and have become increasingly important in developing synthetic materials for energy,3 information4 and environmental applications.5 Specifically, light is commonly used to store and transmit energy—it is transmitted quickly, is easily modified/controlled, and is efficiently read/measured. After being exposed to ultraviolet/visible light, molecular chromophores can absorb some of this light and then re-emit it either via three different mechanisms: (i) fluorescence, (ii) phosphorescence, and/or (iii) thermally activated delayed fluorescence (TADF) (Fig. 1).6–10 The singlet state S0 represents the ground electronic state, while S1 and Sn (n ≥ 2) represent the singlet first excited state and higher excited states, respectively. When excited by a photon, an electron is excited from the S0 state to Sn state. The electron only stays in that excited state for a short time, and then immediately begins to relax down the vibronic manifold through vibrational relaxation. After that process, spin-allowed fluorescence occurs with the emission of photons (Fig. 1, left). Persistent luminescence with broad systems, potentially achieved by phosphorescence and TADF, occurs on relatively long time-scales after excitation with excitation sources including ultraviolet/visible light, electron beams, or high energy radiative processes (such as α-, β- or γ-rays).11,12 Similar to fluorescence, phosphorescence begins with the S0 state excited to a higher energy singlet excited state which can electronically relax down to the S1 state. Afterwards, intersystem crossing (ISC) causes the molecule to move to the spin-forbidden T1 state (triplet state). Relaxing from the T1 state to the S0 state is also spin-forbidden—resulting in a slow radiative transition between the two states (Fig. 1, middle). The TADF process picks up at the T1 state and occurs when the electron in the triplet state undergoes reverse ISC (RISC) to reform the singlet state, which then proceeds to decay via fluorescence (Fig. 1, right). TADF requires the energy splitting between the S1 and T1 states to be small enough to be accessible by thermal energy (kBT). Due to their delayed emission, persistently luminescent materials have been historically used in glow-in-the-dark paints found in emergency signs and watches. Moreover, these materials are also used for in vivo bioimaging as their time-resolved optical signals can reduce background interference.13–15 As an umbrella term, “persistent luminescence” in this review refers to some similar terms found in the literature, including decayed, long-afterglow, long-lasting, and long-lived luminescence.
 Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of the emissive processes of fluorescence (a), phosphorescence (b), and delayed fluorescence (c). Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Historically, persistently luminescent materials were primarily inorganic in nature and were composed of either transition metals and/or rare-earth metals.16 In the mid-1990s, an efficient phosphorescent material (dysprosium and europium doped into SrAl2O4) was developed, which had a long emission time (several hours) and high durability, and became the basis for most commercial glow-in-the-dark phosphors.17 However, the high cost and relatively complex synthesis (high temperature solid-state processes) limited the applications of this material. Molecular solid-state materials with persistent luminescence, particularly room temperature phosphorescence (RTP) and TADF, have recently become popular due to their potential applications in biological imaging, optical recording devices, chemical sensing, and security systems.18–21 Moreover, compared to their inorganic counterparts containing transition metals and/or rare earth metals, these molecular materials have the advantages of potentially facile tuning the structure and simple processing, facilitating the fabrication of soft and flexible optical devices.22,23 In order to improve the key physical characteristics of these materials (such as long excitation lifetimes, high photo/thermal stability, and high quantum efficiencies), several methods (such as matrix-assisted isolation, utilization of the heavy atom effect, hydrogen bonding/halogen bond, and crystallization/aggregation-induced phosphorescence) have recently been developed.24–27
However, there are several key scientific and technical issues that still need to be resolved prior to their widespread implementation. For example, molecular materials typically need to be used in the solid state as their optical properties are highly dependent on their crystalline state, while their solution or amorphous forms exhibit weak persistent luminescence. Molecular hybrid structures have provided a way to overcome these limitations due to the following advantages:28–30 first, molecular hybrids can use intermolecular interactions (e.g., hydrogen bonds) to enhance the rigidity of molecular conformations and restrict molecular motions/vibrations—minimizing the non-radiative decay of triplet excitons and improving their photoemission lifetimes and quantum efficiencies (QEs).31,32 Second, the ordered organization and self-aggregation characteristics within hybrid/composite materials have allowed the fabrication of hybrid films with persistent luminescence. Finally, control of the self-assembled hybrid structures is beneficial to tuning excited states by modulating molecular interactions and orientations in the solid state.
During the last few years, several reviews on purely organic materials with RTP or TADF have been published—primarily focused on the development of these materials through perspectives of organic synthesis and molecular design.18,19,33–36 However, a systematic description of strategies for synthesizing molecular hybrid materials with persistent luminescence has not been summarized, despite the large scientific advances in this field (Fig. 2). Therefore, we hope to review the latest developments in this field, including design principles, material classifications and potential applications with the aim to inspire the development of new emerging persistently luminescent materials. The scientific challenges associated with the construction of hybrid persistently luminescent materials can be broken down into three categories: (i) time, (ii) space and (iii) energy (Fig. 3). In terms of energy, the question is how to tune the excited state energy levels to produce the correct “color” emission along with high QEs. In terms of time, the question becomes how to extend the luminescence lifetime and promote thermal/photostability. Finally, in terms of space, the question becomes what are the structure–property relationships when tuning the orientation, stacking, aggregation, and/or even chirality of the hybrids.
 Fig. 2  Summary of the recent development of persistent luminescence based on the strategies for formation of molecular hybrid materials. 
 Fig. 3  Designing persistent luminescence based on molecular hybrid materials from three views based on time, space and energy dimensions. 
In this review, we focus on the synthesis of new structures and materials with persistent luminescence consisting of different molecular hybrid designs: inorganic/organic, organic/organic, and organic/polymer hybrids (Fig. 2). We discuss recent progress in synthesizing hybrid materials with persistent luminescence in terms of both luminescence performance and theoretical mechanisms. Finally, we discuss the main challenges and opportunities for future research in this area. Throughout this review, we hope to provide readers with a unique perspective on the history, present, and future of persistently luminescent materials based on molecular hybrids. Beyond the chemical synthesis and materials design at the molecular level, this review supplies a clear hybrid route to arouse the development of state-of-the-art materials towards broad photo-functional applications and deep understanding of the structure–property relationships.
2. Inorganic–organic molecular hybrid materials
2.1 Coordination polymers
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) are a subset of coordination polymers (CPs), which consists of networks of metal clusters or metal ions connected by organic ligands.37–39 By combining inorganic nodes and organic linking groups, MOFs have received widespread attention in research/industry due to their applications in drug delivery, catalysis, and energy conversion/storage.40–43 Additionally, due to their facile synthesis and tunable structures/topologies, they have been widely used in the applications of light-emitting diodes (LEDs), chemical sensors, and biological imaging.44–48 Luminescent MOFs containing noble-metal and rare-earth elements (such as Au, Pt, Ru, Ir, Tb and Eu) typically have phosphorescence lifetimes in the range of microseconds to milliseconds based on the ligand-metal charge transfer or metal–ligand charge transfer mechanisms. Therefore, the rational design of novel MOFs for obtaining long-lived persistent luminescence under ambient conditions continues to be a challenging goal.
Our group has developed a series of MOFs with tunable phosphorescence at room temperature.49 These synthesized MOFs exhibited tunable RTP based on different stacking of the organic ligands and alternation of metal ions. These findings provided an effective strategy for achieving high phosphorescence QE via a facile assembly of MOFs. These MOFs and/or CPs with phosphorescence could serve as optical sensors. For example, two different two-dimensional (2D) layered Cd-based MOFs (CP-1 and CP-2) were synthesized through a hydrothermal process.50 The MOF structures are stabilized by both interlayer π–π and C–H⋯π interactions. The phosphorescence lifetimes of these MOFs can be up to the level of seconds at room temperature and can be adjusted by changing the stacking modes of the organic ligands and organic–metal coordination environment. Density function theory (DFT) calculations indicated that the introduction of a second ligand could affect intermolecular electron transfer and the electronic structure, thereby controlling the RTP. Additionally, CP-2 showed well-defined temperature- and pH-dependent phosphorescence behavior. These works developed new types of MOFs with the potential for steady-state and dynamic tuning of RTP from an experimental and theoretical perspective.
For the most part, phosphorescence in MOFs arises from the transition metal-based heavy atom effect. However, Zhai et al. recently designed a heavy-atom-free MOF, which exhibits ligand-based phosphorescence at room temperature.51 They demonstrated that a MOF composed only of an alkaline-earth element (Mg2+) and alkyne-functionalized tetracarboxylate ligands exhibits both fluorescence and RTP. As another example, Wang et al. developed a new phosphorescent MOF by using rigid poly-imidazole moieties coordinated with a zinc phosphite framework, which showed high mechanical and thermal stability.52 They also explored a method for preparing stable and efficient room temperature fluorescent/phosphorescent dual-emission materials, in which nitrogen-containing aromatic struts are used to coordinate with the metal phosphite framework.53
Relative to UV-absorbing MOFs, near-infrared and visible absorbing MOFs with phosphorescence are still rare. Pan et al. designed a “metal–organic supramolecular box” based on donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) type molecules with excellent two-photon absorption cross-sections (Fig. 4).54 Due to the integrated one/two photon activities from the ligand, the heavy-atom effect in the metal center and the J-aggregate states in the supramolecular assembly, these materials can be excited with wavelengths from the ultraviolet to the near-infrared. The design of this supramolecular hybrid allows for phosphorescence using either one- and two-photon excitation pathways. Furthermore, they designed a dynamic MOF that showed reversible breathing behavior upon applying vacuum and heating.55 These structural changes were induced by temperature changes between 300 K and 350 K, which triggered the removal of solvating water molecules from the crystal lattice. Hence, multiple types of emission were observed—including fluorescence, excimer emission and RTP. Thus, this dynamic MOF shows potential applications in sensors and displays.
 Fig. 4  Design concept for the targeted MOF box with long-term persistent luminescence by UV, WL, and NIR radiation. The proposed energy transfer mechanism is shown in the middle (F, fluorescence; P, phosphorescence; LPL, long persistent luminescence; WLE, white-light emission; OPA, one-photon absorption; TPA, two-photon absorption; UV, ultraviolet; WL, white-light; NIR, near-infrared; S, singlet; T, triplet; ISC, intersystem crossing). Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 

2.1.1 Cation-doped MOFs for tunable persistent luminescence. 
Lanthanide cations (such as Eu3+ and Tb3+) have attractive optical properties due to their unique f–f electronic transitions in contrast to inorganic quantum dots and organic phosphors.56 MOFs assembled from lanthanide cations (Ln-MOFs) have high QEs, color purity and low excitation energies; so they offer the possibility of tunable emission and full-color displays.57,58 However, the absorptivity of lanthanide cations is limited by angular momentum-forbidden f–f transitions, and therefore highly efficient emission of Ln-MOFs requires suitable sensitizing antenna molecules. In this case, the energy levels of the excited antenna molecules should match the excited 4f-state energy allowing for energy transfer to the lanthanide, thereby achieving efficient 4f-emission.59
Several Ln-MOFs with long phosphorescence lifetimes have been developed recently. For example, Su et al. obtained different types of bimetallic and trimetallic Ln-MOF hierarchical single crystals with multicolored emission by an anisotropic epitaxial growth method,60 which presented space-resolved luminescence tunability. Different from these Ln-MOF hierarchical single crystals, we have designed Ln-MOFs (Eu-BTC, Tb-BTC, and Eu@Tb-BTC (Fig. 5a) BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid) with one-dimensional (1D) microrod morphologies and different emission colors.61 The emission lifetimes of Eu-BTC, Tb-BTC, and Eu@Tb-BTC are on the millisecond time-scale (Fig. 5b). The RTP lifetime of Eu@Tb-BTC (1.900 ms) was higher than those of Eu-BTC (0.806 ms) and Tb-BTC (1.435 ms) due to energy transfer from Tb3+ to Eu3+ with an energy transfer efficiency of 71.2%. Additionally, these 1D Ln-MOF microrods have high linear and chiral polarization anisotropy due to the orientation and helical distribution of the Ln3+ ions. Based on a similar strategy, Zhao et al. also designed a series of 1D Ln-MOFs with multiblock heterostructures (Fig. 5c).62 For example, the Tb@Eu-MOF has different block lengths and domain-controlled emissive colors (Fig. 5c and d). Different spatial areas of the Tb@Eu-MOF heterostructure can be selected and excited with a laser beam (375 nm) (marked as Spot 1, Spot 2, and Spot 1′ in Fig. 5e–g), which can be used as a method for spatially-resolved information coding. In summary, from the viewpoint of energy, based on the effective ion doping and energy transfer of these Ln-MOFs, distinguishable, visible or near-infrared emission colors with longer lifetimes can be easily obtained. From the view of space, the low-dimensional Ln-MOF heterostructures with multicolor barcodes can be obtained by using a stepwise heteroepitaxial growth. Linear/chiral polarized luminescence also can be achieved due to the chiral space group in the Ln-MOF micro/nanostructures.
 Fig. 5  (a) Ball-and-stick and schematic representations of the 1D inorganic helical chain running along the crystallographic 41 axis of Eu-doped Tb-BTC. Reproduced with permission.61 (b) Time-resolved emission decay curves of Ln-MOFs. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Bright-field and photoluminescence images of a Ln-MOF heterostructure. Scale bar: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission.62 (d) Illustration of a heterostructure excited with a focused laser beam. (e–g) The corresponding photoluminescence spectra collected from three different areas (marked as Spot 1, Spot 2, and Spot 1′). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Recently, we further demonstrated that MOFs doped with lanthanide cations could exhibit unusual green and red persistent luminescence.63 The doped Ln-MOF systems (Cd–Tb-MOF and Cd–Eu-MOF) have much longer lifetimes than those of the pristine Eu/Tb-based MOFs due to the RTP energy transfer. In order to elucidate the energy transfer process of the Cd–Tb-MOF and Cd—Eu-MOFs, the energy levels of the lowest singlet excited state (S1) and the lowest triplet excited state (T1) were estimated. We found that Tb3+ is better than Eu3+ in terms of sensitization with higher energy transfer efficiency and a longer lifetime. Furthermore, the MOFs doped with lanthanide cations (Eu3+/Tb3+) exhibited tunable excitation-dependent persistent luminescence and tribochromic photoemission.64 A solid-state Cd–Eu-MOF logic gate with three input signals (ultraviolet on/off and crystalline state) and three output signals (blue, green, and red persistent luminescence) was constructed. The relationships in this logic gate are three inputs combined to obtain eight luminescent states involving three emissive colors (blue, green, and red). Based on the mechanism of a structural symmetry change, a new tribochromic Cd–Eu-MOF was developed. This work provides insights into tribochromism and tunable persistently luminescent Ln-MOFs, which can be used as a new platform for the development of photonic sensor systems and multimode optical logic gates.


2.1.2 Host–guest persistently luminescent MOFs. 
MOFs with dynamic networks can change their solid-state structures reversibly—with the potential to change their properties and serve as smart materials. One way to introduce dynamic properties in terms of the persistent luminescence of MOFs is by the encapsulation of guest species (such as dyes, anions, cations, and vapors).65 Dynamic MOFs typically undergo a guest-induced transformation between two or more structures upon guest adsorption and/or solvation.66 The guest-induced structural changes of MOFs can cause sensory responses (such as fluorescence or magnetism) in some cases,67,68 and as a result these host–guest MOFs with tunable persistent luminescence have potential applications as smart sensors (Fig. 6a).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the tunable persistently luminescent MOFs based on host–guest interactions. (b) Views of the 2D/3D polythreading architecture from [111] and [010] directions. Two dangling DMF pendants (simplified by sticks for clarity), from the adjacent layers above and below (A and C), thread each window of the central one. Photoluminescence spectra of 1-DMF (c) and MOF-5 (d) with excitation at 280 and 330 nm, respectively. The corresponding crystal images under UV light and daylight are shown in the insets. (e) Time-resolved phosphorescence decay curves of 1-DMF and MOF-5. Frontier orbital (HOMO (f) and LUMO (g)) profiles and TDOS and PDOS (h) for the DFT-optimized structure of 1-DMF. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
For example, we show that two types of Zn-terephthalate (TPA)-MOFs (1-DMF and MOF-5) can exhibit persistently luminescent emission.69 In these hybrid structures, each window of the same layer of 1-DMF and MOF-5 is crossed by two overhanging DMF pendant groups (Fig. 6b). Under ambient conditions, 1-DMF and MOF-5 showed fluorescence at 326 and 434 nm and RTP emission at 503 and 513 nm (Fig. 6c and d), respectively. The phosphorescence quantum yields (ΦP) of 1-DMF and MOF-5 are 4.76% and 0.22%, respectively, and the luminescence lifetimes of 1-DMF and MOF-5 are 472 and 153 ms, respectively (Fig. 6e). After removing the ultraviolet light, the green afterglow of the Zn-based MOFs can be captured in the time range of 0–4 seconds using a digital camera, but can also be recognized by the naked eye. The difference in the luminescence between the two MOFs can be attributed to the different Zn-based metal clusters and different stacking fashions of the ligands between 1-DMF and MOF-5. DFT calculations were performed to explore the electronic structure of 1-DMF (Fig. 6f–h). The total electronic density of states (TDOS) and partial electronic density of states (PDOS) show that 1-DMF has a low band gap (3.31 eV), which corresponds to the fluorescence. Around the Fermi level, the TDOS is mainly composed of the d electrons from the Zn atoms and 2p electrons from the O atoms of the TPA ligand. Frontier orbital analysis shows that the electron density of the HOMO is mainly located on Zn2O8 metal nanoclusters containing O atoms in the TPA and Zn atoms. The transition from the HOMO to LUMO affects the lowest singlet excitation. Therefore, the longer excitation lifetime is due to the excitation and emission involving a metal–ligand charge transfer process from Zn2O8 units to organic bonds. From this combination of experimental and calculated results, the persistent luminescence of the 1-DMF MOF can be explained in the following context: (i) the Zn atoms participate in the frontier orbital distribution, thereby promoting spin–orbit coupling and improving the electron–hole separation due to charge transfer and (ii) the organic ligands are tightly fixed and locked in the hybrid framework—reducing molecular vibrations and nonradiative loss. These two properties increased the ISC between the S1 and T1 and enhanced the phosphorescence yield. Another color-tunable host–guest example is the AMOF-1, which is composed of two sets of ligands: isophthalic acid (IPA) and dimethylamine.70 The as-synthesized AMOF-1 exhibits green phosphorescence, and single crystal structure analysis shows that the AMOF-1 channels are lined with the π-electron rich phenyl rings of IPA and are occupied by dimethylamine cations that serve as an exchangeable guest. The wavelength of phosphorescence of AMOF-1 can be adjusted from blue to violet, white, yellow, orange and red based on a facile cation exchange with different concentrations of Mn2+. These reversible changes in the persistently luminescent emission indicate that AMOF-1 can be used as a Mn2+ responsive switch.
These host–guest MOFs are potentially useful in developing anti-counterfeiting materials and in biochemical applications. Xie et al. encapsulated different dyes as guests into the green-RTP MOFs, and synthesized a series of long-wavelength phosphorescent MOFs with structural stability.71 These MOFs exhibited both green and red RTP, which is due to energy transfer from the MOF to the dye. In addition, the promising optical properties of these persistently luminescent MOFs make them useful as inks for advanced anti-counterfeiting stamps (Fig. 7a). This work provides a facile method for obtaining multicolor persistently luminescent MOFs. Similarly, Lin et al. designed persistently luminescent zirconium-based nanoscale MOFs (host) with high dye (guest) loading;72 notably these nanoscale MOFs are stabilized by thin shells of amorphous silica to prevent rapid release of the guest. By coating these MOFs with poly(ethylene glycol) and poly(ethylene glycol)-anisamide, the biocompatibility and targeting efficiency of the MOF/silica core–shell nanostructures can be further improved. These anisamide-coated particles are effective contrast agents for optical imaging due to their cancer cell specificity, as demonstrated by confocal microscopy and in vitro H460 cells uptake studies (Fig. 7b).
 Fig. 7  (a) Photographs of the anti-counterfeiting stamp under natural light (left), and under ultraviolet excitation on (middle) and off (right). Exposure time was 1/400 s for the left, 1/100 s for the middle, and 1/4 s for the right, respectively. Other parameters were manually kept constant: ISO value = 3200, aperture value = 2.8, and white balance = sunlight. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Confocal microscopy images of H460 cells that have been incubated without any particles, with PEG-SiO2@2, and with AA-PEG-SiO2@2. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs) are a subclass of MOFs.73 ZIF-8 consists of tetrahedral-coordinated Zn ions and methyl imidazolate linkers with zeolite sodalite topology.74 ZIF-8 has high chemical and thermal stability and is used in many fields including catalysis, gas storage, drug delivery, energy conversion, and nonlinear optics.74–76 Ideally, ZIF-8 has potential as a phosphorescent material due to charge transfer between the methylimidazolate and Zn ions; the methyl imidazolate is a commonly used phosphorescent motif. The introduction of guests into the cavities of ZIF-8 is also able to tune the phosphorescence of the ZIF—and surprisingly can be used to generate near-infrared phosphorescence. Near-infrared luminescence is useful for night-vision identification, military devices, spectral analysis, consumer electronics, and telecommunication.77–79 However, near-infrared luminescent materials are limited—generally composed of either semiconductor quantum dots, organic dyes, noble-metals (e.g., Pt and Ir) and rare-earth (e.g., Er, Nd, and Yb) complexes.77–81 These systems are relatively less desirable due to their high costs, complicated syntheses, and relatively low stability.
Yang et al. designed a host–guest ZIF-8 system which exhibited both solid-state white-light emission and near-infrared RTP.82 This hybrid ZIF-8 was also able to change the color temperature by changing the excitation wavelength. Experimental and theoretical results showed that the guest molecules (DMF and water molecules) were critical in determining the fluorescence and phosphorescence of the ZIF. This work not only provides direct white light emission and tunable near-infrared RTP but also describes a detailed mechanism of understanding how a guest-induced energy level modulation mechanism works for a wide luminescence transformation from ultraviolet-visible to near-infrared regions.
Mieno et al. demonstrated that the non-radiative deactivation of the guest emitter can be significantly reduced by encapsulation within the ZIF-8, and long phosphorescence (lifetime: 22.4 s) can be observed even at temperatures of up to 460 K.83 In addition, the small pore windows of ZIF-8 can block the diffusion of the emitting molecule, thus eliminating the possibility of thermal leaching and diffusion (Fig. 8a). XRD showed that the guest (coronene) is completely isolated within the pores of the ZIF-8 (Fig. 8b). The rigidity of the ZIF-8 inhibits the molecular movement of the guest. They also showed that long-lived triplet excitons generated in coronene@ZIF-8 involved a typical TADF process (Fig. 8c), in which the color of the long-lived luminescence is controlled through the temperature. This concept opens up a promising path for triplet excitons with long lifetime at high temperatures.
 Fig. 8  (a) Structure of coronene@ZIF-8. (b) XRD patterns of simulated ZIF-8 (black line), ZIF-8 (blue line), coronene-h12@ZIF-8 (red line), and coronene-d12@ZIF-8 (green line). Reproduced with permission.83 (c) Photographs of a coronene-h12@ZIF-8 single crystal under reflected light (left), under UV light (middle), and after UV irradiation was turned off (right). Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 


2.1.3 MOFs for stimulus-responsive persistent luminescence. 
In the past few decades, stimulus-responsive luminescent materials that respond to external stimuli (such as vaporous, mechanical, electric, and thermal conditions) have been widely used in sensors, data recording, security systems, and storage devices due to their sensitive signals and facile imaging.84–90 Compared to a typical fluorescence system, the phosphorescence usually involves triplet excited states and slow decay rates, which facilitate their use in biological systems and time-gated experiments—since the decayed emission can be effectively separated from auto-fluorescence background.87–89
In response to mechanical stimuli (e.g., shearing, rubbing, and grinding), the emission wavelength, intensity, and/or lifetime of mechanochromic materials can change.91 This process is usually caused by the modification of intermolecular interactions (such as hydrogen bonding and π–π stacking),92,93 and these materials can usually return to their original state after thermal or vapor treatment.91–94 As a result, designing a reasonable balance of intermolecular interactions has become important to the design of mechanically responsive luminescent materials. Until recently, long-lived luminescent CP materials with mechanochromism have been investigated. Yang et al. chose benzimidazole (BIM) and anthracene-9-carboxylate (9-AC) as ligands based on the following design strategy: (i) the conjugated π-systems of the anthracene ring facilitate forming triplet excitons, and the carbonyl group can also enhance the spin–orbit coupling between the singlet states and triplet states; (ii) BIM can dimerize with 9-AC through hydrogen bonding, π–π stacking, and C–H⋯π stacking interactions, and form an excimer/exciplex between them.95 Finally, Cd is selected as the metal unit as it promotes mixing of the S and T states, and can promote energy transfer between the S and T states, thereby increasing the possibility of reverse ISC. These Cd-based CPs have a reversible TADF response under mechanical and vapor-based stimuli. This characteristic is achieved due to transition between the excimer and exciplex due to the forces of stacking interactions and the weak intermolecular interactions under external grinding. Hence, this work provides a new way for constructing mechanochromic TADF based on a transformation mechanism between excimer and exciplex states in the 2D micro/nanostructure.
Besides mechano-responsive sensors, temperature- and gas-dependent persistently luminescent MOFs have also been developed. Li et al. reported that the construction of cluster-based MOFs can provide an alternative method for adjusting fluorescence and phosphorescence emission based on different adjustable interactions (such as π–π stacking, metal cluster units, and halogen bonding).96 The persistent luminescence and temperature-dependent luminescence allow the Zn5 cluster-based MOF to be used as a phosphorescence-responsive switch for anti-counterfeiting by tuning S and T states. Moreover, An et al. developed the TPA-based MOFs with high crystallinity, which exhibit persistent luminescence under ambient conditions. Changes in the cations (Na+, NH4+, or K+) in the MOF phosphors provide access to tunable persistently luminescent colors from sky blue to yellow-green, along with ultralong emission lifetimes as long as 504 ms.97 The reversible ultralong RTP can be achieved by alternately using fuming acid–base gases (hydrogen chloride and ammonia), which demonstrate potential as a hydrogen chloride or ammonia gas sensor. The results provide a practical environmentally responsible synthetic method for expanding the range of persistently luminescent materials and their applications.

2.2 Organic–inorganic metal halide hybrids
The spin–orbit coupling of electronic states plays an important role in the photophysics of molecular hybrid systems.98 Due to mixing of electronic states, the incorporation of heavy atoms into molecular systems leads to changes in photophysical and/or photochemical parameters, which is known as the heavy atom effect.99 This effect is called intramolecular or “internal” when heavy atoms are the chemical part of molecules, while it is called “external” when they belong to the environment. Winefordner et al. demonstrated that the effect of external heavy atoms in long-lived RTP is applicable to many compounds.100–102 It is generally acknowledged that due to the heavy atom effect, persistent luminescence in the case of metal-free organic systems can be enhanced by introduction of halogen atoms (such as I or Br).
Hybrid perovskites that combine organic and inorganic semiconductors at the molecular scale have recently become popular due to their advantages of high luminescence efficiency and carrier mobility.103 For example, 2D layered hybrid perovskites with their natural quantum well structure form dense and uniform films with good moisture resistance and thermal stability.104,105 In addition, the rigid inorganic laminates of perovskites can control the energy transfer from the Wannier excitons to triplet excitons, which is favorable for producing phosphorescence from the organic units.
Yang et al. proposed a simple method for synthesizing organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites with persistent luminescence, which involves doping fluorophores into the organic unit, which inhibits the T–T annihilation process (Fig. 9a).106 This work showed that doping of fluorophores into hybrid perovskites is a promising strategy for designing highly efficient persistent luminescence materials. Ema et al. observed that efficient energy transfer occurred from the inorganic cations in the perovskite to the T state of the organic cations (naphthalene derivative), which produced strong persistent luminescence.107 Hu et al. designed a series of organic cation-based organometallic perovskites, one of which combines PbBr2 with an organic cation (thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2-methyl-ammonium bromide (TTMABr)) as shown in Fig. 9b.108 They observed that the emission was delayed by 0.2 ms after excitation with a peak wavelength of 590 nm (Fig. 9c). By confining the excitons to the high energy levels of the host molecules, the embedded emitters in the host–guest hybrid system can efficiently reduce the exciton quenching (Fig. 9d). This strategy has been reported for achieving efficient persistent luminescence and is commonly used in organic LEDs (OLEDs). In order to design a similar host–guest system, perovskite (PEA)2PbBr4(PPB) based on phenethylammonium (PEA) was selected as the host, and the PEA cations were partially substituted by thieno[3,2-b]thiophene-2-methylammonium (TTMA) cations, which served as the guest (Fig. 9e). The excitons in the PEA-based perovskite were confined by the PEA molecules (which served as energetic barriers), which resulted in bright exciton emission of around 420 nm (Fig. 9f). Fig. 9f shows that (PEA0.9TTMA0.1)2PbBr4 (PTPB) has its maximum ΦP among all the TTMA concentrations. The PTPB exhibited quenching of the fluorescence peak, while the RTP peaks (500–750 nm) dominated the emission, corresponding to the bright yellow color (Fig. 9g). This design strategy reveals the potential of hybrid perovskites as highly efficient long-lived phosphors in the next generation of optoelectronics.
 Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis and structural illustration of the hybrid perovskites. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Structural illustration of the layered hybrid perovskite (TTMA)2PbBr4 (TPB) with TTMA cation.108 (c) Absorption, phosphorescence, and corresponding spectra of the TPB thin film.108 (d) Schematic illustration of the optical excitation, energy transfer, and relaxation paths of excited states in TPB.108 (e) Structural illustration of PEA-based perovskite (PPB) doped with TTMA.108 (f) Photoluminescence spectra of PPB, PTPB, and TPB.108 (g) Photographs of perovskite thin films under ambient light and ultraviolet light. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Very similar to the organic–inorganic perovskites noted above, hybrid metal halides (OIMHs) have achieved attention due to their high proton conductivity and optical/electrical applications in photovoltaics, ferroelectrics, and LEDs.109–111 The easy tuning of the composition and structure of OIMHs allows for diversity of design in photo-functional materials. The dimensionality of OIMHs can be adjusted from 3D to 0D by choosing the inorganic and organic components appropriately. The low temperature synthesis and low economic cost of OIMH thin films enables convenient device fabrication. For example, by doping 1,8-naphthalimide (NI) into 2D Pb-based OIMHs, the T–T annihilation process of luminophores can be inhibited.112 High-efficiency RTP emission can be obtained with a maximum ΦP of 56.1% in crystals and 11.4% in thin films. Two different organic cations, 1-naphthalenemethy-lammonium (NTA) and 4-biphenylmethylamine (BPA) are assembled into the 2D Zn-based OIHM (PEZB) laminates to obtain hybrid OIHMs (PEZB-BPA and PEZB-NTA). They show highly efficient RTP with a ΦP as high as 42%. The different RTP colors and lifetimes obtained from tEZB-BPA, PEZB-NIA, and PEZB-NTA can be used in the design of different anti-counterfeiting patterns.
To date, persistently luminescent OIMHs are mostly composed of 2D PbX42− (X = I, Br and Cl) systems. The triplet states are induced by doped organic cations in the hybrid systems, and the long-lived phosphorescence is due to efficient energy transfer between the doped organic molecules and the layers of inorganic materials, which suppress exciton quenching. Besides the 2D systems, 0D OIMHs also exhibit unique properties that are useful in developing new persistently luminescent materials.113 Recently, a 0D OIMH [BPy]6[Pb3Br12] with RTP was synthesized by Gong et al.114 Through molecular sensitization, its ΦP was increased by up to 14-fold. They also synthesized Pb2(PLA)(H2O)2Br2 (PLA, 1,4-phenylenediacetic acid) that showed anti-Kasha's rule RTP.115 According to the photophysical studies, the twisted intramolecular charge transfer in flexible ligands may be the origin of the anti-Kasha luminescence under the influence of temperature, excitation wavelength and ligand variables. Xu et al. also developed a series of 0D tetraphenylphosphonium metal OIMHs, which showed a change in the phosphorescence lifetime by changing the metal halides.116 During the same time, we designed 0D OIMHs, which exhibit rare zero thermal-quenching phosphorescence, because weak TADF bands can be used as energy buffer layers to compensate for the phosphorescence losses when the temperature is increased by 200 K.117
To meet the challenging goals of long-lived and high-efficiency photoemission, a strategy can use the heavy atom effect to construct materials with persistent TADF with high ΦP. For example, our group has developed metal cadmium-based halide perovskites, which show a weaker heavy atom effect compared to those of Ir3+- or Pt2+-based materials.118 The metal Cd and the organic unit (4-hydroxypyridine (4HP)) have a D–π–A type structure. The resulting 2D blue luminescent hybrid perovskite (CdCl2-4HP) exhibits not only a high ΦP of 63.55% but also an ultralong lifetime of 103.12 ms at room temperature in air. In order to detect the electronic mechanism of CdCl2-4HP perovskites with different heavy atom effects, DFT calculations were used to calculate the band structures, density of states (DOS) and electron-density distribution (Fig. 10a). Taking advantage of the combination of simple fluorescence (2-methylimidazole (2MA)), RTP (Zn-TPA) and TADF (CdCl2-4HP) systems with their respective time-resolved light emission characteristics, an information encryption mode was developed (Fig. 10b). The original information “1” can be encrypted under the pseudo information “E” through two consecutive encryption processes. The only way to access the information is to stop the light excitation and to wait for at least 5 s. If, instead of waiting for more than 5 s, only 1 s has elapsed, the decoy information “F” is displayed. This extra layer of information improves the overall security level and creates a double-encryption system. Thus, the time-resolved persistently luminescent perovskite materials are a good choice for information security applications. As another example, Han and his co-workers observed TADF in all-inorganic Cs2ZrCl6 perovskite nanocrystals. The Cs2ZrCl6 system presents very high ΦP (60.37%), which is promising for optoelectronic applications.119
 Fig. 10  (a) The calculated molecular orbitals, the band structures around the Fermi energy level, the schematic representation of photophysical processes and the total/partial electronic density of states for CdCl2-4HP. Krs and Knrs are the radiative and non-radiative decay rate constants of the S1 state, respectively. KISC and KRISC are the ISC and reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) rate constants, respectively. KrT and KnrT are the radiative and non-radiative decay rate constants of the T1 state, respectively. (b) Diagram depicting the evolution from double information encryption to decryption. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.3 2D clay nanosheets: layered double hydroxides
Layered double hydroxides (LDHs) present a large family of 2D anionic clays and can be described by the general formula [MII1−xMIIIx(OH)2]z+An−z/n·yH2O (MII are divalent metal ions and MIII are trivalent metal ions; An− is an anion).120,121 The structure of the LDH layer is based on brucite. The positive charges on the LDH layers can be further balanced by anions in the galleries of LDH interlayers. The elemental composition and charge density of LDHs can be controlled through the synthetic process, which helps to fine-tune the properties of the LDH layers.120–124 The crystalline and rigid LDH sheets can provide a nanoscale anisotropic microenvironment for the interlayer guest chromophores, which favors the formation of ordered arrangement of phosphor aggregation states with extended excitation lifetime. In addition, LDHs can also provide an interlayer electric field for the polarization of guest molecules due to the positively charged LDH layers.125,126

2.3.1 LDH-based persistently luminescent materials. 
In a recent work, we chose different isomeric benzene dicarboxylates as model systems (isophthalic acid (IPA), phthalic acid (PA), and terephthalic acid (TPA)), as the n–π* transition of the carboxylic acid group helps to enhance the spin–orbit coupling and produce a long-lived triplet state after being fixed into the 2D nano-gallery of LDHs.127 The resulting host–guest nano-hybrid materials exhibit a green long-lived luminescence, confirming that the formation of 2D intercalation nano-hybrids is indeed a viable alternative to the typical crystallization of molecular materials. The strong blue emission from PA/LDH, IPA/LDH and TPA/LDH nano-hybrids can be observed under ultraviolet excitation (320 nm). After removing the excitation source, the emission color turns to green before slowly fading, which can be easily recognized by the naked eye (Fig. 11a). Time-resolved luminescence showed that three LDH nano-hybrids have long lifetimes (Fig. 11b). The corresponding ΦP of PA/LDHs, IPA/LDHs, and TPA/LDHs were 0.71%, 0.69% and 3.02%, respectively. Due to the high photo-emission lifetime of the IPA/LDH nanosheets, the persistent luminescence can be detected up to 6 s after removing the ultraviolet light.
 Fig. 11  (a) Steady-state fluorescence (left) and phosphorescence (right) spectra of PA/LDH, IPA/LDH and TPA/LDH nanohybrids. Insets show the corresponding photographs taken before (left) and after (right) the excitation source is turned off. (b) Time-resolved emission decay profiles of PA/LDH (at 475 nm), IPA/LDH (at 489 nm), and TPA/LDH (at 480 nm). All compounds were excited at 320 nm. (c) Typical snapshot of MD simulation for IPA between the Zn–Al-LDH monolayers. (d) The distribution of orientational angle θ1 (the plane of IPA with respect to the LDH monolayer) (left). The distribution of the central distance between two nearest neighboring IPA anions for the IPA/LDH system (middle). The distribution of orientational angle θ2 between transition dipole vectors of IPA and the lineation vectors of two nearest IPA anion centers (right). Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Molecular dynamic simulations show a typical side-view snapshot of the configuration capturing the IPA/LDH nano-hybrids (Fig. 11c) with the most likely angle of IPA anions relative to the LDH monolayer being about 83°, indicating that the IPA anions are almost perpendicular to the LDH monolayer and stacked in a single layer (Fig. 11d, left). In addition, the average distance between two neighboring IPA anions within the LDH layer is ca. 0.48 nm, which helps to form strong π–π interactions between the phosphors of the interlayer (Fig. 11d, middle). The relative orientation of the two IPA anions next to each other is distributed between 51° and 86° (Fig. 11d, right) with an optimal angle of 69° that shows H-aggregates of the IPA anions. This stacking fashion is also consistent with the luminescent blue-shift of IPA/LDH nano-hybrids compared with that of pure IPA. Huang et al. proposed that H-aggregates can stabilize the T1, and extend the RTP lifetime.27 Therefore, the appearance of H-type IPA in the 2D LDH nano-sheets corresponds to the enhancement of the persistent luminescence. The single-photon and two-photon phosphorescence is also observed for the LDH-based luminescence system; so this work may also open up a wide range of layered phosphorescent nano-hybrids for light-emission and illumination applications.
Based on the above principle, the defects of LDHs can be used to stabilize triplet excitons and enhance the persistent luminescence of carbon dots (CDs). The use of inorganic LDH matrixes with ordered metal arrays and dual structural confinements can activate the persistent luminescence of CDs.128 The ordered arrangement of Zn within the LDH layers helps to enhance the spin–orbit coupling of the excitons and reduces the energy gap of the S–T states. Structural confinement of the LDH layers and the nano-interlayers proves that the suppression of non-radiative processes occurs in the CD-LDHs with RTP. In other CD-LDHs systems, the materials have long persistent luminescence lifetimes (800 ms) in air.129 The appearance of an exciton transfer process associated with tunnels facilitates the CD-LDHs in obtaining long-lived RTP.


2.3.2 LDH-based anti-forgery and stimulus-responsive persistent luminescence. 
In our daily lives, anti-counterfeiting measures are growing rapidly in industrial processes for printing items such as banknotes, postage stamps, checks, passports, tamper-evident labels, stock certificates, security tapes, product authentication, and identity cards.130–132 Many technical methods are used in the security printing industry.130–134 Anti-counterfeiting inks have become popular due to their application in anti-forgery technology.135–139 The persistent luminescence properties of LDH-based hybrid materials make them attractive materials for anti-forgery inks in the fields of information security and anti-counterfeiting. For example, we prepared PMA/LDH@PAA hybrid (PMA = 1,2,4,5-benzenetetracarboxylic acid, and PAA = polyacrylic acid) as an anti-counterfeiting ink.140 The PMA/LDH@PAA dispersion is almost colorless under sunlight and emits bright cyan under ultraviolet light. First, when writing the word “Smoke” by hand on a cigarette case (Fig. 12a), no letters can be seen on the surface in daylight. However, nder 254 nm ultraviolet light, the bright blue word “Smoke” and the proprietary fluorescent anti-counterfeiting marks can be observed (Fig. 12a, middle). After turning off the ultraviolet light, the word “Smoke” can still be seen by the naked eye, but the fluorescent anti-counterfeiting markers disappeared (Fig. 12a, right). This demonstration shows that PMA/LDH@PAA has potential to be used in anti-forgery labels. In addition, in order to demonstrate the potential of these PMA/LDH@PAA dispersions for practical applications in information encryption, PMA/LDH@PAA and (PMA/LDH)@(PAA@AY) (AY = Acid Yellow 73) multicolor persistently luminescent inks were used to construct a 2D square barcode system (Fig. 12b, left). Under ultraviolet irradiation, bluish violet (from the left zone) of PMA/LDH@PAA and bright green (from the right zone) of (PMA/LDH)@(PAA@AY) are observed in the 2D square barcode (Fig. 12b, middle). These colors became the bright blue of PMA/LDH@PAA and bluish green of (PMA/LDH)@(PAA@AY) after turning off the ultraviolet excitation (Fig. 12b, right). The three-color mode 2D barcode demo confirms the applicability of multicolored persistently luminescent anti-forgery inks in advanced information security systems.
 Fig. 12  (a) Photographs of handwritten characters on a cigarette case in daylight, under an ultraviolet lamp (254 nm) and after the lamp was turned off.140 (b) Photographs of a 2D barcode on paper in daylight, under an ultraviolet lamp (254 nm), and with the ultraviolet lamp turned off. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (c) Procedure for assembling long phosphorescent thin films based on the LBL method.141 The phosphorescence response profiles of the (TA/LDH@PAA)80 thin film to (d) pyridine and (e) nitrobenzene at different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
From an engineering perspective, thin films with persistent luminescence are expected to play an important role in the development of a new generation of “smart” sensors, because a phosphorescent film with high sensitivity and easy operation is the key to practical applications. In a recent research study, we developed an ordered assembly method for LDH-based persistently luminescent films using a layer-by-layer process with hydrogen-bonding interaction (Fig. 12c).140,141 LDH-based thin films exhibit polarized persistent luminescence and can be used as sensors for volatile organic compounds (VOCs).141 In order to systematically explore the detection sensitivity, the RTP is measured in different concentration (0.01, 0.1, 1, 10, 50 and 100 ppm) solutions containing nitrobenzene and pyridine. Fig. 12d shows the RTP intensity of the LDH-based thin film responsive to pyridine at a low concentration. After the film is treated with 0.01 ppm of pyridine, a 20% decrease in intensity is observed, and after the film is treated with 50 ppm of pyridine, the persistent luminescence intensity of the film is almost completely quenched. Meanwhile, Fig. 12e shows the typical persistently luminescent spectra of the thin film in response to different concentrations of nitrobenzene. After treating the film with a nitrobenzene solution (concentration: 0.01 ppm), the persistent luminescence is greatly reduced, and the peak position has a red shift. In addition, the recovery and reproducibility of the RTP in the LDH-based thin film are studied. After thoroughly washing the film, the emission wavelength and RTP intensity of the film can return to their original states. The thin film shows at least 10 cycles of reversible changes of light emission, indicating its potential application as a persistently luminescent sensor for VOCs. This layer-by-layer assembly process can be extended to fabricate other inorganic–organic persistently luminescent hybrids for “smart” luminescent sensors.


2.3.3 LDH-based persistent luminescence as a photosensitizer. 
Singlet oxygen has strong oxidizing properties and is popular in biology and catalysis studies.142–144 However, due to their weak absorptivity, poor biocompatibility and low hydrophilicity, photosensitizers for generating singlet oxygen are still inadequate. Recently, the use of near-infrared activated photodynamic therapy technology has been considered to be a promising method as it allows for increased depth of the treatment.145–148 Specifically, two-photon near-infrared activated photodynamic therapy technology has better spatial selectivity and penetration depth.149,150 Our group demonstrated that the 2D confined long-lived triplet excitons can be used as a method for achieving efficient singlet oxygen generation in the near-infrared region (Fig. 13a).151 After being excited by an 808 nm femtosecond laser, five typical LDH-based systems exhibited low-wavelength RTP, and their emission peaks were very close to the emission peaks excited by 320 nm (Fig. 13b). In order to select suitable supramolecular photosensitizers for the study of photodynamic therapy, the singlet oxygen emission of LDH nano-hybrids at 1270 nm was studied. Obviously, the emission intensity of the IPA/LDHs nano-hybrids at 1270 nm was much higher than those of others. We observed that the two-photon-induced singlet oxygen quantum yield based on the self-assembly of LDHs reached up to 74%. In addition, TEM (Fig. 13c) showed that IPA/LDH consists of pseudo-hexagonal nano-sheets with a diameter distribution of ca. 50 nm. Based on in vitro tests, we showed that the photodynamic therapy has good biocompatibility (Fig. 13d and e). In vivo therapeutic studies have also shown a strong ability to complete tumor ablation. The toxicity studies using a large LDH nano-hybrid dosage have shown that there is almost no in vivo toxicity. This work demonstrates a successful example of LDH-based triplet photosensitizer with efficient singlet oxygen generation through near-infrared excitation, which shows a promising application for cancer therapy.
 Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of nano-hybrids as two-photon photosensitizers for the 1O2 generation. Schematic representation of the LDH host and five aromatic RTP guest species, as well as the 2D confined long-lived triplet excitons that can function as a photosensitizing means to achieve efficient 1O2 generation under an 808 nm near-infrared laser. (b) Photoemission spectra of BA/LDH, IPA/LDH, TA/LDH, PMA/LDH, and MA/LDH nanohybrid-TPA excitation by an 808 nm laser at the same power. (c) Structural characterization and evaluation of 1O2 production efficiency. A TEM image, scale bar = 100 nm. The corresponding calcein-AM/PI staining images of cells treated with IPA (d) and IPA/LDH (e) following irradiation. Scale bar = 50 nm. Reproduced with permission.151 Inset of figure c is the diameter distribution of IPA/LDH. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 


2.3.4 LDH-based high-efficiency phosphorescence energy transfer. 
Optimizing the efficiency of the energy storage and transfer of light plays an important role in meeting modern challenges, which focuses on minimizing energy losses and developing high-performance optoelectronic materials.152–154 In principle, persistently luminescent materials can be used as effective donors for energy transfer as they can replace the instantaneous spike in energy density associated with fluorescence donors for energy transfer. Long-lived luminescent materials release energy over a longer period of time, which causes complete energy transfer between donor and acceptor units (Fig. 14a).127 Recently, we proposed a strategy for energy transfer at the interface of 2D ordered LDHs.127 First, we assembled IPA as the guest into the LDH interlayer (host) to obtain new 2D ultra-thin nano-sheets that provide persistent luminescence. Then the IPA (donor) was co-intercalated with eosin Y (acceptor) into the interlayer of 2D LDH nano-sheets to obtain the efficient phosphorescent energy transfer system. Furthermore, the energy transfer efficiency (EP) is up to 99.7%, due to the spatial and energy confinement effects of the LDH layer and the extended lifetime, as confirmed theoretically and experimentally (Fig. 14b–e). Therefore, this work provides an efficient phosphorescent energy transfer system based on 2D persistently luminescent nano-sheets.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of different energy transfer processes showing how phosphorescence energy transfer leads to more efficiency than conventional fluorescence energy transfer. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectrum of pure eosin Y and phosphorescence spectrum of IPA/LDH. (c) Phosphorescence spectra of pure eosin Y, IPA/LDH, eosin Y/LDH and (IPA@eosin Y)/LDH. The frontier orbitals (d) and energy levels of states involved in the phosphorescence energy transfer process (e) for (IPA@eosin Y)/LDH. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 

2.4 Carbon dot-assembled zeolites with persistent luminescence
Carbon dots (CDs) stand for an emerging 0D carbon family that has received extensive attention as photo-functional materials in the past decade.155–158 Compared with traditional organic fluorophores and semiconductor quantum dots, CDs have extraordinary chemical and/or optical advantages, including good biocompatibility, low toxicity, aqueous solubility, and excitation-dependent photoemission.156–160 Despite tremendous achievements in the photoluminescence properties and applications of CDs, the research on the persistent luminescence is still in its infancy. Some efforts have been made to achieve long afterglow and further explore their potential applications.161–163 From a mechanistic point of view, the persistent luminescence of the CD-based nano-materials is mainly related to their T state emission, namely phosphorescence (radiative transition from the T1 to the S0) and delayed fluorescence (radiative transition from the S1 to S0via the reverse ISC process).9
Most TADF materials so far are limited to oxygen-sensitive organic molecules, with lifetimes of a few microseconds or milliseconds.164 Yu and co-workers developed a facial and general “CDs in zeolites” strategy to confine CDs to the zeolitic matrices to produce a series of highly efficient TADF hybrid materials with ultra-long lifetimes. The persistent luminescence behavior of the hybrids are attributed to the confined effect of the zeolitic matrices and the hydrogen bonding interactions between two components.165–169 For example, in 2017, materials with ultralong-lived TADF were prepared by in situ incorporation of CDs in the zeolitic matrices through hydrothermal/solvothermal routes.165 The resultant CDs@zeolite hybrids have a high quantum yield of up to 52.14% and an ultralong lifetime of 350 ms at room temperature in air. The TADF performance is due to the fact that the nano-confined zeolites space can efficiently stabilize the T states of CDs, thereby realizing the reverse ISC process of delayed fluorescence (Fig. 15a). At the same time, the zeolite frameworks can also prevent oxygen quenching, thereby promoting the long persistent luminescence in air. They demonstrated the promising application of CDs@zeolite hybrid as a “smart” material for dual-mode safety protection. The fluorescence signal from benzil serves as one mode for information safety, and the visible TADF from CDs@2D-AlPO serves as another mode with the persistent luminescence after removing the excitation (Fig. 15b). They also designed two afterglow CDs@zeolite hybrids with distinct RTP and TADF properties, which have been in situ solvothermally synthesized by using the same zinc aluminophosphate zeolite matrix but different organic templates.166 This work shows that tuning the photoluminescence through organic templates is a powerful method for preparing and modulating a new kind of afterglow material. Additionally, based on the energy transfer between the heteroatoms and the CDs in the zeolite matrix, they also obtained a red-RTP CDs@zeolite hybrid.167 Then, they developed a CDs-matrix energy transfer strategy for promoting the red RTP performance of the CDs@zeolite hybrid (Fig. 15c). This method focuses on two important factors: (1) a carbon source (mainly an organic amine template), which is preselected to modulate the triplet energy levels of the resulting CDs and energy transfer overlap between the CDs and the matrix; (2) the coordination geometry of the Mn ions in the framework is used to modulate the emission of different acceptors. According to such a CDs-matrix energy transfer route, they obtained a strong red RTP with a ΦP of up to 9.6%. Fig. 15d shows the unique triple-mode switching encryption from CDs@zeolite. The reasonable combination of CDs and host matrices provides a general method to fabricate various CD-based hybrid materials with the required persistent emission. Different from the energy transfer between CDs and zeolite, by utilizing the energy transfer between confined CDs, they embedded different emissive CDs into a zeolite matrix and successfully prepared a series of CDs@zeolite hybrids with tunable persistent luminescence from blue to green.169 The energy transfer process occurs from the blue luminescent CDs (donor) to the green luminescent CDs (acceptor) with different degrees of polymerization, thereby promoting tunable emission with cyan, mint green and olive green colors. Hence, CDs@zeolite hybrids with long-lived persistent luminescence can be used as a “smart material” in security printing. Furthermore, it is expected that these CD-based systems can also be used as ideal contrast agents in future high-sensitivity bioimaging and even in photovoltaic devices due to the efficient triplet excitons.
 Fig. 15  (a) Left: CDs dispersed in the mother liquid show the prompt fluorescence with a short-lived lifetime. The triplet state would be quenched by nonradiative processes such as the active intramolecular vibrations and rotations. Right: The terminal OH groups of the interrupted zeolite framework, along with the occluded organic SDAs may form extensive hydrogen bonds with the surface functional groups of CDs to suppress the nonradiative relaxation of CDs from intramolecular vibrations and rotations and thus stabilize the triplet excited states.165 (b) The security pattern of a rose is coded with the CDs@2D-AlPO as the flower part and the benzil dye molecule as the leaf and stem parts. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Proposed CDs-matrix energy transfer process between CDs and the MnAPO-CJ50 matrix with octahedral Mn2+ centers.168 (d) Schematic diagram and time-resolved security features for triple-mode color-switching encryption. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
2.5 Quantum dots/nanocrystalline materials
Quantum dots (QDs) are crystalline semiconductors, where the electronic wave function is confined in one (or more) dimensions. This quantum confinement of a QD is generally defined in terms of its excitonic states, where the physical size of the semiconductor is on the order of (or smaller) than the Bohr radius.170,171 As a result, the excitonic energies can be approximated by a particle-in-a-box potential model—allowing the optoelectronic properties of the QDs to simply be tuned by the size/shape of the nanocrystals. Here, we refer to colloidal QDs (rather than epitaxial QDs), which are typically composed of inorganic cores coated with organic ligands. As chromophores/fluorophores, QDs have several advantageous properties (as compared to traditionally-used organic/inorganic chromophores) including: narrow, tunable emission (which allows for controllable/high color purity), broad absorption spectra, resistance to photobleaching, and large two-photon cross-sections.172–183 This tunability is one of the advantages of QDs that has triggered their widespread implementation in applications including LEDs,184 bio-imaging,185 solar cells,186 and catalysis.187,188
Many of the commonly used QD materials (e.g., CdSe, CdS, InP, and ZnS) are direct band-gap semiconductors with strong oscillator strengths for their band-edge electronic transitions—resulting in fast radiative recombination and (relatively) short emission lifetimes of 10–100 ns. Furthermore, QDs do not have well-defined singlet–triplet states due to the 10–25 meV energy splitting between the singlet and triplet states.171 One strategy for lengthening the emission lifetime of QDs is through the formation of energetic “heterojunctions”—commonly found in core–shell structures. These heterojunctions promote separation of the electron and hole (akin to a charge transfer state) and delay radiative recombination; common examples of these heterostructures include CdSe/CdTe, CdSe/CdS, and CdSe/ZnSe with lifetimes as long as a microsecond.189–191 A second related approach is to chemically dope the QDs with ions that will serve as trap sites for one of the charge carriers. These dopants can be added during synthesis by adding the dopants directly into the reaction mixture or can be introduced post-synthetically through cation exchange. Commonly used dopants include Mn2+, Cu+, and Ag+192 with lifetimes of up to 1 ms for ZnSe/ZnS QDs doped with Mn2+.193 These chemically doped QDs can also exhibit dual-color emission with emission from both the band-gap of the QDs and the metal dopant center. For example, Klimov and coworkers showed that when they doped lead halide perovskite QDs with Mn2+ they were able to achieve dual-color emission where they could modify the colors by changing both the halide content as well as the concentration of Mn2+ within the QD.
Another strategy for producing QDs with long emission lifetimes is simply to combine QDs with organic phosphors. The idea behind this strategy is to combine the excellent light absorptivity/stability of QDs with the well-defined singlet–triplet states of organic molecules. These organic phosphors can be chemically bound to the surface of the QDs,194,195 freely diffusing in solution,196 or in solid-state materials.197 This strategy relies upon triplet–triplet energy transfer from the QDs to the bound molecules which is found by emission from these molecules or energy transfer to another nearby molecule with emission lifetimes of several milliseconds.196 However, this strategy of combining QDs with phosphors is still a relatively nascent field—most examples use either CdSe QDs or lead-based QDs with the organic acceptor molecule generally being a polyacene. Future works should look at using new combinations of donor QDs and acceptor phosphors with the goal of looking at ways to increase the phosphorescence yield/lifetime while also programming new functionality into these materials—either by introducing more molecules to the surface of the QDs or modifying the acceptor.
3. Organics/organic molecular hybrid materials
Organic persistent luminescence has attracted great attention due to its widespread application in photobiology and optoelectronics (such as OLEDs and biological imaging).24,27 By virtue of easy fabrication and low cost, the development of purely organic (typically as metal-free) phosphorescent materials have received great attention. Pure organic persistently luminescent materials are attractive candidates, and have the advantages of wide variety, appreciable stability, high biocompatibility, and good processability. However, the persistent luminescence of purely organic molecules is fairly weak due to the inefficient spin–orbit coupling. Therefore, researchers are committed to achieving efficient RTP and TADF by developing new methods, such as rational design of molecular structures, careful crystallization, embedding into suitable matrixes, and so on.198,199
3.1 Molecular solid-state engineering: co-crystals and mixed crystals
Molecular solid-state engineering in orderly crystalline solids is used in various aspects of modern materials science to tailor bulk physiochemical properties.200 Changing the luminescence properties of molecular materials by controlling and tuning the arrangement, orientation and intermolecular interactions of the fluorophores in solids plays an important role in achieving persistent luminescence.201 The formation of multi-component molecular solids and polymorphs has aroused great attention because they are new methods to achieve controlled luminescence and other photophysical properties, which can be used in next-generation photo-functional materials. The luminescence properties are adjusted by changing the molecular packing pattern within the crystal structure, that is, by forming polymorphs, which are different solid crystal phases of specific compounds due to different arrangements of the molecules (Fig. 16a and b) within the solid state.202 This tunable emission behavior based on polymorphs not only provides an effective method for tailoring the luminescence properties of molecular materials, but also gives an understanding of the relationship between the molecular packing/arrangement fashion and bulk optical properties of specific compounds. As an alternative method for forming single-material polymorphs, the synthesis of multi-component molecular solids has also attracted widespread attention in the fields of crystal engineering and molecule-based materials chemistry. For example, they have been widely used to improve the stability, bioavailability, and pharmacological activity of drug molecules.202 Herein, the term “multi-component solids” mainly includes co-crystals and mixed crystals. Their difference is that co-crystals are assembled from two or more different kinds of neutral molecules with suitable ratios, while mixed crystals are usually composed of molecules with similar shapes and sizes with relatively free ratios. Incorporating the target chromophore with multiple co-assembled units (co-formers) into co-crystals and mixed crystals is more flexible than the formation of pure polymorphs. Constructing well-organized multi-component materials by assembling two or more units has become an alternative method to obtain tunable long-lived photoemission (Fig. 16c).202 Following this trend, the use of crystal engineering techniques based on weak intermolecular interactions has recently been explored in persistently luminescent hybrid materials.
 Fig. 16  Polymorphs (a and b) of a single chromophore (cyan color) and a multi-component solid (c) of the same chromophore assembled with a co-former (blue color). The different packing modes can give different fluorescence emission from the same chromophore. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Great efforts have been made in the development of single-component and multi-component (mixed crystals and/or co-crystals) persistently luminescent materials, and several strategies have been proposed. Crystallization-induced persistent luminescence in single-component organic materials was firstly observed by Tang and co-workers in various halogenated benzophenones, esters, and so on.203 In 2011, Bolton et al. demonstrated a generalizable method to improve the RTP efficiency of organic materials using the mixed crystal design.20 They reported detailed studies on these mixed crystals based on hybridization of bromobenzaldehyde guest emitters into the crystal host of dibromobenzene with fine-tuned RTP color and optimized emission efficiency. They explained that the efficient inclusion of the emitter into the host crystal is essential to optimize the QE. RTP emission of the mixed crystals is highly polarized because the bromobenzaldehyde guests are ordered in the host crystal of dibromobenzene. The host compounds can tolerate a variety of surprising emitter sizes, where the maximum QE can be obtained when the size of the emitters and hosts are the same (the former accounts for 1–10 wt% of total solids). The optimum QE of these systems are between 45–55%. In order to fine-tune the RTP emission color, changing the halogen substitution of the emitter molecule can change the maximum emission value within the green region by 5–30 nm.
It is known that some types of fluorescent molecules can present strong phosphorescence in a frozen diluted solution due to the suppression of non-radiative decay of triplet energy.204 The solid solvent matrix also suppresses the aggregation-induced emission quenching of the phosphorescent chromophore. In addition, the enhancement of spin–orbit coupling can also accelerate the ISC process and promote the emission of phosphorescence. Based on the above considerations, Wei et al. obtained the persistent luminescence of N-phenyl-naphthalen-2-amine (PNA) and its analogues doped in crystal 4,4′-dibromobiphenyl (DBBP) (Fig. 17a).205 They observed stronger phosphorescence in the mixed crystal (mass ratio of PNA and DBBP = 1:100), which is obtained by removing the solvent from a dichloromethane solution (Fig. 17b). The PNA-doped DBBP mixed crystals can exhibit unique bright-white emission under 365 nm ultraviolet light excitation due to the combination of greenish phosphorescence and blue fluorescence (Fig. 17c). The features of long-lived RTP and dual-emission indicate that the PNA-, PNA-Br, and Br-PNA-doped DBBP crystals are potential “smart” materials for data encryption applications. To prove this idea, a demo of an “umbrella” pattern is printed in three parts: PNA for raindrops, DBBP for umbrella fabric, and DBBP/PNA mixed crystals as the umbrella handle (Fig. 17d). Under the 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation, the “umbrella” pattern is completely visible; the raindrops made of PNA and umbrella fabric made of DBBP are blue, and the handle made of DBBP/PNA is white. However, after the removal of ultraviolet irradiation, the umbrella handle showing the greenish RTP from the DBBP/PNA mixed crystal is the only visible part (Fig. 17d). This kind of fluorescence/RTP dual-emission material is expected to be used in valuable model systems to explore the organic white luminescence and potential applications in high contrast imaging, white-light-emission, optical sensing, and security-mark applications.
 Fig. 17  (a) Molecular structures used in mixed crystals. (b) Luminescence photographs of the school badge of Jilin University prepared with the PNA/DBBP under 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation and after removal of the ultraviolet irradiation. (c) Luminescence photographs of DBBP crystals, PNA crystals, PNA-doped DBBP mixed crystals (1% mass ratio), and PNA/DBBP mixed crystals (1% mass ratio) under 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation. (d) “Umbrella” security painting made from PNA, DBBP and PNA/DBBP before and after the removal of 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation. Reproduced with permission.205 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Unlike mixed crystals with a very wide range of tunable components but similar molecular sizes, co-crystals are usually defined as the molecular solids assembled from at least two types of neutral chemical species in certain ratios, which are also known as “molecular heterojunction hybrids”. With the rapid development of supramolecular chemistry and crystal engineering in the last few decades, recent works have employed the construction of co-crystals to tune solid-state properties (i.e., mechanical behaviors, solubility, electron transfer, and fluorescence), thereby providing an attractive method to prepare well-organized functional materials by molecular self-assembly of components or subunits.206–208 Through the intermolecular locking of multiple non-covalent forces (such as π–π stacking, hydrogen bonding, van der Waals forces, and electrostatic interactions) in co-crystal hybrids, a rigid molecular environment can be constructed, thereby suppressing non-radiation transition for persistent luminescence.209,210 In 2012, Shen et al. explored the possibility of co-crystallized methods and pointed out that halogen-bond interactions play a key role in the development of RTP crystals.211 The co-crystals of 1,4-diiodotetrafluorobenzene (1,4-DITFB) with polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (such as naphthalene and phenanthrene) show bright green (naphthalene-DITFB) and bright orange (phenanthrene-DITFB) RTP. They developed a series of persistently luminescent co-crystals including polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (such as fluorine, pyrene, dibenzofuran, carbazole, and dibenzothiophene) and halogenated systems (such as 9-halophenanthrene) using a similar co-crystal strategy.212–215 Therefore, molecular solid-state engineering involving the weak interactions has become one of the major strategies to design hybrid materials with RTP. Based on this concept, An and his co-workers reported a co-crystal strategy that can increase the ΦP by constructing a crystalline framework and extend the luminescence lifetime.209 They designed and synthesized a new supramolecular co-crystal, isophthalic acid-melamine (IPA-ME), which has ultralong organic RTP by self-assembly of melamine (MA) and aromatic acids in an aqueous medium. The molecular hybrids simultaneously achieve an ultralong emission lifetime of up to 1.91 s and a high ΦP of 24.3% under ambient conditions. In addition, the co-crystal has been successfully applied to barcode identification in the dark.
Almost simultaneously, our group observed very similar results on the hydrogen-bonding IPA-ME co-crystal with a persistent luminescence lifetime of up to 2 s, but put forward a totally different mechanism based on a TADF-assisted energy transfer route.216 The donor and acceptor species of the energy transfer process in IPA-ME co-crystals are based on the TADF (ME) and RTP (IPA) molecules. Both theoretical and experimental studies have shown that an effective Förster resonance energy transfer occurs (Fig. 18a) between IPA and MA molecules with the EP of up to 76%. Moreover, the potential of applying the D–A co-crystal materials for information security (Fig. 18b) and personal identification systems is demonstrated, thanks to their varied luminescence lifetimes and easy identification in the dark. Hence, this work provides a TADF-assisted Förster resonance energy transfer strategy to get ultralong RTP. Moreover, the selection of long-lived species as donors and acceptors for energy transfer in co-crystals is critical for the application of these materials toward persistent luminescence.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the energy level diagram and energy transfer process in long-term persistent phosphors. (b) The schematic diagram for the process of information encryption to decryption. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Sun et al. observed TADF in a 1:2 spin-triplet charge transfer co-crystal of 1,2,4,5-tetracyanobenzene (TCNB) and trans-1,2-diphenyl-ethylene (TSB) (Fig. 19a and b).217 Both the experiment and simulation results show that the intermolecular charge transfer in the co-crystal narrows the S–T energy gap and therefore facilitates reverse ISC for TADF (Fig. 19c). These findings indicate a method for the design of new long-term persistent TADF co-crystal materials. Quite recently, Wang et al. developed a D–A co-crystal based on the assembly of N,N-dimethylpyridin-4-amine (DMAP) and di-(naphthalen-2-yl)-amine (Cdp) through hydrogen bond interactions. The co-crystal presents unique force- and heating-responsive persistent luminescence due to the occurrence of a Förster resonance energy transfer, which was also successfully utilized in thermal printing.218 It is expected that based on different components, molecular arrangement modes, orientations, aggregation states, and intermolecular interaction fashions (such as van der Waals forces, hydrogen bonding, electrostatic forces and/or their combinations) within co-crystals, the D–A pairs can be further modulated and tuned for diversity of persistent luminescence. Zhang and his co-workers have developed a strategy to obtain aggregation-induced emission (AIE) by the D-sp2-A counterpart structure. They found that 5-bromo-2-(3,4-dime-thoxybenzyl)isoindoline-1,3-dione (BrBID), which was produced by a reaction with the N,N-dimethylformamide solvent, could induce strong RTP, and an absolute RTP yield of up to 25.4%. However, a donor-sp3-acceptor counterpart structure did not have a similar RTP.219
 Fig. 19  (a) Monomer molecular structures of TSB and TCNB. (b) The confocal laser scanning microscopy image. (c) Schematic illustration of potential energy surfaces of S0, S1, T1, and T2. T1/T2 has an energy order switch (dashed). Inset summarizes computed energies of absorption, fluorescence, and phosphorescence spectra and ΔEST. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
3.2 Organic doping and blend for persistently luminescent materials
In contrast to co-crystals and/or mixed crystals, which are assembled at the molecular levels, doping and blend hybrid materials are constructed by aggregation of organic particles and/or micro/nanostructures with different chemical components. Doping luminophores into organic compounds is a promising and facile method to obtain hybrids, which can reduce energy dissipation and immobilize the luminophors by suppressing molecular motions and intermolecular collisions.220 Molecular design controls the emission properties of doped materials, making organic materials a potential candidate for many optoelectronic applications and devices. Lei et al. developed a series of materials with RTP based on pure organic doping systems without heavy atoms.221 The guest molecules can be doped with donor or acceptor matrixes, which results in enhanced fluorescence (ΦF = 63–76%) and RTP (ΦP = 7.6–14.5%, and τ = 119–317 ms) in air. The hybrids are also fairly stable in humidity, heat, and light. Therefore, this work provides insights for designing doping hybrids and expanding the scope of organic persistently luminescent applications. Adachi and co-workers designed a secondary animo-substituted deuterated carbon as a guest molecule, with hydroxyl steroidals as the host matrix.222,223 Host–guest hybrid materials with efficient persistent luminescence are developed by minimizing the quenching (kq(RT)) of RTP emission.223 The reduced knr(RT) and kq(RT) combination is much smaller than the radiation rate constant (kr), resulting in efficient persistent RTP of ΦP over 10% and a lifetime of over 1 s. Based on the host–guest approach, Zhang and co-workers also achieved ultralong RTP (the lifetime of over 600 ms) with high efficiency (overall quantum yield of over 20%) by dissolving 1,8-naphthalic anhydride in certain organic solid hosts.224
It is well known that most strong molecular coupling can cause the emission of D–A or D–π–A solids to be red-shifted, especially for the molecules with a longer conjugated framework. Based on this basic idea, Li et al. designed the triphenylamine-quinoxaline-6,7-dicarbonitrile (TPA–QCN) molecule with orange-red TADF emission.225 TPA and QCN are selected as the electron donor and acceptor. Then, TPA–QCN is used as a dopant to prepare deep red and near-infrared luminescent solid films. The high doping concentration and neat films show efficient deep red and near-infrared emission, respectively. Using a similar charge transfer method, Hirata et al. showed that white persistent luminescence can be obtained from an isolated single aromatic structure doped into a rigid amorphous matrix.226
With the aid of the charge transfer state approach, Zhao et al. enhanced the efficiency of persistent luminescence through intramolecular triplet–triplet energy transfer. The design strategy illustrates the efficient photophysical processes (Fig. 20a).227 As expected, the designed carbazole-bromodibenzofuran (CZ-DBFBr) exhibits a bright and afterglow white emission. The time-resolved excitation spectra—monitoring the persistent emission bands in the crystal states of CZ, CZ-DBFBr and DBFBr at 4 K—show that the obvious red-shift inherited from CZ units allows selective excitation of the CZ-DBFBr fragments (Fig. 20b). Furthermore, only the CZ unit is excited at the longer wavelength (400 nm) (Fig. 20b). Fig. 20c shows the time-resolved persistent emission spectra (delayed for 100 ms) of CZ, CZ-DBFBr and DBFBr. Different from the white persistent luminescence measured at room temperature, the observed phosphorescence of CZ-DBFBr is the sum of the vibrational resolution of the CZ and DBFBr emission. This proves the presence of triplet excitons of DBFBr and CZ fragments. Moreover, they also designed an organic long-term persistently luminescent hybrid system (TPP-3C2B/DMA) through the use of a strong organic electron trap (cationic triphenylphosphonium core), which can generate detectable afterglow for as long as 7 h.228 In this system, the cationic triphenylphosphonium core not only acts as a strong electron acceptor for the photo-induced charge transfer event, but also plays the role of multiple protective traps (Fig. 20d).
 Fig. 20  (a) Strategy to achieve efficient persistent luminescence by an intramolecular T–T energy transfer process. Representation of excited-state decay pathways in bromodibenzofuran-substituted carbazole; lifetime, and efficiency in the crystalline state. Reproduced with permission.227 (b) Time-resolved excitation spectra of carbazole (CZ), bromodibenzofuran (DBFBr), and CZ-DBFBr in the crystalline state at 4 K. Reproduced with permission.227 (c) Time-resolved emission spectra of CZ, DBFBr, and CZ-DBFBr in solid state at 4 K. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Left: Chemical structures of TPP-3C2B labeled A for acceptor, and DMA labeled D for donor. Right: Scheme representing the formation of the radical pair through charge transfer, subsequent charge separation and finally charge recombination to achieve long-persistent luminescence.228 Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
The charge transfer state approach can also be used in blended organic materials to enhance the efficiency of persistent luminescence. For example, in a pioneering work, Kabe and Adachi use a blend of organic donor (N,N,N′,N′-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB)) and acceptor (2,8-bis(diphenylphosphoryl)dibenzo[b,d]thiophene (PPT)) to demonstrate low-power excitation of persistent luminescence at room temperature.11 The emission can last for over 1 h due to the charge recombination in long-lived intermediate charge separation states. For this process, both the emission of the recombined charges and the photo-induced charge separation are efficient (Fig. 21a). In order to obtain long-lived charge-separated states, they chose a strong electron donor (TMB), with stable free radical cations and a strong electron acceptor molecule (PPT) with high triplet energy and rigid environment to suppress non-radiative deactivation (Fig. 21b). Unlike organic photovoltaic technology, which removes charges from the device, the photo-generated free radical cations and anions accumulate in the blend without losing energy due to recombination. Then, they fabricated amorphous hybrid films with different ratios of TMB and PPT. They put forward the long persistent luminescence mechanism as follows. First, charge transfer states are formed between PPT and TMB during the photo-excitation process (Fig. 21c-i and ii). Then the generated PPT radical anions diffuse through charge hopping. Hence, the generated PPT radical anions isolate the TMB radical cations from the PPT counter radical anions, and form a stable charge separated state (Fig. 21c-iii). The exciplex emission, which can last for a long time after photo-excitation is generated by gradual recombination of TMB radical cations and PPT radical anions (Fig. 21c-iv and v). The emission of over 30 min can be detected. The intensity of emission is highest near the cracks caused by the rapid cooling of the melt-cast film (Fig. 21d). This persistently luminescent hybrid is transparent, soluble, and may have flexibility and color adjustability, thus opening up new applications in large areas and flexible paints, fabrics, biomarkers, and windows.
 Fig. 21  (a) The emission mechanism of long-lived phosphorescence. (b) Chemical structures of TMB (donor) and PPT (acceptor). (c) Emission mechanism. Left: During photo-excitation, electrons (black circles) are transferred from the HOMO of the donor molecules to the HOMO of the acceptor molecules to form charge transfer states (i and ii). Then, the acceptor radical anions diffuse to isolate the donor (a) radical cations from the acceptor radical anions, forming charge-separated states (iii). Right: Gradual recombination of the radical anions and radical cations (iv) generates exciplex emission (transitions from the LUMO of the acceptor to the HOMO of the donor); (v) the HOMO and LUMO energies were determined by photoelectron spectroscopy and ultraviolet/visible absorption spectroscopy. (d) Triplet harvesting in exciplex emission. Charge recombination of the PPT radical anions (minus symbol) and TMB radical cations (plus symbol) produces exciplexes in a ratio of 25% singlet exciplexes to 75% triplet exciplexes. A small energy gap between the lowest singlet excited state (S1) and the lowest triplet excited state (T1) of exciplex systems enables ISC via thermal activation. (e) Photographs of persistent luminescence from a 1 mol% TMB/PPT blend film. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
3.3 Host–guest inclusion systems for persistently luminescent materials
The host–guest assembly method based on the supramolecular chemistry has also been exploited in the design of persistently luminescent materials. For example, Zhang et al. reported the ΦP of PYCl/CB6 (PYCl = bromophenyl-methyl-pyridinium chloride, and CB6 = cucurbit[6]uril) can be significantly increased from 2.6% to 81.2%.229 From the TEM profile, PYCl/CB6 has a fibrous structure, with widths and lengths of several micrometers (Fig. 22a). Benefiting from the high luminescent properties, the PYCl/CB6 nanofiber (length: 170 mm, and width: 3 mm) can be well imaged under a confocal microscope (Fig. 22b). It is well known that cucurbit[6]uril complexes tend to have a closely packed arrangement into infinite guest-filled channels. Therefore, the nanofibers may have similar arrays. In other words, the PYCl/CB6 complexes are tightly stacked in the same direction, which have been verified by powder XRD. Compared with CB6 without any guest, the skeleton of CB6 with a guest is an ellipsoidal deformation, with the major axis of 10.4 Å and minor axis of 6.46 Å, shortening 0.49 Å and extending 0.65 Å, respectively (Fig. 22c). The huge deformation of CB6 and the increase of ISC in cucurbiturils reveal the unusual promotion of phosphorescence in a solid: tightly enclosed CB6 greatly suppresses the vibrational relaxation of PYCl, and the shorter distance between PYCl and –OH in CB6 also promotes the ISC, and greatly improves RTP lifetime and efficiency. This design of host–guest assembly with counter ion effect provides a new method to enhance RTP. Based on the host–guest design, several phosphorescent complexes with different lifetimes are obtained and successfully applied to triple-mode-encoding for information protection (Fig. 22d).230
 Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of PYCl/CB6;229 (b) LSCM image of PYCl/CB6 (inset: the cartoon of linear array);229 (c) crystal structure of PYCl/CB6 viewed in the c-axis and their chemical structures;229 reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (d) Schematic illustration of lifetime-encoding for security applications using PYCl/CB6, PCC/CB6 and PBC/CB6. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4. Polymeric–organic hybrid materials
4.1 Co-polymer persistently luminescent materials
Covalently linking phosphors to the polymer matrices through intermolecular interaction is an effective method for embedding phosphors into a rigid matrix and producing persistent luminescence.22,32,231–234 Moreover, reactions including free radical copolymerization, covalent cross-linking reactions and ring-opening polymerization are all facile preparation methods for preparing polymers. For example, Kwon et al. proposed a general design rule and used Diels–Alder click chemistry as a cross-linking method according to restricting the molecular motions of embedded phosphors—reducing non-radiative transitions and greatly improving RTP efficiency.235 The resulting cross-linked phosphor-doped polymer was composed of a diene-reactive phosphor (DA1), and the ene-reactive polymer matrix exhibited high-efficiency persistent luminescence with a ΦP of up to ca. 28% with no covalent bond between the phosphor and the matrix (Fig. 23a). Using this method, a sharp increase in ΦP was observed in various polymer matrices. Additionally, a Dexter-type triplet energy transfer process and the vibration mixing between 0-order electronic states and between T1 and S0 result in a reduced ISC processing rate (Fig. 23b).
 Fig. 23  Chemical structures of designed phosphor and polymer and description of covalent cross-linking strategy. (a) Chemical structures of the newly designed DA1 and PFMA. Diels–Alder click reaction in DA1-doped PFMA blend film forms covalent bonds between DA1 and PFMA, resulting in greatly enhanced phosphorescence efficiency (ΦP) compared with Br6A-doped PFMA blend film having no covalent linkages. (b) A general Jablonski diagram of organic emitters is presented. General rules for efficient RTP emitters are shown in the grey box. The influence of cross-linking via the Diels–Alder reaction is described in the blue box. The restriction of motions of phosphors and matrices by cross-linking effectively reduces the collision frequency and hence the Dexter-type triplet energy transfer processes (kq) and the vibronic mixing that directs the reduction of the rate of the ISC process from T1 to S0 (kTS). Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. 
4.2 Phosphor doped/blend persistently luminescent polymers
Amorphous purely organic persistently luminescent systems (for example, phosphors doped or blended into polymers) are promising for practical applications, such as solid-state irradiation, OLEDs, and sensors.236 Quite recently, Zhang et al. illustrated that amorphous polymers have several advantages in the design and development of current metal-free RTP materials.220 For example, the immobilization of phosphors into an amorphous state could protect phosphors from oxygen and reduce their non-radiative deactivation. In 2013, Kim et al. demonstrated persistent luminescence in an amorphous organic material by doping 2,5-dihexyloxy-4-bromobenzaldehyde (Br6A) into isotactic poly(methyl methacrylate) (iPMMA).32 Although these strategies show that limiting the vibrations of the matrix and phosphor is essential for organic persistent luminescence, there is still a need for a more general strategy to suppress these vibrations. In 2014, they reported a strategy for tailoring intermolecular interactions and enhancing persistent luminescence of organic hybrid materials in amorphous matrices under ambient conditions.22 The halogen and hydrogen bonds between the phosphor (G1) and the poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) matrix suppressed vibrations and achieved bright persistent luminescence with the ΦP for the G1–PVA system reaching 24%. Furthermore, they found that water molecules can modulate the strength of halogen and hydrogen bonds in the G1–PVA system and produce reversible switching between fluorescence and phosphorescence. This unique system can be used as a water sensor. Additionally, Su et al. proposed a reasonable design to minimize vibrations of organic molecules to achieve persistent luminescence.237 The organic guest molecule (hexa-(4-carboxyl-phenoxy)-cyclotriphosphazene, namely G) has six extended benzoic acid arms, and the six extended aromatic carbonyl units from G can provide enough n orbitals to trigger the generation of a large amount of triplet excitation of ISC from S1 to Tn. Furthermore, the –COOH groups of G and the –OH of amorphous polymer matrix (PVA) can form hydrogen bonds. By using this strategy, a series of persistent luminescence hybrid films with high ΦP (11.23%) is obtained from amorphous organic phosphors. Then, they developed a low-cost and convenient screen printing technology with anti-counterfeiting potential based on the unique features of persistent luminescence. As another example, we have confirmed that based on hydrogen bonding interactions, direct layer-by-layer assembly of the small persistently luminescent molecule (DBT) and PVA can be achieved.87 The films not only exhibited tunable persistently luminescent colors under the excitation of ultraviolet light at 254 nm and 365 nm, but also present direct white-light-emission-polarized phosphorescence due to the ordered micro/nanostructure of the films.
Adachi and his co-workers demonstrated a polymer-based organic persistent luminescence system, in which TMB is selected as an electron donor and the poly(arylene ether phosphine oxide) (PBPO) is selected as an electron acceptor that suppresses non-radiative deactivation due to the formation of a rigid amorphous environment (Fig. 24a).238 After excitation, this system emits phosphorescence in the first 10 s with persistent luminescence lasting for more than 7 minutes, which is much longer than conventional RTP in polymer systems. Moreover, this polymer-based persistently luminescent hybrid can provide the mechanical flexibility required for the fabrication of various plastic products, films and fibers (Fig. 24b). Since PBPO is an engineered plastic, the luminescent hybrid has high performance in terms of thermal stability, mechanical properties, flame resistance, metal adhesion, and oxygen-plasma resistance. Based on these results, Fig. 24c shows the proposed emission mechanism, in which the persistent luminescence involves the charge transfer, separation and combination processes.
 Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structures. (b) Photographs of a 1 wt% TMB/PBPO thick film at 298 K under the ambient light, during excitation by a 365 nm ultraviolet lamp, and at various times after turning off the excitation. (c) Jablonski diagram for a 1 wt% TMB/PBPO film. Here, S1,D and T1,D indicate the singlet and triplet states of TMB, S1,E and T1,E indicate the singlet and triplet states of an exciplex formed between TMB and PBPO, and S1,A and T1,A indicate the singlet and triplet states of PBPO, which were calculated from fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra of 1 wt% TMB/ZEONOR and PBPO films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
4.3 Polymer-based molecular afterglow
Due to the advantages of persistent luminescence, the phosphorescent optical agents hold promise for ultrasensitive in vivo imaging as they can eliminate tissue auto-fluorescence.239–245 For example, Miao et al. prepared a semiconducting polymer hybrid based on nanoparticles with diameters <40 nm. The polymer hybrids stored photon energy through chemical defects and emitted long-near-infrared phosphorescence at 780 nm with a half-life of about 6 min (Fig. 25a).246 The luminescence intensity of the semiconducting polymer nanoparticles is more than 100 times higher than that of inorganic phosphors with the signal being detected within the body of a mouse in vivo (Fig. 25b). High-contrast tumor and lymph node imaging in mice has been shown to have a signal-to-background ratio of up to 127 times higher than traditional near-infrared fluorescence imaging (Fig. 25c). They also developed a persistent luminescence probe that can only be activated in the presence of biothiols to detect early drug-induced hepatotoxicity in mice.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for 1O2-sensitizer-amplified near-infrared afterglow. (b) Schematic illustration of afterglow luminescence imaging through a living mouse, where a semiconducting polymer nanoparticles-NCBS5 solution is located under the mouse with a depth of 1.7 cm. (c) Afterglow luminescence and fluorescence images of the semiconducting polymer nanoparticle-NCBS5 solution through a living mouse. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
4.4 Polymer/metal ion hybrids with ultralong phosphorescence
Ionic polymers present multiple coordination sites with metal ions, and thus polymer/metal ion hybrids are also an attractive and promising direction for persistent luminescence, but examples are limited and with no universal approaches to synthesizing these systems. Based on traditional polyethylene derivatives, a concise chemical strategy was proposed to achieve ultralong RTP in polymers through ionic bond cross-linking by Cai et al. (Fig. 26a).247 The long RTP lifetime of the polymer/metal hybrids was shown to be up to 2.1 s in air. In addition, multicolored phosphorescence can be obtained by tuning the excitation wavelength in the polymer/metal materials (Fig. 26b). The change in long-lived phosphorescence may be due to aggregation of the adjacent benzene units, as shown by the proposed model in Fig. 26c. These results outline a basic principle for constructing polymer materials with excitation-dependent persistent luminescence.
 Fig. 26  (a) Molecular structure of PSSNa polymer. Right: Photographs of PSSNa solids taken under a 365 nm lamp on and off. (b) Excitation dependent phosphorescence spectra of the PSSNa polymer at 77 K. Insets show photographs taken after the PSSNa polymer was excited by 300, 330, 360, 390, 420, and 450 nm at 77 K. (c) Proposed mechanism for multicolor ultralong phosphorescence as the excitation wavelength changed. Note that the schematic illustration of Models 1 and n represent the isolated and the aggregated chromophores in polymers, respectively. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
5. Conclusions
In summary, this review highlights recent experimental and theoretical progress in persistent luminescence through the synthesis of molecular hybrid materials for the first time. While single-component systems can only be designed through synthesis and chemical functionalization, molecular hybrids offer the ability to tune the optoelectronic properties by controlling the interactions and orientations of phosphors in solution or in the solid state. We defined three typical categories of molecular hybrids—namely inorganics/organics, organics/organics, and organics/polymer materials. The different hybrid materials and their properties such as their lifetimes and quantum yields are also summarized from the typical works in the field (Table S1, ESI†). It is shown that the state-of-the-art persistently luminescent time is approximately up to the hour level and the quantum yields can be more than 80%, which reflect the fast enhancement of the performance parameters for molecular hybrids in recent years. New hybrid structures and materials have also been developed. For example, the lifetime of typical TADF molecules is commonly in the order of microseconds; with the construction of TADF hybrids and an in-depth understanding of the mechanism, TADF materials with ultralong-lived lifetimes at the seconds timescale have been reported continuously. These hybrid materials (such as carbon dots@zeolite, coronene@ZIF-8 and halide perovskites) could serve as an alternative to achieve the persistent luminescence relative to the well-developed RTP materials. Moreover, we discussed the potential applications of persistent luminescence in these hybirid materials—specifically looking at the fields of anti-counterfeiting, bioimaging, fingerprint identification, and stimulus-responsive sensors (e.g., temperature, oxygen, moisture, force, pH, etc.). Despite the advances in developing persistent luminescence in new hybrid materials, there are still several challenges related to understanding the physiochemical mechanisms that govern these materials and developing systems for practical applications. One such question is, how do we theoretically approach understanding persistent luminescence in these materials? What kinds of theoretical approaches are needed for correctly describing the photophysics of these hybrid materials? Another question would be, how can we extend these materials into new applications such as bio-sensors? For example, can we take advantage of the long-lived triplet excited states and utilize time-resolved and space-resolved luminescent techniques to eliminate the short-term background fluorescence? Are these hybrid materials useful as photosensitizers for photodynamic therapy and can we tune their structures to maximize biocompatibility? Biomedical applications will need high-efficiency red or near-infrared emitting materials (an outstanding challenge that needs to be worked on). By highlighting some of the recent works in developing molecular hybrid materials, we hope to provoke the development of new materials—an endeavour being undertaken in our laboratory and many others worldwide.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21771021, 21822501, and 22061130206), the Beijing Municipal Natural Science Foundation (Grant No. JQ20003), the Newton Advanced Fellowship award (NAF\R1\201285), the Fok Ying-Tong Education Foundation (Grant No. 171008), the Beijing Nova Program (Grant No. xx2018115), the Measurements Fund of Beijing Normal University, and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities.
References
R. C. Armstrong, C. Wolfram, K. P. De Jong, R. Gross, N. S. Lewis, B. Boardman, A. J. Ragauskas, K. Ehrhardt-Martinez, G. Crabtree and M. V. Ramana, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 15020–15027 CrossRef .
D. Gielen, F. Boshell and D. Saygin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 117–120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. Van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Poizot and F. Dolhem, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2003–2019 RSC .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, C. Falco and M. Sevilla, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6796–6822 RSC .
R. Gao, X. Fang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3399–3412 RSC .
Y. Tao, K. Yuan, T. Chen, P. Xu, H. Li, R. Chen, C. Zheng, L. Zhang and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7931–7958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, D. Cao, Y. Guan and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9904–9910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Li and H. Lin, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 386–399 RSC .
Z. Pan, Y.-Y. Lu and F. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 58–63 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Nature, 2017, 550, 384–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu and S. Tanabe, J. Lumin., 2019, 205, 581–620 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, N. Chen, Y. Jia, Q. Ma, J. Wang, Q. Yuan and W. Tan, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1279–1292 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maldiney, A. Bessière, J. Seguin, E. Teston, S. K. Sharma, B. Viana, A. J. J. Bos, P. Dorenbos, M. Bessodes, D. Gourier, D. Scherman and C. Richard, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 418–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Vahrmeijer, M. Hutteman, J. R. Van Der Vorst, C. J. H. Van De Velde and J. V. Frangioni, Nat. Rev. Clin. Oncol., 2013, 10, 507–518 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Terraschke and C. Wickleder, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 11352–11378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Matsuzawa, Y. Aoki, N. Takeuchi and Y. Murayama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2670–2673 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, C. Li, Z. Ren, S. Yan and M. R. Bryce, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18020–18024 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Z. Mao, Z. Xie, Y. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Zhao, J. Xu, Z. Chi and M. P. Aldred, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 915–1016 RSC .
O. Bolton, K. Lee, H.-J. Kim, K. Y. Lin and J. Kim, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 205–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou, G. Xiao and D. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2021 DOI:10.1002/adma.202007571 .
M. S. Kwon, D. Lee, S. Seo, J. Jung and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 11359–11363 CrossRef .
S. Mukherjee and P. Thilagar, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10988–11003 RSC .
P. Xue, P. Wang, P. Chen, B. Yao, P. Gong, J. Sun, Z. Zhang and R. Lu, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 6060–6065 RSC .
Y. Gong, L. Zhao, Q. Peng, D. Fan, W. Z. Yuan, Y. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 4438–4444 RSC .
B. Zhou, Q. Zhao, L. Tang and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 7698–7701 RSC .
Z. An, C. Zheng, Y. Tao, R. Chen, H. Shi, T. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Li, R. Deng, X. Liu and W. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 685–690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Sun, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, D. Yang, F. Zhao, J. Chen and D. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1617–1621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amela-Cortes, S. Paofai, S. Cordier, H. Folliot and Y. Molard, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8177–8180 RSC .
A.-Y. Ni, Y. Mu, J. Pan, S.-D. Han, M.-M. Shang and G.-M. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3712–3714 RSC .
H. Chen, X. Ma, S. Wu and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 126, 14373–14376 CrossRef .
D. Lee, O. Bolton, B. C. Kim, J. H. Youk, S. Takayama and J. Kim, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Gan, H. Shi, Z. An and W. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802657 CrossRef .
S. Xu, R. Chen, C. Zheng and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9920–9940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Kenry, C. Chen and B. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2111–2125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Ge, Q. Peng, C. Li, Q. Li and Z. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606829 CrossRef PubMed .
S. L. James, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 276–288 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, C. A. Bauer, R. K. Bhakta and R. J. T. Houk, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1330–1352 RSC .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, L. Chen, H. Cui, J. Zhang, L. Zhang and C.-Y. Su, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6011–6061 RSC .
J. W. Steed, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 506–519 RSC .
A. Morozan and F. Jaouen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9269–9290 RSC .
Y. Bai, Y. Dou, L.-H. Xie, W. Rutledge, J.-R. Li and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2327–2367 RSC .
J. Heine and K. Müller-Buschbaum, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9232–9242 RSC .
J. Hao, X. Xu, H. Fei, L. Li and B. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705634 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Fang, S.-S. Zhao, F. Bai, Z. Zhao, K.-Z. Wang and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 5267–5270 RSC .
S. Yuan, Y. Deng and D. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10093–10098 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang and D. Yan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 897–905 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, K.-Z. Wang and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15489–15496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhai, Z.-X. Yang, W.-W. Zhang, J.-L. Zuo and X.-M. Ren, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 4171–4180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-Y. Ni, Y. Mu, J. Pan, S.-D. Han, M.-M. Shang and G.-M. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 3712–3714 RSC .
A.-Y. Ni, Y. Mu, J. Pan, S.-D. Han, J.-H. Li and G.-M. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10411–10414 RSC .
Z. Wang, C.-Y. Zhu, S.-Y. Yin, Z.-W. Wei, J.-H. Zhang, Y.-N. Fan, J.-J. Jiang, M. Pan and C.-Y. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3481–3485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C.-Y. Zhu, Z.-W. Wei, Y.-N. Fan and M. Pan, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 841–848 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, M. Zhao, Y. Guan, X. Fang, X. Li and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9579–9586 RSC .
N. Willis-Fox, M. Kraft, J. Arlt, U. Scherf and R. C. Evans, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 532–542 CrossRef CAS .
J.-N. Hao and B. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1603856 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Xu and B. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 721–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pan, Y.-X. Zhu, K. Wu, L. Chen, Y.-J. Hou, S.-Y. Yin, H.-P. Wang, Y.-N. Fan and C.-Y. Su, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14582–14586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, X. Lin, Y. Zhao, Y. S. Zhao and D. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7853–7857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, Z. Gao, Y. Lv, X. Lin, Y. Liu, Y. Du, F. Hu and Y. S. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13803–13807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, K.-Z. Wang and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7752–7755 RSC .
Y. Yang, K.-Z. Wang and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17399–17407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhao, G. Shu, J. Zhu, Y. Fu, Z. Gu and D. Yang, Biomaterials, 2019, 217, 119332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. C. Stylianou, R. Heck, S. Y. Chong, J. Bacsa, J. T. A. Jones, Y. Z. Khimyak, D. Bradshaw and M. J. Rosseinsky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 4119–4130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ohba, K. Yoneda, G. Agustí, M. C. Munoz, A. B. Gaspar, J. A. Real, M. Yamasaki, H. Ando, Y. Nakao and S. Sakaki, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4767–4771 CrossRef CAS .
F.-X. Coudert, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1905–1916 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang and D. Yan, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 4519–4526 RSC .
X. Yang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7898–7903 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Zhuang, L. Wang, T. Zhou, N. Hirosaki and R.-J. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1802–1809 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, R. C. Huxford and W. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 3696–3700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Titi, J. M. Marrett, G. Dayaker, M. Arhangelskis, C. Mottillo, A. J. Morris, G. P. Rachiero, T. Friščić and R. D. Rogers, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav9044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu, O. K. Farha, W. Zhang, F. Huo and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3970–3974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Kwon and H.-K. Jeong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10763–10768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Pan, Y. Liu, G. Zeng, L. Zhao and Z. Lai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2071–2073 RSC .
K. A. White, D. A. Chengelis, K. A. Gogick, J. Stehman, N. L. Rosi and S. Petoud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18069–18071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Lian, D. Zhao, Y. Cui, Y. Yang and G. Qian, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 17676–17679 RSC .
Y. Xie, K. Yamaguchi, M. Toganoh, H. Uno, M. Suzuki, S. Mori, S. Saito, A. Osuka and H. Furuta, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5496–5499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, C. M. Shade, D. A. Chengelis and S. Petoud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 14834–14835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Zhang, X. Zhao, X. Liu and L. Peng, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2011, 14, 1723–1727 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 1801–1804 RSC .
H. Mieno, R. Kabe, N. Notsuka, M. D. Allendorf and C. Adachi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1015–1021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yagai, S. Okamura, Y. Nakano, M. Yamauchi, K. Kishikawa, T. Karatsu, A. Kitamura, A. Ueno, D. Kuzuhara, H. Yamada, T. Seki and H. Ito, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4013–4022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Sharker, J. E. Lee, S. H. Kim, J. H. Jeong, I. In, H. Lee and S. Y. Park, Biomaterials, 2015, 61, 229–238 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, Y. Zhao, X. Yang and D. Yan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 56470–56477 RSC .
W. Zhao, Z. He and B. Z. Tang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 869–885 CrossRef .
R. Gao, X. Fang and D. Yan, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 4444–4449 RSC .
T. Maldiney, C. Richard, J. Seguin, N. Wattier, M. Bessodes and D. Scherman, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 854–862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Xie, B. Song, H. Zhang, H. Chen, H. Cai, W. Liu and Y. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 2689–2693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, Z. Chi, Y. Zhang, S. Liu and J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3376–3390 RSC .
R. Misra, T. Jadhav, B. Dhokale and S. M. Mobin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 9076–9078 RSC .
G. Zhang, J. Lu, M. Sabat and C. L. Fraser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2160–2162 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sun, X. Zhang, X. Li, S. Liu and G. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17332–17339 RSC .
Y. Yang, X. Yang, X. Fang, K. Wang and D. Yan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801187 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, X. Yang and D. Yan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34377–34384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, H. Shi, H. Ma, L. Bian, Q. Wu, L. Gu, S. Cai, X. Wang, W. Xiong and Z. An, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 678–682 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maciejewski and R. P. Steer, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 67–98 CrossRef CAS .
K. N. Solov’ev and E. A. Borisevich, Phys.-Usp., 2005, 48, 231–253 CrossRef .
T. Vo Dinh, E. L. Yen and J. D. Winefordner, Anal. Chem., 1976, 48, 1186–1188 CrossRef CAS .
E. L.-Y. Bower and J. D. Winefordner, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1978, 102, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skrilec and L. J. C. Love, J. Phys. Chem., 1981, 85, 2047–2050 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Bermúdez-García, M. Sánchez-Andújar, S. Castro-García, J. López-Beceiro, R. Artiaga and M. A. Señarís-Rodríguez, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15715–15722 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lédée, G. Trippé-Allard, H. Diab, P. Audebert, D. Garrot, J.-S. Lauret and E. Deleporte, CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 2598–2602 RSC .
S. Yang, D. Wu, W. Gong, Q. Huang, H. Zhen, Q. Ling and Z. Lin, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 8975–8981 RSC .
K. Ema, M. Inomata, Y. Kato, H. Kunugita and M. Era, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 257401 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, F. Meier, D. Zhao, Y. Abe, Y. Gao, B. Chen, T. Salim, E. E. M. Chia, X. Qiao, C. Deibel and Y. M. Lam, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707621 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Li, J. Zhou, G. Zhou, M. S. Molokeev, J. Zhao, V. Morad, M. V. Kovalenko and Z. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18670–18675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Wright, C. Verdi, R. L. Milot, G. E. Eperon, M. A. Pérez-Osorio, H. J. Snaith, F. Giustino, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11755–11763 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, B. Zhou, Q. Huang, S. Wang, H. Zhen, D. Yan, Z. Lin and Q. Ling, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 1419–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Li, P. Liang, T. Zhou, L. Wang and R.-J. Xie, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9363–9371 CrossRef CAS .
L.-K. Gong, J.-R. Li, Z.-F. Wu, B. Hu, Z.-P. Wang, N.-N. Shen, Q.-Q. Hu, Z.-H. Deng, Z.-Z. Zhang and J.-J. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 9803–9807 RSC .
L.-L. Zhu, Y.-E. Huang, L.-K. Gong, X.-Y. Huang, X.-H. Qi, X.-H. Wu and K.-Z. Du, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 1454–1460 CrossRef CAS .
L.-J. Xu, A. Plaviak, X. Lin, M. Worku, Q. He, M. Chaaban, B. J. Kim and B. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 23067–23071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Fang, B. Lu and D. Yan, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhou and D. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15128–15135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, B. Yang, J. Chen, D. Wei, D. Zheng, Q. Kong, W. Deng and K. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 21925–21929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yu, Q. Wang, D. O’Hare and L. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5950–5974 RSC .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1900954 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1883–1894 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13128–13139 RSC .
D. Yan, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 123, 746–749 CrossRef .
D. Yan, J. Lu, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 1381–1388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan, S. Qin, L. Chen, J. Lu, J. Ma, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8654–8656 RSC .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 590–599 RSC .
L. Q. Bai, N. Xue, X. R. Wang, W. Y. Shi and C. Lu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 6658–6664 RSC .
W. Shi, J. Yao, L. Bai and C. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804961 CrossRef .
J. M. Meruga, A. Baride, W. Cross, J. J. Kellar and P. S. May, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2221–2227 RSC .
H. Liu, J. Xu, H. Wang, Y. Liu, Q. Ruan, Y. Wu, X. Liu and J. K. W. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807900 CrossRef .
B. Yoon, D.-Y. Ham, O. Yarimaga, H. An, C. W. Lee and J.-M. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5492–5497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, J. Zhao, R. Zhang, Y. Liu, D. Liu, E. M. Goldys, X. Yang, P. Xi, A. Sunna, J. Lu, Y. Shi, R. C. Leif, Y. Huo, J. Shen, J. A. Piper, J. P. Robinson and D. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zirkl, A. Sawatdee, U. Helbig, M. Krause, G. Scheipl, E. Kraker, P. A. Ersman, D. Nilsson, D. Platt, P. Bodö, S. Bauer, G. Domann and B. Stadlober, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 2069–2074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kumar, S. Singh and B. K. Gupta, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14297–14340 RSC .
J. Andres, R. D. Hersch, J.-E. Moser and A.-S. Chauvin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5029–5036 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, Y. Han and F. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3977–3985 CrossRef .
R. Arppe and T. J. Sørensen, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 31–43 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, L. Zhang, J. Lu, C. Xu, C. Cai and H. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7231–7235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Gao, D. Yan, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 3606–3617 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao and D. Yan, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 5408–5411 RSC .
C. S. Foote, Y. C. Chang and R. W. Denny, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1970, 92, 5216–5218 CrossRef CAS .
F. Gao, M. Sun, W. Ma, X. Wu, L. Liu, H. Kuang and C. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606864 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, S. Jiang, S. Chen, D. Li, X. Zhang, W. Shao, X. Sun, J. Xie, Z. Zhao, Q. Zhang, Y. Tian and Y. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6940–6945 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhou, Y. Li and M. Peng, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125688 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, Y. Du, J. Liu, H. Sun, J. Wang, R. Li, D. Kim, T. Hyeon and D. Ling, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1802808 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Zhao, J. Yang, Y. Yang, A. I. Pendharkar, Y. Zhang, S. Kelmar, L. Chen, W. Wu, J. Zhao and G. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604789 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Deng, C. Li, S. Huang, B. Xing, D. Jin, Q. Zeng, Z. Hou and J. Lin, Small, 2017, 13, 1702299 CrossRef .
B. Gu, W. Wu, G. Xu, G. Feng, F. Yin, P. H. J. Chong, J. Qu, K.-T. Yong and B. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701076 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Yang, A. Wang, M. Han, W. Cui and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2561–2570 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gao, X. Mei, D. Yan, R. Liang and M. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2798–2807 CrossRef .
S. A. Al-Sanea and M. F. Zedan, Appl. Energy, 2008, 85, 326–346 CrossRef .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. Van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. A. Challener, C. Peng, A. V. Itagi, D. Karns, W. Peng, Y. Peng, X. Yang, X. Zhu, N. J. Gokemeijer, Y.-T. Hsia, G. Ju, R. E. Rottmayer, M. A. Seigler and E. C. Gage, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 220–224 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, F. Wang and C. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1716–1721 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ge, Q. Jia, W. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Liu, M. Lan, H. Zhang, X. Meng and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4169–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Miao, D. Qu, D. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Zhao, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704740 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Li, P. Jing, L. Sun, Y. An, X. Shan, X. Lu, D. Zhou, D. Han, D. Shen, Y. Zhai, S. Qu, R. Zbořil and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705913 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang and S.-H. Yu, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 382–393 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Cheng, H. Lin, M. G. Humphrey and C. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 82, 87–95 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, Y. Wang, C. Cai and H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4866–4873 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, W. Zhou, Z. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Zhuang, Y. Liu, B. Lei and C. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7278–7283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Deng, D. Zhao, X. Chen, F. Wang, H. Song and D. Shen, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5751–5753 RSC .
L. Bergmann, D. M. Zink, S. Bräse, T. Baumann and D. Volz, Top. Curr. Chem., 2016, 374, 22–60 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, N. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Yan, H. Zhang, J. Li and J. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1603171 CrossRef .
J. Liu, H. Zhang, N. Wang, Y. Yu, Y. Cui, J. Li and J. Yu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 58–63 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Mu, H. Zhang, H. Shi, G. Chen, Y. Yu, Z. Yang, J. Li and J. Yu, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5, 349–356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Y. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Xuan, G. Chen, W. Ma, J. Li and J. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 18443–18448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Liu, B. Wang, K. Liu, G. Chen, X. Yu, J. Li and J. Yu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1404–1410 RSC .
R. Rossetti and L. Brus, J. Phys. Chem., 1982, 86, 4470–4472 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 475–521 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Clapp, I. L. Medintz and H. Mattoussi, ChemPhysChem, 2006, 7, 47–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Algar, H. Kim, I. L. Medintz and N. Hildebrandt, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 263, 65–85 CrossRef .
A. L. Rogach, T. A. Klar, J. M. Lupton, A. Meijerink and J. Feldmann, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 1208–1221 RSC .
L. J. Charbonnière and N. Hildebrandt, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2008, 3241–3251 CrossRef .
W. R. Algar and U. J. Krull, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 391, 1609–1618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Chou and A. Dennis, Sensors, 2015, 15, 13288–13325 CrossRef .
C. Xu and W. W. Webb, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1996, 13, 481–491 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, F. Li, Z. He, J. Zhang, J. Han and P. Lu, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 116, 233106 CrossRef .
S.-C. Pu, M.-J. Yang, C.-C. Hsu, C.-W. Lai, C.-C. Hsieh, S. H. Lin, Y.-M. Chengm and P.-T. Chou, Small, 2006, 2, 1308–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Larson and W. R. Zipfel, Science, 2003, 300, 1434–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, J. Fu, D. J. Hagan, E. W. Van Stryland, C. L. Cesar, L. C. Barbosa and C. H. B. Cruz, Opt. Express, 2005, 13, 6460–6467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Padilha, G. Nootz, S. Webster, D. J. Hagan, E. W. V. Stryland, L. Levina, V. Sukhovatkin and E. H. Sargent, Ultrafast Phenomena in Semiconductors and Nanostructure Materials, 2010, 7600, 760008 Search PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS .
O. T. Bruns, T. S. Bischof, D. K. Harris, D. Franke, Y. Shi, L. Riedemann, A. Bartelt, F. B. Jaworski, J. A. Carr, C. J. Rowlands, M. W. B. Wilson, O. Chen, H. Wei, G. W. Hwang, D. M. Montana, I. Coropceanu, O. B. Achorn, J. Kloepper, J. Heeren, P. T. C. So, D. Fukumura, K. F. Jensen, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Biomed. Eng., 2017, 1, 56–71 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Böhm, T. C. Jellicoe, M. Tabachnyk, N. J. L. K. Davis, F. Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola, C. Ducati, B. Ehrler, A. A. Bakulin and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7987–7993 CrossRef PubMed .
M. S. Kodaimati, S. Lian, G. C. Schatz and E. A. Weiss, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 8290–8295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lian, M. S. Kodaimati, D. S. Dolzhnikov, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8931–8938 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, B. Fisher, H.-J. Eisler and M. Bawendi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 11466–11467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Groeneveld, L. Witteman, M. Lefferts, X. Ke, S. Bals, G. V. Tendeloo and C. de Mello Donega, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7913–7930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-S. Liu, Y. Sun, P. T. Vernier, C.-H. Liang, S. Y. C. Chong and M. A. Gundersen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2872–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Nelson, S. O. M. Hinterding, R. Fainblat, S. E. Creutz, X. Li and D. R. Gamelin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 6411–6421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pu, J. Ma, H. Qin, M. Yan, T. Fu, Y. Niu, X. Yang, Y. Huang, F. Zhao and X. Peng, ACS Cent. Sci., 2016, 2, 32–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. B. Piland, Z. Huang, M. L. Tang and C. J. Bardeen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 5883–5889 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pingel, A. Zen, R. D. Abellón, F. C. Grozema, L. D. A. Siebbeles and D. Neher, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 2286–2295 CrossRef CAS .
C. Mongin, S. Garakyaraghi, N. Razgoniaeva, M. Zamkov and F. N. Castellano, Science, 2016, 351, 369–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabachnyk, B. Ehrler, S. Gelinas, M. L. Bohm, B. J. Walker, K. P. Musselman, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and A. Rao, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1033–1038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jinnai, R. Kabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800365 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Gu, H. Shi, L. Bian, M. Gu, K. Ling, X. Wang, H. Ma, S. Cai, W. Ning and L. Fu, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 406–411 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Foster, M.-O. M. Piepenbrock, G. O. Lloyd, N. Clarke, J. A. K. Howard and J. W. Steed, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 1037–1043 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, Z. Ren, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Xie, Q. Peng, B. Xu, W. Tian, F. Zhang, Z. Chi, Q. Li and Z. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 880–884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yan and D. G. Evans, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 46–57 RSC .
Y. Gong, Y. Tan, H. Li, Y. Zhang, W. Yuan, Y. Zhang, J. Sun and B. Z. Tang, Sci. China: Chem., 2013, 56, 1183–1186 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Aaron, W. J. Spann and J. D. Winefordner, Talanta, 1973, 20, 855–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, B. Liang, R. Duan, Z. Cheng, C. Li, T. Zhou, Y. Yi and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15589–15593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Wuest, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 74–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bhowal, S. Biswas, D. P. Adiyeri Saseendran, A. L. Koner and D. Chopra, CrystEngComm, 2019, 21, 1940–1947 RSC .
G.-G. Hou, H.-J. Zhao, J.-F. Sun, D. Lin, X.-P. Dai, J.-T. Han and H. Zhao, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 577–585 RSC .
L. Bian, H. Shi, X. Wang, K. Ling, H. Ma, M. Li, Z. Cheng, C. Ma, S. Cai, Q. Wu, N. Gan, X. Xu, Z. An and W. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10734–10739 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Pedersen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1967, 89, 7017–7036 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Shen, X. Pang, X. R. Zhao, H. Y. Gao, H.-L. Sun and W. J. Jin, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 5027–5034 RSC .
Q. J. Shen, H. Q. Wei, W. S. Zou, H. L. Sun and W. J. Jin, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1010–1015 RSC .
H. Y. Gao, X. R. Zhao, H. Wang, X. Pang and W. J. Jin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 4377–4387 CrossRef CAS .
X. Pang, H. Wang, X. R. Zhao and W. J. Jin, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 2722–2730 RSC .
H. Wang, R. X. Hu, X. Pang, H. Y. Gao and W. J. Jin, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 7942–7948 RSC .
B. Zhou and D. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807599 CrossRef .
L. Sun, W. Hua, Y. Liu, G. Tian, M. Chen, M. Chen, F. Yang, S. Wang, X. Zhang, Y. Luo and W. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11311–11316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, J. Yang, M. Fang, Y. Yu, B. Zou, L. Wang, Y. Tian, J. Cheng, B. Z. Tang and Z. Li, Matter, 2020, 3, 449–463 CrossRef .
B. Chen, W. Huang, H. Miao, X. Zhang and G. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10023–10026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, X. Ma, H. Wu, L. Zhu, Y. Zhao and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11206–11216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lei, W. Dai, Y. Tian, J. Yang, P. Li, J. Shi, B. Tong, Z. Cai and Y. Dong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6019–6025 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hirata, K. Totani, H. Kaji, M. Vacha, T. Watanabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2013, 1, 438–442 CrossRef .
S. Hirata, K. Totani, J. Zhang, T. Yamashita, H. Kaji, S. R. Marder, T. Watanabe and C. Adachi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3386–3397 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Du, W. Zhao, Z. Zhao, Y. Xiong, X. He, P. F. Gao, P. Alam, C. Wang, Z. Li, J. Leng, J. Liu, C. Zhou, K. W. Y. Lam, D. L. Phillips, G. Zhang and B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5165–5174 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, R. Duan, B. Liang, G. Han, S. Wang, K. Ye, Y. Liu, Y. Yi and Y. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 11525–11529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hirata and M. Vacha, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600996 CrossRef .
W. Zhao, T. S. Cheung, N. Jiang, W. Huang, J. W. Y. Lam, X. Zhang, Z. He and B. Z. Tang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1595–1602 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Alam, N. L. C. Leung, J. Liu, T. S. Cheung, X. Zhang, Z. He, R. T. K. Kwok, J. W. Y. Lam, H. H. Y. Sung, I. D. Williams, C. C. S. Chan, K. S. Wong, Q. Peng and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Zhang, Y. Chen and Y. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 6028–6032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Zhang and Y. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 7773–7778 RSC .
X. Ma, C. Xu, J. Wang and H. Tian, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10854–10858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yu, M. S. Kwon, J. Jung, Y. Zeng, M. Kim, K. Chung, J. Gierschner, J. H. Youk, S. M. Borisov and J. Kim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16207–16211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, S. Zhang, Y. Liu and J. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 3185–3188 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhou, T. Xie, R. Zhou, C. O. Trindle, Y. Tikman, X. Zhang and G. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17209–17216 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Kwon, Y. Yu, C. Coburn, A. W. Phillips, K. Chung, A. Shanker, J. Jung, G. Kim, K. Pipe, S. R. Forrest, J. H. Youk, J. Gierschner and J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8947–8955 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, G. Zhan, Z.-W. Liu, Z.-Q. Bian and C.-H. Huang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2016, 27, 1231–1240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Su, S. Z. F. Phua, Y. Li, X. Zhou, D. Jana, G. Liu, W. Q. Lim, W. K. Ong, C. Yang and Y. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9732 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lin, R. Kabe, N. Nishimura, K. Jinnai and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803713 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wu, Y. Li, W. Ding, L. Xu, Y. Ma and L. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 70–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuan, Y. Jin, Y. Su, H. Wu, Y. Hu and S. Yang, Laser Photonics Rev., 2020, 14, 2000123 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liang, N. Chen, Y. Jia, Q. Ma, J. Wang, Q. Yuan and W. Tan, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 1279–1292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu and S. Tanabe, J. Lumin., 2019, 205, 581–620 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Zhang, Q. Yu, H. Wei, S. Liu, Q. Zhao and W. Huang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 1770–1839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, W. Feng, P. Yang, C. Huang and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1509–1525 RSC .
J. Zhou, Z. Liu and F. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1323–1349 RSC .
Q. Miao, C. Xie, X. Zhen, Y. Lyu, H. Duan, X. Liu, J. V. Jokerst and K. Pu, Nat. Biotechnol., 2017, 35, 1102–1110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cai, H. Ma, H. Shi, H. Wang, X. Wang, L. Xiao, W. Ye, K. Huang, X. Cao, N. Gan, C. Ma, M. Gu, L. Song, H. Xu, Y. Tao, C. Zhang, W. Yao, Z. An and W. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4247–4254 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01463jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Rui Gao
	Rui Gao received her PhD in chemistry from Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT) in 2019. In 2017, she studied at Case Western Reserve University. She is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the Whitesides Lab at Harvard University. Her research interests are the design and synthesis of functional nanomaterials for luminescence and electrochemistry.

Mohamad S. Kodaimati
	Mohamad Kodaimati graduated with BS degrees in chemistry, biochemistry, and mathematics from the University of Chicago in 2014 and received his PhD in chemistry from Northwestern University. During his PhD, he was co-advised by Prof. Emily Weiss and Prof. George Schatz and studied the photophysics of self-assembled quantum dot systems and transport in electron ratchets. He is currently a postdoctoral research fellow in the Whitesides Lab at Harvard University.

Dongpeng Yan
	Dongpeng Yan obtained his PhD degree at BUCT in 2012 (under Prof. Acad. Xue Duan). Then, he became an associate professor at BUCT. In 2011 and 2013, he studied at the Department of Chemistry, University of Cambridge and School of Pharmacy, University College London. In 2014, he moved to Beijing Normal University as a full professor. As the corresponding author, he has published more than 120 scientific papers (including in Angew. Chem., JACS, Adv. Mater. and Nat. Commun.). He was awarded the Newton Advanced Fellowship of the Royal Society and is a Royal Society of Chemistry Fellow (FRSC).

 	Fig. 1  The schematic illustration of the emissive processes of fluorescence (a), phosphorescence (b), and delayed fluorescence (c). Reproduced with permission.9 Copyright 2020, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Summary of the recent development of persistent luminescence based on the strategies for formation of molecular hybrid materials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Designing persistent luminescence based on molecular hybrid materials from three views based on time, space and energy dimensions.	 

 	Fig. 4  Design concept for the targeted MOF box with long-term persistent luminescence by UV, WL, and NIR radiation. The proposed energy transfer mechanism is shown in the middle (F, fluorescence; P, phosphorescence; LPL, long persistent luminescence; WLE, white-light emission; OPA, one-photon absorption; TPA, two-photon absorption; UV, ultraviolet; WL, white-light; NIR, near-infrared; S, singlet; T, triplet; ISC, intersystem crossing). Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Ball-and-stick and schematic representations of the 1D inorganic helical chain running along the crystallographic 41 axis of Eu-doped Tb-BTC. Reproduced with permission.61 (b) Time-resolved emission decay curves of Ln-MOFs. Reproduced with permission.61 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (c) Bright-field and photoluminescence images of a Ln-MOF heterostructure. Scale bar: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission.62 (d) Illustration of a heterostructure excited with a focused laser beam. (e–g) The corresponding photoluminescence spectra collected from three different areas (marked as Spot 1, Spot 2, and Spot 1′). Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic representation of the tunable persistently luminescent MOFs based on host–guest interactions. (b) Views of the 2D/3D polythreading architecture from [111] and [010] directions. Two dangling DMF pendants (simplified by sticks for clarity), from the adjacent layers above and below (A and C), thread each window of the central one. Photoluminescence spectra of 1-DMF (c) and MOF-5 (d) with excitation at 280 and 330 nm, respectively. The corresponding crystal images under UV light and daylight are shown in the insets. (e) Time-resolved phosphorescence decay curves of 1-DMF and MOF-5. Frontier orbital (HOMO (f) and LUMO (g)) profiles and TDOS and PDOS (h) for the DFT-optimized structure of 1-DMF. Reproduced with permission.69 Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Photographs of the anti-counterfeiting stamp under natural light (left), and under ultraviolet excitation on (middle) and off (right). Exposure time was 1/400 s for the left, 1/100 s for the middle, and 1/4 s for the right, respectively. Other parameters were manually kept constant: ISO value = 3200, aperture value = 2.8, and white balance = sunlight. Reproduced with permission.71 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (b) Confocal microscopy images of H460 cells that have been incubated without any particles, with PEG-SiO2@2, and with AA-PEG-SiO2@2. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2011, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Structure of coronene@ZIF-8. (b) XRD patterns of simulated ZIF-8 (black line), ZIF-8 (blue line), coronene-h12@ZIF-8 (red line), and coronene-d12@ZIF-8 (green line). Reproduced with permission.83 (c) Photographs of a coronene-h12@ZIF-8 single crystal under reflected light (left), under UV light (middle), and after UV irradiation was turned off (right). Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Synthesis and structural illustration of the hybrid perovskites. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2018, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Structural illustration of the layered hybrid perovskite (TTMA)2PbBr4 (TPB) with TTMA cation.108 (c) Absorption, phosphorescence, and corresponding spectra of the TPB thin film.108 (d) Schematic illustration of the optical excitation, energy transfer, and relaxation paths of excited states in TPB.108 (e) Structural illustration of PEA-based perovskite (PPB) doped with TTMA.108 (f) Photoluminescence spectra of PPB, PTPB, and TPB.108 (g) Photographs of perovskite thin films under ambient light and ultraviolet light. Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) The calculated molecular orbitals, the band structures around the Fermi energy level, the schematic representation of photophysical processes and the total/partial electronic density of states for CdCl2-4HP. Krs and Knrs are the radiative and non-radiative decay rate constants of the S1 state, respectively. KISC and KRISC are the ISC and reverse intersystem crossing (RISC) rate constants, respectively. KrT and KnrT are the radiative and non-radiative decay rate constants of the T1 state, respectively. (b) Diagram depicting the evolution from double information encryption to decryption. Reproduced with permission.118 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Steady-state fluorescence (left) and phosphorescence (right) spectra of PA/LDH, IPA/LDH and TPA/LDH nanohybrids. Insets show the corresponding photographs taken before (left) and after (right) the excitation source is turned off. (b) Time-resolved emission decay profiles of PA/LDH (at 475 nm), IPA/LDH (at 489 nm), and TPA/LDH (at 480 nm). All compounds were excited at 320 nm. (c) Typical snapshot of MD simulation for IPA between the Zn–Al-LDH monolayers. (d) The distribution of orientational angle θ1 (the plane of IPA with respect to the LDH monolayer) (left). The distribution of the central distance between two nearest neighboring IPA anions for the IPA/LDH system (middle). The distribution of orientational angle θ2 between transition dipole vectors of IPA and the lineation vectors of two nearest IPA anion centers (right). Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Photographs of handwritten characters on a cigarette case in daylight, under an ultraviolet lamp (254 nm) and after the lamp was turned off.140 (b) Photographs of a 2D barcode on paper in daylight, under an ultraviolet lamp (254 nm), and with the ultraviolet lamp turned off. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (c) Procedure for assembling long phosphorescent thin films based on the LBL method.141 The phosphorescence response profiles of the (TA/LDH@PAA)80 thin film to (d) pyridine and (e) nitrobenzene at different concentrations. Reproduced with permission.141 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Illustration of nano-hybrids as two-photon photosensitizers for the 1O2 generation. Schematic representation of the LDH host and five aromatic RTP guest species, as well as the 2D confined long-lived triplet excitons that can function as a photosensitizing means to achieve efficient 1O2 generation under an 808 nm near-infrared laser. (b) Photoemission spectra of BA/LDH, IPA/LDH, TA/LDH, PMA/LDH, and MA/LDH nanohybrid-TPA excitation by an 808 nm laser at the same power. (c) Structural characterization and evaluation of 1O2 production efficiency. A TEM image, scale bar = 100 nm. The corresponding calcein-AM/PI staining images of cells treated with IPA (d) and IPA/LDH (e) following irradiation. Scale bar = 50 nm. Reproduced with permission.151 Inset of figure c is the diameter distribution of IPA/LDH. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of different energy transfer processes showing how phosphorescence energy transfer leads to more efficiency than conventional fluorescence energy transfer. (b) UV-Vis absorption spectrum of pure eosin Y and phosphorescence spectrum of IPA/LDH. (c) Phosphorescence spectra of pure eosin Y, IPA/LDH, eosin Y/LDH and (IPA@eosin Y)/LDH. The frontier orbitals (d) and energy levels of states involved in the phosphorescence energy transfer process (e) for (IPA@eosin Y)/LDH. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Left: CDs dispersed in the mother liquid show the prompt fluorescence with a short-lived lifetime. The triplet state would be quenched by nonradiative processes such as the active intramolecular vibrations and rotations. Right: The terminal OH groups of the interrupted zeolite framework, along with the occluded organic SDAs may form extensive hydrogen bonds with the surface functional groups of CDs to suppress the nonradiative relaxation of CDs from intramolecular vibrations and rotations and thus stabilize the triplet excited states.165 (b) The security pattern of a rose is coded with the CDs@2D-AlPO as the flower part and the benzil dye molecule as the leaf and stem parts. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (c) Proposed CDs-matrix energy transfer process between CDs and the MnAPO-CJ50 matrix with octahedral Mn2+ centers.168 (d) Schematic diagram and time-resolved security features for triple-mode color-switching encryption. Reproduced with permission.168 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 16  Polymorphs (a and b) of a single chromophore (cyan color) and a multi-component solid (c) of the same chromophore assembled with a co-former (blue color). The different packing modes can give different fluorescence emission from the same chromophore. Reproduced with permission.202 Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Molecular structures used in mixed crystals. (b) Luminescence photographs of the school badge of Jilin University prepared with the PNA/DBBP under 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation and after removal of the ultraviolet irradiation. (c) Luminescence photographs of DBBP crystals, PNA crystals, PNA-doped DBBP mixed crystals (1% mass ratio), and PNA/DBBP mixed crystals (1% mass ratio) under 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation. (d) “Umbrella” security painting made from PNA, DBBP and PNA/DBBP before and after the removal of 365 nm ultraviolet irradiation. Reproduced with permission.205 Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic representation of the energy level diagram and energy transfer process in long-term persistent phosphors. (b) The schematic diagram for the process of information encryption to decryption. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Monomer molecular structures of TSB and TCNB. (b) The confocal laser scanning microscopy image. (c) Schematic illustration of potential energy surfaces of S0, S1, T1, and T2. T1/T2 has an energy order switch (dashed). Inset summarizes computed energies of absorption, fluorescence, and phosphorescence spectra and ΔEST. Reproduced with permission.217 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Strategy to achieve efficient persistent luminescence by an intramolecular T–T energy transfer process. Representation of excited-state decay pathways in bromodibenzofuran-substituted carbazole; lifetime, and efficiency in the crystalline state. Reproduced with permission.227 (b) Time-resolved excitation spectra of carbazole (CZ), bromodibenzofuran (DBFBr), and CZ-DBFBr in the crystalline state at 4 K. Reproduced with permission.227 (c) Time-resolved emission spectra of CZ, DBFBr, and CZ-DBFBr in solid state at 4 K. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Left: Chemical structures of TPP-3C2B labeled A for acceptor, and DMA labeled D for donor. Right: Scheme representing the formation of the radical pair through charge transfer, subsequent charge separation and finally charge recombination to achieve long-persistent luminescence.228 Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The emission mechanism of long-lived phosphorescence. (b) Chemical structures of TMB (donor) and PPT (acceptor). (c) Emission mechanism. Left: During photo-excitation, electrons (black circles) are transferred from the HOMO of the donor molecules to the HOMO of the acceptor molecules to form charge transfer states (i and ii). Then, the acceptor radical anions diffuse to isolate the donor (a) radical cations from the acceptor radical anions, forming charge-separated states (iii). Right: Gradual recombination of the radical anions and radical cations (iv) generates exciplex emission (transitions from the LUMO of the acceptor to the HOMO of the donor); (v) the HOMO and LUMO energies were determined by photoelectron spectroscopy and ultraviolet/visible absorption spectroscopy. (d) Triplet harvesting in exciplex emission. Charge recombination of the PPT radical anions (minus symbol) and TMB radical cations (plus symbol) produces exciplexes in a ratio of 25% singlet exciplexes to 75% triplet exciplexes. A small energy gap between the lowest singlet excited state (S1) and the lowest triplet excited state (T1) of exciplex systems enables ISC via thermal activation. (e) Photographs of persistent luminescence from a 1 mol% TMB/PPT blend film. Reproduced with permission.11 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) TEM image of PYCl/CB6;229 (b) LSCM image of PYCl/CB6 (inset: the cartoon of linear array);229 (c) crystal structure of PYCl/CB6 viewed in the c-axis and their chemical structures;229 reproduced with permission.229 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. (d) Schematic illustration of lifetime-encoding for security applications using PYCl/CB6, PCC/CB6 and PBC/CB6. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2019, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  Chemical structures of designed phosphor and polymer and description of covalent cross-linking strategy. (a) Chemical structures of the newly designed DA1 and PFMA. Diels–Alder click reaction in DA1-doped PFMA blend film forms covalent bonds between DA1 and PFMA, resulting in greatly enhanced phosphorescence efficiency (ΦP) compared with Br6A-doped PFMA blend film having no covalent linkages. (b) A general Jablonski diagram of organic emitters is presented. General rules for efficient RTP emitters are shown in the grey box. The influence of cross-linking via the Diels–Alder reaction is described in the blue box. The restriction of motions of phosphors and matrices by cross-linking effectively reduces the collision frequency and hence the Dexter-type triplet energy transfer processes (kq) and the vibronic mixing that directs the reduction of the rate of the ISC process from T1 to S0 (kTS). Reproduced with permission.235 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structures. (b) Photographs of a 1 wt% TMB/PBPO thick film at 298 K under the ambient light, during excitation by a 365 nm ultraviolet lamp, and at various times after turning off the excitation. (c) Jablonski diagram for a 1 wt% TMB/PBPO film. Here, S1,D and T1,D indicate the singlet and triplet states of TMB, S1,E and T1,E indicate the singlet and triplet states of an exciplex formed between TMB and PBPO, and S1,A and T1,A indicate the singlet and triplet states of PBPO, which were calculated from fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra of 1 wt% TMB/ZEONOR and PBPO films, respectively. Reproduced with permission.238 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the proposed mechanism for 1O2-sensitizer-amplified near-infrared afterglow. (b) Schematic illustration of afterglow luminescence imaging through a living mouse, where a semiconducting polymer nanoparticles-NCBS5 solution is located under the mouse with a depth of 1.7 cm. (c) Afterglow luminescence and fluorescence images of the semiconducting polymer nanoparticle-NCBS5 solution through a living mouse. Reproduced with permission.246 Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Molecular structure of PSSNa polymer. Right: Photographs of PSSNa solids taken under a 365 nm lamp on and off. (b) Excitation dependent phosphorescence spectra of the PSSNa polymer at 77 K. Insets show photographs taken after the PSSNa polymer was excited by 300, 330, 360, 390, 420, and 450 nm at 77 K. (c) Proposed mechanism for multicolor ultralong phosphorescence as the excitation wavelength changed. Note that the schematic illustration of Models 1 and n represent the isolated and the aggregated chromophores in polymers, respectively. Reproduced with permission.247 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cs01463j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
