High-power graphene supercapacitors for the effective storage of regenerative energy during the braking and deceleration process in electric vehicles  ...  - Materials Chemistry Frontiers (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1QM00465D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1QM00465D
(Research Article)
Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 6200-6211High-power graphene supercapacitors for the effective storage of regenerative energy during the braking and deceleration process in electric vehicles†

        
          
            Sindhuja 
            Manoharan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Karthikeyan 
            Krishnamoorthy
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Arunprasath 
            Sathyaseelan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Sang-Jae 
            Kim
          
        
      *abc
aNanomaterials & System Laboratory, Major of Mechatronics Engineering, Faculty of Applied Energy System, Jeju National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea. E-mail: kimsangj@jejunu.ac.kr
bSemiconductor & Display Research Centre, Jeju National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea
cResearch Institute of Advanced Technology, Jeju National University, Jeju, 63243, Republic of Korea
Received 
      24th March 2021
    , Accepted 29th June 2021First published on 30th June 2021AbstractSupercapacitors (SCs), with maximal power densities, low self-discharge and wide temperature tolerance, are expected to be ideal electrochemical energy storage (EES) systems for electric vehicles (EVs). Herein, we demonstrated the superior performance metrics of a graphene based SC and its applicability as an advanced EES system for EVs. The 3.0 V graphene SC developed herein possesses a device capacitance of 35.96 F g−1, energy density of 44.95 W h kg−1, power density of 18750 W kg−1, long cycle life and wide temperature operation (−15 to 80 °C). The role of ohmic leakage, diffusion-mediated charge-redistribution and over-charging issues on the self-discharge mechanism of the graphene SC are studied. The effects of temperature on the capacitive properties of the graphene SC are studied using complex capacitance models. Additionally, the use of a graphene SC as the primary EES system to store regenerative energy during braking/deceleration modes and as an auxiliary power source (in combination with a battery) to drive EVs is also demonstrated. These studies highlight the potential applicability of a graphene SC as an ideal EES system for next-generation EVs.
1. Introduction
Supercapacitors (SCs) have emerged as a new power source or electrochemical energy system (EES) for a variety of applications ranging from microelectronic devices to electric vehicle (EV) technology.1 Unlike batteries, supercapacitors possess high-power densities and long cycle lives that make them suitable candidates where (i) peak power demands and (ii) maintenance-free EES systems are necessary.2 Based on their energy/power/cyclic performance metrics, supercapacitors can be used in a variety of applications such as (i) line filters for AC signal, (ii) uninterrupted power supply and backup, (iii) wind patch control systems and (iv) EVs (for rapid acceleration and to store regenerative energy during the deceleration and braking modes).3,4 The current state of the art focus for supercapacitors has been emphasized on improving their energy densities (which are typically in the range of 5–10 W h kg−1) to reach the level of batteries (∼100 W h kg−1).5 To achieve this, research has been carried out in maximizing the operating voltage window (OVW) of the electrolyte and engineering the electrode properties (surface area, conductivity and porosity) to achieve maximum capacitance (C) in the last decade.6 Among the available electrolytes for SCs, such as aqueous (acidic, neutral or basic) and non-aqueous (ionic, or organic) electrolytes, the latter is preferred for SCs owing to their high OVWs (from 3.0 to 4.5 V), thereby the energy density (E = 0.5 CV2) of a SC can be improved.7 Developing a high capacitance electrode is another factor that can increase the energy density of a SC and the majority of materials science researchers are currently working in this area.8 The research trends on electrode materials for SCs have demonstrated that carbon-based materials (such as activated carbon, porous carbon and carbon black) can be widely used in commercial SCs.9 More recently, new carbon allotropes such as fullerenes, buckyballs, SWCNTs and MWCNTs have been investigated as SC electrodes.10 After the discovery of graphene sheets (from the mechanical exfoliation of graphite) by Novoselov in 2004,11 followed by subsequent developments in the preparation of chemically derived graphenes, many researchers have demonstrated the use of graphene sheets as strong alternative carbon materials for SC electrodes.12–14 Following this, 2D materials from other families, such as transition metal chalcogenides (MoS2, MoSe2, WS2 and TiS2), transition metal carbides (Ti3C2 MXenes), siloxenes (the 2D silicon analogue of graphene) and metalenes (antimonene, boron and phosphorene), have been examined as SC electrodes during the past five years.15–18 In general, these 2D materials possess the merits of (i) sheet-like structures with 2D ion transportation channels, (ii) good electrical conductivity when exfoliated, (iii) increased interlayer spacing even after restacking and (iv) the benefit of EDLC in graphene and the redox properties of the transition metal in others.4,6 It is worth mentioning that restacked sheets of graphene, 1T MoS2 and Ti3C2 MXene have been demonstrated to possess high volumetric capacitances of 300, 700 and 900 F cm−3 in aqueous electrolytes, respectively.19 Silicon-based 2D materials, such as siloxene sheets and their derivatives, have been used in promising SCs for micro-electronic devices,6 however, their capacitances are low compared to those of other 2D materials. Metalene based electrodes, such as phosphorene and antimonene sheets, have recently been explored as high capacitance electrodes in aqueous electrolytes,20,21 whereas their use is limited in combination with ionic electrolytes. In terms of performances in ionic/organic electrolytes, graphene sheets possess a higher capacitance than others due to their superior electrochemical stability and EDLC properties.
Graphene sheets are undoubtedly considered to be promising supercapacitor electrodes based on extensive studies by various researchers in the last decade. Recent studies such as (i) tuning the electrical conductivity of graphene sheets via nitrogen or heteroatom doping, (ii) anchoring nanocrystals on graphene sheets, (iii) increasing their surface area, (iv) the use of redox additive electrolytes, (v) growing binder-free graphene electrodes directly on a current collector, (vi) the fabrication of vertically aligned graphene sheets and (vii) the elucidation of the quantum capacitance of graphene sheets has been carried out in recent years to improve the supercapacitive properties of graphene sheets.22–26 Despite these efforts, there are still a few parameters which need to be studied in detail considering their potential applications in industrial applications such as electric vehicles (EVs) technologies where SC might be used as a primary electrochemical energy storage (EES) system for capture of regenerative braking, storing deceleration energy, and auxiliary EES for providing acceleration in combination with battery to EVs.27–30 Considering the commercial/functional standpoint of supercapacitors in EVs, factors such as temperature-dependent supercapacitive properties and self-discharge nature are crucial.31,32 By keeping these standpoints in mind, here, we have examined the supercapacitive properties of graphene sheets in TEABF4 electrolyte and evaluated their charge-storage performance in a temperature-dependent manner. Additionally, we have also examined the self-discharge properties of the graphene SCs and their applications as a next-generation EES (primary and auxiliary) system for EVs.
2. Results and discussion
The graphene nanosheets were prepared via the thermal reduction of graphene oxide (GO) sheets at a high temperature of 900 °C in an argon atmosphere (see the experiment methods given in ESI†). Fig. 1(A) shows the black colored graphene sheets in the alumina crucible after the thermal reduction process. Fig. 1(B) shows the X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) of the graphene sheets compared to that of the GO sheets. The observed shift in the diffraction angle from 10.4° to 24.3°, with a decrease in interplanar spacing (from 0.84 to 0.33 nm), demonstrated that the deoxygenation of GO sheets occurred via a thermal annealing process, leading to the formation of graphene sheets.21,33Fig. 1(C) presents the Fourier transformed infra-red spectra of GO and the graphene sheets that shows CO (1740 cm−1), C–O/C–C (1625 cm−1) and C–O–C (1228 cm−1) groups were present in the GO sheets were removed via the thermal annealing process.34 The C–C vibrations (1574 cm−1) were retained in the graphene sheets even after the high-temperature process, highlighting the graphitization process in the prepared graphene sheets. The X-ray photoelectron survey scans of GO and the graphene sheets (given in Fig. S1, ESI†) show the carbon and oxygen contents in the prepared materials, with a decrease in the O/C ratio from 1.12 to 0.64 after the thermal annealing process. The core-level C 1s spectra of GO and the graphene sheets are provided in Fig. S2, ESI† and Fig. 1(D), respectively. They show that the GO sheets possess functional groups such as C–C (284.5 eV), C–OH (285.6 eV), C–O–C (287.5 eV) and C–OO (288.9 eV), as a result of the oxidation of graphite via Hummers’ method.35 After the thermal annealing process, the C 1s spectrum of the graphene sheets showed the C–C networks’ presence at a binding energy of 284.5 eV with a lower contribution of C–O–C groups at 287.6 eV.35,36 The FT-IR and XPS analysis collectively confirms that the oxygenated functional groups attached to the basal planes and edges of graphene oxide sheets are almost removed after the thermal annealing process, resulting in the formation of graphene sheets with less oxygen content.
 Fig. 1  (A) Digital photograph of the thermally reduced graphene oxide or graphene nanosheets. (B) X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (C) Fourier transformed infra-red spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (D) Core-level C 1s X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the graphene sheets. (E) Laser Raman spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (F) 2D Raman map of the graphene sheets. (G and H) presents the Raman peak position map of (G) the D band and (H) the G band of the graphene sheets. (I) Raman intensity map ratio (ID/IG) of the graphene sheets. 
Laser Raman spectroscopy and mapping are further used to understand the crystallinity changes in GO after the thermal annealing process which leads to the formation of graphene sheets. Fig. 1(E) presents the comparative Raman spectra of GO and the graphene sheets, in which both powders revealed the presence of two major bands viz. (i) the “D” band and (ii) the “G” band. The occurrence of the G band in graphite, GO and the graphene sheets is attributed to the first-order scattering of the E2g mode. The corresponding G band position is used to understand the distribution of sp2 and sp3 hybridized carbon present in them.37,38 The origin of the D band can be explained based on the defects (such as vacancies), edge defects, bond-angle and bond-length disorders present in these 2D systems. The D and G band positions in the GO sheets are around 1354 and 1597 cm−1, respectively, which is in close agreement with the reported values.39 Compared to canonical graphite, the D band becomes prominent and broadened due to the acid-mediated oxidation process involved in the preparation method. Furthermore, the G band position moves to a higher wavenumber than that of canonical graphite due to the conversion of sp2 hybridized carbon into sp3 hybridized carbon after the oxidation process.40 There are significant changes observed in the Raman spectrum of the graphene sheets after the thermal annealing process as follows: (i) the G band position shifted towards a lower wavenumber (1585 cm−1) compared to that of the GO sheets as an indication of the restoration of sp2 carbon and the removal of oxygenated functional groups,41,42 (ii) the D band position shows slight changes in the FWHM in comparison to that of GO sheets, (iii) changes in ID/IG ratio. To gain a deep understanding of the crystallinity and defects of the graphene sheets prepared via the thermal annealing process, Raman mapping analysis was performed and the corresponding 3D and 2D maps are provided in Fig. S3, ESI† and Fig. 1(F), respectively, which indicated the presence of G and D bands with uniform intensity. The peak position maps of the D band vary from 1336 to 1360 cm−1 (Fig. 1(G)), and the G band varies from 1576 to 1595 cm−1 (Fig. 1(H). The intensity maps of the D and G bands are provided in Fig. S4, ESI† and the corresponding intensity ratio (ID/IG) map (Fig. 1(I)) shows that the intensity ratio is almost constant over the range of 1.04 to 1.13. These peak position and intensity ratio values indicate that the thermal annealing process results in a better reduction of GO into graphene. Fig. S5, ESI† shows the morphological and elemental mapping analysis of the GO sheets using a field emission scanning electron microscope (FE-SEM), indicating the presence of layered structures with uniform distribution of carbon and oxygen atoms throughout the sheets. Fig. 2(A–C) summarize the FE-SEM micrographs of the thermally reduced GO or graphene sheets that indicate the retention of the sheet-like structures even after the high temperature processing of GO. The elemental maps of the prepared graphene sheets (Fig. S6, ESI†) show carbon and oxygen, suggesting that some oxygen groups are still attached to the graphene sheets. Fig. 2(D–F) present the high-resolution transmission electron micrographs (HR-TEM) of the graphene sheets recorded under different levels of magnification, illustrating their sheet-like layered morphology. The selected area diffraction pattern of the graphene sheets given in the inset of Fig. 2(F) shows the presence of a ring with six diffraction spots, which is consistent with the hexagonal structure of the graphene sheets.43 The elemental map of the graphene sheets (Fig. 2(G)) shows the homogeneous distribution of carbon (Fig. 2(H)) and oxygen (Fig. 2(I)) with a C:O atomic ratio of about 92.04:7.96, analyzed using the Cliff–Lorimer ratio method (Fig. S7, ESI†).6
 Fig. 2  (A–C) Field-emission scanning electron micrographs of graphene sheets under various levels of magnification viz. (A) 18.7k× and scale bar: 2 μm, (B) 25k× and scale bar: 2 μm and (C) 101k× and scale bar: 500 nm. (D–F) High-resolution transmission electron micrographs of the graphene sheets under various levels of magnification viz. (D) scale bar: 100 nm, (E) scale bar: 20 nm and (F) scale bar: 10 nm. The inset in (F) shows the selected area diffraction pattern of the graphene sheets. (G) Overlay HR-TEM micrograph of the graphene sheets used for the elemental mapping analysis of (H) carbon and (I) oxygen atoms present in the graphene sheets. 
To explore the energy storage performance of the prepared graphene sheets, a symmetric type SC using 1 M TEABF4 electrolyte was fabricated in a CR2032 coin-cell and best practice methods such as cyclic voltammetry, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy and galvanostatic charge–discharge measurements were carried out in a systematic manner.44,45Fig. 3(A–C) summarize the cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC recorded using different ranges of applied scan rates from 5 to 1000 mV s−1. The graphene SC operates over a wide OVW of 3.0 V without any signs of evolution, thanks to the ionic liquid electrolyte maximizing the OVW.7 The cyclic voltammogram of the graphene SC measured at 5 mV s−1 demonstrates the presence of a typical rectangular shaped profile, indicating that the charge storage process was governed by the formation of electric double-layer capacitance, which occurred at the interface region between the electrolyte and the graphene electrodes.24 The effect of the applied scan rate on the cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC is depicted in Fig. 3(A–C), showing a linear increase in the current range with an increase in the applied scan rate due to the rapid electrochemical reactions. Fig. 3(D) illustrates the effect of the applied scan rate on the device capacitance of the graphene SC, which reaches a higher value of 48.16 F g−1 (5 mV s−1) and retains almost 57.42% capacitance with a 10-fold increase in the scan rate as a result of the better rate capability.6,46 The capacitance of a single graphene electrode is estimated to be 192.64 F g−1. The obtained device capacitance values of graphene SC are higher compared to those of (i) many of the reported graphene SCs, (ii) carbon SC, (iii) 2D material (MoS2, MoSe2) based SCs, (iv) BOC SC and (v) SiOC SC, as seen from Tables S1 and S2, ESI.†Fig. 3(E) presents the five-consecutive charge–discharge profiles of the graphene SC, recorded using an applied current of 5 mA, and the charge–discharge profiles recorded at different levels of applied current from 1 to 25 mA are given in Fig. 3(F). A symmetric triangular shaped CD profile was obtained for the graphene SC for all of the applied current densities with a Coulombic efficiency close to 100%, thus suggesting its better capacitive properties.47 The graphene SC possesses a high capacitance of 35.96 F g−1 from the CD profile recorded using an applied current of 1 mA, which is evident from the plot of capacitance versus applied current given in Fig. 3(G). This obtained capacitance of the graphene SC overwhelms many of the reported values of symmetric-type SCs in the literature (see Tables S1 and S2, ESI†). Fig. 3(H) shows the better electrochemical cyclic stability of the graphene SC, with a capacitance retention of about 93.79% even after 10000 cycles of continuous charge–discharge analysis. The Ragone plots of the graphene SC provided in Fig. 3(I) and Tables S1, S2, ESI†, indicates its superior performance over those of very recently reported SCs. They show that the device possesses a high energy density of 44.95 W h kg−1 with a power density of 750 W kg−1 from the CD profiles recorded using an applied current of 1 mA. Furthermore, the graphene SC retains an energy density of 5.68 W h kg−1 when the power density is increased up to 18750 W kg−1 as evidenced from Fig. 3(I). The energy and power performance metrics of the thermally reduced graphene SC are superior compared to those of the ionic/organic liquid based SCs utilizing electrode materials made of (i) activated carbon, (ii) nanocarbon, (iii) porous graphene macrofoam, (iv) poly (ionic liquid)-modified rGO, (v) BDA/rGO, (vi) tris–rGO, (vii) sonochemically prepared rGO and (vii) hydrothermally prepared rGO, as evidenced from Table S1, ESI.† Furthermore, the performance metrics of the graphene SC are also higher compared to those of the SCs made of new 2D layered materials such as (i) MoS2, (ii), MoSe2, (iii) SiOC, (vi) BOC and (v) VS2, etc., as seen from Table S2, ESI.† The superior energy and power performance obtained for the graphene SC suggests that they can be used as energy devices in electric vehicles, since it has achieved the recommended power values for next-generation electric vehicles.4,48
 Fig. 3  (A–C) Cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC recorded using different levels of applied scan rates from 5 to 1000 mV s−1. (D) Effect of the applied scan rate on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (E) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the graphene SC measured using an applied current of 5 mA. (F) CD profiles of the graphene SC recorded using different applied current ranges (1 to 25 mA). (G) Effect of applied current on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (H) Cyclic stability of the graphene SC over 10000 continuous CD measurements. (I) Ragone plot of the graphene SC, demonstrating its superior energy and power performance metrics over those of recently reported SCs. The references marked in figure (I) are provided in Tables S1 and S2, ESI.† 
Self-discharge is an important characteristic of a SC device considering their commercialization prospects, however, less attention has been paid to understanding the self-discharge that occurs in a SC.32,49,50 Generally, the self-discharge of a SC can be accompanied by (i) ohmic leakage, (ii) diffusion-controlled reactions and (iii) over-voltage charging issues.51Fig. 4(A) presents the self-discharge profile of the graphene SC after charging up to 3.0 V for 10 minutes. It shows the presence of a small drop at the beginning of the self-discharge profile that is due to the equivalent series resistance of the graphene SC. Following this, the rate of self-discharge is higher during the initial time, followed by a slow decay in voltage during the later time periods. To understand the detailed mechanism of self-discharge that occurred in the graphene SC, we have used a method reported in the literature.52 The voltage against time profile is plotted in the form of logV against t and V against t1/2 for a better understanding of the self-discharge due to the ohmic and diffusion-controlled pathways. Fig. 4(B) shows the plot of log(voltage) versus the self-discharge time, which shows the non-linear nature of the curves, suggesting that the observed self-discharge is not only due to the ohmic leakage between the two graphene electrodes. Fig. 4(C) shows the plot of V versus t1/2, which indicates better linearity in the slow decay regime, which confirmed the role of the diffusion-controlled pathway due to the differential ion concentration governed by the charge-redistribution process.53 Furthermore, there is no linearity seen in the plot of V versus log(t) (given in Fig. 4(D)), confirming that the observed self-discharge in the graphene SC is not due to the over-charging mediated charge-redistribution. Fig. 4(E) shows the effect of the initial charging voltage on the self-discharge profiles of the graphene SC. It shows that the self-discharge rate is low at low initial charging voltages, whereas the voltage decay rate is higher for high voltages. This can be explained based on the presence of more electrolyte ions adsorbed on the surface of the graphene electrodes (i.e., the state of charge of the SC54) at much higher charging voltages, leading to a rapid self-discharging process. Whereas a smaller ion concentration will be available at the graphene electrode surface, thereby minimizing the self-discharging rate.55 From Fig. 4(F), it is clear that the low initial voltage minimizes the ohmic drop at the beginning of the self-discharge profiles and also possesses a good degree of linearity compared to the profiles of self-discharge at much higher voltages. This study also highlights the role of diffusion-mediated ion migration in the graphene SC on the self-discharge properties.51 This electrochemical analysis of the graphene SC shows that it possesses high energy and power densities, with minimal self-discharge. As well as the achieved performance metrics of the graphene SC, demonstrating its practical applications is highly desirable for realizing commercial applications.56Fig. 4(G) shows the self-powered system, comprising a solar cell for charging the graphene SC to drive the portable electronic display (ED). Here, the graphene SC is charged for 1 min using a solar panel and the stored energy is used to power up the ED over a long-time duration of 30 minutes (as seen from Fig. 4(H)) with all of its functionalities, such as temperature sensing, timer and humidity sensing, clearly working, thus demonstrating its application in portable electronics.
 Fig. 4  (A) Self-discharge profile of the graphene SC after charging up to 3.0 V for 10 minutes. (B) The plot of log(voltage) against the self-discharge time. (C) Plot of voltage against time1/2. (D) Plot of voltage versus log(time). (E) Effect of the charging voltage (Vinitial) on the self-discharge profile of the graphene SC, where (F) shows the enlarged portion of (E) from 0 to 1000 seconds, presenting the variation in the ohmic drop occurring during self-discharge. (G and H) Practical applications of graphene SC in portable electronics. The 3.0 V graphene SC was initially charged using a solar cell for 1 minute and used to power the electronic display over 30 minutes. 
For realizing the utility of the graphene SC for applications in electric vehicles (EVs), we have analysed the temperature-dependent electrochemical performances and experiments related to EVs.57Fig. 5 presents the electrochemical characterization of the graphene SC studied in a temperature-dependent manner using cyclic voltammograms and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Fig. 5(A) shows the cyclic voltammetric profiles of the graphene SC recorded using a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, which indicates the presence of rectangular-shaped profiles at all of the temperatures. However, the changes in the area under the voltammograms and the current ranges highlight the role of temperature on the energy storage performance of the graphene SC. Fig. 5(B) shows the plot of the capacitance retention of the graphene SC against temperature, that indicates that the amount of charge storage is higher at extremely high temperatures and vice versa. In comparison with the capacitance of the graphene SC at 20 °C, the capacitance value decreases to 31.45% at an extremely low temperature of −15 °C and increases to 119.11% at a temperature of 80 °C. The variation in the capacitance of the graphene SC can be explained based on the ionic movement of the electrolyte due to temperature with the use of electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. The Nyquist plot of the graphene SC recorded at different temperature ranges is given in Fig. 5(C), showing the presence of three characteristic regime portions: (i) synchronous charging (low-frequency regime), (ii) asynchronous charging (intermediate frequency regime) and (iii) non-charging (high frequency regime, shown in the inset of Fig. 5(C)).6 Fig. S8, ESI† presents the Nyquist plot of the graphene SC (recorded at room temperature) and the equivalent circuit model that comprises the solution resistance (Rs), charge-transfer resistance (Rct), constant phase element (CPE1 and CPE2) and the Warburg impedance (Zw). The solution resistance (Rs) and the charge-transfer resistance (Rct) of the graphene SC are about 4.03 and 21.69 Ω, respectively, indicating their resistive characteristics at the higher frequency region. The use of two constant phase elements (CPE1 and CPE2) relates to the inherent property of double-layer capacitance which occurred at the surface of the graphene sheets and the semi-infinite diffusion of electrolyte ions.58 The low frequency region presents the Warburg line (ion diffusion kinetics) that is nearly parallel to the imaginary axis, thus suggesting the ideal capacitive nature of the graphene SC.59 The plot of the charge transfer resistance (Rct) of the graphene SC with respect to temperature is provided in Fig. S9, ESI,† and indicates that the Rct values are higher at low temperatures, due to the limited ion transport at the temperature ranges of −15 to 5 °C, and it decreases with an increase in temperature (20 to 80 °C) due to the fast ion transportation activated by the thermal energy.60,61 Furthermore, the Warburg line moves away from the imaginary axis for the low temperature range (as a result of the limited ion diffusion kinetics) and is closer at the high temperature range, suggesting the better capacitive properties of the latter.62 The Bode phase angle plots of the graphene SC at different temperature ranges (Fig. 5(D)) show that the phase angle at a low frequency of 0.01 Hz is about 69.07° (close to that of an ideal capacitive nature63), obtained at a temperature of 80 °C. Fig. S10, ESI,† shows the plot of the phase angle at low frequency against temperature, which reveals that the phase angle decreases with a decrease in temperature and reaches a value of 53.69° at a temperature of −15 °C. Fig. 5(E) reveals the high impedance of the graphene SC at lower temperatures and vice versa. Fig. 5(F) presents the graph of capacitance versus applied frequency of the graphene SC derived from the impedance analysis. The capacitance values of the graphene SC are found to vary from 9.58 to 29.94 F g−1 when the temperature is increased from −15 to 80 °C, thus highlighting that the graphene SC can be used as an energy storage device in various temperature ranges. To gain a better understanding of the temperature effects on the graphene SC, we have plotted the real (C′) and imaginary (C′′) capacitances of the graphene SC as a function of the applied frequency (given in Fig. 5(G–I)). Here, it is worth mentioning that the real and imaginary capacitances are related to the amount of energy stored and energy dissipated via irreversible losses.59,64 It is clear from Fig. 5(G) that the real capacitance of the graphene SC is almost minimal at higher frequencies (above 5 Hz), showing the resistive characteristics for all of the temperatures and the pure capacitive characteristics at lower frequencies (below 1 Hz). The real capacitance is higher (at a frequency of 0.01 Hz) for the graphene SC recorded at a high temperature (80 °C), and it decreases when the temperature is lowered to −15 °C. The plot of the imaginary capacitance against applied frequency given in Fig. 5(H), shows that the energy loss is higher at temperatures of 20° and 40°, comparatively, than at the extreme high and low temperatures tested for the graphene SC. To study the overall resistance of the graphene SC at different temperatures, the plots of imaginary capacitance versus the real impedance of the graphene SC were derived, as shown in Fig. 5(I) and Fig. S11, ESI.† At higher frequencies, the imaginary capacitance of the graphene SC is closer to zero (showing the resistive nature of the device) and starts increasing (showing the capacitive nature of the device) when the frequency decreases for all of the tested temperatures.65 The magnitude of the frequency (where the imaginary capacitance is closer to zero) is higher for the graphene SC at low temperature, and it decreases with an increase in the operating temperature. This is ascribed to the lower ionic conductivity of the TEABF4 electrolyte and the increase in the overall cell resistance of the graphene SC at lower temperatures. This demonstrates that the graphene SC can operate over a wide temperature range, which is an essential characteristic for considering its usefulness in EVs.
 Fig. 5  Temperature-dependent supercapacitive properties of the graphene SC. (A) Cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC over a wide temperature range from −15 to 80 °C. (B) Effect of temperature on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (C) Nyquist plots of the graphene SC recorded at different temperatures, and the inset in (C) shows the enlarged portion of the high frequency region. (D) Bode phase angle plot of the graphene SC as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (E) The plot of electrochemical impedance (Z) as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (F) The plot of the capacitance of the graphene SC as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (G) The real component of the capacitance as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature; (H) the imaginary component of the capacitance as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature; and (I) the imaginary component of the capacitance as a function of the real component of the impedance with respect to temperature. 
Next, we have examined the usefulness of the fabricated high performance graphene SC in EVs such as (i) an auxiliary energy device in combination with a battery, (ii) to capture regenerative braking energy when the EV is subjected to braking, (iii) to store the deceleration energy produced from the EV when it is in deceleration mode, etc.4,66 Currently, batteries are used in EVs as the primary power source, whereas SCs are expected or proposed to act as auxiliary energy devices in EVs. This approach can eventually increase the shelf-life of batteries by limiting the peak current pulse (generated during braking) to the battery system directly. Fig. 6(A and B) describe the principles of operation of EVs in the drive and braking modes, respectively. During acceleration (Fig. 6(A)), the energy system (either a battery alone or in combination with a SC) will provide the electrical energy that is converted into mechanical energy with the aid of a DC motor that results in the acceleration of the EV. When the EV is subjected to braking (Fig. 6(B)), the kinetic energy of the EV will be transformed into the energy system (here, the DC motor acts as a generator) with high peak currents that can damage the battery due to their low power density.67 It is expected that a high-power SC can be used for recovering or storing this energy in EVs, otherwise, it can be wasted in the form of heat.1 This process is called regenerative braking energy storage.68,69 Previous theoretical and experimental studies have demonstrated the use of high power SCs for the RBE process in next-generation EVs. Furthermore, the power density value of the graphene SC studied in this work is about 18750 W kg−1, which reaches the required power target for future-generation EVs.48,70 Fig. S12, ESI,† shows the design of the EV prototype used in this work for studying various modes of operation including the acceleration, braking and deceleration processes. Fig. S13, ESI,† shows the use of three graphene SCs (serially connected) as an auxiliary energy device in combination with a battery to power the EV prototype. Fig. 6(C) shows the comparative voltage profiles of the EV prototype driven by battery and battery–graphene SC hybrid systems. The voltage profile of the battery driven EV prototype shows the presence of a sudden rise to ∼8.5 V during acceleration and drops suddenly when switched off. There are significant changes observed in the voltage profile of the EV prototype driven by a battery–graphene SC hybrid system. When the switch is ON to acceleration mode, the voltage profile follows a slope (instead of the sharp increase seen for the battery-driven EV prototype) and it reaches a maximum of ∼7.5 V, suggesting that some charge from the battery is stored in the graphene SCs prior to driving the EV prototype.71 Similarly, when the battery switch is subjected to OFF conditions, the stored energy in the graphene SCs powers the EV prototype, thus demonstrating their use as an auxiliary energy storage system for EVs.30Fig. 6(D and E) present the voltage profiles of the individual battery and battery–graphene SC hybrid driven EV prototypes under braking conditions. Both profiles showed that the voltage applied to the DC motor for driving the EV starts decreasing (8.2 to 5.6 V in Fig. 6(E)) when the EV is subjected to braking and rises again to the initial voltage when the brake is released. The decrease in voltage values seen in both cases is due to the flow of generated reverse current (as a result of kinetic to electrical energy transduction) back to the system. The presence of the graphene SCs in between the battery and the DC motor can effectively increase the lifetime of the battery since the peak current generated during braking conditions is directly transferred to the graphene SC prior to being transferred to the battery. Fig. 6(F) shows the practical possibility of a single graphene SC to store the energy produced from the RBE process in EVs using the designed prototype. Here, there is no battery connected to the EV prototype for acceleration. Both the acceleration and braking modes are controlled manually. For studying the ability of the graphene SC to capture braking energy, the graphene SC is connected to the DC motor in the EV prototype. Fig. 6(F) presents the voltage profile of the graphene SC that was monitored during the acceleration and braking modes. It shows that there is no charge stored in the graphene SC during the acceleration mode, and a sharp increase in voltage is seen when the brake is applied. The voltage values of the graphene SC increase up to 0.35 V and to a maximum of 2.37 V, which directly depends on the level of the applied brake. Fig. 6(G) shows the enlarged portion of Fig. 6(F) that shows the clear voltage profile of the graphene SC charged via the energy regeneration process that occurred during braking. This study highlights the use of a graphene SC for storing the regenerative braking energy from EVs. The third application is the use of supercapacitors to store the deceleration energy when the EVs are subjected to deceleration when neither acceleration nor braking are applied.72 Fig. S14, ESI,† shows the digital photograph of the system used for examining the deceleration energy storage properties of a single graphene SC in which the acceleration process is controlled with the help of a battery. Fig. 6(H) shows that the voltage of the graphene SC is almost zero during acceleration and it starts charging up to ∼2.3 V when the EV is subjected to deceleration. Altogether, these studies highlight that the graphene SC developed in this work can be used as an auxiliary energy storage system for EVs and also can be used as the primary energy storage system for the storage of regenerative and deceleration energy in EVs.
 Fig. 6  (A and B) Principle and working mechanism of EV operation during acceleration and braking conditions, respectively. (C) The voltage profiles of the bare 6F22 battery and graphene SC–battery hybrid energy devices for driving the EV prototype. (D and E) Voltage profiles of the individual (D) battery and (E) battery–graphene SC hybrid driven EV prototypes under acceleration and braking modes. (F) Voltage profiles of the graphene SC during acceleration and braking pulses in the EV prototype. (G) The enlarged portion from figure (F) over the region of 43 to 47 seconds. (H) Voltage profiles of the graphene SC under deceleration conditions. 
3. Conclusion
The key findings of this work illustrated the self-discharging mechanism and temperature-dependent supercapacitive properties of a graphene SC and its application in EVs as an auxiliary power source and for the effective storage of regenerative and deceleration energy from the EVs. The electrochemical studies on the graphene SC, utilizing thermally reduced graphene oxide sheets as the SC electrode and 1 M TEABF4 as the electrolyte, showed a high capacitance (35.96 F g−1), high energy density (44.95 W h kg−1), high power density (18750 W kg−1) and long cycle life of over 10000 cycles. The self-discharge process in the graphene SC due to ohmic leakage, diffusion-controlled pathways and the charge re-distribution process was analyzed in detail. The good capacitance of the graphene SC over a wide temperature range from −15 to 80 °C was demonstrated and the associated mechanism underlying the variation in capacitance due to temperature effects was discussed using electrochemical impedance spectroscopy. Finally, as a proof of concept, the potential applicability of the graphene SCs towards portable electronics and EVs was demonstrated. The experimental studies highlighted the use of the graphene SC as an auxiliary power source in combination with a battery for driving the EV prototype and as a primary energy device to store the energy regenerated during braking and deceleration conditions. Collectively, our studies demonstrated the fabrication of a graphene SC with high performance metrics, including low self-discharge and wide temperature operation, with a wide range of applications that make it an ideal candidate for next-generation energy devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research work was supported by the Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (2019R1A2C3009747, 2020R1A2C2007366 and 2021R1A4A2000934).
References
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Where do batteries end and supercapacitors begin?, Science, 2014, 343, 1210–1211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Guo, C. Yu, S. Li and J. Qiu, Toward commercial-level mass-loading electrodes for supercapacitors: opportunities, challenges and perspectives, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 576–601 RSC .
M. Wu, F. Chi, H. Geng, H. Ma, M. Zhang, T. Gao, C. Li and L. Qu, Arbitrary waveform AC line filtering applicable to hundreds of volts based on aqueous electrochemical capacitors, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2855 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, S. Manoharan, D. Kesavan and S.-J. Kim, Two-Dimensional Siloxene–Graphene Heterostructure-Based High-Performance Supercapacitor for Capturing Regenerative Braking Energy in Electric Vehicles, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2008422 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, Y. Li, G. Wang, T. Wei, Z. Liu, K. Cheng, K. Ye, K. Zhu, D. Cao and Z. Fan, Enabling high-volumetric-energy-density supercapacitors: designing open, low-tortuosity heteroatom-doped porous carbon-tube bundle electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23085–23093 RSC .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S.-J. J. Kim, Two-dimensional siloxene nanosheets: novel high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1595–1602 RSC .
F. Béguin, V. Presser, A. Balducci and E. Frackowiak, Carbons and electrolytes for advanced supercapacitors, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2219–2251 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hu, R. Cheng, Z. Li, T. Hu, H. Zhang, C. Shi, J. Yang, C. Cui, C. Zhang, H. Wang, B. Fan, X. Wang and Q.-H. Yang, Interlayer engineering of Ti3C2Tx MXenes towards high capacitance supercapacitors, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 763–771 RSC .
K. Jeyasubramanian, T. S. Gokul Raja, S. Purushothaman, M. V. Kumar and I. Sushmitha, Supercapacitive performances of MnO2 nanostructures grown on hierarchical Cu nano leaves via electrodeposition, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 401–409 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. S. Prabhin, K. Jeyasubramanian, V. S. S. Benitha, P. Veluswamy and B. J. Cho, Fabrication and evaluation of hybrid supercapacitor consisting of nano cobalt oxide and manganese oxide deposited electrochemically on nanoporous Au-Electrode, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135199 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, Electric Field Effect in Atomically Thin Carbon Films, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Raghavan, S. Thangavel and G. Venugopal, A short review on preparation of graphene from waste and bioprecursors, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 7, 246–254 CrossRef .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, N. A. Kumar and X. S. Zhao, Functionalization of chemically derived graphene for improving its electrocapacitive energy storage properties, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1891–1930 RSC .
A. Rose, K. Guru Prasad, T. Sakthivel, V. Gunasekaran, T. Maiyalagan and T. Vijayakumar, Electrochemical analysis of Graphene Oxide/Polyaniline/Polyvinyl alcohol composite nanofibers for supercapacitor applications, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 551–557 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Panda, A. Grigoriev, Y. K. Mishra and R. Ahuja, Progress in supercapacitors: roles of two dimensional nanotubular materials, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 70–108 RSC .
K. S. Kumar, N. Choudhary, Y. Jung and J. Thomas, Recent Advances in Two-Dimensional Nanomaterials for Supercapacitor Electrode Applications, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 482–495 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu and X. Peng, Recent advances of supercapacitors based on two-dimensional materials, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 8, 104–115 CrossRef .
R. Ramachandran, Q. Hu, K. Rajavel, P. Zhu, C. Zhao, F. Wang and Z.-X. Xu, Non-peripheral octamethyl-substituted copper(II) phthalocyanine nanorods with MXene sheets: An excellent electrode material for symmetric supercapacitor with enhanced electrochemical performance, J. Power Sources, 2020, 471, 228472 CrossRef CAS .
M. Acerce, D. Voiry and M. Chhowalla, Metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets as supercapacitor electrode materials, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 313–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tao, T. Huang, C. Ding, F. Yu, D. Tan, F. Wang, Q. Xie and S. Yao, Few-layer phosphorene: An emerging electrode material for electrochemical energy storage, Appl. Mater. Today, 2019, 15, 18–33 CrossRef .
V. K. Mariappan, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, S. Natarajan, S. Sahoo, S. S. Nardekar and S.-J. Kim, Antimonene dendritic nanostructures: Dual-functional material for high-performance energy storage and harvesting devices, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105248 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Zhang, X. Zhao, H. Ji, M. D. Stoller, L. Lai, S. Murali, S. McDonnell, B. Cleveger, R. M. Wallace and R. S. Ruoff, Nitrogen doping of graphene and its effect on quantum capacitance, and a new insight on the enhanced capacitance of N-doped carbon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9618–9625 RSC .
Z. J. Han, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, D. H. Seo, K. (Ken) Ostrikov and A. Bendavid, RuO2-coated vertical graphene hybrid electrodes for high-performance solid-state supercapacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17293–17301 RSC .
Z. Li, S. Gadipelli, H. Li, C. A. Howard, D. J. L. Brett, P. R. Shearing, Z. Guo, I. P. Parkin and F. Li, Tuning the interlayer spacing of graphene laminate films for efficient pore utilization towards compact capacitive energy storage, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Gao, X. Liu, J. Chang, D. Wu, F. Xu, L. Zhang, W. Du and K. Jiang, Graphene incorporated, N doped activated carbon as catalytic electrode in redox active electrolyte mediated supercapacitor, J. Power Sources, 2017, 337, 25–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and L. Zhi, Graphene hybridization for energy storage applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3189–3216 RSC .
J. Armenta, C. Núñez, N. Visairo and I. Lázaro, An advanced energy management system for controlling the ultracapacitor discharge and improving the electric vehicle range, J. Power Sources, 2015, 284, 452–458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ortuzar, J. Moreno and J. Dixon, Ultracapacitor-Based Auxiliary Energy System for an Electric Vehicle: Implementation and Evaluation, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2007, 54, 2147–2156 Search PubMed .
T. M. Gür, Review of electrical energy storage technologies, materials and systems: Challenges and prospects for large-scale grid storage, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2696–2767 RSC .
F. Naseri, E. Farjah and T. Ghanbari, An Efficient Regenerative Braking System Based on Battery/Supercapacitor for Electric, Hybrid and Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles with BLDC Motor, IEEE Trans. Veh. Technol., 2016, 1 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, X. Hu, Z. Wang, F. Sun and D. G. Dorrell, Experimental impedance investigation of an ultracapacitor at different conditions for electric vehicle applications, J. Power Sources, 2015, 287, 129–138 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Chu, Z. Xu, H. Su, C. Yan, F. Liu, B. Gu, H. Huang, D. Xiong, H. Zhang, W. Deng, H. Zhang and W. Yang, Extremely low self-discharge solid-state supercapacitors via the confinement effect of ion transfer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8633–8640 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Park, P. Cui, S. Bak, H. Lee, S. M. Lee and H. Lee, Facile preparation of an n-type reduced graphene oxide field effect transistor at room temperature, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1224–1226 RSC .
H. Ma, X. Chen, S. Mohammed, Y. Hu, J. Lu, G. P. Simon, H. Hou and H. Wang, A thermally reduced graphene oxide membrane interlayered with an in situ synthesized nanospacer for water desalination, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25951–25958 RSC .
S. Sahoo, K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, S. Manoharan and S.-J. Kim, High performance self-charging supercapacitors using a porous PVDF-ionic liquid electrolyte sandwiched between two-dimensional graphene electrodes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21693–21703 RSC .
D. Yang, A. Velamakanni, G. Bozoklu, S. Park, M. Stoller, R. D. Piner, S. Stankovich, I. Jung, D. A. Field, C. A. Ventrice and R. S. Ruoff, Chemical analysis of graphene oxide films after heat and chemical treatments by X-ray photoelectron and Micro-Raman spectroscopy, Carbon, 2009, 47, 145–152 CrossRef CAS .
N. Raghavan, S. Thangavel, Y. Sivalingam and G. Venugopal, Investigation of photocatalytic performances of sulfur based reduced graphene oxide-TiO2 nanohybrids, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 449, 712–718 CrossRef CAS .
D. López-Díaz, M. López Holgado, J. L. García-Fierro and M. M. Velázquez, Evolution of the Raman Spectrum with the Chemical Composition of Graphene Oxide, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 20489–20497 CrossRef .
D. Kostiuk, M. Bodik, P. Siffalovic, M. Jergel, Y. Halahovets, M. Hodas, M. Pelletta, M. Pelach, M. Hulman, Z. Spitalsky, M. Omastova and E. Majkova, Reliable determination of the few-layer graphene oxide thickness using Raman spectroscopy, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2016, 47, 391–394 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kumar, N. M. Bardhan, G.-Y. Chen, Z. Li, A. M. Belcher and J. C. Grossman, New insights into the thermal reduction of graphene oxide: Impact of oxygen clustering, Carbon, 2016, 100, 90–98 CrossRef CAS .
J.-B. Wu, M.-L. Lin, X. Cong, H.-N. Liu and P.-H. Tan, Raman spectroscopy of graphene-based materials and its applications in related devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 1822–1873 RSC .
A. C. Ferrari and D. M. Basko, Raman spectroscopy as a versatile tool for studying the properties of graphene, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 235–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Wilson, P. A. Pandey, R. Beanland, R. J. Young, I. A. Kinloch, L. Gong, Z. Liu, K. Suenaga, J. P. Rourke, S. J. York and J. Sloan, Graphene Oxide: Structural Analysis and Application as a Highly Transparent Support for Electron Microscopy, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2547–2556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller and R. S. Ruoff, Best practice methods for determining an electrode material's performance for ultracapacitors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1294–1301 RSC .
W. Raza, F. Ali, N. Raza, Y. Luo, K.-H. Kim, J. Yang, S. Kumar, A. Mehmood and E. E. Kwon, Recent advancements in supercapacitor technology, Nano Energy, 2018, 52, 441–473 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, H. Wang, X. Lu, Y. Ling, M. Yu, T. Zhai, Y. Tong and Y. Li, Solid-State Supercapacitor Based on Activated Carbon Cloths Exhibits Excellent Rate Capability, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2676–2682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, C. Wu, Y. Wang, A. P. Tomsia, M. Li, E. Saiz, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Super-tough MXene-functionalized graphene sheets, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Krishnamoorthy, M. S. P. Sudhakaran, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, Y. S. Mok and S.-J. Kim, A highly efficient 2D siloxene coated Ni foam catalyst for methane dry reforming and an effective approach to recycle the spent catalyst for energy storage applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18950–18958 RSC .
M. A. Bissett, I. A. Kinloch and R. A. W. Dryfe, Characterization of MoS2-Graphene Composites for High-Performance Coin Cell Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17388–17398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. S. Ike, I. Sigalas and S. Iyuke, Understanding performance limitation and suppression of leakage current or self-discharge in electrochemical capacitors: a review, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 661–680 RSC .
S. Subramanian, M. A. Johny, M. Malamal Neelanchery and S. Ansari, Self-Discharge and Voltage Recovery in Graphene Supercapacitors, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2018, 33, 10410–10418 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Rong, D. Ma and B. Wei, The governing self-discharge processes in activated carbon fabric-based supercapacitors with different organic electrolytes, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2152 RSC .
L. Chen, H. Bai, Z. Huang and L. Li, Mechanism investigation and suppression of self-discharge in active electrolyte enhanced supercapacitors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1750–1759 RSC .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai, V. K. Mariappan, S. S. Nardekar, S. Sahoo and S.-J. Kim, Probing the energy conversion process in piezoelectric-driven electrochemical self-charging supercapacitor power cell using piezoelectrochemical spectroscopy, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. Rong and B. Wei, A divided potential driving self-discharge process for single-walled carbon nanotube based supercapacitors, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 989 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, N. R. Chodankar, D.-H. H. Kim and P. Gomez-Romero, Towards flexible solid-state supercapacitors for smart and wearable electronics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2065–2129 RSC .
K. Nomura, H. Nishihara, N. Kobayashi, T. Asada and T. Kyotani, 4.4 V supercapacitors based on super-stable mesoporous carbon sheet made of edge-free graphene walls, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1542–1549 RSC .
D. P. Dubal, S. H. Lee, J. G. Kim, W. B. Kim and C. D. Lokhande, Porous polypyrrole clusters prepared by electropolymerization for a high performance supercapacitor, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 3044 RSC .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S. J. Kim, Ruthenium sulfide nanoparticles as a new pseudocapacitive material for supercapacitor, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 85–94 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xia, Y. Zhang, D. Chao, Q. Xiong, Z. Fan, X. Tong, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Tubular TiC fibre nanostructures as supercapacitor electrode materials with stable cycling life and wide-temperature performance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1559–1568 RSC .
X. Lin, M. Salari, L. M. R. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and M. W. Grinstaff, High temperature electrical energy storage: advances, challenges, and frontiers, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848–5887 RSC .
W. Wei, X. Cui, W. Chen and D. G. Ivey, Manganese oxide-based materials as electrochemical supercapacitor electrodes, Chem.
Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1697–1721 RSC .
R. Ramachandran, Y. Lan, Z.-X. Xu and F. Wang, Construction of NiCo-Layered Double Hydroxide Microspheres from Ni-MOFs for High-Performance Asymmetric Supercapacitors, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 6633–6643 CrossRef CAS .
R. Drummond, C. Huang, P. S. Grant and S. R. Duncan, Overcoming diffusion limitations in supercapacitors using layered electrodes, J. Power Sources, 2019, 433, 126579 CrossRef CAS .
H. Banda, S. Périé, B. Daffos, L. Dubois, O. Crosnier, P. Simon, P.-L. Taberna and F. Duclairoir, Investigation of ion transport in chemically tuned pillared graphene materials through electrochemical impedance analysis, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 296, 882–890 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kouchachvili, W. Yaïci and E. Entchev, Hybrid battery/supercapacitor energy storage system for the electric vehicles, J. Power Sources, 2018, 374, 237–248 CrossRef CAS .
K. Uddin, A. D. Moore, A. Barai and J. Marco, The effects of high frequency current ripple on electric vehicle battery performance, Appl. Energy, 2016, 178, 142–154 CrossRef .

          R. M. Schupbach, J. C. Balda, M. Zolot and B. Kramer, in IEEE 34th Annual Conference on Power Electronics Specialist, PESC ’03., IEEE, 2003, vol. 1, pp. 88–93.

          B. K. Kim, S. Sy, A. Yu and J. Zhang, Handbook of Clean Energy Systems, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2015, pp. 1–25 Search PubMed .
D.-W. W. Wang, F. Li, M. Liu, G. Q. Lu and H.-M. M. Cheng, 3D aperiodic hierarchical porous graphitic carbon material for high-rate electrochemical capacitive energy storage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 373–376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Dixon, I. Nakashima, E. F. Arcos and M. Ortuzar, Electric Vehicle Using a Combination of Ultracapacitors and ZEBRA Battery, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2010, 57, 943–949 Search PubMed .
S. H. Kim, O. J. Kwon, D. Hyon, S. H. Cheon, J. S. Kim, B. H. Kim, S. T. Hwang, J. S. Song, M. T. Hwang and B. S. Oh, Regenerative braking for fuel cell hybrid system with additional generator, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8415–8421 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qm00465dThis journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (A) Digital photograph of the thermally reduced graphene oxide or graphene nanosheets. (B) X-ray diffraction pattern (XRD) of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (C) Fourier transformed infra-red spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (D) Core-level C 1s X-ray photoelectron spectrum of the graphene sheets. (E) Laser Raman spectra of graphene oxide (GO) and the graphene sheets. (F) 2D Raman map of the graphene sheets. (G and H) presents the Raman peak position map of (G) the D band and (H) the G band of the graphene sheets. (I) Raman intensity map ratio (ID/IG) of the graphene sheets.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A–C) Field-emission scanning electron micrographs of graphene sheets under various levels of magnification viz. (A) 18.7k× and scale bar: 2 μm, (B) 25k× and scale bar: 2 μm and (C) 101k× and scale bar: 500 nm. (D–F) High-resolution transmission electron micrographs of the graphene sheets under various levels of magnification viz. (D) scale bar: 100 nm, (E) scale bar: 20 nm and (F) scale bar: 10 nm. The inset in (F) shows the selected area diffraction pattern of the graphene sheets. (G) Overlay HR-TEM micrograph of the graphene sheets used for the elemental mapping analysis of (H) carbon and (I) oxygen atoms present in the graphene sheets.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A–C) Cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC recorded using different levels of applied scan rates from 5 to 1000 mV s−1. (D) Effect of the applied scan rate on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (E) Galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles of the graphene SC measured using an applied current of 5 mA. (F) CD profiles of the graphene SC recorded using different applied current ranges (1 to 25 mA). (G) Effect of applied current on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (H) Cyclic stability of the graphene SC over 10000 continuous CD measurements. (I) Ragone plot of the graphene SC, demonstrating its superior energy and power performance metrics over those of recently reported SCs. The references marked in figure (I) are provided in Tables S1 and S2, ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Self-discharge profile of the graphene SC after charging up to 3.0 V for 10 minutes. (B) The plot of log(voltage) against the self-discharge time. (C) Plot of voltage against time1/2. (D) Plot of voltage versus log(time). (E) Effect of the charging voltage (Vinitial) on the self-discharge profile of the graphene SC, where (F) shows the enlarged portion of (E) from 0 to 1000 seconds, presenting the variation in the ohmic drop occurring during self-discharge. (G and H) Practical applications of graphene SC in portable electronics. The 3.0 V graphene SC was initially charged using a solar cell for 1 minute and used to power the electronic display over 30 minutes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Temperature-dependent supercapacitive properties of the graphene SC. (A) Cyclic voltammograms of the graphene SC over a wide temperature range from −15 to 80 °C. (B) Effect of temperature on the capacitance of the graphene SC. (C) Nyquist plots of the graphene SC recorded at different temperatures, and the inset in (C) shows the enlarged portion of the high frequency region. (D) Bode phase angle plot of the graphene SC as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (E) The plot of electrochemical impedance (Z) as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (F) The plot of the capacitance of the graphene SC as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature. (G) The real component of the capacitance as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature; (H) the imaginary component of the capacitance as a function of applied frequency with respect to temperature; and (I) the imaginary component of the capacitance as a function of the real component of the impedance with respect to temperature.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A and B) Principle and working mechanism of EV operation during acceleration and braking conditions, respectively. (C) The voltage profiles of the bare 6F22 battery and graphene SC–battery hybrid energy devices for driving the EV prototype. (D and E) Voltage profiles of the individual (D) battery and (E) battery–graphene SC hybrid driven EV prototypes under acceleration and braking modes. (F) Voltage profiles of the graphene SC during acceleration and braking pulses in the EV prototype. (G) The enlarged portion from figure (F) over the region of 43 to 47 seconds. (H) Voltage profiles of the graphene SC under deceleration conditions.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1qm00465d

This journal is © the Partner Organisations 2021
